21 CFR Part 312 - Investigational New Drug Application
- IND content and format requirements: Covered under Subpart B (21 CFR 312.20–312.38)
	312.20 Requirement for an IND.
	(a) A sponsor shall submit an IND to FDA if the sponsor intends to conduct a clinical investigation with an investigational new drug that is subject to 312.2 (a).		
		312.2.2 (a) Applicability.  Except as provided in this section, this part applies to all clinical investigations of products that are subject to section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or to 				the licensing provisions of the Public Health Service Act (58 Stat. 632, as amended (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.)).
			(b)Exemptions. 
				(1) The clinical investigation of a drug product that is lawfully marketed in the United States is exempt from the requirements of this part if all the following apply:
					(i) The investigation is not intended to be reported to FDA as a well-controlled study in support of a new indication for use nor intended to be used to support any other significant 						change in the labeling for the drug;
					(ii) If the drug that is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed as a prescription drug product, the investigation is not intended to support a significant change in the 						advertising for the product;
					(iii) The investigation does not involve a route of administration or dosage level or use in a patient population or other factor that significantly increases the risks (or decreases 						the acceptability of the risks) associated with the use of the drug product;
					(iv) The investigation is conducted in compliance with the requirements for institutional review set forth in part 56 and with the requirements for informed consent set forth in part 						50; and
					(v) The investigation is conducted in compliance with the requirements of § 312.7.
						312.7 Promotion of investigational drugs.
							(a) Promotion of an investigational new drug.  A sponsor or investigator, or any person acting on behalf of a sponsor or investigator, shall not represent in a 								promotional context that an investigational new drug is safe or effective for the purposes for which it is under investigation or otherwise promote the drug. This 								provision is not intended to restrict the full exchange of scientific information concerning the drug, including dissemination of scientific findings in scientific or 								lay media. Rather, its intent is to restrict promotional claims of safety or effectiveness of the drug for a use for which it is under investigation and to preclude 								commercialization of the drug before it is approved for commercial distribution.
							(b) Commercial distribution of an investigational new drug.  A sponsor or investigator shall not commercially distribute or test market an investigational new drug.
							(c) Prolonging an investigation.  A sponsor shall not unduly prolong an investigation after finding that the results of the investigation appear to establish sufficient 							data to support a marketing application.

				(2) 
					(i) A clinical investigation involving an in vitro diagnostic biological product listed in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section is exempt from the requirements of this part if (a) it 						is intended to be used in a diagnostic procedure that confirms the diagnosis made by another, medically established, diagnostic product or procedure and (b) it is shipped in compliance 					with § 312.160.
					(ii) In accordance with paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section, the following products are exempt from the requirements of this part: (a) blood grouping serum; (b) reagent red blood 						cells; and (c) anti-human globulin.

				(3) A drug intended solely for tests in vitro or in laboratory research animals is exempt from the requirements of this part if shipped in accordance with § 312.160.
					§ 312.160 Drugs for investigational use in laboratory research animals or in vitro tests.
						(a) Authorization to ship. 
							(1) 
								(i) A person may ship a drug intended solely for tests in vitro or in animals used only for laboratory research purposes if it is labeled as follows:
								CAUTION: Contains a new drug for investigational use only in laboratory research animals, or for tests in vitro. Not for use in humans.
								(ii) A person may ship a biological product for investigational in vitro diagnostic use that is listed in § 312.2(b)(2)(ii) if it is labeled as follows:
								CAUTION: Contains a biological product for investigational in vitro diagnostic tests only.
							(2) A person shipping a drug under paragraph (a) of this section shall use due diligence to assure that the consignee is regularly engaged in conducting such tests and 							that the shipment of the new drug will actually be used for tests in vitro or in animals used only for laboratory research.
							(3) A person who ships a drug under paragraph (a) of this section shall maintain adequate records showing the name and post office address of the expert to whom the 								drug is shipped and the date, quantity, and batch or code mark of each shipment and delivery. Records of shipments under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section are to be 								maintained for a period of 2 years after the shipment. Records and reports of data and shipments under paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section are to be maintained in 								accordance with § 312.57(b). The person who ships the drug shall upon request from any properly authorized officer or employee of the Food and Drug Administration, at 								reasonable times, permit such officer or employee to have access to and copy and verify records required to be maintained under this section.

						(b) Termination of authorization to ship.  FDA may terminate authorization to ship a drug under this section if it finds that:
							(1) The sponsor of the investigation has failed to comply with 	any of the conditions for shipment established under this section; or
							(2) The continuance of the investigation is unsafe or otherwise contrary to the public interest or the drug is used for purposes other than bona fide scientific 								investigation. FDA will notify the person shipping the drug of its finding and invite immediate correction. If correction is not immediately made, the person shall have 							an opportunity for a regulatory hearing before FDA pursuant to part 16.

						(c) Disposition of unused drug.  The person who ships the drug under paragraph (a) of this section shall assure the return of all unused supplies of the drug from individual 							investigators whenever the investigation discontinues or the investigation is terminated. The person who ships the drug may authorize in writing alternative disposition of 							unused supplies of the drug provided this alternative disposition does not expose humans to risks from the drug, either directly or indirectly (e.g., through food-producing 							animals). The shipper shall maintain records of any alternative disposition.


				(4) FDA will not accept an application for an investigation that is exempt under the provisions of paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
				(5) A clinical investigation involving use of a placebo is exempt from the requirements of this part if the investigation does not otherwise require submission of an IND.
				(6) A clinical investigation involving an exception from informed consent under § 50.24 of this chapter is not exempt from the requirements of this part.

			(c) Bioavailability studies. The applicability of this part to in vivo bioavailability studies in humans is subject to the provisions of § 320.31.
			(d) Unlabeled indication. This part does not apply to the use in the practice of medicine for an unlabeled indication of a new drug product approved under part 314 or of a licensed biological 				product.
			(e) Guidance. FDA may, on its own initiative, issue guidance on the applicability of this part to particular investigational uses of drugs. On request, FDA will advise on the applicability of this 				part to a planned clinical investigation.

	(b) A sponsor shall not begin a clinical investigation subject to § 312.2(a) until the investigation is subject to an IND which is in effect in accordance with § 312.40.
		§ 312.40 General requirements for use of an investigational new drug in a clinical investigation.
			(a) An investigational new drug may be used in a clinical investigation if the following conditions are met:
				(1) The sponsor of the investigation submits an IND for the drug to FDA; the IND is in effect under paragraph (b) of this section; and the sponsor complies with all applicable requirements in 				this part and parts 50 and 56 with respect to the conduct of the clinical investigations; and
				(2) Each participating investigator conducts his or her investigation in compliance with the requirements of this part and parts 50 and 56.

			(b) An IND goes into effect:
				(1) Thirty days after FDA receives the IND, unless FDA notifies the sponsor that the investigations described in the IND are subject to a clinical hold under § 312.42; or
				(2) On earlier notification by FDA that the clinical investigations in the IND may begin. FDA will notify the sponsor in writing of the date it receives the IND.

			(c) A sponsor may ship an investigational new drug to investigators named in the IND:
				(1) Thirty days after FDA receives the IND; or
				(2) On earlier FDA authorization to ship the drug.

			(d) An investigator may not administer an investigational new drug to human subjects until the IND goes into effect under paragraph (b) of this section.

	(c) A sponsor shall submit a separate IND for any clinical investigation involving an exception from informed consent under § 50.24 of this chapter. Such a clinical investigation is not permitted to proceed without 		the prior written authorization from FDA. FDA shall provide a written determination 30 days after FDA receives the IND or earlier.
	
§ 312.42 Clinical holds and requests for modification.

(a) General.  A clinical hold is an order issued by FDA to the sponsor to delay a proposed clinical investigation or to suspend an ongoing investigation. The clinical hold order may apply to one or more of the investigations covered by an IND. When a proposed study is placed on clinical hold, subjects may not be given the investigational drug. When an ongoing study is placed on clinical hold, no new subjects may be recruited to the study and placed on the investigational drug; patients already in the study should be taken off therapy involving the investigational drug unless specifically permitted by FDA in the interest of patient safety.

(b) Grounds for imposition of clinical hold —

(1) Clinical hold of a Phase 1 study under an IND.  FDA may place a proposed or ongoing Phase 1 investigation on clinical hold if it finds that:

(i) Human subjects are or would be exposed to an unreasonable and significant risk of illness or injury;

(ii) The clinical investigators named in the IND are not qualified by reason of their scientific training and experience to conduct the investigation described in the IND;

(iii) The investigator brochure is misleading, erroneous, or materially incomplete; or

(iv) The IND does not contain sufficient information required under § 312.23 to assess the risks to subjects of the proposed studies.

(v) The IND is for the study of an investigational drug intended to treat a life-threatening disease or condition that affects both genders, and men or women with reproductive potential who have the disease or condition being studied are excluded from eligibility because of a risk or potential risk from use of the investigational drug of reproductive toxicity (i.e., affecting reproductive organs) or developmental toxicity (i.e., affecting potential offspring). The phrase “women with reproductive potential” does not include pregnant women. For purposes of this paragraph, “life-threatening illnesses or diseases” are defined as “diseases or conditions where the likelihood of death is high unless the course of the disease is interrupted.” The clinical hold would not apply under this paragraph to clinical studies conducted:

(A) Under special circumstances, such as studies pertinent only to one gender (e.g., studies evaluating the excretion of a drug in semen or the effects on menstrual function);

(B) Only in men or women, as long as a study that does not exclude members of the other gender with reproductive potential is being conducted concurrently, has been conducted, or will take place within a reasonable time agreed upon by the agency; or

(C) Only in subjects who do not suffer from the disease or condition for which the drug is being studied.

(2) Clinical hold of a Phase 2 or 3 study under an IND.  FDA may place a proposed or ongoing Phase 2 or 3 investigation on clinical hold if it finds that:

(i) Any of the conditions in paragraphs (b)(1)(i) through (b)(1)(v) of this section apply; or

(ii) The plan or protocol for the investigation is clearly deficient in design to meet its stated objectives.

(3) Clinical hold of an expanded access IND or expanded access protocol.  FDA may place an expanded access IND or expanded access protocol on clinical hold under the following conditions:

(i) Final use.  FDA may place a proposed expanded access IND or treatment use protocol on clinical hold if it is determined that:

(A) The pertinent criteria in subpart I of this part for permitting the expanded access use to begin are not satisfied; or

(B) The expanded access IND or expanded access protocol does not comply with the requirements for expanded access submissions in subpart I of this part.

(ii) Ongoing use.  FDA may place an ongoing expanded access IND or expanded access protocol on clinical hold if it is determined that the pertinent criteria in subpart I of this part for permitting the expanded access are no longer satisfied.

(4) Clinical hold of any study that is not designed to be adequate and well-controlled.  FDA may place a proposed or ongoing investigation that is not designed to be adequate and well-controlled on clinical hold if it finds that:

(i) Any of the conditions in paragraph (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section apply; or

(ii) There is reasonable evidence the investigation that is not designed to be adequate and well-controlled is impeding enrollment in, or otherwise interfering with the conduct or completion of, a study that is designed to be an adequate and well-controlled investigation of the same or another investigational drug; or

(iii) Insufficient quantities of the investigational drug exist to adequately conduct both the investigation that is not designed to be adequate and well-controlled and the investigations that are designed to be adequate and well-controlled; or

(iv) The drug has been studied in one or more adequate and well-controlled investigations that strongly suggest lack of effectiveness; or

(v) Another drug under investigation or approved for the same indication and available to the same patient population has demonstrated a better potential benefit/risk balance; or

(vi) The drug has received marketing approval for the same indication in the same patient population; or

(vii) The sponsor of the study that is designed to be an adequate and well-controlled investigation is not actively pursuing marketing approval of the investigational drug with due diligence; or

(viii) The Commissioner determines that it would not be in the public interest for the study to be conducted or continued. FDA ordinarily intends that clinical holds under paragraphs (b)(4)(ii), (b)(4)(iii) and (b)(4)(v) of this section would only apply to additional enrollment in nonconcurrently controlled trials rather than eliminating continued access to individuals already receiving the investigational drug.

(5) Clinical hold of any investigation involving an exception from informed consent under § 50.24 of this chapter.  FDA may place a proposed or ongoing investigation involving an exception from informed consent under § 50.24 of this chapter on clinical hold if it is determined that:

(i) Any of the conditions in paragraphs (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section apply; or

(ii) The pertinent criteria in § 50.24 of this chapter for such an investigation to begin or continue are not submitted or not satisfied.

(6) Clinical hold of any investigation involving an exception from informed consent under § 50.23(d) of this chapter. FDA may place a proposed or ongoing investigation involving an exception from informed consent under § 50.23(d) of this chapter on clinical hold if it is determined that:

(i) Any of the conditions in paragraphs (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section apply; or

(ii) A determination by the President to waive the prior consent requirement for the administration of an investigational new drug has not been made.

(c) Discussion of deficiency.  Whenever FDA concludes that a deficiency exists in a clinical investigation that may be grounds for the imposition of clinical hold FDA will, unless patients are exposed to immediate and serious risk, attempt to discuss and satisfactorily resolve the matter with the sponsor before issuing the clinical hold order.

(d) Imposition of clinical hold.  The clinical hold order may be made by telephone or other means of rapid communication or in writing. The clinical hold order will identify the studies under the IND to which the hold applies, and will briefly explain the basis for the action. The clinical hold order will be made by or on behalf of the Division Director with responsibility for review of the IND. As soon as possible, and no more than 30 days after imposition of the clinical hold, the Division Director will provide the sponsor a written explanation of the basis for the hold.

(e) Resumption of clinical investigations.  An investigation may only resume after FDA (usually the Division Director, or the Director's designee, with responsibility for review of the IND) has notified the sponsor that the investigation may proceed. Resumption of the affected investigation(s) will be authorized when the sponsor corrects the deficiency(ies) previously cited or otherwise satisfies the agency that the investigation(s) can proceed. FDA may notify a sponsor of its determination regarding the clinical hold by telephone or other means of rapid communication. If a sponsor of an IND that has been placed on clinical hold requests in writing that the clinical hold be removed and submits a complete response to the issue(s) identified in the clinical hold order, FDA shall respond in writing to the sponsor within 30-calendar days of receipt of the request and the complete response. FDA's response will either remove or maintain the clinical hold, and will state the reasons for such determination. Notwithstanding the 30-calendar day response time, a sponsor may not proceed with a clinical trial on which a clinical hold has been imposed until the sponsor has been notified by FDA that the hold has been lifted.

(f) Appeal.  If the sponsor disagrees with the reasons cited for the clinical hold, the sponsor may request reconsideration of the decision in accordance with § 312.48.

(g) Conversion of IND on clinical hold to inactive status.  If all investigations covered by an IND remain on clinical hold for 1 year or more, the IND may be placed on inactive status by FDA under § 312.45.

§ 312.23 IND content and format.

(a) A sponsor who intends to conduct a clinical investigation subject to this part shall submit an “Investigational New Drug Application” (IND) including, in the following order:

(1) Cover sheet (Form FDA-1571).  A cover sheet for the application containing the following:

(i) The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor, the date of the application, and the name of the investigational new drug.

(ii) Identification of the phase or phases of the clinical investigation to be conducted.

(iii) A commitment not to begin clinical investigations until an IND covering the investigations is in effect.

(iv) A commitment that an Institutional Review Board (IRB) that complies with the requirements set forth in part 56 will be responsible for the initial and continuing review and approval of each of the studies in the proposed clinical investigation and that the investigator will report to the IRB proposed changes in the research activity in accordance with the requirements of part 56.

(v) A commitment to conduct the investigation in accordance with all other applicable regulatory requirements.

(vi) The name and title of the person responsible for monitoring the conduct and progress of the clinical investigations.

(vii) The name(s) and title(s) of the person(s) responsible under § 312.32 for review and evaluation of information relevant to the safety of the drug.

(viii) If a sponsor has transferred any obligations for the conduct of any clinical study to a contract research organization, a statement containing the name and address of the contract research organization, identification of the clinical study, and a listing of the obligations transferred. If all obligations governing the conduct of the study have been transferred, a general statement of this transfer—in lieu of a listing of the specific obligations transferred—may be submitted.

(ix) The signature of the sponsor or the sponsor's authorized representative. If the person signing the application does not reside or have a place of business within the United States, the IND is required to contain the name and address of, and be countersigned by, an attorney, agent, or other authorized official who resides or maintains a place of business within the United States.

(2) A table of contents. 

(3) Introductory statement and general investigational plan. 

(i) A brief introductory statement giving the name of the drug and all active ingredients, the drug's pharmacological class, the structural formula of the drug (if known), the formulation of the dosage form(s) to be used, the route of administration, and the broad objectives and planned duration of the proposed clinical investigation(s).

(ii) A brief summary of previous human experience with the drug, with reference to other IND's if pertinent, and to investigational or marketing experience in other countries that may be relevant to the safety of the proposed clinical investigation(s).

(iii) If the drug has been withdrawn from investigation or marketing in any country for any reason related to safety or effectiveness, identification of the country(ies) where the drug was withdrawn and the reasons for the withdrawal.

(iv) A brief description of the overall plan for investigating the drug product for the following year. The plan should include the following: 

(a) The rationale for the drug or the research study; 

(b) the indication(s) to be studied; 

(c) the general approach to be followed in evaluating the drug; 

(d) the kinds of clinical trials to be conducted in the first year following the submission (if plans are not developed for the entire year, the sponsor should so indicate); 

(e) the estimated number of patients to be given the drug in those studies; and 

(f) any risks of particular severity or seriousness anticipated on the basis of the toxicological data in animals or prior studies in humans with the drug or related drugs.

(4) [Reserved]

(5) Investigator's brochure.  If required under § 312.55, a copy of the investigator's brochure, containing the following information:

(i) A brief description of the drug substance and the formulation, including the structural formula, if known.

(ii) A summary of the pharmacological and toxicological effects of the drug in animals and, to the extent known, in humans.

(iii) A summary of the pharmacokinetics and biological disposition of the drug in animals and, if known, in humans.

(iv) A summary of information relating to safety and effectiveness in humans obtained from prior clinical studies. (Reprints of published articles on such studies may be appended when useful.)

(v) A description of possible risks and side effects to be anticipated on the basis of prior experience with the drug under investigation or with related drugs, and of precautions or special monitoring to be done as part of the investigational use of the drug.

(6) Protocols. 

(i) A protocol for each planned study. (Protocols for studies not submitted initially in the IND should be submitted in accordance with § 312.30(a).) In general, protocols for Phase 1 studies may be less detailed and more flexible than protocols for Phase 2 and 3 studies. Phase 1 protocols should be directed primarily at providing an outline of the investigation—an estimate of the number of patients to be involved, a description of safety exclusions, and a description of the dosing plan including duration, dose, or method to be used in determining dose—and should specify in detail only those elements of the study that are critical to safety, such as necessary monitoring of vital signs and blood chemistries. Modifications of the experimental design of Phase 1 studies that do not affect critical safety assessments are required to be reported to FDA only in the annual report.

(ii) In Phases 2 and 3, detailed protocols describing all aspects of the study should be submitted. A protocol for a Phase 2 or 3 investigation should be designed in such a way that, if the sponsor anticipates that some deviation from the study design may become necessary as the investigation progresses, alternatives or contingencies to provide for such deviation are built into the protocols at the outset. For example, a protocol for a controlled short-term study might include a plan for an early crossover of nonresponders to an alternative therapy.

(iii) A protocol is required to contain the following, with the specific elements and detail of the protocol reflecting the above distinctions depending on the phase of study:

(a) A statement of the objectives and purpose of the study.

(b) The name and address and a statement of the qualifications (curriculum vitae or other statement of qualifications) of each investigator, and the name of each subinvestigator (e.g., research fellow, resident) working under the supervision of the investigator; the name and address of the research facilities to be used; and the name and address of each reviewing Institutional Review Board.

(c) The criteria for patient selection and for exclusion of patients and an estimate of the number of patients to be studied.

(d) A description of the design of the study, including the kind of control group to be used, if any, and a description of methods to be used to minimize bias on the part of subjects, investigators, and analysts.

(e) The method for determining the dose(s) to be administered, the planned maximum dosage, and the duration of individual patient exposure to the drug.

(f) A description of the observations and measurements to be made to fulfill the objectives of the study.

(g) A description of clinical procedures, laboratory tests, or other measures to be taken to monitor the effects of the drug in human subjects and to minimize risk.

(7) Chemistry, manufacturing, and control information. 

(i) As appropriate for the particular investigations covered by the IND, a section describing the composition, manufacture, and control of the drug substance and the drug product. Although in each phase of the investigation sufficient information is required to be submitted to assure the proper identification, quality, purity, and strength of the investigational drug, the amount of information needed to make that assurance will vary with the phase of the investigation, the proposed duration of the investigation, the dosage form, and the amount of information otherwise available. FDA recognizes that modifications to the method of preparation of the new drug substance and dosage form and changes in the dosage form itself are likely as the investigation progresses. Therefore, the emphasis in an initial Phase 1 submission should generally be placed on the identification and control of the raw materials and the new drug substance. Final specifications for the drug substance and drug product are not expected until the end of the investigational process.

(ii) It should be emphasized that the amount of information to be submitted depends upon the scope of the proposed clinical investigation. For example, although stability data are required in all phases of the IND to demonstrate that the new drug substance and drug product are within acceptable chemical and physical limits for the planned duration of the proposed clinical investigation, if very short-term tests are proposed, the supporting stability data can be correspondingly limited.

(iii) As drug development proceeds and as the scale or production is changed from the pilot-scale production appropriate for the limited initial clinical investigations to the larger-scale production needed for expanded clinical trials, the sponsor should submit information amendments to supplement the initial information submitted on the chemistry, manufacturing, and control processes with information appropriate to the expanded scope of the investigation.

(iv) Reflecting the distinctions described in this paragraph (a)(7), and based on the phase(s) to be studied, the submission is required to contain the following:

(a) Drug substance.  A description of the drug substance, including its physical, chemical, or biological characteristics; the name and address of its manufacturer; the general method of preparation of the drug substance; the acceptable limits and analytical methods used to assure the identity, strength, quality, and purity of the drug substance; and information sufficient to support stability of the drug substance during the toxicological studies and the planned clinical studies. Reference to the current edition of the United States Pharmacopeia—National Formulary may satisfy relevant requirements in this paragraph.

(b) Drug product.  A list of all components, which may include reasonable alternatives for inactive compounds, used in the manufacture of the investigational drug product, including both those components intended to appear in the drug product and those which may not appear but which are used in the manufacturing process, and, where applicable, the quantitative composition of the investigational drug product, including any reasonable variations that may be expected during the investigational stage; the name and address of the drug product manufacturer; a brief general description of the manufacturing and packaging procedure as appropriate for the product; the acceptable limits and analytical methods used to assure the identity, strength, quality, and purity of the drug product; and information sufficient to assure the product's stability during the planned clinical studies. Reference to the current edition of the United States Pharmacopeia—National Formulary may satisfy certain requirements in this paragraph.

(c) A brief general description of the composition, manufacture, and control of any placebo used in a controlled clinical trial.

(d) Labeling.  A copy of all labels and labeling to be provided to each investigator.

(e) Environmental analysis requirements.  A claim for categorical exclusion under § 25.30 or 25.31 or an environmental assessment under § 25.40.

(8) Pharmacology and toxicology information.  Adequate information about pharmacological and toxicological studies of the drug involving laboratory animals or in vitro, on the basis of which the sponsor has concluded that it is reasonably safe to conduct the proposed clinical investigations. The kind, duration, and scope of animal and other tests required varies with the duration and nature of the proposed clinical investigations. Guidance documents are available from FDA that describe ways in which these requirements may be met. Such information is required to include the identification and qualifications of the individuals who evaluated the results of such studies and concluded that it is reasonably safe to begin the proposed investigations and a statement of where the investigations were conducted and where the records are available for inspection. As drug development proceeds, the sponsor is required to submit informational amendments, as appropriate, with additional information pertinent to safety.

(i) Pharmacology and drug disposition.  A section describing the pharmacological effects and mechanism(s) of action of the drug in animals, and information on the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of the drug, if known.

(ii) Toxicology.  

(a) An integrated summary of the toxicological effects of the drug in animals and in vitro. Depending on the nature of the drug and the phase of the investigation, the description is to include the results of acute, subacute, and chronic toxicity tests; tests of the drug's effects on reproduction and the developing fetus; any special toxicity test related to the drug's particular mode of administration or conditions of use (e.g., inhalation, dermal, or ocular toxicology); and any in vitro studies intended to evaluate drug toxicity.

(b) For each toxicology study that is intended primarily to support the safety of the proposed clinical investigation, a full tabulation of data suitable for detailed review.

(iii) For each nonclinical laboratory study subject to the good laboratory practice regulations under part 58, a statement that the study was conducted in compliance with the good laboratory practice regulations in part 58, or, if the study was not conducted in compliance with those regulations, a brief statement of the reason for the noncompliance.

(9) Previous human experience with the investigational drug.  A summary of previous human experience known to the applicant, if any, with the investigational drug. The information is required to include the following:

(i) If the investigational drug has been investigated or marketed previously, either in the United States or other countries, detailed information about such experience that is relevant to the safety of the proposed investigation or to the investigation's rationale. If the drug has been the subject of controlled trials, detailed information on such trials that is relevant to an assessment of the drug's effectiveness for the proposed investigational use(s) should also be provided. Any published material that is relevant to the safety of the proposed investigation or to an assessment of the drug's effectiveness for its proposed investigational use should be provided in full. Published material that is less directly relevant may be supplied by a bibliography.

(ii) If the drug is a combination of drugs previously investigated or marketed, the information required under paragraph (a)(9)(i) of this section should be provided for each active drug component. However, if any component in such combination is subject to an approved marketing application or is otherwise lawfully marketed in the United States, the sponsor is not required to submit published material concerning that active drug component unless such material relates directly to the proposed investigational use (including publications relevant to component-component interaction).

(iii) If the drug has been marketed outside the United States, a list of the countries in which the drug has been marketed and a list of the countries in which the drug has been withdrawn from marketing for reasons potentially related to safety or effectiveness.

(10) Additional information.  In certain applications, as described below, information on special topics may be needed. Such information shall be submitted in this section as follows:

(i) Drug dependence and abuse potential.  If the drug is a psychotropic substance or otherwise has abuse potential, a section describing relevant clinical studies and experience and studies in test animals.

(ii) Radioactive drugs.  If the drug is a radioactive drug, sufficient data from animal or human studies to allow a reasonable calculation of radiation-absorbed dose to the whole body and critical organs upon administration to a human subject. Phase 1 studies of radioactive drugs must include studies which will obtain sufficient data for dosimetry calculations.

(iii) Pediatric studies.  Plans for assessing pediatric safety and effectiveness.

(iv) Other information.  A brief statement of any other information that would aid evaluation of the proposed clinical investigations with respect to their safety or their design and potential as controlled clinical trials to support marketing of the drug.

(11) Relevant information.  If requested by FDA, any other relevant information needed for review of the application.

(b) Information previously submitted.  The sponsor ordinarily is not required to resubmit information previously submitted, but may incorporate the information by reference. A reference to information submitted previously must identify the file by name, reference number, volume, and page number where the information can be found. A reference to information submitted to the agency by a person other than the sponsor is required to contain a written statement that authorizes the reference and that is signed by the person who submitted the information.

(c) Material in a foreign language.  The sponsor shall submit an accurate and complete English translation of each part of the IND that is not in English. The sponsor shall also submit a copy of each original literature publication for which an English translation is submitted.

(d) Number of copies.  The sponsor shall submit an original and two copies of all submissions to the IND file, including the original submission and all amendments and reports.

(e) Numbering of IND submissions.  Each submission relating to an IND is required to be numbered serially using a single, three-digit serial number. The initial IND is required to be numbered 000; each subsequent submission (e.g., amendment, report, or correspondence) is required to be numbered chronologically in sequence.

(f) Identification of exception from informed consent.  If the investigation involves an exception from informed consent under § 50.24 of this chapter, the sponsor shall prominently identify on the cover sheet that the investigation is subject to the requirements in § 50.24 of this chapter.

§ 312.32 IND safety reporting.

(a) Definitions.  The following definitions of terms apply to this section:

Adverse event   means any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in humans, whether or not considered drug related.

Life-threatening adverse event or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction.   An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “life-threatening” if, in the view of either the investigator or sponsor, its occurrence places the patient or subject at immediate risk of death. It does not include an adverse event or suspected adverse reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.

Serious adverse event or serious suspected adverse reaction.   An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “serious” if, in the view of either the investigator or sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: Death, a life-threatening adverse event, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.

Suspected adverse reaction   means any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the adverse event. For the purposes of IND safety reporting, “reasonable possibility” means there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event. Suspected adverse reaction implies a lesser degree of certainty about causality than adverse reaction, which means any adverse event caused by a drug.

Unexpected adverse event or unexpected suspected adverse reaction.   An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “unexpected” if it is not listed in the investigator brochure or is not listed at the specificity or severity that has been observed; or, if an investigator brochure is not required or available, is not consistent with the risk information described in the general investigational plan or elsewhere in the current application, as amended. For example, under this definition, hepatic necrosis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater severity) if the investigator brochure referred only to elevated hepatic enzymes or hepatitis. Similarly, cerebral thromboembolism and cerebral vasculitis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater specificity) if the investigator brochure listed only cerebral vascular accidents. “Unexpected,” as used in this definition, also refers to adverse events or suspected adverse reactions that are mentioned in the investigator brochure as occurring with a class of drugs or as anticipated from the pharmacological properties of the drug, but are not specifically mentioned as occurring with the particular drug under investigation.

(b) Review of safety information.  The sponsor must promptly review all information relevant to the safety of the drug obtained or otherwise received by the sponsor from foreign or domestic sources, including information derived from any clinical or epidemiological investigations, animal or in vitro studies, reports in the scientific literature, and unpublished scientific papers, as well as reports from foreign regulatory authorities and reports of foreign commercial marketing experience for drugs that are not marketed in the United States.

(c) 

(1) IND safety reports.  The sponsor must notify FDA and all participating investigators (i.e., all investigators to whom the sponsor is providing drug under its INDs or under any investigator's IND) in an IND safety report of potential serious risks, from clinical trials or any other source, as soon as possible, but in no case later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor determines that the information qualifies for reporting under paragraph (c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), (c)(1)(iii), or (c)(1)(iv) of this section. In each IND safety report, the sponsor must identify all IND safety reports previously submitted to FDA concerning a similar suspected adverse reaction, and must analyze the significance of the suspected adverse reaction in light of previous, similar reports or any other relevant information.

(i) Serious and unexpected suspected adverse reaction.  The sponsor must report any suspected adverse reaction that is both serious and unexpected. The sponsor must report an adverse event as a suspected adverse reaction only if there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event, such as:

(A) A single occurrence of an event that is uncommon and known to be strongly associated with drug exposure (e.g., angioedema, hepatic injury, Stevens-Johnson Syndrome);

(B) One or more occurrences of an event that is not commonly associated with drug exposure, but is otherwise uncommon in the population exposed to the drug (e.g., tendon rupture);

(C) An aggregate analysis of specific events observed in a clinical trial (such as known consequences of the underlying disease or condition under investigation or other events that commonly occur in the study population independent of drug therapy) that indicates those events occur more frequently in the drug treatment group than in a concurrent or historical control group.

(ii) Findings from other studies.  The sponsor must report any findings from epidemiological studies, pooled analysis of multiple studies, or clinical studies (other than those reported under paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section), whether or not conducted under an IND, and whether or not conducted by the sponsor, that suggest a significant risk in humans exposed to the drug. Ordinarily, such a finding would result in a safety-related change in the protocol, informed consent, investigator brochure (excluding routine updates of these documents), or other aspects of the overall conduct of the clinical investigation.

(iii) Findings from animal or in vitro testing.  The sponsor must report any findings from animal or in vitro testing, whether or not conducted by the sponsor, that suggest a significant risk in humans exposed to the drug, such as reports of mutagenicity, teratogenicity, or carcinogenicity, or reports of significant organ toxicity at or near the expected human exposure. Ordinarily, any such findings would result in a safety-related change in the protocol, informed consent, investigator brochure (excluding routine updates of these documents), or other aspects of the overall conduct of the clinical investigation.

(iv) Increased rate of occurrence of serious suspected adverse reactions.  The sponsor must report any clinically important increase in the rate of a serious suspected adverse reaction over that listed in the protocol or investigator brochure.

(v) Submission of IND safety reports.  The sponsor must submit each IND safety report in a narrative format or on FDA Form 3500A or in an electronic format that FDA can process, review, and archive. FDA will periodically issue guidance on how to provide the electronic submission (e.g., method of transmission, media, file formats, preparation and organization of files). The sponsor may submit foreign suspected adverse reactions on a Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) I Form instead of a FDA Form 3500A. Reports of overall findings or pooled analyses from published and unpublished in vitro, animal, epidemiological, or clinical studies must be submitted in a narrative format. Each notification to FDA must bear prominent identification of its contents, i.e., “IND Safety Report,” and must be transmitted to the review division in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research or in the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research that has responsibility for review of the IND. Upon request from FDA, the sponsor must submit to FDA any additional data or information that the agency deems necessary, as soon as possible, but in no case later than 15 calendar days after receiving the request.

(2) Unexpected fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction reports.  The sponsor must also notify FDA of any unexpected fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction as soon as possible but in no case later than 7 calendar days after the sponsor's initial receipt of the information.

(3) Reporting format or frequency.  FDA may require a sponsor to submit IND safety reports in a format or at a frequency different than that required under this paragraph. The sponsor may also propose and adopt a different reporting format or frequency if the change is agreed to in advance by the director of the FDA review division that has responsibility for review of the IND.

(4) Investigations of marketed drugs.  A sponsor of a clinical study of a drug marketed or approved in the United States that is conducted under an IND is required to submit IND safety reports for suspected adverse reactions that are observed in the clinical study, at domestic or foreign study sites. The sponsor must also submit safety information from the clinical study as prescribed by the postmarketing safety reporting requirements (e.g., §§ 310.305, 314.80, and 600.80 of this chapter).

(5) Reporting study endpoints.  Study endpoints (e.g., mortality or major morbidity) must be reported to FDA by the sponsor as described in the protocol and ordinarily would not be reported under paragraph (c) of this section. However, if a serious and unexpected adverse event occurs for which there is evidence suggesting a causal relationship between the drug and the event (e.g., death from anaphylaxis), the event must be reported under § 312.32(c)(1)(i) as a serious and unexpected suspected adverse reaction even if it is a component of the study endpoint (e.g., all-cause mortality).

(d) Followup. 

(1) The sponsor must promptly investigate all safety information it receives.

(2) Relevant followup information to an IND safety report must be submitted as soon as the information is available and must be identified as such, i.e., “Followup IND Safety Report.”

(3) If the results of a sponsor's investigation show that an adverse event not initially determined to be reportable under paragraph (c) of this section is so reportable, the sponsor must report such suspected adverse reaction in an IND safety report as soon as possible, but in no case later than 15 calendar days after the determination is made.

(e) Disclaimer.  A safety report or other information submitted by a sponsor under this part (and any release by FDA of that report or information) does not necessarily reflect a conclusion by the sponsor or FDA that the report or information constitutes an admission that the drug caused or contributed to an adverse event. A sponsor need not admit, and may deny, that the report or information submitted by the sponsor constitutes an admission that the drug caused or contributed to an adverse event.

§ 310.305 Records and reports concerning adverse drug experiences on marketed prescription drugs for human use without approved new drug applications.

(a) Scope.  FDA is requiring manufacturers, packers, and distributors of marketed prescription drug products that are not the subject of an approved new drug or abbreviated new drug application to establish and maintain records and make reports to FDA of all serious, unexpected adverse drug experiences associated with the use of their drug products. Any person subject to the reporting requirements of paragraph (c) of this section must also develop written procedures for the surveillance, receipt, evaluation, and reporting of postmarketing adverse drug experiences to FDA.

(b) Definitions.  The following definitions of terms apply to this section:

Adverse drug experience.   Any adverse event associated with the use of a drug in humans, whether or not considered drug related, including the following: An adverse event occurring in the course of the use of a drug product in professional practice; an adverse event occurring from drug overdose whether accidental or intentional; an adverse event occurring from drug abuse; an adverse event occurring from drug withdrawal; and any failure of expected pharmacological action.

Disability.   A substantial disruption of a person's ability to conduct normal life functions.

Individual case safety report (ICSR).   A description of an adverse drug experience related to an individual patient or subject.

ICSR attachments.   Documents related to the adverse drug experience described in an ICSR, such as medical records, hospital discharge summaries, or other documentation.

Life-threatening adverse drug experience.   Any adverse drug experience that places the patient, in the view of the initial reporter, at immediate risk of death from the adverse drug experience as it occurred, i.e., it does not include an adverse drug experience that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.

Serious adverse drug experience.   Any adverse drug experience occurring at any dose that results in any of the following outcomes: Death, a life-threatening adverse drug experience, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse drug experience when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.

Unexpected adverse drug experience.   Any adverse drug experience that is not listed in the current labeling for the drug product. This includes events that may be symptomatically and pathophysiologically related to an event listed in the labeling, but differ from the event because of greater severity or specificity. For example, under this definition, hepatic necrosis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater severity) if the labeling only referred to elevated hepatic enzymes or hepatitis. Similarly, cerebral thromboembolism and cerebral vasculitis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater specificity) if the labeling only listed cerebral vascular accidents. “Unexpected,” as used in this definition, refers to an adverse drug experience that has not been previously observed (i.e., included in the labeling) rather than from the perspective of such experience not being anticipated from the pharmacological properties of the pharmaceutical product.

(c) Reporting requirements.  Each person identified in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section must submit to FDA adverse drug experience information as described in this section. Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) of this section, 15-day “Alert reports” and followup reports, including ICSRs and any ICSR attachments, must be submitted to the Agency in electronic format as described in paragraph (e)(1) of this section.

(1) Postmarketing 15-day “Alert reports”. 

(i) Any person whose name appears on the label of a marketed prescription drug product as its manufacturer, packer, or distributor must report to FDA each adverse drug experience received or otherwise obtained that is both serious and unexpected as soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar days from initial receipt of the information by the person whose name appears on the label. Each report must be accompanied by the current content of labeling in electronic format as an ICSR attachment unless it is already on file at FDA.

(ii) A person identified in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section is not required to submit a 15-day “Alert report” for an adverse drug experience obtained from a postmarketing study (whether or not conducted under an investigational new drug application) unless the applicant concludes that there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the adverse experience.

(2) Postmarketing 15-day “Alert reports”—followup.  Each person identified in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section must promptly investigate all serious, unexpected adverse drug experiences that are the subject of these postmarketing 15-day Alert reports and must submit followup reports within 15 calendar days of receipt of new information or as requested by FDA. If additional information is not obtainable, records should be maintained of the unsuccessful steps taken to seek additional information.

(3) Submission of reports.  To avoid unnecessary duplication in the submission of, and followup to, reports required in this section, a packer's or distributor's obligations may be met by submission of all reports of serious adverse drug experiences to the manufacturer of the drug product. If a packer or distributor elects to submit these adverse drug experience reports to the manufacturer rather than to FDA, it must submit, by any appropriate means, each report to the manufacturer within 5 calendar days of its receipt by the packer or distributor, and the manufacturer must then comply with the requirements of this section even if its name does not appear on the label of the drug product. Under this circumstance, the packer or distributor must maintain a record of this action which must include:

(i) A copy of each adverse drug experience report;

(ii) The date the report was received by the packer or distributor;

(iii) The date the report was submitted to the manufacturer; and

(iv) The name and address of the manufacturer.

(4) [Reserved]

(5) A person identified in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section is not required to resubmit to FDA adverse drug experience reports forwarded to that person by FDA; however, the person must submit all followup information on such reports to FDA.

(d) Information reported on ICSRs.  ICSRs include the following information:

(1) Patient information. 

(i) Patient identification code;

(ii) Patient age at the time of adverse drug experience, or date of birth;

(iii) Patient gender; and

(iv) Patient weight.

(2) Adverse drug experience. 

(i) Outcome attributed to adverse drug experience;

(ii) Date of adverse drug experience;

(iii) Date of ICSR submission;

(iv) Description of adverse drug experience (including a concise medical narrative);

(v) Adverse drug experience term(s);

(vi) Description of relevant tests, including dates and laboratory data; and

(vii) Other relevant patient history, including preexisting medical conditions.

(3) Suspect medical product(s). 

(i) Name;

(ii) Dose, frequency, and route of administration used;

(iii) Therapy dates;

(iv) Diagnosis for use (indication);

(v) Whether the product is a combination product as defined in § 3.2(e) of this chapter;

(vi) Whether the product is a prescription or nonprescription product;

(vii) Whether adverse drug experience abated after drug use stopped or dose reduced;

(viii) Whether adverse drug experience reappeared after reintroduction of drug;

(ix) Lot number;

(x) Expiration date;

(xi) National Drug Code (NDC) number; and

(xii) Concomitant medical products and therapy dates.

(4) Initial reporter information. 

(i) Name, address, and telephone number;

(ii) Whether the initial reporter is a health care professional; and

(iii) Occupation, if a health care professional.

(5) Manufacturer, packer, or distributor information. 

(i) Manufacturer, packer, or distributor name and contact office address;

(ii) Telephone number;

(iii) Report source, such as spontaneous, literature, or study;

(iv) Date the report was received by manufacturer, packer, or distributor;

(v) Whether the ICSR is a 15-day “Alert report”;

(vi) Whether the ICSR is an initial report or followup report; and

(vii) Unique case identification number, which must be the same in the initial report and any subsequent followup report(s).

(e) Electronic format for submissions. 

(1) Each report required to be submitted to FDA under this section, including the ICSR and any ICSR attachments, must be submitted in an electronic format that FDA can process, review, and archive. FDA will issue guidance on how to provide the electronic submission (e.g., method of transmission, media, file formats, preparation and organization of files).

(2) Each person identified in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section may request, in writing, a temporary waiver of the requirements in paragraph (e)(1) of this section. These waivers will be granted on a limited basis for good cause shown. FDA will issue guidance on requesting a waiver of the requirements in paragraph (e)(1) of this section.

(f) Patient privacy.  Manufacturers, packers, and distributors should not include in reports under this section the names and addresses of individual patients; instead, the manufacturer, packer, and distributor should assign a unique code for identification of the patient. The manufacturer, packer, and distributor should include the name of the reporter from whom the information was received as part of the initial reporter information, even when the reporter is the patient. The names of patients, individual reporters, health care professionals, hospitals, and geographical identifiers in adverse drug experience reports are not releasable to the public under FDA's public information regulations in part 20 of this chapter.

(g) Recordkeeping. 

(1) Each manufacturer, packer, and distributor must maintain for a period of 10 years records of all adverse drug experiences required under this section to be reported, including raw data and any correspondence relating to the adverse drug experiences, and the records required to be maintained under paragraph (c)(3) of this section.

(2) Manufacturers and packers may retain the records required in paragraph (f)(1) of this section as part of its complaint files maintained under § 211.198 of this chapter.

(3) Manufacturers, packers, and distributors must permit any authorized FDA employee, at all reasonable times, to have access to and copy and verify the records established and maintained under this section.

(h) Disclaimer.  A report or information submitted by a manufacturer, packer, or distributor under this section (and any release by FDA of that report or information) does not necessarily reflect a conclusion by the manufacturer, packer, or distributor, or by FDA, that the report or information constitutes an admission that the drug caused or contributed to an adverse effect. The manufacturer, packer, or distributor need not admit, and may deny, that the report or information submitted under this section constitutes an admission that the drug caused or contributed to an adverse effect.

§ 211.198 Complaint files.

(a) Written procedures describing the handling of all written and oral complaints regarding a drug product shall be established and followed. Such procedures shall include provisions for review by the quality control unit, of any complaint involving the possible failure of a drug product to meet any of its specifications and, for such drug products, a determination as to the need for an investigation in accordance with § 211.192. Such procedures shall include provisions for review to determine whether the complaint represents a serious and unexpected adverse drug experience which is required to be reported to the Food and Drug Administration in accordance with §§ 310.305 and 514.80 of this chapter.

(b) A written record of each complaint shall be maintained in a file designated for drug product complaints. The file regarding such drug product complaints shall be maintained at the establishment where the drug product involved was manufactured, processed, or packed, or such file may be maintained at another facility if the written records in such files are readily available for inspection at that other facility. Written records involving a drug product shall be maintained until at least 1 year after the expiration date of the drug product, or 1 year after the date that the complaint was received, whichever is longer. In the case of certain OTC drug products lacking expiration dating because they meet the criteria for exemption under § 211.137, such written records shall be maintained for 3 years after distribution of the drug product.

(1) The written record shall include the following information, where known: the name and strength of the drug product, lot number, name of complainant, nature of complaint, and reply to complainant.

(2) Where an investigation under § 211.192 is conducted, the written record shall include the findings of the investigation and followup. The record or copy of the record of the investigation shall be maintained at the establishment where the investigation occurred in accordance with § 211.180(c).

(3) Where an investigation under § 211.192 is not conducted, the written record shall include the reason that an investigation was found not to be necessary and the name of the responsible person making such a determination.

§ 50.24 Exception from informed consent requirements for emergency research.

(a) The IRB responsible for the review, approval, and continuing review of the clinical investigation described in this section may approve that investigation without requiring that informed consent of all research subjects be obtained if the IRB (with the concurrence of a licensed physician who is a member of or consultant to the IRB and who is not otherwise participating in the clinical investigation) finds and documents each of the following:

(1) The human subjects are in a life-threatening situation, available treatments are unproven or unsatisfactory, and the collection of valid scientific evidence, which may include evidence obtained through randomized placebo-controlled investigations, is necessary to determine the safety and effectiveness of particular interventions.

(2) Obtaining informed consent is not feasible because:

(i) The subjects will not be able to give their informed consent as a result of their medical condition;

(ii) The intervention under investigation must be administered before consent from the subjects' legally authorized representatives is feasible; and

(iii) There is no reasonable way to identify prospectively the individuals likely to become eligible for participation in the clinical investigation.

(3) Participation in the research holds out the prospect of direct benefit to the subjects because:

(i) Subjects are facing a life-threatening situation that necessitates intervention;

(ii) Appropriate animal and other preclinical studies have been conducted, and the information derived from those studies and related evidence support the potential for the intervention to provide a direct benefit to the individual subjects; and

(iii) Risks associated with the investigation are reasonable in relation to what is known about the medical condition of the potential class of subjects, the risks and benefits of standard therapy, if any, and what is known about the risks and benefits of the proposed intervention or activity.

(4) The clinical investigation could not practicably be carried out without the waiver.

(5) The proposed investigational plan defines the length of the potential therapeutic window based on scientific evidence, and the investigator has committed to attempting to contact a legally authorized representative for each subject within that window of time and, if feasible, to asking the legally authorized representative contacted for consent within that window rather than proceeding without consent. The investigator will summarize efforts made to contact legally authorized representatives and make this information available to the IRB at the time of continuing review.

(6) The IRB has reviewed and approved informed consent procedures and an informed consent document consistent with § 50.25. These procedures and the informed consent document are to be used with subjects or their legally authorized representatives in situations where use of such procedures and documents is feasible. The IRB has reviewed and approved procedures and information to be used when providing an opportunity for a family member to object to a subject's participation in the clinical investigation consistent with paragraph (a)(7)(v) of this section.

(7) Additional protections of the rights and welfare of the subjects will be provided, including, at least:

(i) Consultation (including, where appropriate, consultation carried out by the IRB) with representatives of the communities in which the clinical investigation will be conducted and from which the subjects will be drawn;

(ii) Public disclosure to the communities in which the clinical investigation will be conducted and from which the subjects will be drawn, prior to initiation of the clinical investigation, of plans for the investigation and its risks and expected benefits;

(iii) Public disclosure of sufficient information following completion of the clinical investigation to apprise the community and researchers of the study, including the demographic characteristics of the research population, and its results;

(iv) Establishment of an independent data monitoring committee to exercise oversight of the clinical investigation; and

(v) If obtaining informed consent is not feasible and a legally authorized representative is not reasonably available, the investigator has committed, if feasible, to attempting to contact within the therapeutic window the subject's family member who is not a legally authorized representative, and asking whether he or she objects to the subject's participation in the clinical investigation. The investigator will summarize efforts made to contact family members and make this information available to the IRB at the time of continuing review.

(b) The IRB is responsible for ensuring that procedures are in place to inform, at the earliest feasible opportunity, each subject, or if the subject remains incapacitated, a legally authorized representative of the subject, or if such a representative is not reasonably available, a family member, of the subject's inclusion in the clinical investigation, the details of the investigation and other information contained in the informed consent document. The IRB shall also ensure that there is a procedure to inform the subject, or if the subject remains incapacitated, a legally authorized representative of the subject, or if such a representative is not reasonably available, a family member, that he or she may discontinue the subject's participation at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to which the subject is otherwise entitled. If a legally authorized representative or family member is told about the clinical investigation and the subject's condition improves, the subject is also to be informed as soon as feasible. If a subject is entered into a clinical investigation with waived consent and the subject dies before a legally authorized representative or family member can be contacted, information about the clinical investigation is to be provided to the subject's legally authorized representative or family member, if feasible.

(c) The IRB determinations required by paragraph (a) of this section and the documentation required by paragraph (e) of this section are to be retained by the IRB for at least 3 years after completion of the clinical investigation, and the records shall be accessible for inspection and copying by FDA in accordance with § 56.115(b) of this chapter.

(d) Protocols involving an exception to the informed consent requirement under this section must be performed under a separate investigational new drug application (IND) or investigational device exemption (IDE) that clearly identifies such protocols as protocols that may include subjects who are unable to consent. The submission of those protocols in a separate IND/IDE is required even if an IND for the same drug product or an IDE for the same device already exists. Applications for investigations under this section may not be submitted as amendments under §§ 312.30 or 812.35 of this chapter.

(e) If an IRB determines that it cannot approve a clinical investigation because the investigation does not meet the criteria in the exception provided under paragraph (a) of this section or because of other relevant ethical concerns, the IRB must document its findings and provide these findings promptly in writing to the clinical investigator and to the sponsor of the clinical investigation. The sponsor of the clinical investigation must promptly disclose this information to FDA and to the sponsor's clinical investigators who are participating or are asked to participate in this or a substantially equivalent clinical investigation of the sponsor, and to other IRB's that have been, or are, asked to review this or a substantially equivalent investigation by that sponsor.

§ 312.21 Phases of an investigation.

An IND may be submitted for one or more phases of an investigation. The clinical investigation of a previously untested drug is generally divided into three phases. Although in general the phases are conducted sequentially, they may overlap. These three phases of an investigation are a follows:

(a) Phase 1. 

(1) Phase 1 includes the initial introduction of an investigational new drug into humans. Phase 1 studies are typically closely monitored and may be conducted in patients or normal volunteer subjects. These studies are designed to determine the metabolism and pharmacologic actions of the drug in humans, the side effects associated with increasing doses, and, if possible, to gain early evidence on effectiveness. During Phase 1, sufficient information about the drug's pharmacokinetics and pharmacological effects should be obtained to permit the design of well-controlled, scientifically valid, Phase 2 studies. The total number of subjects and patients included in Phase 1 studies varies with the drug, but is generally in the range of 20 to 80.

(2) Phase 1 studies also include studies of drug metabolism, structure-activity relationships, and mechanism of action in humans, as well as studies in which investigational drugs are used as research tools to explore biological phenomena or disease processes.

(b) Phase 2.  Phase 2 includes the controlled clinical studies conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the drug for a particular indication or indications in patients with the disease or condition under study and to determine the common short-term side effects and risks associated with the drug. Phase 2 studies are typically well controlled, closely monitored, and conducted in a relatively small number of patients, usually involving no more than several hundred subjects.

(c) Phase 3.  Phase 3 studies are expanded controlled and uncontrolled trials. They are performed after preliminary evidence suggesting effectiveness of the drug has been obtained, and are intended to gather the additional information about effectiveness and safety that is needed to evaluate the overall benefit-risk relationship of the drug and to provide an adequate basis for physician labeling. Phase 3 studies usually include from several hundred to several thousand subjects.


§ 312.22 General principles of the IND submission.

(a) FDA's primary objectives in reviewing an IND are, in all phases of the investigation, to assure the safety and rights of subjects, and, in Phase 2 and 3, to help assure that the quality of the scientific evaluation of drugs is adequate to permit an evaluation of the drug's effectiveness and safety. Therefore, although FDA's review of Phase 1 submissions will focus on assessing the safety of Phase 1 investigations, FDA's review of Phases 2 and 3 submissions will also include an assessment of the scientific quality of the clinical investigations and the likelihood that the investigations will yield data capable of meeting statutory standards for marketing approval.

(b) The amount of information on a particular drug that must be submitted in an IND to assure the accomplishment of the objectives described in paragraph (a) of this section depends upon such factors as the novelty of the drug, the extent to which it has been studied previously, the known or suspected risks, and the developmental phase of the drug.

(c) The central focus of the initial IND submission should be on the general investigational plan and the protocols for specific human studies. Subsequent amendments to the IND that contain new or revised protocols should build logically on previous submissions and should be supported by additional information, including the results of animal toxicology studies or other human studies as appropriate. Annual reports to the IND should serve as the focus for reporting the status of studies being conducted under the IND and should update the general investigational plan for the coming year.

(d) The IND format set forth in § 312.23 should be followed routinely by sponsors in the interest of fostering an efficient review of applications. Sponsors are expected to exercise considerable discretion, however, regarding the content of information submitted in each section, depending upon the kind of drug being studied and the nature of the available information. Section 312.23 outlines the information needed for a commercially sponsored IND for a new molecular entity. A sponsor-investigator who uses, as a research tool, an investigational new drug that is already subject to a manufacturer's IND or marketing application should follow the same general format, but ordinarily may, if authorized by the manufacturer, refer to the manufacturer's IND or marketing application in providing the technical information supporting the proposed clinical investigation. A sponsor-investigator who uses an investigational drug not subject to a manufacturer's IND or marketing application is ordinarily required to submit all technical information supporting the IND, unless such information may be referenced from the scientific literature.

§ 312.23 IND content and format.

(a) A sponsor who intends to conduct a clinical investigation subject to this part shall submit an “Investigational New Drug Application” (IND) including, in the following order:

(1) Cover sheet (Form FDA-1571).  A cover sheet for the application containing the following:

(i) The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor, the date of the application, and the name of the investigational new drug.

(ii) Identification of the phase or phases of the clinical investigation to be conducted.

(iii) A commitment not to begin clinical investigations until an IND covering the investigations is in effect.

(iv) A commitment that an Institutional Review Board (IRB) that complies with the requirements set forth in part 56 will be responsible for the initial and continuing review and approval of each of the studies in the proposed clinical investigation and that the investigator will report to the IRB proposed changes in the research activity in accordance with the requirements of part 56.

(v) A commitment to conduct the investigation in accordance with all other applicable regulatory requirements.

(vi) The name and title of the person responsible for monitoring the conduct and progress of the clinical investigations.

(vii) The name(s) and title(s) of the person(s) responsible under § 312.32 for review and evaluation of information relevant to the safety of the drug.

(viii) If a sponsor has transferred any obligations for the conduct of any clinical study to a contract research organization, a statement containing the name and address of the contract research organization, identification of the clinical study, and a listing of the obligations transferred. If all obligations governing the conduct of the study have been transferred, a general statement of this transfer—in lieu of a listing of the specific obligations transferred—may be submitted.

(ix) The signature of the sponsor or the sponsor's authorized representative. If the person signing the application does not reside or have a place of business within the United States, the IND is required to contain the name and address of, and be countersigned by, an attorney, agent, or other authorized official who resides or maintains a place of business within the United States.

(2) A table of contents. 

(3) Introductory statement and general investigational plan. 

(i) A brief introductory statement giving the name of the drug and all active ingredients, the drug's pharmacological class, the structural formula of the drug (if known), the formulation of the dosage form(s) to be used, the route of administration, and the broad objectives and planned duration of the proposed clinical investigation(s).

(ii) A brief summary of previous human experience with the drug, with reference to other IND's if pertinent, and to investigational or marketing experience in other countries that may be relevant to the safety of the proposed clinical investigation(s).

(iii) If the drug has been withdrawn from investigation or marketing in any country for any reason related to safety or effectiveness, identification of the country(ies) where the drug was withdrawn and the reasons for the withdrawal.

(iv) A brief description of the overall plan for investigating the drug product for the following year. The plan should include the following: 

(a) The rationale for the drug or the research study; 

(b) the indication(s) to be studied; 

(c) the general approach to be followed in evaluating the drug; 

(d) the kinds of clinical trials to be conducted in the first year following the submission (if plans are not developed for the entire year, the sponsor should so indicate); 

(e) the estimated number of patients to be given the drug in those studies; and 

(f) any risks of particular severity or seriousness anticipated on the basis of the toxicological data in animals or prior studies in humans with the drug or related drugs.

(4) [Reserved]

(5) Investigator's brochure.  If required under § 312.55, a copy of the investigator's brochure, containing the following information:

(i) A brief description of the drug substance and the formulation, including the structural formula, if known.

(ii) A summary of the pharmacological and toxicological effects of the drug in animals and, to the extent known, in humans.

(iii) A summary of the pharmacokinetics and biological disposition of the drug in animals and, if known, in humans.

(iv) A summary of information relating to safety and effectiveness in humans obtained from prior clinical studies. (Reprints of published articles on such studies may be appended when useful.)

(v) A description of possible risks and side effects to be anticipated on the basis of prior experience with the drug under investigation or with related drugs, and of precautions or special monitoring to be done as part of the investigational use of the drug.

(6) Protocols. 

(i) A protocol for each planned study. (Protocols for studies not submitted initially in the IND should be submitted in accordance with § 312.30(a).) In general, protocols for Phase 1 studies may be less detailed and more flexible than protocols for Phase 2 and 3 studies. Phase 1 protocols should be directed primarily at providing an outline of the investigation—an estimate of the number of patients to be involved, a description of safety exclusions, and a description of the dosing plan including duration, dose, or method to be used in determining dose—and should specify in detail only those elements of the study that are critical to safety, such as necessary monitoring of vital signs and blood chemistries. Modifications of the experimental design of Phase 1 studies that do not affect critical safety assessments are required to be reported to FDA only in the annual report.

(ii) In Phases 2 and 3, detailed protocols describing all aspects of the study should be submitted. A protocol for a Phase 2 or 3 investigation should be designed in such a way that, if the sponsor anticipates that some deviation from the study design may become necessary as the investigation progresses, alternatives or contingencies to provide for such deviation are built into the protocols at the outset. For example, a protocol for a controlled short-term study might include a plan for an early crossover of nonresponders to an alternative therapy.

(iii) A protocol is required to contain the following, with the specific elements and detail of the protocol reflecting the above distinctions depending on the phase of study:

(a) A statement of the objectives and purpose of the study.

(b) The name and address and a statement of the qualifications (curriculum vitae or other statement of qualifications) of each investigator, and the name of each subinvestigator (e.g., research fellow, resident) working under the supervision of the investigator; the name and address of the research facilities to be used; and the name and address of each reviewing Institutional Review Board.

(c) The criteria for patient selection and for exclusion of patients and an estimate of the number of patients to be studied.

(d) A description of the design of the study, including the kind of control group to be used, if any, and a description of methods to be used to minimize bias on the part of subjects, investigators, and analysts.

(e) The method for determining the dose(s) to be administered, the planned maximum dosage, and the duration of individual patient exposure to the drug.

(f) A description of the observations and measurements to be made to fulfill the objectives of the study.

(g) A description of clinical procedures, laboratory tests, or other measures to be taken to monitor the effects of the drug in human subjects and to minimize risk.

(7) Chemistry, manufacturing, and control information. 

(i) As appropriate for the particular investigations covered by the IND, a section describing the composition, manufacture, and control of the drug substance and the drug product. Although in each phase of the investigation sufficient information is required to be submitted to assure the proper identification, quality, purity, and strength of the investigational drug, the amount of information needed to make that assurance will vary with the phase of the investigation, the proposed duration of the investigation, the dosage form, and the amount of information otherwise available. FDA recognizes that modifications to the method of preparation of the new drug substance and dosage form and changes in the dosage form itself are likely as the investigation progresses. Therefore, the emphasis in an initial Phase 1 submission should generally be placed on the identification and control of the raw materials and the new drug substance. Final specifications for the drug substance and drug product are not expected until the end of the investigational process.

(ii) It should be emphasized that the amount of information to be submitted depends upon the scope of the proposed clinical investigation. For example, although stability data are required in all phases of the IND to demonstrate that the new drug substance and drug product are within acceptable chemical and physical limits for the planned duration of the proposed clinical investigation, if very short-term tests are proposed, the supporting stability data can be correspondingly limited.

(iii) As drug development proceeds and as the scale or production is changed from the pilot-scale production appropriate for the limited initial clinical investigations to the larger-scale production needed for expanded clinical trials, the sponsor should submit information amendments to supplement the initial information submitted on the chemistry, manufacturing, and control processes with information appropriate to the expanded scope of the investigation.

(iv) Reflecting the distinctions described in this paragraph (a)(7), and based on the phase(s) to be studied, the submission is required to contain the following:

(a) Drug substance.  A description of the drug substance, including its physical, chemical, or biological characteristics; the name and address of its manufacturer; the general method of preparation of the drug substance; the acceptable limits and analytical methods used to assure the identity, strength, quality, and purity of the drug substance; and information sufficient to support stability of the drug substance during the toxicological studies and the planned clinical studies. Reference to the current edition of the United States Pharmacopeia—National Formulary may satisfy relevant requirements in this paragraph.

(b) Drug product.  A list of all components, which may include reasonable alternatives for inactive compounds, used in the manufacture of the investigational drug product, including both those components intended to appear in the drug product and those which may not appear but which are used in the manufacturing process, and, where applicable, the quantitative composition of the investigational drug product, including any reasonable variations that may be expected during the investigational stage; the name and address of the drug product manufacturer; a brief general description of the manufacturing and packaging procedure as appropriate for the product; the acceptable limits and analytical methods used to assure the identity, strength, quality, and purity of the drug product; and information sufficient to assure the product's stability during the planned clinical studies. Reference to the current edition of the United States Pharmacopeia—National Formulary may satisfy certain requirements in this paragraph.

(c) A brief general description of the composition, manufacture, and control of any placebo used in a controlled clinical trial.

(d) Labeling.  A copy of all labels and labeling to be provided to each investigator.

(e) Environmental analysis requirements.  A claim for categorical exclusion under § 25.30 or 25.31 or an environmental assessment under § 25.40.

(8) Pharmacology and toxicology information.  Adequate information about pharmacological and toxicological studies of the drug involving laboratory animals or in vitro, on the basis of which the sponsor has concluded that it is reasonably safe to conduct the proposed clinical investigations. The kind, duration, and scope of animal and other tests required varies with the duration and nature of the proposed clinical investigations. Guidance documents are available from FDA that describe ways in which these requirements may be met. Such information is required to include the identification and qualifications of the individuals who evaluated the results of such studies and concluded that it is reasonably safe to begin the proposed investigations and a statement of where the investigations were conducted and where the records are available for inspection. As drug development proceeds, the sponsor is required to submit informational amendments, as appropriate, with additional information pertinent to safety.

(i) Pharmacology and drug disposition.  A section describing the pharmacological effects and mechanism(s) of action of the drug in animals, and information on the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of the drug, if known.

(ii) Toxicology.  

(a) An integrated summary of the toxicological effects of the drug in animals and in vitro. Depending on the nature of the drug and the phase of the investigation, the description is to include the results of acute, subacute, and chronic toxicity tests; tests of the drug's effects on reproduction and the developing fetus; any special toxicity test related to the drug's particular mode of administration or conditions of use (e.g., inhalation, dermal, or ocular toxicology); and any in vitro studies intended to evaluate drug toxicity.

(b) For each toxicology study that is intended primarily to support the safety of the proposed clinical investigation, a full tabulation of data suitable for detailed review.

(iii) For each nonclinical laboratory study subject to the good laboratory practice regulations under part 58, a statement that the study was conducted in compliance with the good laboratory practice regulations in part 58, or, if the study was not conducted in compliance with those regulations, a brief statement of the reason for the noncompliance.

(9) Previous human experience with the investigational drug.  A summary of previous human experience known to the applicant, if any, with the investigational drug. The information is required to include the following:

(i) If the investigational drug has been investigated or marketed previously, either in the United States or other countries, detailed information about such experience that is relevant to the safety of the proposed investigation or to the investigation's rationale. If the drug has been the subject of controlled trials, detailed information on such trials that is relevant to an assessment of the drug's effectiveness for the proposed investigational use(s) should also be provided. Any published material that is relevant to the safety of the proposed investigation or to an assessment of the drug's effectiveness for its proposed investigational use should be provided in full. Published material that is less directly relevant may be supplied by a bibliography.

(ii) If the drug is a combination of drugs previously investigated or marketed, the information required under paragraph (a)(9)(i) of this section should be provided for each active drug component. However, if any component in such combination is subject to an approved marketing application or is otherwise lawfully marketed in the United States, the sponsor is not required to submit published material concerning that active drug component unless such material relates directly to the proposed investigational use (including publications relevant to component-component interaction).

(iii) If the drug has been marketed outside the United States, a list of the countries in which the drug has been marketed and a list of the countries in which the drug has been withdrawn from marketing for reasons potentially related to safety or effectiveness.

(10) Additional information.  In certain applications, as described below, information on special topics may be needed. Such information shall be submitted in this section as follows:

(i) Drug dependence and abuse potential.  If the drug is a psychotropic substance or otherwise has abuse potential, a section describing relevant clinical studies and experience and studies in test animals.

(ii) Radioactive drugs.  If the drug is a radioactive drug, sufficient data from animal or human studies to allow a reasonable calculation of radiation-absorbed dose to the whole body and critical organs upon administration to a human subject. Phase 1 studies of radioactive drugs must include studies which will obtain sufficient data for dosimetry calculations.

(iii) Pediatric studies.  Plans for assessing pediatric safety and effectiveness.

(iv) Other information.  A brief statement of any other information that would aid evaluation of the proposed clinical investigations with respect to their safety or their design and potential as controlled clinical trials to support marketing of the drug.

(11) Relevant information.  If requested by FDA, any other relevant information needed for review of the application.

(b) Information previously submitted.  The sponsor ordinarily is not required to resubmit information previously submitted, but may incorporate the information by reference. A reference to information submitted previously must identify the file by name, reference number, volume, and page number where the information can be found. A reference to information submitted to the agency by a person other than the sponsor is required to contain a written statement that authorizes the reference and that is signed by the person who submitted the information.

(c) Material in a foreign language.  The sponsor shall submit an accurate and complete English translation of each part of the IND that is not in English. The sponsor shall also submit a copy of each original literature publication for which an English translation is submitted.

(d) Number of copies.  The sponsor shall submit an original and two copies of all submissions to the IND file, including the original submission and all amendments and reports.

(e) Numbering of IND submissions.  Each submission relating to an IND is required to be numbered serially using a single, three-digit serial number. The initial IND is required to be numbered 000; each subsequent submission (e.g., amendment, report, or correspondence) is required to be numbered chronologically in sequence.

(f) Identification of exception from informed consent.  If the investigation involves an exception from informed consent under § 50.24 of this chapter, the sponsor shall prominently identify on the cover sheet that the investigation is subject to the requirements in § 50.24 of this chapter.

§ 312.30 Protocol amendments.

Once an IND is in effect, a sponsor shall amend it as needed to ensure that the clinical investigations are conducted according to protocols included in the application. This section sets forth the provisions under which new protocols may be submitted and changes in previously submitted protocols may be made. Whenever a sponsor intends to conduct a clinical investigation with an exception from informed consent for emergency research as set forth in § 50.24 of this chapter, the sponsor shall submit a separate IND for such investigation.

(a) New protocol.  Whenever a sponsor intends to conduct a study that is not covered by a protocol already contained in the IND, the sponsor shall submit to FDA a protocol amendment containing the protocol for the study. Such study may begin provided two conditions are met: 

(1) The sponsor has submitted the protocol to FDA for its review; and 

(2) the protocol has been approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) with responsibility for review and approval of the study in accordance with the requirements of part 56. The sponsor may comply with these two conditions in either order.

(b) Changes in a protocol. 

(1) A sponsor shall submit a protocol amendment describing any change in a Phase 1 protocol that significantly affects the safety of subjects or any change in a Phase 2 or 3 protocol that significantly affects the safety of subjects, the scope of the investigation, or the scientific quality of the study. Examples of changes requiring an amendment under this paragraph include:

(i) Any increase in drug dosage or duration of exposure of individual subjects to the drug beyond that in the current protocol, or any significant increase in the number of subjects under study.

(ii) Any significant change in the design of a protocol (such as the addition or dropping of a control group).

(iii) The addition of a new test or procedure that is intended to improve monitoring for, or reduce the risk of, a side effect or adverse event; or the dropping of a test intended to monitor safety.

(2) 

(i) A protocol change under paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be made provided two conditions are met:

(a) The sponsor has submitted the change to FDA for its review; and

(b) The change has been approved by the IRB with responsibility for review and approval of the study. The sponsor may comply with these two conditions in either order.

(ii) Notwithstanding paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section, a protocol change intended to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to subjects may be implemented immediately provided FDA is subsequently notified by protocol amendment and the reviewing IRB is notified in accordance with § 56.104(c).

(c) New investigator.  A sponsor shall submit a protocol amendment when a new investigator is added to carry out a previously submitted protocol, except that a protocol amendment is not required when a licensed practitioner is added in the case of a treatment protocol under § 312.315 or § 312.320. Once the investigator is added to the study, the investigational drug may be shipped to the investigator and the investigator may begin participating in the study. The sponsor shall notify FDA of the new investigator within 30 days of the investigator being added.

(d) Content and format.  A protocol amendment is required to be prominently identified as such (i.e., “Protocol Amendment: New Protocol”, “Protocol Amendment: Change in Protocol”, or “Protocol Amendment: New Investigator”), and to contain the following:

(1) 

(i) In the case of a new protocol, a copy of the new protocol and a brief description of the most clinically significant differences between it and previous protocols.

(ii) In the case of a change in protocol, a brief description of the change and reference (date and number) to the submission that contained the protocol.

(iii) In the case of a new investigator, the investigator's name, the qualifications to conduct the investigation, reference to the previously submitted protocol, and all additional information about the investigator's study as is required under § 312.23(a)(6)(iii)(b).

(2) Reference, if necessary, to specific technical information in the IND or in a concurrently submitted information amendment to the IND that the sponsor relies on to support any clinically significant change in the new or amended protocol. If the reference is made to supporting information already in the IND, the sponsor shall identify by name, reference number, volume, and page number the location of the information.

(3) If the sponsor desires FDA to comment on the submission, a request for such comment and the specific questions FDA's response should address.

(e) When submitted.  A sponsor shall submit a protocol amendment for a new protocol or a change in protocol before its implementation. Protocol amendments to add a new investigator or to provide additional information about investigators may be grouped and submitted at 30-day intervals. When several submissions of new protocols or protocol changes are anticipated during a short period, the sponsor is encouraged, to the extent feasible, to include these all in a single submission.

§ 312.31 Information amendments.

(a) Requirement for information amendment.  A sponsor shall report in an information amendment essential information on the IND that is not within the scope of a protocol amendment, IND safety reports, or annual report. Examples of information requiring an information amendment include:

(1) New toxicology, chemistry, or other technical information; or

(2) A report regarding the discontinuance of a clinical investigation.

(b) Content and format of an information amendment.  An information amendment is required to bear prominent identification of its contents (e.g., “Information Amendment: Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Control”, “Information Amendment: Pharmacology-Toxicology”, “Information Amendment: Clinical”), and to contain the following:

(1) A statement of the nature and purpose of the amendment.

(2) An organized submission of the data in a format appropriate for scientific review.

(3) If the sponsor desires FDA to comment on an information amendment, a request for such comment.

(c) When submitted.  Information amendments to the IND should be submitted as necessary but, to the extent feasible, not more than every 30 days.

312.32 IND safety reporting.

(a) Definitions.  The following definitions of terms apply to this section:

Adverse event   means any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in humans, whether or not considered drug related.

Life-threatening adverse event or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction.   An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “life-threatening” if, in the view of either the investigator or sponsor, its occurrence places the patient or subject at immediate risk of death. It does not include an adverse event or suspected adverse reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.

Serious adverse event or serious suspected adverse reaction.   An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “serious” if, in the view of either the investigator or sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: Death, a life-threatening adverse event, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.

Suspected adverse reaction   means any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the adverse event. For the purposes of IND safety reporting, “reasonable possibility” means there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event. Suspected adverse reaction implies a lesser degree of certainty about causality than adverse reaction, which means any adverse event caused by a drug.

Unexpected adverse event or unexpected suspected adverse reaction.   An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “unexpected” if it is not listed in the investigator brochure or is not listed at the specificity or severity that has been observed; or, if an investigator brochure is not required or available, is not consistent with the risk information described in the general investigational plan or elsewhere in the current application, as amended. For example, under this definition, hepatic necrosis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater severity) if the investigator brochure referred only to elevated hepatic enzymes or hepatitis. Similarly, cerebral thromboembolism and cerebral vasculitis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater specificity) if the investigator brochure listed only cerebral vascular accidents. “Unexpected,” as used in this definition, also refers to adverse events or suspected adverse reactions that are mentioned in the investigator brochure as occurring with a class of drugs or as anticipated from the pharmacological properties of the drug, but are not specifically mentioned as occurring with the particular drug under investigation.

(b) Review of safety information.  The sponsor must promptly review all information relevant to the safety of the drug obtained or otherwise received by the sponsor from foreign or domestic sources, including information derived from any clinical or epidemiological investigations, animal or in vitro studies, reports in the scientific literature, and unpublished scientific papers, as well as reports from foreign regulatory authorities and reports of foreign commercial marketing experience for drugs that are not marketed in the United States.

(c) 

(1) IND safety reports.  The sponsor must notify FDA and all participating investigators (i.e., all investigators to whom the sponsor is providing drug under its INDs or under any investigator's IND) in an IND safety report of potential serious risks, from clinical trials or any other source, as soon as possible, but in no case later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor determines that the information qualifies for reporting under paragraph (c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), (c)(1)(iii), or (c)(1)(iv) of this section. In each IND safety report, the sponsor must identify all IND safety reports previously submitted to FDA concerning a similar suspected adverse reaction, and must analyze the significance of the suspected adverse reaction in light of previous, similar reports or any other relevant information.

(i) Serious and unexpected suspected adverse reaction.  The sponsor must report any suspected adverse reaction that is both serious and unexpected. The sponsor must report an adverse event as a suspected adverse reaction only if there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event, such as:

(A) A single occurrence of an event that is uncommon and known to be strongly associated with drug exposure (e.g., angioedema, hepatic injury, Stevens-Johnson Syndrome);

(B) One or more occurrences of an event that is not commonly associated with drug exposure, but is otherwise uncommon in the population exposed to the drug (e.g., tendon rupture);

(C) An aggregate analysis of specific events observed in a clinical trial (such as known consequences of the underlying disease or condition under investigation or other events that commonly occur in the study population independent of drug therapy) that indicates those events occur more frequently in the drug treatment group than in a concurrent or historical control group.

(ii) Findings from other studies.  The sponsor must report any findings from epidemiological studies, pooled analysis of multiple studies, or clinical studies (other than those reported under paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section), whether or not conducted under an IND, and whether or not conducted by the sponsor, that suggest a significant risk in humans exposed to the drug. Ordinarily, such a finding would result in a safety-related change in the protocol, informed consent, investigator brochure (excluding routine updates of these documents), or other aspects of the overall conduct of the clinical investigation.

(iii) Findings from animal or in vitro testing.  The sponsor must report any findings from animal or in vitro testing, whether or not conducted by the sponsor, that suggest a significant risk in humans exposed to the drug, such as reports of mutagenicity, teratogenicity, or carcinogenicity, or reports of significant organ toxicity at or near the expected human exposure. Ordinarily, any such findings would result in a safety-related change in the protocol, informed consent, investigator brochure (excluding routine updates of these documents), or other aspects of the overall conduct of the clinical investigation.

(iv) Increased rate of occurrence of serious suspected adverse reactions.  The sponsor must report any clinically important increase in the rate of a serious suspected adverse reaction over that listed in the protocol or investigator brochure.

(v) Submission of IND safety reports.  The sponsor must submit each IND safety report in a narrative format or on FDA Form 3500A or in an electronic format that FDA can process, review, and archive. FDA will periodically issue guidance on how to provide the electronic submission (e.g., method of transmission, media, file formats, preparation and organization of files). The sponsor may submit foreign suspected adverse reactions on a Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) I Form instead of a FDA Form 3500A. Reports of overall findings or pooled analyses from published and unpublished in vitro, animal, epidemiological, or clinical studies must be submitted in a narrative format. Each notification to FDA must bear prominent identification of its contents, i.e., “IND Safety Report,” and must be transmitted to the review division in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research or in the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research that has responsibility for review of the IND. Upon request from FDA, the sponsor must submit to FDA any additional data or information that the agency deems necessary, as soon as possible, but in no case later than 15 calendar days after receiving the request.

(2) Unexpected fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction reports.  The sponsor must also notify FDA of any unexpected fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction as soon as possible but in no case later than 7 calendar days after the sponsor's initial receipt of the information.

(3) Reporting format or frequency.  FDA may require a sponsor to submit IND safety reports in a format or at a frequency different than that required under this paragraph. The sponsor may also propose and adopt a different reporting format or frequency if the change is agreed to in advance by the director of the FDA review division that has responsibility for review of the IND.

(4) Investigations of marketed drugs.  A sponsor of a clinical study of a drug marketed or approved in the United States that is conducted under an IND is required to submit IND safety reports for suspected adverse reactions that are observed in the clinical study, at domestic or foreign study sites. The sponsor must also submit safety information from the clinical study as prescribed by the postmarketing safety reporting requirements (e.g., §§ 310.305, 314.80, and 600.80 of this chapter).

(5) Reporting study endpoints.  Study endpoints (e.g., mortality or major morbidity) must be reported to FDA by the sponsor as described in the protocol and ordinarily would not be reported under paragraph (c) of this section. However, if a serious and unexpected adverse event occurs for which there is evidence suggesting a causal relationship between the drug and the event (e.g., death from anaphylaxis), the event must be reported under § 312.32(c)(1)(i) as a serious and unexpected suspected adverse reaction even if it is a component of the study endpoint (e.g., all-cause mortality).

(d) Followup. 

(1) The sponsor must promptly investigate all safety information it receives.

(2) Relevant followup information to an IND safety report must be submitted as soon as the information is available and must be identified as such, i.e., “Followup IND Safety Report.”

(3) If the results of a sponsor's investigation show that an adverse event not initially determined to be reportable under paragraph (c) of this section is so reportable, the sponsor must report such suspected adverse reaction in an IND safety report as soon as possible, but in no case later than 15 calendar days after the determination is made.

(e) Disclaimer.  A safety report or other information submitted by a sponsor under this part (and any release by FDA of that report or information) does not necessarily reflect a conclusion by the sponsor or FDA that the report or information constitutes an admission that the drug caused or contributed to an adverse event. A sponsor need not admit, and may deny, that the report or information submitted by the sponsor constitutes an admission that the drug caused or contributed to an adverse event.

§ 312.33 Annual reports.

A sponsor shall within 60 days of the anniversary date that the IND went into effect, submit a brief report of the progress of the investigation that includes:

(a) Individual study information.  A brief summary of the status of each study in progress and each study completed during the previous year. The summary is required to include the following information for each study:

(1) The title of the study (with any appropriate study identifiers such as protocol number), its purpose, a brief statement identifying the patient population, and a statement as to whether the study is completed.

(2) The total number of subjects initially planned for inclusion in the study; the number entered into the study to date, tabulated by age group, gender, and race; the number whose participation in the study was completed as planned; and the number who dropped out of the study for any reason.

(3) If the study has been completed, or if interim results are known, a brief description of any available study results.

(b) Summary information.  Information obtained during the previous year's clinical and nonclinical investigations, including:

(1) A narrative or tabular summary showing the most frequent and most serious adverse experiences by body system.

(2) A summary of all IND safety reports submitted during the past year.

(3) A list of subjects who died during participation in the investigation, with the cause of death for each subject.

(4) A list of subjects who dropped out during the course of the investigation in association with any adverse experience, whether or not thought to be drug related.

(5) A brief description of what, if anything, was obtained that is pertinent to an understanding of the drug's actions, including, for example, information about dose response, information from controlled trials, and information about bioavailability.

(6) A list of the preclinical studies (including animal studies) completed or in progress during the past year and a summary of the major preclinical findings.

(7) A summary of any significant manufacturing or microbiological changes made during the past year.

(c) A description of the general investigational plan for the coming year to replace that submitted 1 year earlier. The general investigational plan shall contain the information required under § 312.23(a)(3)(iv).

(d) If the investigator brochure has been revised, a description of the revision and a copy of the new brochure.

(e) A description of any significant Phase 1 protocol modifications made during the previous year and not previously reported to the IND in a protocol amendment.

(f) A brief summary of significant foreign marketing developments with the drug during the past year, such as approval of marketing in any country or withdrawal or suspension from marketing in any country.

(g) If desired by the sponsor, a log of any outstanding business with respect to the IND for which the sponsor requests or expects a reply, comment, or meeting.

§ 312.38 Withdrawal of an IND.

(a) At any time a sponsor may withdraw an effective IND without prejudice.

(b) If an IND is withdrawn, FDA shall be so notified, all clinical investigations conducted under the IND shall be ended, all current investigators notified, and all stocks of the drug returned to the sponsor or otherwise disposed of at the request of the sponsor in accordance with § 312.59.

(c) If an IND is withdrawn because of a safety reason, the sponsor shall promptly so inform FDA, all participating investigators, and all reviewing Institutional Review Boards, together with the reasons for such withdrawal.






Guidance for Industry and InvestigatorsSafety Reporting Requirements for INDs and BA/BE StudiesU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)December 2012Drug SafetyGuidance for Industry and InvestigatorsSafety Reporting Requirements for INDs and BA/BE StudiesGuidance for Industry and Investigators1Safety Reporting Requirements forINDs and BA/BE StudiesThis guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA's) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the appropriate number listed on the title page of this guidance.I. INTRODUCTIONThis guidance is intended to help sponsors and investigators comply with the requirements for investigational new drug (IND) safety reporting and safety reporting for bioavailability (BA) and bioequivalence (BE) studies under 21 CFR 312.32, 312.64(b), and 320.31(d)(3). This document provides guidance to sponsors and investigators on expedited safety reporting requirements for human drug and biological products2 that are being investigated under an IND and for drugs that are the subjects of BA and BE studies that are exempt from the IND requirements. This guidance defines terms used for safety reporting, makes recommendations on when and how to submit a safety report, and provides advice on other safety reporting issues that have arisen from sponsors and investigators.FDA's guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency's current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. BACKGROUND AND BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE REQUIREMENTSOn September 29, 2010, FDA published a final rule amending the IND safety reporting requirements under 21 CFR part 312 and adding safety reporting requirements for persons conducting BA and BE studies under 21 CFR part 320.1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Medical Policy in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) in conjunction with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) at FDA.2 For the purposes of this document, unless otherwise specified, all references to “drugs” or “drug products” include human drug products and biological products that are also drugs.Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsA. IND Safety Reporting RequirementsUnder the former 21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i)(A) and (B), sponsors investigating a drug under an IND were required to notify FDA and all participating investigators, in a written IND safety report, of any adverse experience associated with the use of the drug that was both serious and unexpected, and any finding from tests in laboratory animals that suggested a significant risk for human subjects. The phrase associated with the use of the drug was defined as “there is a reasonable possibility that the experience may have been caused by the drug” (former 21 CFR 312.32(a)). Notwithstanding this definition, sponsors frequently reported, as individual cases, serious adverse experiences for which there was little reason to believe that the drug caused the event. For example, sponsors often reported:Serious adverse experiences (e.g., mortality or major morbidity) that were likely to have been manifestations of the underlying diseaseSerious adverse experiences that commonly occurred in the study population independent of drug exposure (e.g., strokes or acute myocardial infarctions in an elderly population)Serious adverse experiences that were study endpoints (i.e., the study was evaluating whether the drug reduced the rate of these events)These types of reports are generally uninformative when reported as single events (i.e., without a comparison of the incidence of the event in treated and untreated subjects), and they do not contribute meaningfully to the developing safety profile of an investigational drug or to human subject protection. Attempting to review and evaluate these reports without the necessary context was also a drain on resources for FDA, investigators, and institutional review boards (IRBs),3 diverting them from other activities.The tendency for sponsors to report such uninformative individual cases seems to have been primarily related to interpretation of the reasonable possibility standard in the definition of associated with the use of the drug. For an individual case of the types of adverse events described above, there would generally not be enough evidence to suggest that there was a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the adverse event. Such events would therefore not meet the definition of “associated with the use of the drug” and should not have been reported as IND safety reports.Under 21 CFR 312.32, the amended requirements revise the definitions used for safety reporting and make clear when to submit expedited safety reports. The requirements distinguish circumstances in which it is appropriate to submit individual cases and circumstances in which cases should be aggregated and compared to cases in a control group and submitted only if the event occurs more frequently in the drug treatment group. Compliance with these requirements will increase the likelihood that submitted information will be interpretable and will meaningfully contribute to the developing safety profile of the investigational drug and improve the overall quality of safety reporting. In addition, reducing the number of uninformative individual reports will enhance the ability of sponsors, FDA, investigators, and IRBs to focus on safety issues that affect public health.3 See section VI.F of this guidance for more information on safety reporting to IRBs. 2Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsBecause the regulations require reporting certain adverse events in the aggregate rather than as individual cases, it is important for sponsors to collect and evaluate safety data systematically during product development, including accumulating safety data (see section V.A.3).B. Safety Reporting Requirements for BA and BE Studies (21 CFR 320.31(d)(3))Under former 21 CFR 320.31(d), certain in vivo BA and BE studies in humans were exempted from the IND requirements under part 312 if specific conditions were satisfied (i.e., samples of any test article and reference standard were reserved by the persons conducting the study and released to FDA upon request, studies were conducted in compliance with the requirements for institutional review set forth in 21 CFR part 56 and informed consent set forth in 21 CFR part 50). Although these studies were not subject to the IND safety reporting requirements under 21 CFR 312.32, FDA received safety information from these studies that provided important information about drugs under investigation. For this reason, the final rule contains safety reporting requirements under 21 CFR 320.31(d)(3) for persons conducting BA or BE studies that are exempt from the IND requirements. These requirements will help FDA monitor the safety of these drugs and better protect human subjects enrolled in BA or BE studies.III. DEFINITIONS (21 CFR 312.32(a))The IND safety reporting rule introduces terms and definitions that are meant to be clear and consistent. New definitions replace the definition of the phrase associated with the use of the drug in former 21 CFR 312.32(a), which, as previously discussed, has been a source of confusion. The definitions, followed by further explanation and examples, are provided in this section, and Appendix A provides a visual representation of the relationship between three of the terms.A. Adverse Event (21 CFR 312.32(a))Adverse event means any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in humans, whether or not considered drug related.An adverse event (also referred to as an adverse experience) can be any unfavorable and unintended sign (e.g., an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a drug, and does not imply any judgment about causality. An adverse event can arise with any use of the drug (e.g., off-label use, use in combination with another drug) and with any route of administration, formulation, or dose, including an overdose.3Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsB. Suspected Adverse Reaction (21 CFR 312.32(a))Suspected adverse reaction means any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the adverse event. For the purposes of IND safety reporting, ‘reasonable possibility’ means there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event. A suspected adverse reaction implies a lesser degree of certainty about causality than adverse reaction, which means any adverse event caused by a drug.Within the reporting requirement under 21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i), FDA makes clear the meaning of reasonable possibility by providing the following examples of types of evidence that would suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event.A single occurrence of an event that is uncommon and known to be strongly associated with drug exposure (e.g., angioedema, hepatic injury, Stevens-Johnson Syndrome)One or more occurrences of an event that is not commonly associated with drug exposure, but is otherwise uncommon in the population exposed to the drug (e.g., tendon rupture)An aggregate analysis of specific events observed in a clinical trial (such as known consequences of the underlying disease or condition under investigation or other events that commonly occur in the study population independent of drug therapy) that indicates those events occur more frequently in the drug treatment group than in a concurrent or historical control groupSuspected adverse reactions are the subset of all adverse events for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the event. Inherent in this definition, and in the requirement to report suspected adverse reactions, is the need for the sponsor to evaluate the available evidence and make a judgment about the likelihood that the drug actually caused the adverse event. We consider the application of the reasonable possibility causality standard to be consistent with the discussion about causality in the International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) E2A Guideline (“ICH E2A guidance”).4 However, the Agency notes there is a difference between this rule and the ICH E2A guidance with respect to who is responsible for making the causality judgment. The sponsor is responsible for making the causality judgment for this rule, whereas the ICH E2A guidance recommends that the judgment be based on either the investigator’s or the sponsor’s opinion. This is explained further in sections V.A and VI.D.1 of this document.4 ICH E2A Guideline for Industry, Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting, March 1995, pages 6-7. CDER guidance documents can be found on the Internet at http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm. We update guidances periodically. To make sure you have the most recent version of a guidance, check the CDER guidance Web site. CBER guidance documents can be found at http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm. 4Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsC. Adverse Reaction5An adverse reaction means any adverse event caused by a drug. Adverse reactions are a subset of all suspected adverse reactions where there is reason to conclude that the drug caused the event.D. Unexpected (21 CFR 312.32(a))An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “unexpected” if it is not listed in the investigator brochure or is not listed at the specificity or severity that has been observed; or, if an investigator brochure is not required or available, is not consistent with the risk information described in the general investigational plan or elsewhere in the current application, as amended. For example, under this definition, hepatic necrosis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater severity) if the investigator brochure referred only to elevated hepatic enzymes or hepatitis. Similarly, cerebral thromboembolism and cerebral vasculitis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater specificity) if the investigator brochure listed only cerebral vascular accidents. "Unexpected," as used in this definition, also refers to adverse events or suspected adverse reactions that are mentioned in the investigator brochure as occurring with a class of drugs or as anticipated from the pharmacological properties of the drug, but are not specifically mentioned as occurring with the particular drug under investigation.This definition relies entirely on the adverse events or suspected adverse reactions listed in the investigator brochure for the particular drug under investigation (or elsewhere in the general investigational plan if an investigator brochure is not required or available) as the basis for determining whether newly acquired information generated from clinical trials or reported from other sources is unexpected.6 This means that events not listed for the particular drug under investigation in the investigator brochure are considered “unexpected” and those listed are considered “expected.” When new adverse event information is received, it is the sponsor’s responsibility to determine whether the event is “unexpected” for IND safety reporting purposes. In the clinical trial setting, there has been some confusion with the term “expected” as it has been used to mean “anticipated” for the disease being treated or population being studied rather than “listed in the investigator brochure.” For example, some adverse events can be anticipated to occur as a result of a disease or in an older population (e.g., cancer-related deaths in a cancer trial, strokes or acute myocardial infarctions in an older population). However, for reporting purposes, these anticipated events are not “expected” because they are not listed in the investigator brochure (i.e., the test drug is not suspected or known to cause them). Monitoring and reporting these types of anticipated events are further discussed in section V.A.3 of this document.5 For the purposes of prescription drug labeling, the term adverse reaction is defined to mean “an undesirable effect, reasonably associated with use of a drug, that may occur as part of the pharmacological action of the drug or may be unpredictable in its occurrence. This definition does not include all adverse events observed during use of a drug, only those adverse events for which there is some basis to believe there is a causal relationship between the drug and the occurrence of the adverse event” (see 21 CFR 201.57(c)(7) and 201.80(g)).6 For drugs marketed or approved in the United States, ordinarily FDA-approved prescription drug labeling is used as the basis for determining whether an event is unexpected for reporting purposes.5Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsAdverse events listed in the investigator brochure as occurring with members of the same class of drugs, or as anticipated from the pharmacological properties of the drug, would be considered unexpected until they have been observed with the drug under investigation. For example, although angioedema is anticipated to occur in some patients exposed to drugs in the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor class and angioedema would be described in the investigator brochure as a class effect, a case of angioedema observed with the drug under investigation should be considered unexpected for reporting purposes until it is included in the investigator brochure as occurring with the drug under investigation.E. Serious (21 CFR 312.32(a))An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “serious” if, in the view of either the investigator or sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: Death, a life-threatening adverse event, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.This definition permits either the sponsor or the investigator to decide whether an event is serious. The investigator’s perspective may be informed by having actually observed the event, while the sponsor is likely to have broader knowledge of the drug and its effects to inform its evaluation of the significance of the event. Because serious adverse events are critically important for the identification of significant safety problems, FDA believes taking into account both the investigator’s and the sponsor’s assessment is important. Therefore, if either the sponsor or investigator believes that the event is serious, the event must be considered serious and evaluated by the sponsor for expedited reporting (21 CFR 312.32(a) and 312.32(c)(1)).We note that the definition of “serious” differs slightly from the ICH E2A guidance7 (i.e., FDA definition uses “and” rather than “or” in the sentence “Important medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition”). We will accept application of either the FDA definition (i.e., “and”) or the ICH E2A guidance criteria (i.e., “or”) in determining the seriousness of an event.7 ICH E2A, pages 4-5.6Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsF. Life-Threatening (21 CFR 312.32(a))An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “life-threatening” if, in the view of either the investigator or sponsor, its occurrence places the patient or subject at immediate risk of death. It does not include an adverse event or suspected adverse reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.As with the definition of serious, the determination of whether an adverse event is life-threatening can be based on the opinion of either the investigator or sponsor. Thus, if either believes that it meets the definition of life-threatening, it must be considered life-threatening for reporting purposes (21 CFR 312.32(a)).IV.REVIEW OF SAFETY INFORMATION (21 CFR 312.32(b))The sponsor is required to review promptly all information relevant to the safety of the drug (21 CFR 312.32(b)). During the course of drug development, adverse event information is generally reported to a sponsor by investigators conducting clinical trials; however, a sponsor may become aware of new safety information from a variety of sources, both domestic and foreign. Some examples of sources are listed as follows, but safety information from any other source would also need to be reviewed and evaluated by the sponsor.Animal studies or in vitro studiesClinical or epidemiological investigationsReports in the scientific literatureUnpublished scientific papersInformation presented at scientific meetingsReports from foreign regulatory authoritiesReports from commercial marketing experienceSafety information presented at a professional meetingForeign spontaneous reportsThe sponsor’s review should include examining data from all sources and deciding whether the information meets the criteria for expedited reporting (see section V), as well as evaluating all accumulating data at regular intervals to update safety information and to identify new safety signals. Some types of information should be sought by the sponsor as part of its continuous pharmacovigilance on the safety of the drug. For example, the sponsor should conduct literature searches regularly with a frequency appropriate to the drug or study design to seek safety information and report that information if necessary.V.MONITORING THE SAFETY DATABASE AND SUBMITTING IND SAFETY REPORTSUnder 21 CFR 312.32(c), the sponsor is required to notify FDA and all participating investigators in an IND safety report (i.e., 7- or 15-day expedited report) of potentially serious risks from clinical trials or any other source as soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor receives the safety information and determines that the information7Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsqualifies for reporting (see VII.C for a discussion of IND safety reporting time frames). Participating investigators include all investigators to whom the sponsor is providing drug under any of its INDs or under any investigator’s IND (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)). This includes, for example, all investigators participating in clinical trials under an IND, at U.S. and non-U.S. sites, for the investigational drug, and any investigators conducting a study under their own IND for whom the sponsor provides investigational drug.In addition, the sponsor must identify in each IND safety report all IND safety reports previously submitted to FDA concerning a similar suspected adverse reaction and must analyze the significance of the suspected adverse reaction in light of previous, similar reports or any other relevant information (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)). The analysis must include similar reports from all INDs held by the sponsor and any other relevant information known to the sponsor (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)). Sponsors should evaluate a suspected adverse reaction in the context of other related reports or adverse events, including those that occurred in the placebo or active comparator group and those that occurred in pre- and postmarketing studies.Sponsors should conduct ongoing safety evaluations, including periodic review and analyses of their entire safety database, not only for IND safety reporting purposes, but also to update investigator brochures, protocols, and consent forms with new safety information (see section VI.B.2 for information about updating investigator brochures).Sponsor-investigators, as defined in 21 CFR 312.3(b), are required to comply with both the sponsor and the investigator responsibilities under 21 CFR part 312. With respect to safety reporting under 21 CFR 312.32, this includes examining data from reports in the scientific literature and reports from foreign commercial marketing experience. The Agency recognizes that a sponsor-investigator may not have access to complete safety data maintained by a commercial sponsor or other sponsor-investigators, but sponsor-investigators are responsible for evaluating all safety information available to them. To protect human subjects, we recommend that entities that provide drug to or receive drug from other entities share safety information with each other.The sponsor must submit an IND safety report when any of the following criteria are met:A. Serious and Unexpected Suspected Adverse Reaction (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i))The sponsor must report in an IND safety report any suspected adverse reaction to study treatment (i.e., including active comparators) that is both serious and unexpected (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i)). Before submitting an IND safety report, the sponsor needs to ensure that the event meets all three of the definitions:Suspected adverse reactionSeriousUnexpected8Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsIf the adverse event does not meet all three of the definitions, it should not be submitted as an IND safety report.8Deciding whether the adverse event meets the definition of a suspected adverse reaction is usually the most difficult determination, but this decision is critical to avoid the submission of uninformative IND safety reports. The sponsor should evaluate the available information and decide whether there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the adverse event and, therefore, that the event meets the definition of a suspected adverse reaction. The suspected adverse reaction must then be reported expeditiously in an IND safety report if it also meets the definitions of serious and unexpected (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i)).Under 21 CFR 312.64, investigators are required to provide a causality assessment for each serious adverse event reported to the sponsor. For serious events that are unexpected, the sponsor considers the investigator’s causality assessment but submits an IND safety report only for those events for which the sponsor determines there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the event, regardless of the investigator’s causality assessment. (See Appendix B for a chart that clarifies sponsor and investigator responsibilities for reporting.)For example:Sponsor would not report events for which the investigator’s assessment is positive for causality, but where the sponsor’s evaluation did not find evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the event.Sponsor would report events for which the investigator’s assessment is negative for causality, but where the sponsor’s evaluation found evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the event.The investigator’s assessment of causality should be included in the report submitted to the sponsor. If the investigator fails to provide a causality assessment and the sponsor is unable to obtain it, or if the investigator assesses the causality as unknown, the sponsor should evaluate the event without the investigator’s assessment.To assist sponsors with determining whether an adverse event meets the definition of suspected adverse reaction, the requirement under 21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i) specifies that sponsors are to report to FDA only if there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event and it provides examples of such evidence, described below.1. Individual Occurrences (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i)(A))Certain serious adverse events are informative as single cases because they are uncommon and are known to be strongly associated with drug exposure. Some examples include angioedema, blood dyscrasias, rhabdomyolysis, hepatic injury, anaphylaxis, and Stevens-Johnson Syndrome. The occurrence of even one case of such adverse events8 Adverse events that do not meet the criteria for reporting in an IND safety report must still be reported in accordance with the periodic reporting regulations, when applicable (e.g., 21 CFR 312.33 IND annual report).9Contains Nonbinding Recommendationswould meet the definition of suspected adverse reaction (i.e., there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the event).2. One or More Occurrences (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i)(B))A single occurrence, or a small number of occurrences, of a serious adverse event that is uncommon in the study population, but not commonly associated with drug exposure may also be informative. If the event occurs in association with other factors strongly suggesting causation (e.g., strong temporal association, event recurs on rechallenge), a single case may be sufficiently persuasive to report in an IND safety report. Often, more than one occurrence from one or multiple studies would be needed before the sponsor could determine that there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the event. Examples include tendon rupture or heart valve lesions in young adults, or intussusception in healthy infants.3. Aggregate Analysis of Specific Events (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i)(C))Certain serious adverse events can be anticipated to occur in the study population independent of drug exposure. Such events include known consequences of the underlying disease or condition under investigation (e.g., symptoms, disease progression) and events unlikely to be related to the underlying disease or condition under investigation but common in the study population independent of drug therapy (e.g., cardiovascular events in an elderly population). An example of the former would be a non-acute death observed in a trial in cancer patients. An example of the latter would be an acute myocardial infarction observed in a long-duration trial in an elderly population with cancer. Although these serious adverse events meet the definition of unexpected at 21 CFR 312.32(a), as they are not listed in the investigator brochure (see sections III.D and VI.B), these events do not warrant expedited reporting as individual cases because it is not possible, based on a single case, to determine that there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the event. As a result, they do not meet the definition of a suspected adverse reaction.Section 312.32(c)(1)(i)(C) requires reporting in an IND safety report when an aggregate analysis of specific events observed in a clinical trial indicates those events occur more frequently in the drug treatment group than in a concurrent control group. In cases where a randomized comparison is not available, the estimate of whether the rate is greater than in a control population would have to be based on some other group not receiving the drug, such as the general population or populations similar to the drug population with respect to demographics and disease state but not receiving the test drug (e.g., a historical control). An aggregate analysis of specific events should reflect information from all relevant studies. Therefore, it should be performed both for individual studies (if there are enough events to be informative) and across all studies, including across INDs of the drug, to determine whether they meet the criteria for expedited reporting.The following recommendations are intended to assist sponsors with protocol development and monitoring the safety database.10Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsa.Reporting Study Endpoints (21 CFR 312.32(c)(5))Generally, study endpoints refer to outcomes that sponsors are measuring to evaluate efficacy. For trials designed to evaluate the effect of a drug on disease-related mortality or major morbidity, endpoint information should be collected, tracked, and monitored, usually by a Data Monitoring Committee (DMC), during the course of the study. The protocol would prespecify a monitoring plan for determining whether subjects receiving the drug treatment are at higher risk for the outcome (e.g., all-cause mortality), and such results would be reported according to the protocol. The study endpoints must be reported to FDA by the sponsor according to the protocol, and ordinarily would not be reported as IND safety reports, except when there is evidence suggesting a causal relationship between the drug and the event (21 CFR 312.32(c)(5)). For example, a death ordinarily would not be reported as an individual case in an expedited report from a trial designed to compare all-cause mortality in subjects receiving either drug treatment or a placebo. On the other hand, in the same trial with an all-cause mortality endpoint, if the death occurred as a result of an anaphylactic reaction that coincided with initial exposure to the drug, or as a result of fatal hepatic necrosis, the death must be reported as an individual case in an IND safety report because there would then be evidence suggesting a causal relationship between the drug and the event (21 CFR 312.32(c)(5)).In addition to the study endpoints described above, some studies also evaluate the effect of the drug on several other specific adverse events, often called “safety endpoints” or “secondary endpoints.” These safety endpoints or secondary endpoints should be identified in the protocol and monitored and reported by the sponsor as described in section V.A.3.b.b.Serious Adverse Events That Are Not Study EndpointsOther serious adverse events that are not study endpoints and are not “expected” (e.g., because they are not in the investigator’s brochure), can be anticipated to occur with some frequency during the course of the trial, regardless of drug exposure, depending on the patient population and disease under study. Examples of such “anticipated” events include known consequences of the underlying disease or condition under investigation, events anticipated from any background regimen, events common in the study population, or re-emergence or worsening of a condition relative to pretreatment baseline. In general, a limited number of occurrences of such an adverse event in a study population in which occurrences of the event are anticipated is not an adequate basis to conclude that the event is a suspected adverse reaction (i.e., that there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the event). Such events should not be reported individually as they occur because they are uninformative as single cases. Such anticipated adverse events should nonetheless be monitored at appropriate intervals, and the numbers of events in each arm of a controlled study should be compared. The adverse event must be reported to FDA expeditiously as an IND safety report if there is an imbalance between arms suggesting there is a reasonable possibility that the drug11Contains Nonbinding Recommendationscaused the adverse event (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i)(C)). It is important to consider the entire clinical trial database in such analyses.i.Identifying and monitoring protocol-specified serious adverse eventsAt the time of protocol development, the sponsor should identify in the protocol the serious adverse events that it does not plan to report individually in an expedited manner because they are anticipated to occur in the study population at some frequency independent of drug exposure. It is not possible or desirable to list in the protocol every adverse event that may occur in the study population. Factors to consider when deciding which adverse events to identify include, for example, characteristics of the study population, natural progression of the disease, background event rates, background regimens, co-morbid conditions, and past experience with similar populations. The list of the more common serious adverse events, based on past experience, could be used for all protocols (taking into account population differences) because the analyses of these adverse events should consider the entire safety database. Therefore, the sponsor should limit the list to those events that are common enough to make an overall analysis useful. For example, in a long-term osteoporosis trial in an elderly population, it would be reasonable to list myocardial infarction, but unreasonable to list acute narrow angle glaucoma, an event that can occur in this elderly population, but is relatively rare. The protocol should also describe how the protocol-specified serious adverse events will be monitored. The sponsor or an independent group should monitor the identified events during the conduct of the trial and submit an IND safety report if an aggregate analysis indicates that the events are occurring more frequently in the drug treatment group (see section V.A.3.c).ii.Reporting serious adverse events that are not protocol-specifiedThe fact that an event is not identified in the protocol does not mean that the sponsor must report a single occurrence of the event expeditiously. The sponsor should use judgment in determining whether there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the event. Often, a single case will be unpersuasive. For example, in the osteoporosis trial previously described, a single case of acute narrow angle glaucoma would generally not be reported in an IND safety report because such cases are seen in an untreated elderly population, but if monitoring for subsequent cases revealed additional cases in the drug treatment group, the sponsor would consider the events to meet the definition of suspected adverse reactions at 21 CFR 312.32(a) and would report them expeditiously. However, FDA will accept expedited reports for individual cases of unexpected serious adverse events that are not study endpoints and are not specified in the protocol as “anticipated” (e.g., they are known consequences of the disease being treated or common in the study population) to address concerns expressed by sponsors about not expeditiously reporting such cases.12Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsc.Safety Surveillance for Ongoing Clinical Trials9Because it is critical that a drug product’s risks be adequately assessed during development, sponsors should ensure that they have in place a systematic approach for safety surveillance. Such an approach should include a process for reviewing, evaluating, and managing accumulating safety data from the entire clinical trial database at appropriate intervals. In some cases, a specific independent committee with substantial external representation could be created to perform this function. In others, the sponsor may choose to create a safety team within the sponsor’s organization. In either case, this independent group would oversee the evolving safety profile of the investigational drug and evaluate, at appropriate intervals, the accumulating data from individual and multiple clinical trials, as well as other available information.B.Findings From Other Sources (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(ii) and (iii))The sponsor must also report expeditiously any findings from clinical, epidemiological, or pooled analysis of multiple studies or any findings from animal or in vitro testing that suggest a significant risk in humans exposed to the drug (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(ii) and (iii)). These reports are required for studies from any source, regardless of whether they are conducted under the IND or by the sponsor (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(ii) and (iii)). A finding that suggests a significant risk would ordinarily result in a safety-related change in the protocol, informed consent, investigator brochure (excluding routine updates of these documents), or other aspects of the overall conduct of the clinical investigation. For example, actions often taken in response to a significant risk finding include immediate revision of the informed consent, intensification of subject monitoring, revised eligibility criteria or screening procedures, enrollment hold, or consideration of discontinuation of the trial. The sponsor is also required to submit protocol amendments that describe changes to the protocol or other documents (21 CFR 312.30(b)) in addition to the IND safety report.1.Findings From Other Studies (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(ii))Findings that suggest a significant risk generally arise from ongoing or completed clinical studies, pooled data from multiple studies, epidemiological studies, and published and unpublished scientific papers. Findings from clinical studies that are subject to this requirement are those that have not already been reported under 21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i). For example, any clinically important finding from a drug interaction study, from a study evaluating the QT interval, or from a study of a marketed drug would be reported under this provision. An example of such a finding would be a prolongation of the QT interval in subjects receiving the investigational product.9 For more discussion of this subject, see FDA’s guidances on Establishment and Operation of Clinical Trial Data Monitoring Committees and Premarketing Risk Assessment (see footnote 4 for location), and references 1-3.13Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2.Findings From Animal or In Vitro Testing (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(iii))Findings from animal studies, such as carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, teratogenicity, or reports of significant organ toxicity at or near the expected human exposure are examples of the types of findings that could suggest a significant risk. Before reporting a finding to FDA, the sponsor should use judgment to decide whether the finding suggests a significant risk in humans or is too preliminary to interpret without replication or further investigation.C.Increased Occurrence of Serious Suspected Adverse Reactions (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(iv))The sponsor must report any clinically important increase in the rate of a serious suspected adverse reaction over that listed in the protocol or investigator brochure (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(iv)). A baseline incidence rate may not always be available, but when one is available or can be inferred from data or analyses in the investigator brochure (e.g., from a table), a clinically important increase from that rate must be reported (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(iv)). The decision about when to report is a matter of judgment based on a variety of factors including the study population, the nature and seriousness of the reaction, and the magnitude of the observed increase in the rate. For example, rhabdomyolysis is a recognized, infrequent adverse reaction that is known to occur in the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor class of drugs (i.e., statins). A higher than expected rate would merit reporting.VI. OTHER SAFETY REPORTING ISSUESA. Alternative Reporting Arrangements (21 CFR 312.32(c)(3))Title 21 of the CFR §§ 312.32(c)(1) and 312.32(c)(1)(v) specify the format and time frame for reporting suspected adverse reactions in an IND safety report (see section VII). Sponsors may request and adopt different reporting formats or frequencies if agreed to in advance by the director of the FDA review division that has responsibility for review of the IND (21 CFR 312.32(c)(3)). In addition, FDA may require a sponsor to submit IND safety reports in a different format or at a different frequency than required under 21 CFR 312.32(c)(1) and 312.32(c)(1)(v) (see 21 CFR 312.32(c)(3)). FDA may require a sponsor to continue to report expeditiously a medically significant suspected adverse reaction that is listed in the investigator brochure as observed with the drug (i.e., expected) so that its rate can be carefully monitored (21 CFR 312.32(c)(3)). For example, if a single occurrence of Stevens-Johnson Syndrome was observed in a subject receiving the investigational drug, FDA may require expedited reporting of additional cases of rash of a lesser severity. FDA may also require an alternative format or frequency for reporting suspected adverse reactions from clinical trials once a study or design has been identified as posing a potential or previously unforeseen risk to participants. See sections VI.D and VI.D.3 for information on investigator reporting arrangements.14Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsB. Investigator BrochureThe purpose of the investigator brochure is to provide the investigator with information (clinical and nonclinical) about the investigational drug that is relevant to the study of the drug in human subjects. The investigator brochure should include the information that is important for the investigator, who is administering the drug to human subjects, to know and understand. The investigator brochure is required to include information about the following (see 21 CFR 312.23(a)(5)):Drug substance and formulationPharmacological and toxicological effects of the drug in animals (and in humans, if known)Pharmacokinetics and biological disposition of the drug in animals (and in humans, if known)Information relating to safety and effectiveness in humans obtained from prior clinical studiesInformation about possible risks and side effects to be anticipated on the basis of prior experience with the drug under investigation or with related drugsPrecautions or special monitoring to be done as part of the investigational use of the drugThe Agency accepts a variety of formats for the investigator brochure. Although the most important purpose of the investigator brochure is to provide the investigator with information about the investigational product, the investigator brochure is also used by the sponsor as the basis for determining whether a suspected adverse reaction is unexpected for purposes of IND safety reporting (see section III.D).1.Clinical Risk InformationWith respect to clinical risk information, the investigator brochure should specifically and accurately list those adverse events that have been observed with an investigational drug and for which a causal relationship with the drug is suspected or confirmed. In addition, the investigator brochure should list adverse events that commonly occur with the class of drugs or may be predicted to occur based on the pharmacological properties of the drug, even if not yet observed with the drug under investigation, to alert the investigator to the possibility of their occurrence. Sponsors should use judgment in determining which terms accurately reflect a particular adverse event, including syndrome names if applicable. The investigator brochure should not list adverse events that are unlikely to have been caused by the drug because such lists could dilute the importance of clinically meaningful risk information.2. Updating the Investigator BrochureDuring the course of the clinical trial, the sponsor must update the investigator brochure on an ongoing basis with new important safety information (21 CFR 312.55). Some updates to the investigator brochure should be made as soon as possible while others can be made on a routine basis. For example, a new safety finding that represents a15Contains Nonbinding Recommendationssignificant risk to study subjects (e.g., a finding that patients with renal impairment are likely to experience a serious adverse reaction) should be communicated to investigators immediately, along with an update to the investigator brochure and possibly to the protocol (e.g., a change in screening procedures and eligibility criteria). On the other hand, an update to reflect a minor change in a suspected adverse reaction rate could be done on an annual basis.The sponsor should exercise judgment when deciding whether the threshold has been reached for adding a newly observed adverse event to the investigator brochure. Criteria to consider usually include the strength of the evidence from individual or multiple cases and previous knowledge about the drug or drug class.Until the investigator brochure is updated to include a new serious, suspected adverse reaction, subsequent occurrences of similar serious, suspected adverse reactions must be submitted expeditiously in IND safety reports (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i)) to FDA and all participating investigators.There is more than one acceptable approach for updating the investigator brochure with new safety information. For example, adding a new serious and unexpected suspected adverse reaction to the investigator brochure as an addendum, rather than reissuing the entire brochure, is an acceptable approach for keeping investigators informed of new observations. Sponsors should ensure that any addenda are incorporated into the next full revision of the investigator brochure.C. UnblindingThe blind should ordinarily be broken for IND safety reports submitted to FDA and all participating investigators. Knowledge of the treatment received is necessary for interpreting the event, may be essential for the medical management of the subject, and may provide critical safety information about a drug that could have implications for the ongoing conduct of the trial (e.g., monitoring, informed consent). The Agency does not believe that unblinding single or small numbers of serious and unexpected adverse event cases will compromise the integrity of the study, in part because such unblinding should be infrequent. For example, because the requirement under § 312.32(c)(5) specifically describes different reporting requirements for study endpoints, in a trial evaluating death, myocardial infarctions, and strokes as endpoints, a case of liver injury, if unblinded, would have no effect on overall study integrity.In general, if the blind is broken and a subject with an adverse event that would meet the criteria for reporting as a single event was receiving placebo, the event should not be reported in an IND safety report because there is not a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the adverse event. If the blind is broken and this subject was receiving drug treatment (test drug or active comparator), it must be reported in an IND safety report (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(i)(A)). For those adverse events that would not be reported unless an aggregate analysis indicated that they are occurring more frequently in the drug treatment group than in the placebo group, a determination that the adverse event is a suspected adverse reaction would require analysis and reporting of the event rates in both the drug-treatment and placebo groups.16Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsTo comply with the requirements for IND safety reports based on data in the aggregate, the sponsor should have in place a systematic approach for evaluating the accumulating safety data. A Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) or an independent sponsor safety team could perform this function (see sections V and V.A.3.c).As described in section V.A.3.a, there should generally be no need to report unblinded study endpoints in an IND safety report. In many cases, an independent DMC would monitor the serious events that are study endpoints (see FDA’s guidance document on Establishment and Operation of Clinical Trial Data Monitoring Committees).10 If a sponsor has concerns that unblinding of adverse events will compromise the integrity of the study, the sponsor can propose in advance an alternative reporting format or frequency to maintain the blind that must be agreed to by the director of the review division in FDA with responsibility for review of the IND (21 CFR 312.32(c)(3)) (see section VI.A).D.Investigator Reporting (21 CFR 312.64(b))Most of the information about the safety of a drug prior to marketing comes from clinical trials. Therefore, adverse event reports from investigators are critically important, as they observe subjects’ responses to the drug. Except for study endpoints, the investigator must immediately report to the sponsor all serious adverse events, regardless of whether the investigator believes that they are drug related, including those events listed in the protocol as anticipated to occur in the study population independent of drug exposure or in the investigator brochure as predicted to occur with the drug (21 CFR 312.64(b)). The Agency recognizes that it may take the investigator a short period of time (i.e., a day) to compile information about the event, but then expects the information to be immediately reported to the sponsor. Investigators are not required to determine whether an event is “unexpected,” as defined in 312.32(a). This is a sponsor responsibility (see Appendix B).Although it is the exception, immediate reporting of all serious adverse events to the sponsor may not be necessary in certain trials if the events are expected and well-defined. For example, many oncologic clinical trials use drugs with known serious hematologic adverse reactions and immediate reporting of each serious adverse event may not be useful. In these cases, the sponsor may propose an alternative reporting arrangement by identifying and describing the alternative reporting arrangement in the protocol or by requesting a waiver. The review division that has responsibility for the IND must agree to any alternative reporting arrangements (21 CFR 312.32(c)(3) and 312.10). Sponsor monitoring and reporting of these types of serious adverse events is discussed in section V.A.3.b.10 See footnote 4 for location.17Contains Nonbinding Recommendations1.Assessment of CausalityFDA believes that the sponsor is better positioned than the individual investigator to assess the overall safety of the investigational drug because the sponsor has access to serious adverse event reports from multiple study sites and multiple studies and is able to aggregate and analyze these reports (see section V.A). Moreover, the sponsor is more familiar with the drug’s mechanism of action, class effects, and other information. For these reasons, investigators must immediately report any serious adverse event to the sponsor, whether or not the investigator considers the event to be drug related (21 CFR 312.64(b)).In the report to the sponsor, the investigator must include an assessment of causality (i.e., whether there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the event) (21 CFR 312.64(b)). The investigator’s view is important for the sponsor to consider when assessing the safety of the drug and determining whether to report an event expeditiously to FDA, because the investigator, who monitors the subject’s response to the drug, is knowledgeable about the subject’s clinical state (e.g., medical history, concomitant medications) and thus may be sensitive to distinctions between events that may be related to the drug versus those due to the underlying disease process and/or concomitant therapies. The sponsor should decide how to capture the investigator’s causality assessment (e.g., rating scale, yes/no response to a question such as, “Was there a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the adverse event?”).2.Study EndpointsThe investigator must report study endpoints that are serious adverse events in accordance with the protocol (21 CFR 312.64(b)). Because endpoints are specifically defined in the protocol, they are often not collected on the adverse event pages of the case report form. The exception to this reporting requirement is when there is evidence suggesting a causal relationship between a drug and an event (e.g., death from anaphylaxis). In this case, the investigator must immediately report the event to the sponsor, even if the event is a component of the endpoint (e.g., all-cause mortality) (21 CFR 312.64(b)). “Safety endpoints” or “secondary endpoints,” as described in section V.A.3.a, are not considered “study endpoints” and, therefore, must be reported to the sponsor immediately (21 CFR 312.64(b)).3.Nonserious Adverse EventsThe investigator must record nonserious adverse events and report them to the sponsor according to the timetable for reporting specified in the protocol (21 CFR 312.64(b)). Generally, nonserious events are recorded on the case report forms and are submitted to the sponsor and reviewed at regular intervals during the course of the investigation. The18Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsinvestigator’s assessment of causality is not required for nonserious adverse events by the regulations, although many sponsors may require it in the protocol.11For certain trials, such as a postmarketing outcome trial for a drug that has a well-established safety profile, it may be necessary for investigators to record only a subset of nonserious adverse events, or none at all. The sponsor can arrange that only specific types of adverse events be reported to the sponsor (e.g., those that resulted in withdrawal from the study or cessation of therapy, modification of dose, or addition of another drug) provided the director of the FDA review division that has responsibility for review of the IND has agreed to that arrangement in advance (21 CFR 312.32(c)(3)). Other nonserious adverse events would not need to be recorded by the investigator on the case report form.E.Investigations of Marketed Drugs (21 CFR 312.32(c)(4))According to 21 CFR 312.32(c)(4), a sponsor of a clinical study of a drug marketed or approved in the United States that is conducted under an IND must submit IND safety reports for suspected adverse reactions that are observed in the study, at either domestic or foreign sites. The sponsor must also submit safety information from the clinical study as prescribed by the relevant postmarketing safety reporting requirements (e.g., under 21 CFR 310.305, 314.80, 600.80, 606.170, or under the Dietary Supplement and Nonprescription Drug Consumer Protection Act (Public Law 109-462)). Note that § 312.32(c)(1)(ii) requires the sponsor to report findings from other studies that suggest a significant risk in humans, whether or not conducted under an IND and whether or not conducted by the sponsor. Therefore, as long as the sponsor maintains an open IND for a drug marketed or approved in the United States, safety information from foreign and domestic studies, including non-IND studies, must be reported to the IND and in accordance with the postmarketing requirements, if it meets the criteria for reporting.For example, if an applicant of a drug marketed or approved in the United States sponsors a multicenter, multinational clinical trial for a new indication, where the domestic sites are included in an IND, adverse events from the clinical trial, whether or not the foreign sites are also conducted under the IND, must be promptly evaluated and reported if they qualify for reporting under § 312.32 and the postmarketing requirements.If the same applicant or sponsor receives a spontaneous report of an adverse event from U.S. or foreign commercial marketing experience for a drug that is also under investigation, the report would not need to be reported to the IND because it is not a suspected adverse reaction observed in a study, but would need to be reported in accordance with the postmarketing reporting requirements, if it meets the criteria for reporting.11 CIOMS VI recommends that collection of investigator’s causality assessments are not needed for routine regulatory reporting, but “there may be circumstances when such assessments are useful and important, such as for non-serious adverse events of special interest” (CIOMS 2005, at 85).19Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsF.Adverse Event Reporting to Institutional Review Boards (IRBs)Investigators are required to promptly report “to the IRB … all unanticipated problems involving risk to human subjects or others,” including adverse events that should be considered unanticipated problems (21 CFR 312.66). In 2009, FDA issued a guidance on Adverse Event Reporting to IRBs – Improving Human Subject Protection that makes recommendations on the types of adverse event information that should be reported to an IRB.12 The term unanticipated problem used in the Adverse Event Reporting to IRBs guidance describes adverse events and other types of problems (i.e., adverse events are a subset of unanticipated problems) that investigators are required to report to IRBs.Although the rule on IND safety reporting does not directly address safety reporting by investigators to IRBs, questions have arisen about its impact on adverse event reports to IRBs, particularly with respect to the specific adverse events considered to be “unanticipated problems” that must be reported to the IRB. In general, a report that meets the criteria for reporting in an IND safety report should also be considered an “unanticipated problem” and reported to the IRB by the investigator.It is important to note that some events that would not meet the criteria for reporting in an IND safety report would be considered unanticipated problems involving risk to human subjects (e.g., informed consent or privacy issues, certain adverse events that could not be caused by the investigational drug, such as events that occur prior to test article administration as a result of a washout period or due to a screening procedure). As part of their clinical trial monitoring responsibility, sponsors generally require that investigators report such unanticipated problems to them. Sponsors should discuss any significant unanticipated problem with the applicable FDA review division, as the problem may affect trial conduct and subject monitoring.G.Duration of Safety ReportingThe purpose of sending IND safety reports to investigators is to provide investigators with information they need to protect their patients participating in clinical trials. Once they are no longer enrolling or monitoring patients, this information is no longer necessary. Cutoff dates for sending IND safety reports to investigators may be described in the protocol. If no cutoff dates are specified, once a site has been officially closed out, the sponsor usually does not need to continue sending IND safety reports to that site, and an investigator does not need to receive or review them. If the sponsor continues to send IND safety reports to the investigator and the investigator does not wish to continue receiving them, the investigator should contact the sponsor and request that the sponsor stop sending them.In unusual cases, safety information related to delayed toxicity may be reported after a site is officially closed out. For example, if a late toxicity is discovered that would affect subjects who received the investigational drug, the investigator should be notified so that patients could be followed up if necessary.12 See footnote 4 for location.20Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsH.IND Annual Reports and LabelingThe IND safety reporting requirements did not make any changes to the requirements for IND annual reports (21 CFR 312.33). FDA recently adopted the guidance for industry E2F Development Safety Update Report,13 which describes a common standard for periodic reporting on drugs under development among the ICH regions and is intended to meet the IND annual reporting requirements. Questions have arisen about whether the Agency will accept the Development Safety Update Report (DSUR) because of the difference in the party responsible for making the causality judgment (see section III.C of this document). To promote global harmonization, FDA will accept the DSUR, as described in the E2F Development Safety Update Report guidance, to meet the IND annual report requirements.The Agency does not expect the IND safety reporting requirements to have any impact on the adverse reaction information presented in prescription drug labeling.14VII.SUBMITTING AN IND SAFETY REPORT (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(v))A. Report Identification and FormatEach report must prominently identify its contents (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(v)).“IND safety report” for 15-day reports“Followup IND safety report” for followup information“7-day IND safety report” for unexpected fatal or life threatening adverse reaction reportsThe type of report should be checked in box G7 on the FDA Form 3500A. The report can also be identified in box B5 and/or on a cover letter submitted with the FDA Form 3500A.The format for IND safety reports is based on the type of expedited report.1.Individual CasesFor reports of individual cases, a sponsor would ordinarily use FDA Form 3500A.15 FDA will accept foreign suspected adverse reaction reports on a CIOMS I Form instead of FDA Form 3500A (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(v)). These forms should be completed with all available information, including a brief narrative describing the suspected adverse reaction and any other relevant information. If applicable, the narrative must also include identification of similar reports and an analysis of the significance of the suspected adverse reaction (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)).13 See footnote 4 for location.14 For more information, see 21 CFR 201.57(c)(7), 201.80(g) and the guidance for industry on Adverse Reactions Section of Labeling for Human Prescription Drug and Biological Products – Content and Format. See footnote 4 for location.15 FDA Form 3500A can be found on the Internet at http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/HowToReport/DownloadForms/default.htm. 21Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2.Aggregate ReportsAn IND safety report based on data in the aggregate must be in a narrative format (§ 312.32(c)(1)(v)). Sponsors should use judgment in deciding what to include in the narrative report. The report should include a description of the suspected adverse reaction, along with all relevant information, such as summary information about symptoms, concomitant medications, demographics, comorbid conditions, past history, pertinent laboratory test results, timing of events (onset and duration), and duration of treatment. Data from previously submitted individual case IND safety reports should be included, if applicable. Finally, the narrative report should describe the characteristics and results of the analysis, including a description of the databases, how the conclusion was reached, who reviewed the analysis, any planned changes in monitoring or to study documents (e.g., informed consent, investigator brochure), and any planned further analyses.To evaluate the aggregated data in narrative format, FDA and participating investigators need the information on the individual cases that are summarized in the report. Therefore, at the same time that the narrative format IND safety report is submitted, the individual cases that were analyzed should also be submitted (e.g., a completed FDA Form 3500A for each case). If some individual cases were previously submitted as IND safety reports, they should be resubmitted and clearly identified as duplicates. Before submission, each individual case report should generally be unblinded. If a sponsor has concerns that unblinding will compromise the integrity of the study, the sponsor should discuss this in advance with the review division (see section VI.C).If a sponsor is monitoring and evaluating the occurrence of a serious event in the aggregate (rather than submitting each case individually), FDA expects that records of each case will be complete (e.g., a completed FDA Form 3500A for each case), including a description of the suspected adverse reaction and any other relevant information, and that each case will be followed up for additional information, if necessary.The sponsor should determine an appropriate approach for reporting subsequent occurrences of the same event to FDA and all participating investigators, and the sponsor should include a description of this approach in the initial expedited narrative IND safety report. For example, each subsequent occurrence of an infrequent event with immediate health implications or an event that is uncommon in a specific study population (e.g., stroke in young adults) should be reported in an expedited report. For an event that is known to occur independent of drug exposure in the study population, the sponsor may specifically describe an approach for reporting to FDA and all participating investigators (e.g., an updated aggregate narrative once a certain number of additional cases are identified or after a specified period of time, as appropriate).3.Other ReportsFor reports of overall findings or pooled analyses from published and unpublished in vitro, animal, epidemiological, or clinical studies, a narrative format must be used (2122Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsCFR 312.32(c)(1)(v)). If the findings are published, in full or in abstract form, the sponsor should include a copy of the publication.B. Where and How to SubmitThe report must be transmitted to the CDER or CBER review division that has responsibility for review of the IND (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(v)). IND safety reports should be submitted to all of the sponsor’s INDs under which the drug is being administered. For example, if a drug is found to cause drug induced liver injury, that should be reported to any IND under which the drug is being administered. The sponsor should reference all INDs to which the IND safety report is being submitted in the subject line of the cover letter. If applicable, the sponsor should also identify (e.g., with use of an underline) the specific IND under which the suspected adverse reaction occurred (e.g., “Suspected adverse reaction occurred under IND XXXX1, reference to INDs XXXX2, XXXX3”).FDA accepts electronic submission of 15-day IND safety reports in eCTD format to the IND application if the IND is in eCTD format or if the sponsor intends to convert the IND to eCTD format. Complete information on eCTD specifications and guidance can be found on the FDA eCTD Web site, and assistance may be obtained by contacting ESUB@fda.hhs.gov.We recommend that sponsors submit 7-day IND safety reports electronically in eCTD format. If the IND is not in eCTD format, other means of rapid communication (e.g., telephone, facsimile transmission, email) may be used. If the IND is not in eCTD format and the sponsor intends to submit 7-day IND safety reports by facsimile transmission or email, the sponsor should address the submissions to the Regulatory Project Manager and the Chief, Project Management Staff in the FDA review division that has responsibility for review of the IND. In addition, if the sponsor intends to submit 7-day IND safety reports by email, we recommend the sponsor obtain a secure email account with FDA.16C. Reporting Time FrameThe time frame for submitting an IND safety report to FDA and all participating investigators is no later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor determines that the suspected adverse reaction or other information qualifies for reporting (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)). The language in the IND safety reporting regulations was modified to describe the reporting time frame applicable to aggregate reports (§ 312.32(c)(1)(i)(B) and (C)) and increases in rates of occurrence of serious suspected adverse reactions (§ 312.32(c)(1)(iv)), which generally require more than one occurrence to make the determination that the event meets the criteria for reporting. Thus, the date of initial receipt of the first event could be well before it was determined that the event must be reported.Sponsors should have a predefined safety monitoring plan that includes processes and procedures for the review of safety information, including the frequency of review (see section V). FDA16 Refer to the following link for details on obtaining a secure email account with FDA: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/FormsSubmissionRequirements/ElectronicSubmissions/default.htm.23Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsexpects that events that are interpretable as single cases (i.e., uncommon and known to be strongly associated with drug exposure) should be reported to FDA within 15 days from initial receipt. For events that require more than one occurrence to assess causality and events evaluated in the aggregate, the time clock starts when the sponsor determines that the events qualify for expedited reporting. This means that, for example, incomplete cases should be immediately followed up for additional information so that a determination can be made about whether the event is reportable as an IND safety report.Unexpected fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reactions represent especially important safety information and, therefore, must be reported more rapidly to FDA (21 CFR 312.32(c)(2)). The requirement for reporting any unexpected fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction to FDA is no later than 7 calendar days after the sponsor’s initial receipt of the information (21 CFR 312.32(c)(2)). If the safety report submitted within 7 calendar days is complete, an additional submission within 15 days from day zero is not required.The day of initial receipt for cases that are interpretable as single cases and the day the sponsor determines that multiple cases qualify for expedited reporting are considered day zero.If FDA requests any additional data or information, the sponsor must submit it to FDA as soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar days after receiving the request (21 CFR 312.32(c)(1)(v)). See section VIII for reporting time frames for followup information.VIII. FOLLOWUP INFORMATION (21 CFR 312.32(d))Most IND safety reports are derived from observations from clinical trials. In the setting of a clinical trial, information is collected in a controlled environment so that the information needed to evaluate the suspected adverse reaction (e.g., information that would be contained in a narrative report or on FDA Form 3500A) is generally readily available. If any information necessary to evaluate the suspected adverse reaction is missing or unknown, the sponsor should actively seek such information from the source of the report. Any relevant additional information that the sponsor obtains that pertains to a previously submitted IND safety report must be submitted as a Followup IND Safety Report without delay, as soon as the information is available (21 CFR 312.32(d)(2)), but should be submitted no later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor receives the information. The sponsor should maintain records of its efforts to obtain additional information.For example, if information on concomitant medications is obtained after the initial IND safety report is submitted, and such information is relevant to evaluating the suspected adverse reaction, a sponsor must submit a Followup IND Safety Report immediately (21 CFR 312.32(d)(2)). However, if the sponsor obtains other information that is not relevant to evaluating the suspected adverse reaction, records of such information should be maintained by the sponsor and, if applicable, submitted in an information amendment (21 CFR 312.31) or in an IND annual report (21 CFR 312.33).24Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsIX. SAFETY REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR BA AND BE STUDIESThe IND safety reporting requirements under 21 CFR 312.32 apply to BA and BE studies that are conducted under an IND. However, BA and BE studies that meet the conditions for exemption under 21 CFR 320.31 are not conducted under an IND and are not subject to the IND safety reporting requirements. The rule contains safety reporting requirements under 21 CFR 320.31(d)(3) that apply to persons conducting BA or BE studies that are exempt from the IND requirements. The following information addresses these requirements.FDA believes that BA and BE studies that meet the requirements for exemption are generally safe. The occurrence of a serious adverse event is very unusual because the number of subjects enrolled in such a study is small, subjects are usually healthy volunteers, and drug exposure is typically brief. However, FDA occasionally receives safety-related information associated with these types of studies, which could reflect either a problem with the drug product being evaluated or with the study design being used. For these reasons, the occurrence of any serious adverse event, whether or not it is considered drug related, is of interest. Timely review of this safety information is critical to ensuring the safety of study subjects.A. BA/BE Study Safety Reporting Requirements (21 CFR 320.31(d)(3))The person conducting a BA or BE study, including any contract research organization, must notify FDA and all participating investigators of any serious adverse event observed during conduct of the study, regardless of whether the event is considered drug related, as soon as possible but in no case later than 15 calendar days after becoming aware of its occurrence (21 CFR 320.31(d)(3)). This includes, for example, serious adverse events listed in the reference listed product’s approved labeling, the investigator brochure, and protocol. Serious adverse events, whether observed in the investigational drug group or in the approved drug group (e.g., reference listed drug), must be reported (21 CFR 320.31(d)(3)).If any information necessary to evaluate the serious adverse event is missing or unknown, the person conducting the study should actively seek such information and maintain records of efforts made to obtain additional information. Any relevant additional information that is obtained that pertains to a previously submitted safety report must be submitted as a Followup Bioavailability/Bioequivalence Safety Report as soon as the information is available (21 CFR 320.31(d)(3)), but should be submitted no later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor receives the information. In addition, upon request from FDA, the person conducting the study must submit to FDA any additional data or information that FDA deems necessary as soon as possible, but in no case later than 15 calendar days after receiving the request (e.g., hospital record, autopsy report) (21 CFR 320.31(d)(3)).If the adverse event is fatal or life-threatening, the person conducting the study must also notify the Clinical Safety Coordinator in CDER’s Office of Generic Drugs as soon as possible but in no case later than 7 calendar days after becoming aware of its occurrence (21 CFR 320.31(d)(3)). We recommend that these notifications be made by telephone, email, or facsimile transmission.25Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsB. BA/BE Studies Conducted at Non-U.S. SitesUnder 21 CFR 320.31(d)(3), persons conducting human BA and BE studies in the United States that are exempt from the IND requirements under part 312 must report any serious adverse events from the study to FDA and to all participating investigators. The requirements under 21 CFR 320.31(d)(3) do not apply to human BA and BE studies that are exempt from the IND requirements and conducted outside of the United States. However, as part of the information required to establish that the proposed drug product can be expected to have the same therapeutic effect as the reference listed product, adverse event information from foreign clinical studies must be included in the abbreviated new drug application (ANDA) submission (see 21 CFR 314.94(a)(7)).C. How and Where to Submit a Report (21 CFR 320.31(d)(3))Each report must be submitted on FDA Form 3500A (21 CFR 320.31(d)(3)). The form should be completed with all the available information, including a brief narrative describing the serious adverse event, an assessment of causality, and any other relevant information. If applicable, the narrative should also include identification of other similar reports and an analysis of the significance of the serious adverse event. A summary of the study protocol should be submitted with the report.Each report must prominently identify its contents (21 CFR 320.31(d)(3)).“Bioavailability/Bioequivalence safety report” for 15-day reports“Followup Bioavailability/Bioequivalence safety report” for followup information“7-day Bioavailability/Bioequivalence safety report” for unexpected fatal or life threatening adverse reaction reportsThe type of report should be checked in box G7 on FDA Form 3500A. The report can also be identified in box B5 and/or in a cover letter submitted with the FDA Form 3500A.The drug product should be listed in box C1 of FDA Form 3500A, and if the serious adverse event occurs in a subject receiving the investigational drug product, the drug administered during the BA/BE study should be identified as investigational and the established name of the reference listed drug should be identified.Fifteen-day reports should be sent by email to OGD-PremarketSafetyReports@fda.hhs.gov. Paper reports may be sent to the Clinical Safety Coordinator, Office of Generic Drugs, in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research at FDA.17We recommend that 7-day notifications be made by telephone, email, or facsimile transmission. If the safety report submitted within 7 calendar days is complete, an additional submission within 15 days from day zero is not required.17 The address for the Office of Generic Drugs is available at http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/OfficeofMedicalProductsandTobacco/CDER/ucm119100.htm. The phone and fax numbers (for fatal or life-threatening adverse event reports) are also available at this site. 26Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 27Master Protocols:  Efficient Clinical Trial Design Strategies to Expedite Development of Oncology Drugs and Biologics Guidance for Industry U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE) March 2022 ProceduralMaster Protocols:  Efficient Clinical Trial Design Strategies to Expedite Development of Oncology Drugs and Biologics Guidance for Industry Contains Nonbinding Recommendations Master Protocols:  Efficient Clinical Trial Design Strategies to Expedite Development of Oncology Drugs and Biologics Guidance for Industry1 This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic.  It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public.  You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page. I. INTRODUCTION This guidance provides recommendations to sponsors of drugs or biologics for the treatment of cancer regarding the design and conduct of clinical trials intended to simultaneously evaluate more than one investigational drug2 and/or more than one cancer type within the same overall trial structure (master protocols) in adult and pediatric cancers. In general, the recommended phase 2 dose (RP2D) should have been established for an investigational drug or drugs evaluated in a master protocol.  This guidance is intended to serve as advice and a focus for continued discussions among FDA, pharmaceutical sponsors, the academic community, and the public.3  This guidance describes aspects of master protocol designs and trial conduct and related considerations, such as biomarker codevelopment and statistical analysis considerations, and provides recommendations on the information that sponsors should submit to FDA and on how sponsors can interact with FDA to facilitate efficient review. This guidance does not cover first-in-human or early stage clinical trials using expansion cohorts to expedite drug development. FDA addresses that topic in the draft guidance for industry 1This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Oncologic Diseases in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research in cooperation with the Oncology Center of Excellence and the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research at the Food and Drug Administration.  2For the purpose of this guidance, the term drug refers to human drugs and to biological products that are regulated as drugs.  3In addition to consulting guidances, sponsors are encouraged to contact the review division to discuss specific issues that arise during drug development. 1 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations Expansion Cohorts: Use in First-In-Human Clinical Trials to Expedite Development of Oncology Drugs and Biologics (August 2018).4 There are many aspects of study design, statistical analysis, choice of study endpoints, and development of biomarkers that are not addressed in this guidance but are considered in other FDA guidances, including the guidances for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (September 1998) and E10 Choice of Control Group and Related Issues in Clinical Trials (May 2001), which were developed by the International Conference for Harmonisation (ICH) and adopted by FDA, as well as the guidance for industry In Vitro Companion Diagnostic Devices (August 2014).5 The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way, unless specifically incorporated into a contract. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law. FDA guidance documents, including this guidance, should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required. II. BACKGROUND There is increased interest in expediting late-stage drug development (i.e., trials intended to provide substantial evidence of effectiveness) through developing trial designs that test multiple drugs and/or multiple cancer subpopulations in parallel under a single protocol without a need to develop new protocols for every trial. The term master protocol is often used to describe the design of such trials, with a variety of terms such as umbrella, basket, or platform describing specific designs (Woodcock and LaVange 2017). Examples of trials using master protocols include the Lung-MAP trial (NCT02154490; see Figure B in the Appendix),6 the NCI-MATCH trial (EAY131, NCT02465060; see Figure C in the Appendix),7 and the Pediatric MATCH trial (APEC1621, NCT03155620).8 In contrast to traditional trial designs, where a single drug is tested in a single disease population in one clinical trial, master protocols use a single 4When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidancedocuments.  5See also the guidances for industry Codevelopment of Two or More New Investigational Drugs for Use in Combination (June 2013), Adaptive Designs for Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biologics (November 2019), and Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials to Support Determination of Effectiveness of Human Drugs and Biological Products (March 2019). We update guidances periodically. To make sure you have the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm. 6See information on this trial at https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/. 7See information on this trial at the National Cancer Institute web page at https://www.cancer.gov/aboutcancer/treatment/clinical-trials/search/v?id=NCT02465060&r=1 as well as https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/. 8See information on this trial at https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/. 2 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations infrastructure, trial design, and protocol to simultaneously evaluate multiple drugs and/or disease populations in multiple substudies, allowing for efficient and accelerated drug development.  Because of the complexity of these trials, which evaluate multiple drugs and/or disease populations, and their intent to support regulatory approval, it is important that such trials be well designed and well conducted to help ensure human subject safety and to generate data that meets regulatory standards for demonstrating each investigational drug’s safety and effectiveness.9 III. MASTER PROTOCOL DEFINITION AND POTENTIAL OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES A. Description and Concept of Master Protocols For the purpose of this guidance, a master protocol is defined as a protocol designed with multiple substudies, which may have different objectives and involve coordinated efforts to evaluate one or more investigational drugs in one or more disease subtypes within the overall trial structure. In general, FDA recommends that the sponsor establish the RP2D for the investigational drug or drugs before evaluation using a master protocol. However, individual drug substudies under the master protocol might incorporate an initial dose-finding phase, for example, in pediatric subjects when sufficient adult data are available to inform a starting dose and the investigational drug provides the prospect of direct clinical benefit to pediatric subjects (21 CFR 50.52).  A master protocol may be used to conduct the trial or trials for exploratory purposes or to support a marketing application and can be structured to evaluate, in parallel, different drugs compared with their respective controls or to a single common control. The sponsor can design the master protocol with a fixed or an adaptive design10 with the intent to modify the protocol to incorporate or terminate individual substudies within the master protocol. For examples of types of master protocols, see section IV., Types of Master Protocols.  B. Potential Opportunities and Challenges Posed by Master Protocols The potential advantage of a master protocol is flexibility and efficiency in drug development, consistent with FDA’s goal of helping to make safe and effective drugs and drug combination treatments available to the public. A master protocol provides an opportunity to incorporate efficient approaches, such as a shared control arm and/or the use of centralized data capture systems to enhance efficiency. However, a master protocol can also create challenges in the 9Under 42 U.S.C. § 282(j), including its implementing regulations in 42 CFR part 11, certain applicable clinical trials must be registered at https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/. Within 1 year of the primary completion date, with certain exceptions for submission beyond 1 year, responsible parties must submit required summary results information to https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/. FDA encourages responsible parties to submit summary results information as soon as possible and ahead of required statutory and regulatory deadlines. 10 See the guidance for industry Adaptive Designs for Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biologics. 3 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations conduct and analysis of the trial that, if not properly addressed, can increase risk to human subjects or delay the development of the drug.11 Examples of potential challenges include the following: (1) Difficulty attributing adverse events to one or more investigational drugs can occur when multiple drugs are administered within each investigational treatment arm and the trial lacks a single internal control for those drugs. (2) With multiple drugs being studied across multiple protocols and investigational new drug applications (INDs), assessing the safety profile of any given investigational drug is difficult.  (3) The presence of multiple study groups allows potential overinterpretation of findings, resulting in delays in drug development. For example, an apparent difference in efficacy in a biomarker-defined subpopulation could be identified based on multiple ad hoc between-arm comparisons that prove to be false.  IV. TYPES OF MASTER PROTOCOLS This section provides examples of types of master protocols and considerations related to their designs. FDA encourages sponsors to discuss with the review division plans to develop drugs under a master protocol early in the development program to obtain feedback on the design of such a protocol before the submission of the protocol to an IND.  A. Single Investigational Drug or Investigational Drug Combination Across Multiple Cancer Populations A master protocol designed to test a single investigational drug or drug combination in different populations defined by different cancers, disease stages for a specific cancer, histologies, number of prior therapies, genetic or other biomarkers, or demographic characteristics is commonly referred to as a basket trial (shown in Figure 1). A basket trial evaluating an investigational drug combination may include a dose-finding or safety lead-in component to identify safe doses of the combination before proceeding with an activity-estimating component. Figure 1: Schematic Representation of a Master Protocol With Basket Trial Design Single investigational drug or drug combination (T1)* D1* D2 D3 D4 D5 11 See also the ICH guidance for industry E6(R2) Good Clinical Practice: Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1) (March 2018). 4 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations * T = investigational drug; D = protocol-defined subpopulation in multiple disease subtypes; D5 = dashed lines indicate potential amendments to include additional subpopulations. The substudies within basket trials are usually designed as single-arm, activity-estimating trials with overall response rate as the primary endpoint. A strong response signal seen in a substudy may allow for expansion of the substudy to generate data that could potentially support a marketing application. Each substudy should include specific objectives, the scientific rationale for inclusion of each population, and a detailed statistical analysis plan (SAP) that includes sample size justification and stopping rules for futility or efficacy. For specific aspects related to design and analysis related to a master protocol for a basket trial, see section V., Specific Design Considerations in Master Protocols, and section VII., Statistical Considerations.  An example of a master protocol with basket trial design is the phase 2 trial evaluating vemurafenib in multiple nonmelanoma cancers with BRAF V600 mutations (see Figure A in the Appendix) (Hyman et al. 2015). B. Investigational Drugs or Investigational Drug Combinations in Single Cancer Type A master protocol that is designed to evaluate multiple investigational drugs administered as single drugs or as drug combinations in a single disease population is commonly referred to as an umbrella trial (shown in Figure 2). Substudies within umbrella trials can include dose-finding or safety lead-in components to identify safe doses of an investigational drug combination before proceeding with an activity-estimating component. As previously stated, sponsors should ensure the RP2D for each investigational drug has been established before evaluation in a master protocol.  Figure 2:  Schematic Representation of a Master Protocol With Umbrella Trial Design Single tumor type or histological sub-type (D1)* Control T1* T2 T3 TX * T = investigational drug or investigational drug combination; D = protocol defined subpopulation in single disease subtypes; TX = dashed lines indicate potential amendments to include future treatment arms. 5  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations Umbrella trials can employ randomized controlled designs to compare the activity of the investigational drug or drugs with a common control arm. The drug chosen as the control arm for the randomized substudy or substudies should be the standard of care (SOC) for the target population, and this may change over time if newer drugs replace the SOC. For specific aspects related to design and analysis related to a master protocol for an umbrella trial, see section V., Specific Design Considerations in Master Protocols, and section VII., Statistical Considerations.  An example of a master protocol with umbrella trial design is the original version of the LUNGMAP trial, a multidrug, multi-substudy, biomarker-driven trial in human subjects with advanced/metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the lung where docetaxel was the common control arm in four of the five substudies (Herbst et al. 2015). Eligible subjects were assigned to substudies based on their biomarkers or to a nonmatch therapy substudy for subjects not eligible for the biomarker-specific substudies. Within the substudies, subjects were randomized to a biomarker-driven target or to SOC therapy (see Figure B in the Appendix).   C. Other Trial Designs Master protocol designs may also incorporate design features common to both basket and umbrella trials and may evaluate multiple investigational drugs and/or drug combination regimens across multiple tumor types.  An example of a master protocol with a complex trial design is the NCI-MATCH trial, which aims to establish whether human subjects with one or more tumor mutations, amplifications, or translocations in a genetic pathway of interest identified in solid tumors or hematologic malignancies derive clinical benefit if treated with drugs targeting that specific pathway in a single-arm design (see Figure C in the Appendix) (Abrams et al. 2014).  V. SPECIFIC DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS IN MASTER PROTOCOLS A. Use of a Single Common Control Arm For oncology clinical trials, FDA recommends that a sponsor use a common control arm to improve efficiency in master protocols where multiple drugs are evaluated simultaneously in a single disease (e.g., umbrella trials). FDA recommends that the control arm be the current SOC so that the trial results will be interpretable in the context of U.S. medical practice. Changes in SOC for the target population can occur during the conduct of the trial because of a new drug approval or new scientific evidence, making it no longer ethical to randomize human subjects to the previous SOC. In that case, the sponsor should suspend subject enrollment until the protocol and the protocol informed consent document are modified to include the new SOC as control. The SAP should be modified as soon as possible and before any analysis of the data.  In general, comparative analyses should be conducted only between a test drug and the common control and not between experimental treatment arms (for statistical considerations in the use of common control, see section VII., Statistical Considerations). Where an IND sponsor has right of 6 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations reference to data in more than one experimental arm, a comparison between such experimental arms might also be proposed prospectively. B. Novel Combination of Two or More Investigational Drugs In master protocols with substudies intended to evaluate concomitant administration of two or more investigational drugs, the sponsor should provide strong scientific rationale for the use of the drug combination regimen. FDA recommends that the sponsor ensures the RP2D has been identified for each individual drug in all cases where each drug may have antitumor activity. The master protocol should summarize available safety, pharmacology, and preliminary efficacy data for each investigational drug; the biological rationale for use of the drugs in combination rather than use of an individual drug; and evidence, if any, of synergy when used in combination. In some instances, the master protocol may include a dose-finding component for novel combinations where the RP2D of the combination regimen has not been established. Safety data from a minimum of six subjects treated at the proposed dosage for the drug combination regimen should be available before proceeding with the efficacy evaluation. The sponsor should submit results of the dose-finding phase to the IND for the master protocol before proceeding with the efficacy phase. If such an approach is considered in a pediatric population, the sponsor should ensure, for a particular tumor type and/or relevant mutations, that the full relevant age range of pediatric subjects (generally speaking 0 to ≤17 years of age) is addressed and the investigational drug provides the prospect of direct clinical benefit to pediatric subjects. For additional requirements that pertain to clinical investigations in pediatric subjects, see 21 CFR 50 subpart D. Specific age eligibility should depend on the prevalence of the particular tumor type in children. For clinical development programs designed to evaluate combinations of two or more investigational drugs, it is important that the general investigational plan describe the approach to demonstrating the contribution of each investigational drug to the observed treatment effect to support a benefit-risk assessment.12 C. Studies With Drugs Targeting Multiple Biomarkers FDA recommends early discussion with the review division of biomarker development plans when the sponsor plans to use one or more biomarkers to inform human subject selection for trials. The sponsor should provide the rationale for conducting the substudy in a biomarkerdefined population, such as a tumor biomarker likely to predict a therapeutic response to the investigational drug based on the drug’s purported mechanism of action (drug target) or a biomarker that enriches the study for subjects with one or more prognostic factors. For master protocols with drugs targeting multiple biomarkers, it is important that subject selection tests be analytically validated with well-defined criteria for marker positivity before initiation of the trial.   12 See the guidances for industry Codevelopment of Two or More New Investigational Drugs for Use in Combination and Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials to Support Determination of Effectiveness of Human Drugs and Biological Products.  7 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations In master protocols containing substudies with drugs that target multiple biomarkers, the protocol should contain a prespecified plan for allocation of subjects who are potentially eligible for more than one substudy. Human subject allocation and sample size assumptions for each randomized substudy should take into consideration the potential prognostic implications of specific biomarkers.  For additional information, see section VI., Biomarker Development Considerations, and section VII., Statistical Considerations. D. Adding and Stopping Treatment Arms Master protocols evaluating multiple investigational drugs can add, expand, or discontinue treatment arms based on findings from prespecified interim analyses or external new data.13  Before initiating the trial, the sponsor should ensure that the master protocol and its associated SAP describe conditions that would result in adaptations such as the reestimation of the sample size based on the results of an interim analysis or discontinuation of an experimental arm based on futility rules. E. Independent Data Monitoring Committees If results from one or more substudies are anticipated to form the basis of a marketing application, the master protocol should describe and provide the charter for an independent radiologic review committee to perform blinded tumor-based assessments, as appropriate. In addition, the protocol should describe and provide a charter for an independent data monitoring committee (IDMC) or other appropriate independent entity to monitor efficacy and safety results.14 The IDMC charter should authorize the committee to conduct prespecified and ad hoc assessments of efficacy and futility and recommend protocol modifications or other actions, including sample size adjustment and discontinuation or modification of a substudy based on futility or overwhelming evidence of efficacy.  Pediatric expertise should be provided on IDMCs that will review pediatric studies; an ethicist should be considered for all studies, pediatric and adult.  For additional responsibilities related to safety monitoring, see section VIII. B., Independent Safety Assessment. VI. BIOMARKER DEVELOPMENT CONSIDERATIONS Master protocols evaluating biomarker-defined populations should explain why use of the biomarker is appropriate and employ in vitro diagnostic (IVD) tests, either as single biomarker tests or as a platform assessing multiple biomarkers, that are analytically validated. Use of IVDs 13 See the guidance for industry Adaptive Designs for Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biologics. 14 See the guidance for clinical trial sponsors Establishment and Operation of Clinical Trial Data Monitoring Committees (March 2006). 8 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations with inadequate analytical performance characteristics (e.g., precision, accuracy) may produce unreliable results with respect to performance of the drug. Protocols with IVD tests that are not analytically validated can be placed on clinical hold for deficiencies in design to meet the stated objectives (21CFR 312.42(b)(2)(ii)).15   Sponsors should establish procedures for sample acquisition, handling, and the testing and analysis plans as early as possible in the biomarker development program. Sponsors should discuss with the review division whether to submit the IVD’s analytical validation data for FDA to determine whether the clinical results will be interpretable. Further, when the trial uses an investigational IVD, sponsors and institutional review boards (IRBs) should assess what investigational device requirements16 apply using the definitions in 21 CFR 812.3 and the criteria found in 21 CFR 812.2 that address the level of risk that the device presents to trial subjects (i.e., significant risk, nonsignificant risk) and address exempted device investigations.17,18 Clinical investigations of devices that pose a significant risk generally require both FDA and IRB approval before initiation.19 FDA approval can be obtained through submitting an investigational device exemption (IDE) application to FDA (§ 812.20).20 Sponsors can contact the appropriate center at FDA (the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) or the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)) for the device, or sponsors can submit all information about the oncology codevelopment program, including IVD information in the IND submitted to the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) or CBER, to seek trial risk determination.21 Sponsors interested in pursuing the development of a specific biomarker test for marketing as a device should consult the appropriate center at FDA (CDRH or CBER) responsible for review of the IVD. 15 See the draft guidance for industry and FDA staff, Principles for Codevelopment of an In Vitro Companion Diagnostic Device with a Therapeutic Product (July 2016). When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic. 16 21 CFR part 812. 17 See the guidance for sponsors, clinical investigators, IRBs, and FDA staff FDA Decisions for Investigational Device Exemption Clinical Investigations (August 2014) and the guidance for IRBs, clinical investigators, and sponsors IRB Responsibilities for Reviewing the Qualifications of Investigators, Adequacy of Research Sites, and the Determination of Whether an IND/IDE is Needed (August 2013). 18 See the draft guidance for industry, FDA staff, sponsors, and IRBs Investigational IVDs Used in Clinical Investigations of Therapeutic Products (December 2017). When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  19 21 CFR 56.103 and 812.20. 20 See the guidance for sponsors, clinical investigators, IRBs, and FDA staff, FDA Decisions for Investigational Device Exemption Clinical Investigations. Additional information is available at https://www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/investigational-device-exemption-ide/ide-approval-process. 21 See the guidance for industry Investigational In Vitro Diagnostics in Oncology Trials: Streamlined Submission Process for Study Risk Determination (October 2019). 9 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations VII. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS A. Nonrandomized, Activity-Estimating Design In nonrandomized protocols, where the primary endpoint is overall response rate, the planned sample size should be sufficient to rule out a clinically unimportant response rate based on the lower bound of the 95 percent confidence interval around the observed response rate. The analysis plan should describe the futility analyses to be conducted. FDA recommends designs, such as the Simon two-stage design, that limit exposure to an ineffective drug (Simon 1989). However, other statistical approaches may be acceptable and, if proposed, should be described in detail in the SAP. If a sponsor anticipates that the results would form the basis of an efficacy claim in a marketing application, the clinical protocol and SAP should ensure that collected data are of adequate quality for this purpose. If preliminary results from a substudy or substudies suggest a major advance over available therapy, the sponsor should meet with the review division to discuss modifications to the protocol (e.g., to propose interim analyses for efficacy or consider early termination of the trial) or to modify the development program (e.g., discuss potential for breakthrough therapy designation). B. Randomized Designs If a sponsor incorporates randomization into an umbrella trial design, FDA recommends use of a common control arm when possible. The general comments about generation of an appropriate SAP and information about futility analysis in the previous section (VII. A., Nonrandomized, Activity-Estimating Design) also apply to randomized trials. Before initiating the proposed substudy, the sponsor should meet with the division to discuss the SAP with regard to how the strength of evidence will be assessed and how potential sources of bias will be controlled.  C. Master Protocols Employing Adaptive/Bayesian Design In master protocols that incorporate adaptive designs, the SAP should provide all information described in the guidances for industry Adaptive Designs for Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biologics and Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials to Support Determination of Effectiveness of Human Drugs and Biological Products. The SAP should also describe plans for futility analyses.22 Master protocols can use a Bayesian statistical method or other methods for planning or modifying the sample size, dropping an arm, and other adaptive strategies. The SAP should include details on implementation of Bayesian or other methods.  D. Master Protocols With Biomarker-Defined Subgroups In master protocols with basket or complex design, where human subject assignment to a treatment arm is based on the presence of a specific biomarker of interest, the protocol should clearly specify how subjects with more than one biomarker of interest will be assigned to 22 See also the ICH guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials and the guidance for clinical trial sponsors Establishment and Operation of Clinical Trial Data Monitoring Committees. 10 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations substudies. There are two approaches to making such assignments that FDA recommends from a clinical trial design perspective, but other approaches may also be appropriate. One approach is to prioritize biomarkers or treatments. For example, in the BATTLE-1 trial, investigators ranked the biomarker groups based on their predictive values and assigned human subjects with multiple biomarkers to the group for one of their biomarkers that has the highest predictive value (Kim et al. 2011). The other approach is based on a prespecified randomization ratio. For example, the Lung-MAP trial uses a reversed ratio of prevalence rates. Using reverse prevalence ratios, subjects in the trial with tumors that have biomarkers with low prevalence have a greater likelihood to be assigned to a substudy for the lower prevalence population.23 Consideration should be given to the clinical relevance, if any, of low-prevalence passenger mutations that coexist with driver mutations, for which adjustment to randomization may not be needed. Sponsors should provide justification for the selected approach and should state in the justification whether the proposed approach of assigning subjects with more than one biomarker of interest to a particular substudy would impact the prevalence of the biomarkers in each subpopulation and whether any statistical methods to address this potential issue/bias are needed. VIII. SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS A. Safety Monitoring and Reporting Plans The sponsor of the master protocol IND is required to ensure proper monitoring of the investigations and to ensure that the investigations are conducted in accordance with the general investigational plan and protocols contained in the IND (21 CFR 312.50).24 Similarly, the sponsor of the investigational product IND for a drug that will be administered under a master protocol IND is responsible for monitoring the safety of its drug and evaluating all accumulating safety data, including data from trials not conducted by the sponsor of the investigational product IND (21 CFR 312.32(b)). The sponsor of the master protocol IND should establish a systematic approach that ensures rapid communication of serious safety issues to all participating clinical investigators and FDA under IND safety reporting regulations.25 Additionally the master protocol IND sponsor should ensure rapid communication of serious safety issues to the sponsors of all products used in the master protocol, according to the established safety reporting plan. In addition, the approach should describe the process for rapid implementation of protocol amendments to address serious safety issues.26  Safety monitoring and reporting obligations of the sponsor of the master protocol IND and sponsors of each IND covered by the master protocol remain unchanged in master protocol trials. 23 See the guidance for industry Developing Targeted Therapies in Low-Frequency Molecular Subsets of a Disease (October 2018). 24 See the guidance for industry Oversight of Clinical Investigations — A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring (August 2013). 25 21 CFR 312.32. 26 21 CFR 312.30(b)(1) and 312.30(b)(2)(ii). 11 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations These reporting obligations are described, along with recommendations to help sponsors comply with expedited safety reporting requirements, in the draft guidance for industry Sponsor Responsibilities—Safety Reporting Requirements and Safety Assessment for IND and Bioavailability/Bioequivalence Studies (June 2021).27  For master protocols in oncology, FDA may expect a sponsor to conduct aggregate analyses of all SAEs at intervals based on the volume of safety data collected or based on the number of subjects accrued into the master protocol in order to fulfill its review obligations under 312.32(b). A sponsor would then be required to submit events that qualify for reporting under 312.32(c) and as described in the draft guidance for industry Sponsor Responsibilities—Safety Reporting Requirements and Safety Assessment for IND and Bioavailability/Bioequivalence  Studies. The frequency of the cumulative aggregate safety analyses should be discussed with the Agency at a pre-IND meeting, taking into account specific program needs. Given the complexity of and the generally rapid accrual to these trials, resulting in increased risks to subjects should there be a failure to promptly identify suspected and unexpected serious adverse reactions, sponsors should select medical monitors who have training and experience in cancer research and in the conduct of clinical trials so that safety information can be promptly assessed.   B. Independent Safety Assessment  For all master protocols, the sponsor should institute an IDMC or other appropriate independent entity structured to assess safety in addition to efficacy (section V. E., Independent Data Monitoring Committee). The sponsor should describe in the IND the constitution of this committee and the definition of its responsibilities. The committee should complete the real-time review of all serious adverse events as defined in FDA regulations and periodically assess the totality of safety information in the development program.28 The IDMC or other appropriate independent entity should have responsibility for conducting prespecified and ad hoc assessments of safety to recommend protocol modifications or other actions including, but not limited to, the following:   (1) Discontinuing or modifying a substudy based on safety information obtained from the protocol or from information external to the trial (2) Changing the eligibility criteria if the risks of the intervention appear to be higher in a particular subgroup (3) Altering the drug dosage and/or schedule if the adverse events observed appear likely to be mitigated by such changes 27 When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic. 28  See the guidance for clinical trial sponsors Establishment and Operation of Clinical Trial Data Monitoring Committees and the draft guidance for industry Sponsor Responsibilities—Safety Reporting Requirements and Safety Assessment for IND and Bioavailability/Bioequivalence Studies. 12 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations (4) Instituting screening procedures that could identify those subjects at increased risk of a particular adverse event (5) Identifying information needed to inform current and future trial subjects of newly identified risks via changes in the informed consent document and, if appropriate, recommending reconsent of current subjects to continue trial participation For more information regarding entities that review aggregate data for IND safety reporting, see section VI of the guidance for industry Sponsor Responsibilities—Safety Reporting Requirements and Safety Assessment for IND and Bioavailability/Bioequivalence Studies. C. Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics Committee  A clinical trial being conducted under a master protocol IND must not be initiated until an IRB or independent ethics committee has reviewed and approved the protocol, and the trial remains subject to continuing review by an IRB.29 After initiation, modifications to the master protocol must be approved by the IRB or independent ethics committee before implementation, with the exception of protocol amendments that are necessary to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to trial participants, which can generally be immediately implemented but are required to be reported to the IRB afterward.30 Sponsors are required to “keep each participating investigator informed of new observations discovered by or reported to the sponsor on the drug, particularly with respect to adverse effects and safe use.”31 Investigators are required under § 312.66 to report all “unanticipated problems involving risk to human subjects or others” to the IRB. FDA considers a serious and unexpected adverse event that meets the criteria for sponsor reporting to FDA and all investigators in an IND safety report under § 312.32 to be an “unanticipated problem[ ] involving risk to human subjects or others” that therefore must be reported to the IRB by the investigator. The investigator must convey this information to the IRB during the time of the IRB’s continuing review, or sooner, if the information is an unanticipated problem involving risk to human subjects or others.32 This information can include a description of the detailed plan for timely, periodic communication of trial progress, cumulative safety information, and other reports from the IDMC. This information is necessary to allow the IRB to evaluate, for example, the risks to human subjects of the ongoing investigation and the adequacy of the informed consent document.33  29 21 CFR 56.103(a); 21 CFR 312.66. 30 21 CFR 56.108(a)(4), 56.104(c), and 21 CFR 312.66. 31 21 CFR 312.55(b). 32 See 21 CFR 312.66 and the draft guidance for industry Investigator Responsibilities — Safety Reporting for Investigational Drugs and Devices (September 2021).When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic. 33 21 CFR 56.109(f). 13 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations To facilitate IRB review of master protocols, FDA recommends the use of a central IRB.34 The central IRB should have adequate resources and appropriate expertise to review master protocols in a timely and thorough manner. In its discretion, an IRB can invite individuals with competence in special areas (i.e., consultants) to help review complex issues that require expertise beyond or in addition to that available on the IRB.35  For research conducted under a master protocol, safety data may rapidly accumulate. IRBs should consider convening additional meetings (i.e., ad hoc meetings of an existing IRB) to review the safety data that the investigator has provided to the IRB for any unanticipated problem involving risk to human subjects or others. The purpose of such meetings would be to expeditiously review the unanticipated problems and, if needed, any proposed trial modifications. Alternatively, a separate, duly constituted specialty IRB can be established and specifically charged with meeting on short notice to review new information and modifications to trials with master protocols. Such an IRB would need to satisfy the same requirements of any IRB (i.e., 21 CFR part 56); however, it could be designed to facilitate a quorum by keeping membership to a minimum (i.e., 21 CFR 56.107 requires that each IRB have at least five members) and being composed of experienced members who are capable of meeting and reviewing trial-related materials on short notice. Ad hoc meetings of an existing IRB or the establishment of a separate specialty IRB designed to facilitate the review of trials with master protocols are acceptable approaches that, if appropriately constituted and operated, can satisfy the regulatory requirement for IRB oversight.  Irrespective of the type of IRB that is used, if the master protocol includes plans to enroll pediatric subjects in the trial, FDA recommends the IRB include (either as a member or an invited nonvoting expert) an individual or individuals who have expertise in the management of pediatric oncology patients.36 IRBs reviewing protocols involving pediatric subjects also should include an individual or individuals with experience with the regulatory requirements for the inclusion of pediatric subjects in clinical trials, including the requirements for parental permission and assent.37  D. Informed Consent Document In addition to submitting informed consent documents to the IRB for review, the sponsor may need to submit the original and all updated informed consent documents to the IND to allow FDA to assess that human subjects have the information to make informed decisions about participation in the trial (21 CFR 50.20). Depending upon the design of the trial, a sponsor may consider the use of informed consent documents specific to each substudy. 34 See 21 CFR 56.114 and the guidance for industry Using a Centralized IRB Review Process in Multicenter Clinical Trials (March 2006). 35 21 CFR 56.107(f). These individuals may not vote with the IRB.  36 21 CFR 56.107. 37 21 CFR 56.107 and 21 CFR 50 subpart D. 14 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations In addition to new safety information, updates to the informed consent document to reflect protocol modifications may be required.38 Protocol amendments submitted under 21 CFR 312.30 should be accompanied by the revised informed consent documents unless immediate modifications are intended to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to subjects, in which case the sponsor should submit the revised informed consent document as soon as possible.  IX. ADDITIONAL REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS Because of the complexity of master protocols and the need to avoid miscommunication that could compromise subject safety, sponsors should submit each master protocol as part of a new IND to FDA. For INDs that contain master protocols, sponsors should consider the following:  – The master protocol should be the only trial that is conducted under the IND.   – The sponsor should submit the master protocol to the review division in CDER or CBER responsible for reviewing the primary indication or indications. If more than one indication is being investigated, the sponsor should submit the IND to the most appropriate clinical review division within the Office of Oncologic Diseases in CDER, or within CBER, taking into account the population to be studied. X. CONTENT OF A MASTER PROTOCOL A. New IND Submission INDs containing master protocols are subject to all the requirements under 21 CFR 312. To ensure that all required aspects are complete, a master protocol must contain the required elements for clinical protocols described in 21 CFR 312.23(a)(6)(iii) and should contain all the information described in sections V, VI, VII, and VIII of this guidance. Specifically, the protocol and IND submission must address the following elements:  (1) Core elements as required per 21 CFR 312.20-23 (2) Submission in electronic (electronic common technical document (eCTD)) format39  The protocol and IND submission should also address the following elements:  (3) Appropriate letters of authorization to the other INDs for each investigational drug also being studied under the IND for the master protocol indicating the location of chemistry, 38 21 CFR 50.25(a). 39 See the guidance for industry Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic Format — Certain Human Pharmaceutical Product Applications and Related Submissions Using the eCTD Specifications  Guidance (February 2020). 15 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations manufacturing, and controls; nonclinical pharmacology and toxicology; clinical pharmacology; and clinical information in the IND referenced in support of the master protocol IND (4) Suggested IND title as “PROTOCOL NAME: List of investigational drugs” (e.g., LUNG-MAP: Drug X, Drug Y, Drug Z)   (5) Submission of each substudy within the same IND under a separate folder in Section 5.3.5. of the eCTD (as shown in Figure D in the Appendix) to facilitate review (6) Inclusion of a list of all the substudies in Section 5.2 of the eCTD, in addition to the master protocol title (as shown in Figure E in the Appendix) The master protocol should also include the following:  (1) A detailed description of the trial design as text and as a visual depiction (2) Procedures for sample acquisition, handling, and testing of biomarkers, as well as information pertaining to any IVDs employed in the trial, as appropriate (3) Prominent identification of all substudies (4) Description of all groups responsible for monitoring subject safety (e.g., IRB, IDMC) (5) Description of the plan for submission of interim safety and efficacy results (6) The proposed informed consent document B. Amendments to the Master Protocol Protocol amendments that substantively affect the safety or scope of the master protocol should contain the following:40 (1) An updated informed consent document (2) A clean and tracked changes version of the amended master protocol document (3) A list of the proposed changes in tabular format with the rationale for each proposed change and the following supportive information, if available: (a) Summary of available safety and efficacy data 40 See 21 CFR 312.30(d) and 312.31(b) for content and format requirements for protocol amendments and information amendments. 16 (b) Contains Nonbinding Recommendations New nonclinical toxicology or pharmacology data and clinical data as appropriate to support the protocol modification In general, to facilitate communications and expedite the drug development program, FDA recommends that a sponsor submit a substudy for disease-specific development to a new master protocol IND reviewed by the appropriate disease-specific team, particularly when that team is located in another review division. In such instances, the sponsor should cross-reference to the original master protocol IND information on common elements (e.g., description of groups responsible for monitoring patient safety) rather than resubmit the information with the substudy. XI. COMMUNICATION AND INTERACTIONS WITH FDA Sponsors should consult guidances for industry for best communication practices41 and meetings42 with FDA to ensure open lines of dialogue before and during the drug development process. With regard to master protocols, sponsors should consider the following:  – FDA encourages the sponsor of the master protocol to request a pre-IND meeting. This can allow the sponsor and FDA to reach key agreements on the design and conduct of the protocol. – The cover letter for all meeting requests should clearly state “REQUEST FOR MEETING-MASTER PROTOCOL (Meeting Type).” – The sponsor should notify the regulatory project manager via secure email or a phone call 48 hours before submitting any protocol amendment that substantively affects the safety or scope of the protocol. – The cover letter for such protocol amendments should be clearly marked as “Protocol Amendment-MASTER PROTOCOL.” – If the amendment contains changes intended to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to subjects (e.g., closure of a substudy for unacceptable toxicity, modification of eligibility or monitoring to mitigate the risks), the sponsor should implement immediately the revised protocol.43 The sponsor must ensure that FDA is subsequently notified by protocol 41 See the guidance for industry and review staff Best Practices for Communication Between IND Sponsors and FDA During Drug Development (December 2017). 42 See the draft guidances for industry Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or Applicants of BsUFA Products (June 2018) and Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or Applicants of PDUFA Products (December 2017). When final, these guidances will represent the FDA’s current thinking on these topics.  43 See 21 CFR 312.30(b)(2)(ii) (allowing protocol changes intended for this purpose to be “implemented immediately provided FDA is subsequently notified by protocol amendment and the reviewing IRB is notified in accordance with 56.104(c).”). 17 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations amendment and the reviewing IRB is notified in accordance with 21 CFR 56.104(c).44 For other substantive changes that affect safety, scope, or the scientific quality of the study, the cover letter should contain a statement that the revised protocol will not be initiated until 30 days after submission to the IND to allow FDA to assess the risks of the proposed change and until the change has been approved by the IRB.45  44 See 21 CFR 56.104(c) (permitting IRB exemption for emergency use of a test article). 45 See 21 CFR 312.30(b)(2)(i)(b) (permitting a protocol change to be made once the sponsor has submitted the change to FDA and the change has been approved by the IRB). 18 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations REFERENCES Abrams J, B Conley, M Mooney, J Zwiebel, A Chen, JJ Welch, N Takebe, S Malik, L McShane, E Korn, M Williams, L Staudt, and J Doroshow, 2014, National Cancer Institute’s Precision Medicine Initiatives for the New National Clinical Trials Network, Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book, 34:71–76. Herbst RS, DR Gandara, FR Hirsch, MW Redman, M LeBlanc, PC Mack, LH Schwartz, E Vokes, SS Ramalingam, JD Bradley, D Sparks, Y Zhou, C Miwa, VA Miller, R Yelensky, Y Li, JD Allen, EV Sigal, D Wholley, CC Sigman, GM Blumenthal, S Malik, GJ Kelloff, JS Abrams, CD Blanke, and VA Papadimitrakopoulou, 2015, Lung Master Protocol (Lung-MAP)—A Biomarker-Driven Protocol for Accelerating Development of Therapies for Squamous Cell Lung Cancer: SWOG S1400, Clin Cancer Res, 21(7):1514–1524. Hyman DM, I Puzanov, V Subbiah, JE Faris, I Chau, J-Y Blay, J Wolf, NS Raje, EL Diamond, A Hollebecque, R Gervais, ME Elez-Fernandez, A Italiano, R-D Hofheinz, M Hildago, E Chan, M Schuler, SF Lasserre, M Makrutzki, F Sirzen, ML Veronese, J Tabernero, and J Baselga, 2015, Vemurafenib in Multiple Nonmelanoma Cancers with BRAF V600 Mutations, N Engl J Med, 373(8):726–736. Kim ES, RS Herbst, II Wistuba, JJ Lee, GR Blumenschein Jr., A Tsao, DJ Stewart, ME Hicks, J Erasmus Jr., S Gupta, CM Alden, S Liu, X Tang, FR Khuri, HT Tran, BE Johnson, JV Heymach, L Mao, F Fossella, MS Kies, V Papadimitrakopoulou, SE Davis, SM Lippman, and WK Hong, 2011, The BATTLE Trial: Personalizing Therapy for Lung Cancer, Cancer Discov, 1(1): 44–53. Simon R, 1989, Optimal Two-Stage Designs for Phase II Clinical Trials, Control Clin Trials, 10(1):1–10. Woodcock, J and LM LaVange, 2017, Master Protocols to Study Multiple Therapies, Multiple Diseases, or Both, N Engl J Med, 377(1):62–70. 19 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations APPENDIX Example of a Master Protocol With a Basket Trial Design An example of a master protocol with basket design is the phase 2 trial evaluating vemurafenib in multiple nonmelanoma cancers with BRAF V600 mutations, as shown in Figure A.  Figure A:  Vemurafenib in Nonmelanoma Cancers Harboring BRAF V600 Mutations1 * * *NSCLC = Non-small cell lung cancer; ECD = Erdheim-Chester disease; LCH = Langerhans cell histiocytosis. 1Hyman DM, I Puzanov, V Subbiah, JE Faris, I Chau, J-Y Blay, J Wolf, NS Raje, EL Diamond, A Hollebecque, R Gervais, ME Elez-Fernandez, A Italiano, R-D Hofheinz, M Hildago, E Chan, M Schuler, SF Lasserre, M Makrutzki, F Sirzen, ML Veronese, J Tabernero, and J Baselga, 2015, Vemurafenib in Multiple Nonmelanoma Cancers with BRAF V600 Mutations, N Engl J Med, 373(8):726–736. 20 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations Example of a Master Protocol With an Umbrella Trial Design An example of a master protocol with an umbrella design is the original version of the LUNGMAP trial, a multidrug, multi-substudy, biomarker-driven trial in patients with advanced/metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the lung, as shown in Figure B. Figure B:  LUNG-MAP Trial in Patients With Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Lung2 *Archival formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor, fresh core needle biopsy if needed. NGS = next generation DNA sequencing; OS = overall survival; PFS = progression free survival; TT = targeted therapy; CT = chemotherapy (docetaxel or gemcitabine); TKI = tyrosine kinase inhibitor (erlotinib). 2Herbst RS, DR Gandara, FR Hirsch, MW Redman, M LeBlanc, PC Mack, LH Schwartz, E Vokes, SS Ramalingam, JD Bradley, D Sparks, Y Zhou, C Miwa, VA Miller, R Yelensky, Y Li, JD Allen, EV Sigal, D Wholley, CC Sigman, GM Blumenthal, S Malik, GJ Kelloff, JS Abrams, CD Blanke, and VA Papadimitrakopoulou, 2015, Lung Master Protocol (Lung-MAP)—A Biomarker-Driven Protocol for Accelerating Development of Therapies for Squamous Cell Lung Cancer: SWOG S1400, Clin Cancer Res, 21(7):1514–1524. 21 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations Example of a Master Protocol With a Complex Trial Design An example of a master protocol with a complex trial design is the NCI-MATCH trial, as shown in Figure C.  Figure C:  National Cancer Institute Match Trial Scheme3 * *RECIST = response evaluation criteria in solid tumors; SD = stable disease. 3Adapted from Abrams J, B Conley, M Mooney, J Zwiebel, A Chen, JJ Welch, N Takebe, S Malik, L McShane, E Korn, M Williams, L Staudt, and J Doroshow, 2014, National Cancer Institute’s Precision Medicine Initiatives for the New National Clinical Trials Network, Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book, 34:71–76. 22 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations Examples of How to Use eCTD for a Master Protocol Figure D (below) gives an example of how a sponsor can submit each substudy within the same investigational new drug application under a separate folder in section 5.3.5. of the electronic common technical document (eCTD). Figure D:  Schematic Figure of eCTD with an IND with Master Protocol “CANCER 123” and Substudies S-1, S-2, S-3, and S-4* * eCTD = electronic common technical document; IND = investigational new drug application. 23 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations Figure E (below) gives an example of how a sponsor can include a list of all the substudies in section 5.2 of the eCTD, in addition to the master protocol title. Figure E:  Module 5.2 of eCTD Tabular Listing of 



Rare Diseases: Considerations for the Development of Drugs and Biological Products Guidance for Industry U.S. Department of Health and Human Services  Food and Drug Administration  Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)  Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)  December 2023 Rare Diseases Rare Diseases: Considerations for the Development of Drugs and Biological Products Guidance for Industry Additional copies are available from:  Office of Communications, Division of Drug Information Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Food and Drug Administration 10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 4th Floor  Silver Spring, MD  20993-0002  Phone: 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400; Fax: 301-431-6353 Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.gov https://www.fda.gov/drugs/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information/guidances-drugs and/or Office of Communication, Outreach, and Development Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research Food and Drug Administration 10903 New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 71, Room 3128 Silver Spring, MD  20993-0002 Phone: 800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010 Email: ocod@fda.hhs.gov https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information-biologics/biologics-guidances U.S. Department of Health and Human Services  Food and Drug Administration  Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)  Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)  December 2023 Rare Diseases Contains Nonbinding Recommendations   Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 1 Rare Diseases: Considerations for the Development of 1 Drugs and Biological Products 2 Guidance for Industry1 3  4  5  6  7 This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on 8 this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can 9 use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To 10 discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title 11 page.   12  13  14  15  16 I. INTRODUCTION 17  18 The purpose of this guidance is to assist sponsors of drugs2 for the treatment of rare diseases in 19 conducting efficient and successful drug development programs. The statutory requirements for 20 marketing approval for drugs to treat rare and common diseases are the same and issues 21 discussed in this guidance are encountered in other drug development programs. These issues are 22 frequently more difficult to address in the context of a rare disease for which there is often 23 limited medical and scientific knowledge, poorly understood natural history data, sample size 24 constraints, and lack of drug development experience. 25  26 This guidance does not contain discussion of the general issues of statistical analysis. Those 27 topics are addressed in other documents, including ICH guidances for industry E9 Statistical 28 Principles for Clinical Trials3 (September 1998) and E10 Choice of Control Group and Related 29  1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of New Drugs and the Office of Translational Sciences in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research in cooperation with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research at the Food and Drug Administration.  2 The term drug, as used in this guidance, refers to both human drugs and biological products unless otherwise specified.  3 Clinical trial has the same meaning as the term clinical investigation as the latter is defined in FDA regulations (see 21 CFR 312.3(b)). Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 2 Issues in Clinical Trials (May 2001), respectively.4 Additional FDA guidances cover other 30 specific topics that may be of specialized interest.5,6,7,8 31  32 In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. 33 Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only 34 as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of 35 the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but 36 not required. 37  38  39 II. BACKGROUND 40  41 Section 526(a)(2)(A) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) defines a rare 42 disease or condition, in part, as a disease or condition that “affects less than 200,000 persons in 43 the United States.”9 Most rare diseases, however, affect far fewer people. The sponsor of an 44 orphan drug (a drug intended for use in a rare disease or condition10)  may be eligible for orphan-45 drug designation and certain financial incentives intended to help make developing drugs for 46 small numbers of patients financially viable;11 however, the Orphan Drug Act does not create a 47 statutory standard for the approval of orphan drugs that is different from the standard for 48 approval of drugs for common diseases or conditions. 49  50  4 We update guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents.  5 See the ICH guidance for industry E8(R1) General Considerations for Clinical Studies (April 2022).  6 See the guidance for industry Adaptive Designs for Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biologics (November 2019).  7 See the draft guidance for industry Considerations for the Design and Conduct of Externally Controlled Trials for Drug and Biological Products (February 2023). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents. Also see the guidance for industry Considerations for the Use of Real-World Data and Real-World Evidence To Support Regulatory Decision-Making for Drug and Biological Products (August 2023).  8 See the guidance for industry E9(R1) Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials: Addendum: Estimands and Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical Trials (May 2021).  9 In addition, section 526(a)(2)(B) of the FD&C Act also defines a rare disease or condition as any disease or condition that “affects more than 200,000 in the United States and for which there is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and making available in the United States a drug for such disease or condition will be recovered from sales in the United States of such drug.”  10 See 21 CFR 316.3(b)(10).   11 Incentives associated with orphan-drug designation include a tax credit for 25 percent of qualified clinical trial costs, exemption from fees under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act, and potential eligibility for a 7-year period of market exclusivity. See Public Law 97-414 (1983), as amended.   Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 3 Approval of any drug — for either a rare disease or a common disease or condition — must be 51 based on substantial evidence of the drug’s effectiveness for its intended use and sufficient 52 information to conclude that the drug is safe for use under the conditions prescribed, 53 recommended, or suggested in the proposed labeling.12 Sponsors should demonstrate evidence of 54 effectiveness in an identified population from adequate and well-controlled13 clinical 55 investigations.14 FDA regulations provide flexibility in how the regulatory standard may be met. 56 FDA “exercise[s] its scientific judgment” in determining the kind and quantity of data a sponsor 57 is required to provide for individual drug development programs.15 This flexibility extends from 58 the early stages of development to the design of adequate and well-controlled clinical 59 investigations required to demonstrate effectiveness to support marketing approval and to 60 establish safety data needed for the intended use. 61  62 Many rare diseases are serious conditions with no approved treatments, leaving substantial 63 unmet medical need for patients. FDA recognizes that rare diseases are highly diverse with 64 varying prevalence, rates of progression, and degrees of heterogeneity that can affect both 65 clinical manifestations and disease courses even within a condition. Further complexity is added 66 depending on what is known about a disease’s natural history and pathophysiology. As such, no 67 one program can be designed exactly like another. FDA is committed to helping sponsors create 68 successful drug development programs that address the particular challenges posed by each 69 disease and encourages sponsors to engage early with the Agency to discuss their drug 70 development program.  71  72  73 III. CONSIDERATIONS FOR NATURAL HISTORY STUDIES 74  75 All drug development programs benefit from a firm scientific foundation, including an 76 understanding of disease natural history. The natural history of rare diseases is often poorly 77 understood, and the need for prospectively designed, protocol-driven natural history studies 78 initiated in the earliest drug development planning stages cannot be overemphasized. Although 79 FDA does not require natural history studies, we advise sponsors to evaluate early the depth and 80 quality of existing natural history knowledge to determine whether it is sufficient to inform their 81 drug development programs.  82  83 For details about natural history studies, refer to the draft guidance for industry Rare Diseases: 84 Natural History Studies for Drug Development (March 2019).16 85  86  12 See section 505(d) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 355(d)).  13 See 21 CFR 314.126.   14 See 21 CFR 314.126.   15 21 CFR 314.105(c).   16 When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 4  87 IV. NONCLINICAL STUDIES 88  89 Nonclinical studies are a mandated part of drug development.17 The goal of the nonclinical 90 program, which consists of in vitro and/or in vivo studies, is to provide evidence that the drug is 91 “reasonably safe to conduct the proposed clinical investigations.”18 Nonclinical studies can also 92 contribute to a better understanding of the drug’s mechanism of action, metabolism, 93 pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and possible efficacy. The data generated from 94 nonclinical studies are important to the design of early-phase clinical investigations, particularly 95 for selecting the starting clinical dose, dose escalation plan, dosing regimen, and route of 96 administration. The nonclinical data may help guide the selection of patient eligibility criteria 97 and will often determine important safety monitoring procedures based on the observed 98 toxicological profile. 99  100 Internationally accepted guidelines discuss the general design of nonclinical safety studies and 101 the timing of such studies relative to the conduct of a clinical development program.19 Factors 102 that FDA evaluates when determining areas of nonclinical flexibility include the 103 pharmacological and chemical characteristics of the drug, the design and objectives of the 104 proposed clinical investigations, the severity of the targeted disease (including the rate of 105 progression to death or irreversible morbidity), adequacy of other available therapies, and the 106 anticipated risks to humans based on the accumulated nonclinical toxicology and human data. 107 When determining the relevance of existing data, a sponsor can consider factors such as drug 108 product constituents, dosage form, route of administration, dose levels, and dosing regimen plan.  109  110 The sponsor should design the pivotal toxicology studies considering the biology of the disease, 111 expected pharmacology of the drug, existing proof-of-concept (POC) data, proposed population 112 to be studied (e.g., adult versus pediatric), and proposed clinical investigation design(s) for the 113 clinical indication sought. Generally, healthy animals are the test system used in traditional 114 toxicology testing and, in most circumstances, would be the test system used to support initiation 115 of clinical investigations.20 When an animal model of the disease is available, pharmacology and 116 safety studies may contribute to understanding the actions of the drug on disease 117 pathophysiology, inform safety in the context of that disease, and guide plans for measuring 118 biological effects in patients. Combined POC and safety studies in animal models of human 119  17 See 21 CFR 312.23(a)(8).   18 21 CFR 312.23(a)(8).   19 See the ICH guidances for industry M3(R2) Nonclinical Safety Studies for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals (January 2010) (ICH M3(R2)); S6(R1) Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals (June 2011) (ICH S6(R1)); and S9 Nonclinical Evaluation for Anticancer Pharmaceuticals (March 2010) (ICH S9).   20 We support the principles of the 3Rs (replace/reduce/refine) for animal use in testing when feasible. FDA encourages sponsors to consult with review divisions when considering a nonanimal testing method believed to be suitable, adequate, validated, and feasible. FDA will consider if the alternative method could be assessed for equivalency to an animal test method.  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 5 disease have been used in limited situations such as enzyme replacement therapy. Toxicology 120 testing in an animal model of disease may contribute to the nonclinical support for clinical 121 investigations but usually will not substitute for toxicology testing in healthy animals. However, 122 safety evaluation in an animal model may be particularly valuable when drug toxicity is 123 predicted to be more severe in the presence of disease pathophysiology. 124  125 It can also be appropriate to conduct the pivotal toxicology studies in juvenile animals when the 126 indicated population is pediatric and/or the weight of evidence suggests a cause for concern for 127 adverse developmental effects not otherwise evaluated by studies conducted to assess 128 developmental and reproductive toxicity, or the data from adult animals (and adult humans, if 129 appropriate) are inadequate.21 130  131 When clinical investigations are to be conducted in pediatric participants, POC data are required 132 to establish a prospect of direct benefit to the pediatric population.22 Robust animal model results 133 may support the possibility of clinical benefit and the potential for a favorable benefit-risk 134 assessment to support testing in children. However, for many rare diseases, an animal disease 135 model may not exist or may not exhibit some of the clinically important manifestations of the 136 disease. Sponsors should thoroughly understand the biological relevance and limitations of the 137 animal model of disease if it is used in nonclinical studies. Data from relevant ex vivo or in vitro 138 models, such as tissue explants or cell cultures from participant-derived samples, can also be 139 used to support the POC in some instances (e.g., correction of an mRNA or protein expression or 140 subcellular trafficking defect that is known to have a causal relationship to the disease).  141  142 FDA has determined that it is appropriate to exercise the broadest flexibility in applying the 143 statutory standards, while preserving appropriate standards of safety and effectiveness, for 144 products that are being developed to treat severely debilitating or life-threatening (SDLT) rare 145 diseases.23 For products being developed for SDLT rare disease indications, clinical 146 investigations can often proceed with modifications to the typical nonclinical development 147 programs described in guidance.24 The degree of flexibility afforded to such programs may 148 depend on a variety of factors, such as the adequacy of current treatment options, the mechanism 149 of the drug, the safety findings from the available data, and the expected rate of progression to 150 mortality or irreversible morbidity.  151  152 For SDLT rare disease indications, certain types of nonclinical data — primary pharmacology 153 (including POC data); secondary pharmacology; safety pharmacology; in vitro absorption, 154 distribution, metabolism, and excretion; and genetic toxicology data — is generally expected at 155 the time of investigational new drug application (IND) submission, as appropriate, as outlined in 156  21 See the ICH guidance for industry S11 Nonclinical Safety Testing in Support of Development of Pediatric Pharmaceuticals (May 2021).  22 See 21 CFR 50.52, 50.53, and 50.55(c)(2).   23 See 21 CFR 312, subpart E.  24 See ICH M3(R2), ICH S6(R1), and ICH S9.  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 6 relevant regulations and guidance.25 The IND application should also include results from good 157 laboratory practice–compliant general toxicology studies of sufficient duration to support the 158 proposed first-in-human clinical protocol.26 The in vivo safety pharmacology assessments can 159 generally be integrated into the general toxicology studies. 160  161 Modifications to the typical nonclinical development paradigm may be appropriate for SDLT 162 rare disease indications in the following areas: 163  164 • Repeat-Dose General Toxicology Study Duration and Timing of Submission: 165  166 – If the clinical investigation entry criteria define a phenotype that is anticipated to 167 progress rapidly to mortality within approximately 1 year (i.e., similar prognosis as 168 for advanced cancer), 1-month general toxicology studies will be adequate to evaluate 169 support for early clinical development. The study reports from the completed 170 subchronic general toxicology studies (typically of 3 months’ duration) should be 171 submitted before initiating pivotal clinical investigations (those intended to provide 172 substantial evidence of clinical effectiveness) and would generally be adequate to 173 support marketing. 174  175 – If the clinical investigation entry criteria define a phenotype that would be expected 176 to have a slower rate of progression to death or is characterized by major debilitating 177 irreversible morbidity, then the 3-month general toxicology studies should be 178 submitted to support clinical investigations of greater than 1 month’s duration. 179 Chronic toxicity studies, when warranted (see ICH M3(R2) or ICH S6(R1) as 180 appropriate), should be ongoing at the time of submission of clinical investigation 181 protocols of more than 3 months’ duration. Study reports from the chronic toxicity 182 studies can generally be submitted with the marketing application but should be 183 submitted earlier if warranted. In cases where the shorter duration studies identify 184 safety signals needing further characterization, the chronic toxicity studies should be 185 completed before initiating the pivotal clinical investigation(s). 186  187 • Species Selection: 188  189 – Sponsors should conduct nonclinical evaluations in pharmacologically relevant 190 species. It may be appropriate to conduct the general toxicology studies in a single 191 species, for example, if there is only one relevant species and the potential for off-192 target toxicity is low. In some cases, initiation of clinical investigations can be 193 supported by POC studies of appropriate duration in animal disease models, with 194 incorporation of adequate toxicological assessments into the POC study. For such 195 modified POC studies, FDA encourages sponsors to discuss the adequacy of the study 196  25 See 21 CFR 312.23. See also ICH M3(R2), ICH S6(R1), and ICH S9. Additionally, see the ICH guidances for industry S7A Safety Pharmacology Studies for Human Pharmaceuticals (July 2001), S7B Nonclinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals (October 2005), and E14 and S7B Clinical and Nonclinical Evaluation of QT/QTc Interval Prolongation and Proarrhythmic Potential — Questions and Answers (August 2022).  26 See 21 CFR 312.23(a)(8) and ICH M3(R2), ICH S6(R1), and ICH S9. Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 7 design (e.g., number of animals used and plans for tissue collection and evaluation, 197 good laboratory practice status) with the review division before initiating the study. 198  199 • Developmental and Reproductive Toxicity Assessment: 200  201 – An assessment of toxicity to embryofetal development can generally be submitted 202 with the marketing application;27 however, it may be appropriate to defer submission 203 to after approval, depending on factors such as the indication and patient population. 204 In some instances, embryofetal developmental data may be requested earlier if there 205 is a cause for concern that needs to be better characterized. The need for fertility and 206 prenatal and postnatal development studies should be determined based on the patient 207 population and existing data concerning identified hazards to these endpoints. If these 208 studies are needed, the data would generally be submitted with the marketing 209 application or in the postmarket period, as appropriate. 210  211 • Carcinogenicity Assessment: 212  213 – If the conduct of carcinogenicity studies is warranted, these data should generally be 214 submitted with the marketing application. In certain circumstances, submission of 215 these data may be deferred to after approval. The timing of carcinogenicity studies 216 should be discussed with the review division as early as possible in the drug 217 development program.28  218  219 The suitability of any or all of the above flexibilities to any given development program needs to 220 be determined on a case-by-case basis. Therefore, FDA strongly encourages the sponsor to 221 discuss the proposed approach with the review division to obtain concurrence with the sponsor’s 222 proposed nonclinical development program.29 223  224  225  27 This is predicated on an expectation that effective pregnancy prevention measures will be employed by persons of childbearing potential enrolled in the clinical trials. See ICH M3(R2).  28 See ICH S6(R1), and the ICH guidances for industry S1A The Need for Long-term Rodent Carcinogenicity Studies of Pharmaceuticals (March 1996) and S1B(R1) Addendum to S1B Testing for Carcinogenicity of Pharmaceuticals (November 2022).  29 For recommendations on the substance and scope of nonclinical information needed to support clinical trials for cell therapy and gene therapy products, see the guidance for industry Preclinical Assessment of Investigational Cellular and Gene Therapy Products (November 2013).   Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 8 V. CONSIDERATIONS IN CLINICAL DEVELOPMENT, EFFECTIVENESS, AND 226 SAFETY 227  228 A. Clinical Pharmacology Considerations, Dose Selection, and Use of 229 Biomarkers 230  231 The following should be considered about clinical pharmacology, dose selection, and use of 232 biomarkers in rare disease drug development. 233  234 1. Clinical Pharmacology Considerations and Dose Selection 235  236 FDA expects that routine clinical pharmacology assessments typically undertaken during drug 237 development will be performed in rare disease drug development programs.30 The need for 238 specific clinical pharmacology assessments may depend on factors such as what is known about 239 the drug’s disposition, drug interaction potential with any concomitant medications, 240 comorbidities, the anticipated safety profile of the drug, and the potential impacts of organ 241 impairment on a drug’s pharmacokinetics.   242  243 In general, sponsors should evaluate the effects of more than one dosage on response using 244 pharmacodynamic or other sensitive clinical measures of efficacy and safety to inform dosing. 245 Use of more than one dosage provides a range of exposures that can be used to determine which 246 dosage should be carried forward into registrational clinical investigations and which dosage is 247 appropriate for the general population upon approval. Biospecimens for analysis of 248 pharmacokinetics and/or pharmacodynamics should be obtained from all clinical investigation 249 participants to aid in evaluation of exposure-response relationships and selection of the most 250 appropriate dosage. Sponsors developing drugs for rare diseases should provide a comprehensive 251 plan for clinical pharmacology assessments to FDA early in drug development and discuss the 252 plan with the review division. Further information on dose selection is under subsection E., 253 Additional Considerations Related to Clinical Development for Rare Disease Drugs.   254  255 2. Identification and Use of Biomarkers 256  257 Sponsors are encouraged to evaluate biomarkers that are relevant to the disease process and drug 258 response throughout the course of drug development for rare diseases. When appropriate and 259 feasible, sponsors should develop a plan for obtaining specimens from clinical investigation 260 participants to evaluate the effects of the drug in relevant tissues. When biomarkers are used to 261 support critical decisions, such as for patient monitoring, dose selection, or supporting efficacy 262  30 See the guidances for industry Pharmacokinetics in Patients with Impaired Hepatic Function: Study Design, Data Analysis, and Impact on Dosing and Labeling (May 2003), Population Pharmacokinetics (February 2022), In Vitro Drug Interaction Studies – Cytochrome P450 Enzyme- and Transporter-Mediated Drug Interactions (January 2020), Clinical Drug Interaction Studies – Cytochrome P450 Enzyme- and Transporter-Mediated Drug Interactions (January 2020). See also the draft guidance for industry Pharmacokinetics in Patients with Impaired Renal Function - Study Design, Data Analysis, and Impact on Dosing (September 2020). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 9 and safety, adequate information should be provided to support the biomarker and validation of 263 the assay method.31 Early consultation with the appropriate review division is encouraged. 264  265 The following should also be considered for use of biomarkers in rare disease drug development:  266  267 • Identifying new biomarkers or modifying the use of existing biomarkers that may 268 indicate effects on different steps in the pathophysiologic processes. 269  270 — Predictive biomarkers may have critical roles in POC and dose-selection clinical 271 investigations or in identification of characteristics of patients with greater potential 272 to respond to therapy. Biomarkers that promptly indicate drug response might be used 273 in a patient-specific manner to individualize the dosage or regimen. 274  275 • Identifying early biomarkers of disease or effects of interventions and biomarkers that 276 could be used in adaptive and enrichment designs for greater efficiency.32 277  278 — For example, values of a laboratory measurement expected to be sensitive to a drug’s 279 effect could be used to screen potential responders for inclusion in efficacy clinical 280 investigations. Sponsors may also be able to identify clinical or genomic 281 characteristics that predict response using these biomarkers.  282  283 The analytical validity of the assay(s) used for biomarker quantitation should be evaluated before 284 the phase 3 clinical investigation.33 In addition, standardized methods for sample collection, 285 storage, shipment, and preparation should be used.  286  287 The guidance for industry and FDA staff Qualification Process for Drug Development Tools 288 (November 2020) includes important information about the features of biomarkers used as 289 endpoints.34 For information about biomarker development within a specific drug development 290 program, the sponsor should discuss with the appropriate review division.35  291  292  31 See the draft guidance for industry and FDA staff Biomarker Qualification: Evidentiary Framework (December 2018). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  32 See the guidances for industry Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials to Support Determination of Effectiveness of Human Drugs and Biological Products (March 2019) and Adaptive Designs for Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biologics.   33 See the guidance for industry Bioanalytical Method Validation (May 2018).   34 There is no statutory requirement that biomarkers be qualified through this process.   35 See the draft guidance for industry Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or Applicants of PDUFA Products (September 2023). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.   Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 10 B. Clinical Investigation Design 293  294 In rare disease drug development, given the limited number of patients, it is crucial to optimize 295 all aspects of clinical investigation design and standardize the collection and management of data 296 to ensure quality and interpretability. In general, increased measurement variability and 297 inconsistency reduce data interpretability and confidence in the results. Standardized operating 298 procedures, quality assurance, and quality control are essential. This is especially important when 299 the clinical investigation is being conducted at multiple sites.  300  301 The purpose of conducting clinical investigations of a drug product is to distinguish the effect of 302 a drug on the target condition from other influences, such as spontaneous change in the course of 303 the disease, placebo effect, or biased observation.36 Adequate and well-controlled clinical 304 investigations provide the primary basis for determining whether there is substantial evidence to 305 support the claims of effectiveness, and sponsors should discuss with FDA their anticipated 306 approach to demonstrating substantial evidence of effectiveness early in the development 307 process.37 FDA’s regulation at 21 CFR 314.126(b) describes characteristics of an adequate and 308 well-controlled clinical investigation.38  309  310 Recommendations for the design of clinical investigations below reflect best practices for 311 conducting rare disease clinical studies designed to demonstrate whether a drug is effective in a 312 patient population. However, in certain rare disease development programs, such as cell and gene 313 therapies, there may be situations where it would be reasonable to explore flexibility in clinical 314 investigation design.39 Important factors would include if there is a well-defined, predictable 315 natural history and if the therapeutic product has a large treatment effect on an objective and 316 reliably measured biomarker or clinical endpoint. In these situations, flexibility in design should 317 be considered on a case-by-case basis in discussion with the review division. 318  319 Considerations that are particularly relevant to rare disease drug development are addressed 320 below. 321  322 1. Controls 323  324 A critical element of an adequate and well-controlled study is the use of an appropriate control to 325 enable reliable and unbiased, to the degree possible, efficacy assessments. Typically, use of a 326 randomized concurrent control group (e.g., placebo, no treatment, active treatment) is 327 recommended to distinguish changes occurring because of the drug from those changes 328 occurring because of other factors, such as natural disease progression. 329  36 See 21 CFR 314.126(a).  37 See section 505(d) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 355(d)); 21 CFR 314.126(a).  38 See also the draft guidance for industry Demonstrating Substantial Evidence of Effectiveness for Human Drug and Biological Products (December 2019). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  39 See the guidance for industry Human Gene Therapy for Rare Diseases (January 2020).  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 11  330 For serious rare diseases with unmet medical need, interest is frequently expressed in using an 331 external control. In clinical investigations with external controls, outcomes in participants 332 receiving the test treatment according to a protocol are compared with outcomes in a group of 333 people external to the clinical investigation who had not received the same treatment.40 However, 334 the lack of blinding and inability to eliminate systematic differences between treatment groups, 335 given the nonrandomized nature of the comparison, are limitations to the use of an external 336 control group. For example, in the case of a historical external control, there may be systematic 337 differences between the nonconcurrent treatment groups attributable to changes in standard of 338 care or diagnostic approaches over time. 339  340 Given the limitations, external control designs are usually reserved for specific circumstances, 341 such as clinical investigations where the drug effect can be demonstrated in diseases with well-342 understood and characterized natural history, high and predictable mortality or progressive and 343 predictable morbidity, and clinical investigations in which the drug effect is large and self-344 evident.41,42 The suitability of an externally controlled clinical investigation design warrants a 345 case-by-case assessment, and early discussion with the relevant review division is recommended.  346  347 2. Randomization and Blinding  348  349 Randomization in combination with blinding is a powerful clinical investigation design feature to 350 mitigate bias as it aims to balance both known and unknown factors that may affect the outcome. 351 Randomized, double-blind, controlled clinical investigations are an efficient and effective way to 352 generate data on clinically meaningful outcomes to demonstrate substantial evidence of 353 effectiveness.43 Thus, randomized, double-blind, controlled clinical investigations are generally 354 the preferred approach.  355  356 Randomization of all enrolled clinical investigation participants, including those in the earliest 357 phases of clinical development, helps ensure that each participant’s contribution is interpretable, 358 avoiding potentially misleading findings from open-label, single-arm, externally controlled 359 clinical investigations. Stratification of randomization by important prognostic factors such as 360 age or disease severity may be considered to improve comparability of treatment groups. FDA 361 also recommends that sponsors consider adjustment for prognostic factors as covariates in 362 statistical analyses to improve precision and power.44  363  40 See the draft guidance for industry Considerations for the Design and Conduct of Externally Controlled Trials for Drug and Biological Products.  41 See the draft guidance for industry Demonstrating Substantial Evidence of Effectiveness for Human Drug and Biological Products.  42 See the draft guidance for industry Considerations for the Design and Conduct of Externally Controlled Trials for Drug and Biological Products.  43 See ICH E9.  44 See the guidance for industry Adjusting for Covariates in Randomized Clinical Trials for Drugs and Biological Products (May 2023).  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 12  364 Sponsors should explore and address concerns about clinical investigation design (such as 365 control arms and randomization) with patients, caregivers, and clinical investigators early in 366 planning stages to avoid undermining clinical investigation recruitment and retention. Sponsors 367 can sometimes address patient and family concerns by using modified clinical investigation 368 designs, when appropriate, to demonstrate effectiveness and identify important safety signals. 369 These designs retain the advantages of placebo-controlled clinical investigations and include 370 features that minimize placebo exposure and enhance access to experimental therapies (e.g., dose 371 response, delayed start, randomized withdrawal, crossover, adaptive designs with interim 372 analysis, unequal randomization ratio).45 373  374 3. Innovative Designs 375  376 It is important that plans to use innovative clinical investigation designs be discussed in advance 377 with the review division, ideally at the pre-investigational new drug application (pre-IND) 378 meeting.46 Examples of innovative or nontraditional approaches in rare diseases include 379 Bayesian methods, n-of-1 clinical investigations, randomized delayed-start designs, crossover 380 designs, and master protocols (where a common placebo arm is shared among different drug 381 arms).47  382  383 For example, sponsors may be able to use Bayesian methods to maximize the use of information 384 gleaned from early-phase studies or natural history studies. Bayesian methods also may inform 385 pediatric clinical investigations through incorporation of adult clinical data. 386  387 The design of clinical investigations may allow early evidence to be used later in a clinical 388 investigation, which may be especially helpful when there are limited numbers of participants to 389 study, as is the case in rare diseases.48 If an adaptive clinical investigation design is under 390 consideration, a detailed statistical analysis plan including the key features of the clinical 391 investigation design and preplanned analyses (including interim analyses) should be discussed 392 with the review division before clinical investigation initiation.  393  394 C. Evidence of Effectiveness and Efficacy Endpoints 395  396 The overall goals of drug development programs are to demonstrate the effectiveness of a drug in 397 treating or preventing a disease or condition, to assess the magnitude and frequency of that 398 effect, and to assess the risks of the drug, thereby enabling a benefit-risk assessment and 399 appropriate labeling.  400  45 See the guidance for industry Adaptive Designs for Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biologics.  46 See the guidance for industry Interacting with the FDA on Complex Innovative Trial Designs for Drugs and Biological Products (December 2020).  47 See the guidance for industry Master Protocols: Efficient Clinical Trial Design Strategies to Expedite Development of Oncology Drugs and Biologics (March 2022).  48 See the guidance for industry Adaptive Designs for Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biologics.  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 13  401 One of the statutory requirements for drug marketing approval is substantial evidence that the 402 drug will have its claimed effect.49 This requirement is the same for all drugs regardless of 403 whether they are for common or rare diseases. Adequate and well-controlled investigations of a 404 drug are able to “distinguish the effect of a drug from other influences, such as spontaneous 405 change in the course of the disease, placebo effect, or biased observation.”50  406  407 In addition to clinical investigation design considerations discussed above, the selection of 408 appropriate endpoints is critical for a clinical investigation. An endpoint is a precisely defined 409 variable intended to reflect an outcome of interest that is statistically analyzed to address a 410 particular research question.51 A precise definition of an endpoint typically specifies the type of 411 assessments made, the timing of those assessments, the assessments used, and possibly other 412 details, as applicable, such as how multiple assessments within an individual are to be combined. 413 For many rare diseases, well-characterized efficacy endpoints appropriate for the disease are not 414 available. The frequency of assessments and patients’ (and caregivers’) involvement in the 415 selection, development, or modification of existing clinical outcome assessment measures and 416 available instruments can improve the chances of success for the development program.52  417   418 Endpoint selection for a clinical investigation involves understanding the following:  419  420 • The range and course of clinical manifestations associated with the disease. Sponsors can 421 often obtain this knowledge, along with possible differences among patient subtypes, 422 from a natural history study of the disease.53 423  424 • The clinical characteristics of the specific target population, which may be a subset of the 425 total population with a disease. 426  427 • The aspects of the disease that are meaningful to the patient and caregivers and that could 428 be assessed to evaluate the drug’s effectiveness at each of the different stages of disease 429 and levels of disease severity.54  430  431  49 See section 505(d) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 355(d)). For a biological product to be licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, a sponsor must demonstrate, among other things, that its product is safe, pure, and potent. Potency has long been interpreted to include effectiveness (21 CFR 600.3(s)).  50 See 21 CFR 314.126(a).  51 See the FDA-NIH-BEST (Biomarkers, Endpoints, and other Tools) Resource for a definition of endpoint, available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK338448/.  52 See the CDER Patient-Focused Drug Development web page, available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/development-approval-process-drugs/cder-patient-focused-drug-development.   53 For further discussion, see the draft guidance for industry Rare Diseases: Natural History Studies for Drug Development.   54 See the guidance for industry, Food and Drug Administration staff, and other stakeholders Patient-Focused Drug Development: Methods to Identify What Is Important to Patients (February 2022).   Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 14 • In small sample sizes, it is important to distinguish outcomes from different participants 432 as much as possible. Dichotomous endpoints (e.g., dichotomizing a continuous 433 measurement) can result in loss of information and should be avoided whenever possible. 434  435 Sponsors should select endpoints considering the objectives of each clinical investigation in the 436 context of the overall clinical development program. Endpoint selection, especially 437 considerations related to novel endpoints (that could be clinical outcomes or biomarkers as 438 surrogate endpoints), is an important aspect of rare disease drug development. Sponsors are 439 encouraged to engage early with the Agency to discuss endpoint development. Clinical 440 investigations within a drug development program generally build upon the knowledge gained in 441 early studies to guide the design and endpoint selection for later stages of development. 442 Exploratory evidence from earlier phase clinical investigations may help inform the choice of 443 dose and timing of endpoints.  444  445 Different endpoints are often appropriate for the evolving objectives of successive clinical 446 investigations. Although the earliest clinical investigations will usually focus on safety 447 assessments, they also can be useful in evaluating a drug’s pharmacokinetics and assessing 448 pharmacodynamic effects. Ideally, sponsors should conduct early- and mid-phase investigations 449 (e.g., phase 2 clinical investigations, dedicated pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic studies) to 450 guide selection of dose and frequency and can rely on pharmacodynamic or intermediate clinical 451 effects, which may be assessed earlier than more definitive endpoints.55 Additionally data from 452 initial rare disease drug development in animal models may help to identify biomarkers to be 453 used as candidate surrogate endpoints. Leveraging data from natural history or registry-based 454 studies of rare diseases may also help to identify clinically relevant endpoints as well as to 455 examine the relationship between disease severity/progression and the biomarker changes (e.g., 456 to provide initial support for a surrogate endpoint). In general, late-phase clinical investigations 457 are designed to provide clear determinations of efficacy and further evaluation of safety. FDA 458 acknowledges that in rare disease drug development, the size of the population may prevent 459 traditional early-, mid-, and late-phase clinical investigations. Other types of studies conducted 460 early in drug development, including natural history or registry-based studies and use of animal 461 models, can provide important information for later stages. FDA encourages sponsors to engage 462 early with the Agency to discuss their drug development program to ensure learnings from 463 earlier phases can be carried forward and adapted throughout a drug development program.  464   465 Sponsors should also consider the characteristics of an endpoint for the full range of participants, 466 including all ages, affected races, ethnicities, and sexes to be enrolled into a clinical 467 investigation. For rare diseases, practical considerations may warrant inclusion of a broad range 468 of disease stages (e.g., severity of manifestations, development of manifestations secondary to 469 long-standing primary disease manifestations) or phenotypes. The validity, sensitivity, reliability, 470 or interpretability of an endpoint may be different for patients with mild, early-stage, or slowly 471 progressive forms of a disease compared to patients with severe, late-stage, or rapidly 472  55 See the guidance for industry Population Pharmacokinetics (February 2022).  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 15 progressive forms of the same disease.56 These differences in characteristics of rare disease 473 conditions can have effects on aspects of clinical investigation design (e.g., power) and endpoint 474 interpretation. For considerations related to the patient population and enrollment criteria for a 475 particular study endpoint in a rare disease drug development program, sponsors should 476 communicate with the relevant review division.    477  478 Sponsors should consider approaches to clinical investigation design and assessment procedures 479 that may improve the evidence supporting the rationale that an assessment is fit for purpose and 480 the standardization/interpretability of assessment tools.57 For example, qualitative interviews 481 with clinicians can improve the quality of clinician-reported outcome measures, and detailed 482 descriptions of procedures and training for performing assessments may improve accuracy and 483 intra-reader and inter-reader reliability. It is possible for sponsors to assess the adequacy or 484 success of blinding at the end of a clinical investigation.58 Effective blinding of treatments can 485 reduce concern about bias in the subjective aspects of an assessment (e.g., participant 486 motivation), as can conduct of endpoint evaluation by raters not involved in other aspects of the 487 clinical investigation (e.g., radiologists, exercise testers). Another consideration is that rare 488 disease clinical development programs are often multinational, and sponsors should consider the 489 effects of language, culture, and customs on the interpretability and relevance of outcome 490 assessments.  491  492 Sponsors considering the development of novel clinical outcome assessments should identify and 493 characterize these assessments early in their drug development programs. FDA advises sponsors 494 to consider using or modifying existing measures for the disease under study because evaluating 495 novel measures is time consuming, with potential unexpected outcomes, and evaluations initiated 496 late in the process could delay drug development. FDA acknowledges that sometimes use of an 497 existing endpoint measure is not feasible. Therefore, creation of a novel clinical outcome 498 assessment may be necessary. At meetings with FDA, sponsors should discuss the availability 499 and modification of existing clinical outcome assessments; such discussions should take place as 500 early as possible in the drug development program. Furthermore, it is important to consider that 501 the appropriateness of a clinical endpoint or clinical outcome assessment is context dependent, 502 and endpoints that might be appropriate for some patients with a rare disease may not be 503 appropriate for all patients with that rare disease, for patients with other rare diseases, or for 504 patients with common diseases.  505  506 The following should also be considered for endpoint selection in rare disease clinical 507 investigations:  508  509  56 See the draft guidance for industry Demonstrating Substantial Evidence of Effectiveness for Human Drug and Biological Products.    57 See the draft guidance for industry, Food and Drug Administration staff, and other stakeholders Patient Focused Drug Development: Selecting, Developing, or Modifying Fit-for Purpose Clinical Outcome Assessments (June 2022). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  58 See the guidance for industry Placebos and Blinding in Randomized Controlled Cancer Clinical Trials for Drug and Biological Products (August 2019).  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 16 • Selecting the appropriate endpoint (and timing of endpoint assessment) in a specific drug 510 development program, such as a clinical endpoint that directly measures patient benefit or 511 a surrogate endpoint that is not a direct measure of clinical benefit. In cases where using 512 clinical endpoints is not feasible because changes in symptoms and disease status occur 513 too slowly to be measured in a clinical investigation of reasonable duration, surrogate 514 endpoints may be considered.59  515  516 • Estimating the magnitude of effect that may provide clinically meaningful benefit. 517  518 Additionally, FDA recognizes that for diseases that are very rare or have very slow and variable 519 progression over years, the use of clinical endpoints may be challenging. In these situations, 520 several strategies may be considered, such as using data from natural history or registry-based 521 studies, to identify clinically relevant changes that are most prominent and most rapidly 522 progressive that could serve as the basis for a clinical endpoint. Another strategy is to consider 523 early development work on biomarkers as surrogate endpoints that may support approval (either 524 for traditional or accelerated approval). Initial evaluation of the literature to identify such 525 biomarkers, early work on translational animal models, and leveraging data from natural history 526 cohorts before initiation of clinical development is essential. An early focus on developing a 527 broad package of information, including genetic, in vitro, animal model, clinical data in patients 528 with the disease, and eventually clinical pharmacodynamic (PD) data from early clinical 529 investigations with the drug, can contribute to substantiate the use of the proposed biomarker as a 530 surrogate. Sponsors are encouraged to request initial discussions with FDA (e.g., pre-IND) when 531 they have a well-developed strategy and initial information on a proposed surrogate endpoint in 532 drug development programs.60  533  534 D. Safety Evaluation  535  536 Evaluating whether a drug is safe involves weighing whether the benefits of the drug outweigh 537 its risks under the conditions of use defined in labeling. Ultimately, what is a feasible and 538 sufficient safety assessment is a matter of scientific and regulatory judgment based on the 539 particular challenges posed by each drug and disease, including patients’ tolerance and 540 acceptance of risk in the setting of unmet medical need and the benefit offered by the drug.61 A 541 higher degree of uncertainty is common in drug development programs for rare diseases, where 542 the prevalence of disease, and consequent limitations of study size, can limit the precision of 543 safety and efficacy characterizations.62 FDA recognizes that when a drug is developed to treat 544  59 See the draft guidance for industry Demonstrating Substantial Evidence of Effectiveness for Human Drug and Biological Products.  60 See SOPP 8101.1: Regulatory Meetings with Sponsors and Applicants for Drugs and Biological Products (March 2023) for information on types of FDA meetings.   61 See the guidance for industry Determining the Extent of Safety Data Collection Needed in Late-Stage Premarket and Postapproval Clinical Investigations (February 2016).  62 See the guidance for industry Benefit-Risk Assessment for New Drug and Biological Products (October 2023).   Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 17 serious diseases for which there are few or no approved therapies, greater uncertainty or greater 545 risks may be acceptable provided that the substantial evidence standard has been met. 546  547 Regulations do not specify the needed evidence of safety, except that the evidence must include 548 adequate tests by all methods reasonably applicable.63 The ICH guidance for industry E1A The 549 Extent of Population Exposure to Assess Clinical Safety: For Drugs Intended for Long-Term 550 Treatment of Non-Life-Threatening Conditions (March 1995) (ICH E1A) describes expected 551 exposure for chronically used drugs for non-life-threatening conditions, but these expectations do 552 not apply to the many rare diseases that are life threatening. Although ICH E1A does not 553 mention rare diseases, the guidance states that a smaller number of patients may be acceptable 554 when the intended treatment population is small.  555  556 E. Additional Considerations Related to Clinical Development for Rare Disease 557 Drugs 558  559 Evidence-based decisions about what is feasible in terms of rare disease drug clinical 560 investigation enrollment depend on accurately estimated disease prevalence.64 Many rare 561 diseases are genetic in origin and characterized by more than one phenotypic subtype (e.g., 562 infantile, juvenile, adult). Prevalence estimates should include all phenotypic subtypes of a 563 disease anticipated to respond to the investigational drug. Sponsors should determine prevalence 564 estimates for countries in which clinical investigation sites are being considered. If prevalence 565 estimates are anticipated to vary across countries, sponsors should evaluate the potential 566 differences in prevalence estimates. Sponsors should provide the individual sources of current 567 published prevalence estimates, rather than calculated averages, because published prevalence 568 estimates can vary widely depending on clinical investigation details (e.g., case definition), 569 country or region, and advances in diagnostics and treatment over time. To facilitate discussion 570 with the review division about a feasible clinical investigation population enrollment goal, 571 submissions should include complete citations and, if possible, a copy of each reference 572 pertaining to the prevalence estimate.  573  574 FDA encourages sponsors to discuss their overall plans for maximizing the quantity and quality 575 of safety and efficacy data in early drug development meetings with FDA. This may include 576 approaches such as the following:  577  63 See the guidance for industry Premarketing Risk Assessment (March 2005).  64 The term prevalence is used here in the context of a database for clinical development program, not in the context of orphan-drug designation. Information about prevalence in orphan-drug designation can be found on the FDA’s Designating an Orphan Product: Drugs and Biological Products web page, available at https://www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/DevelopingProductsforRareDiseasesConditions/HowtoapplyforOrphanProductDes ignation/default.htm.  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 18  578 • Decentralized clinical investigations: Decentralized clinical investigations may enhance 579 convenience for clinical investigation participants by enabling remote participation. 580 Decentralized clinical investigations reduce the burden on caregivers and facilitate 581 research on rare diseases and diseases affecting populations with limited mobility or 582 access to traditional clinical investigation sites. This may help improve clinical 583 investigation participant engagement, recruitment, enrollment, and retention of a 584 meaningfully diverse clinical population.65 585  586 • Natural history: Knowledge about a disease’s natural history can inform many important 587 aspects of clinical investigations, including planning for disease-specific challenges to 588 patient accrual and retention to increase the size of the dataset. Robust natural history 589 data can also help distinguish drug-related adverse events from underlying disease 590 manifestations.66 591  592 • Clinical investigation eligibility: For rare diseases, it is especially important that inclusion 593 and exclusion criteria do not unnecessarily constrain patient eligibility not only for 594 patient accrual but also for an adequate representation of the safety in the intended 595 treatment population. However, when appropriate, sponsors should consider enrichment 596 strategies to decrease heterogeneity (nondrug-related variability) and to enhance the 597 ability of the clinical investigation to identify safety risks of the drug and demonstrate a 598 potential treatment effect.67 Many rare diseases severely affect children, and for diseases 599 that affect both children and adults, sponsors should explore early inclusion of pediatric 600 participants in clinical studies and discuss their plans for pediatric enrollment with FDA 601 during early stages of drug development, including pre-IND meetings.68,69 602  603 • Dose selection: Data-driven dose selection is important to avoid participant 604 discontinuations because of unnecessary toxicity (dose too high) or lack of efficacy (dose 605 too low), especially when only one registration clinical investigation is feasible. Consider 606 using data from animal models of disease for different doses, a range of exposure 607 response, intrapatient dose escalation studies, or quantitative modeling approaches (e.g., 608 physiologically based pharmacokinetic or pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic modeling) 609 to facilitate dose selection. 610  611  65 See the draft guidance for industry, investigators, and other stakeholders Decentralized Clinical Trials for Drugs, Biological Products, and Devices (May 2023). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.   66 See the draft guidance for industry Rare Diseases: Natural History Studies for Drug Development.  67 See the guidance for industry Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials to Support Determination of Effectiveness of Human Drugs and Biological Products.   68 See 21 CFR part 50, subpart D, Additional Safeguards for Children in Clinical Investigations.   69 See the draft guidance for industry Rare Diseases: Early Drug Development and the Role of Pre-IND Meetings (October 2018). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 19 • Comparator arm: Sponsors should use a concurrent comparator arm design (e.g., placebo, 612 no treatment, standard of care, active drug, multiple doses), employing randomization 613 and blinding/masking whenever ethically and practicably feasible, to facilitate 614 interpretation of results, including adverse event causality, especially with respect to the 615 incidence and severity of adverse events that could be a manifestation of the disease 616 under study.  617  618 • Clinical investigation conduct and data quality: Sponsors should ensure appropriate 619 clinical investigation conduct and high data quality. This should include steps to prevent 620 missing data, as even a small amount of missing data can impact the reliability of results. 621 Sponsors should also maintain confidentiality of interim results while the clinical 622 investigation is ongoing.  623  624 • Auxiliary cohorts: Depending on details of the clinical development program, the 625 following approaches may augment the safety and efficacy database if the sponsor 626 rigorously collects and analyzes the data:  627  628 — A clinical investigation protocol with a safety cohort running parallel to the efficacy 629 clinical investigation: This cohort would include patients with the disease who 630 investigators think might benefit from the investigational drug but who do not meet 631 all the registration clinical investigation eligibility criteria. Such patients can be 632 enrolled in the clinical investigation, avoiding the need for a separate clinical 633 investigation and protocol. However, these patients are not randomized and are 634 excluded from the efficacy analysis. The ability to reliably evaluate outcomes from 635 nonrandomized data sources can be limited. 636  637 — Patients receiving drugs under expanded access:70 Systematic collection of expanded 638 access safety data might identify important premarketing signals that might otherwise 639 not be observed until the drug is used in the more diverse practice setting. Plans for 640 the use of these cohorts in a drug development program should be discussed early in 641 the development process with the review division.  642  643 — Relevant data from other sources, such as clinical investigations using the drug for 644 other indications or studies of similar drugs.71  645  646  70 See the draft guidance for industry Expanded Access to Investigational Drugs for Treatment Use — Questions and Answers (November 2022). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  71 New drug applications must include a “description and analysis of any other data or information relevant to an evaluation of the safety and effectiveness of the drug product obtained or otherwise received by the applicant from any source, foreign or domestic, including information derived from clinical investigations, including controlled and uncontrolled studies of uses of the drug other than those proposed in the NDA, commercial marketing experience, reports in the scientific literature, and unpublished scientific papers” (21 CFR 314.50(d)(5)(iv)). If an applicant relies on FDA’s finding of safety or effectiveness for another drug or uses information to which it does not have a right of reference to fulfill a requirement for approval or licensure, FDA will not be able to consider the marketing application as a stand-alone application.   Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 20 Sponsors should maintain communication with FDA throughout the development program to 647 discuss potential required studies to collect additional efficacy data, such as postmarketing 648 studies, and risk mitigation strategies. This can help avoid preventable delays in approving a safe 649 and effective drug for patients with unmet medical need.72 For additional information, refer to 650 section VIII., Interactions With FDA.  651  652  653 VI. PHARMACEUTICAL QUALITY CONSIDERATIONS 654  655 Drug manufacturing should undergo development concurrently with clinical development. 656 Review divisions encourage sponsors to discuss pharmaceutical quality development plans in 657 early-phase meetings (such as at pre-IND meetings73) and throughout drug development to 658 decrease the potential for developmental or approval delays related to drug manufacturing.  659  660 FDA recommends that the sponsor carefully assess any planned changes to the drug substance or 661 drug product manufacturing process, analytical methods, or drug product formulation at any 662 phase of development to determine if the changes could affect the safety or efficacy of the drug. 663 These assessments may include analytical studies, nonclinical studies, and clinical investigations. 664 These assessments should be conducted with each change and could inform whether bridging 665 studies will be needed. Sponsors should design adequate testing procedures early and implement 666 them in a timely manner to mitigate delays. To allow time to evaluate the potential effect of 667 manufacturing changes on drug safety and effectiveness and to minimize possible delays in 668 development, manufacturing changes should be made as early as feasible, and sponsors should 669 use quality risk management.74,75  670  671 FDA may exercise some flexibility on the type and extent of manufacturing information that is 672 expected at the time of submission and approval for certain components (e.g., stability data 673 updates, process validation strategies, inspection planning, manufacturing scale-up). FDA can 674 explore the level of flexibility on a case-by-case basis after considering factors such as (1) 675 product characteristics, (2) seriousness of the condition and medical need, (3) manufacturing 676 processes, (4) the robustness of the pharmaceutical quality system, and (5) the strength of the 677 sponsor’s risk-based quality assessment.  678  679  72 See the guidances for industry Good Pharmacovigilance Practices and Pharmacoepidemiologic Assessment (March 2005) and REMS: FDA’s Application of Statutory Factors in Determining When a REMS Is Necessary (April 2019).   73 See the draft guidance for industry Rare Diseases: Early Drug Development and the Role of Pre-IND Meetings.  74 See FDA’s Emerging Technology Program web page, available at https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/center-drugevaluation-and-research-cder/emerging-technology-program, and the CBER Advanced Technologies Team (CATT) web page, available at https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/industry-biologics/cber-advancedtechnologies-team-catt.  75 See the draft guidance for industry Manufacturing Changes and Comparability for Human Cellular and Gene Therapy Products (July 2023). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic. Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 21 The need for larger amounts of the drug during the product development process may lead to the 680 need to modify manufacturing procedures and purification methods. FDA also recognizes that 681 transfer of manufacturing responsibilities may occur after initial nonclinical studies and/or 682 clinical investigations (e.g., from a single investigator to a company, from a small company to a 683 large company), which may be a more common scenario for drugs for rare diseases. Any of these 684 changes (even changes expected to be minor) might result in unanticipated changes to drug 685 characteristics (e.g., drug impurities, physical-chemical characteristics of proteins, cell 686 phenotype of cellular products). If significant differences are identified in drug characteristics 687 after a manufacturing change compared with drug batches (or biological product lots) used in 688 earlier nonclinical studies or clinical investigations, then additional nonclinical studies and 689 clinical investigations may be needed because these differences can raise concerns that the 690 knowledge gained from the earlier studies will not apply to further use of the drug. Some 691 examples of the many ways a change in drug characteristics may affect drug development 692 include the following:  693  694 • The type, number, and level of impurities in a drug used in clinical investigations and for 695 commercial distribution should be comparable to the drug batches used in toxicology 696 studies. Changes might raise concerns that the drug used in later clinical investigations 697 has unknown toxicological characteristics. Additional toxicology studies may be needed 698 to evaluate the newly produced drug, delaying the clinical development program.  699  700 • Changes in critical quality attributes of the planned commercial drug after the clinical 701 investigations might raise concerns that the safety and effectiveness findings of the 702 clinical investigations do not apply to the newly manufactured drug. These concerns 703 could warrant additional studies (nonclinical, clinical, or both) to address the concern 704 before marketing approval.  705  706 Given the wide variety of drugs, some of which are complex, FDA advises sponsors to consult 707 relevant guidances for industry (see sections III through V for a list of selected guidances).  708  709  710 VII. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 711  712 A Participation of Patients, Caregivers, and Advocates 713  714 FDA encourages involvement of patients, their caregivers, and advocates in rare disease drug 715 development.76 Patient input can provide important information about patients’ experiences, 716 perspectives, needs, and priorities that can be incorporated throughout the drug development 717 process. This engagement can take many forms, such as providing solicited consultation on 718 scientific issues (e.g., clinically meaningful treatment effects), working with industry sponsors as 719 they design and conduct clinical investigations, and contributing to patient-focused drug 720  76 FDA can provide support for patients, caregivers, and advocates through interactions with FDA staff and offices (e.g., CDER’s Professional Affairs and Stakeholder Engagement team, CDER’s Patient Focused Drug Development, the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) Patient Engagement Program, and the Office of Commissioner’s Patient Affairs Staff).  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 22 development initiatives.77 For drugs in development, FDA is subject to strict confidentiality 721 requirements and may not be able to discuss with the public specific information about a drug 722 development program.78 In these situations, FDA encourages direct sponsor-patient 723 communication, when feasible, to facilitate the incorporation of patient perspectives and 724 experiences into the drug development process.  725  726 B. Expedited Programs 727  728 Many rare diseases are serious or life-threatening disorders with unmet medical needs. 729 Therefore, drugs treating these diseases may qualify for one or more expedited programs. FDA 730 encourages sponsors to consider these programs, which include fast-track designation, 731 breakthrough therapy designation, and accelerated approval. For details on eligibility and 732 applications for expedited program designation, sponsors should consult the guidances for 733 industry Expedited Programs for Serious Conditions — Drugs and Biologics (May 2014) and 734 Expedited Programs for Regenerative Medicine Therapies for Serious Conditions (February 735 2019).  736  737 C. Pediatric Considerations 738  739 According to estimates, about half of the people affected by rare diseases are children. Therefore, 740 conducting studies to evaluate drugs in pediatric patients is critical for determining the safety and 741 efficacy of medications for many rare diseases.79,80 When preparing development plans, the 742 sponsor should consider whether the rare disease affects children and adults or only children. The 743 degree of overlap between pathophysiology and similarity of clinical outcomes is an important 744 consideration in pediatric development when a disease is seen across the life span. In general, 745 sponsors should include pediatric patients with rare diseases in premarketing clinical studies to 746 develop data on the full range of people with the disease.  747  748 FDA strongly encourages sponsors to study the drug in all relevant pediatric populations, birth to 749 younger than 17 years of age, so that the drug can be properly and completely labeled for 750 pediatric use. As part of these pediatric studies, FDA encourages sponsors to develop pediatric 751  77 See the draft guidance for industry and other stakeholders Developing and Submitting Proposed Draft Guidance Relating to Patient Experience Data (December 2018). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic. For more information, see the web page Learn About FDA Patient Engagement, available at https://www.fda.gov/ForPatients/PatientEngagement/default.htm#PFDD_2.   78 For example, see 21 CFR 314.430.   79 21 CFR 201.57(c)(9)(iv)(A) defines “pediatric population(s)” and “pediatric patient(s)” as “the pediatric age group, from birth to 16 years, including age groups often called neonates, infants, children, and adolescents.”   80 For the purposes of pediatric drug development, FDA interprets “birth to 16 years” in 21 CFR 201.57(c)(9)(iv)(A) to mean from birth to before the 17th birthday (i.e., birth through 16 years of age).   Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 23 formulations of the drug to enable accurate dosing, down to the youngest children affected by the 752 rare disease.81  753  754 For studies in which both pediatric and adult participants are included, the sponsor should 755 consider the relevance and comparability of endpoints to both groups, including whether results 756 from both groups can be combined in a single statistical analysis. Importantly, there are 757 additional safeguards for pediatric participants enrolled in clinical studies beyond those provided 758 for adult participants.82 These additional safeguards could limit the use of some procedures in 759 children that would be acceptable for adults. Careful planning for a drug being developed to treat 760 a rare disease in children is important to maximize the efficiency and increase the likelihood of 761 success of the drug’s clinical development program. Such planning should include discussions 762 with FDA early in drug development about the epidemiology of the rare disease and plans for 763 inclusion of pediatric participants in clinical studies.83, 764  765  766 VIII. INTERACTIONS WITH FDA 767  768 FDA offers sponsors numerous opportunities for interaction. When developing an investigational 769 drug for a rare disease, FDA encourages sponsors to meet with the relevant drug review division 770 supporting development of that particular drug early in the development program.84 FDA’s early 771 feedback to sponsors may result in more efficient drug development. At the sponsor’s request, 772 FDA will, if possible, provide advice on specific matters relating to an IND, including advice on 773 the adequacy of data to support an investigational plan, the design of a clinical investigation, and 774 whether proposed investigations are likely to produce the data and information needed to meet 775 requirements for a marketing application.85 FDA provides formal advice through milestone 776 meetings (e.g., pre-IND meeting, end of phase 2 meeting).  777  778 In addition, CDER’s Critical Path Innovation Meetings (CPIM) program provides a nonbinding 779 and informal forum for investigators from industry, academia, patient advocacy groups, and 780 government to obtain general advice on methodologies or technologies and to discuss topics of 781  81 See the draft guidance for industry General Clinical Pharmacology Considerations for Pediatric Studies of Drugs, Including Biological Products (September 2022). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  82 See 21 CFR part 50, subpart D.   83 See the draft guidance for industry Pediatric Drug Development: Regulatory Consideration—Complying With the Pediatric Research Equity Act and Qualifying for Pediatric Exclusivity Under the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act (May 2023) and the draft guidance for industry, sponsors, and IRB’s Ethical Considerations for Clinical Investigations of Medical Products Involving Children (September 2022). When final, these guidances will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  84 See the draft guidance for industry Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or Applicants of PDUFA Products.  85 See the guidance for industry and review staff Best Practices for Communication Between IND Sponsors and FDA During Drug Development (December 2017).   Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 24 interest independent of a specific drug development program.86 In CPIMs, FDA staff members 782 may provide general advice on how a technology or methodology might be used to enhance drug 783 development. CBER participates in CPIM meetings when crosscutting issues arise that involve 784 both centers. CPIM discussions are nonregulatory and nonbinding on both FDA and CPIM 785 requesters. 786  787 In addition, the INitial Targeted Engagement for Regulatory Advice on CBER/CDER ProducTs 788 (INTERACT) meetings are intended for novel questions and unique challenges in early 789 development (i.e., prior to filing of an IND). The advice provided by the FDA staff to a potential 790 sponsor during an INTERACT meeting may help streamline development by, for example, 791 helping sponsors avoid unnecessary preclinical studies.87  792  793 Additional information about rare disease drug development programs can also be found at 794 CDER’s Accelerating Rare disease Cures (ARC) Program website,88 CDER’s Rare Diseases 795 Team website,89 and CBER’s Rare Disease Program website.90 The Office of Orphan Products 796 Development can be contacted for matters related to orphan product designation.



Multiple Endpoints in Clinical Trials Guidance for Industry U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) October 2022 Biostatistics Multiple Endpoints in Clinical Trials Guidance for Industry Additional copies are available from: Office of Communications, Division of Drug Information  Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Food and Drug Administration  Contains Nonbinding Recommendations Multiple Endpoints in Clinical Trials Guidance for Industry1 This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.  I. INTRODUCTION  This guidance provides sponsors and review staff with the Agency’s thinking about the problems posed by multiple endpoints in the analysis and interpretation of study results and how these problems can be managed in clinical trials for human drugs, including drugs subject to licensing as biological products. Most clinical trials performed in drug development contain multiple endpoints to assess the effects of the drug and to document the ability of the drug to favorably affect one or more disease characteristics. When more than one endpoint is analyzed in a single trial, the likelihood of making false conclusions about a drug’s effects with respect to one or more of those endpoints could increase if there is no appropriate adjustment for multiplicity. The purpose of this guidance is to describe various strategies for grouping and ordering endpoints for analysis of a drug’s effects and applying some well-recognized statistical methods for managing multiplicity within a study to control the chance of making erroneous conclusions about a drug’s effects. Basing a conclusion on an analysis where the risk of false conclusions has not been appropriately controlled can lead to false or misleading representations regarding a drug’s effects.  The ICH guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (September 1998)2 is a broad ranging guidance that includes discussion of multiple endpoints. This guidance on multiple endpoints in clinical trials for human drugs provides greater detail on the topic. The issuance of this guidance represents partial fulfillment of an FDA commitment under the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA) of 2007. 1This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Biostatistics in the Office of Translational Sciences in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research in cooperation with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research at the Food and Drug Administration. 2The ICH E9 guidance is available on the FDA guidance web page under the topic ICH – Efficacy. We update guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents. 1 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.  II. BACKGROUND AND SCOPE Efficacy endpoints are measures designed to reflect the intended effects of a drug. They include assessments of clinical events (e.g., mortality, stroke, pulmonary exacerbation, venous thromboembolism), symptoms (e.g., pain, dyspnea, symptoms of depression), measures of function (e.g., ability to walk or exercise), or surrogate endpoints that are reasonably likely or expected to predict a clinical benefit.  Because most diseases can potentially cause more than one clinical event, symptom, and/or altered function, many trials are designed to examine the effect of a drug on more than one aspect of the disease. In some cases, efficacy cannot be adequately established based on a single disease aspect, and the study should use either an endpoint that incorporates multiple aspects of the disease into a single endpoint or effects should be demonstrated on multiple endpoints. In other cases, an effect on any of several endpoints could be sufficient to support approval of a marketing application. Failure to account for multiplicity when there are several endpoints evaluated in a study can increase the chance of false conclusions regarding the effects of the drug. The regulatory concern regarding multiplicity arises principally in the evaluation of clinical trials intended to demonstrate effectiveness supporting drug approval and claims in FDA-approved labeling; however, this issue is important for trials throughout the drug development process. For instance, if safety outcomes are to be assessed via hypothesis testing, they would be subject to the multiplicity considerations described in this guidance. Multiplicity problems for safety analyses that are not part of a prespecified set of hypotheses for formal statistical testing are outside the scope of this guidance. In the following sections, the issues of multiple endpoints and methods to address them are discussed. The issues of multiplicity and methods that apply to multiple endpoints also generally apply to other sources of multiplicity, including other estimand3 attributes (e.g., multiple doses, time points, or study population subgroups); however, these other sources of multiplicity will not be specifically addressed in this guidance. Furthermore, there may be different considerations related to multiplicity in certain unique settings, such as the evaluation of multiple different drugs for a single disease in a master protocol, that are not addressed in this guidance. This guidance focuses on the analysis and interpretation of multiple endpoints within a single clinical trial.  3See the ICH Guidance for Industry E9(R1) Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials: Addendum: Estimands and Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical Trials (May 2021). 2 A. Contains Nonbinding Recommendations Demonstrating the Study Objective of Effectiveness A conclusion that a study has demonstrated an intended effect of a drug is critical to meeting the legal standard for substantial evidence of effectiveness required to support approval of a new drug (i.e., “… adequate and well-controlled investigations…on the basis of which it could fairly and responsibly be concluded…that the drug will have the effect it purports…to have…”) (section 505(d) of the FD&C Act).4 FDA regulations further establish that to be adequate and well controlled, a clinical study of a drug must include, among other things, “an analysis of the results of the study adequate to assess the effects of the drug,” a requirement that furthers the “purpose of conducting clinical investigations of a drug,” which is “to distinguish the effect of a drug from other influences, such as spontaneous change in the course of the disease, placebo effect, or biased observation.”5 There are also other important factors (e.g., clinical relevance of the endpoint and estimated effect, relevant external information) that are considered in evaluating substantial evidence of effectiveness beyond the results of hypothesis tests in a single trial. A more general discussion of demonstrating substantial evidence of effectiveness can be found in other FDA guidance documents6 and is outside the scope of this document. Hypothesis testing is commonly used to address the uncertainty in the assessment of a treatment effect on a chosen endpoint. This approach begins with stating the relevant hypotheses for a chosen endpoint. In the simplest situation where the aim is to demonstrate the superiority of a test drug over control, two mutually exclusive hypotheses are specified for the endpoint in advance of conducting a clinical trial:  • One hypothesis, the null hypothesis, states that there is no treatment effect on the chosen endpoint.  • The other hypothesis is called the alternative hypothesis and posits that there is at least some treatment effect of the test drug. This pair of hypotheses are tested using a prespecified statistical test to determine whether the trial results are sufficiently unlikely under the null hypothesis so that the null hypothesis can be rejected in favor of the alternative hypothesis. Note that if the null hypothesis is not rejected, it does not necessarily mean that the null hypothesis is true. There are many other potential reasons that could lead to a failure to reject the null hypothesis, such as insufficient sample size. 4See 21 U.S.C. 355. Biological products are licensed based on a demonstration of safety, purity, and potency (section 351(a)(2)(C) of the Public Health Service Act, 42 USC 262(a)(2)(C)). Potency has long been interpreted to include effectiveness (21 CFR 600.3(s)). In 1972, FDA initiated a review of the safety and effectiveness of all previously licensed biological products. The Agency stated then that proof of effectiveness would consist of controlled clinical investigations as defined in the provision for adequate and well-controlled studies for new drugs (21 CFR 314.126), unless waived as not applicable to the biological product or essential to the validity of the study when an alternative method is adequate to substantiate effectiveness.” (37 FR 16681, August 18, 1972).  5See 21 CFR 314.126(b)(7), 314.126(a). 6See the FDA draft guidance for industry Demonstrating Substantial Evidence of Effectiveness for Human Drug and Biological Products (December 2019). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.  3 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations Sometimes (e.g., in some vaccine trials), demonstration of an effect of at least some minimum size is considered critical for approval of a drug. In this case, if formal statistical testing is used for the demonstration, the null hypothesis might be modified to incorporate the smallest clinically meaningful effect that could be accepted.  This guidance focuses on a statistical framework based on hypothesis testing. Sponsors should discuss early with FDA plans to use other approaches (e.g., Bayesian approaches) for a specific development program such as for pediatrics.  B. Type I Error The rejection of the null hypothesis supports the study conclusion that there is a difference between treatment groups but does not constitute absolute proof that the null hypothesis is false. There is always some possibility of mistakenly rejecting the null hypothesis when it is, in fact, true. Such an erroneous conclusion is called a Type I error. For an endpoint, the probability of falsely rejecting its null hypothesis and, thus, concluding that there is a treatment effect due to the drug on this endpoint when, in fact, there is none, is called the Type I error probability or Type I error rate for this endpoint. The significance level, denoted as alpha (), is the threshold below which the Type I error rate should be controlled. Null hypothesis rejection is based on a determination that the probability of observing a result at least as extreme as the result of the study assuming the null hypothesis is true (the p-value) is sufficiently low (usually no larger than ). The alternative hypothesis can be one-sided or two-sided, and statistical tests are performed accordingly. For two-sided hypothesis statistical tests, the Type I error probability refers to the probability of concluding that there is a difference (beneficial or harmful) between the drug and control when there is no difference. For one-sided hypothesis tests, the Type I error probability refers to the probability of concluding specifically that there is a beneficial difference due to the drug when there is not. The most widely used values for  are 0.05 for two-sided tests and 0.025 for one-sided tests. In the case of two-sided tests, an  of 0.05 means that the probability of falsely concluding that the drug differs from the control in either direction (benefit or harm) when no difference exists is no more than 5%, or 1 chance in 20. In the case of one-sided tests, an  of 0.025 means that the probability of falsely concluding a beneficial effect of the drug when none exists is no more than 2.5%, or 1 chance in 40. Use of a two-sided test with an  of 0.05 that allocates the  symmetrically to each side generally also ensures that the probability of falsely concluding benefit when there is none is no more than approximately 2.5% (1 chance in 40). These Type I error rates are correct if the statistical test is appropriate. If there are issues with the statistical test (e.g., the underlying assumptions do not hold), the Type I error rate could be even larger. FDA’s concern for controlling the Type I error probability is to minimize the chances of a false favorable conclusion for any primary or secondary endpoints (see section III.), regardless of which and how many of these endpoints in the study have no effect. The Type I error probability associated with testing multiple endpoints of a study is called overall Type I error probability. The rationale for controlling this probability is given in the next subsection (section II.C.). When 4 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations there is more than one primary or secondary endpoint, it is important to ensure that the evaluation of multiple hypotheses will not lead to inflation of the study’s overall Type I error probability (or rate) relative to the planned level. To control the Type I error rate, it is critical that sponsors prospectively specify the following: • all endpoints in the primary and secondary families (see section III. for definitions). • all data analyses that will be performed to test hypotheses about the prespecified endpoints, regardless of whether they are considered primary or secondary. For a study with multiple endpoints, the analysis plan should describe the testing procedure for the hypotheses being tested with a proper control of overall Type I error rate.  C. Multiplicity In a clinical trial with a single endpoint tested at two-sided α = 0.05, the probability of finding a difference between the treatment group and a control group in favor of the treatment group when no difference exists in the population is 0.025 (a 2.5% chance). That is, there is a 97.5% chance of appropriately not finding a favorable effect if there is no true effect for this endpoint. By contrast, if there are two independent endpoints, each tested at two-sided α = 0.05, and if success on either endpoint by itself would lead to a conclusion of a drug effect, the chance of appropriately not finding a favorable effect on both endpoints together is thus 0.975 * 0.975, which is approximately 0.95, and so the probability of falsely finding a favorable effect on at least one endpoint is approximately 0.05. Thus, the overall Type I error rate in favor of the drug nearly doubles when two independent endpoints are tested. This higher-than-intended overall Type I error rate when multiple tests are conducted without adjustment is called the multiplicity problem. Thus, without correction for multiplicity, the chance of making a Type I error for this example study as a whole would rise to approximately as high as 5% in favor of the drug, and, therefore, the overall Type I error rate would not be adequately controlled. The problem is exacerbated when more than two endpoints are considered. For example, for three independent endpoints, the Type I error rate is 1 - (0.975 * 0.975 * 0.975), which is about 7%. For ten independent endpoints, the Type I error rate is about 22%. If the multiple endpoints are correlated, the overall Type I error rate is also inflated but potentially by a lesser degree.  Even when a single outcome variable is being assessed, if multiple facets of that outcome are analyzed (e.g., multiple dose groups, multiple time points, or multiple subject subgroups based on demographic or other characteristics) and if any one of the analyses is used to conclude that the drug has been shown to produce a beneficial effect, the multiplicity of analyses may cause inflation of the Type I error rate. Hence, by inflating the Type I error rate, multiplicity produces uncertainty in interpretation of the study results such that the conclusions about whether effectiveness has been demonstrated in the study become unreliable. There are various approaches that can be planned prospectively and applied to maintain the overall Type I error rate at 2.5% or below. For controlling multiplicity, an important principle is to first prospectively specify all planned endpoints, time points, analysis populations, doses, and analyses; then, once these factors are 5 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations specified, appropriate adjustments for multiple endpoints and analyses can be selected, prespecified, and applied, as appropriate. Changes in the analytic plan to perform additional analyses can reintroduce a multiplicity problem that can negatively impact the ability to interpret the study’s results unless these changes are made prior to data analysis and appropriate multiplicity adjustments are performed. The statistical analysis plan should not be changed after unmasking of treatment assignments and performing statistical analyses.  A focus of this guidance is control of the Type I error rate for the prespecified set of endpoints (i.e., primary and secondary endpoints) of a clinical trial to ensure that the major findings of a clinical trial are well supported, and the effects of the drug have been demonstrated. Analyses that explicate the characteristics of an effect on an endpoint that has been demonstrated—such as time of onset, distribution of effect sizes across the population, effects in subgroups, and effects on the components of a composite endpoint—are all descriptive to provide a deeper understanding of the nature of that endpoint finding, and do not extend to effects outside of that endpoint. These descriptive analyses can be considered for inclusion in the FDA-approved labeling without presenting p-values.  Of note, there is not always a clear-cut distinction between an analysis closely related to a major finding and one that demonstrates additional effects. Therefore, when definitive conclusions are to be drawn, such analyses should be prespecified and appropriately included in the prespecified multiple-testing strategy. A descriptive analysis that is not included in the prespecified multipletesting strategy should not be presented in FDA-approved labeling in ways that imply a statistically rigorous conclusion or convey certainty about the effects that are not supported by that trial. Descriptive analyses are not the subject of this guidance and are not addressed in detail. III. MULTIPLE ENDPOINTS: GENERAL PRINCIPLES A. The Hierarchy of Families of Endpoints Endpoints in adequate and well-controlled drug trials are usually grouped hierarchically, often according to their clinical importance, but also taking into consideration the expected frequency of the endpoint events and anticipated drug effects. The critical determination for grouping endpoints is whether they are intended to establish effectiveness to support approval or intended to demonstrate additional meaningful effects. Endpoints critical to establish effectiveness for approval are often designated as primary endpoints. Secondary endpoints can provide useful description to support the primary endpoint(s) and/or demonstrate additional clinically important effects. The third category in the hierarchy includes all other endpoints, which are referred to as exploratory. Exploratory endpoints can include endpoints for research purposes or for new hypotheses generation. Each category in the hierarchy can contain a single endpoint or a family of endpoints. 1.  Primary Endpoint Family The endpoint(s) that establish the effect(s) of the drug and will be the basis for concluding that the study meets its objective are designated the primary endpoint family. When there is a single 6 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations prespecified primary endpoint, there are no multiple-endpoint-related multiplicity issues in the determination that the study achieves its objective.  Multiple primary endpoints occur in three ways, further described in section III.C. The first is when there are multiple primary endpoints, and each endpoint could be sufficient on its own to establish the drug’s efficacy. These multiple endpoints thus correspond to multiple chances of success, and in this case, failure to adjust for multiplicity can lead to Type I error rate inflation and a false conclusion that the drug is effective. The second is when the determination of effectiveness depends on success on all primary endpoints, when there are two or more primary endpoints. In this setting, there are no multiplicity issues related to primary endpoints, as there is only one path that leads to a successful outcome for the trial and therefore, no concern with Type I error rate inflation. In the third, critical aspects of effectiveness can be combined into a single primary composite or other multicomponent endpoint, thereby avoiding multiple-endpointrelated multiplicity issues. For example, in many cardiovascular studies it is usual to combine several endpoints (e.g., cardiovascular death, heart attack, and stroke) into a single composite endpoint that is primary and to consider death a secondary endpoint (see section III.A.2.).  2. Secondary and Exploratory Endpoint Families When an effect on the primary endpoint is shown, the secondary endpoints can be formally tested. A secondary endpoint could be a clinical effect related to the primary endpoint that extends the understanding of that effect (e.g., an effect on survival when a cardiovascular drug has shown an effect on the primary endpoint of heart failure-related hospitalizations) or provide evidence of a clinical benefit distinct from the effect shown by the primary endpoint (e.g., a disability endpoint in a multiple sclerosis treatment trial in which relapse rate is the primary endpoint). As a general principle, it is important to include the secondary endpoints that can potentially provide evidence of additional effects of the drug on the disease or condition in the Type I error control plan.  In general, it may be desirable to limit the number of secondary endpoints, because if multiplicity adjustments are used, the chance of demonstrating an effect on any secondary endpoint may become increasingly small as the number of secondary endpoints increases, or if a hierarchy is used, the important hypotheses further down the hierarchy might never get tested. Exploratory endpoints do not need multiplicity adjustment because they are generally not used to support conclusions. 3.  Selecting and Interpreting the Endpoints in the Primary and Secondary Endpoint Families Positive results on the secondary endpoints can be interpretable if there is first a demonstration of a treatment effect on the primary endpoint family (O’Neill 1997). The overall Type I error rate should control for the primary and secondary endpoint families all together. Occasionally, there are trials where a clinically important endpoint (e.g., mortality or irreversible morbidity) is expected to have too few events to provide adequate power for the trial, while a 7 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations different clinically important endpoint occurs more frequently or earlier in the disease process, leading to larger power. In such cases, generally the endpoint with inadequate power for detection is classified as a secondary endpoint, while the endpoint for which larger power is expected is classified as the primary endpoint. For example, in some oncology trials, progression-free survival is selected as the primary endpoint, and overall survival is selected as the secondary endpoint because an effect of treatment on disease progression is clinically important and may be more readily demonstrable, may be detected earlier, and may often be larger because the observed effect on overall survival can be impacted by subsequent treatment post progression. B. Type II Error Rate and Sample Size FDA is also concerned with the risk of making a Type II error, which is failing to show an effect of a drug where there actually is one. The study power is the probability that the study will be successful if a treatment effect of a specified size is in fact present. The desired power is an important factor in determining the sample size, especially for the primary endpoints.  The sample size of a study is generally chosen to provide a reasonably high power to show a treatment effect if an effect of a specified size on the primary endpoint(s) is in fact present. The sample size calculation may need to account for the statistical adjustments to control the Type I error rate for multiplicity. For example, if a lower  level is used for a study endpoint, then the sample size should be adjusted to provide desired statistical power for this endpoint.  Using two or more endpoints for which demonstration of an effect on each is recommended to support regulatory approval (called co-primary endpoints; see section III.C.1. below) will increase the Type II error rate and decrease study power. For example, assume two endpoints have the same effect size and the study sample size is selected to provide 80% power to show success on each of these two endpoints. If the endpoints are independent, the power to show success on both will be approximately 64% (0.8 x 0.8); i.e., the likelihood of the study failing to support a conclusion of a favorable drug effect when such an effect existed (the Type II error rate) would be 36%. To maintain desired study power, a larger sample size is recommended, and the individual endpoints could be powered at approximately 90% to ensure the probability of success is at least 80%. The calculation would be different if the endpoints were highly positively correlated or the power was not equal for each endpoint. C. Types of Multiple Endpoints  Multiple endpoints can be used when demonstration of a drug effect on more than one disease aspect or outcome is critical for determining that the drug confers a clinical benefit. Multiple endpoints can also be used when (1) there are several important aspects of a disease or several ways to assess an important aspect, (2) it may not be known in advance which aspect is more likely to show a drug effect, and (3) an effect on any one endpoint will be sufficient as evidence of effectiveness to support approval. In some cases, multiple aspects of a disease can appropriately be combined into a single endpoint, but subsequent analysis examining each disease aspect or component of this endpoint is generally important for an adequate understanding of the drug’s effect. These circumstances are discussed in more detail below.  8 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 1. When Demonstration of Treatment Effects on Two or More Distinct Endpoints Is Recommended to Establish Clinical Benefit (Co-Primary Endpoints) For some disorders, there are two or more different features that are so critically important to the disease under study that a drug will not be considered effective without demonstration of a treatment effect on all of these disease features. The term used in this guidance to describe this circumstance of multiple primary endpoints is co-primary endpoints. Multiple primary endpoints become co-primary endpoints when demonstrating an effect on each of the endpoints is critical to concluding that a drug is effective. Therapies for the acute treatment of migraine headaches illustrate this circumstance. Although pain is the most prominent feature, migraine headaches are also characterized by the presence of photophobia, phonophobia, and/or nausea, all of which are clinically important. Which of the three is most clinically important varies among individuals. An approach to studying acute treatments for migraine headaches is to consider a drug effective for migraines only if the proportion of subjects with no headache pain at 2 hours after dosing and the proportion of subjects with absence of the most bothersome associated symptom at 2 hours after dosing are both shown to be improved by the drug treatment. Another approach could be to evaluate the drug effect on a response endpoint where response is defined by the absence of both pain and an individually specified second symptom within an individual subject. This approach would utilize a single multi-component endpoint rather than co-primary endpoints. Trials of combination vaccines are a situation in which co-primary endpoints are applicable. These vaccine trials are typically designed and powered for demonstration of a successful outcome on effectiveness endpoints for each pathogen against which the vaccine is intended to provide protection. As discussed in section III.B., there is no multiplicity problem when the study is designed to demonstrate efficacy on all of the separate endpoints. However, co-primary endpoint testing increases the Type II error rate. In general, unless clinically very important, the use of more than two co-primary endpoints should be carefully considered because of the loss of power. There have been suggestions that the statistical testing criteria for each co-primary endpoint could be increased (e.g., testing at an  of 0.06 or 0.07) when the targeted  is 0.05 to accommodate the loss in statistical power arising from the need to show an effect on both endpoints. Increasing  for each co-primary endpoint is not acceptable because doing so may undermine the ability to interpret a treatment effect on each disease aspect considered critical to show that the drug is effective in support of approval.  2. When Demonstration of a Treatment Effect on at Least One of Several Primary Endpoints Is Sufficient Many diseases have multiple sequelae, and an effect demonstrated on any one of these aspects could support a conclusion of effectiveness. Selection of a single primary endpoint may be difficult, however, if the aspect of a disease that will be responsive to the drug or the evaluation 9 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations method that will better detect a treatment effect is not known a priori (at the time of trial design). In this circumstance, a study might be designed such that success on any one of several endpoints could support a conclusion of effectiveness. This creates a primary endpoint family. For example, consider a drug for the treatment of burn wounds where it is not known whether the drug will increase the rate of wound closure or reduce scarring, but the demonstration of either effect alone would be considered clinically important. A study in this case might have both wound closure rate and a scarring measure as separate primary endpoints.  This use of multiple endpoints creates a multiplicity problem because there are several ways for the study to successfully demonstrate a treatment effect. Control of the Type I error rate for the primary endpoint family is critical. A variety of approaches can be used to address this multiplicity problem; the appendix describes and discusses some of these approaches.  3. Composite Endpoints There are some disorders for which more than one clinical outcome in a clinical trial is important, and all outcomes are expected to be affected by the treatment. Rather than using each as a separate primary endpoint (creating multiplicity) or selecting just one to be the primary endpoint and designating the others as secondary endpoints, it could be appropriate to combine those clinical outcomes into a single variable. This is often called a composite endpoint, where an endpoint is defined as the occurrence or realization in a subject of any one of the specified components. A typical example is a composite of major adverse clinical outcome events in cardiovascular trials (e.g., a composite of myocardial infarction, stroke, or death). When the components correspond to distinct events, composite endpoints are often assessed as the time to first occurrence of any one of the components. If a single statistical test is performed on the composite endpoint, no multiplicity problem will occur for this endpoint.  One possible reason for using a composite endpoint is that the incidence of each of the events may be too low to allow a study of reasonable size to have adequate power; the composite endpoint can provide a substantially higher overall event rate that allows a study with a reasonable sample size and study duration to have adequate power. Composite endpoints are often used when the goal of treatment is to prevent or delay occurrence of one of several clinically important and related events (e.g., use of an anti-platelet drug in subjects with coronary artery disease to prevent myocardial infarction, stroke, or death), possibly without knowledge of which event(s) may be affected.  The choice of the components of a composite endpoint should be made carefully. The treatment effect on the composite event rate can be interpreted as characterizing the overall clinical effect when the individual events all have reasonably similar clinical importance. The effect on the composite endpoint, however, will not be a reasonable indicator of the effect on all of the components or an accurate description of the drug’s benefit if the clinical importance of different components is substantially different and the treatment effect is chiefly on the least important event. Furthermore, it is possible that a component with greater importance would be adversely affected by the treatment, even if one or more event types of lesser importance are favorably affected, so that although the overall outcome still has a favorable statistical result, doubt may arise about the treatment’s clinical value. In this case, although the overall statistical analysis 10 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations indicates the treatment is beneficial, careful examination of the data could call this conclusion into question. For this reason, as well as for a greater depth of understanding of the treatment’s effects, analyses of the components of the composite endpoint are important (see section III.D.) and can influence interpretation of the overall study results. The examination of the components is always necessary, but whether multiplicity adjustment should be made depends on the purpose. If the intent is to better understand the demonstrated effect on the composite, then no adjustment is recommended. In that case, clinical judgment is used to decide whether the benefit is clinically meaningful and exceeds risk, and how it will be described in the FDA-approved labeling. If the intent is to establish additional effects of the drug, then multiplicity adjustment should be made.  4. Multi-Component Endpoints A multi-component endpoint is a within-subject combination of two or more components. In this endpoint, an individual subject’s evaluation is dependent upon observation of all the specified components in that subject. A single overall rating or status is then determined according to specified rules.  A single overall rating can be formed by some kind of average (either weighted or unweighted) across the individual domain scores. An example of a multi-component endpoint is the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) in schizophrenia research. A multi-component endpoint can also be a dichotomous (response) endpoint corresponding to an individual subject achieving specified criteria on each of the multiple components. For example, the primary endpoint in clinical trials of allogeneic pancreatic islet cells for Type 1 diabetes mellitus can be a response rate in which subjects are considered responders only if they meet two dichotomous response criteria: normal range of HbA1c and elimination of hypoglycemia.  There are more complex endpoint formulations where several, but not all, different features of a disease must be positively affected for a subject to be regarded as receiving benefit. For example, a positive response for an individual subject might be defined as a certain degree of improvement in two specific aspects of a disease along with improvement in at least three out of five additional disease features, as in the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) scoring system for rheumatoid arthritis.  The use of within-subject multi-component endpoints may be efficient if the treatment effects on the different components are generally trending in the same direction within a subject. Study power can be adversely affected, however, if there is limited concordance among the endpoints. Although multi-component endpoints can provide some gains in efficiency compared to coprimary endpoints, the appropriateness of a particular within-subject multi-component endpoint is generally determined by clinical, rather than statistical, considerations. Similar to the assessment of the component endpoints of a composite endpoint in section III.C.3., evaluation of the components of a multi-component endpoint may be important but should be subject to prespecification and multiplicity adjustment if the intent is to support specific conclusions on how a treatment affects specific components (see section III.D.). 11 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 5. Clinically Critical Endpoints Too Infrequent for Use as a Primary Endpoint  For many serious diseases, there is an endpoint of such great clinical importance that it is unreasonable not to collect and analyze the endpoint data; the usual example is mortality or major morbidity events (e.g., stroke, fracture, pulmonary exacerbation). Even if relatively few of these events are expected to occur in the trial, they can be included in a composite endpoint (see section III.C.3.) and also designated as a planned secondary endpoint to potentially support a conclusion regarding effect on that separate endpoint, if the effect of the drug on the composite primary endpoint is demonstrated.  D. 1. The Individual Components of Composite and Multi-Component Endpoints Evaluating and Reporting the Results of Composite Endpoints For composite endpoints whose components correspond to events, an event is usually defined as the first occurrence of any of the designated component events. Such composites can be analyzed either with comparisons of proportions between study groups at the end of the study or using time-to-event analyses. The time-to-event method of analysis is the more common method when, within the study’s timeframe of observation, the duration of being event-free is clinically meaningful. Although there may be an expectation that the drug will have a favorable effect on all the components of a composite endpoint, that is not a certainty. Results for each component event should therefore be individually examined and should be included in study reports. These analyses will not alter a conclusion about the statistical significance of the composite primary endpoint; however, interpretation of the result of the composite endpoint can be uncertain (see section III.C.3.). If there is an interest in analyzing one or more of the components of a composite endpoint as distinct hypotheses to demonstrate effects of the drug, the hypotheses should be part of the prospectively specified statistical analysis plan that accounts for the multiplicity this analysis will entail, as described above, for mortality. However, testing for individual component endpoints is likely to be underpowered as the sample size or total number of events is usually planned for testing the composite endpoint. Decomposition of the first composite event is often presented to depict how the component events constitute the composite event in terms of proportion. For example, in the RENAAL trial (Brenner et al. 2001), the primary efficacy endpoint was the first occurrence of the composite endpoint of doubling of serum creatinine, end-stage renal disease, or death. Based on such decomposition, 52% of the first composite events were doublings of serum creatinine, 19% were end-stage renal disease events, and 29% were deaths. However, subjects may experience more than one event type. For these subjects, events occurring after the first composite event (e.g., end-stage renal disease or death occurring after a doubling of serum creatinine) would not be counted in the decomposition. Therefore, evaluation of the individual event types in analyses that include all events for the event type of interest (even those that occur after events of other event types) is also important. Such analyses could demonstrate a possible additional effect of the drug if they are pre-specified, multiplicity is properly accounted for, and the results are interpretable.  2. Evaluating and Reporting the Results on Other Multi-Component Endpoints 12 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations As with composite endpoints, understanding which components of a within-subject multicomponent endpoint have contributed most to the overall statistical significance could be important to correctly understanding the clinical effects of the drug. Consequently, analysis of the study results on the individual components is usually important but, as stated previously, if undertaken, should not be presented in FDA-approved labeling in ways that imply a statistically rigorous conclusion or convey certainty about the effects that are not supported by that trial. For many of these multi-component endpoints, the overall score is regarded as comprehensive and clinically interpretable. The individual component scales, however, may or may not be independently clinically interpretable. Analyses of specific components or subdomains of a clinical outcome assessment as explicit endpoints in the primary or secondary endpoint families can be reasonable, contingent on the endpoint being clinically interpretable. Pre-specification of specific components or subdomains as endpoints with appropriate multiplicity control is recommended if the intent is to demonstrate an effect of a drug on one or more of these endpoints in addition to the overall multi-component endpoint.  IV. METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS  A variety of situations in which multiplicity arises have been discussed in sections II. and III.  When there is a family of endpoints (discussed in section III.A.), the probability of erroneously finding a statistically significant treatment effect in at least one endpoint regardless of the presence or absence of treatment effects in the other endpoints is the overall Type I error rate. This error rate is typically held to 0.05 (or 0.025 for one-sided tests). Statistical methods that control this error rate at the desired level can permit an effectiveness conclusion on individual endpoints.  There are many common statistical methods for addressing multiple-endpoint-related multiplicity problems (Hochberg and Tamhane 1987). The appendix presents some of the commonly considered methods. Examples include the Bonferroni, Holm (Holm 1979), and Hochberg (Hochberg 1988) procedures, which do not assume any hierarchy among the tested null hypotheses (i.e., any individual null hypothesis in the family can be rejected regardless of the rejection of other hypotheses). Other viable methods apply a combination of partial alpha allocation and hierarchies, such as graphical methods (Bretz et al. 2009) that are presented in the appendix. If finding a statistically significant treatment effect in any one of the considered endpoints is considered a success, then methods that appropriately adjust for multiplicity across the family of endpoints can be applicable. However, if endpoints are ordered based on clinical importance or logically related, then different methods can be recommended (e.g., Pocock et al. 2012). For example, in the simple case where there is one primary and one secondary endpoint, a hierarchical testing approach can be used. Some methodologies have been developed to account for more complex logical/ hierarchical relationships among the endpoints such as graphical approaches (e.g., Bretz et al. 2009) and mixture gatekeeping procedures (Dmitrienko et al. 2008). The graphical method has a sequential testing algorithm and makes it possible to visualize the testing process via a graph. 13 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations In some cases, a primary endpoint can be tested for non-inferiority (with a fixed margin), followed by testing it for superiority. If this endpoint is the only endpoint being tested, then noninferiority and superiority can be tested without multiplicity adjustment because the null hypotheses of non-inferiority and superiority are naturally ordered, and the two tests apply to the one hierarchy considered for this endpoint. However, if at least one more endpoint is included for testing, then multiplicity issues arise, and adjustments should be made to control the overall Type I error probability. For example, the tests could be ordered in a single hierarchy where the additional endpoint(s) are tested after the superiority hypothesis for the primary endpoint. Or, alternatively, testing could proceed to both the superiority hypothesis for the primary endpoint and to the hypotheses for the additional endpoints, with alpha allocation across these multiple hypotheses. To see why such alpha allocation can be applicable, suppose the drug is non-inferior to the active control with respect to the primary endpoint, but the drug is neither superior to the active control for the primary endpoint nor non-inferior to the active control for the secondary endpoint. Thus, a Type I error could occur with either of these hypothesis tests. If both of these were tested at 0.05, the probability of at least one of these leading to a spurious conclusion would be greater than 0.05. Thus, there should be appropriate control in some manner (e.g., test the secondary endpoint only if the primary endpoint superiority is shown or split alpha between the two tests). Additional discussion on this special case and on other methodological considerations is provided in the appendix.  V. SUMMARY  Making a false positive conclusion about effectiveness (i.e., falsely concluding that a drug has a positive treatment effect when it does not) is a major concern. A common approach is to control the Type I error rate at less than 5% (1 in 20 chance) for a false conclusion that there is a treatment difference or 2.5% (1 in 40 chance) for a false positive conclusion about effectiveness. As the number of endpoints or analyses increases, the Type I error rate can increase well beyond 2.5% due to multiplicity. Multiplicity adjustments, as described in this guidance, provide means for controlling the Type I error rate when the drug effect is evaluated in multiple endpoints. There are many strategies and methods that can be used, as appropriate, as described in this guidance. Each of these methods has advantages and disadvantages, and the selection of suitable strategies and methods is a challenge that should be addressed at the study-planning stage. Statistical expertise should be enlisted to help choose the most appropriate approach. Failing to appropriately control the Type I error rate may increase the risk of a false positive conclusion; this guidance is intended to clarify when and how multiplicity due to multiple endpoints should be managed to avoid reaching such false conclusions. 14 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  15 VI. GENERAL REFERENCES 1  2 Alosh M, F Bretz, and M Huque, 2014, Advanced multiplicity adjustment methods in clinical 3 trials, Statistics in Medicine, 33(4): 693-713. 4  5 Bauer P, 1991, Multiple testing in clinical trials, Statistics in Medicine, 10: 871-890. 6 Bretz, F, T Hothorn, and P Westfall, Multiple Comparisons Using R, Boca Raton (FL): Chapman 7 and Hall/CRC. 8  9 Brenner BM, ME Cooper, D de Zeeuw, WF Keane, WE Mitch, H-H Parving, G Remuzzi, SM 10 Snapinn, Z Zhang, and S Shahinfar, 2001, Effects of Losartan on Renal and Cardiovascular 11 Outcomes in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Nephropathy, New England Journal of 12 Medicine, 345:861-869. 13  14 Bretz F, W Maurer, W Brannath, and M Posch, 2009, A graphical approach to sequentially 15 rejective multiple test procedures, Statistics in Medicine, 28: 586-604. 16  17 Bretz F, M Posch, E Glimm, F Klinglmueller, W Maurer, and K Rohmeyer, 2011, Graphical 18 approaches for multiple comparison procedures using weighted Bonferroni, Simes, or parametric 19 tests, Biometrical Journal, 53(6): 894-913. 20  21 Committee For Proprietary Medicinal Products, 2002, Points to consider on multiplicity issues in 22 clinical trials, London: The European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products, accessed 23 December 1, 2020, 24 http://www.emea.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientific_guideline/2009/09/WC500 25 003640.pdf. 26  27 Dahlöf G, RB Devereux, SE Kjeldsen, S Julius, G Beevers, U de Faire, F Fyhrquist, H Ibsen, K 28 Kristiansson, O Lederballe-Pedersen, LH Lindholm, MS Nieminen, P Omvik, S Oparil, H 29 Wedel, and LIFE Study Group, 2002, Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the Losartan 30 Intervention For Endpoint reduction in hypertension study (LIFE): a randomised trial against 31 atenolol, Lancet, 359(9311): 995-1003.  32  33 Dmitrienko A, AC Tamhane, and BL Wiens, 2008, General Multistage Gatekeeping Procedures, 34 Biometrical Journal, 50: 667-677. 35  36 Dmitrienko A, AC Tamhane, and F Bretz, 2010, Multiple testing problems in pharmaceutical 37 statistics, Boca Raton (FL): Chapman & Hall/CRC. 38  39 Dmitrienko A, D’Agostino RB, Huque MF. Key multiplicity issues in clinical drug development. 40 Statistics in Medicine 2013; 32: 1079–1111. 41  42 Dmitrienko A, D’Agostino RB. Tutorial in Biostatistics: Traditional multiplicity adjustment 43 methods in clinical trials. Statistics in Medicine 2013; 32(29): 5172-5218. 44  45 Hochberg Y. A sharper Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of significance. Biometrika 1988; 46 75: 800-802. 47 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  16  48 Hochberg Y and AC Tamhane, 1987, Multiple Comparison Procedures, New York (NY): John 49 Wiley & Sons. 50  51 Holm SA, 1979, A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure, Scandinavian Journal of 52 Statistics, 6(2): 65-70. 53  54 Hommel G, F Bretz, and W Maurer, 2011, Multiple hypotheses testing based on ordered p values 55 — a historical survey with applications to medical research, Journal of Biopharmaceutical 56 Statistics, 21(4): 595-609. 57  58 Hung HMJ and SJ Wang, 2010, Challenges to multiple testing in clinical trials, Biometrical 59 Journal, 52(6): 747-756.  60  61 Huque MF, 2016, Validity of the Hochberg procedure revisited for clinical trial applications, 62 Statistics in Medicine, 35(1):5-20. 63  64 Huque MF, M Alosh, and R Bhore, 2011, Addressing multiplicity issues of a composite endpoint 65 and its components in clinical trials, Journal of Biopharmaceutical Statistics, 21: 610-634. 66  67 Huque MF, A Dmitrienko, and RB D’Agostino, 2013, Multiplicity issues in clinical trials with 68 multiple objectives, Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research, 5(4): 321-337. 69  70 Guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (September 1998) 71  72 Guidance for industry E9(R1) Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials: Addendum: Estimands 73 and Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical Trials (October 2017) 74  75 Lubsen J and BA Kirwan, 2002, Combined endpoints: can we use them?, Statistics in Medicine, 76 21: 2959–2970. 77  78 Moye LA, 2000, Alpha calculus in clinical trials: considerations and commentary for the new 79 millennium, Statistics in Medicine, 19:767-779. 80  81 Moye LA, 2003, Multiple Analyses in Clinical Trials, New York (NY): Springer-Verlag. 82  83 O’Neill RT, 1997, Secondary endpoints cannot be validly analyzed if the primary endpoint does 84 not demonstrate clear statistical significance, Controlled Clinical Trials, 18: 550-556. 85  86 Pocock SJ, CA Ariti, TJ Collier, and D Wang, 2012, The win ratio: a new approach to the 87 analysis of composite endpoints in clinical trials based on clinical priorities, European Heart 88 Journal, 33: 176–182.  89  90 Sarkar S and CK Chang, 1997, Simes’ method for multiple hypotheses testing with positively 91 dependent test statistics, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92: 1601-1608. 92  93 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  17 Westfall PH, RD Tobias, D Rom, RD Wolfinger, and Y Hochberg, 1999, Multiple Comparisons 94 and Multiple Tests Using the SAS® System, Cary (NC): SAS Institute.  95  96 Westfall PH and SS Young, 1993, Resampling Based Multiple Testing: Examples and Methods 97 for P-value Adjustment, New York (NY): Wiley-Interscience.  98  99 Wiens BL, 2003, A fixed sequence Bonferroni procedure for testing multiple endpoints, 100 Pharmaceutical Statistics, 2: 211-215. 101 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  18 APPENDIX: STATISTICAL METHODS 102   103 This appendix presents some commonly used statistical methods and approaches for addressing 104 multiplicity problems in controlled clinical trials that evaluate treatment effects on multiple 105 endpoints. The methods listed in this appendix are not intended to be a comprehensive list of 106 methods for controlling multiplicity; other approaches could be appropriate for specific 107 situations. The choice of the method to use for a specific clinical trial will depend on the 108 objectives and the design of the trial, as well as the knowledge of the drug being developed and 109 the clinical setting. The method, however, should be decided upon prospectively. Because the 110 considerations that go into the choice of multiplicity adjustment method can be complex and 111 specific to individual product development programs, this guidance does not attempt to 112 recommend any one method over another in most cases. Sponsors should consider the variety of 113 methods available and in the prospective analysis plan select the most powerful method that is 114 suitable for the design and objective of the study and maintains Type I error rate control.  115  116 1. The Bonferroni Method  117   118 The Bonferroni method is a single-step procedure that is commonly used, perhaps because of its 119 simplicity and broad applicability. The drug is considered to have shown effects for each 120 endpoint that succeeds on this test. The Holm and Hochberg methods (see below) are more 121 powerful than the Bonferroni method for primary endpoints and are therefore preferable in many 122 cases. However, sponsors might still wish to use the Bonferroni method for primary endpoints to 123 maximize power for secondary endpoints or because the assumptions of the Hochberg method 124 are not justified. 125   126 The most common form of the Bonferroni method divides the available total  (typically 0.05 127 two-sided) equally among the chosen endpoints. The method then concludes that a treatment 128 effect is significant at the  level for each one of the m endpoints for which the endpoint’s p-129 value is less than α/m. Thus, with two endpoints, the critical  for each endpoint is two-sided 130 0.025. The Bonferroni test can also be performed with different weights assigned to endpoints, 131 with the sum of the relative weights equal to 1.0 (e.g., 0.4, 0.3, 0.2, and 0.1 for four endpoints). 132 These weights should be prespecified in the design of the trial, taking into consideration the 133 clinical importance of the endpoints, the likelihood of success, or other factors.  134  135 2. The Holm Procedure  136  137 The Holm procedure is a multi-step step-down procedure; it is useful for endpoints with any 138 degree of correlation. It is less conservative than the Bonferroni method because a success with 139 the smallest p-value (at the same endpoint-specific alpha as the Bonferroni method) allows other 140 endpoints to be tested at larger endpoint-specific alpha levels than does the Bonferroni method. 141 The algorithm for performing this test is as follows: 142  143 The endpoint p-values resulting from the completed study are first ordered from the smallest to 144 the largest. Suppose that there are m endpoints to be tested and p(1) represents the smallest p-145 value, p(2) the next-smallest p-value, p(3) the third-smallest p-value, and so on.  146  147 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  19 i. The test begins by comparing the smallest p-value, p(1), to α/m, the same threshold used 148 in the equally-weighted Bonferroni correction. If this p(1) is less than α/m, the treatment 149 effect for the endpoint associated with this p-value is considered significant.  150  151 ii. The test then compares the next-smallest p-value, p(2), to an endpoint-specific alpha of 152 the total alpha divided by the number of yet-untested endpoints (e.g., α/(m-1) for the 153 second smallest p-value, a somewhat less conservative significance level). If p(2) < 154 α/(m-1), then the treatment effect for the endpoint associated with this p(2) is also 155 considered significant.  156   157 iii. The test then compares the next ordered p-value, p(3), to α/(m-2), and so on until the last 158 p-value (the largest p-value) is compared to α.  159  160 iv. The procedure stops, however, whenever a step yields a non-significant result. Once an 161 ordered p-value is not significant, the remaining larger p-values are not evaluated and 162 cannot be considered as statistically significant.  163  164 There is also a more general weighted version of Holm which allows unequal alpha allocation to 165 the individual null hypotheses. 166  167 3. The Hochberg Procedure 168   169 The Hochberg procedure is a step-up testing procedure. It is more powerful than the Holm 170 procedure (i.e., if a treatment effect is significant under Holm procedure it will be also significant 171 under Hochberg procedure but not necessarily vice versa), but, unlike the Holm procedure, it 172 controls the overall error rate only under certain assumptions. It compares the p-values to the 173 same alpha critical values of α/m, α/(m-1), …, α, as the Holm procedure, but, in contrast to the 174 Holm procedure, the Hochberg procedure is a step-up procedure. Instead of starting with the 175 smallest p-value, the procedure starts with the largest p-value, which is compared to the largest 176 endpoint-specific critical value (α). Also, essentially in the reverse of the Holm procedure, if the 177 first test of hypothesis does not show statistical significance, testing proceeds to compare the 178 second-largest p-value to the second-largest adjusted alpha value, α/2. Sequential testing 179 continues in this manner until a p-value for an endpoint is statistically significant, whereupon the 180 Hochberg procedure provides a conclusion of statistically significant treatment effects for that 181 endpoint and all endpoints with smaller p-values. For example, when the largest p-value is less 182 than α, then the method concludes that there are significant treatment effects for all endpoints. In 183 another situation, when the largest p-value is not less than α, but the second-largest p-value is 184 less than α/2, then the method concludes that treatment effects have been demonstrated for all 185 endpoints except for the one associated with the largest p-value. 186  187 The Bonferroni and the Holm procedures are well known for being assumption-free. The 188 methods can be applied without concern for the endpoint types, their statistical distributions, and 189 the type of correlation structure. The Hochberg procedure, on the other hand, is not assumption-190 free in this way. The Hochberg procedure is known to provide adequate overall alpha-control for 191 independent endpoint tests or for positively correlated dependent tests with standard test statistics 192 in some cases (e.g., the test statistics are jointly bivariate normal). It is also a valid test procedure 193 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  20 when certain conditions are met. Various simulation experiments for the general case (e.g., for 194 more than two endpoints with unequal correlation structures) indicate that the Hochberg 195 procedure usually will, but is not guaranteed to, control the overall Type I error rate for 196 positively correlated endpoints, but fails to do so for some negatively correlated tests (Sarkar et 197 al. 1997, Huque 2016). 198   199 4. Prospective Alpha Allocation Scheme 200  201 The Prospective Alpha Allocation Scheme (PAAS) (Moye 2000) is a single-step method that has 202 a slight advantage in power over the Bonferroni method. The method allows equal or unequal 203 alpha allocations to all endpoints, but, as with the Bonferroni method, each specific endpoint 204 receives a prospective allocation of a specific amount of the overall alpha. The alpha allocations 205 are required to satisfy the equation: 206  207   (1 - α1)(1 – α2) … (1 – αk) … (1 – αm) = (1- α). 208  209 Each element in this equation, (1 – αk), is the probability of correctly not rejecting the null 210 hypothesis for the kth endpoint, when it is tested at the allocated alpha αk. This procedure is valid 211 when the endpoints are independent or positively correlated, but the Type I error rate may be 212 inflated when the endpoints are negatively correlated. This equation states the requirement that 213 probability of correctly not rejecting all of the individual null hypotheses, calculated by 214 multiplying each of the m probabilities together, should equal the selected goal (e.g., 0.95). The 215 alpha allocation for any of the individual endpoint tests can be arbitrarily assigned, if desired, but 216 the total group of allocations should always satisfy the above equation. In general, when arbitrary 217 alpha allocations are made for some endpoints, at least the last endpoint’s alpha should be 218 calculated in order to satisfy the overall equation. As stated earlier, the Bonferroni method relies 219 upon a similar constraint-defining equation, except that for the Bonferroni method the sum of all 220 the individual alphas should equal the overall alpha. 221   222 5. The Fixed-Sequence Method  223  224 In many studies, testing of the endpoints can be ordered in a specified sequence, often ranking 225 them by clinical relevance or likelihood of success. A fixed-sequence statistical testing procedure 226 tests endpoints in a predefined order, all at the same significance level alpha (e.g., α = 0.05), 227 moving to the next endpoint only after a success on the previous endpoint. Such a testing 228 procedure requires (1) prospective specification of the testing sequence and (2) no further testing 229 once the sequence breaks; that is, further testing stops as soon as there is a failure of an endpoint 230 in the sequence to show significance at level alpha (e.g., α = 0.05).  231   232 The appeal of the fixed-sequence testing method is that it does not require any alpha adjustment 233 of the individual tests. Its main drawback is that if a hypothesis in the sequence is not rejected, 234 statistical significance cannot be achieved for the endpoints planned for the subsequent 235 hypotheses, even if they have extremely small p-values. Suppose, for example, that in a study, 236 the p-value for the first endpoint test in the sequence is p = 0.59, and the p-value for the second 237 endpoint is p = 0.001; despite the apparent strong finding for the second endpoint, the result is 238 not considered statistically significant. Ignoring the first endpoint’s result recreates the 239 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  21 multiplicity problem and causes inflation of the overall Type I error rate. For this example, other 240 methods of controlling Type I error such as the Bonferroni method, would have shown an effect 241 for the second endpoint.  242  243 Thus, for the fixed-sequence method, carefully selecting the ordering of the tests of hypotheses is 244 critical. A test early in the sequence that fails to show statistical significance will render the 245 remainder of the endpoints not statistically significant. It is often not possible to determine a 246 priori the best order for testing (Hung and Wang 2010), and there are other methods for 247 addressing the multiplicity problem, which are described in the following subsections.  248  249 6. Resampling-Based, Multiple-Testing Procedures  250  251 When there is correlation among multiple endpoints, resampling (Westfall and Young 1993) is 252 one general statistical approach that can provide more power than the methods described above 253 to detect a true treatment effect while maintaining control of the overall Type I error rate, and the 254 power increases as the correlation increases. With these methods, a distribution of the possible 255 test-statistic values under the null hypothesis is generated based upon the observed data of the 256 trial. This data-based distribution is then used to find the p-value of the observed study result 257 instead of using a theoretical distribution of the test statistics (e.g., a normal distribution of Z-258 scores, or a t-distribution for t-scores) as with most other methods. 259  260 Resampling methods include the bootstrap and permutation approaches for multiple endpoints 261 and require few, albeit important, assumptions about the true distribution of the endpoints. There 262 are, however, some drawbacks to these methods. The important assumptions are generally 263 difficult to verify, particularly for small study sample sizes. These methods, consequently, 264 usually require large study sample sizes (particularly bootstrap methods) and often require 265 simulations to ensure the data-based distribution of the test statistics from the limited trial data is 266 applicable and to ensure adequate Type I error rate control. Inflation of the Type I error rate may 267 occur, for example, if the shape of the data distribution is different between the treatment groups 268 being compared.  269  270 7. Gatekeeping Testing Strategies 271  272 Gatekeeping procedures (e.g., Dmitrienko et al. 2008, Dmitrienko and D’Agostino 2013) address 273 the problems of testing hierarchically ordered families of null hypotheses. Families usually 274 correspond to primary and secondary objectives in a clinical trial (see section III.A.). Inferences 275 in each family depend on the acceptance or rejection of null hypotheses in the earlier families 276 consistent with logical relationships that may exist among the null hypotheses. The relationships 277 usually reflect the relevant clinical considerations and are specified using a set of logical 278 restrictions. Different types of logical gatekeeping constraints have been studied including serial 279 gatekeeping, parallel gatekeeping and their generalization referred to as tree-structured 280 gatekeeping. 281  282 A serial strategy can be applied, for example, in the scenario where the endpoints of the primary 283 family are tested as co-primary endpoints (section III.C.). If all endpoints in the primary family 284 are statistically significant at the alpha level (e.g., α = 0.05), the endpoints in the second family 285 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  22 are examined. The endpoints in the second family can be tested at the overall alpha level by any 286 prespecified acceptable method (e.g., Holm procedure, the fixed-sequence method, or others 287 described in this appendix) that controls Type I error rate within the second family. If, however, 288 at least one of the null hypotheses of the primary family fails to be rejected, the primary family 289 criterion has not been met and the secondary endpoint family is not tested. 290   291 A parallel gatekeeping strategy is applied when the endpoints in the primary family are not all 292 co-primary endpoints, and a separable testing method (e.g., Bonferroni method or Truncated 293 Holm method) is specified for the primary family. In this strategy, the second endpoint family is 294 examined when at least one of the endpoints in the first family has shown statistical significance.  295  296 Some multiplicity problems are multidimensional. One dimension may correspond to multiple 297 endpoints, a second to multiple-dose groups (that have each of those endpoints tested), and yet 298 another dimension to multiple hypotheses regarding an endpoint, such as non-inferiority and 299 superiority tests (for each dose and each endpoint). The multiple sources of multiplicity create 300 the potential for multiple pathways of testing the hypotheses. For example, if the goal of a study 301 is to demonstrate non-inferiority as well as superiority, a single path of sequential tests is 302 preferred. Suppose, however, that one wants to analyze a second endpoint for non-inferiority 303 after the first endpoint is successfully shown to be non-inferior. The testing path now branches 304 into two paths from this initial test (i.e., testing superiority for the first endpoint and non-305 inferiority for the second endpoint).  306  307 The multi-branched gatekeeping procedure allows for ordering the sequence of testing with the 308 option of testing of more than one endpoint if a preceding test is successful. When there are 309 multiple levels of this sequential hierarchy, and branching is applied at several of the steps, the 310 possible paths of endpoint testing become a complex, multi-branched structure. 311  312 As a simple illustration (Figure A1), consider a clinical trial that compares a treatment to control 313 on two primary endpoints (Endpoint 1 and Endpoint 2) to determine first whether the treatment 314 is non-inferior to the control for at least one endpoint. If, for either of the two endpoints, the 315 treatment is found non-inferior to the control, there is also a desire to test whether it is superior to 316 control for that endpoint. The analytic plan for the trial thus sets the following logical 317 restrictions:  318  319 i. Test endpoint two only after non-inferiority for endpoint one is first established.  320  321 ii.  Test for superiority on an endpoint only after non-inferiority for that endpoint is first 322 concluded.  323  324 The following diagram shows the decision structure of the test strategy. In this diagram, each 325 block (or node) states the null hypothesis that it tests.  326  327  328  329 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  23  330  331 Figure A1: Example of a flow diagram for non-inferiority and superiority tests for endpoints one and two of a trial 332 with logical restrictions, where α1 + α2 = α. To test for superiority for Endpoint 1 and/or 2, one should first establish 333 non-inferiority for that endpoint. 334  335 Thus, the above test strategy has a two-dimensional hierarchical structure, one dimension for the 336 two different endpoints and the other for the non-inferiority and superiority tests, with the logical 337 restrictions as stated above. Note that for this type of procedure, if multiple branches split off 338 from a single node, the alpha should be split across the multiple branches. 339  340 8. Graphical Approaches Based on Sequentially Rejective Tests  341   342 The graphical approach (e.g., Bretz et al. 2009) is a means for developing and evaluating 343 multiple analysis strategies for Bonferroni-based sequentially rejective methods. This approach 344 illustrates differences in endpoint importance as well as the relationships among the endpoints by 345 mapping onto a test strategy that ensures control of the Type I error rate and aids in creating and 346 evaluating alternative test strategies.  347  348 Graphical displays of complex analysis strategies can aid in describing and assessing the 349 proposed plan by displaying all the logical relationships among endpoint tests of hypotheses.  350  351 Basics of the Graphical Approach: Use of vertex (node) and path (order or direction) 352  353 In the graphical approach, the testing strategy is defined by a figure (graph) that shows each of 354 the hypotheses (H1, H2,..., Hm) located at a vertex (or node, a junction of testing order paths). 355 Each vertex (hypothesis) is allocated an initial amount of alpha, which this document defines as 356 the endpoint-specific alpha (with the understanding that a test of an endpoint is associated with a 357 test of a hypothesis, and vice versa). A key requirement is that the sum of all of the endpoint-358 specific alpha levels is equal to the total alpha level available for the study (the overall Type I 359 error rate). At each step of the algorithm, endpoints are tested at the endpoint-specific 360 significance levels using Bonferroni procedure. 361  362 Another feature of the figure (graph) is a set of directed edges. Each directed edge (or arrow) 363 connects two hypotheses and is assigned a value between 0 and 1, called a weight for that edge 364 and shown above the arrow, which indicates the fraction of the preserved alpha to be shifted 365 H3 : treatment inferior to control for Endpoint 2 (i.e., test for non-inferiority) H2 : treatment not superior to control for Endpoint 1 (i.e., test for superiority) H1 : treatment inferior to control for Endpoint 1 (i.e., test for non-inferiority) H4 : treatment not superior to control for Endpoint 2 (i.e., test for superiority) α1 α2 α2 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  24 along that path to the receiving hypothesis, when the hypothesis at the tail end of the path is 366 successful (i.e., is rejected). The sum of the weights across all the paths leaving a vertex should 367 be 1.0, so that the entire preserved alpha is used in testing subsequent hypotheses. All study 368 hypotheses that are intended to potentially provide firm conclusions of efficacy are shown in the 369 graph.  370  371 Several examples of the graphical method follow to help illustrate the concept, construction, 372 interpretation, and application of these diagrams.  373  374 Fixed-Sequence Method 375  376 The fixed-sequence testing strategy (appendix section 5.), shown in Figure A2, illustrates a 377 simple case of the graphical method with three hypotheses. In this scheme, the endpoints 378 (hypotheses) are ordered. Testing begins with the first endpoint at the full alpha level and 379 continues through the sequence only until an endpoint is not statistically significant. This 380 diagram shows that the endpoint-specific alpha levels associated with hypotheses H1, H2, and H3 381 are set in the beginning as α, 0, and 0. For the fixed-sequence method, arrows represent the 382 sequence of testing, and if the test is successful, the full alpha is shifted along to the next test. 383 Consequently, if null hypothesis H1 is successfully rejected, the endpoint-specific alpha level for 384 H2 becomes 0 + 1  α = α, which allows testing of H2 at level α. However, if the test of H1 is 385 unsuccessful, there is no pre-assigned non-zero alpha for H2 to allow testing of H2, so the testing 386 stops. 387  388 H1 α H2 0 H3 0 1 1 389 Figure A2: Graphical illustration of the fixed-sequence testing with three hypotheses. 390  391   392 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  25 Loop-Back Feature to Indicate Two-Way Potential for Retesting  393  394 Another valuable feature of the graphical method occurs when the available alpha level is split 395 between two or more endpoints into endpoint-specific alpha levels; these diagrams illustrate the 396 potential for loop-back passing of endpoint-specific alpha. 397  398 The Holm procedure (appendix section 2.) is a specific case of tests for two hypotheses with a 399 loop-back feature where the graphical method enables a simple depiction of the procedure and its 400 rationale. The Holm procedure directs that the first step is to test the smaller p-value at endpoint-401 specific alpha = α/2 and, only if successful, proceed to test the larger p-value at the level α (e.g., 402 0.05). Because the Holm procedure splits alpha evenly in half, if the test of hypothesis with the 403 smaller p-value was not significant, it is clear that the test with the larger p-value will also fail to 404 be significant; performing that comparison is unnecessary. The diagram for the Holm procedure 405 (Figure A3), shows two vertices and associated endpoint-specific alpha levels of α1 = 0.025 and 406 α2 = 0.025, respectively, satisfying the requirement for total alpha = 0.05. The two arrows show 407 that alpha might be passed along from H1 to H2, or H2 to H1. If the first test is successful, the 408 endpoint-specific alpha of 0.025 is shifted entirely to the other hypothesis and added to the 409 endpoint-specific alpha already allocated for that hypothesis to provide a net alpha of 0.05. 410 Because either hypothesis might be tested first, the diagram shows a loop-back configuration.  411  412 H1 α1 = 0.025 H2 α2 = 0.025 1 1 413  414 Figure A3: Graphical illustration of the Holm procedure with two hypotheses. 415  416 Testing on the diagram can start at any of the vertices that have non-zero alpha in the initial 417 diagram, and all vertices with non-zero alpha can be tested until one is found for which the test is 418 successful (i.e., the hypothesis is rejected). Then, the respective node is removed, and the alpha 419 allocated to the rejected hypothesis propagates to other nodes following the arrows, as directed in 420 the diagram. The final conclusions of which hypotheses were rejected and which were not will 421 be the same irrespective of which vertex was inspected first. The graphical method enables 422 complex alpha-splitting and branching of testing path features to be clearly identified as part of 423 the analysis plan and correctly implemented. 424   425 Progressive Updating of the Diagram When Hypotheses Are Successfully Rejected 426  427 The graphical approach guides the hierarchical testing of multiple hypotheses through continual 428 updating of the initial graph whenever a hypothesis is successfully rejected. The initial graph 429 represents the full testing strategy (with all hypotheses). Each new graph shows the progression 430 Contains Nonbinding Recommendations  26 of the testing strategy by eliminating hypotheses that have been rejected and retaining those yet 431 to be tested or re-tested.  432  433 When there is a desire to consider analysis strategies with complex division of alpha, the 434 graphical method and progressive updating of the diagram can aid in understanding the 435 implication of the different strategies for a variety of different hypothetical scenarios. This 436 progressive updating can aid in selecting which specific strategy to select for the final study 437 statistical analysis plan.  



Adaptive Designs for
Clinical Trials of Drugs
and Biologics
Guidance for Industry
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
1
Adaptive Designs for Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biologics
Guidance for Industry1
This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on
this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can
use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To
discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for this guidance as listed on the title
page.
I. INTRODUCTION AND SCOPE
This document provides guidance to sponsors and applicants submitting investigational new drug
applications (INDs), new drug applications (NDAs), biologics licensing applications (BLAs), or
supplemental applications on the appropriate use of adaptive designs for clinical trials to provide
evidence of the effectiveness and safety of a drug or biologic.
2 The guidance describes important
principles for designing, conducting, and reporting the results from an adaptive clinical trial. The
guidance also advises sponsors on the types of information to submit to facilitate FDA evaluation
of clinical trials with adaptive designs, including Bayesian adaptive and complex trials that rely
on computer simulations for their design.
The primary focus of this guidance is on adaptive designs for clinical trials intended to support
the effectiveness and safety of drugs. The concepts contained in this guidance are also useful for
early-phase or exploratory clinical trials as well as trials conducted to satisfy post-marketing
commitments or requirements.
In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities.
Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only
as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of
the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but
not required.
 1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Biostatistics in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research and
the Division of Biostatistics in the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research at the Food and Drug
Administration.
2 The term drug as used in this guidance refers to both human drugs and biological products unless otherwise
specified.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
2
II. DESCRIPTION OF AND MOTIVATION FOR ADAPTIVE DESIGNS
A. Definition
For the purposes of this guidance, an adaptive design is defined as a clinical trial design that
allows for prospectively planned modifications to one or more aspects of the design based on
accumulating data from subjects in the trial.
B. Important Concepts
The following are descriptions of important concepts used in this guidance:
• An interim analysis3 is any examination of data obtained from subjects in a trial while that
trial is ongoing and is not restricted to cases in which there are formal between-group
comparisons. The observed data used in the interim analysis can include one or more types,
such as baseline data, safety outcome data, pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic or other
biomarker data, or efficacy outcome data.
• A non-comparative analysis is an examination of accumulating trial data in which the
treatment group assignments of subjects are not used in any manner in the analysis. A
comparative analysis is an examination of accumulating trial data in which treatment groups
are identified, either with the actual assigned treatments or with codes (e.g., labeled as A and
B, without divulging which treatment is investigational).4 The terms unblinded analysis and
blinded analysis are also sometimes used to make the distinction between analyses in which
treatment assignments are and are not identified, respectively. We avoid the terms unblinded
analysis and blinded analysis in this guidance because these terms can misleadingly conflate
knowledge of treatment assignment with the use of treatment assignment in adaptation
algorithms. An interim analysis can be comparative or non-comparative regardless of
whether trial subjects, investigators, and other personnel such as the sponsor and data
monitoring committee (DMC) have knowledge of individual treatment assignments or access
to comparative results by treatment arm. For example, it is possible to include adaptations
based on a non-comparative analysis even in open-label trials, but ensuring that the
adaptations are completely unaffected by knowledge of comparative data presents additional
challenges. The importance of limiting access to comparative interim results is discussed in
detail in section VII. of this guidance.
 3 The FDA guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (September 1998) defines an interim
analysis as “any analysis intended to compare treatment arms with respect to efficacy or safety…” The current
guidance uses a broader meaning for interim analysis to accommodate the wide range of analyses of accumulating
data that can be used to determine trial adaptations. We update guidances periodically. For the most recent version
of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at
https://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm. 4 These definitions of the terms non-comparative analysis and comparative analysis refer to the setting of a multiarm clinical trial. In a single-arm clinical trial, any analysis of accumulating trial data involves identification of
treatment assignment information and, therefore, is considered comparable to a comparative analysis for the
purposes of this guidance. 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
3
• The term prospective, for the purposes of this guidance, means that the adaptation is planned
and details specified before any comparative analyses of accumulating trial data are
conducted. In nearly all situations, potential adaptive design modifications should be planned
and described in the clinical trial protocol (and in a separate statistical analysis plan) prior to
initiation of the trial.
• This guidance distinguishes between those trials that are intended to provide substantial
evidence of effectiveness and other trials, termed exploratory trials.
5 This distinction
depends on multiple features of a clinical trial, such as the clinical relevance of the primary
endpoint, quality of trial conduct, rigor of control of the chance of erroneous conclusions,
and reliability of estimation.
• A fixed sample trial is a clinical trial with a targeted total sample size, or a targeted total
number of events,
6 that is specified at the design stage and not subject to prospectively
planned adaptation.
• A non-adaptive trial is a clinical trial without any prospectively planned opportunities for
modifications to the design.
• Bias is a systematic tendency for the estimate of treatment effect to deviate from its true
value.
• Reliability is the extent to which statistical inference from the clinical trial accurately and
precisely evaluates the treatment effect.
• A critical component of the demonstration of the effectiveness and, in some cases, safety of a
drug is the test of a null hypothesis in a clinical trial. If the null hypothesis is rejected at a
specified level of significance (typically a one-sided level equal to .025), with demonstration
of a clinically meaningful effect of the drug, the evidence generally supports a conclusion of
effectiveness. Sometimes, however, the null hypothesis is rejected even though the drug is
ineffective. This is called a Type I error. Typically, there are multiple scenarios for which the
null hypothesis is true. We will use the term Type I error probability to refer to the maximum
probability of rejecting the null hypothesis across these scenarios.
C. Potential Advantages and Examples
Adaptive designs can provide a variety of advantages over non-adaptive designs. These
advantages arise from the fundamental property of clinical trials with an adaptive design: they
allow the trial to adjust to information that was not available when the trial began. The specific
 5 A variety of terms have been used to describe different kinds of clinical trials, such as phase 1, phase 2, and phase
3 (21 CFR 312.21); pivotal; registration; and confirmatory (FDA guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for
Clinical Trials (September 1998)). These terms will not be used in this guidance. 6 In settings where the primary outcome of interest is the time to event (such as death), the statistical power of the
trial is determined by the total number of observed events rather than the sample size.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
4
nature of the advantages depends on the scientific context and type or types of adaptation
considered, with potential advantages falling into the following major categories:
• Statistical efficiency: In some cases, an adaptive design can provide a greater chance to
detect a true drug effect (i.e., greater statistical power) than a comparable non-adaptive
design.
7 This is often true, for example, of group sequential designs (section V.A.) and
designs with adaptive modifications to the sample size (section V.B.). Alternatively, an
adaptive design may provide the same statistical power with a smaller expected sample size8
or shorter expected duration than a comparable non-adaptive design.
• Ethical considerations: There are many ways in which an adaptive design can provide ethical
advantages over a non-adaptive design. For example, the ability to stop a trial early if it
becomes clear that the trial is unlikely to demonstrate effectiveness can reduce the number of
patients exposed to the unnecessary risk of an ineffective investigational treatment and allow
subjects the opportunity to explore more promising therapeutic alternatives.
• Improved understanding of drug effects: An adaptive design can make it possible to answer
broader questions than would normally be feasible with a non-adaptive design. For example,
an adaptive enrichment design (section V.C.) may make it possible to demonstrate
effectiveness in either a given population of patients or a targeted subgroup of that
population, where a non-adaptive alternative might require infeasibly large sample sizes. An
adaptive design can also yield improved understanding of the effect of the experimental
treatment. For example, a design with adaptive dose selection (section V.D.) may yield better
estimates of the dose-response relationship, which may also lead to more efficient subsequent
trials.
• Acceptability to stakeholders: An adaptive design may be considered more acceptable to
stakeholders than a comparable non-adaptive design because of the added flexibility. For
example, sponsors might be more willing to commit to a trial that allows planned design
modifications based on accumulating information. Patients may be more willing to enroll in
trials that use response-adaptive randomization (section V.E.) because these trials can
increase the probability that subjects will be assigned to the more effective treatment.
The following examples of clinical trials with adaptive designs illustrate some of the potential
advantages:
• A clinical trial was conducted to evaluate Eliprodil for treatment of patients suffering from
severe head injury (Bolland et al. 1998). The primary efficacy endpoint was a three-category
outcome defining the functional status of the patient after six months of treatment. There was
considerable uncertainty at the design stage about the proportions of patients in the placebo
control group who would be expected to experience each of the three different functional
outcomes. An interim analysis was prespecified to update estimates of these proportions
based on pooled, non-comparative data in order to potentially increase the sample size. This
 7 An example of a comparable non-adaptive design is a fixed sample design with sample size equal to the expected
sample size of the adaptive design. 8 The expected sample size is the average sample size if the trial were repeated many times. 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
5
approach was chosen to avoid a trial with inadequate statistical power and therefore helped
ensure that the trial would efficiently and reliably achieve its objective. The interim analysis
ultimately led to a sample size increase from 400 to 450 patients.
• PARADIGM-HF was a clinical trial in patients with chronic heart failure with reducedejection fraction designed to compare LCZ696, a combination of the neprilysin inhibitor
sacubitril and the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) inhibitor valsartan, with the RAS inhibitor
enalapril with respect to risk of the composite endpoint of cardiovascular death or
hospitalization for heart failure (McMurray et al. 2014). The trial design included three
planned interim analyses after accrual of one-third, one-half, and two-thirds of the total
planned number of events, with the potential to stop the trial for superior efficacy of LCZ696
over enalapril based on comparative results. The addition of interim analyses with stopping
rules for efficacy reduced the expected sample size and expected duration of the trial while
maintaining a similar probability of trial success, relative to a trial with a single analysis after
observation of a fixed total number of events. PARADIGM-HF was stopped after the third
interim analysis because the prespecified stopping boundary for compelling superiority of
LCZ696 over enalapril had been crossed. The group sequential design therefore facilitated a
more rapid determination of benefit than would have been possible with a fixed sample
design.
• To evaluate the safety and effectiveness of a nine-valent human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccine, a clinical trial with adaptive dose selection was carried out (Chen et al. 2015). The
trial randomized subjects to one of three dose formulations of the nine-valent HPV vaccine or
an active control, the four-valent HPV vaccine. An interim analysis was carried out to select
one of the three dose formulations to carry forward into the second stage of the trial. The goal
of the trial was to select an appropriate dose and confirm the safety and effectiveness of that
dose in a timely manner.
• STAMPEDE was a clinical trial designed to inform the practice of medicine and
simultaneously evaluate multiple treatments in prostate cancer by comparing standard
androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) with several different treatment regimens that combined
ADT with one or more approved therapies (Sydes et al. 2012). The trial design included
multiple interim analyses to potentially drop treatment arms that were not performing well
based on comparative results. The use of a common control group, along with sequential
analyses to potentially terminate treatment arms, allowed the simultaneous evaluation of
several treatments more efficiently than could have been achieved in multiple individual
trials.
• PREVAIL II was a clinical trial conducted to evaluate ZMapp plus the current standard of
care as compared to the current standard of care alone for treatment of patients with Ebola
virus disease (PREVAIL II Writing Group et al. 2016; Dodd et al. 2016). The trial utilized a
novel Bayesian adaptive design in which decision rules for concluding effectiveness at
interim and final analyses were based on the Bayesian posterior probability that the addition
of ZMapp to standard of care reduces 28-day mortality. Interim analyses were planned after
every 2 patients completed, with no potential action taken until a minimum number of
patients (12 per group) were enrolled. The design also allowed the potential to add
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
6
experimental agents as new treatment arms and the potential to supplement or replace the
current standard of care arm with any agents determined to be efficacious during the conduct
of the trial.
D. Limitations
The following are some of the possible limitations associated with a clinical trial employing an
adaptive design:
• Adaptive designs require specific analytical methods to avoid increasing the chance of
erroneous conclusions and introducing bias in estimates. For complex adaptive designs, such
methods may not be readily available, and simulations are often critical (section VI.A.).
• Gains in efficiency in some respects may be offset by losses in other respects. For example,
an adaptive design may have a reduced minimum and expected sample size but have an
increased maximum sample size9 relative to a comparable non-adaptive design. In addition,
preplanning adaptive design modifications can require more effort at the design stage,
leading to longer lead times between planning and starting the trial.
• The use of an adaptive design adds logistical challenges to ensuring appropriate trial conduct
and trial integrity. In particular, approaches to appropriately limit access to comparative
interim results may be complex and add costs to the trial. In addition, it is challenging to
ensure high-quality interim data are available in a timely manner so that adaptive decisionmaking is based on up-to-date and reliable results.
• The opportunity for efficiency gains through adaptation may be limited by important
scientific constraints or in certain clinical settings. For example, a minimum sample size may
be expected for a reliable evaluation of safety. There also may be limited utility in certain
types of adaptations if the primary outcome of interest is ascertained over a longer period of
time than the time it takes to enroll most or all patients in the trial.
• An adaptive change to a trial design may lead to results after the adaptation that are different
from those before the adaptation. This may lead to challenges in interpretability of results.
E. Choosing to Adapt
In general, the decision to use or not use adaptive elements in a clinical trial design will depend
on a large number of factors, including the potential advantages and disadvantages described in
the preceding sections. There may also be a variety of non-scientific considerations. In short,
designing a clinical trial is a complex process, and it is not the intent of this guidance to require
or restrict the use of adaptive designs in general or in specific settings. However, FDA
encourages sponsors to explore a variety of design options in planning and to discuss their
 9 The minimum and maximum sample sizes are the smallest and largest sample sizes, respectively, that could be
selected under the adaptive design if the trial were repeated many times.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
7
considerations with the appropriate FDA review division at regulatory meetings such as End-ofPhase-2 (EOP2) or Type C meetings.
III. PRINCIPLES FOR ADAPTIVE DESIGNS
In general, the design, conduct, and analysis of an adaptive clinical trial intended to provide
substantial evidence of effectiveness should satisfy four key principles: the chance of erroneous
conclusions should be adequately controlled, estimation of treatment effects should be
sufficiently reliable, details of the design should be completely prespecified, and trial integrity
should be appropriately maintained. While all clinical trials intended to provide substantial
evidence of effectiveness should satisfy these four principles, the following sections outline
considerations specific to adaptive designs.
A. Controlling the Chance of Erroneous Conclusions
Because clinical trials play a central role in premarket decision-making, it is critical to assess the
probability that any trial design under consideration will lead to incorrect conclusions of safety
or effectiveness, incorrect conclusions of lack of safety or effectiveness, or misleading estimates
that contribute to an overall assessment of benefit-risk. For example, there are a number of ways
in which adaptive features can inflate the Type I error probability of a trial. The most obvious
examples of this are cases in which multiple statistical hypothesis tests are performed. Consider a
group sequential design, in which a preliminary test to potentially stop the trial for efficacy is
performed after 50 percent of planned subjects have completed the trial. If the trial is not stopped
early, a final test is performed once 100 percent of the planned subjects have completed the trial.
If each of these two tests were performed at the conventional .025 one-sided significance level
and the drug were not effective, the overall chance of the trial yielding a Type I error would
exceed 2.5 percent. This is a well-known problem, and a variety of methods exist to determine
appropriate significance levels for interim and final analyses that together ensure the overall
Type I error probability of the trial is controlled at 2.5 percent (Jennison and Turnbull 1999).
Explicit multiple hypothesis tests are not the only way adaptive design features can lead to
erroneous conclusions. Consider a naive approach to adaptive patient population selection, in
which data in the overall trial population and in a subpopulation are examined halfway through a
trial, and the population with the larger treatment effect at that point is chosen for continued
study. If the final analysis is performed in the selected population at a .025 significance level and
includes the same data that were used to choose the patient population, the Type I error
probability would exceed 2.5 percent. Other adaptive design features may introduce still more
subtle Type I error probability inflation.
Adaptive design proposals for trials incorporating null hypothesis testing should therefore
address the possibility of Type I error probability inflation. In some cases, such as simple group
sequential designs (section V.A.), statistical theory can be used to derive significance levels that
ensure Type I error probability is controlled at the desired level. In other cases, such as sample
size re-estimation based on non-comparative interim results (section IV.), it can be shown that
performing analyses at the conventional .025 significance level has no effect or a limited effect 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
8
on the Type I error probability. In still other cases, such as many Bayesian adaptive designs
(section VI.B.), it may be critical to use simulations (section VI.A.) to evaluate the chance of an
erroneous conclusion.
B. Estimating Treatment Effects
It is important that clinical trials produce sufficiently reliable treatment effect estimates to
facilitate an evaluation of benefit-risk and to appropriately label new drugs, enabling the practice
of evidence-based medicine. Some adaptive design features can lead to statistical bias in the
estimation of treatment effects and related quantities. For example, each of the two cases of Type
I error probability inflation mentioned in section III.A. above has a potential for biased estimates.
Specifically, a conventional end-of-trial treatment effect estimate such as a sample mean that
does not take the adaptations into account would tend to overestimate the true population
treatment effect. This is true not only for the primary endpoint which formed the basis of the
adaptations, but also for secondary endpoints correlated with the primary endpoint. Furthermore,
confidence intervals for the primary and secondary endpoints may not have correct coverage
probabilities for the true treatment effects.
For some designs there are known methods for adjusting estimates to reduce or remove bias
associated with adaptations and to improve performance on measures such as the mean squared
error10 (e.g., Jennison and Turnbull 1999; Wassmer and Brannath 2016). Such methods should
be prospectively planned and used for reporting results when they are available. Biased
estimation in adaptive design is currently a less well-studied phenomenon than Type I error
probability inflation, however, and methods may not be available for other designs. For these
other designs, the extent of bias in estimates should be evaluated, and treatment effect estimates
and associated confidence intervals should be presented with appropriate cautions regarding their
interpretation.
C. Trial Planning
In general, as with any clinical trial,
11 it is expected that the details of the adaptive design are
completely specified prior to initiation of the trial and documented accordingly (section VIII.B.).
Prospective planning should include prespecification of the anticipated number and timing of
interim analyses, the type of adaptation, the statistical inferential methods to be used, and the
specific algorithm governing the adaptation decision. Complete prespecification is important for
a variety of reasons. First, for many types of adaptations, if aspects of the adaptive decisionmaking are not planned, appropriate statistical methods to control the chance of erroneous
conclusions and to produce reliable estimates may not be feasible once data have been collected.
Second, complete prespecification helps increase confidence that adaptation decisions were not
based on accumulating knowledge in an unplanned way. For example, consider a trial with
planned sample size re-estimation based on pooled, non-comparative interim estimates of the
variance (section IV.) in which personnel involved in the adaptive decision-making (e.g., a
monitoring committee) have access to comparative interim results. Prespecification that includes
 10 The mean squared error is a measure of the performance of an estimate that incorporates both bias and variability. 11 FDA guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (September 1998) recommends
prespecification of the design and analysis plan for all clinical trials.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
9
the exact rule for modifying the sample size reduces concern that the adaptation could have been
influenced by knowledge of comparative results and precludes the use of a statistical adjustment
to account for modifications based on comparative interim results (section V.B.). Finally,
complete prespecification can motivate careful planning at the design stage, eliminate
unnecessary sponsor access to comparative interim data, and help ensure that the DMC, if
involved in implementing the adaptive design, effectively focuses on its primary responsibilities
of maintaining patient safety and trial integrity (section VII.).
Although we recommend prespecification of the rules governing adaptations, monitoring
committee recommendations might occasionally deviate from the anticipated algorithm based on
the totality of the data. If this type of flexibility is desired, the prespecified plan should
acknowledge the possibility of deviations from the anticipated algorithm, outline factors that
may lead to such deviations, and propose testing and estimation methods that do not rely on strict
adherence to the algorithm. When completely unforeseen circumstances arise, we recommend
discussing any potential design changes with FDA as soon as possible.
D. Maintaining Trial Conduct and Integrity
Adaptive designs can create additional trial operational complications. Knowledge of
accumulating data can affect the course and conduct of a trial, and the behavior of its sponsor,
investigators, and participants, in ways that are difficult to predict and impossible to adjust for.
Therefore, for all clinical trials (adaptive and non-adaptive) it is strongly recommended that
access to comparative interim results be limited to individuals with relevant expertise who are
independent of the personnel involved in conducting or managing the trial.12 Maintaining
confidentiality of comparative interim results is especially challenging when the trial design
includes adaptive features. Two examples of issues that could arise in adaptive trials are:
• If investigators are improperly provided access to comparative results from an interim
analysis, knowledge of a small or unfavorable estimated treatment effect based on unreliable
data could be misinterpreted as reliable evidence of no effect, leading to decreased adherence
and decreased efforts to retain patients, increasing the amount of missing data in the
remainder of the trial.
• After an interim analysis in a design with sample size re-estimation based on comparative
results (section V.B.), knowledge that the targeted sample size has been increased could be
interpreted by investigators and potential trial subjects as indicative of a less-than-expected
interim treatment effect, potentially depressing future enrollment and endangering the
success of the trial.
As these and other similar issues are generally impossible to adjust for once data have been
collected, planning for an adaptive design trial should include a consideration of possible sources
and consequences of trial conduct issues and plans to avoid these issues. Plans should describe
the processes intended to control access to information and to document access throughout the
trial. This is discussed in more detail in section VII.
 12 This recommendation is also conveyed in FDA guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials
(September 1998).
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
10
IV. ADAPTIVE DESIGNS BASED ON NON-COMPARATIVE DATA
This section addresses adaptive clinical trial designs in which adaptations are based entirely on
analyses of non-comparative data, that is, without incorporating information about treatment
assignment. Such analyses are sometimes called blinded or masked analyses. In general,
adequately prespecified adaptations based on non-comparative data have no effect or a limited
effect on the Type I error probability. This makes them an attractive choice in many settings,
particularly when uncertainty about event probabilities or endpoint variability is high.
Accumulating outcome data can provide a useful basis for trial adaptations. The analysis of
outcome data without using treatment assignment is sometimes called pooled analysis. The most
widely used category of adaptive design based on pooled outcome data involves sample size
adaptations (sometimes called blinded sample size re-estimation). Sample size calculations in
clinical trials depend on several factors: the desired significance level, the desired power, the
assumed or targeted difference in outcome due to treatment assignment, and additional nuisance
parameters—values that are not of primary interest but may affect the statistical comparisons. In
trials with binary outcomes such as a response or an undesirable event, the probability of
response or event in the control group is commonly considered a nuisance parameter. In trials
with continuous outcomes such as symptom scores, the variance of the scores is a nuisance
parameter. By using accumulating information about nuisance parameters, sample sizes can be
adjusted according to prespecified algorithms to ensure the desired power is maintained. In some
cases, these techniques involve statistical modeling to estimate the value of the nuisance
parameter, because the parameter itself depends on knowledge of treatment assignment (Gould
and Shih 1992). These adaptations generally do not inflate the Type I error probability. However,
there is the potential for limited Type I error probability inflation in trials incorporating
hypothesis tests of non-inferiority or equivalence (Friede and Kieser 2003). Sponsors should
evaluate the extent of inflation in these scenarios.
Another example of adapting based on pooled outcome data is the planned interim reevaluation
of the prognostic strength of a biomarker or other baseline characteristic in a prognostic
enrichment strategy.13 For example, a trial may be targeting greater enrollment among patients
with a certain biomarker to increase the number of endpoint events, but interim pooled outcome
data may suggest the biomarker does not have the anticipated effect on the pooled event rate,
perhaps leading to a change in recruitment strategies.
V. ADAPTIVE DESIGNS BASED ON COMPARATIVE DATA
This section discusses different types of clinical trial designs in which there are prespecified
rules for stopping the trial or modifying the design based on interim analyses of comparative
data. Such analyses are sometimes called unblinded or unmasked analyses. There are a few
important concepts that are generally applicable to the sections that follow. First, in contrast to
adaptations based on non-comparative data, adaptations based on comparative data often directly
increase the Type I error probability and induce bias in treatment effect estimates. Therefore,
 13 See additional discussion in the FDA guidance for industry Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials to Support
Approval of Human Drugs and Biological Products (March 2019).
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
11
statistical methods should take into account the adaptive trial design. Second, when adaptations
are based on comparative interim analyses, additional steps are critical to ensure appropriate trial
conduct. This is discussed in more detail in section VII. Finally, stopping or adaptation rules can
be specified on a variety of different scales, such as the estimate of treatment effect, fixed sample
p-value, conditional probability of trial success, Bayesian posterior probability that the drug is
effective, or Bayesian predictive probability of trial success. The choice of scale is relatively
unimportant as long as the operating characteristics14 of the designs are adequately evaluated.
A. Group Sequential Designs
Group sequential trials allow for one or more prospectively planned interim analyses of
comparative data with prespecified criteria for stopping the trial. The inclusion of sequential
analyses can provide ethical and efficiency advantages by reducing the expected sample size and
duration of clinical trials and by accelerating the approval of safe and effective new treatments.
For example, a group sequential design with a single interim analysis and a commonly used
stopping boundary for efficacy can reduce the expected sample size of the trial by roughly 15
percent relative to a comparable fixed sample trial.
15
Group sequential designs may include rules for stopping the trial when there is sufficient
evidence of efficacy to support regulatory decision-making or when there is evidence that the
trial is unlikely to demonstrate efficacy, which is often called stopping for futility. Performing
each of the multiple statistical hypothesis tests for efficacy in a group sequential trial at the
conventional .025 one-sided significance level would inflate the Type I error probability and,
therefore, increase the chance of erroneous conclusions. A variety of methods exist to determine
appropriate stopping boundaries for the interim and final analyses such that the Type I error
probability is appropriately controlled. For example, the O’Brien-Fleming approach tends to
require very persuasive early results to stop the trial for efficacy (O’Brien and Fleming 1979).
Alternative approaches such as that proposed by Pocock require less persuasive early results and
have higher probabilities of early stopping (Pocock 1977). These and other approaches rely on
prospective planning of both the number of interim analyses and the specific sample size or
number of event targets at which those analyses will occur.
The Lan-DeMets alpha-spending16 approach accommodates varying levels of evidence for early
stopping by specifying a function for how the Type I error probability is spent throughout the
trial, while also allowing for flexibility in determining the number and timing of interim analyses
(Lan and DeMets 1983). The flexibility in timing helps accommodate scheduling of monitoring
meetings at specific calendar times rather than at specific interim sample sizes or number of
 14 Trial operating characteristics are the properties of the trial with a given design. For example, properties of interest
might include Type I error probability; power; expected, minimum, and maximum sample size; bias of treatment
effect estimates; and coverage of confidence intervals (i.e., the probability the confidence interval would include the
true treatment effect if the clinical trial were repeated many times). 15 A group sequential design with an interim analysis that occurs when outcome information is available on half of
the maximum number of patients and that utilizes an O’Brien-Fleming stopping boundary for efficacy, reduces the
expected sample size of the trial by roughly 15 percent if the alternative hypothesis (at which there is 90 percent
power) is true, as compared to a design with a single analysis planned when all patients have been enrolled and had
their outcomes ascertained.
16 The Type I error probability of a clinical trial is often denoted by the Greek letter α (alpha).
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
12
event targets. The flexibility in the number of analyses can help accommodate faster- or slowerthan-expected enrollment rates. If, however, interim analysis times are chosen based on
accumulating comparative results, the Type I error probability can be inflated. For example,
adjusting the next interim analysis to occur sooner than originally planned because the current
interim analysis result is close to the stopping boundary would not be appropriate. Because of
this potential issue with the Lan-DeMets alpha-spending approach, sponsors should put in place
additional safeguards such as a targeted number of interim analyses and an approximate schedule
for their occurrence, as well as a decision framework for changing the number or timing of
analyses after the trial has begun. The decision framework should be based on information that is
statistically independent of the estimated treatment effect (e.g., enrollment rate or scheduling
logistics). For example, the decision framework could specify semi-annual interim analyses, with
additional analyses planned if enrollment is considerably slower than a prespecified target.
There are a number of additional considerations for ensuring the appropriate design, conduct,
and analysis of a group sequential trial. First, for group sequential methods to be valid, it is
important to adhere to the prospective analytic plan and terminate the trial for efficacy only if the
stopping criteria are met. Second, guidelines for stopping the trial early for futility should be
implemented appropriately. Trial designs often employ nonbinding futility rules, in that the
futility stopping criteria are guidelines that may or may not be followed, depending on the
totality of the available interim results. The addition of such nonbinding futility guidelines to a
fixed sample trial, or to a trial with appropriate group sequential stopping rules for efficacy, does
not increase the Type I error probability and is often appropriate. Alternatively, a group
sequential design may include binding futility rules, in that the trial should always stop if the
futility criteria are met. Binding futility rules can provide some advantages in efficacy analyses
(e.g., a relaxed threshold for a determination of efficacy), but the Type I error probability is
controlled only if the stopping rules are followed. Therefore, if a trial continues despite meeting
prespecified binding futility rules, the Agency will likely consider that trial to have failed to
provide evidence of efficacy, regardless of the outcome at the final analysis. Note also that some
DMCs might prefer the flexibility of nonbinding futility guidelines.
Third, a trial terminated early for efficacy will have a smaller sample size for the evaluation of
safety and potentially important secondary efficacy endpoints. Therefore, early stopping for
efficacy is typically reserved for circumstances where there are compelling ethical reasons (e.g.,
the primary endpoint is survival or irreversible morbidity) or where the stopping rules require
highly persuasive results in terms of both the magnitude of the estimated treatment effect and the
strength of evidence of an effect. In some cases, there may be a limit on how early group
sequential interim analyses should occur or whether they should occur at all because of a
minimum sample size expected for a reliable evaluation of safety. This is often true, for example,
in preventive vaccine trials.
Finally, conventional fixed sample estimates of the treatment effect such as the sample mean
tend to be biased toward greater effects than the true value when a group sequential design is
used. Similarly, confidence intervals do not have the desired nominal coverage probabilities.
Therefore, a variety of methods exist to compute estimates and confidence intervals that
appropriately adjust for the group sequential stopping rules (Jennison and Turnbull 1999). To
ensure the scientific and statistical credibility of trial results and facilitate important benefit-risk 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
13
considerations, an approach for calculating estimates and confidence intervals that appropriately
accounts for the group sequential design should be prospectively planned and used for reporting
results.
B. Adaptations to the Sample Size
One adaptive approach is to prospectively plan modifications to the sample size based on interim
estimates of nuisance parameters from analyses that utilize treatment assignment information.
For example, there are techniques that estimate the variance of a continuous outcome
incorporating estimates of the variances on the individual treatment arms, or that estimate the
probability of a binary outcome on the control arm based on only data from that arm. These
approaches generally have no effect, or a limited effect, on the Type I error probability.
However, unlike adaptations based on non-comparative pooled interim estimates of nuisance
parameters (section IV.), these adaptations involve treatment assignment information and,
therefore, require additional steps to maintain trial integrity (section VII.).
Another adaptive approach is to prospectively plan modifications to the sample size based on
comparative interim results (i.e., interim estimates of the treatment effect). This is often called
unblinded sample size adaptation or unblinded sample size re-estimation. Sample size
determination depends on many factors, such as the event rate in the control arm or the
variability of the primary outcome, the Type I error probability, the hypothesized treatment
effect size, and the desired power to detect this effect size. In section IV., we described potential
adaptations based on non-comparative interim results to address uncertainty at the design stage
in the variability of the outcome or the event rate on the control arm. In contrast, designs with
sample size adaptations based on comparative interim results might be used when there is
considerable uncertainty about the true treatment effect size. Similar to a group sequential trial, a
design with sample size adaptations based on comparative interim results can provide adequate
power under a range of plausible effect sizes, and therefore, can help ensure that a trial maintains
adequate power if the true magnitude of treatment effect is less than what was hypothesized, but
still clinically meaningful. Furthermore, the addition of prespecified rules for modifying the
sample size can provide efficiency advantages with respect to certain operating characteristics in
some settings.
Indiscriminately modifying the sample size of a trial without proper adjustment can inflate the
Type I error probability. Consider a design with one interim analysis at which the interim
estimate of treatment effect is used to modify the final sample size. If one carries out a
hypothesis test at the end of the trial at the conventional .025 significance level, the Type I error
probability can be more than doubled (Proschan and Hunsberger 1995).
17 Therefore, one of a
variety of available methods should be used to appropriately control the Type I error probability
with this type of adaptive design. For example, hypothesis testing approaches have been
developed based on combining test statistics or p-values from the different stages of the trial in a
preplanned manner or through preservation of the conditional Type I error probability (e.g.,
Bauer and Kohne 1994; Fisher 1998; Cui et al. 1999; Denne 2001; Müller and Schäfer 2001;
Chow and Chang 2011). These approaches also accommodate adaptations to aspects of the
 17 This means that even use of the Bonferroni method to adjust for the two analyses conducted would not be
adequate.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
14
sampling plan other than the maximum sample size, such as the number and spacing of future
interim analyses.
The additional considerations regarding adherence to the adaptation plan, the evaluation of
safety, and the estimation of treatment effects that were discussed in section V.A. on group
sequential designs also apply to designs with sample size adaptations based on comparative data.
Of note, prospective planning should include prespecification of not only the statistical
hypothesis testing method that will be used, but also the rule governing the sample size
modification. Finally, there are additional challenges in maintaining trial integrity in the presence
of sample size adaptations. For example, sample size modification rules are often based on
maintaining the conditional probability of a statistically significant treatment effect at the end of
the trial (often called the conditional power) at or near some desired level. In this scenario,
knowledge of the adaptation rule and the adaptively chosen sample size allows a relatively
straightforward back-calculation of the interim estimate of treatment effect. Therefore, additional
steps should be taken to limit personnel with this detailed knowledge so that trial integrity can be
maintained. See section VII. for additional discussion.
The principles discussed in this section also apply to trials with time-to-event endpoints where
the adaptive design allows prospectively planned modifications to the total number of events
based on comparative interim results. However, there are some special additional considerations
in such settings that are discussed further in section VI.C.
C. Adaptations to the Patient Population (e.g., Adaptive Enrichment)
In many settings, it may be expected that the treatment effect will be greater in a certain subset of
the trial population. This subpopulation could be defined, for example, by a demographic
characteristic or by a genetic or pathophysiologic marker that is thought to be related to the
drug’s mechanism of action. In such a setting, consideration could be given to a design that
allows adaptive modifications to the patient population based on comparative interim results. For
example, a trial might enroll subjects from the overall trial population up through an interim
analysis, at which time a decision will be made based on prespecified criteria whether to
continue enrollment in the overall population or to restrict future enrollment to the targeted
subpopulation. Data accumulated both before and after the interim analysis may be combined to
draw inference on the treatment effect in the targeted group. This type of design, often called an
adaptive enrichment18 design, can provide advantages over non-adaptive designs. In particular,
such an adaptive design can provide greater power19 at the same sample size as a non-adaptive
fixed sample design in the overall population. Furthermore, unlike a trial restricting enrollment
to the targeted subpopulation, the adaptive design allows an evaluation of the experimental
treatment in the non-targeted (complementary) subpopulation.
A design that allows adaptive modifications to the patient population often involves both (1)
modification of design features, such as the enrolled population and the population evaluated in
 18 The term adaptive enrichment is used, for example, in the FDA guidance for industry Enrichment Strategies for
Clinical Trials to Support Approval of Human Drugs and Biological Products (March 2019). 19 Power in this context could be defined, for example, as the probability of successfully identifying a true treatment
effect in either the targeted subpopulation or the overall population.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
15
the primary analysis, based on comparative interim results; and (2) hypothesis tests in multiple
populations, such as a targeted subpopulation and the overall population. Therefore, statistical
hypothesis testing methods should account for both sources of multiplicity. For example, one
approach is to combine test statistics or p-values from the different stages of the trial in a
preplanned manner, while also using an appropriate multiple testing procedure (Wassmer and
Brannath 2016). Such an approach could potentially also accommodate adaptations to the sample
size or to the proportion of patients enrolled from a particular subpopulation (e.g., increasing the
proportion in a subset rather than completely restricting enrollment to that subset).
There are a number of important considerations beyond those previously discussed for group
sequential designs and designs with adaptive modifications to the sample size. First, in the case
of an adaptive enrichment design, the proposed adaptive modifications to the patient population
should be motivated by results from previous (e.g., early-phase) trials and/or strong biologic
plausibility that the benefit-risk profile will be most favorable in a particular subpopulation.
Second, if the baseline characteristic that is thought to modify the treatment effect is not binary
in nature, any threshold or thresholds used to define subpopulations should be appropriately
justified. Third, the identification of the targeted subpopulation may depend on the use of an in
vitro diagnostic device. In this scenario, the diagnostic device should have adequate performance
characteristics.20 Finally, the extent to which the trial should be designed to characterize the
treatment effect in the complementary subpopulation may depend on a number of factors, such
as the pathophysiologic or empirical rationale for enrichment, the toxicities of the drug, the
distribution of the baseline marker defining the subpopulations, the justification for a threshold
defining subpopulations, and the potential for off-label use in the complementary subpopulation
if approval is limited to the targeted subpopulation.
D. Adaptations to Treatment Arm Selection
Another adaptive approach is to prospectively plan modifications to the treatment arms included
in the clinical trial based on comparative interim results. Modifications could include adding or
terminating arms. This kind of design has often been used in early-phase exploratory doseranging trials. An adaptive dose-ranging trial might begin with several doses and incorporate
interim analyses based on comparative data to select doses for continued evaluation, with the
goal of providing improved characterization of the dose-response relationship relative to a nonadaptive design and allowing selection of an optimal dose or doses for evaluation in future
confirmatory trials. For example, the continual reassessment method (CRM) is an approach to
adaptively escalate the doses evaluated in early-phase trials based on observed toxicities in order
to reliably and efficiently estimate the maximum tolerated dose for a new drug (Le Tourneau et
al. 2009). Adaptive treatment arm selection is also possible in trials intended to provide
substantial evidence of effectiveness. For example, in a setting where it is plausible that either or
both of two doses might have a favorable benefit-risk profile, an adaptive design with sequential
analyses allowing early termination of one of the dose arms can meet its scientific objective in a
 20 See the FDA guidance for industry and FDA staff In Vitro Companion Diagnostic Devices (August 2014) and the
FDA draft guidance for industry and FDA staff Principles for Codevelopment of an In Vitro Companion Diagnostic
Device with a Therapeutic Product (July 2016). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking
on this topic. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at
https://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
16
more efficient manner than alternative non-adaptive designs. Such an adaptive design could in
principle allow interim modifications to additional aspects of the design, such as the number of
additional patients that will be enrolled (the sample size) and the randomization ratio for
treatment arms carried forward.
For trials intended to provide substantial evidence of effectiveness, statistical hypothesis testing
methods should account for the adaptive selection of a best dose or doses from among the
multiple doses evaluated in the trial, as well as any additional adaptive modifications, such as the
potential to stop the trial early or to modify future sample sizes. In the simple case of a design
with more than one dose that includes interim analyses to potentially stop enrollment for a
particular dose for efficacy or futility, typical group sequential testing methods can be used,
along with some multiple testing approach to control the Type I error probability across the
multiple doses evaluated. If the design allows for additional adaptations such as modifications to
the sample size, methods such as those described for sample size and population adaptations
should be used. As with other adaptive designs, prospective planning is important and should
include prespecification of not only the testing method, but also the adaptation rule for selecting
treatment arms and for any other potential interim modifications. In general, seamless designs
that incorporate both dose selection and confirmation of efficacy of a selected dose (based on
data from the entire trial) can be considered if the principles outlined in section III. are followed.
A special case of adaptive treatment arm selection occurs in the context of an adaptive platform
trial designed to compare more than one experimental treatment against an appropriate control
for a disease (e.g., Woodcock and LaVange 2017). Two features of these trials often
incorporated for efficiency gains are use of a common control arm and use of prospectively
planned adaptations to select promising treatments at interim analyses for continued study.
Because these trials may involve investigational agents from more than one sponsor, may be
conducted for an unstated length of time, and often involve complex adaptations, they should
generally involve extensive discussion with FDA.
E. Adaptations to Patient Allocation
This section considers two types of adaptations to patient allocation: adaptations based on
comparative baseline characteristic data and adaptations based on comparative outcome data.
The first type is covariate-adaptive treatment assignment, a technique in which a patient’s
treatment assignment depends in part or entirely on his or her baseline characteristics and the
baseline characteristics and treatment assignments of previously enrolled patients. Such an
approach is used to promote balance between treatment groups on baseline covariates. One wellknown example of covariate-adaptive randomization is minimization (Pocock and Simon 1975),
which involves assigning each consecutive patient to treatment in such a way that differences
between treatment groups on potentially prognostic covariates are minimized. Covariate-adaptive
treatment assignment techniques do not directly increase the Type I error probability when
analyzed with the appropriate methodologies (generally randomization or permutation tests).
These techniques can increase the predictability of treatment assignment relative to simple
randomization, but this predictability can be mitigated with an additional random component to
prevent perfectly deterministic treatment assignment.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
17
The second type is response-adaptive randomization, an adaptive feature in which the chance of
a newly-enrolled subject being assigned to a treatment arm varies over the course of the trial
based on accumulating outcome data for subjects previously enrolled. There are a variety of
response-adaptive randomization techniques, some of which go by names such as play the
winner designs. Statistical, ethical, and pragmatic rationales are all sometimes given for using
response-adaptive randomization. In statistical terms, response-adaptive techniques can in some
circumstances minimize the variance of the test statistics, leading to shorter trials, smaller sample
sizes, and/or greater statistical power. The ethical argument for response-adaptive randomization
is that this design feature can lead to more trial subjects being assigned to the more promising of
the treatment arms. Finally, a pragmatic argument is that clinical trials with this design feature
can be appealing to potential participants, thereby increasing speed and ease of accrual. Note that
the arguments for response-adaptive randomization are controversial, and some researchers feel
that inconclusive interim results should not be used to alter randomization in an ongoing trial
and/or that statistical efficiency is not substantially improved in two-arm trials to justify
adjusting randomization ratios (Hey and Kimmelman 2015, and accompanying commentaries).
Response-adaptive randomization alone does not generally increase the Type I error probability
of a trial when used with appropriate statistical analysis techniques. It is important to ensure that
the analysis methods appropriately take the design of the trial into account. Finally, as with many
other adaptive techniques based on outcome data, response-adaptive randomization works best in
trials with relatively short-term ascertainment of outcomes.
F. Adaptations to Endpoint Selection
This is a design that allows adaptive modification to the choice of primary endpoint based on
comparative interim results. Such a design might be motivated by uncertainty about the treatment
effect sizes on multiple patient outcomes that would be considered acceptable primary endpoints
by FDA. As with other adaptive designs, the adaptation rule should be prespecified, and
statistical hypothesis testing methods should account for the adaptive endpoint selection.
Because endpoint selection involves important clinical considerations, early discussion with the
FDA review division is recommended when such designs are being considered.
G. Adaptations to Multiple Design Features
It is possible for a clinical trial to be more complex by combining two or more of the adaptive
design features discussed in this guidance. The same general principles apply to these complex
designs as to simpler adaptive designs. It may be particularly difficult to estimate Type I error
probability and other operating characteristics for designs that incorporate multiple adaptive
features. Clinical trial simulations (section VI.A.) will often be critical to evaluate the trial
design.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
18
VI. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS AND TOPICS
A. Simulations in Adaptive Design Planning
Clinical trial simulations often play a critical role in planning and designing clinical trials in
general and are particularly important for adaptive trials. Simulations can be used, for example,
to select the number and timing of interim analyses, or to determine the appropriate critical value
of a test statistic for declaring efficacy or futility. Simulations can also be useful for comparing
the performance of alternative designs. A major use of simulations in adaptive trial design is to
estimate trial operating characteristics and to demonstrate that these operating characteristics
meet desired levels.
Traditional non-adaptive clinical trials have generally relied on statistical theory to ensure that
Type I error probability is controlled at a desired level and to obtain estimates of the power of the
trial. In the simplest case, when testing a single endpoint in a fixed-sample size clinical trial
design, it can typically be shown that the final test statistic has a certain asymptotic probability
distribution,21 and inference and operating characteristics can then be based on the properties of
this distribution. For many adaptive designs, such as traditional group sequential designs, it is
similarly possible to derive asymptotic probability distributions mathematically and base
inference and planning on those distributions.
For some adaptive designs, however, it either is not possible to derive relevant distributions of
test statistics, or the distributions themselves are not computationally tractable. This tends to be
the case for more complex adaptive designs, such as designs that adapt several elements or
designs that use predictive probability models to determine analysis time points. In these cases,
trial operating characteristics can often be estimated by means of clinical trial simulations. For
example, for Type I error probability and power, the basic logic of this approach is to simulate
many instances of the trial based on various assumptions and evaluate the proportion of
simulations that would have met the predetermined bar for supporting a conclusion of
effectiveness under each set of assumptions.
For simulations intended to estimate Type I error probability, hypothetical clinical trials would
be simulated under a series of assumptions compatible with the null hypothesis. For each set of
such assumptions, the proportion of simulated trials that led to a false positive conclusion would
be taken as an estimate of Type I error probability under those assumptions. In almost all cases,
there are an infinite number of scenarios potentially compatible with the null hypothesis.
Identifying which scenarios should be considered when estimating Type I error probability can
be challenging and may rely on a combination of medical and mathematical considerations.
These scenarios may include varying assumptions about nuisance parameters. These nuisance
parameters can include statistical parameters, such as the variance of a symptom scale or the
probability of response in the control group, and also operational parameters, such as the speed
of subject accrual to a trial. For example, consider a trial comparing 2-year mortality rates
between an experimental therapy and placebo in an oncology indication with very low (for
 21 The asymptotic distribution of a test statistic is the approximate probability distribution of that statistic when the
sample size gets large.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
19
example, median 6-month) survival. The null hypothesis is equal mortality rates in the two arms.
Possible scenarios consistent with this null hypothesis would include equal mortality rates of 5
percent, of 50 percent, of 99 percent, of 99.01 percent, and so on. While it is impossible to
simulate every scenario compatible with the null hypothesis, it may be possible to determine a
limited set of scenarios that adequately represent the plausible range of potential false positives.
In this example, medical experts might feel comfortable ruling out any scenario with a 2-year
placebo mortality rate below 75 percent, for instance, based on literature and clinical experience
with the disease. Mathematical considerations can also play a role in determining which
scenarios need to be simulated to estimate Type I error probability. It could be possible to argue
that certain scenarios necessarily have lower Type I error probability than other scenarios based
on monotonicity.
In many cases, it will not be possible to estimate Type I error probability for every set of null
assumptions even after taking clinical and mathematical considerations into account. It is
common to perform simulations on a grid of plausible values and argue based on the totality of
the evidence from the simulations that maximal Type I error probability likely does not exceed a
desired level across the range covered by the grid. In the example above, simulations might be
performed at placebo and experimental treatment mortality rates equal to 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, and
99 percent. If, in each of these scenarios, estimated Type I error probability was below .025, that
could be considered sufficient evidence that Type I error probability was adequately controlled
for all scenarios with placebo mortality between 75 and 99 percent. However, with any approach,
the evaluation at the end of the trial should consider whether the statistical inference is
appropriate and the conclusions are justified in light of the accumulated information about the
nuisance parameters. In the example, if the observed placebo mortality rate was unexpectedly 50
percent, additional simulations would be required.
Another complicating factor is the presence of multiple endpoints. If a sponsor would like to test
multiple clinical endpoints and control the familywise Type I error probability across all of these
endpoints, then simulations of all endpoints for each subject under null hypothesis scenarios
should be performed, which could in turn require knowledge of the correlational structure of the
multiple endpoints. This can be too complex an issue to address in clinical trial simulation. In
some cases, however, it can be argued that assuming independence among multiple endpoints
will provide an upper bound on the Type I error probability. This is true, for instance, when
using the Bonferroni or Holm approach to control for multiple testing.22
It is important to consider the precision of simulated operating characteristics, which depends on
the number of simulated trials (iterations). The number of iterations should be sufficient to
facilitate an understanding and review of the proposed clinical trial design. Using 100,000
iterations per scenario, for instance, ensures a 95% confidence interval for estimated Type I error
probability with a width of approximately ± 0.1%, which would be sufficient in most cases. This
will allow very small differences in estimated Type I error probability to be identified, which
may be important in some cases. In general, it is also preferable to use different random seeds for
different simulation scenarios; this helps avoid consistently atypical results across scenarios. In
 22 Additional discussion on the Bonferroni, Holm, and other multiple testing approaches can be found in the FDA
draft guidance for industry Multiple Endpoints in Clinical Trials (January 2017). When final, this guidance will
represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
20
some cases, fewer iterations might suffice to evaluate Type I error probability. For example, it
might be sufficient to use 10,000 iterations if a particularly fine grid of scenarios is explored and
every scenario has an estimated Type I error probability below the desired level. Also, a smaller
number of simulations can generally be used if the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval
for the Type I error probability estimate is below the desired level.
Clinical trial simulations can also be used to estimate power and other relevant operating
characteristics, such as expected sample size, expected duration, and bias in treatment effect
estimates, for complex adaptive designs. Similar considerations apply to these estimates as to
Type I error probability estimates. The level of precision expected for Type I error probability
estimates, however, is generally not needed for other operating characteristics, so it is usually
appropriate to investigate a sparser set of scenarios using smaller numbers of iterations for power
and other operating characteristics.
B. Bayesian Adaptive Designs
The term Bayesian adaptive design has been used to refer to a wide variety of clinical trial
designs that use Bayesian statistical reasoning and/or calculations in various ways (Berry, et al.
2010). Some examples of Bayesian adaptive design features are:
• Use of predictive statistical modeling, possibly incorporating information external to a trial,
to govern the timing and decision rules for interim analyses
• Use of assumed dose-response relationships to govern dose escalation and selection
• Explicit borrowing of information from external sources, e.g., previous trials, natural history
studies, and registries, via informative prior distributions to improve the efficiency of a trial
• Use of posterior probability distributions to form trial success criteria
In general, the same principles apply to Bayesian adaptive designs as to adaptive designs without
Bayesian features. Trial designs that use Bayesian adaptive features may rely on frequentist or
Bayesian inferential procedures to support conclusions of drug effectiveness. Frequentist
inference is characterized by hypothesis tests performed with known power and Type I error
probabilities and is often used along with Bayesian computational techniques that rely on noninformative prior distributions. Bayesian inference is characterized by drawing conclusions
based directly on posterior probabilities that a drug is effective and has important differences
from frequentist inference (Berger and Wolpert 1988). For trials that use Bayesian inference with
informative prior distributions, such as trials that explicitly borrow external information,
Bayesian statistical properties are more informative than Type I error probability. FDA’s draft
guidance for industry Interacting with the FDA on Complex Innovative Clinical Trial Designs
for Drugs and Biological Products (September 2019) provides recommendations on what
information should be submitted to FDA to facilitate the review of trial design proposals that use
Bayesian inference.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
21
One common feature of many Bayesian adaptive designs is the use of simulations (section VI.A.)
to estimate trial operating characteristics. Because many Bayesian methods themselves rely on
extensive computations (Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods and other techniques),
trial simulations can be particularly resource-intensive for Bayesian adaptive designs.
C. Adaptations in Time-to-Event Settings
There are certain additional considerations specific to adaptive trials in which the primary
endpoint is the time to occurrence of a certain event, such as time to death or time to tumor
response. In these trials, power is dependent on the number of events rather than the number of
subjects. It is therefore common to target a fixed number of events rather than a fixed number of
subjects. Sample size adjustment in these trials has the purpose of modifying the number of
events and, therefore, may take the form of modifying the number of subjects, the length of the
follow-up period for each subject, or both. In addition, interim analyses in time-to-event settings
may utilize information on surrogate or intermediate outcomes, and use of such approaches
should be appropriately accounted for in the analysis (see next section for further discussion).
D. Adaptations Based on a Potential Surrogate or Intermediate Endpoint
Most adaptive designs rely on ongoing monitoring of the primary endpoint or endpoints.
However, in cases where a potential surrogate or intermediate endpoint23 exists that is correlated
with the primary endpoint, and the primary endpoint itself is difficult or slow to ascertain, an
adaptive design can be based on the potential surrogate or intermediate endpoint. For example,
consider a trial of a treatment for a cancer where the primary endpoint is overall survival, median
survival time is well over 2 years, and tumor response (e.g., complete or partial response) may be
anticipated to predict clinical benefit. In this case, it may be sensible to base sample size
reassessment or other adaptive features on tumor response rather than mortality. The final
evaluation of efficacy would still be based on the primary endpoint (overall survival in this
example). Similarly, an adaptive design could be based on a 2-month measurement of patient
symptoms when the primary endpoint is the assessment of the same symptom outcome at 6
months. Some approaches involve assumptions about the relationship between the potential
surrogate or intermediate endpoint and the primary endpoint, and any evaluation of Type I error
probability or other trial operating characteristics should consider the possible effects of
misspecification of this relationship. Other approaches do not rely on assumptions about the
relationship between the potential surrogate or intermediate endpoint and the primary endpoint
(Jenkins et al. 2011; Irle et al. 2012; Magirr et al. 2016).
In adaptive design trials with time-to-event or longitudinal outcomes, using surrogate or
intermediate outcome information at the interim analysis can increase the chance of an erroneous
conclusion of effectiveness unless appropriate statistical analysis techniques are used. For
example, it has been noted (Bauer and Posch 2004) that in trials with time-to-event endpoints,
using surrogate information at the time of an interim analysis from subjects for whom events
 23 For the purposes of this guidance, a potential surrogate endpoint refers to an endpoint that may be a candidate
surrogate endpoint, a reasonably likely surrogate endpoint, or a validated surrogate endpoint, and an intermediate
endpoint refers to an intermediate clinical endpoint. See The Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools (BEST)
Resource glossary for definitions of these additional terms.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
22
have not been observed to help predict future event times can lead to Type I error probability
inflation. Additional safeguards such as limitation of access to comparative interim results and
prespecification of an adaptation rule that relies on only the primary endpoint can help increase
confidence that such unplanned approaches were not carried out. See section VII. for additional
discussion.
E. Secondary Endpoints
Most clinical trials have one or more secondary endpoints specified in addition to the primary
endpoint,24 and adaptive designs can have consequences for the analysis of these secondary
endpoints. Consider group sequential designs: It is widely understood that multiple analyses of
the primary endpoint can inflate the Type I error probability and lead to biased estimation of
treatment effects on that endpoint. Less well appreciated, however, is that Type I error
probability inflation and biased estimation can also apply to any endpoint correlated with the
primary endpoint (Hung et al. 2007). Most secondary endpoints in clinical trials are correlated
with the primary endpoint, often very highly correlated. For some designs such as group
sequential approaches, methods exist to adjust secondary endpoint analyses for the adaptation
(Glimm et al. 2010). Without such adjustment, appropriate caution should be applied in
interpreting secondary endpoint results.
F. Safety Considerations
Although adaptive design clinical trial planning often focuses on outcomes intended to
demonstrate effectiveness, safety objectives also play a critical role. First, there are cases where
adaptations are planned on safety rather than efficacy endpoints. One example is early-phase
dose-ranging trials in oncology that attempt to identify a maximum tolerated dose using the
CRM or other adaptive techniques. Another example is the Rotavirus Efficacy and Safety Trial
(REST) that formed a primary basis for the 2006 approval of a rotavirus vaccine, RotaTeq
(Heyse et al. 2008). REST was a group sequential trial designed to evaluate the risk of
intussusception, a serious gastrointestinal condition, in up to 100,000 infants, of whom a subset
was used for an efficacy evaluation.
Second, the acquisition of sufficient safety information to support product approval is usually a
major concern in trials that adapt on efficacy endpoints. Trials with early stopping for strong
evidence of effectiveness still need to collect sufficient safety data to allow for a reliable benefitrisk evaluation of the investigational drug and to inform labeling. For this reason, the size of a
safety database should be taken into account when planning the number, timing, and stopping
boundaries of interim analyses. In particular, the timing of interim analyses may be restricted by
the expectation for a minimum number of patients studied and a minimum length of exposure to
ensure a reliable safety evaluation.
Finally, it is important to consider whether certain adaptations can potentially put trial subjects at
unnecessary risk. This can be a concern in particular in early-phase dose-escalation trials.
 24 See the FDA draft guidance for industry Multiple Endpoints in Clinical Trials (January 2017) for a discussion of
general considerations in the evaluation of multiple endpoints in clinical trials. When final, this guidance will
represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
23
Adaptation rules that allow for successive cohorts of subjects to receive quickly escalating doses
could lead to subjects receiving unsafe high doses that would have been avoided by a design with
more gradual dose-escalation. This is particularly true when there is a possibility for serious
adverse events with a delayed onset of action of the investigational drug. For this reason, the
speed of escalation should be considered in choosing a specific adaptation rule in an adaptive
dose-escalation trial.
G. Adaptive Design in Early-Phase Exploratory Trials
Exploratory trials in drug development are intended to obtain information on a wide range of
aspects of drug use that guide later decisions on how best to study a drug (e.g., choices of dose,
regimen, population, concomitant treatments, or endpoints). There can be a series of separate
early trials in which different aspects of the drug’s effect are sequentially examined or a more
complex trial attempting to evaluate multiple different aspects simultaneously. The flexibilities
offered by adaptive designs may be particularly useful in this exploratory period of development
by allowing initial evaluation of a broad range of choices. Using adaptive designs in early
development trials to learn about various aspects of dosing, exposure, pharmacodynamics,
variability in patient response, or response modifiers offers sponsors opportunities that can
improve the designs and possibly the chances of success of later-phase trials.
Although exploratory trials do not generally have the same regulatory expectations as trials
intended to provide substantial evidence of effectiveness in terms of statistical rigor and
operating characteristics, it is still important to be aware of the potential for erroneous
conclusions in exploratory trials. For example, flaws in an exploratory multiple-dose comparison
trial could lead to suboptimal dose selection for a subsequent confirmatory trial, with a resultant
failure to show effectiveness or a finding of unnecessarily excessive toxicity. Thus, following
good principles of adaptive trial design for exploratory trials can decrease the risk of adversely
affecting the development program.
H. Unplanned Design Changes Based on Comparative Interim Results
When trial data are examined in a comparative interim analysis, data analyses that were not
prospectively planned as the basis for adaptations may unexpectedly appear to indicate that some
specific design change (e.g., restricting analyses to some population subset, dropping a treatment
arm, adjusting sample size, modifying the primary endpoint, or changing analysis methods) is
ethically important or might increase the potential for a statistically significant final trial result.
For example, unexpected lack of treatment adherence in one arm of a multiple-arm trial might
motivate dropping that treatment arm. Such revisions based on non-prospectively planned
analyses can create difficulty in controlling the Type I error probability and in interpreting the
trial results. Sponsors are strongly discouraged from implementing such changes without first
meeting with FDA to discuss the changes being considered, provided patient safety is not
compromised.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
24
I. Design Changes Based on Information From a Source External to the Trial
Unpredictable events that occur outside of an ongoing trial during the course of drug
development programs may provide important new information relevant to the ongoing trial and
may motivate revisions to the trial design. For example, there may be unexpected safety
information arising from a different study (perhaps in a different patient population), new
information regarding the disease pathophysiology or patient characterization that identifies
disease subtypes, new information on pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamic responses to the
drug, or other information that might have led to a different trial design had the information been
known when the trial was designed. When this occurs, there may be reason to revise the trial
design in some manner rather than, for example, terminating the existing trial and starting a new
trial with a modified design. In cases of serious safety concerns, and particularly in large trials,
revising the trial design may be critical to allowing the trial to continue. Well-motivated design
changes based on only information external to the trial do not affect the validity of statistical
inference and will often be considered acceptable to the Agency. Practically, it is very
challenging to ensure that a decision to modify a trial was based entirely on external information
except in cases where the sponsor is completely blinded to comparative interim results. This is
one reason why limitation of access to comparative interim results is so important. See section
VII. for additional discussion.
VII. MAINTAINING TRIAL INTEGRITY
In general, it is strongly recommended that access to comparative interim results be limited to
individuals with relevant expertise who are independent of the personnel involved in conducting
or managing the trial and have a need to know. Ensuring that patients, investigators and their
staff, and sponsor personnel do not have access to comparative interim results serves two
important purposes. First, it provides the greatest confidence that potential unplanned design
modifications are not motivated in any way by accumulating data. For example, knowledge of
comparative interim results by trial management personnel may make it difficult for regulators to
determine whether a protocol amendment seemingly well-motivated by information external to
the trial was influenced, in any way, by access to accumulating comparative data. If it is thought
that design changes may have been influenced by comparative interim results, appropriate
statistical methods to control the chance of erroneous conclusions and to produce reliable
estimates may not be known, may be challenging to implement, or may greatly reduce the
efficiency of the trial.
Second, limitation of access to comparative interim results provides the greatest assurance of
quality trial conduct. Knowledge of accumulating data by trial investigators can adversely affect
patient accrual, adherence, retention, or endpoint assessment, compromising the ability of the
trial to reliably achieve its objective in a timely manner (Fleming et al. 2008). Issues with trial
conduct are difficult to predict and generally impossible to adjust for in statistical analyses.
Therefore, a clinical trial with an adaptive design should include rigorous planning, careful
implementation, and comprehensive documentation of approaches taken to maintain
confidentiality of comparative interim results and to preserve trial integrity.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
25
There are multiple potential models for implementing a plan for the sponsor to limit access to
comparative data in an adaptive design trial. A dedicated independent adaptation body could be
established, exclusive of a DMC, if one exists. Alternatively, the adaptive decision-making role
could be assigned to the DMC, although its primary responsibility should remain to ensure
patient safety and trial integrity.
25 This latter model might best be reserved for group sequential
designs and other straightforward adaptive designs with simple adaptation algorithms. There are
arguments favoring both approaches. For example, use of separate bodies might facilitate the
inclusion of more relevant expertise on each committee and allow the DMC to most effectively
focus on its primary responsibilities. On the other hand, use of a single body such as a DMC for
both purposes avoids the logistical challenges of determining information sharing with and
interactions between multiple monitoring groups.
Regardless of the approach chosen, the committee tasked with making adaptation
recommendations should have members with the proper expertise, including a statistician or
statisticians who are knowledgeable about the adaptation methodology, the data monitoring plan,
and the decision rules. Furthermore, the responsibility of this committee should be to make
adaptation recommendations or decisions based on appropriately implementing a carefully
designed and prespecified adaptation plan, not to identify potential design aspects to adapt after
reviewing comparative interim results. Therefore, it is important for the DMC and/or adaptation
committee to be involved at the design stage in extensive discussions with the sponsor about
hypothetical scenarios and whether actions dictated by the adaptation plan would be considered
reasonable by all involved parties.
Safeguards should be in place to ensure that the persons responsible for preparing and reporting
interim analysis results to the DMC or the adaptation committee are physically and logistically
separated from the personnel tasked with managing and conducting the trial, whether those
personnel reside within the sponsor organization, another organization such as a contract
research organization (CRO), or both. This practice will help ensure that persons involved in the
day-to-day management and conduct of the trial do not have access to treatment assignments or
comparative results, even inadvertently. Similarly, recommendations from the DMC or
adaptation committee back to the sponsor should generally exclude any details of the interim
analysis results for the reasons cited above.
Although it is generally recommended that no sponsor representatives have access to
comparative interim results, there are situations where limited access for specific sponsor
personnel can be justified. For example, some adaptive trials may involve decisions, such as dose
selection, that are typically the responsibility of the sponsor in non-adaptive settings and have
important long-term implications for the drug development program. Limited access by sponsor
personnel might be justifiable in such circumstances; for example, if a small number of sponsor
representatives are involved, the individuals allowed access are not otherwise involved in trial
conduct or management, and appropriate procedures are put in place to ensure that comparative
interim results remain unknown to other key parties, such as patients, investigators, and the trial
steering committee. However, risks to trial integrity are most easily minimized by completely
 25 See the FDA guidance for clinical trial sponsors Establishment and Operation of Clinical Trial Data Monitoring
Committees (March 2006) for a detailed discussion of the roles, responsibilities, and operating procedures of DMCs
in clinical trials.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
26
restricting sponsor access to comparative interim results, and this is likely to be achievable in
most circumstances through extensive planning and discussion between the sponsor and the
DMC or adaptation committee at the design stage.
Appropriate limitation of access entails carefully planned procedures to maintain and verify
confidentiality, as well as documentation of monitoring and adherence to the operating
procedures. Approaches typically include the use of confidentiality agreements for persons with
access to interim data; the use of logistical or physical firewalls that prevent access by trial
personnel to any data that include information that might allow one to infer treatment
assignment; and development and use of a data access plan that identifies who has access to
confidential data, when that access occurs, and what types of data and results are involved.
Important documentation is discussed in more detail in section VIII.
There is also potential in adaptive trials for knowledge of the adaptation decision to convey
information about the interim results. Knowledge of a sample size modification algorithm and
the adaptively chosen sample size, for example, can allow back-calculation of the interim
estimate of the treatment effect. Therefore, steps should be taken where possible to minimize the
information that can be inferred by observers. Prespecification of the adaptation rule remains
critical, although the protocol could perhaps outline only the general approach, with details on
the specific algorithm reserved for documents such as the DMC charter or adaptive design
charter that are made available to fewer individuals. Careful consideration and planning with
respect to the extent of information that is disseminated following an interim analysis is also
important. In general, investigators and trial participants should be shielded as much as possible
from knowledge of adaptive changes. For example, if the sample size is increased after an
interim analysis, trial sites could be informed that the targeted enrollment number has not been
reached rather than being notified of the specific targeted final sample size. The use of a
discretized rather than a continuous adaptation decision threshold is another possible approach to
limit the knowledge that can be inferred to help minimize risks to trial integrity.
VIII. REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS
A. Interactions With FDA
The purpose and nature of interactions between a trial sponsor and FDA vary depending on the
stage of development. The increased complexity of some adaptive trials and uncertainties
regarding their operating characteristics may warrant earlier and more extensive interactions than
usual. Early in the development of a drug, FDA’s review of a trial protocol typically focuses on
the safety of trial participants rather than the validity of inference about pharmacologic activity
or efficacy. However, as resources allow, FDA might review exploratory protocols to consider
the relevance of the information being gathered to guide the design of later trials. Sponsors who
have questions about adaptive design elements in an early-phase exploratory trial should seek
FDA feedback by requesting a meeting (or written responses only) addressing those questions.
For example, discussion of the plans for an adaptive trial can be the basis for requesting a Type
C meeting. FDA’s ability to address such requests early in development may be limited and will
depend on competing workload priorities and on the specifics of the development program.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
27
At later phases of development, FDA will have a more extensive role in evaluating the design
and analysis plan to ensure that the trial will provide sufficiently reliable results to inform a
regulatory decision. Regulatory mechanisms for obtaining formal, substantive feedback from
FDA on later stage clinical trials are well-established and include, for example, EOP2 meetings.
Depending on the preexisting knowledge regarding the drug and its intended use, and the nature
of the adaptive features, an EOP2 meeting may be the appropriate setting for a sponsor to obtain
feedback, or earlier interactions with FDA may be advisable (e.g., at a Type C or EOP2A
meeting). Earlier interactions can help allow time for iterative discussions without slowing
product development.
FDA’s review of complex adaptive designs often involves challenging evaluations of design
operating characteristics, usually requiring extensive computer simulations, as well as increased
discussion across disciplines and FDA offices about the evaluations. This may make it difficult
for FDA to adequately review such designs under short timelines. Given the timelines (45-day
responses) and commitments involved with special protocol assessments (SPAs), we recommend
the submission of SPAs for trials with complex adaptive designs only if there has been extensive
previous discussion between FDA and the sponsor regarding the proposed trial and design.
FDA’s review of proposed late-phase adaptive clinical trials will include considerations about
whether the design and analysis plan satisfy the key principles outlined in this guidance. In
particular, the sponsor should prespecify the details of the adaptive design and explain how the
chance of erroneous conclusions will be adequately controlled, estimation of treatment effects
will be sufficiently reliable, and trial integrity will be appropriately maintained. Furthermore, it is
good practice for a sponsor to have explored a variety of adaptive and non-adaptive design
options in planning and to discuss its considerations in choosing the proposed adaptive design
with the Agency.
Although FDA should be advised during the course of a trial of any proposed unplanned changes
to the trial design (usually through protocol amendments), the Agency will generally not be
involved in the prospectively planned adaptive decision-making. This is the responsibility of the
sponsor, typically through the use of a committee (such as a DMC) designated to implement the
adaptive design. Meeting minutes from open sessions of a monitoring committee may be
requested by the Agency during an ongoing trial, but meeting minutes of closed sessions or any
other communication or information about comparative interim results should be kept
confidential until the conclusion of the trial, except in unusual circumstances where patients’
safety is at risk.
B. Documentation Prior to Conducting an Adaptive Trial
To allow for a thorough FDA evaluation, the documented plan for a clinical trial with an
adaptive design will necessarily be more complex than for a trial with a non-adaptive design. In
addition to the typical components of a non-adaptive clinical trial protocol and statistical analysis
plan, such as those discussed in the ICH guidance E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials,
documentation submitted to the Agency prior to initiation of an adaptive design trial should
include the following: 
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
28
• A rationale for the selected design. As discussed in other sections, it is good practice to
evaluate the important operating characteristics of the proposed design as compared to
alternative adaptive and non-adaptive designs, and it can be useful to submit such
information to FDA. However, the ultimate choice of design is the sponsor’s responsibility.
• A detailed description of the adaptation plan, including the anticipated number and timing of
interim analyses, the specific aspects of the design that may be modified, and the rule that
will be used to make adaptation decisions.
• Information on the roles of the bodies responsible for implementing the adaptive design, such
as the DMC and/or the dedicated adaptation committee, if applicable.
• Prespecification of the statistical methods that will be used to produce interim results, guide
adaptation decisions, carry out hypothesis tests, estimate treatment effects, and estimate
uncertainty in the treatment effect estimates at the end of the trial. Software to carry out
interim and final analyses should be prespecified. If novel or custom software will be used,
sufficient information should be submitted to FDA before the trial to ensure there is no
ambiguity in the statistical procedures that will be performed. This information might include
computer code when applicable.
• Evaluation and discussion of the design operating characteristics, which should typically
include Type I error probability; power; expected, minimum, and maximum sample size; bias
of treatment effect estimates; and coverage of confidence intervals. Such evaluations might
be achieved through analytical calculations and/or computer simulations. If operating
characteristics are evaluated analytically, appropriate details (e.g., literature references or
proofs) for the methodology should be submitted.
• In cases where simulations are the primary or sole technique for evaluating trial operating
characteristics as defined above, a detailed simulation report should be submitted, including:
o An overall description of the trial design.
o Example trials, in which a small number of hypothetical trials are described with
different conclusions, such as a positive trial with the original sample size, a trial
stopped for futility after the first interim look, a positive trial after increasing the
sample size, etc.
o A description of the set of parameter configurations used for the simulation scenarios,
including a justification of the adequacy of the choices.
o The number of simulated trials (iterations) evaluated for each scenario and a rationale
for the adequacy of this number.
o Simulation results detailing the estimated operating characteristics under the various
scenarios.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
29
o Simulation code. Because FDA reviewers will need to verify simulation studies used
to evaluate trial operating characteristics, it is important to document the software
package used for simulations and, if custom software was used, to provide the code
used for the simulations. When code is provided, it should be readable and adequately
commented. The code should include the random seeds used to generate the
simulation results. It is also helpful to provide code written in widely-used statistical
programming languages. Even in cases where another language has been used to
generate simulation results (typically for reasons of computational efficiency), it can
be helpful to provide a runnable version of the code in a widely-used statistical
programming language to facilitate the simulation review. In some cases, it will be
important to include additional detailed information, such as formulas and
instructions for use of simulation code.
o A summary providing overall conclusions.
• A comprehensive written data access plan defining how trial integrity will be maintained in
the presence of the planned adaptations. This documentation should include information
regarding: (1) the personnel who will perform the interim analyses; (2) the personnel who
will have access to interim results; (3) how that access will be controlled; (4) how adaptive
decisions will be made; and (5) what type of information will be disseminated following
adaptive decisions, and to whom it will be disseminated. The data access plan should
describe what information, under what circumstances, is permitted to be passed on to the
sponsor or investigators. In addition, it is recommended that sponsors establish procedures to
evaluate compliance with the data access plan and to document all interim meetings of the
committee tasked with making adaptation decisions (i.e., the DMC or adaptation committee).
For example, interim meetings should be documented with written meeting minutes
describing what was reviewed, discussed, and decided.

This written documentation could be included in the clinical trial protocol and/or in separate
documents such as a statistical analysis plan, a DMC charter, or an adaptation committee charter.
Although different types of information might be included in different documents, all important
information described above should be submitted to FDA during the design stage so that the
review division has sufficient time to provide feedback prior to initiation of the trial.
C. Evaluating and Reporting a Completed Trial
A marketing application to FDA that relies on a trial with an adaptive design should include
sufficient information and documentation to allow FDA to thoroughly review the results. In
particular, in addition to the typical content of an NDA or a BLA,
26 the application should
include the following:
 26 See, for example, the FDA draft guidance for industry Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic Format —
Certain Human Pharmaceutical Product Applications and Related Submissions Using the eCTD Specifications (July
2019). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
30
• All prospective plans, any relevant committee charters (e.g., the DMC or adaptation
committee charter), and any supporting documentation, as described above (e.g., literature
references, programming code, and a simulation report).
• Information on compliance with the planned adaptation rule and compliance with the
procedures outlined in the data access plan to maintain trial integrity.
• Records of deliberations and participants for any interim discussions by any committees
involved in the adaptive process (e.g., meeting minutes from closed and open DMC or
adaptation committee meetings, meeting minutes from steering or executive committee
meetings).
• Results of the interim analysis or analyses used for the adaptation decisions.
• Appropriate reporting of the adaptive design and trial results in section 14 of the proposed
package insert. For example, the trial summary should describe the adaptive design utilized.
In addition, treatment effect estimates should adequately take the design into account, or if
naive estimates such as unadjusted sample means are used, the extent of bias should be
evaluated, and estimates should be presented with appropriate cautions regarding their
interpretation.
More limited information (e.g., reports without the database copies and less detailed information
on other aspects) may be sufficient for trial summaries provided to FDA during the course of
development to support ongoing discussions within an IND.



Clinical Trial Endpoints for the Approval of Cancer Drugs and BiologicsGuidance for IndustryU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationOncology Center of ExcellenceCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)Clinical Trial Endpoints for the Approval of Cancer Drugs and BiologicsGuidance for Industry1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONThis guidance provides recommendations to applicants on endpoints for cancer clinical trials submitted to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to support effectiveness claims in new drug applications (NDAs), biologics license applications (BLAs), or supplemental applications.2 It also provides background information and discusses general regulatory principles. The endpoints discussed in this guidance are for drugs to treat patients with an existing cancer.3 This guidance does not address endpoints for drugs to prevent or decrease the incidence of cancer.This guidance is a revision of the final guidance of the same title that published in May 2007. This guidance replaces the May 2007 guidance of the same title.In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.1 This guidance has been prepared by the Oncology Center of Excellence, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), and Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) at the Food and Drug Administration.2 For the purposes of this guidance, all references to drugs include both human drugs and biological products unless otherwise specified.3 See the guidance for industry Clinical Trial Endpoints for the Approval of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Drugs and Biologics for recommendations specific to non-small cell lung cancer clinical trials. See the guidance for industry Pathological Complete Response in Neoadjuvant Treatment of High-Risk Early-Stage Breast Cancer: Use as an Endpoint to Support Accelerated Approval for recommendations specific to high-risk early-stage breast cancer. We update guidances periodically. To make sure you have the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA web page. The guidances mentioned in this document are available on the Biologics guidance web page at http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm, and/or the Drugs guidance web page at http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2II. BACKGROUNDClinical trial endpoints serve different purposes. In conventional oncology drug development, early phase clinical trials evaluate safety and identify evidence of biological drug activity, such as tumor shrinkage. Endpoints for later phase efficacy studies commonly evaluate whether a drug provides a clinical benefit such as prolongation of survival or an improvement in symptoms. The following sections discuss the general regulatory requirements for efficacy and how they have influenced endpoint selection for the approval of cancer drugs. Later sections describe these endpoints in more detail and discuss whether they might serve as measures of disease activity or clinical benefit in various clinical settings.A. Statutory and Regulatory Requirements for EffectivenessThe requirement that new drugs show effectiveness is based on a 1962 amendment to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act). This law requires substantial evidence of effectiveness and specifies that this evidence must be derived from adequate and well-controlled clinical investigations. Similarly, the Public Health Service Act requires biological products to be safe, pure, and potent.4 Clinical benefits that have supported drug approval have included important clinical outcomes (e.g., increased survival, symptomatic improvement) but have also included effects on surrogate endpoints known to predict clinical benefit (e.g., blood pressure).The accelerated approval regulations (21 CFR part 314, subpart H and 21 CFR part 601, subpart E), promulgated in 1992, allow use of additional endpoints for approval of drugs or biological products that are intended to treat serious or life-threatening diseases and that generally demonstrate an improvement over available therapy or provide therapy where none exists. In this setting, the FDA may grant approval based on an effect on a surrogate endpoint that is reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit.5 Such surrogate endpoints are less well-established than those surrogate endpoints for traditional approvals, such as blood pressure for cardiovascular disease. FDA may also grant accelerated approval based on an effect on a clinical endpoint that can be measured earlier than irreversible morbidity or mortality that is reasonably likely to predict an effect on irreversible morbidity or mortality or other clinical benefit (i.e., an intermediate clinical endpoint).6 A drug is approved under the accelerated approval regulations on condition that the manufacturer conducts clinical studies to verify and describe the actual clinical benefit.7 If the postmarketing studies fail to demonstrate clinical benefit or if the applicant does not demonstrate due diligence in conducting the required studies, among other reasons, FDA may withdraw approval of the drug or indication.8 In the following discussion, the term traditional approval denotes the longstanding route of drug approval based on the demonstration of clinical benefit or an effect on a surrogate endpoint4 Potency has long been interpreted to include effectiveness (21 CFR 600.3(s)).5 Section 506(c)(1)(B) of the FD&C Act. 21 CFR 314.510 and 601.41 provide that the Agency may consider “. . . epidemiologic, therapeutic, pathophysiologic, or other evidence . . .” in determining whether an endpoint isreasonably likely to predict clinical benefit. The Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act of 2012 provides that FDA may consider “. . . epidemiological, pathophysiological, therapeutic, pharmacologic, or other evidence developed using biomarkers, for example, or other scientific methods or tools.” See guidance for industry Expedited Programs for Serious Conditions – Drugs and Biologics.6 See guidance for industry Expedited Programs for Serious Conditions – Drugs and Biologics.7 For a more comprehensive discussion of this condition of accelerated approval and a discussion of other conditions of approval, see the guidance for industry Expedited Programs for Serious Conditions – Drugs and Biologics.8 See section 506(c)(3) of the FD&C Act and §§ 314.530(a) and 601.43(a).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3known to predict clinical benefit. That term is distinguished from accelerated approval, which is associated with use of a surrogate endpoint or intermediate clinical endpoint that is reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit to support drug approval.The evidence needed to establish effectiveness is discussed in the guidance for industry Providing Clinical Evidence of Effectiveness for Human Drug and Biological Products and the guidance for industry FDA Approval of New Cancer Treatment Uses for Marketed Drug and Biological Products. In many cases, at least two adequate and well-controlled clinical investigations are needed. In certain cases, evidence from a single adequate and well-controlled clinical investigation, with confirmatory evidence, can be sufficient (e.g., in cases in which a single multicenter study provides highly reliable and statistically strong evidence of an important clinical benefit). FDA may consider data from one adequate and well-controlled clinical investigation and confirmatory evidence as substantial evidence, if FDA determines that such data and evidence are sufficient to establish effectiveness.9 For example, for drugs approved for treatment of patients with a specific stage of a particular malignancy, evidence from one adequate and well-controlled clinical investigation with confirmatory evidence may be sufficient to support an efficacy supplement for treatment of a different stage of the same cancer.B. Endpoints Supporting Past Approvals in OncologyFor traditional approval, applicants show direct evidence of clinical benefit or improvement in a surrogate endpoint known to predict clinical benefit. In oncology, survival improvement is considered an appropriate measure of clinical benefit. In addition, sponsors have used other endpoints for cancer drug approval. In the 1970s, the FDA usually approved cancer drugs based on objective response rate (ORR), determined by tumor assessments from radiological tests or physical examinations. In the early 1980s, after discussion with the Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee (ODAC), the FDA determined that cancer drug approval should be based on more direct evidence of clinical benefit, such as improvement in survival, improvement in a patient’s quality of life, improved physical functioning, or improved tumor-related symptoms. These benefits may not always be predicted by, or correlate with, ORR.Over time, larger improvements in tumor reduction and delay in tumor growth have been seen, and tumor measurement endpoints have been used to support both traditional and accelerated approval. Improvement in disease-free survival (DFS) has supported drug approval in selected adjuvant settings, in which a large proportion of patients were expected to have cancer symptoms at the time of recurrence. Durable complete response has supported traditional approval in leukemia, where complete response (CR) is associated with less infection, bleeding, and blood product support. A large improvement in progression-free survival (PFS) or high, substantiated durable ORR has been used to support traditional approval in select malignancies, but magnitude of effect, relief of tumor-related symptoms, and drug toxicity should also be considered when making the approval decision.10,11,12 For example, randomized trials for9 See section 505(d) as amended by the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997.10 Blumenthal GM, PG Kluetz, J Schneider, KB Goldberg, AE McKee, R Pazdur, 2017, Oncology Drug Approvals: Evaluating Endpoints and Evidence in an Era of Breakthrough Therapies, The Oncologist, 22(7): 762-767.11 Blumenthal GM and R Pazdur, 2016, Response Rate as an Approval Endpoint in Oncology: Back to the Future, JAMA Oncol, 2(6): 720-721.12 O’Shaughnessy and Wittes et al.,1991, Commentary Concerning Demonstration of Safety and Efficacy of Investigational Anticancer Agents in Clinical Trials, J Clin Oncol, 9:2225-2232.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4hormonal drugs for breast cancer and a single arm trial of a drug for ROS1-positive metastatic non-small cell lung cancer have used ORR as an endpoint supporting traditional approval. Improvement in tumor-related symptoms in conjunction with an improved ORR and adequate response duration has supported traditional approval in several clinical settings.Surrogate endpoints for accelerated approval must be reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit (FD&C Act § 506(c)(1)(A); 21 CFR part 314, subpart H; and 21 CFR part 601, subpart E). While durable ORR has been used as a traditional approval endpoint in some circumstances, ORR has also been the most commonly used surrogate endpoint in support of accelerated approval. Tumor response is widely accepted by oncologists in guiding cancer treatments. Because ORR is directly attributable to drug effect, single-arm trials conducted in patients with refractory tumors where no available therapy exists provide an accurate assessment of ORR. Whether tumor measures such as ORR or PFS are used as an accelerated approval or traditional approval endpoint will depend on the disease context and the magnitude of the effect, among other factors (see sections III.B.2 and 4).III. GENERAL ENDPOINT CONSIDERATIONSThis section provides an overview of general issues in cancer drug development. A discussion of commonly used cancer endpoints is followed by a discussion of pertinent issues in cancer clinical trial design using these endpoints (see the guidances referenced in footnote 3 regarding non-small cell lung cancer and high-risk early-stage breast cancer for more detailed discussion for these diseases). The endpoints that are discussed in this section include overall survival, endpoints based on tumor assessments (e.g., DFS, event-free survival (EFS), ORR, CR, time to progression (TTP), and PFS), endpoints involving symptom assessment, blood or body fluid-based biomarkers, and emerging endpoints. Tables 1 and 2 provide a comparison of endpoints in cancer drug approval. Many issues relating to the proper analysis of efficacy endpoints are addressed in the ICH guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials. Recommendations regarding the use of placebos and blinding in randomized controlled clinical trials are described in the draft guidance for industry Hematologic Malignancy and Oncologic Disease: Considerations for Use of Placebos and Blinding in Randomized Clinical Trials for Drug Product Development.13 Cancer patient and caregiver experiences provide unique insights that contribute to important patient preference information for identifying relevant clinical trial endpoints to ultimately inform medical product development programs that best meet patient needs. Recommendations on how stakeholders can collect and submit patient experience data14 and other relevant information from patients and caregivers for medical product development and regulatory decision making are described in the draft guidance for industry, FDA staff, and other stakeholders Patient-Focused Drug Development: Collecting Comprehensive and Representative Input.1513 When finalized this guidance will represent FDA current thinking on the topics it addresses.14 21st Century Cures Act: https://www.congress.gov/114/plaws/publ255/PLAW-114publ255.pdf.15 When finalized this guidance will represent FDA current thinking on the topics it addresses.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5Table 1. A Comparison of Important Cancer Approval EndpointsAs noted in the table, several oncology endpoints can serve different purposes (i.e., clinical endpoint that represents clinical benefit for traditional approval, surrogate endpoint to support traditional approval, surrogate endpoint to support accelerated approval) based on the specific context of use. The determination is based on the specific diseases and is highly dependent upon factors such as effect size, effect duration, depth of response (e.g., number of CRs), available therapy, disease setting, location of disease, the clinical consequences of delaying or preventing disease progression or delaying administration of more toxic therapies, and the risk-benefit relationship. See text for details. See section V regarding recommendations for obtaining FDA feedback on endpoints and protocol design.EndpointType of EndpointStudy Design RecommendationsClinicalEndpointSurrogate Endpoint for TA*Surrogate Endpoint for AA**RandomizedSingle-ArmIndependent Blinded ReviewOverall SurvivalXXSymptom Endpoints (patient-reported outcomes)XXDisease-Free Survival or Event-Free SurvivalXXXXX***Objective Response RateXXXXXXComplete ResponseXXXXXXProgression-Free Survival or Time to ProgressionXXXXX**** TA - Traditional approval, ** AA - Accelerated approval, *** Not always recommendedContains Nonbinding Recommendations6Table 2. Advantages and Disadvantages of Important Cancer Approval EndpointsEndpointAdvantagesDisadvantagesOverall Survival• Easily and precisely measured• Generally based on objective and quantitative assessment•May be affected by switch-over of control to treatment or subsequent therapies• Needs longer follow-up• Includes noncancer deathsSymptom Endpoints (patient-reported outcomes)• Generally assessed earlier and with smaller sample size compared with survival studies• Blinding is important for assessing the endpoint• Potentially subject to assessment bias, particularly in open-label studies• Lack of validated instruments in many disease areas• Definitions vary among studies• Balanced timing of assessments among treatment arms is criticalDisease-Free Survival or Event-Free Survival• Generally assessed earlier and with smaller sample size compared with survival studies• Generally based on objective and quantitative assessment• Potentially subject to assessment bias, particularly in open-label studies• Definitions vary among studies• Balanced timing of assessments among treatment arms is critical• Includes noncancer deathsObjective Response Rate• Generally assessed earlier and with smaller sample size compared with survival studies• Effect on tumor attributable to drug(s), not natural history• Generally based on objective and quantitative assessment• Definitions vary among studies• Frequent radiological or other assessments•May not always correlate with survivalComplete Response• Generally assessed earlier and with smaller sample size compared with survival studies• Effect on tumor attributable to drug(s), not natural history• Generally based on objective and quantitative assessment• Definitions vary among studies• Frequent radiological or other assessments•May not always correlate with survivalProgression-Free Survival or Time to Progression• Generally assessed earlier and with smaller sample size compared with survival studies•Measurement of stable disease included• Generally based on objective and quantitative assessment• Potentially subject to assessment bias, particularly in open-label studies• Definitions vary among studies• Frequent radiological or other assessments• Balanced timing of assessments among treatment arms is critical•May not always correlate with survivalContains Nonbinding Recommendations7A. Overall SurvivalOverall survival is defined as the time from randomization until death from any cause and is measured in the intent-to-treat population. Survival is considered the most reliable cancer endpoint, and when studies can be conducted to adequately assess survival, it is usually the preferred endpoint. This endpoint is precise and easy to measure, documented by the date of death. Bias is not a factor in endpoint measurement. Survival improvement should be analyzed as a risk-benefit analysis to assess clinical benefit.Overall survival should be evaluated in randomized controlled studies. Data derived from externally controlled trials are seldom reliable for time-to-event endpoints, including overall survival. Apparent differences in outcome between external controls and current treatment groups can arise from differences other than drug treatment, including patient selection, improved imaging techniques, or improved supportive care. Randomized studies minimize the effect of these known and unknown differences by providing a direct outcome comparison. Demonstration of a statistically significant improvement in overall survival can be considered to be clinically significant if the toxicity profile is acceptable and has often supported new drug approval.Difficulties in performing and analyzing survival studies include long follow-up periods in large trials and subsequent cancer therapy potentially confounding survival analysis.B. Endpoints Based on Tumor AssessmentsThis section discusses several endpoints that are based on tumor assessments. In many cancer types, radiographic tumor assessments directly measure components of the disease, and tumor measures commonly trigger treatment decisions in clinical practice. Therefore, tumor measure-based endpoints are considered more clinically relevant than other biomarkers. Tumor measure-based endpoints may support either traditional (as a clinical endpoint that represents clinical benefit or a surrogate endpoint for traditional approval) or accelerated approval and include DFS (and EFS), ORR, CR, TTP, and PFS.Tumor assessment endpoint selection should include two judgments. First, a determination of whether the endpoint may support either accelerated approval or traditional approval should be ascertained. Second, the endpoint should be evaluated for the potential of bias or uncertainty. Drug applications using studies that rely on tumor assessment endpoints as sole evidence of efficacy may need confirmatory evidence from a second trial. Accuracy in measuring tumors can differ among tumor settings. Tumor measurements used in ORR determinations can be imprecise in locations where there is a lack of demarcated margins (e.g., pleural or peritoneal mesothelioma, pancreatic cancer, brain tumors).When the primary study endpoint is based on tumor measurements (e.g., PFS or ORR), tumor assessments generally should be verified by central reviewers blinded to study treatments (see Appendix) to ascertain lack of assessment bias. Additional details regarding data collection are listed in the guidance for industry Clinical Trial Endpoints for the Approval of Non-Small CellContains Nonbinding Recommendations8Lung Cancer Drugs and Biologics, Appendix A.16 Alternatively, a random sample-based blinded central review auditing approach could be used with a detailed auditing plan prespecified including a strategy to detect potential assessment bias. If bias cannot be excluded based upon the audit, a blinded central review of all radiographic images will be necessary.17 Sponsors should seek FDA input prior to conducting an audit based central review. Centralized independent verification of tumor assessment endpoints (especially for PFS or DFS) may not be necessary when randomized trials are blinded (unless the adverse event profile would substantially unblind the trial in practice) or effect sizes are robust in large randomized trials where sensitivity analysis supports lack of investigator bias.1. Disease-Free Survival (and Event-Free Survival)Generally, DFS is defined as the time from randomization until disease recurrence or death from any cause. The most frequent use of this endpoint is in the adjuvant setting after definitive surgery or radiotherapy. DFS also can be an important endpoint when a large percentage of patients achieve CRs with chemotherapy. Although overall survival is a conventional endpoint for most adjuvant settings, DFS can be an important endpoint in situations where survival may be prolonged, making an overall survival endpoint impractical. An endpoint that is similar to DFS but is differentiated from it in that randomization takes place before definitive surgery or radiotherapy in the adjuvant setting is EFS. For the purpose of this guidance, EFS is defined as time from randomization to any of the following events: progression of disease that precludes surgery, local or distant recurrence, or death due to any cause. DFS has been the primary basis of approval for adjuvant breast cancer hormonal therapy, adjuvant colon cancer, and adjuvant cytotoxic breast cancer therapy, whereas EFS is an appropriate endpoint for the evaluation of neoadjuvant breast cancer therapy given prior to definitive surgery. Compared with standard cytotoxic therapies, hormonal therapies carry minimal side effects and thus a favorable risk-benefit relationship. Treatment effect measured by DFS or EFS can be a surrogate endpoint to support accelerated approval, a surrogate endpoint to support traditional approval, or it can represent direct clinical benefit based on the specific disease, context of use, magnitude of the effect, the disease setting, available therapy, and the risk-benefit relationship. In December 2003, the ODAC consensus was DFS prolongation represented clinical benefit if the magnitude of this benefit outweighed the toxicity of the adjuvant treatment. In May 2004, the ODAC recommended that DFS be considered a clinical endpoint for colon cancer drugs in the surgical adjuvant setting.18 DFS has been used for traditional approval for diseases such as breast cancer, colorectal cancer, gastrointestinal stromal tumors, melanoma, and renal cell carcinoma.Important considerations in evaluating DFS or EFS as a potential endpoint include the estimated size of the treatment effect and proven benefits of standard therapies. The protocol should16 Appendices A-D in the guidance for industry Clinical Trial Endpoints for the Approval of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Drugs and Biologics, regarding tumor measurement data collection and PFS analysis also apply more broadly to oncology endpoints and should be used in conjunction with this guidance, as needed.17 Discussed during July 24, 2012 ODAC meeting. Transcripts are available at https://wayback.archive-it.org/7993/20170403224012/https://www.fda.gov/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Drugs/OncologicDrugsAdvisoryCommittee/default.htm.18 Transcripts are available at https://wayback.archive-it.org/7993/20170403224012/https://www.fda.gov/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Drugs/OncologicDrugsAdvisoryCommittee/default.htm.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations9carefully delineate both the definition of DFS or EFS and the schedule for follow-up assessments and visits. Unscheduled assessments can occur for many reasons and differences between study arms in the frequency, timing, or reason for unscheduled assessments can introduce bias. Bias can be minimized by blinding patients and investigators to the treatment assignments, as appropriate.Application of the definition of DFS or EFS in a study can be complicated, particularly when deaths are noted without prior tumor progression documentation. These events can be scored either as disease recurrences or as censored events. Although all methods for statistical analysis of deaths have some limitations, considering deaths from all causes as recurrences can minimize bias. DFS or EFS can be overestimated using this definition, especially in patients who die after a long period without observation. Bias can be introduced if the frequency of long-term follow-up visits is dissimilar between the study arms or if dropouts are not random because of toxicity. Some analyses count cancer-related deaths as DFS or EFS events and censor noncancer deaths. This method can introduce bias in the attribution of the cause of death. Furthermore, any method that censors observations on patients, whether at death or at the last visit, assumes that the patients with censored observations have the same risk of recurrence as patients with noncensored observations who have not yet experienced the event.2. Objective Response RateORR is defined as the proportion of patients with tumor size reduction of a predefined amount and for a minimum time period. Response duration usually is measured from the time of initial response until documented tumor progression. Generally, the FDA has defined ORR as the sum of partial responses plus CRs. When defined in this manner, ORR is a direct measure of a drug antitumor activity, which can be evaluated in a single-arm study. Stable disease should not be a component of ORR. Stable disease can reflect the natural history of disease, whereas tumor reduction is a direct therapeutic effect. Also, stable disease can be more accurately assessed by TTP or PFS analysis (see section III.B.4). If available, standardized criteria should be used to ascertain response. A variety of response criteria have been considered appropriate (e.g., revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1))19 The response criteria should be predefined in the protocol before the start of the study. The significance of ORR is assessed by its magnitude and duration, and the percentage of CRs. Treatment effect measured by ORR can be a surrogate endpoint to support accelerated approval, a surrogate endpoint to support traditional approval, or it can represent direct clinical benefit based on the specific disease, context of use, magnitude of the effect, the number of CRs, the durability of response, the disease setting, the location of the tumors, available therapy, and the risk-benefit relationship.3. Complete ResponseCR is defined as no detectable evidence of tumor. CR is generally measured through imaging studies (e.g., CT scans) or through histopathologic assessment (e.g., bone marrow biopsy or breast cancer resection specimens). Treatment effect measured by CR can be a surrogate endpoint to support accelerated approval, a surrogate endpoint to support traditional approval, or it can represent direct clinical benefit based on the specific disease, context of use, magnitude of the19 Eisenhauer EA, P Therasse, J Bogaerts, LH Schwartz, D Sargent, R Ford, et al., 2009, New Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours: Revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1), Eur J Cancer, 45(2):228-247.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations10effect, effect duration, disease setting, location of disease, available therapy, and the risk-benefit relationship. For hematologic malignancies such as acute leukemia, CR has been used as a clinical endpoint for traditional approval. For early high-risk breast cancer, pathologic CR (pCR) has been used as a surrogate endpoint for accelerated approval.4. Time to Progression and Progression-Free SurvivalTTP and PFS have served as primary endpoints for drug approval. TTP is defined as the time from randomization until objective tumor progression; TTP does not include deaths. PFS is defined as the time from randomization until objective tumor progression or death, whichever occurs first. The precise definition of tumor progression is important and should be carefully detailed in the protocol.Compared with TTP, PFS is the preferred regulatory endpoint. PFS includes deaths and thus can be a better correlate to overall survival. In TTP analysis, death events are censored, either at the time of death or at an earlier visit representing informative censoring (nonrandom pattern of loss from the study). PFS assumes that death events are randomly related to tumor progression.PFS can reflect tumor growth and be assessed before the determination of a survival benefit. Its determination is not confounded by subsequent therapy. For a given sample size, the magnitude of effect on PFS can be larger than the effect on overall survival. Data are usually insufficient to allow a robust evaluation of the correlation between effects on overall survival and PFS. Cancer trials are often small, and proven survival benefits of existing drugs are generally modest. Treatment effect measured by PFS can be a surrogate endpoint to support accelerated approval, a surrogate endpoint to support traditional approval, or it can represent direct clinical benefit based on the specific disease, context of use, magnitude of the effect, the disease setting, location of metastatic sites, available therapy, the risk-benefit relationship, and the clinical consequences of delaying or preventing progression in key disease sites (e.g., delay of new lesions in the brain or spine) or delaying administration of more toxic therapies.It is important to carefully define tumor progression criteria in the protocol. There are no standard regulatory criteria for defining progression. Applicants have used a variety of different criteria, including the RECIST criteria. The broad outline presented in most published PFS criteria should be supplemented with additional details in the protocol and statistical analysis plan (SAP).Because progression data can be collected from multiple sources (including physical exams at unscheduled visits and radiological scans of various types) and at different times, data collection for each assessment visit should be limited to a specified short time interval around the scheduled visit. Difficulties can arise in determining the event date and censoring date when data are collected over a prolonged time period. We recommend assigning the progression date to the earliest time when any progression is observed without prior missing assessments and censoring at the date when the last radiological assessment determined a lack of progression.The guidance for industry Clinical Trial Endpoints for the Approval of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Drugs and Biologics, Appendices C and D provides a set of tables for potential analyses of PFS that can be used for primary or sensitivity analyses. Plans for PFS data collection and analysis should be discussed with FDA at end-of-phase 2 meetings.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations115. Time to Treatment FailureTime to treatment failure (TTF) is defined as a composite endpoint measuring time from randomization to discontinuation of treatment for any reason, including disease progression, treatment toxicity, and death. TTF is generally not recommended as a regulatory endpoint for new molecular entity drug approval.C. Endpoints Involving Symptom AssessmentSymptomatic improvement is considered a clinical benefit. FDA drug approvals have used patient symptom assessments and/or physical signs representing symptomatic improvement (e.g., weight gain, decreased effusion) as an important efficacy endpoint. For the improvement of signs and symptoms or other clinical outcome assessments (COA) to be used as efficacy endpoints to support cancer drug approval, symptoms should be assessed that are due to cancer rather than drug toxicity to the extent possible.1. Specific Symptom EndpointsSymptom improvement/palliation is a direct measure of clinical benefit rather than a surrogate endpoint. A decrease in the severity of cancer symptoms has been used to support traditional approval of anti-cancer agents where anti-tumor activity has also been demonstrated. The use of a symptom palliation endpoint requires that the population be symptomatic at baseline, which can be problematic in many cancer trials where patients can often be asymptomatic at baseline. This endpoint can also be subject to open label response bias, the magnitude of which is not well described.Time to progression of cancer symptoms, an endpoint similar to TTP, is also a direct measure of clinical benefit rather than a potential surrogate endpoint. As discussed earlier, problems in measuring progression (e.g., missing assessments) also exist in evaluating time to symptomatic progression. Because few cancer trials are blinded, symptom assessments can also be subject to response bias. A delay between tumor progression and the onset of cancer symptoms can occur. Often alternative treatments are initiated before achieving the symptom endpoint, confounding this analysis. In addition, tumor symptoms can be difficult to differentiate from drug toxicity.A composite symptom endpoint or symptom scale should have components of similar clinical importance and an analysis of the contribution of the components should be submitted with the primary analysis of the overall composite endpoint. An example is the composite symptom scale that includes several important symptoms of myelofibrosis, the myelofibrosis symptom assessment form.20 An example of a composite endpoint for clinical events exists for patients with cancer metastases to the skeleton. Drugs have been approved based on delaying the time to skeletal-related events defined as pathological fractures, radiation therapy to bone, surgery to bone, and spinal cord compression.20 Deisseroth A, E Kamiskas, J Grillo, W Chen, H Saber, HL Lu, et. al., 2012, U.S. Food and Drug Administration Approval: Ruxolitinib for the Treatment of Patients with Intermediate and High-Risk Myelofibrosis, Clin Cancer Res, 18(12): 3212-7.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations12Selection of the appropriate population can be critical for documenting symptom benefit. Patients symptomatic at study baseline can be evaluated with a categorical symptom response analysis. In asymptomatic patients at baseline, a time-to-first-symptom analysis can be used, although this approach can be limited by intermittent missing data and discontinuation of the study drug prior to symptomatic progression.2. Problems Encountered with Symptom DataMissing data and infrequent assessments can complicate the evaluation of symptom data particularly for time to deterioration analyses. Procedures should be put in place to maximize completion rate during trial conduct and the statistical analysis plan should outline how missing data will be handled. Data collection to support multiple symptom endpoints should be addressed prospectively regarding multiple hypotheses testing and the necessary statistical adjustments should be specified in the SAP. Additional information on the use of patient-reported outcomes can be found in the guidance for industry Patient Reported Outcome Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling Claims.D. Blood or Body Fluid-Based BiomarkersGenerally, biomarkers assayed from blood or body fluids have not served as primary endpoints for cancer drug approval, although paraprotein levels measured in blood and urine have been used as part of myeloma response criteria, and durable major molecular response is a surrogate endpoint used for traditional approval for therapies in chronic myelogenous leukemia.The FDA has accepted blood-based markers as elements of a composite endpoint. The occurrence of certain clinical events (a significant decrease in performance status, or bowel obstruction) in conjunction with marked increases in CA-125 was considered progression in ovarian cancer patients. In addition, blood-based biomarkers can be useful in identifying prognostic factors and in selection of patients and stratification factors to be considered in study designs.E. Emerging EndpointsIn addition to the endpoints discussed in this section, FDA recognizes that advances in science are facilitating development of oncology products, which may also result in the identification of additional endpoints that may be used to support approval of oncology products. As examples, minimal residual disease21 has been used as a surrogate endpoint for accelerated approval for a therapy in acute lymphoblastic leukemia and metastasis-free survival has been used as a clinical endpoint for traditional approval for a therapy in non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. If a sponsor is planning to use an emerging endpoint in its clinical development program, we recommend discussing such use with the applicable FDA Division or Office prior to initiating a trial (see section V).21 See draft guidance for industry Hematologic Malignancies: Regulatory Considerations for Use in Minimal Residual Disease in Development of Drug and Biological Products for Treatment for information to assist sponsors planning to use minimal residual disease to support marketing approval of drugs and biological products for the treatment of specific hematologic malignancies. When finalized this guidance will represent FDA current thinking on the topics it addresses.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations13IV. CLINICAL TRIAL DESIGN AND ANALYSIS CONSIDERATIONSPer 21 CFR 314.126, the FDA approves drugs based on substantial evidence of efficacy from “adequate and well-controlled investigations,” as described in the regulations. Studies must allow a valid comparison to a control and must provide a quantitative assessment of the drug’s effect.22 The most reliable method for demonstrating efficacy is to show a statistically significant improvement in a clinically meaningful endpoint in randomized controlled trials (i.e., superiority). The following sections discuss other approaches that may be indicated when a randomized controlled trial demonstrating superiority is not feasible or ethical. If a sponsor is planning to use one of these approaches, we recommend discussing such use with the applicable FDA Division or Office prior to initiating a trial (see section V).A. Single-Arm StudiesIn settings where there is no available therapy and where major tumor regressions can be presumed to be attributed to the tested drug, the FDA has sometimes accepted ORR and response duration observed in single-arm studies as substantial evidence supporting accelerated approval. Response rates have been used in settings such as acute leukemia for traditional approval where CRs have been associated with decreased transfusion requirements, decrease in infections, and increased survival. Single-arm trials do not adequately characterize time-to-event endpoints such as overall survival, DFS (and EFS), TTP, or PFS. Because of variability in the natural history of many forms of cancer, a randomized study is necessary to evaluate time-to-event endpoints.B. Randomized Studies Designed to Demonstrate NoninferiorityA noninferiority (NI) trial should demonstrate the new drug’s effectiveness by showing that the new drug is not less effective than a standard regimen (the active control) by a prespecified amount (noninferiority margin).23 This noninferiority margin should be a clinically acceptable loss that is not larger than the effect of the active control drug. The standard regimen should have a well-characterized clinical benefit (survival benefit). If the new drug is inferior to the active control by more than the noninferiority margin, it will be presumed to be ineffective.NI trials rely on externally controlled (historical) data to establish the active control’s treatment effect size. In cancer trials, this effect frequently has not been adequately characterized. NI trials also rely on constancy assumption. This assumption includes that the active-control effect has remained constant between the externally controlled study and the current study. This assumes constancy of patient population characteristics, supportive care measures, and evaluation techniques between the current trial and the externally controlled data from which the active-control effect was derived. The estimated size of the active-control’s treatment effect should be based on a comprehensive meta-analysis of externally controlled studies. These studies should reliably reproduce the active-control effect compared with placebo arm.22 See 21 CFR 314.126(b)(2) and (7).23 See guidance for industry Non-Inferiority Clinical Trials to Establish Effectiveness. See also the ICH guidance for industry E10 Choice of Control Group and Related Issues.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations14Difficulties in conducting NI trials include the estimation of active-control effect and the determination of amount of effect (NI margin) to be retained. NI trials usually involve large sample sizes compared with superiority trials and involve replication of clinical trial results. Furthermore, subsequent therapies and crossover to the active-control arm can confound any NI analysis. NI trials with endpoints other than overall survival and ORR are problematic.C. Trial Designs for Radiotherapy Protectants and Chemotherapy ProtectantsRadiotherapy protectants and chemotherapy protectants are drugs designed to ameliorate the toxicities of therapies. These trials usually have two objectives. The first is to assess the amelioration of cancer treatment toxicity. The second objective is to determine whether anticancer activity is compromised by the protectant. The second objective usually examines earlier endpoints; for example, ORR or PFS, rather than overall survival.D. Clinical Trial Design ConsiderationsThe methodology for assessing, measuring, and analyzing the endpoint(s) should be detailed in the protocol and SAP.Visits and radiological assessments, when applicable, should be symmetric between the two study arms to prevent systematic bias. The FDA and the applicant should agree prospectively on the following items and the applicant should finalize the items before the initiation of the study, to the extent possible:• The study design• The definition of progression• The SAP• The methodology for handling missing data and censoring methods• The data to be recorded on the case report form (CRF)• The operating procedures of an independent endpoint review committee (IRC), if applicable (see Appendix)E. Clinical Trial Analysis IssuesMissing data can complicate endpoint analysis. For endpoints based on tumor assessments, the protocol should define an adequate assessment visit for each patient (i.e., a visit when all scheduled tumor assessments have been done). The analysis plan should outline a comparison of the adequacy of follow-up in each treatment arm. Methodology for analyzing incomplete and/or missing follow-up visits and censoring methods should be specified in the protocol. The analysis plan should specify the primary analysis and one or more sensitivity analyses to evaluate the robustness of the results. Although any analyses with missing data can be problematic, the results can be strengthened by similar results in both the primary and the sensitivity analyses. When applicable, the evaluation should include the number of deaths in patients who have been lost to follow-up for a prolonged time period. For example, an imbalance in such deaths could bias a PFS measurement by overestimating PFS in the treatment arm with less follow-up.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations15V. CONCLUSIONAlthough the general principles outlined in this guidance should help applicants select endpoints for marketing applications, we recommend that applicants meet with the FDA before submitting protocols intended to support NDA or BLA marketing applications. The FDA will ensure that these meetings include a multidisciplinary FDA team of oncologists, statisticians, clinical pharmacologists, and external expert consultants as needed. Applicants can submit protocols after these meetings and request a special protocol assessment that provides confirmation of the acceptability of endpoints and protocol design to support drug marketing applications.24 Ultimately, of course, marketing approval depends not only on the design of clinical trials, but on FDA review of the results and data from all studies in the drug marketing application.24 See the guidance for industry Special Protocol Assessment.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations16APPENDIX: INDEPENDENT REVIEW OF TUMOR ENDPOINTSClinical trial results that support drug approval should be verifiable by applicants and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Objective response rate (ORR) determined in single-arm studies can be evaluated by reviewing a limited number of images. When drug approval is based on measurement of progression-free survival (PFS), careful planning can minimize bias and enable the applicant and the FDA to verify results. An independent endpoint review committee (IRC) can minimize bias in radiographic interpretation of the radiological findings and independent adjudication of assessments. A clearly written plan of the charter outlining the IRC function and process (independent review charter) should be in place before initiation of the study. The plan should describe the assurance of the committee’s independence and procedure for collection, storage, and transportation of the results. The charter also should include the resolution of differences in interpretation and incorporation of clinical data in the final interpretation of data and audit procedures. The use of an IRC is discussed further in the guidance for industry Developing Medical Imaging Drug and Biological Products, Part 3: Design, Analysis, and Interpretation of Clinical Studies.

E6(R2) Good Clinical Practice: Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1) Guidance for Industry1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.INTRODUCTIONGood Clinical Practice (GCP) is an international ethical and scientific quality standard for designing, conducting, recording and reporting trials that involve the participation of human subjects. Compliance with this standard provides public assurance that the rights, safety, and well-being of trial subjects are protected, consistent with the principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki, and that the clinical trial data are credible.The objective of this ICH GCP guidance is to provide a unified standard for the European Union, Japan, and the United States to facilitate the mutual acceptance of clinical data by the regulatory authorities in these jurisdictions.The guidance was developed with consideration of the current good clinical practices of the European Union, Japan, and the United States, as well as those of Australia, Canada, the Nordic countries, and the World Health Organization.This guidance should be followed when generating clinical trial data that are intended to be submitted to regulatory authorities.The principles established in this guidance may also be applied to other clinical investigations that may have an impact on the safety and well-being of human subjects.1 This guidance was developed within the Expert Working Group (Procedural) of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) (formerly the International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use) and has been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH process. This document has been endorsed by the ICH Management Committee at Step 4 of the ICH process, November 2016. At Step 4 of the process, the final draft is recommended for adoption to the regulatory bodies of the European Union, Japan, and the United States authorities represented at ICH.1Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsADDENDUMSince the development of the ICH GCP Guidance, the scale, complexity, and cost of clinical trials have increased. Evolutions in technology and risk management processes offer new opportunities to increase efficiency and focus on relevant activities. When the original ICH E6(R1) text was prepared, clinical trials were performed in a largely paper-based process. Advances in use of electronic data recording and reporting facilitate implementation of other approaches. For example, centralized monitoring can now offer a greater advantage, to a broader range of trials than is suggested in the original text. Therefore, this guidance has been amended to encourage implementation of improved and more efficient approaches to clinical trial design, conduct, oversight, recording, and reporting while continuing to ensure human subject protection and reliability of trial results. Standards regarding electronic records and essential documents intended to increase clinical trial quality and efficiency have also been updated.This guidance should be read in conjunction with other ICH guidances relevant to the conduct of clinical trials (e.g., E2A (clinical safety data management), E3 (clinical study reporting), E7 (geriatric populations), E8 (general considerations for clinical trials), E9 (statistical principles), and E11 (pediatric populations)).This ICH GCP Guidance Integrated Addendum provides a unified standard for the European Union, Japan, the United States, Canada, and Switzerland to facilitate the mutual acceptance of data from clinical trials by the regulatory authorities in these jurisdictions. In the event of any conflict between the E6(R1) text and the E6(R2) addendum text, the E6(R2) addendum text should take priority.In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.2Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsl. GLOSSARY1.1 Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR)In the preapproval clinical experience with a new medicinal product or its new usages, particularly as the therapeutic dose(s) may not be established, all noxious and unintended responses to a medicinal product related to any dose should be considered adverse drug reactions. The phrase “responses to a medicinal product” means that a causal relationship between a medicinal product and an adverse event is at least a reasonable possibility, i.e., the relationship cannot be ruled out.Regarding marketed medicinal products: A response to a drug which is noxious and unintended and which occurs at doses normally used in man for prophylaxis, diagnosis, or therapy of diseases or for modification of physiological function (see the ICH Guideline for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting).1.2 Adverse Event (AE)Any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical investigation subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not related to the medicinal (investigational) product (see the ICH Guidance for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting).1.3 Amendment (to the protocol)See Protocol Amendment.1.4 Applicable Regulatory Requirement(s)Any law(s) and regulation(s) addressing the conduct of clinical trials of investigational products.1.5 Approval (in relation to institutional review boards (IRBs))The affirmative decision of the IRB that the clinical trial has been reviewed and may be conducted at the institution site within the constraints set forth by the IRB, the institution, good clinical practice (GCP), and the applicable regulatory requirements.1.6 AuditA systematic and independent examination of trial-related activities and documents to determine whether the evaluated trial-related activities were conducted, and the data were recorded, analyzed, and accurately reported according to the protocol, sponsor's standard operating procedures (SOPs), good clinical practice (GCP), and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).1.7 Audit CertificateA declaration of confirmation by the auditor that an audit has taken place.1.8 Audit ReportA written evaluation by the sponsor’s auditor of the results of the audit.3Contains Nonbinding Recommendations1.9 Audit TrailDocumentation that allows reconstruction of the course of events.1.10 Blinding/MaskingA procedure in which one or more parties to the trial are kept unaware of the treatment assignment(s). Single-blinding usually refers to the subject(s) being unaware, and double-blinding usually refers to the subject(s), investigator(s), monitor, and, in some cases, data analyst(s) being unaware of the treatment assignment(s).1.11 Case Report Form (CRF)A printed, optical, or electronic document designed to record all of the protocol required information to be reported to the sponsor on each trial subject.1.12 Clinical Trial/StudyAny investigation in human subjects intended to discover or verify the clinical, pharmacological and/or other pharmacodynamic effects of an investigational product(s), and/or to identify any adverse reactions to an investigational product(s), and/or to study absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of an investigational product(s) with the object of ascertaining its safety and/or efficacy. The terms clinical trial and clinical study are synonymous.1.13 Clinical Trial/Study ReportA written description of a trial/study of any therapeutic, prophylactic, or diagnostic agent conducted in human subjects, in which the clinical and statistical description, presentations, and analyses are fully integrated into a single report (see the ICH Guidance for Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports).1.14 Comparator (Product)An investigational or marketed product (i.e., active control), or placebo, used as a reference in a clinical trial.1.15 Compliance (in relation to trials)Adherence to all the trial-related requirements, good clinical practice (GCP) requirements, and the applicable regulatory requirements.1.16 ConfidentialityPrevention of disclosure, to other than authorized individuals, of a sponsor’s proprietary information or of a subject’s identity.1.17 ContractA written, dated, and signed agreement between two or more involved parties that sets out any arrangements on delegation and distribution of tasks and obligations and, if appropriate, on financial matters. The protocol may serve as the basis of a contract.1.18 Coordinating CommitteeA committee that a sponsor may organize to coordinate the conduct of a multicenter trial.4Contains Nonbinding Recommendations1.19 Coordinating InvestigatorAn investigator assigned the responsibility for the coordination of investigators at different centers participating in a multicenter trial.l.20 Contract Research Organization (CRO)A person or an organization (commercial, academic, or other) contracted by the sponsor to perform one or more of a sponsor's trial-related duties and functions.l.2l Direct AccessPermission to examine, analyze, verify, and reproduce any records and reports that are important to evaluation of a clinical trial. Any party (e.g., domestic and foreign regulatory authorities, sponsor’s monitors, and auditors) with direct access should take all reasonable precautions within the constraints of the applicable regulatory requirement(s) to maintain the confidentiality of subjects’ identities and sponsor’s proprietary information.1.22 DocumentationAll records, in any form (including, but not limited to, written, electronic, magnetic, and optical records, and scans, x-rays, and electrocardiograms) that describe or record the methods, conduct, and/or results of a trial, the factors affecting a trial, and the actions taken.1.23 Essential DocumentsDocuments that individually and collectively permit evaluation of the conduct of a study and the quality of the data produced (see section 8. “Essential Documents for the Conduct of a Clinical Trial”).1.24 Good Clinical Practice (GCP)A standard for the design, conduct, performance, monitoring, auditing, recording, analyses, and reporting of clinical trials that provides assurance that the data and reported results are credible and accurate, and that the rights, integrity, and confidentiality of trial subjects are protected.1.25 Independent Data Monitoring Committee (IDMC) (Data and Safety Monitoring Board, Monitoring Committee, Data Monitoring Committee)An independent data monitoring committee that may be established by the sponsor to assess at intervals the progress of a clinical trial, the safety data, and the critical efficacy endpoints, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial.1.26 Impartial WitnessA person, who is independent of the trial, who cannot be unfairly influenced by people involved with the trial, who attends the informed consent process if the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative cannot read, and who reads the informed consent form and any other written information supplied to the subject.1.27 Independent Ethics Committee (IEC)An independent body (a review board or a committee, institutional, regional, national, or supranational), constituted of medical professionals and non-medical members, whose5Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsresponsibility it is to ensure the protection of the rights, safety and well-being of human subjects involved in a trial and to provide public assurance of that protection, by, among other things, reviewing and approving/providing favorable opinion on the trial protocol, the suitability of the investigator(s), facilities, and the methods and material to be used in obtaining and documenting informed consent of the trial subjects.The legal status, composition, function, operations and regulatory requirements pertaining to Independent Ethics Committees may differ among countries, but should allow the Independent Ethics Committee to act in agreement with GCP as described in this guidance.1.28 Informed ConsentA process by which a subject voluntarily confirms his or her willingness to participate in a particular trial, after having been informed of all aspects of the trial that are relevant to the subject’s decision to participate. Informed consent is documented by means of a written, signed, and dated informed consent form.1.29 InspectionThe act by a regulatory authority(ies) of conducting an official review of documents, facilities, records, and any other resources that are deemed by the authority(ies) to be related to the clinical trial and that may be located at the site of the trial, at the sponsor’s and/or contract research organization’s (CROs) facilities, or at other establishments deemed appropriate by the regulatory authority(ies).1.30 Institution (medical)Any public or private entity or agency or medical or dental facility where clinical trials are conducted.l.31 Institutional Review Board (IRB)An independent body constituted of medical, scientific, and nonscientific members, whose responsibility is to ensure the protection of the rights, safety and well-being of human subjects involved in a trial by, among other things, reviewing, approving, and providing continuing review of trial protocols and amendments and of the methods and material to be used in obtaining and documenting informed consent of the trial subjects.1.32 Interim Clinical Trial/Study ReportA report of intermediate results and their evaluation based on analyses performed during the course of a trial.1.33 Investigational ProductA pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial, including a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from the approved form, or when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain further information about an approved use.1.34 InvestigatorA person responsible for the conduct of the clinical trial at a trial site. If a trial is conducted by a6Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsteam of individuals at a trial site, the investigator is the responsible leader of the team and may be called the principal investigator. (See also Subinvestigator.)1.35 Investigator/InstitutionAn expression meaning “the investigator and/or institution, where required by the applicable regulatory requirements.”1.36 Investigator’s BrochureA compilation of the clinical and nonclinical data on the investigational product(s) that is relevant to the study of the investigational product(s) in human subjects (see section 7. “Investigator’s Brochure”).1.37 Legally Acceptable RepresentativeAn individual or juridical or other body authorized under applicable law to consent, on behalf of a prospective subject, to the subject’s participation in the clinical trial.1.38 MonitoringThe act of overseeing the progress of a clinical trial, and of ensuring that it is conducted, recorded, and reported in accordance with the protocol, standard operating procedures (SOPs), GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).1.39 Monitoring ReportA written report from the monitor to the sponsor after each site visit and/or other trial-related communication according to the sponsor’s SOPs.1.40 Multicenter TrialA clinical trial conducted according to a single protocol but at more than one site, and therefore, carried out by more than one investigator.1.41 Nonclinical StudyBiomedical studies not performed on human subjects.1.42 Opinion (in relation to Independent Ethics Committee)The judgment and/or the advice provided by an Independent Ethics Committee (IEC).1.43 Original Medical RecordSee Source Documents.1.44 ProtocolA document that describes the objective(s), design, methodology, statistical considerations, and organization of a trial. The protocol usually also gives the background and rationale for the trial, but these could be provided in other protocol referenced documents. Throughout the ICH GCP Guidance, the term protocol refers to protocol and protocol amendments.1.45 Protocol AmendmentA written description of a change(s) to or formal clarification of a protocol.7Contains Nonbinding Recommendations1.46 Quality Assurance (QA)All those planned and systematic actions that are established to ensure that the trial is performed and the data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance with GCP and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).1.47 Quality Control (QC)The operational techniques and activities undertaken within the quality assurance system to verify that the requirements for quality of the trial-related activities have been fulfilled.1.48 RandomizationThe process of assigning trial subjects to treatment or control groups using an element of chance to determine the assignments in order to reduce bias.1.49 Regulatory AuthoritiesBodies having the power to regulate. In the ICH GCP guidance, the expression “Regulatory Authorities” includes the authorities that review submitted clinical data and those that conduct inspections (see 1.29). These bodies are sometimes referred to as competent authorities.1.50 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) or Serious Adverse Drug Reaction (Serious ADR)Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose:-Results in death,-Is life-threatening,-Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization,-Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or-Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect.(See the ICH guidance for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting.)1.51 Source DataAll information in original records and certified copies of original records of clinical findings, observations, or other activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial. Source data are contained in source documents (original records or certified copies).1.52 Source DocumentOriginal documents, data, and records (e.g., hospital records, clinical and office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, recorded data from automated instruments, copies or transcriptions certified after verification as being accurate copies, microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or magnetic media, x-rays, subject files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories and at medico-technical departments involved in the clinical trial).1.53 SponsorAn individual, company, institution, or organization that takes responsibility for the initiation,8Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsmanagement, and/or financing of a clinical trial.1.54 Sponsor-InvestigatorAn individual who both initiates and conducts, alone or with others, a clinical trial, and under whose immediate direction the investigational product is administered to, dispensed to, or used by a subject. The term does not include any person other than an individual (e.g., it does not include a corporation or an agency). The obligations of a sponsor-investigator include both those of a sponsor and those of an investigator.1.55 Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)Detailed, written instructions to achieve uniformity of the performance of a specific function.1.56 SubinvestigatorAny individual member of the clinical trial team designated and supervised by the investigator at a trial site to perform critical trial-related procedures and/or to make important trial-related decisions (e.g., associates, residents, research fellows). See also Investigator.1.57 Subject/Trial SubjectAn individual who participates in a clinical trial, either as a recipient of the investigational product(s) or as a control.1.58 Subject Identification CodeA unique identifier assigned by the investigator to each trial subject to protect the subject’s identity and used in lieu of the subject’s name when the investigator reports adverse events and/or other trial-related data.1.59 Trial SiteThe location(s) where trial-related activities are actually conducted.1.60 Unexpected Adverse Drug ReactionAn adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not consistent with the applicable product information (e.g., Investigator’s Brochure for an unapproved investigational product or package insert/summary of product characteristics for an approved product). (See the ICH Guidance for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting.)1.61 Vulnerable SubjectsIndividuals whose willingness to volunteer in a clinical trial may be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation, or of a retaliatory response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate. Examples are members of a group with a hierarchical structure, such as medical, pharmacy, dental, and nursing students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the pharmaceutical industry, members of the armed forces, and persons kept in detention. Other vulnerable subjects include patients with incurable diseases, persons in nursing homes, unemployed or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors, and those incapable of giving consent.9Contains Nonbinding Recommendations1.62 Well-being (of the trial subjects)The physical and mental integrity of the subjects participating in a clinical trial.ADDENDUM1.63 Certified CopyA copy (irrespective of the type of media used) of the original record that has been verified (i.e., by a dated signature or by generation through a validated process) to have the same information, including data that describe the context, content, and structure, as the original.1.64 Monitoring PlanA document that describes the strategy, methods, responsibilities, and requirements for monitoring the trial.1.65 Validation of Computerized SystemsA process of establishing and documenting that the specified requirements of a computerized system can be consistently fulfilled from design until decommissioning of the system or transition to a new system. The approach to validation should be based on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use of the system and the potential of the system to affect human subject protection and reliability of trial results.10Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2. THE PRINCIPLES OF ICH GCP2.l Clinical trials should be conducted in accordance with the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki, and that are consistent with GCP and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).2.2 Before a trial is initiated, foreseeable risks and inconveniences should be weighed against the anticipated benefit for the individual trial subject and society. A trial should be initiated and continued only if the anticipated benefits justify the risks.2.3 The rights, safety, and well-being of the trial subjects are the most important considerations and should prevail over interests of science and society.2.4 The available nonclinical and clinical information on an investigational product should be adequate to support the proposed clinical trial.2.5 Clinical trials should be scientifically sound, and described in a clear, detailed protocol.2.6 A trial should be conducted in compliance with the protocol that has received prior institutional review board (IRB)/independent ethics committee (IEC) approval/favorable opinion.2.7 The medical care given to, and medical decisions made on behalf of, subjects should always be the responsibility of a qualified physician or, when appropriate, of a qualified dentist.2.8 Each individual involved in conducting a trial should be qualified by education, training, and experience to perform his or her respective task(s).2.9 Freely given informed consent should be obtained from every subject prior to clinical trial participation.2.10 All clinical trial information should be recorded, handled, and stored in a way that allows its accurate reporting, interpretation, and verification.ADDENDUMThis principle applies to all records referenced in this guidance, irrespective of the type of media used.2.11 The confidentiality of records that could identify subjects should be protected, respecting the privacy and confidentiality rules in accordance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s).2.12 Investigational products should be manufactured, handled, and stored in accordance with applicable good manufacturing practice (GMP). They should be used in accordance with the approved protocol.11Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2.13 Systems with procedures that assure the quality of every aspect of the trial should be implemented.ADDENDUMAspects of the trial that are essential to ensure human subject protection and reliability of trial results should be the focus of such systems.3. INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD/INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE (IRB/IEC)3.1 Responsibilities3.1.1 An IRB/IEC should safeguard the rights, safety, and well-being of all trial subjects. Special attention should be paid to trials that may include vulnerable subjects.3.1.2 The IRB/IEC should obtain the following documents: Trial protocol(s)/amendment(s), written informed consent form(s) and consent form updates that the investigator proposes for use in the trial, subject recruitment procedures (e.g., advertisements), written information to be provided to subjects, Investigator’s Brochure (IB), available safety information, information about payments and compensation available to subjects, the investigator’s current curriculumvitae and/or other documentation evidencing qualifications, and any other documents that the IRB/IEC may need to fulfil its responsibilities.The IRB/IEC should review a proposed clinical trial within a reasonable time and document its views in writing, clearly identifying the trial, the documents reviewed and the dates for the following:-Approval/favorable opinion;-Modifications required prior to its approval/favorable opinion;-Disapproval/negative opinion; and-Termination/suspension of any prior approval/favorable opinion.3.1.3 The IRB/IEC should consider the qualifications of the investigator for the proposed trial, as documented by a current curriculum vitae and/or by any other relevant documentation the IRB/IEC requests.3.1.4 The IRB/IEC should conduct continuing review of each ongoing trial at intervals appropriate to the degree of risk to human subjects, but at least once per year.3.1.5 The IRB/IEC may request more information than is outlined in paragraph 4.8.10 be given to subjects when, in the judgment of the IRB/IEC, the additional information would add meaningfully to the protection of the rights, safety, and/or well-being of the subjects.12Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3.1.6 When a nontherapeutic trial is to be carried out with the consent of the subject’s legally acceptable representative (see sections 4.8.12, 4.8.14), the IRB/IEC should determine that the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials.3.1.7 Where the protocol indicates that prior consent of the trial subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative is not possible (see section 4.8.15), the IRB/IEC should determine that the proposed protocol and/or other document(s) adequately addresses relevant ethical concerns and meets applicable regulatory requirements for such trials (i.e., in emergency situations).3.1.8 The IRB/IEC should review both the amount and method of payment to subjects to assure that neither presents problems of coercion or undue influence on the trial subjects. Payments to a subject should be prorated and not wholly contingent on completion of the trial by the subject.3.1.9 The IRB/IEC should ensure that information regarding payment to subjects, including the methods, amounts, and schedule of payment to trial subjects, is set forth in the written informed consent form and any other written information to be provided to subjects. The way payment will be prorated should be specified.3.2 Composition, Functions, and Operations3.2.1 The IRB/IEC should consist of a reasonable number of members, who collectively have the qualifications and experience to review and evaluate the science, medical aspects, and ethics of the proposed trial. It is recommended that the IRB/IEC should include:(a)At least five members.(b)At least one member whose primary area of interest is in a nonscientific area.(c)At least one member who is independent of the institution/trial site.Only those IRB/IEC members who are independent of the investigator and the sponsor of the trial should vote/provide opinion on a trial-related matter.A list of IRB/IEC members and their qualifications should be maintained.3.2.2 The IRB/IEC should perform its functions according to written operating procedures, should maintain written records of its activities and minutes of its meetings, and should comply with GCP and with the applicable regulatory requirement(s).3.2.3 An IRB/IEC should make its decisions at announced meetings at which at least a quorum, as stipulated in its written operating procedures, is present.3.2.4 Only members who participate in the IRB/IEC review and discussion should13Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsvote/provide their opinion and/or advice.3.2.5The investigator may provide information on any aspect of the trial, but should not participate in the deliberations of the IRB/IEC or in the vote/opinion of the IRB/IEC.3.2.6An IRB/IEC may invite nonmembers with expertise in special areas for assistance.3.3ProceduresThe IRB/IEC should establish, document in writing, and follow its procedures, which should include:3.3.1 Determining its composition (names and qualifications of the members) and the authority under which it is established.3.3.2 Scheduling, notifying its members of, and conducting its meetings.3.3.3 Conducting initial and continuing review of trials.3.3.4 Determining the frequency of continuing review, as appropriate.3.3.5 Providing, according to the applicable regulatory requirements, expedited review and approval/favorable opinion of minor change(s) in ongoing trials that have the approval/favorable opinion of the IRB/IEC.3.3.6 Specifying that no subject should be admitted to a trial before the IRB/IEC issues its written approval/favorable opinion of the trial.3.3.7 Specifying that no deviations from, or changes of, the protocol should be initiated without prior written IRB/IEC approval/favorable opinion of an appropriate amendment, except when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to the subjects or when the change(s) involves only logistical or administrative aspects of the trial (e.g., change of monitor(s), telephone number(s)) (see section 4.5.2).3.3.8 Specifying that the investigator should promptly report to the IRB/IEC:(a)Deviations from, or changes of, the protocol to eliminate immediate hazards to the trial subjects (see sections 3.3.7, 4.5.2, 4.5.4).(b)Changes increasing the risk to subjects and/or affecting significantly the conduct of the trial (see section 4.10.2).(c)All adverse drug reactions (ADRs) that are both serious and unexpected.(d)New information that may affect adversely the safety of the subjects or the conduct of the trial.3.3.9 Ensuring that the IRB/IEC promptly notify in writing the investigator/institution concerning:14Contains Nonbinding Recommendations(a)Its trial-related decisions/opinions.(b)The reasons for its decisions/opinions.(c)Procedures for appeal of its decisions/opinions.3.4 RecordsThe IRB/IEC should retain all relevant records (e.g., written procedures, membership lists, lists of occupations/affiliations of members, submitted documents, minutes of meetings, and correspondence) for a period of at least 3 years after completion of the trial and make them available upon request from the regulatory authority(ies).The IRB/IEC may be asked by investigators, sponsors or regulatory authorities to provide its written procedures and membership lists.4. INVESTIGATOR4.l Investigator’s Qualifications and Agreements4.1.1 The investigator(s) should be qualified by education, training, and experience to assume responsibility for the proper conduct of the trial, should meet all the qualifications specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and should provide evidence of such qualifications through up-to-date curriculum vitae and/or other relevant documentation requested by the sponsor, the IRB/IEC, and/or the regulatory authority(ies).4.l.2 The investigator should be thoroughly familiar with the appropriate use of the investigational product(s), as described in the protocol, in the current Investigator’s Brochure, in the product information, and in other information sources provided by the sponsor.4.l.3 The investigator should be aware of, and should comply with, GCP and the applicable regulatory requirements.4.l.4 The investigator/institution should permit monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by the appropriate regulatory authority(ies).4.l.5 The investigator should maintain a list of appropriately qualified persons to whom the investigator has delegated significant trial-related duties.4.2 Adequate Resources4.2.1 The investigator should be able to demonstrate (e.g., based on retrospective data) a potential for recruiting the required number of suitable subjects within the agreed recruitment period.4.2.2 The investigator should have sufficient time to properly conduct and complete the trial within the agreed trial period.15Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4.2.3 The investigator should have available an adequate number of qualified staff and adequate facilities for the foreseen duration of the trial to conduct the trial properly and safely.4.2.4 The investigator should ensure that all persons assisting with the trial are adequately informed about the protocol, the investigational product(s), and their trial-related duties and functions.ADDENDUM4.2.5 The investigator is responsible for supervising any individual or party to whom the investigator delegates trial-related duties and functions conducted at the trial site.4.2.6 If the investigator/institution retains the services of any individual or party to perform trial-related duties and functions, the investigator/institution should ensure this individual or party is qualified to perform those trial-related duties and functions and should implement procedures to ensure the integrity of the trial-related duties and functions performed and any data generated.4.3 Medical Care of Trial Subjects4.3.1 A qualified physician (or dentist, when appropriate), who is an investigator or a subinvestigator for the trial, should be responsible for all trial-related medical (or dental) decisions.4.3.2 During and following a subject’s participation in a trial, the investigator/institution should ensure that adequate medical care is provided to a subject for any adverse events, including clinically significant laboratory values, related to the trial. The investigator/institution should inform a subject when medical care is needed for intercurrent illness(es) of which the investigator becomes aware.4.3.3 It is recommended that the investigator inform the subject’s primary physician about the subject’s participation in the trial if the subject has a primary physician and if the subject agrees to the primary physician being informed.4.3.4 Although a subject is not obliged to give his/her reason(s) for withdrawing prematurely from a trial, the investigator should make a reasonable effort to ascertain the reason(s), while fully respecting the subject’s rights.4.4 Communication with IRB/IEC4.4.1 Before initiating a trial, the investigator/institution should have written and dated approval/favorable opinion from the IRB/IEC for the trial protocol, written informed consent form, consent form updates, subject recruitment procedures (e.g., advertisements), and any other written information to be provided to subjects.4.4.2 As part of the investigator’s/institution’s written application to the IRB/IEC, the investigator/institution should provide the IRB/IEC with a current copy of the Investigator’s Brochure. If the Investigator’s Brochure is updated during the trial, the16Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsinvestigator/institution should supply a copy of the updated Investigator’s Brochure to the IRB/IEC.4.4.3 During the trial the investigator/institution should provide to the IRB/IEC all documents subject to review.4.5 Compliance with Protocol4.5.1 The investigator/institution should conduct the trial in compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and, if required, by the regulatory authority(ies), and which was given approval/favorable opinion by the IRB/IEC. The investigator/institution and the sponsor should sign the protocol, or an alternative contract, to confirm agreement.4.5.2 The investigator should not implement any deviation from, or changes of, the protocol without agreement by the sponsor and prior review and documented approval/favorable opinion from the IRB/IEC of an amendment, except where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to trial subjects, or when the change(s) involves only logistical or administrative aspects of the trial (e.g., change in monitor(s), change of telephone number(s)).4.5.3 The investigator, or person designated by the investigator, should document and explain any deviation from the approved protocol.4.5.4 The investigator may implement a deviation from, or a change in, the protocol to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to trial subjects without prior IRB/IEC approval/favorable opinion. As soon as possible, the implemented deviation or change, the reasons for it, and, if appropriate, the proposed protocol amendment(s) should be submitted:(a)To the IRB/IEC for review and approval/favorable opinion;(b)To the sponsor for agreement and, if required;(c)To the regulatory authority(ies).4.6 Investigational Product(s)4.6.1 Responsibility for investigational product(s) accountability at the trial site(s) rests with the investigator/institution.4.6.2 Where allowed/required, the investigator/institution may/should assign some or all of the investigator’s/institution’s duties for investigational product(s) accountability at the trial site(s) to an appropriate pharmacist or another appropriate individual who is under the supervision of the investigator/institution.4.6.3 The investigator/institution and/or a pharmacist or other appropriate individual, who17Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsis designated by the investigator/institution, should maintain records of the product’s delivery to the trial site, the inventory at the site, the use by each subject, and the return to the sponsor or alternative disposition of unused product(s). These records should include dates, quantities, batch/serial numbers, expiration dates (if applicable), and the unique code numbers assigned to the investigational product(s) and trial subjects. Investigators should maintain records that document adequately that the subjects were provided the doses specified by the protocol and reconcile all investigational product(s) received from the sponsor.4.6.4 The investigational product(s) should be stored as specified by the sponsor (see sections 5.13.2 and 5.14.3) and in accordance with applicable regulatory requirement(s).4.6.5 The investigator should ensure that the investigational product(s) are used only in accordance with the approved protocol.4.6.6 The investigator, or a person designated by the investigator/institution, should explain the correct use of the investigational product(s) to each subject and should check, at intervals appropriate for the trial, that each subject is following the instructions properly.4.7 Randomization Procedures and UnblindingThe investigator should follow the trial’s randomization procedures, if any, and should ensure that the code is broken only in accordance with the protocol. If the trial is blinded, the investigator should promptly document and explain to the sponsor any premature unblinding (e.g., accidental unblinding, unblinding due to a serious adverse event) of the investigational product(s).4.8 Informed Consent of Trial Subjects4.8.1 In obtaining and documenting informed consent, the investigator should comply with the applicable regulatory requirement(s), and should adhere to GCP and to the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki. Prior to the beginning of the trial, the investigator should have the IRB/IEC’s written approval/favorable opinion of the written informed consent form and any other written information to be provided to subjects.4.8.2 The written informed consent form and any other written information to be provided to subjects should be revised whenever important new information becomes available that may be relevant to the subject’s consent. Any revised written informed consent form, and written information should receive the IRB/IEC’s approval/favorable opinion in advance of use. The subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative should be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the subject’s willingness to continue participation in the trial. The communication of this information should be documented.4.8.3 Neither the investigator, nor the trial staff, should coerce or unduly influence a subject to participate or to continue to participate in a trial.18Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4.8.4 None of the oral and written information concerning the trial, including the written informed consent form, should contain any language that causes the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative to waive or to appear to waive any legal rights, or that releases or appears to release the investigator, the institution, the sponsor, or their agents from liability for negligence.4.8.5 The investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, should fully inform the subject or, if the subject is unable to provide informed consent, the subject’s legally acceptable representative, of all pertinent aspects of the trial including the written information and the approval/ favorable opinion by the IRB/IEC.4.8.6 The language used in the oral and written information about the trial, including the written informed consent form, should be as non-technical as practical and should be understandable to the subject or the subject's legally acceptable representative and the impartial witness, where applicable.4.8.7 Before informed consent may be obtained, the investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, should provide the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative ample time and opportunity to inquire about details of the trial and to decide whether or not to participate in the trial. All questions about the trial should be answered to the satisfaction of the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative.4.8.8 Prior to a subject’s participation in the trial, the written informed consent form should be signed and personally dated by the subject or by the subject’s legally acceptable representative, and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion.4.8.9 If a subject is unable to read or if a legally acceptable representative is unable to read, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion. After the written informed consent form and any other written information to be provided to subjects, is read and explained to the subject or the subject's legally acceptable representative, and after the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative has orally consented to the subject’s participation in the trial and, if capable of doing so, has signed and personally dated the informed consent form, the witness should sign and personally date the consent form. By signing the consent form, the witness attests that the information in the consent form and any other written information was accurately explained to, and apparently understood by, the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative, and that informed consent was freely given by the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative.4.8.10 Both the informed consent discussion and the written informed consent form and any other written information to be provided to subjects should include explanations of the following:(a)That the trial involves research.(b)The purpose of the trial.19Contains Nonbinding Recommendations(c)The trial treatment(s) and the probability for random assignment to each treatment.(d)The trial procedures to be followed, including all invasive procedures.(e)The subject’s responsibilities.(f)Those aspects of the trial that are experimental.(g)The reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences to the subject and, when applicable, to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant.(h)The reasonably expected benefits. When there is no intended clinical benefit to the subject, the subject should be made aware of this.(i)The alternative procedure(s) or course(s) of treatment that may be available to the subject, and their important potential benefits and risks.(j)The compensation and/or treatment available to the subject in the event of trial-related injury.(k)The anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the subject for participating in the trial.(l)The anticipated expenses, if any, to the subject for participating in the trial.(m)That the subject’s participation in the trial is voluntary and that the subject may refuse to participate or withdraw from the trial, at any time, without penalty or loss of benefits to which the subject is otherwise entitled.(n)That the monitor(s), the auditor(s), the IRB/IEC, and the regulatory authority(ies) will be granted direct access to the subject’s original medical records for verification of clinical trial procedures and/or data, without violating the confidentiality of the subject, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and regulations and that, by signing a written informed consent form, the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative is authorizing such access.(o)That records identifying the subject will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by the applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly available. If the results of the trial are published, the subject’s identity will remain confidential.(p)That the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative will be informed in a timely manner if information becomes available that may be relevant to the subject’s willingness to continue participation in the trial.(q)The person(s) to contact for further information regarding the trial and the rights of trial subjects, and whom to contact in the event of trial-related injury.(r)The foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons under which the subject’s participation in the trial may be terminated.(s)The expected duration of the subject’s participation in the trial.(t)The approximate number of subjects involved in the trial.4.8.11 Prior to participation in the trial, the subject or the subject's legally acceptable representative should receive a copy of the signed and dated written informed consent form and any other written information provided to the subjects. During a subject’s participation in the trial, the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable20Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsrepresentative should receive a copy of the signed and dated consent form updates and a copy of any amendments to the written information provided to subjects.4.8.12 When a clinical trial (therapeutic or non-therapeutic) includes subjects who can only be enrolled in the trial with the consent of the subject’s legally acceptable representative (e.g., minors, or patients with severe dementia), the subject should be informed about the trial to the extent compatible with the subject’s understanding and, if capable, the subject should sign and personally date the written informed consent.4.8.13 Except as described in 4.8.14, a non-therapeutic trial (i.e., a trial in which there is no anticipated direct clinical benefit to the subject), should be conducted in subjects who personally give consent and who sign and date the written informed consent form.4.8.14 Nontherapeutic trials may be conducted in subjects with consent of a legally acceptable representative provided the following conditions are fulfilled:(a)The objectives of the trial cannot be met by means of a trial in subjects who can give informed consent personally.(b)The foreseeable risks to the subjects are low.(c)The negative impact on the subject’s well-being is minimized and low.(d)The trial is not prohibited by law.(e)The approval/favorable opinion of the IRB/IEC is expressly sought on the inclusion of such subjects, and the written approval/ favorable opinion covers this aspect.Such trials, unless an exception is justified, should be conducted in patients having a disease or condition for which the investigational product is intended. Subjects in these trials should be particularly closely monitored and should be withdrawn if they appear to be unduly distressed.4.8.15 In emergency situations, when prior consent of the subject is not possible, the consent of the subject’s legally acceptable representative, if present, should be requested. When prior consent of the subject is not possible, and the subject’s legally acceptable representative is not available, enrollment of the subject should require measures described in the protocol and/or elsewhere, with documented approval/favorable opinion by the IRB/IEC, to protect the rights, safety and well-being of the subject and to ensure compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. The subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative should be informed about the trial as soon as possible and consent to continue and other consent as appropriate (see s e c t i o n 4.8.10) should be requested.21Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4.9 Records and ReportsADDENDUM4.9.0 The investigator/institution should maintain adequate and accurate source documents and trial records that include all pertinent observations on each of the site's trial subjects. Source data should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, accurate, and complete. Changes to source data should be traceable, should not obscure the original entry, and should be explained if necessary (e.g., via an audit trail).4.9.1 The investigator should ensure the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data reported to the sponsor in the CRFs and in all required reports.4.9.2 Data reported on the CRF, that are derived from source documents, should be consistent with the source documents or the discrepancies should be explained.4.9.3 Any change or correction to a CRF should be dated, initialed, and explained (if necessary) and should not obscure the original entry (i.e., an audit trail should be maintained); this applies to both written and electronic changes or corrections (see 5.18.4(n)). Sponsors should provide guidance to investigators and/or the investigators' designated representatives on making such corrections. Sponsors should have written procedures to assure that changes or corrections in CRFs made by sponsor's designated representatives are documented, are necessary, and are endorsed by the investigator. The investigator should retain records of the changes and corrections.4.9.4 The investigator/institution should maintain the trial documents as specified in Essential Documents for the Conduct of a Clinical Trial (see section 8.) and as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s). The investigator/institution should take measures to prevent accidental or premature destruction of these documents.4.9.5 Essential documents should be retained until at least 2-years after the last approval of a marketing application in an ICH region and until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications in an ICH region or at least 2 years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product. These documents should be retained for a longer period, however, if required by the applicable regulatory requirements or by an agreement with the sponsor. It is the responsibility of the sponsor to inform the investigator/institution as to when these documents no longer need to be retained (see section 5.5.12).4.9.6 The financial aspects of the trial should be documented in an agreement between the sponsor and the investigator/institution.4.9.7 Upon request of the monitor, auditor, IRB/IEC, or regulatory authority, the investigator/institution should make available for direct access all requested trial-related records.22Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4.10 Progress Reports4.10.1 The investigator should submit written summaries of the trial’s status to the IRB/IEC annually, or more frequently, if requested by the IRB/IEC.4.10.2 The investigator should promptly provide written reports to the sponsor, the IRB/IEC (see section 3.3.8) and, where applicable, the institution on any changes significantly affecting the conduct of the trial, and/or increasing the risk to subjects.4.11 Safety Reporting4.11.1 All SAEs should be reported immediately to the sponsor except for those SAEs that the protocol or other document (e.g., Investigator's Brochure) identifies as not needing immediate reporting. The immediate reports should be followed promptly by detailed, written reports. The immediate and follow-up reports should identify subjects by unique code numbers assigned to the trial subjects rather than by the subjects' names, personal identification numbers, and/or addresses. The investigator should also comply with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) related to the reporting of unexpected serious adverse drug reactions to the regulatory authority(ies) and the IRB/IEC.4.11.2 Adverse events and/or laboratory abnormalities identified in the protocol as critical to safety evaluations should be reported to the sponsor according to the reporting requirements and within the time periods specified by the sponsor in the protocol.4.11.3 For reported deaths, the investigator should supply the sponsor and the IRB/IEC with any additional requested information (e.g., autopsy reports and terminal medical reports).4.12 Premature Termination or Suspension of a TrialIf the trial is prematurely terminated or suspended for any reason, the investigator/institution should promptly inform the trial subjects, should assure appropriate therapy and follow-up for the subjects, and, where required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), should inform the regulatory authority(ies). In addition:4.12.1 If the investigator terminates or suspends a trial without prior agreement of the sponsor, the investigator should inform the institution, where applicable, and the investigator/institution should promptly inform the sponsor and the IRB/IEC, and should provide the sponsor and the IRB/IEC a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.4.12.2 If the sponsor terminates or suspends a trial (see section 5.21), the investigator should promptly inform the institution where applicable and the investigator/institution should promptly inform the IRB/IEC, and provide the IRB/IEC a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.23Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4.12.3 If the IRB/IEC terminates or suspends its approval/favorable opinion of a trial (see sections 3.1.2 and 3.3.9), the investigator should inform the institution where applicable and the investigator/institution should promptly notify the sponsor and provide the sponsor with a detailed written explanation of the termination or suspension.4.13 Final Report(s) by InvestigatorUpon completion of the trial, the investigator, where applicable, should inform the institution; the investigator/institution should provide the IRB/IEC with a summary of the trial's outcome, and the regulatory authority(ies) with any reports required.5. SPONSORADDENDUM5.0 Quality ManagementThe sponsor should implement a system to manage quality throughout all stages of the trial process.Sponsors should focus on trial activities essential to ensuring human subject protection and the reliability of trial results. Quality management includes the design of efficient clinical trial protocols, tools, and procedures for data collection and processing, as well as the collection of information that is essential to decision making.The methods used to assure and control the quality of the trial should be proportionate to the risks inherent in the trial and the importance of the information collected. The sponsor should ensure that all aspects of the trial are operationally feasible and should avoid unnecessary complexity, procedures, and data collection. Protocols, case report forms, and other operational documents should be clear, concise, and consistent.The quality management system should use a risk-based approach as described below.5.0.1 Critical Process and Data IdentificationDuring protocol development, the sponsor should identify those processes and data that are critical to ensure human subject protection and the reliability of trial results.5.0.2 Risk IdentificationThe sponsor should identify risks to critical trial processes and data. Risks should be considered at both the system level (e.g., standard operating procedures, computerized systems, and personnel) and clinical trial level (e.g., trial design, data collection, and informed consent process).5.0.3 Risk EvaluationThe sponsor should evaluate the identified risks, against existing risk controls by considering:24Contains Nonbinding Recommendations(a)The likelihood of errors occurring.(b)The extent to which such errors would be detectable.(c)The impact of such errors on human subject protection and reliability of trial results.5.0.4 Risk ControlThe sponsor should decide which risks to reduce and/or which risks to accept. The approach used to reduce risk to an acceptable level should be proportionate to the significance of the risk. Risk reduction activities may be incorporated in protocol design and implementation, monitoring plans, agreements between parties defining roles and responsibilities, systematic safeguards to ensure adherence to standard operating procedures, and training in processes and procedures.Predefined quality tolerance limits should be established, taking into consideration the medical and statistical characteristics of the variables as well as the statistical design of the trial, to identify systematic issues that can impact subject safety or reliability of trial results. Detection of deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits should trigger an evaluation to determine if action is needed.5.0.5 Risk CommunicationThe sponsor should document quality management activities. The sponsor should communicate quality management activities to those who are involved in or affected by such activities, to facilitate risk review and continual improvement during clinical trial execution.5.0.6 Risk ReviewThe sponsor should periodically review risk control measures to ascertain whether the implemented quality management activities remain effective and relevant, taking into account emerging knowledge and experience.5.0.7 Risk Reporting The sponsor should describe the quality management approach implemented in the trial and summarize important deviations from the predefined quality tolerance limits and remedial actions taken in the clinical study report (ICH E3, section 9.6 Data Quality Assurance).5.l Quality Assurance and Quality Control5.1.1 The sponsor is responsible for implementing and maintaining quality assurance and quality control systems with written SOPs to ensure that trials are conducted and data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance with the protocol, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).5.1.2 The sponsor is responsible for securing agreement from all involved parties to ensure direct access (see section 1.21) to all trial-related sites, source data/documents, and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by domestic and foreign regulatory authorities.5.1.3 Quality control should be applied to each stage of data handling to ensure that all data are reliable and have been processed correctly.25Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5.1.4 Agreements, made by the sponsor with the investigator/institution and any other parties involved with the clinical trial, should be in writing, as part of the protocol or in a separate agreement.5.2 Contract Research Organization (CRO)5.2.1 A sponsor may transfer any or all of the sponsor's trial-related duties and functions to a CRO, but the ultimate responsibility for the quality and integrity of the trial data always resides with the sponsor. The CRO should implement quality assurance and quality control.5.2.2 Any trial-related duty and function that is transferred to and assumed by a CRO should be specified in writing.ADDENDUMThe sponsor should ensure oversight of any trial-related duties and functions carried out on its behalf, including trial-related duties and functions that are subcontracted to another party by the sponsor's contracted CRO(s).5.2.3 Any trial-related duties and functions not specifically transferred to and assumed by a CRO are retained by the sponsor.5.2.4 All references to a sponsor in this guidance also apply to a CRO to the extent that a CRO has assumed the trial-related duties and functions of a sponsor.5.3 Medical ExpertiseThe sponsor should designate appropriately qualified medical personnel who will be readily available to advise on trial-related medical questions or problems. If necessary, outside consultant(s) may be appointed for this purpose.5.4 Trial Design5.4.1 The sponsor should utilize qualified individuals (e.g., biostatisticians, clinical pharmacologists, and physicians) as appropriate, throughout all stages of the trial process, from designing the protocol and CRFs and planning the analyses to analyzing and preparing interim and final clinical trial reports.5.4.2 For further guidance: Clinical Trial Protocol and Protocol Amendment(s) (see section 6), the ICH Guideline for Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports, and other appropriate ICH guidance on trial design, protocol, and conduct.26Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5.5 Trial Management, Data Handling, and Recordkeeping5.5.1 The sponsor should utilize appropriately qualified individuals to supervise the overall conduct of the trial, to handle the data, to verify the data, to conduct the statistical analyses, and to prepare the trial reports.5.5.2 The sponsor may consider establishing an independent data monitoring committee (IDMC) to assess the progress of a clinical trial, including the safety data and the critical efficacy endpoints at intervals, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a trial. The IDMC should have written operating procedures and maintain written records of all its meetings.5.5.3 When using electronic trial data handling and/or remote electronic trial data systems, the sponsor should:(a) Ensure and document that the electronic data processing system(s) conforms to the sponsor's established requirements for completeness, accuracy, reliability, and consistent intended performance (i.e., validation).ADDENDUMThe sponsor should base their approach to validation of such systems on a risk assessment that takes into consideration the intended use of the system and the potential of the system to affect human subject protection and reliability of trial results.(b) Maintains SOPs for using these systems.ADDENDUM The SOPs should cover system setup, installation, and use. The SOPs should describe system validation and functionality testing, data collection and handling, system maintenance, system security measures, change control, data backup, recovery, contingency planning, and decommissioning. The responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator, and other parties with respect to the use of these computerized systems should be clear, and the users should be provided with training in their use.(c)Ensure that the systems are designed to permit data changes in such a way that the data changes are documented and that there is no deletion of entered data (i.e., maintain an audit trail, data trail, edit trail).(d)Maintain a security system that prevents unauthorized access to the data.(e)Maintain a list of the individuals who are authorized to make data changes (see sections 4.1.5 and 4.9.3).(f)Maintain adequate backup of the data.(g)Safeguard the blinding, if any (e.g., maintain the blinding during data entry and processing).27Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsADDENDUM(h) Ensure the integrity of the data, including any data that describe the context, content, and structure. This is particularly important when making changes to the computerized systems, such as software upgrades or migration of data.5.5.4 If data are transformed during processing, it should always be possible to compare the original data and observations with the processed data.5.5.5 The sponsor should use an unambiguous subject identification code (see 1.58) that allows identification of all the data reported for each subject.5.5.6 The sponsor, or other owners of the data, should retain all of the sponsor-specific essential documents pertaining to the trial (see section 8. Essential Documents for the Conduct of a Clinical Trial).5.5.7 The sponsor should retain all sponsor-specific essential documents in conformance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) of the country(ies) where the product is approved, and/or where the sponsor intends to apply for approval(s).5.5.8 If the sponsor discontinues the clinical development of an investigational product (i.e., for any or all indications, routes of administration, or dosage forms), the sponsor should maintain all sponsor-specific essential documents for at least 2-years after formal discontinuation or in conformance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s).5.5.9 If the sponsor discontinues the clinical development of an investigational product, the sponsor should notify all the trial investigators/institutions and all the regulatory authorities.5.5.10 Any transfer of ownership of the data should be reported to the appropriate authority(ies), as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s).5.5.11 The sponsor specific essential documents should be retained until at least 2 years after the last approval of a marketing application in an ICH region and until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications in an ICH region or at least 2 years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product. These documents should be retained for a longer period, however, if required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s) or if needed by the sponsor.5.5.12 The sponsor should inform the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing of the need for record retention and should notify the investigator(s)/institution(s) in writing when the trial-related records are no longer needed.5.6 Investigator Selection28Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5.6.1 The sponsor is responsible for selecting the investigator(s)/institution(s). Each investigator should be qualified by training and experience and should have adequate resources (see sections 4.1, 4.2) to properly conduct the trial for which the investigator is selected. If organization of a coordinating committee and/or selection of coordinating investigator(s) are to be utilized in multicenter trials, their organization and/or selection are the sponsor's responsibility.5.6.2 Before entering an agreement with an investigator/institution to conduct a trial, the sponsor should provide the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the protocol and an up-to-date Investigator's Brochure, and should provide sufficient time for the investigator/institution to review the protocol and the information provided.5.6.3 The sponsor should obtain the investigator's/institution's agreement:(a)To conduct the trial in compliance with GCP, with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) (see section 4.1.3), and with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and given approval/favorable opinion by the IRB/IEC (see section 4.5.1);(b)To comply with procedures for data recording/reporting;(c)To permit monitoring, auditing, and inspection (see section 4.1.4); and(d)To retain the trial-related essential documents until the sponsor informs the investigator/institution these documents are no longer needed (see sections 4.9.4 and 5.5.12).The sponsor and the investigator/institution should sign the protocol, or an alternative document, to confirm this agreement.5.7 Allocation of ResponsibilitiesPrior to initiating a trial, the sponsor should define, establish, and allocate all trial-related duties and functions.5.8 Compensation to Subjects and Investigators5.8.1 If required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), the sponsor should provide insurance or should indemnify (legal and financial coverage) the investigator/the institution against claims arising from the trial, except for claims that arise from malpractice and/or negligence.5.8.2 The sponsor's policies and procedures should address the costs of treatment of trial subjects in the event of trial-related injuries in accordance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s).5.8.3 When trial subjects receive compensation, the method and manner of compensation should comply with applicable regulatory requirement(s).5.9 FinancingThe financial aspects of the trial should be documented in an agreement between the sponsor29Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsand the investigator/institution.5.10 Notification/Submission to Regulatory Authority(ies)Before initiating the clinical trial(s), the sponsor (or the sponsor and the investigator, if required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s)) should submit any required application(s) to the appropriate authority(ies) for review, acceptance, and/or permission (as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s)) to begin the trial(s). Any notification/submission should be dated and contain sufficient information to identify the protocol.5.11 Confirmation of Review by IRB/IEC5.11.1 The sponsor should obtain from the investigator/institution:(a)The name and address of the investigator's/institution's IRB/IEC.(b)A statement obtained from the IRB/IEC that it is organized and operates according to GCP and the applicable laws and regulations.(c)Documented IRB/IEC approval/favorable opinion and, if requested by the sponsor, a current copy of protocol, written informed consent form(s) and any other written information to be provided to subjects, subject recruiting procedures, and documents related to payments and compensation available to the subjects, and any other documents that the IRB/IEC may have requested.5.11.2 If the IRB/IEC conditions its approval/favorable opinion upon change(s) in any aspect of the trial, such as modification(s) of the protocol, written informed consent form and any other written information to be provided to subjects, and/or other procedures, the sponsor should obtain from the investigator/institution a copy of the modification(s) made and the date approval/favorable opinion was given by the IRB/IEC.5.11.3 The sponsor should obtain from the investigator/institution documentation and dates of any IRB/IEC reapprovals/reevaluations with favorable opinion, and of any withdrawals or suspensions of approval/favorable opinion.5.12 Information on Investigational Product(s)5.12.1 When planning trials, the sponsor should ensure that sufficient safety and efficacy data from nonclinical studies and/or clinical trials are available to support human exposure by the route, at the dosages, for the duration, and in the trial population to be studied.The sponsor should update the Investigator's Brochure as significant new informationbecomes available (see section 7. Investigator's Brochure).5.13 Manufacturing, Packaging, Labeling, and Coding Investigational Product(s)5.13.1 The sponsor should ensure that the investigational product(s) (including active30Contains Nonbinding Recommendationscomparator(s) and placebo, if applicable) is characterized as appropriate to the stage of development of the product(s), is manufactured in accordance with any applicable GMP, and is coded and labelled in a manner that protects the blinding, if applicable. In addition, the labeling should comply with applicable regulatory requirement(s).5.13.2 The sponsor should determine, for the investigational product(s), acceptable storage temperatures, storage conditions (e.g., protection from light), storage times, reconstitution fluids and procedures, and devices for product infusion, if any. The sponsor should inform all involved parties (e.g., monitors, investigators, pharmacists, storage managers) of these determinations.5.13.3 The investigational product(s) should be packaged to prevent contamination and unacceptable deterioration during transport and storage.5.13.4 In blinded trials, the coding system for the investigational product(s) should include a mechanism that permits rapid identification of the product(s) in case of a medical emergency, but does not permit undetectable breaks of the blinding.5.13.5 If significant formulation changes are made in the investigational or comparator product(s) during the course of clinical development, the results of any additional studies of the formulated product(s) (e.g., stability, dissolution rate, bioavailability) needed to assess whether these changes would significantly alter the pharmacokinetic profile of the product should be available prior to the use of the new formulation in clinical trials.5.14 Supplying and Handling Investigational Product(s)5.14.1 The sponsor is responsible for supplying the investigator(s)/institution(s) with the investigational product(s).5.14.2 The sponsor should not supply an investigator/institution with the investigational product(s) until the sponsor obtains all required documentation (e.g., approval/favorable opinion from IRB/IEC and regulatory authority(ies)).5.14.3 The sponsor should ensure that written procedures include instructions that the investigator/institution should follow for the handling and storage of investigational product(s) for the trial and documentation thereof. The procedures should address adequate and safe receipt, handling, storage, dispensing, retrieval of unused product from subjects, and return of unused investigational product(s) to the sponsor (or alternative disposition if authorized by the sponsor and in compliance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s)).31Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5.14.4 The sponsor should:(a)Ensure timely delivery of investigational product(s) to the investigator(s).(b)Maintain records that document shipment, receipt, disposition, return, and destruction of the investigational product(s) (see section 8. Essential Documents for the Conduct of a Clinical Trial).(c)Maintain a system for retrieving investigational products and documenting this retrieval (e.g., for deficient product recall, reclaim after trial completion, expired product reclaim).(d)Maintain a system for the disposition of unused investigational product(s) and for the documentation of this disposition.5.14.5 The sponsor should:(a)Take steps to ensure that the investigational product(s) are stable over the period of use.(b)Maintain sufficient quantities of the investigational product(s) used in the trials to reconfirm specifications, should this become necessary, and maintain records of batch sample analyses and characteristics. To the extent stability permits, samples should be retained either until the analyses of the trial data are complete or as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s), whichever represents the longer retention period.5.15 Record Access5.15.1 The sponsor should ensure that it is specified in the protocol or other written agreement that the investigator(s)/institution(s) provide direct access to source data/documents for trial-related monitoring, audits, IRB/IEC review, and regulatory inspection.5.15.2 The sponsor should verify that each subject has consented, in writing, to direct access to his/her original medical records for trial-related monitoring, audit, IRB/IEC review, and regulatory inspection.5.16 Safety Information5.16.1 The sponsor is responsible for the ongoing safety evaluation of the investigational product(s).5.16.2 The sponsor should promptly notify all concerned investigator(s)/institution(s) and the regulatory authority(ies) of findings that could affect adversely the safety of subjects, impact the conduct of the trial, or alter the IRB/IEC's approval/favorable opinion to continue the trial.32Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5.17 Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting5.17.1 The sponsor should expedite the reporting to all concerned investigator(s)/institutions(s), to the IRB(s)/IEC(s), where required, and to the regulatory authority(ies) of all adverse drug reactions (ADRs) that are both serious and unexpected.5.17.2 Such expedited reports should comply with the applicable regulatory requirement(s) and with the ICH Guideline for Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting.5.17.3 The sponsor should submit to the regulatory authority(ies) all safety updates and periodic reports, as required by applicable regulatory requirement(s).5.18 Monitoring5.18.1 PurposeThe purposes of trial monitoring are to verify that:(a)The rights and well-being of human subjects are protected.(b)The reported trial data are accurate, complete, and verifiable from source documents.(c)The conduct of the trial is in compliance with the currently approved protocol/amendment(s), with GCP, and with the applicable regulatory requirement(s).5.18.2 Selection and Qualifications of Monitors(a)Monitors should be appointed by the sponsor.(b)Monitors should be appropriately trained, and should have the scientific and/or clinical knowledge needed to monitor the trial adequately. A monitor's qualifications should be documented.(c)Monitors should be thoroughly familiar with the investigational product(s), the protocol, written informed consent form and any other written information to be provided to subjects, the sponsor's SOPs, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).5.18.3 Extent and Nature of MonitoringThe sponsor should ensure that the trials are adequately monitored. The sponsor should determine the appropriate extent and nature of monitoring. The determination of the extent and nature of monitoring should be based on considerations such as the objective, purpose, design, complexity, blinding, size, and endpoints of the trial. In general there is a need for on-site monitoring, before, during, and after the trial; however, in exceptional circumstances the sponsor may determine that central monitoring in conjunction with procedures such as investigators' training and meetings, and extensive written guidance33Contains Nonbinding Recommendationscan assure appropriate conduct of the trial in accordance with GCP. Statistically controlled sampling may be an acceptable method for selecting the data to be verified.ADDENDUMThe sponsor should develop a systematic, prioritized, risk-based approach to monitoring clinical trials. The flexibility in the extent and nature of monitoring described in this section is intended to permit varied approaches that improve the effectiveness and efficiency of monitoring. The sponsor may choose on-site monitoring, a combination of on-site and centralized monitoring, or, where justified, centralized monitoring. The sponsor should document the rationale for the chosen monitoring strategy (e.g., in the monitoring plan).On-site monitoring is performed at the sites at which the clinical trial is being conducted. Centralized monitoring is a remote evaluation of accumulating data, performed in a timely manner, supported by appropriately qualified and trained persons (e.g., data managers, biostatisticians).Centralized monitoring processes provide additional monitoring capabilities that can complement and reduce the extent and/or frequency of on-site monitoring and help distinguish between reliable data and potentially unreliable data.Review that may include statistical analyses of accumulating data from centralized monitoring can be used to:(a)Identify missing data, inconsistent data, data outliers, unexpected lack of variability and protocol deviations(b)Examine data trends such as the range, consistency, and variability of data within and across sites(c)Evaluate for systematic or significant errors in data collection and reporting at a site or across sites; or potential data manipulation or data integrity problems(d)Analyze site characteristics and performance metrics(e)Select sites and/or processes for targeted on-site monitoring.5.18.4 Monitor's ResponsibilitiesThe monitor(s), in accordance with the sponsor's requirements, should ensure that the tri al is conducted and documented properly by carrying out the following activities when relevant and necessary to the trial and the trial site:(a)Acting as the main line of communication between the sponsor and the investigator.(b)Verifying that the investigator has adequate qualifications and resources (see sections 4.1, 4.2, 5.6) and these remain adequate throughout the trial period, that facilities including laboratories and equipment, and staff, are adequate to safely and properly conduct the trial and remain adequate throughout the trial period.34Contains Nonbinding Recommendations(c)Verifying, for the investigational product(s):(i)That storage times and conditions are acceptable, and that supplies are sufficient throughout the trial.(ii)That the investigational product(s) are supplied only to subjects who are eligible to receive it and at the protocol specified dose(s).(iii) That subjects are provided with necessary instruction on properly using, handling, storing, and returning the investigational product(s).(iv)That the receipt, use, and return of the investigational product(s) at the trial sites are controlled and documented adequately.(v)That the disposition of unused investigational product(s) at the trial sites complies with applicable regulatory requirement(s) and is in accordance with the sponsor.(d)Verifying that the investigator follows the approved protocol and all approved amendment(s), if any.(e)Verifying that written informed consent was obtained before each subject's participation in the trial.(f)Ensuring that the investigator receives the current Investigator's Brochure, all documents, and all trial supplies needed to conduct the trial properly and to comply with the applicable regulatory requirement(s).(g)Ensuring that the investigator and the investigator's trial staff are adequately informed about the trial.(h)Verifying that the investigator and the investigator's trial staff are performing the specified trial functions, in accordance with the protocol and any other written agreement between the sponsor and the investigator/institution, and have not delegated these functions to unauthorized individuals.(i)Verifying that the investigator is enrolling only eligible subjects.(j)Reporting the subject recruitment rate.(k)Verifying that source documents and other trial records are accurate, complete, kept up-to-date, and maintained.(l)Verifying that the investigator provides all the required reports, notifications, applications, and submissions, and that these documents are accurate, complete, timely, legible, dated, and identify the trial.(m)Checking the accuracy and completeness of the CRF entries, source documents and other trial-related records against each other. The monitor specifically should verify that:(i)The data required by the protocol are reported accurately on the CRFs and are consistent with the source documents.(ii)Any dose and/or therapy modifications are well documented for each of the trial subjects.(iii) Adverse events, concomitant medications and intercurrent illnesses are35Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsreported in accordance with the protocol on the CRFs.(iv)Visits that the subjects fail to make, tests that are not conducted, and examinations that are not performed are clearly reported as such on the CRFs.(v)All withdrawals and dropouts of enrolled subjects from the trial are reported and explained on the CRFs.(n)Informing the investigator of any CRF entry error, omission, or illegibility. The monitor should ensure that appropriate corrections, additions, or deletions are made, dated, explained (if necessary), and initialed by the investigator or by a member of the investigator's trial staff who is authorized to initial CRF changes for the investigator. This authorization should be documented.(o)Determining whether all adverse events (AEs) are appropriately reported within the time periods required by GCP, the protocol, the IRB/IEC, the sponsor, and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).(p)Determining whether the investigator is maintaining the essential documents (see section 8. Essential Documents for the Conduct of a Clinical Trial).(q)Communicating deviations from the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements to the investigator and taking appropriate action designed to prevent recurrence of the detected deviations.5.18.5 Monitoring ProceduresThe monitor(s) should follow the sponsor's established written SOPs as well as those procedures that are specified by the sponsor for monitoring a specific trial.5.18.6 Monitoring Report(a)The monitor should submit a written report to the sponsor after each trial-site visit or trial-related communication.(b)Reports should include the date, site, name of the monitor, and name of the investigator or other individual(s) contacted.(c)Reports should include a summary of what the monitor reviewed and the monitor's statements concerning the significant findings/facts, deviations and deficiencies, conclusions, actions taken or to be taken and/or actions recommended to secure compliance.(d)The review and follow-up of the monitoring report with the sponsor should be documented by the sponsor's designated representative.ADDENDUM(e) Reports of on-site and/or centralized monitoring should be provided to the sponsor (including appropriate management and staff responsible for trial and site oversight) in a timely manner for review and follow up. Results of monitoring activities should be documented in sufficient detail to allow verification of36Contains Nonbinding Recommendationscompliance with the monitoring plan. Reporting of centralized monitoringactivities should be regular and may be independent from site visits.ADDENDUM5.18.7 Monitoring PlanThe sponsor should develop a monitoring plan that is tailored to the specific human subject protection and data integrity risks of the trial. The plan should describe the monitoring strategy, the monitoring responsibilities of all the parties involved, the various monitoring methods to be used, and the rationale for their use. The plan should also emphasize the monitoring of critical data and processes. Particular attention should be given to those aspects that are not routine clinical practice and that require additional training. The monitoring plan should reference the applicable policies and procedures.5.19 AuditIf or when sponsors perform audits, as part of implementing quality assurance, they should consider:5.19.1 PurposeThe purpose of a sponsor's audit, which is independent of and separate from routine monitoring or quality control functions, should be to evaluate trial conduct and compliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements.5.19.2 Selection and Qualification of Auditors(a)The sponsor should appoint individuals, who are independent of the clinical trials/systems, to conduct audits.(b)The sponsor should ensure that the auditors are qualified by training and experience to conduct audits properly. An auditor's qualifications should be documented.5.19.3 Auditing Procedures(a)The sponsor should ensure that the auditing of clinical trials/systems is conducted in accordance with the sponsor's written procedures on what to audit, how to audit, the frequency of audits, and the form and content of audit reports.(b)The sponsor's audit plan and procedures for a trial audit should be guided by the importance of the trial to submissions to regulatory authorities, the number of subjects in the trial, the type and complexity of the trial, the level of risks to the trial subjects, and any identified problem(s).(c)The observations and findings of the auditor(s) should be documented.(d)To preserve the independence and value of the audit function, the regulatory authority(ies) should not routinely request the audit reports. Regulatory authority(ies) may seek access to an audit report on a case-by-case basis when37Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsevidence of serious GCP non-compliance exists, or in the course of legal proceedings.(e)When required by applicable law or regulation, the sponsor should provide an audit certificate.5.20 Noncompliance5.20.1 Noncompliance with the protocol, SOPs, GCP, and/or applicable regulatory requirement(s) by an investigator/institution, or by member(s) of the sponsor's staff should lead to prompt action by the sponsor to secure compliance.ADDENDUMIf noncompliance that significantly affects or has the potential to significantly affect human subject protection or reliability of trial results is discovered, the sponsor should perform a root cause analysis and implement appropriate corrective and preventive actions.5.20.2 If the monitoring and/or auditing identifies serious and/or persistent noncompliance on the part of an investigator/institution, the sponsor should terminate the investigator's/institution's participation in the trial. When an investigator's/institution's participation is terminated because of noncompliance, the sponsor should notify promptly the regulatory authority(ies).5.21 Premature Termination or Suspension of a TrialIf a trial is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor should promptly inform the investigators/institutions, and the regulatory authority(ies) of the termination or suspension and the reason(s) for the termination or suspension. The IRB/IEC should also be informed promptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension by the sponsor or by the investigator/institution, as specified by the applicable regulatory requirement(s).5.22 Clinical Trial/Study ReportsWhether the trial is completed or prematurely terminated, the sponsor should ensure that the clinical trial reports are prepared and provided to the regulatory agency(ies) as required by the applicable regulatory requirement(s). The sponsor should also ensure that the clinical trial reports in marketing applications meet the standards of the ICH Guidance for Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports. (NOTE: The ICH Guidance for Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports specifies that abbreviated study reports may be acceptable in certain cases.)5.23 Multicenter TrialsFor multicenter trials, the sponsor should ensure that:5.23.1 All investigators conduct the trial in strict compliance with the protocol agreed to by the sponsor and, if required, by the regulatory authority(ies), and given38Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsapproval/favorable opinion by the IRB/IEC.5.23.2 The CRFs are designed to capture the required data at all multicenter trial sites. For those investigators who are collecting additional data, supplemental CRFs should also be provided that are designed to capture the additional data.5.23.3 The responsibilities of coordinating investigator(s) and the other participating investigators are documented prior to the start of the trial.5.23.4 All investigators are given instructions on following the protocol, on complying with a uniform set of standards for the assessment of clinical and laboratory findings, and on completing the CRFs.5.23.5Communication between investigators is facilitated.6.CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL AND PROTOCOL AMENDMENT(S)The contents of a trial protocol should generally include the following topics. However, site specific information may be provided on separate protocol page(s), or addressed in a separate agreement, and some of the information listed below may be contained in other protocol referenced documents, such as an Investigator's Brochure.6.l General Information6.1.1 Protocol title, protocol identifying number, and date. Any amendment(s) should also bear the amendment number(s) and date(s).6.1.2 Name and address of the sponsor and monitor (if other than the sponsor).6.1.3 Name and title of the person(s) authorized to sign the protocol and the protocol amendment(s) for the sponsor.6.1.4 Name, title, address, and telephone number(s) of the sponsor's medical expert (or dentist when appropriate) for the trial.6.1.5 Name and title of the investigator(s) who is (are) responsible for conducting the trial, and the address and telephone number(s) of the trial site(s).6.1.6 Name, title, address, and telephone number(s) of the qualified physician (or dentist, if applicable), who is responsible for all trial-site related medical (or dental) decisions (if other than investigator).6.1.7 Name(s) and address(es) of the clinical laboratory(ies) and other medical and/or technical department(s) and/or institutions involved in the trial.6.2 Background Information6.2.1 Name and description of the investigational product(s).39Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6.2.2 A summary of findings from nonclinical studies that potentially have clinical significance and from clinical trials that are relevant to the trial.6.2.3 Summary of the known and potential risks and benefits, if any, to human subjects.6.2.4 Description of and justification for the route of administration, dosage, dosage regimen, and treatment period(s).6.2.5 A statement that the trial will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirement(s).6.2.6 Description of the population to be studied.6.2.7 References to literature and data that are relevant to the trial and that provide background for the trial.6.3 Trial Objectives and PurposeA detailed description of the objectives and the purpose of the trial.6.4 Trial DesignThe scientific integrity of the trial and the credibility of the data from the trial depend substantially on the trial design. A description of the trial design should include:6.4.1 A specific statement of the primary endpoints and the secondary endpoints, if any, to be measured during the trial.6.4.2 A description of the type/design of trial to be conducted (e.g., double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel design) and a schematic diagram of trial design, procedures, and stages.6.4.3 A description of the measures taken to minimize/avoid bias, including:(a)Randomization(b)Blinding.6.4.4 A description of the trial treatment(s) and the dosage and dosage regimen of the investigational product(s). Also include a description of the dosage form, packaging, and labelling of the investigational product(s).6.4.5 The expected duration of subject participation, and a description of the sequence and duration of all trial periods, including follow-up, if any.6.4.6 A description of the "stopping rules" or "discontinuation criteria" for individual subjects, parts of trial, and entire trial.6.4.7 Accountability procedures for the investigational product(s), including the placebo(s) and comparator(s), if any.40Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6.4.8 Maintenance of trial treatment randomization codes and procedures for breaking codes.6.4.9 The identification of any data to be recorded directly on the CRFs (i.e., no prior written or electronic record of data), and to be considered to be source data.6.5 Selection and Withdrawal of Subjects6.5.1 Subject inclusion criteria.6.5.2 Subject exclusion criteria.6.5.3 Subject withdrawal criteria (i.e., terminating investigational product treatment/trial treatment) and procedures specifying:(a)When and how to withdraw subjects from the trial/investigational product treatment(b)The type and timing of the data to be collected for withdrawn subjects(c)Whether and how subjects are to be replaced(d)The follow-up for subjects withdrawn from investigational product treatment/trial treatment.6.6 Treatment of Subjects6.6.1 The treatment(s) to be administered, including the name(s) of all the product(s), the dose(s), the dosing schedule(s), the route/mode(s) of administration, and the treatment period(s), including the follow-up period(s) for subjects for each investigational product treatment/trial treatment group/arm of the trial.6.6.2 Medication(s)/treatment(s) permitted (including rescue medication) and not permitted before and/or during the trial.6.6.3 Procedures for monitoring subject compliance.6.7 Assessment of Efficacy6.7.1 Specification of the efficacy parameters.6.7.2 Methods and timing for assessing, recording, and analyzing efficacy parameters.6.8 Assessment of Safety6.8.1 Specification of safety parameters.6.8.2 The methods and timing for assessing, recording, and analyzing safety parameters.6.8.3 Procedures for eliciting reports of and for recording and reporting adverse event and intercurrent illnesses.41Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6.8.4 The type and duration of the follow-up of subjects after adverse events.6.9 Statistics6.9.1 A description of the statistical methods to be employed, including timing of any planned interim analysis(ses).6.9.2 The number of subjects planned to be enrolled. In multicenter trials, the numbers of enrolled subjects projected for each trial site should be specified. Reason for choice of sample size, including reflections on (or calculations of) the power of the trial and clinical justification.6.9.3 The level of significance to be used.6.9.4 Criteria for the termination of the trial.6.9.5 Procedure for accounting for missing, unused, and spurious data.6.9.6 Procedures for reporting any deviation(s) from the original statistical plan (any deviation(s) from the original statistical plan should be described and justified in protocol and/or in the final report, as appropriate).6.9.7 The selection of subjects to be included in the analyses (e.g., all randomized subjects, all dosed subjects, all eligible subjects, evaluable subjects).6.10 Direct Access to Source Data/DocumentsThe sponsor should ensure that it is specified in the protocol or other written agreement that the investigator(s)/institution(s) will permit trial-related monitoring, audits, IRB/IEC review, and regulatory inspection(s), providing direct access to source data/documents.6.11 Quality Controland Quality Assurance6.12 EthicsDescription of ethical considerations relating to the trial.6.13 Data Handling and Recordkeeping6.14 Financing and InsuranceFinancing and insurance if not addressed in a separate agreement.6.1 5 Publication PolicyPublication policy, if not addressed in a separate agreement.6.16 Supplements(NOTE: Since the protocol and the clinical trial/study report are closely related, further relevant information can be found in the ICH Guidance for Structure and Content of Clinical Study42Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsReports.)7. INVESTIGATOR'S BROCHURE7.l IntroductionThe Investigator's Brochure (IB) is a compilation of the clinical and nonclinical data on the investigational product(s) that are relevant to the study of the product(s) in human subjects. Its purpose is to provide the investigators and others involved in the trial with the information to facilitate their understanding of the rationale for, and their compliance with, many key features of the protocol, such as the dose, dose frequency/interval, methods of administration: and safety monitoring procedures. The IB also provides insight to support the clinical management of the study subjects during the course of the clinical trial. The information should be presented in a concise, simple, objective, balanced, and non-promotional form that enables a clinician, or potential investigator, to understand it and make his/her own unbiased risk-benefit assessment of the appropriateness of the proposed trial. For this reason, a medically qualified person should generally participate in the editing of an IB, but the contents of the IB should be approved by the disciplines that generated the described data.This guidance delineates the minimum information that should be included in an IB and provides suggestions for its layout. It is expected that the type and extent of information available will vary with the stage of development of the investigational product. If the investigational product is marketed and its pharmacology is widely understood by medical practitioners, an extensive IB may not be necessary. Where permitted by regulatory authorities, a basic product information brochure, package leaflet, or labelling may be an appropriate alternative, provided that it includes current, comprehensive, and detailed information on all aspects of the investigational product that might be of importance to the investigator. If a marketed product is being studied for a new use (i.e., a new indication), an IB specific to that new use should be prepared. The IB should be reviewed at least annually and revised as necessary in compliance with a sponsor's written procedures. More frequent revision may be appropriate depending on the stage of development and the generation of relevant new information. However, in accordance with GCP, relevant new information may be so important that it should be communicated to the investigators, and possibly to the Institutional Review Boards (IRBs)/Independent Ethics Committees (IECs) and/or regulatory authorities before it is included in a revised IB.Generally, the sponsor is responsible for ensuring that an up-to-date IB is made available to the investigator(s) and the investigators are responsible for providing the up-to-date IB to the responsible IRBs/IECs. In the case of an investigator sponsored trial, the sponsor-investigator should determine whether a brochure is available from the commercial manufacturer. If the investigational product is provided by the sponsor-investigator, then he or she should provide the necessary information to the trial personnel. In cases where preparation of a formal IB is impractical, the sponsor-investigator should provide, as a substitute, an expanded background information section in the trial protocol that contains the minimum current information described in this guidance.7.2 General ConsiderationsThe IB should include:43Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7.2.1 Title Page This should provide the sponsor's name, the identity of each investigational product (i.e., research number, chemical or approved generic name, and trade name(s) where legally permissible and desired by the sponsor), and the release date. It is also suggested that an edition number, and a reference to the number and date of the edition it supersedes, be provided. An example is given in Appendix 1.44Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7.2.2 Confidentiality StatementThe sponsor may wish to include a statement instructing the investigator/recipients to treat the IB as a confidential document for the sole information and use of the investigator's team and the IRB/IEC.7.3 Contents of the Investigator's BrochureThe IB should contain the following sections, each with literature references where appropriate:7.3.1 Table of ContentsAn example of the Table of Contents is given in Appendix 27.3.2 SummaryA brief summary (preferably not exceeding two pages) should be given, highlighting the significant physical, chemical, pharmaceutical, pharmacological, toxicological, pharmacokinetic, metabolic, and clinical information available that is relevant to the stage of clinical development of the investigational product.7.3.3 IntroductionA brief introductory statement should be provided that contains the chemical name (and generic and trade name(s) when approved) of the investigational product(s), all active ingredients, the investigational product (s) pharmacological class and its expected position within this class (e.g., advantages), the rationale for performing research with the investigational product(s), and the anticipated prophylactic, therapeutic, or diagnostic indication(s). Finally, the introductory statement should provide the general approach to be followed in evaluating the investigational product.7.3.4 Physical, Chemical, and Pharmaceutical Properties and Formulation A description should be provided of the investigational product substance(s) (including the chemical and/or structural formula(e)), and a brief summary should be given of the relevant physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties.To permit appropriate safety measures to be taken in the course of the trial, a description of the formulation(s) to be used, including excipients, should be provided and justified if clinically relevant. Instructions for the storage and handling of the dosage form(s) should also be given.Any structural similarities to other known compounds should be mentioned.7.3.5 Nonclinical StudiesIntroduction: The results of all relevant nonclinical pharmacology, toxicology, pharmacokinetic, and investigational product metabolism studies should be provided in summary form. This summary should address the methodology used, the results, and a discussion of the relevance of the findings to the investigated therapeutic and the possible unfavorable45Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsand unintended effects in humans.The information provided may include the following, as appropriate, if known/available:􀁸 Species tested; 􀁸 Number and sex of animals in each group; 􀁸 Unit dose (e.g., milligram/kilogram (mg/kg)); 􀁸 Dose interval; 􀁸 Route of administration; 􀁸 Duration of dosing; 􀁸 Information on systemic distribution; 􀁸 Duration of post-exposure follow-up; 􀁸 Results, including the following aspects:􀀐 Nature and frequency of pharmacological or toxic effects; 􀀐 Severity or intensity of pharmacological or toxic effects; 􀀐 Time to onset of effects; 􀀐 Reversibility of effects; 􀀐 Duration of effects; 􀀐 Dose response.Tabular format/listings should be used whenever possible to enhance the clarity of the presentation.The following sections should discuss the most important findings from the studies, including the dose response of observed effects, the relevance to humans, and any aspects to be studied in humans. If applicable, the effective and nontoxic dose findings in the same animal species should be compared (i.e., the therapeutic index should be discussed). The relevance of this information to the proposed human dosing should be addressed. Whenever possible, comparisons should be made in terms of blood/tissue levels rather than on an mg/kg basis.(a) Nonclinical PharmacologyA summary of the pharmacological aspects of the investigational product and, where appropriate, its significant metabolites studied in animals, should be included. Such a summary should incorporate studies that assess potential therapeutic activity (e.g., efficacy models, receptor binding, and specificity) as well as those that assess safety (e.g., special studies to assess pharmacological actions other than the intended therapeutic effect(s)).(b) Pharmacokinetics and Product Metabolism in AnimalsA summary of the pharmacokinetics and biological transformation and disposition of the investigational product in all species studied should be given. The discussion of the findings should address the absorption and the local and systemic bioavailability of the investigational product and its metabolites, and their relationship to the pharmacological and toxicological findings in animal species.(c) Toxicology46Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsA summary of the toxicological effects found in relevant studies conducted in different animal species should be described under the following headings where appropriate:􀀐 Single dose 􀀐 Repeated dose 􀀐 Carcinogenicity 􀀐 Special studies (e.g., irritancy and sensitization) 􀀐 Reproductive toxicity 􀀐 Genotoxicity (mutagenicity)7.3.6 Effects in HumansIntroductionA thorough discussion of the known effects of the investigational product(s) in humans should be provided, including information on pharmacokinetics, metabolism, pharmacodynamics, dose response, safety, efficacy, and other pharmacological activities. Where possible, a summary of each completed clinical trial should be provided. Information should also be provided regarding results of any use of the investigational product(s) other than from in clinical trials, such as from experience during marketing.􀁄􀀌 Pharmacokinetics and Product Metabolism in HumansA summary of information on the pharmacokinetics of the investigational􀀃product(s) should be presented, including the following, if available:-Pharmacokinetics (including metabolism, as appropriate, and absorption,􀀃 plasma protein binding, distribution, and elimination). -Bioavailability of the investigational product (absolute, where possible,􀀃and/ or relative) using a reference dosage form. -Population subgroups (e.g., 􀁖􀁈􀁛, age, and impaired organ function). -Interactions (e.g., product-product interactions and effects of food). -Other pharmacokinetic data (e.g., results of population studies performed􀀃 within clinical trial(s).􀁅􀀌 Safety and EfficacyA summary of information should be provided about the investigational􀀃 product's/products' (including metabolites, where appropriate) safety,􀀃 pharmacodynamics, efficacy, and dose response that were obtained from􀀃 preceding trials in humans (healthy volunteers and/or patients). The implications􀀃 of this information should be discussed. In cases where a number of clinical􀀃 trials have been completed, the use of summaries of safety and efficacy across􀀃 multiple trials by indications in subgroups may provide a clear presentation of the􀀃 data. Tabular summaries of adverse drug reactions for all the clinical trials (including those for all the studied indications) would be useful. Important􀀃 differences in adverse drug reaction patterns/incidences across indications or􀀃 subgroups should be discussed.47Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsThe IB should provide a description of the possible risks and adverse drug reactions to be anticipated on the basis of prior experiences with the product under investigation and with related products. A description should also be provided of the precautions or special monitoring to be done as part of the investigational use of the product(s).(c) Marketing ExperienceThe IB should identify countries where the investigational product has been marketed or approved. Any significant information arising from the marketed use should be summarized (e.g., formulations, dosages, routes of administration, and adverse product reactions). The IB should also identify all the countries where the investigational product did not receive approval/registration for marketing or was withdrawn from marketing/registration.7.3.7 Summary of Data and Guidance for the InvestigatorThis section should provide an overall discussion of the nonclinical and clinical data, and should summarize the information from various sources on different aspects of the investigational product(s), wherever possible. In this way, the investigator can be provided with the most informative interpretation of the available data and with an assessment of the implications of the information for future clinical trials.Where appropriate, the published reports on related products should be discussed. This could help the investigator to anticipate adverse drug reactions or other problems in clinical trials.The overall aim of this section is to provide the investigator with a clear understanding of the possible risks and adverse reactions, and of the specific tests, observations, and precautions that may be needed for a clinical trial. This understanding should be based on the available physical, chemical, pharmaceutical, pharmacological, toxicological, and clinical information on the investigational product(s). Guidance should also be provided to the clinical investigator on the recognition and treatment of possible overdose and adverse drug reactions that are based on previous human experience and on the pharmacology of the investigational product.48Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7.4 APPENDIX lTITLE PAGE (Example) SPONSOR'S NAME Product: Research Number: Name(s): Chemical, Generic (if approved)Trade Name(s) (if legally permissible and desired by the sponsor)INVESTIGATOR'S BROCHUREEdition Number: Release Date:Replaces Previous Edition Number: Date:49Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7.5 APPENDIX 2 TABLE OF CONTENTS OF INVESTIGATOR'S BROCHURE (Example)- Confidentiality Statement (optional)-Signature Page (optional)1.Table of Contents2.Summary3.Introduction4.Physical, Chemical, and Pharmaceutical Properties and Formulation5.Nonclinical Studies5.1 Nonclinical Pharmacology5.2 Pharmacokinetics and Product Metabolism in Animals5.3Toxicology6.Effects in Humans.6.1 Pharmacokinetics and Product Metabolism in Humans6.2 Safety and Efficacy6.3Marketing Experience7.Summary of Data and Guidance for the InvestigatorNB: References on 1. Publications2. Reports These references should be found at the end of each chapter. Appendices (if any)50Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8. ESSENTIAL DOCUMENTS FOR THE CONDUCT OF A CLINICAL TRIAL8.l IntroductionEssential Documents are those documents that individually and collectively permit evaluation of the conduct of a trial and the quality of the data produced. These documents serve to demonstrate the compliance of the investigator, sponsor, and monitor with the standards of GCP and with all applicable regulatory requirements.Essential Documents also serve a number of other important purposes. Filing essential documents at the investigator/institution and sponsor sites in a timely manner can greatly assist in the successful management of a trial by the investigator, sponsor, and monitor. These documents are also the ones t h a t are usually audited by the sponsor's independent audit function and inspected by the regulatory authority(ies) as part of the process to confirm the validity of the trial conduct and the integrity of data collected.The minimum list of essential documents that has been developed follows. The various documents are grouped in three sections according to the stage of the trial during which they will normally be generated: (1) before the clinical phase of the trial commences, ( 2 ) during the clinical conduct of the trial, and (3) after completion or termination of the trial. A description is given of the purpose of each document, and whether it should be filed in either the investigator/institution or sponsor files, or both. It is acceptable to combine some of the documents, provided the individual elements are readily identifiable.Trial master files should be established at the beginning of the trial, both at the investigator/institution's site and at the sponsor's office. A final close-out of a trial can only be done when the monitor has reviewed both investigator/institution and sponsor files and confirmed that all necessary documents are in the appropriate files.Any or all of the documents addressed in this guidance may be subject to, and should be available for, audit by the sponsor's auditor and inspection by the regulatory authority(ies).ADDENDUMThe sponsor and investigator/institution should maintain a record of the location(s) of their respective essential documents including source documents. The storage system used during the trial and for archiving (irrespective of the type of media used) should provide for document identification, version history, search, and retrieval.Essential documents for the trial should be supplemented or may be reduced where justified (in advance of trial initiation), based on the importance and relevance of the specific documents to the trial.51Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsThe sponsor should ensure that the investigator has control of and continuous access to the CRF data reported to the sponsor. The sponsor should not have exclusive control of those data.When a copy is used to replace an original document (e.g., source documents, CRF), the copy should fulfill the requirements for certified copies.The investigator/institution should have control of all essential documents and records generated by the investigator/institution before, during, and after the trial.8.2 Before the Clinical Phase of the Trial CommencesDuring this planning stage the following documents should be generated and should be on file before the trial formally starts.Title of DocumentPurposeLocated in Files ofInvestigator/InstitutionSponsor8.2.1INVESTIGATOR’S BROCHURETo document that relevant and current scientific information about the investigational product has been provided to the investigatorXX8.2.2SIGNED PROTOCOL AND AMENDMENTS, IF ANY, AND SAMPLE CASE REPORT FORM (CRF)To document investigator and sponsor agreement to the protocol/amendment(s) and CRFXX8.2.3INFORMATION GIVEN TO TRIAL SUBJECT -INFORMED CONSENT FORM (including all applicable translations)To document the informed consentXX-ANY OTHER WRITTEN INFORMATIONTo document that subjects will be given appropriate written information (content and wording) to support their ability to give fully informed consentXX-ADVERTISEMENT FOR SUBJECT RECRUITMENT (if used)To document that recruitment measures are appropriate and not coerciveX52Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8.2.4FINANCIAL ASPECTS OF THE TRIALTo document the financial agreement between the investigator/institution and the sponsor for the trialXX8.2.5INSURANCE STATEMENT (where required)To document that compensation to subject(s) for trial-related injury will be availableXX8.2.6SIGNED AGREEMENT BETWEEN INVOLVED PARTIES, e.g.: -Investigator/institution and sponsor -Investigator/institution and CRO -Sponsor and CRO -Investigator/institution and authority(ies) (where required)To document agreementsX X XX X (where required) X X8.2.7DATED, DOCUMENTED APPROVAL/FAVORABLE OPINION OF INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (IRB)/INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE (IEC) OF THE FOLLOWING: 􀁸 Protocol and any amendments 􀁸 CRF (if applicable) 􀁸 Informed consent form(s) 􀁸 Any other written information to be provided to the subject(s) 􀁸 Advertisement for subject recruitment (if used) 􀁸 Subject compensation (if any) 􀁸 Any other documents given approval/favorable opinionTo document that the trial has been subject to IRB/IEC review and given approval/favorable opinion. To identify the version number and date of the document(s)XX53Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8.2.8INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD/INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE COMPOSITIONTo document that the IRB/IEC is constituted in agreement with GCPXX (where required)8.2.9REGULATORY AUTHORITY(IES) AUTHORIZATION/APPROVAL/NOTIFICATION OF PROTOCOL (where required)To document appropriate authorization/approval/notification by the regulatory authority(ies) has been obtained prior to initiation of the trial in compliance with the applicable regulatory requirement(s)X (where required)X (where required)8.2.10CURRICULUM VITAE AND/OR OTHER RELEVANT DOCUMENTS EVIDENCING QUALIFICATIONS OF INVESTIGATOR(S) AND SUBINVESTIGATOR(S)To document qualifications and eligibility to conduct trial and/or provide medical supervision of subjectsXX8.2.11NORMAL VALUE(S)/RANGE(S) FOR MEDICAL/LABORATORY/TECHNICAL PROCEDURES(S) AND/OR TEST(S) INCLUDED IN THE PROTOCOLTo document normal values and/or ranges of the testsXX8.2.12MEDICAL/LABORATORY/TECHNICAL PROCEDURES/TESTS -Certification or -Accreditation or -Established quality control and/or external quality assessment or -Other validation (where required)To document competence of facility to perform required test(s), and support reliability of resultsX (where required)X8.2.13SAMPLE OF LABEL(S) ATTACHED TO INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT CONTAINER(S)To document compliance with applicable labelling regulations and appropriateness of instructions provided to the subjectsX54Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8.2.14INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING OF INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) AND TRIALRELATED MATERIALS (if not included in protocol or Investigator’s Brochure)To document instructions needed to ensure proper storage, packaging, dispensing, and disposition of investigational product(s) and trial-related materialsXX8.2.15SHIPPING RECORDS FOR INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) AND TRIAL-RELATED MATERIALSTo document shipment dates, batch numbers and method of shipment of investigational product(s) and trial-related materials. Allows tracking of product batch, review of shipping conditions, and accountabilityXX8.2.16CERTIFICATE(S) OF ANALYSIS OF INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) SHIPPEDTo document identity, purity, and strength of investigational product(s) to be used in the trialX8.2.17DECODING PROCEDURES FOR BLINDED TRIALSTo document how, in case of an emergency, identity of blinded investigational product can be revealed without breaking the blind for the remaining subjects’ treatmentXX (third party if applicable)8.2.18MASTER RANDOMIZATION LISTTo document method for randomization of trial populationX (third party if applicable)8.2.19PRE-TRIAL MONITORING REPORTTo document that the site is suitable for the trial (may be combined with 8.2.20)X8.2.20TRIAL INITIATION MONITORING REPORTTo document that trial procedures were reviewed with the investigator and the investigator’s trial staff (may be combined with 8.2.19)XX55Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8.3 During the Clinical Conduct of the TrialIn addition to having on file the above documents, the following should be added to the files during the trial as evidence that all new relevant information is documented as it becomes available.Title of DocumentPurposeLocated in Files ofInvestigator/InstitutionSponsor8.3.1INVESTIGATOR’S BROCHURE UPDATESTo document that investigator is informed in a timely manner of relevant information as it becomes availableXX8.3.2ANY REVISION TO: -Protocol/amendment(s) and CRF -Informed consent form -Any other written information provided to subjects -Advertisement for subject recruitment (if used)To document revisions of these trial related documents that take effect during trialXX8.3.3DATED, DOCUMENTED APPROVAL/FAVORABLE OPINION OF INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD IRB)/INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE (IEC) OF THE FOLLOWING: 􀁸 Protocol amendment(s) 􀁸 Revision(s) of: 􀀐 Informed consent form 􀀐 Any other written information to be provided to the subject 􀀐 Advertisement for subject recruitment (if used) 􀁸 Any other documents given approval/favorable opinion 􀁸 Continuing review of trial (where required)To document that the amendment(s) and/or revision(s) have been subject to IRB/IEC review and were given approval/favorable opinion. To identify the version number and date of the document(s).XX56Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8.3.4REGULATORY AUTHORITY(IES) AUTHORIZATIONS/APPROVALS/NOTIFICATIONS WHERE REQUIRED FOR: 􀁸 Protocol amendment(s) and other documentsTo document compliance with applicable regulatory requirementsX (where required)X8.3.5CURRICULUM VITAE FOR NEW INVESTIGATOR(S) AND/OR SUBINVESTIGATOR(S)(See 8.2.10)XX8.3.6UPDATES TO NORMAL VALUE(S)/RANGE(S) FOR MEDICAL/LABORATORY/TECHNICAL PROCEDURE(S)/TEST(S) INCLUDED IN THE PROTOCOLTo document normal values and ranges that are revised during the trial (see 8.2.11)XX8.3.7UPDATES OF MEDICAL/LABORATORY/TECHNICAL PROCEDURES/TESTS -Certification or -Accreditation or -Established quality control and/or external quality assessment or -Other validation (where required)To document that tests remain adequate throughout the trial period (see 8.2.12)X (where required)X8.3.8DOCUMENTATION OF INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) AND TRIAL-RELATED MATERIALS SHIPMENT(See 8.2.15)XX8.3.9CERTIFICATE(S) OF ANALYSIS FOR NEW BATCHES OF INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCTS(See 8.2.16)X8.3.10MONITORING VISIT REPORTSTo document site visits by, and findings of, the monitorX57Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8.3.11RELEVANT COMMUNICATIONS OTHER THAN SITE VISITS -Letters -Meeting notes -Notes of telephone callsTo document any agreements or significant discussions regarding trial administration, protocol violations, trial conduct, adverse event (AE) reportingXX8.3.12SIGNED INFORMED CONSENT FORMSTo document that consent is obtained in accordance with GCP and protocol and dated prior to participation of each subject in trial. Also to document direct access permission (see 8.2.3)X8.3.13SOURCE DOCUMENTSTo document the existence of the subject and substantiate integrity of trial data collected. To include original documents related to the trial, to medical treatment, and history of subjectX8.3.14SIGNED, DATED, AND COMPLETED CASE REPORT FORMS (CRF)To document that the investigator or authorized member of the investigator’s staff confirms the observations recordedX (copy)X (original)8.3.15DOCUMENTATION OF CRF CORRECTIONSTo document all changes/additions or corrections made to CRF after initial data were recordedX (copy)X (original)8.3.16NOTIFICATION BY ORIGINATING INVESTIGATOR TO SPONSOR OF SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS AND RELATED REPORTSNotification by originating investigator to sponsor of serious adverse events and related reports in accordanceXX58Contains Nonbinding Recommendationswith 4.118.3.17NOTIFICATION BY SPONSOR AND/OR INVESTIGATOR, WHERE APPLICABLE, TO REGULATORY AUTHORITY(IES) AND IRB(S)/IEC(S) OF UNEXPECTED SERIOUS ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS AND OF OTHER SAFETY INFORMATIONNotification by sponsor and/or investigator, where applicable, to regulatory authorities and IRB(s)/IEC(s) of unexpected serious adverse drug reactions in accordance with 5.17 and 4.11.1 and of other safety information in accordance with 5.16.2 and 4.11.2X (where required)X8.3.18NOTIFICATION BY SPONSOR TO INVESTIGATORS OF SAFETY INFORMATIONNotification by sponsor to investigators of safety information in accordance with 5.16.2XX8.3.19INTERIM OR ANNUAL REPORTS TO IRB/IEC AND AUTHORITY(IES)Interim or annual reports provided to IRB/IEC in accordance with 4.10 and to authority(ies) in accordance with 5.17.3XX (where required)8.3.20SUBJECT SCREENING LOGTo document identification of subjects who entered pre-trial screeningXX (where required)8.3.21SUBJECT IDENTIFICATION CODE LISTTo document that investigator/institution keeps a confidential list of names of all subjects allocated to trial numbers on enrolling in the trial. Allows investigator/institution to reveal identity of any subjectX8.3.22SUBJECT ENROLMENT LOGTo document chronological enrolment of subjects by trialX59Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsnumber8.3.23INVESTIGATION PRODUCTS ACCOUNTABILITY AT THE SITETo document that investigational product(s) have been used according to the protocolXX8.3.24SIGNATURE SHEETTo document signatures and initials of all persons authorized to make entries and/or corrections on CRFsXX8.3.25RECORD OF RETAINED BODY FLUIDS/TISSUE SAMPLES (IF ANY)To document location and identification of retained samples if assays need to be repeatedXX60Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8.4 After Completion or Termination of the TrialAfter completion or termination of the trial, all of the documents identified in Sections 8.2 and 8.3 should be in the file together with the followingTitle of DocumentPurposeLocated in Files ofInvestigator/InstitutionSponsor8.4.1INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT(S) ACCOUNTABILITY AT SITETo document that the investigational product(s) have been used according to the protocol. To document the final accounting of investigational product(s) received at the site, dispensed to subjects, returned by the subjects, and returned to sponsorXX8.4.2DOCUMENTATION OF INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT DESTRUCTIONTo document destruction of unused investigational products by sponsor or at siteX (if destroyed at site)X8.4.3COMPLETED SUBJECT IDENTIFICATION CODE LISTTo permit identification of all subjects enrolled in the trial in case follow-up is required. List should be kept in a confidential manner and for agreed upon timeX8.4.4AUDIT CERTIFICATE (if available)To document that audit was performedX8.4.5FINAL TRIAL CLOSE-OUT MONITORING REPORTTo document that all activities required for trial close-out are completed, and copies of essential documents are held in the appropriate filesX61Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8.4.6TREATMENT ALLOCATION AND DECODING DOCUMENTATIONReturned to sponsor to document any decoding that may have occurredX8.4.7FINAL REPORT BY INVESTIGATOR TO IRB/IEC WHERE REQUIRED, AND WHERE APPLICABLE, TO THE REGULATORY AUTHORITY(IES)To document completion of the trialX8.4.8CLINICAL STUDY REPORTTo document results and interpretation of trialX (if applicable)X62Processes and PracticesApplicable to Bioresearch Monitoring InspectionsGuidance for IndustryDRAFT GUIDANCEThis guidance document is being distributed for comment purposes only.Comments and suggestions regarding this draft document should be submitted within 60 days of publication in the Federal Register of the notice announcing the availability of the draft guidance. Submit electronic comments to https://www.regulations.gov. Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Staff (HFA-305), Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, Rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. All comments should be identified with the docket number listed in the notice of availability that publishes in the Federal Register.For questions or information regarding this guidance, contact the Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA), Office of Policy, Compliance, and Enforcement (OPCE), Food and Drug Administration at ORAPolicyStaffs@fda.hhs.gov.U.S.Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration Office of Regulatory Affairs Office of Clinical Policy Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Center for Devices and Radiological Health Center for Food Safety and Applied NutritionCenter for Tobacco Products Center for Veterinary MedicineJune 2024Processes and Practices Applicable to Bioresearch Monitoring InspectionsGuidance for IndustryAdditional copies are available from: Office of Policy, Compliance, and Enforcement Office of Regulatory Affairs Food and Drug Administration 12420 Parklawn Drive, Element Building, Rockville, MD 20857U.S.Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration Office of Regulatory Affairs Office of Clinical Policy Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Center for Devices and Radiological Health Center for Food Safety and Applied NutritionCenter for Tobacco Products Center for Veterinary MedicineJune 2024Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for ImplementationTABLE OF CONTENTSI.INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................1II.BACKGROUND...............................................................................................................2III.PROCESSES AND PRACTICES APPLICABLE TO BIORESEARCH MONITORING INSPECTIONS.................................................................................................4A.BIMO Processes and Practices.....................................................................................................4B.Types of Inspections.......................................................................................................................5C.International Inspections...............................................................................................................5IV.BEST PRACTICES FOR COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THE FDA AND INDUSTRY IN ADVANCE OF, DURING, OR AFTER AN INSPECTION.........................6A.Pre-announcement Notice and Communication.........................................................................6B.Inspection Timeframe and Duration............................................................................................7C.Communication During An Inspection........................................................................................7D.Communication After An Inspection...........................................................................................8E.Who to Contact at FDA for More Information?.........................................................................9RESOURCE GUIDE............................................................................................................................11Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for Implementation1Processes and Practices Applicable to Bioresearch Monitoring2Inspections3Guidance for Industry1456This draft guidance, when finalized, will represent the current thinking of the Food and Drug7Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not8binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the9applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible10for this guidance as listed on the title page.11121314I. INTRODUCTION1516FDA is issuing this guidance to comply with section 3612(b)(2) of the Food and Drug Omnibus17Reform Act of 2022 (FDORA), enacted as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023.218FDORA directs FDA to issue guidance describing the processes and practices applicable to19inspections of sites and facilities described in section 704(a)(5)(C)(i) of the Federal Food, Drug,20and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act),3 to the extent not specified in existing publicly available FDA21guides and manuals for such inspections. These establishments4 are inspected under FDA’s22Bioresearch Monitoring (BIMO) program in accordance with section 704(a)(5) of the FD&C23Act. Specifically, this guidance addresses the following (to the extent not publicly available in24FDA guides and manuals): the types of records and information required to be provided, best25practices for communication between FDA and industry in advance of or during an inspection or26request for records or other information, and other inspections-related conduct.52728In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities.29Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA) in cooperation with the Office ofClinical Policy (OCLiP), the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), the Center for Drug Evaluationand Research (CDER), the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN), the Center for TobaccoProducts (CTP), the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), and the Center for Veterinary Medicine(CVM) at the Food and Drug Administration.2 FDORA was enacted as title III of Division FF of Public Law No. 117-328 (2022).3 Section 704(a)(5) of the FD&C Act clarified FDA’s authority with respect to bioresearch related inspections.4 In this guidance, the term “establishment” includes any entity, person, site, or facility, whether foreign or domestic,within the scope of section 704(a)(5)(C) of the FD&C Act.5 The following two guidances will be withdrawn upon finalization of this guidance (as their substance is supersededby this draft guidance and other guidances and related documents described in this draft guidance):“Information Sheet Guidance For IRBs, Clinical Investigators, and Sponsors: FDA Inspections of ClinicalInvestigators,” available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/fdainspections-clinical-investigators, and “Information Sheet Guidance For IRBs, Clinical Investigators, and Sponsors:FDA Institutional Review Board Inspections,” available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fdaguidance-documents/fda-institutional-review-board-inspections.1Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for Implementation30 as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of 31 the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but 32 not required. 33 34 II. BACKGROUND 35 36 FDA’s BIMO program is a comprehensive portfolio of programs designed to assess and monitor 37 all aspects of the conduct and reporting of FDA-regulated research as well as certain 38 postmarketing activities through on-site inspections, investigations,6 and Remote Regulatory 39 Assessments (RRAs). The BIMO program was established to assess the quality and integrity of 40 data submitted to the Agency in support of regulatory decision-making, as well as to provide for 41 protection of the rights, safety, and welfare of human trial participants7 and animal subjects 42 involved in FDA-regulated research.8 The program assesses compliance with statutory 43 requirements and FDA’s regulations governing the conduct of nonclinical and clinical studies, 44 and applicable postmarketing activities (e.g., in REMS and PADE).9 45 46 FDA is authorized at reasonable times to access, inspect, and copy records and other information 47 as described in section 704(a) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 374(a)). The general authority for 48 establishment inspections is found in section 704(a)(1) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 374(a)(1)). 49 Section 704(a)(5) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 374(a)(5)), as added by FDORA, clarified10 and 50 detailed the Agency’s authority for conducting BIMO inspections. Specifically, in clarifying the 51 Agency’s BIMO inspection authority, section 704(a)(5) includes, among other things, the 52 following: 53 54 • the establishments subject to BIMO inspection, e.g., those used by sponsors in connection 55 with developing an application or other submission to FDA for marketing authorization, 56 or those conducting a study related to such an application or submission; and 57 • the records and other information that may be inspected, e.g., information related to the 58 conduct, results, and analyses of studies, including those involving human trial 59 participants or animal subjects. 60 61 It also underscores that those subject to BIMO inspection must provide FDA with access to the 62 information to be inspected (including access to all paper and electronic records and access to 63 electronic information systems used to hold, analyze, process, or transfer that information), and6 See “Bioresearch Monitoring Investigations” under section 8.6 of the “Investigations Operations Manual,” available at https://www.fda.gov/inspections-compliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/inspectionreferences/investigations-operations-manual. 7 In this document, the term “trial participant” is used and covers both human trial participants and animal subjects. 8 The terms “research,” “trial,” and “study,” are deemed to be synonymous for purposes of this guidance and include both clinical research (also referred to as “clinical study,” “clinical trial,” and “clinical investigation”) and nonclinical research (also referred to as “nonclinical trial” and “nonclinical laboratory study”). 9 “REMS” refers to Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies, see section 505-1 of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 3551). “PADE” refers to Postmarketing Adverse Drug Experience, see e.g. 21 CFR 310.305 , 21 CFR 314.80, 21 CFR329.100 , 21 CFR 600.80 , and 21 CFR parts 803 and 806. 10 See section 704(a)(5)(F) of the FD&C Act.2Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for Implementation64 permit FDA to inspect relevant facilities and equipment used in generating that information.11 At 65 the same time, section 704(a)(5) makes clear that existing safeguards12 against disclosure of 66 confidential commercial information and trade secrets continue to apply, and that BIMO 67 inspections – like inspections generally – are to be conducted at reasonable times, within 68 reasonable limits, and in a reasonable manner.13 69 70 Generally, an inspection, such as described in section 704(a) of the FD&C Act, involves duly 71 designated officers or employees of FDA physically entering establishments subject to regulation 72 under the FD&C Act to determine compliance with applicable FDA requirements. FDA also uses 73 other oversight tools when appropriate, such as RRAs. An RRA is an examination of an FDA74 regulated establishment and/or its records, conducted entirely remotely, to evaluate compliance 75 with applicable FDA requirements. RRAs under the BIMO Program may consist of: (1) Remote 76 Interactive Evaluations14 and (2) requests for records or other information under section 77 704(a)(4) of the FD&C Act from sites and facilities subject to inspection under section 78 704(a)(5)(C)(i) (i.e., establishments subject to BIMO inspections) in advance of or in lieu of such 79 inspections.15 80 81 82 8311 See section 704(a)(5)(D)(i) of the FD&C Act. 12 See section 704(a)(5)(D)(ii) of the FD&C Act. 13 See section 704(a)(5)(D)(iii) of the FD&C Act. Also see Department of Health and Human Services’ website for information on permissible disclosures of protected health information to public health authorities (including FDA), available at https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/special-topics/public-health/index.html. 14 For more information on Remote Interactive Evaluations, see "Remote Interactive Evaluations of Drug Manufacturing and Bioresearch Monitoring Facilities Guidance for Industry" available athttps://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/remote-interactive-evaluations-drugmanufacturing-and-bioresearch-monitoring-facilities. We update guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fdaguidance-documents. 15 For more information on RRAs generally, including their applicability to BIMO sites and facilities, communications between FDA and industry regarding requests for records or other information, and the distinction between an RRA and inspections under sections 704(a)(1) and 704(a)(5) of the FD&C Act, see “Conducting Remote Regulatory Assessments Questions and Answers Draft Guidance for Industry” (hereafter, the “Draft RRA Guidance”), available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/conductingremote-regulatory-assessments-questions-and-answers. Although an RRA is not an inspection and the Draft RRA Guidance notes that the Agency does not intend to conduct an RRA at the same time as an inspection, the Draft RRA Guidance provides information about communications between industry and FDA during an RRA that may be relevant for communications during an inspection. Specifically, see the Draft RRA Guidance’s discussion of records security, file format (e.g., Portable Document Formats), and language translation. When finalized, that guidance will represent the Agency’s current thinking on how RRAs apply generally to all FDA-regulated products. For additional translation guidance, see the draft “Translation of GLP Study Reports: Questions and Answers” available athttps://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/translation-good-laboratory-practicestudy-reports-questions-and-answers.3Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for Implementation84 III. PROCESSES AND PRACTICES APPLICABLE TO BIORESEARCH 85 MONITORING INSPECTIONS 86 87 A. BIMO Processes and Practices 88 89 The Agency’s processes and practices applicable to BIMO inspections are detailed in 90 its Investigations Operations Manual (IOM), compliance programs, and the Regulatory 91 Procedures Manual (RPM). In general, for all domestic and foreign BIMO inspections, FDA 92 follows the same processes and practices before and during the inspection, except as noted in this 93 guidance. 94 95 FDA’s IOM16 is the primary operational reference for FDA investigators and other FDA 96 personnel to perform investigational activities in support of the Agency’s public health mission 97 across all program areas. The BIMO compliance programs were developed to provide uniform 98 and specific instructions for FDA personnel. They describe the inspection focus and types of 99 records and information FDA personnel evaluate to assess compliance with the relevant FDA100 regulations and statutory requirements for each regulated entity or program.17101102 These compliance programs include:103104 • In Vivo Bioavailability-Bioequivalence Studies -Clinical105 • In Vivo Bioavailability-Bioequivalence Studies -Analytical106 • Inspection of Nonclinical Laboratories Conducting Animal Rule-Specific Studies107 • Good Laboratory Practice (Nonclinical Laboratories)108 • Good Laboratory Practice Program (Nonclinical Laboratories) EPA Data Audit109 Inspections110 • Institutional Review Boards111 • Radioactive Drug Research Committees112 • Sponsors and Contract Research Organizations113 • Clinical Investigators and Sponsor-Investigators114 • Postmarketing Adverse Drug Experience (PADE) Reporting Inspections115 • Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies (REMS) Reporting Inspections11616 See “Investigations Operations Manual,” available at https://www.fda.gov/inspections-compliance-enforcementand-criminal-investigations/inspection-references/investigations-operations-manual. The IOM is reference material for investigators and other FDA personnel. The document does not bind FDA and does not confer any rights, privileges, benefits, or immunities for or on any person(s). 17 See “Bioresearch Monitoring Program (BIMO) Compliance Programs,” available athttps://www.fda.gov/inspections-compliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/compliance-programmanual/bioresearch-monitoring-program-bimo-compliance-programs. Compliance programs do not create or confer any rights for or on any person and do not operate to bind FDA or the public. An alternative approach may be used as long as the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.4Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for Implementation117 FDA's centers (CBER, CDER, CDRH, CFSAN, CTP, and CVM) and the Office of Bioresearch 118 Monitoring Operations (OBIMO), within the Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA), administer the 119 applicable BIMO compliance programs. 120 121 For regulatory and enforcement matters, the RPM18 is a reference manual that provides internal 122 procedures and related information for FDA employees to administer these matters in support of 123 the Agency’s public health mission. The RPM includes information detailing administrative 124 actions such as clinical investigator disqualifications and related procedures such as a Notice of 125 Opportunity for Hearing (NOOH). 126 127 Although the IOM, compliance programs, and RPM are primarily used by FDA staff, all are 128 available publicly so regulated industry and other interested parties can better understand FDA 129 operations. We note that FDA regularly reviews its processes and practices described in the 130 IOM, compliance programs, and RPM that are applicable to establishment inspections to 131 evaluate whether any updates are needed.19 132 133 See the Resource Guide, below, for further details on the IOM, compliance programs, and RPM 134 as well as additional resources on BIMO inspections and RRAs. 135 136 B. Types of Inspections 137 138 FDA personnel conduct inspections to determine an establishment’s compliance with applicable 139 FDA statutory and regulatory requirements (e.g. with respect to bioresearch inspections – to help 140 ensure trial participant safety, and to evaluate data reliability). FDA BIMO inspections generally 141 include: inspections conducted in support of FDA’s review of specific submissions or marketing 142 applications; periodic inspections of establishments with on-going activities, such as nonclinical 143 laboratories or institutional review boards; or inspections conducted to evaluate potential 144 noncompliance or safety issues raised in a complaint or required report (e.g., from IRBs or 145 sponsors) pertaining to a study or establishment. Inspections may be comprehensive, covering all 146 operations of the establishment, or directed, covering a subset of operations. As explained in Part 147 IV below, FDA conducts both announced and unannounced BIMO inspections. 148 149 C. International Inspections 150 151 Product development and marketing are often global pursuits and therefore FDA’s BIMO 152 inspections are not limited to the United States. International inspections may be conducted when 153 appropriate (e.g., when studies conducted outside the United States are in support of, or18 See “Regulatory Procedures Manual,” available at https://www.fda.gov/inspections-compliance-enforcement-andcriminal-investigations/compliance-manuals/regulatory-procedures-manual. The RPM does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. 19 In accordance with section 3612(b)(1) of FDORA, as part of developing this guidance, the Agency reviewed “processes and practices in effect as of the date of enactment of this Act [i.e., FDORA] applicable to inspections of foreign and domestic sites and facilities described” in section 704(a)(5)(C)(i) of the FD&C Act “to evaluate whether any updates are needed to facilitate the consistency of such processes and practices”. FDA makes needed updates on a routine basis, as part of our regular review of processes and practices, as noted above.5Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for Implementation154 otherwise related to, a marketing application submitted to FDA and provide data critical to 155 regulatory decision making). For domestic inspections, a notice of inspection (e.g., Form FDA 156 48220) is issued at the time of inspection. During foreign inspections, FDA credentials are 157 presented to the top management official (or onsite designee) but FDA does not issue a notice of 158 inspection.21 With the exception of this difference and those related to pre-announcement 159 procedures described below22 inspections of foreign and domestic establishments are generally 160 the same in terms of processes and practices. 161 162 FDA has issued guidance23 relevant to the conduct of clinical studies, including guidance on 163 issues specific to studies conducted internationally.24 FDA also collaborates with certain 164 international regulatory partner agencies to conduct joint inspections, observe inspections, share 165 inspection information and develop policy.25 This collaboration is important to the BIMO 166 program. 167 168 IV. BEST PRACTICES FOR COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THE FDA AND 169 INDUSTRY IN ADVANCE OF, DURING, OR AFTER AN INSPECTION 170 171 A. Pre-announcement Notice and Communication 172 173 The Agency’s primary purpose for pre-announcing an inspection is to ensure the appropriate 174 records and establishment personnel will be available during the inspection. FDA may 175 communicate a general idea of the records that may be requested during the inspection (e.g., 176 regarding certain establishment procedures and any associated records). 177 178 Pre-announcement practices depend on the type of inspectional activity being conducted and are 179 explained in each compliance program.26 During pre-announcement of FDA inspections, FDA 180 intends to make reasonable efforts to contact the establishment, including to discuss inspection 181 plans, and the inspection start date and time. Pre-announcement communications also include 182 discussions with the establishment to ensure the availability of relevant establishment staff and20 See section 5.5 of the IOM. 21 For additional information on FDA notice of inspection (e.g., Form FDA 482), see “Authority to Inspect” under section 2.2 of the IOM. See also the Bioresearch Monitoring Program compliance programs. 22 See Part IV. A Pre-announcement Notice and Communication. 23 See “Search for FDA Guidance Documents,” available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fdaguidance-documents. 24 FDA BIMO inspections include, but are not limited to, studies that are conducted under an FDA investigational new drug application (IND), as well as studies at non-U.S. establishments that are not conducted under an IND, an investigational new animal drug (INAD) exemption, or under an investigational device exemption (IDE). See, for example, the “Information Sheet Guidance for Sponsors, Clinical Investigators, and IRBs: Frequently Asked Questions Statement of Investigator (Form FDA 1572),” discussing foreign clinical studies conducted under an IND or as non-IND studies. 25 FDA may enter into cooperative arrangements and confidentiality commitments to facilitate international partnerships with counterpart foreign government agencies. See “International Arrangements,” available at https://www.fda.gov/international-programs/international-arrangements. 26 See footnote 17 for more on compliance programs. Also see Part III of this guidance and“Pre-Announcements” under section 5.2 of the IOM.6Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for Implementation183 the associated records and specific operations for review during the inspection, as applicable. 184 Establishments using electronic information systems to hold, analyze, process, or transfer 185 pertinent information should be prepared to provide access to FDA personnel upon their 186 arrival.27 187 188 FDA investigators routinely share their names, titles, contact information, and, when appropriate, 189 reasons for conducting the inspection. There may be instances in which FDA investigators may 190 not disclose specific reasons for conducting the inspection during pre-announcement. In such 191 cases, if appropriate, FDA investigators may inform the establishment representative that 192 additional details will be shared during the opening meeting of the inspection. 193 194 Establishment staff should also confirm arrival details with FDA investigators and provide a 195 contact phone number. FDA believes that an establishment’s failure to acknowledge the pre196 announcement notification should not be a reason to delay the start of an inspection. This pre197 announcement notification should be provided within a reasonable time before the inspection is 198 scheduled to occur. FDA generally pre-announces both foreign and domestic inspections, but 199 pre-announcement for foreign inspections is generally further in advance of the inspection due to 200 country clearance requirements. In general, pre-announcements for domestic inspections will be 201 given via phone while for foreign inspections pre-announcements may be by phone and/or email. 202 203 Inspections, whether pre-announced or unannounced, are conducted consistent with our 204 compliance programs, the IOM, and applicable statutory authority. The Agency may determine 205 to not pre-announce an inspection (foreign or domestic) if prior notification may impact the 206 inspection. 207 208 B. Inspection Timeframe and Duration 209 210 During the pre-announcement, FDA investigators intend to communicate with the establishment 211 the planned timeframe and duration of the inspection, including appropriate working hours 212 during which the inspection is likely to take place. Inspection duration is impacted by a myriad 213 of factors, such as the complexities of the operations, availability of knowledgeable staff, the 214 nature of any observations, and if FDA needs to follow-up on complaints received by the 215 Agency. 216 217 C. Communication During An Inspection 218 219 When FDA personnel request records or other information as part of an inspection,28 the Agency 220 will typically provide an opportunity to discuss the nature, process, and timeline of the request. 221 The establishment may ask clarifying questions and should be prepared to provide the records in 222 a timely manner during the inspection. Details of the establishment's electronic information27 See Part II. Background for additional detail. Access may be read-only. See “Read-Only Access to Electronic Databases During Bioresearch Monitoring Inspection Assignments” under section 5.14 of the IOM. 28 Such requests are distinct from requests for records or other information in advance of, or in lieu of, an inspection under section 704(a)(4) of the FD&C Act.7Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for Implementation223 systems, including the technical capabilities for providing FDA access to electronic records, 224 should also be discussed. 225 226 FDA personnel can view electronic records via read-only access or other methods. Regardless of 227 the method(s) used to view records, establishments should be prepared to provide requested 228 copies from electronic systems to FDA29 either electronically, via electronic storage media or as 229 paper copies. 230 231 When time and circumstances permit, FDA personnel should discuss observations with the staff 232 in charge of the establishment as they are observed, or on a daily basis. These discussions may 233 address findings not documented on the FDA “Inspectional Observations” (Form FDA 483) for 234 which FDA seeks clarification during the inspection.30 235 236 D. Communication After An Inspection 237 238 At the end of an inspection, the FDA investigator conducts a closeout of the inspection with the 239 establishment representative that includes discussing the findings from the inspection31 and, if 240 appropriate, issuing a written Form FDA 483 to the establishment. The Form FDA 483 is 241 intended for use in notifying the inspected establishment’s top management in writing of 242 “observations of objectionable conditions and practices”32 identified during an inspection in 243 order to “assist firms inspected in complying with the Acts and regulations enforced by the Food 244 and Drug Administration.”33 245 246 If the establishment chooses to respond to the Form FDA 483 observations orally during the 247 closeout of the inspection, those responses may be incorporated into the inspection report.34 248 However, there may not be complete information about corrective and preventative actions at the 249 time of closeout. Although there is no regulatory requirement for the inspected establishment to 250 respond to a Form FDA 483, a timely written response to the Form FDA 483 that includes 251 appropriate corrective and preventive actions could impact FDA’s determination of the need for 252 subsequent Agency action. FDA encourages establishments to provide written responses to the 253 observations within fifteen (15) U.S. business days after the end date of the inspection. 254 Responses submitted to FDA during that timeframe addressing the issues identified during the 255 inspection generally will be considered before further Agency action or decision.29 See section 704(a)(5)(D) of the FD&C Act. 30 For additional detail on Form FDA 483, see Chapter 5 of the IOM. See also the Bioresearch Monitoring Program compliance programs. 31 Once the inspection is closed by the Agency, the inspected establishment will be provided a copy of the Establishment Inspection Report. See “FMD-145 -Release of the Establishment Inspection Report (EIR)” available at https://www.fda.gov/media/83055/download. 32 See “Reports of Observations” and “General Discussion with Management” under sections 5.5 and 5.7 of the IOM for more on discussing the objectionable conditions observed and the potential legal sanctions available to FDA after further review by the Agency. 33 Language on back of FDA Form 483. There may be other objectionable conditions that exist at the establishment that are not cited on the Form FDA 483. Also see the Bioresearch Monitoring Program compliance programs. 34 See “General Discussion with Management” under section 5.7 of the IOM.8Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for Implementation256 For domestic inspections, if the establishment chooses to respond in writing to the observations 257 discussed or listed on the Form FDA 483, the response should be addressed to the FDA OBIMO 258 division contact which is listed on the Form FDA 483. Hard copy responses may be mailed to 259 the address listed on the Form FDA 483 or emailed, with email being the preferred approach.35 It 260 is recommended that the respondent include the FDA Establishment Identification (FEI) of the 261 inspected location in its correspondence.36 For foreign inspections, if the establishment chooses 262 to respond in writing to the observations discussed or listed on the Form FDA 483, the response 263 should be addressed to the FDA center point of contact (POC) provided by the investigator. 264 265 There are several best practices for responding in writing to a Form FDA 483. A response should 266 demonstrate the establishment’s acknowledgment and understanding of FDA’s observations. It 267 should also demonstrate the establishment’s commitment to address the observations, including a 268 commitment from senior leadership. 269 270 Responses should be well-organized and structured to: 271 • Address each observation separately 272 • Note whether the establishment agree(s) or disagree(s), and why 273 • Provide both corrective and preventive actions and timelines for completion 274 • Provide both completed and planned actions and related timelines 275 • Provide a method of verifying or monitoring the effectiveness of the actions 276 • Submit documentation (e.g., training, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), corrective 277 action plans, records, etc.) 278 279 E. Who to Contact at FDA for More Information? 280 281 If an inspected establishment has any questions that the FDA personnel conducting the 282 inspection has not answered, the establishment may contact the ORA OBIMO management staff. 283 The FDA investigator who conducted the inspection should be able to provide the name and 284 telephone number of OBIMO division management to the establishment.37 Questions about the 285 inspection classification38 can be directed to the FDA center POC identified in the post286 inspection correspondence or in the relevant compliance program. Alternatively, the ORA35 Email appropriate division contacts depending on the location of establishment. See “Office of Bioresearch Monitoring Operations Map” available at https://www.fda.gov/media/104799/download?attachment for more on district abbreviations and contact information. 36 For more on the FDA Establishment Identification, see “FEI Search Portal,” available at https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/feiportal/index.cfm?action=portal.login. 37 FDA intends to provide an inspectional handout with contact information to the establishment during the inspection. 38 Following an inspection, the Agency evaluates the inspection findings to determine if the establishment is in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations and classifies the inspection according to three classifications (No Action Indicated, Voluntary Action Indicated, Official Action Indicated). See “Inspection classifications” available at https://www.fda.gov/inspections-compliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/inspectionbasics/inspection-classifications and Chapter 4 of the RPM, available at https://www.fda.gov/inspectionscompliance-enforcement-and-criminal-investigations/compliance-manuals/regulatory-procedures-manual#_top.9290295300305310315Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for Implementation287 Ombudsman Program is a communication resource for stakeholders facing unresolved concerns, 288 providing a confidential and impartial avenue to address and resolve their issues effectively.39 289291 292 293 294296 297 298 299301 302 303 304306 307 308 309311 312 313 314316 31739 Contact information can be found on the ORA Ombudsman webpage available at https://www.fda.gov/aboutfda/contact-ora/ora-ombudsman.10Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDraft — Not for ImplementationBIMO Inspection and Program ResourcesSummary of ResourceWhere can I find this information?40BIMO Program InformationCore Patient-Reported Outcomes in Cancer Clinical TrialsGuidance for IndustryU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationOncology Center of Excellence (OCE)Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)Core Patient-Reported Outcomes in Cancer Clinical TrialsGuidance for Industry1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONThis guidance provides recommendations to sponsors for collection of a core set of patient-reported clinical outcomes (herein referred to as core patient-reported outcomes) in cancer clinical trials and related considerations for instrument selection and trial design. Although this guidance focuses on patient-reported outcome (PRO) measures, some of these recommendations may be relevant to other clinical outcome assessments (i.e., clinician-reported outcome, observer-reported outcome, performance outcome) in cancer clinical trials. Recommendations supplement previous guidance on use of PRO measures in clinical trials by providing additional considerations specific to the cancer clinical trial setting. Guidance specific to PRO endpoints and details of analytic methods are not comprehensively covered. FDA does not endorse any specific PRO measure and examples within this document are illustrative and should not be construed as endorsements.This guidance is specific to FDA regulated trials for anti-cancer therapies intended to demonstrate an effect on survival, tumor response, or delay in the progression of a malignancy. Demonstration of a clinically meaningful improvement in patient-reported symptoms or functional impacts alone (i.e., in the absence of evidence of anti-cancer activity) would be more applicable to supportive care drugs and is outside the scope of this guidance. Refer to the guidance for industry Patient-Reported Outcome Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling Claims (PRO guidance) for situations where the PRO endpoint will be used as the primary evidence of effectiveness.2 PRO measurement may not be feasible in all cancer trial populations (e.g., in patients with significant cognitive impairment).1 This guidance has been prepared by the Oncology Center of Excellence, the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, and the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, in consultation with the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) at FDA.2 December 2009. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents. Also refer to the FDA Patient-Focused Drug Development Guidance Series for Enhancing the Incorporation of the Patient’s Voice in Medical Product Development and Regulatory Decision Making available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/development-approval-process-drugs/fda-patient-focused-drug-development-guidance-series-enhancing-incorporation-patients-voice-medical. When final, the PFDD guidance series will replace the 2009 final PRO guidance.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. BACKGROUNDAssessment of a clinical outcome can be made through report by a clinician, a patient, a non-clinician observer, a performance-based assessment, or through other methods. A PRO measure is a type of clinical outcome assessment (COA) based on a report that comes directly from the patient about the status of a their health condition without amendment or interpretation of the patient's response by a clinician or anyone else.3 Additional definitions of patient-focused drug development terms can be found in the Patient-Focused Drug Development Glossary.4Cancer trials typically employ standardized efficacy assessments using overall survival and tumor measures, and safety assessments provided by clinician reporting of adverse events. FDA acknowledges the added value of incorporating PRO measurement of symptoms and functional impacts into the benefit/risk assessment in appropriately designed trials; however, heterogeneity in PRO assessment strategies has lessened the regulatory utility of PRO data from cancer trials. Systematic assessment of a core set of PROs using fit-for-purpose5 PRO measures can facilitate high quality data on patient-reported symptoms and functional impacts.A core set of PROs that may be important contributors to a patient’s health-related quality of life (HRQOL) and that may be sensitive to the effect of the disease and treatment under study has been described in published literature.6 This guidance expands on this concept, acknowledging that a core PRO set can provide a minimum expectation for patient experience data across cancer settings, but may not include all important patient experience outcomes to measure in specific disease contexts.III. CORE PATIENT-REPORTED OUTCOMESTo maximize the regulatory utility of submitted PRO information, we recommend collecting and separately analyzing the following core PROs:3 Throughout this guidance, FDA uses certain terms that appear in the FDA-NIH Biomarker Working Group, BEST (Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools) Resource available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK338448/ (accessed June 1, 2021).4 Available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/development-approval-process-drugs/patient-focused-drug-development-glossary (current as of June 8, 2018).5 Fit-for-purpose is defined as a conclusion that the level of validation associated with a tool is sufficient to support its context of use. See BEST Resource.6 Kluetz PG, Slagle A, Papadopoulos E, et al., 2016, Focusing on Core Patient-Reported Outcomes in Cancer Clinical Trials: Symptomatic Adverse Events, Physical Function, and Disease-Related Symptoms, Clin Can Res, Apr 1;22(7):1553-8.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3• Disease-related symptoms• Symptomatic adverse events• Overall side effect impact summary measure• Physical function• Role functionAdditional PROs that are important to patients, outside of the core concepts in this section, could be prospectively specified and collected in clinical studies based on the context of a given clinical trial. For instance, swallowing function and cognitive function may be outcomes of interest in addition to the core set in the context of advanced esophageal cancer and neuro-oncology, respectively. Selection of outcomes outside of the core PRO set should be carefully considered to minimize patient burden and improve the quality of data collected by focusing on the most meaningful and measurable outcomes.IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR INSTRUMENT SELECTION TO MEASURE THE CORE PATIENT-REPORTED OUTCOMESFor a PRO result to meaningfully contribute to a therapy’s benefit/risk assessment, the PRO instrument used should be well-defined, relevant, and reliable (i.e. fit-for-purpose) so that the results presented are accurate and not misleading. Sponsors should provide support for the selection of PRO instrument(s) with available data and/or published peer-reviewed literature guided by the principles laid out in the PRO guidance and the FDA Patient-Focused Drug Development (PFDD) guidance series.7Some commonly used PRO instruments or measurement systems may have been developed prior to publication of the PRO guidance and may differ from some of the recommendations. In these cases, the sponsor should provide a rationale for why the endpoint measured by the PRO instrument is well-defined, relevant, and reliable. For example, there may be evidence from previous trials that the measure is sensitive to a disease or treatment-related change. Some general principles to determine whether the PRO instrument is fit-for-purpose include the following:• The PRO instrument is appropriate for its intended use (e.g., study design, patient population)• The PRO instrument validly and reliably measures concepts that are clinically relevant and important to patients7 See the FDA Patient-Focused Drug Development Guidance Series for Enhancing the Incorporation of the Patient’s Voice in Medical Product Development and Regulatory Decision Making available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/development-approval-process-drugs/fda-patient-focused-drug-development-guidance-series-enhancing-incorporation-patients-voice-medical. These guidances are part of FDA’s commitments under section I.J.1 associated with the sixth authorization of the Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA VI) under Title I of the FDA Reauthorization Act of 2017, as well as requirements under section 3002 of the 21st Century Cures Act. When final, the PFDD guidance series will replace the 2009 final PRO guidance.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4• The PRO data can be communicated in a way that is accurate, interpretable, and not misleadingA PRO instrument can be used to assess a range of concepts of interest using single item symptoms (e.g., pain intensity), symptom scales (e.g., disease symptom scale consisting of multiple symptoms), functional scales (e.g., physical function), and multi-dimensional constructs (e.g., HRQOL). To allow for clear and accurate analyses and labeling, the PRO measure should be well-defined. One important aspect of a well-defined PRO measure is that the items within the measure should all be related to the concept of interest. For instance, a well-defined physical function scale should include items on a range of activities requiring physical effort and should not contain specific items tied to or dependent on other concepts such as side effects or symptoms.8In some cases, subscales or subsets of items from existing PRO instruments may be used to inform the benefit/risk assessment and support labeling claims if prospectively defined and their measurement properties have been adequately evaluated. Early consultation with FDA is recommended regarding selection of appropriate instrument(s) for a particular cancer clinical trial context. Ideally, interactions with the Agency would include discussion of the PRO instrument, trial design, and labeling considerations.PRO instrument considerations and examples for the core PROs are:• Disease-related symptoms: Where a group of common cardinal disease symptoms exist, disease symptom scales should be used. One example of a disease symptom scale is the Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Symptom Assessment Questionnaire (NSCLC-SAQ) that has gone through the FDA Drug Development Tool Qualification program.9 In contexts where disease symptoms are heterogeneous in type and incidence, symptoms that patients have reported as being important across advanced cancer settings, such as pain, anorexia, and fatigue, can be measured either individually or within a symptom score with other important disease-related symptoms. Examples of patient-reported symptom severity assessments that may be fit-for-purpose include an 11-point (i.e., 0 to 10) numeric rating scale or verbal rating scale (e.g., none, mild, moderate, severe) that asks patients to rate their worst experience of a specific disease symptom over a specified recall period. Alternatively, a frequency scale for one or more of these items may also be considered (e.g., ranging from none of the time to all of the time).• Symptomatic adverse events (AEs): FDA recommends selecting a concise set of the most important symptomatic AEs that are expected to occur from an item library. In trials with active controls, symptomatic AEs expected to occur from both treatment regimens should be assessed for all patients in both arms. For example, if neuropathy is expected in patients in the control arm only, an item assessing neuropathy should be included in both the experimental arm and control arms of the trial. FDA considers the National Cancer Institute’s PRO version of the Common Terminology Criteria for8 Ibid.9 See https://www.fda.gov/drugs/development-approval-process-drugs/ddt-coa-000009-non-small-cell-lung-cancer-symptom-assessment-questionnaire-nsclc-saq (accessed June 1, 2021).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5Adverse Events (PRO-CTCAE) to be an example of one acceptable item library for assessment of symptomatic adverse events.10 Sponsors should provide a rationale for the selection of symptomatic AEs that will be assessed, based on mechanism of action, early clinical data, and input from patients and healthcare providers. In consultation with FDA, sponsors should select only the most important and/or high frequency AEs to reduce question burden and consider a free-text question to mitigate concerns for missing important symptom items.Importantly, PRO data describing symptomatic AEs are intended to complement, not replace, safety data.• Overall side effect impact summary measure: A summary measure of the overall side effect impact can inform the tolerability of a treatment. Because individual patients may weigh some side effects as more important than others, one option to consider is a single global impression of severity item. For example, “Please choose the response below that best describes the severity of your overall side effects from treatment over the past week” (where 0 represents none and 3 represents severe). Examples of existing single item global side effect impact items include the GP5 item from the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy (FACIT) item library,11 and the Q168 question from the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) item library.12 Existing item libraries should consider developing and including a global side effect item if not already included.• Physical function: Sponsors should select scales that measure defined concepts and assess varying levels of ability to perform activities that require physical effort. One option to consider is the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS)® physical function item bank.13 Another commonly used physical function scale that can be considered is the EORTC Quality of Life of Cancer Patients QLQ-C30 physical function scale.14• Role function: The impact of a treatment on the ability to work and carry out daily activities, including leisure activities, is important to patients and may also provide some information on other functional abilities. One example of an existing tool that assesses this concept is the EORTC QLQ-C30 role function scale.15Some of these instrument examples were developed prior to the PRO guidance and may not be suitable to address all clinical trial questions. For instance, using PRO measures to support a claim of equivalence or non-inferiority between two arms is problematic without sufficient support that the sensitivity of the measure is adequate.10 See https://healthcaredelivery.cancer.gov/pro-ctcae/ (accessed June 1, 2021).11 See https://www.facit.org/ (accessed June 1, 2021).12 See https://qol.eortc.org/item-library/13 See http://www.nihpromis.org/measures/measureshome (accessed June 1, 2021).14 See https://qol.eortc.org/questionnaires/ (accessed June 1, 2021).15 Ibid.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6V. TRIAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONSA. Assessment FrequencyThe following should be considered when determining the frequency of PRO assessment for core PROs:• A baseline assessment(s) prior to treatment initation should be included as a reference point for assessing change.• Assessment frequency should be higher within the first few treatment cycles and depending on the trial may be less frequent in later cycles.• Assessment frequency should take into account the administration schedule of the treatment(s) under study.• Different assessment frequencies can be selected for each core concept depending on the outcome and research objective.It is acknowledged that other PRO concepts outside of FDA’s core PRO set may be of interest to other stakeholders (e.g., international regulators, health-technology assessment bodies) and may include other functional domains (e.g., social function, emotional function) that comprise overall HRQOL. When using a modular approach where these elements are able to be assessed and analyzed separately, different assessment frequencies can be selected that can reduce the response burden to patients. Where possible, a standard approach to assessment frequency over the first year of therapy would aid in consistency and interpretation across advanced cancer trials. An example of a PRO assessment strategy that assesses PROs more frequently in the first 8 weeks of treatment would be suitable across most treatment administration schedules and is provided below:Figure 1: Example PRO assessment frequency for first 12 months of advanced cancer trialInitial treatment periodRemainder of treatment periodBLw2w3w4w5w6w7w8M3M4M5M6M9M12*Symptomatic AE16XXXXXXXXXXXXXXSingle Item Side Effect GlobalXXXXXXXXXXXXXXPhysical FunctionXXXXXXXXXXXXXXRole FunctionXXXXXXXXXXDisease SymptomsXXXXXOther HRQOLXXXXBL – baseline, w - week, M - month, * - context dependent long-term follow-up16 Symptomatic AEs assessed by PROs are intended to complement, not replace, standard CTCAE safety data.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7How a therapy is administered can affect the timing of assessments. For instance, intermittently administered intravenous (IV) cytotoxic chemotherapy often has the maximum intensity of symptomatic AEs earlier in each cycle, whereas this may not be the case with an oral drug administered on a continuous daily schedule. Schedule of administration should be taken into account, and assessments and their analysis harmonized so as not to obscure the results of either arm. In the case where both arms have orally administered treatments on a daily schedule, assessments could be less frequent given the lack of cyclic variability surrounding administration schedules seen with IV chemotherapies.B. Other Trial Design ConsiderationsThe following should be considered to mitigate missing data and improve the interpretability of PRO results:• Procedures should be prospectively established for mitigating missing data, including training for investigators and patients, a completion monitoring strategy (e.g., reminders to patients), and obtaining PRO data from patients at time of early withdrawal. Include these procedures in the protocol.• Methods to lessen patient burden should be explored, including use of electronic PRO capture that may allow for assessments outside of the clinic. Sponsors should document how and where patients completed their PRO assessments (e.g., in the clinic or in a remote setting.).• Reasons for missing PRO data should be documented and included in the analysis dataset.• A pre-specified plan for the analysis of PRO data should be provided, including the threshold for and interpretation of a meaningful change in score(s), if relevant.• Any deviation from the instrument’s scoring manual should be noted and a rationale provided.• Use (including changes in dose) of concomitant medications or therapies that may affect the interpretation of the concept(s) being measured (e.g., use of concomitant pain medications when measuring pain) should be carefully recorded.VI. LABELING CONSIDERATIONSInclusion of PRO data in the product labeling will depend on the adequacy of the design and conduct of the trial, the strengths and limitations of the instrument within the given context of use, and the quality of submitted data.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8• Lack of statistical superiority is not suitable evidence for claims of “no meaningful difference.” A claim of non-inferiority or equivalence should be supported by evidence that the sensitivity of the measure is adequate and the trial should be adequately designed, including justification for the selected non-inferiority margin, to make such a claim as documented in the statistical analysis plan.• If a claim of superiority in a particular PRO endpoint is sought, pre-specify the PRO hypothesis and test it within the clinical trial. Control the overall type I error rate if multiple hypotheses are being tested. Prospectively define the statistical analysis methods, especially procedures for handling missing values and censoring rules if appropriate. Provide justification for the endpoint definition, including what constitutes meaningful change, for FDA review and comment in advance of initiating the clinical trial. This information should be included in the statistical analysis plan.• Exploratory PRO findings (i.e., not included in the statistical hierarchy) are considered descriptive. FDA will review these data and will evaluate and consider whether inclusion of descriptive PRO data in labeling is appropriate on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration any factors that may affect the interpretability and reliability of the findings.For example, exploratory PRO results further describing the timing, frequency, and impact of visual disturbances were included in the ADVERSE REACTIONS section of labeling for XALKORI, to provide additional detail about the nature, frequency, and severity of vision disorders reported by clinicians.17Generally, exploratory PRO findings of a comparative treatment benefit are unlikely to support inclusion in product labeling.17 For adverse reactions with significant clinical implications, the listings [in the Clinical Trials Experience subsection of the ADVERSE REACTIONS section] must be supplemented with additional detail about the nature, frequency, and severity of the adverse reaction and the relationship of the adverse reaction to drug dose and demographic characteristics, if data are available and important. See 21 CFR 201.57(c)(7)(ii)(A).




Conducting Clinical Trials With Decentralized ElementsGuidance for Industry, Investigators, and Other Interested Parties 1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONThis guidance provides recommendations for sponsors, investigators, and other interested parties regarding the implementation of decentralized elements in clinical trials.2 Decentralized elements allow trial-related activities to occur remotely at locations convenient for trial participants. Decentralized elements can include, among other things, telehealth3 visits with trial personnel, in-home visits with remote trial personnel, or visits with local health care providers (HCPs)4 (see sections II and III.B). In this guidance, a decentralized clinical trial (DCT) refers to a clinical trial that includes decentralized elements where trial-related activities occur at locations other than traditional clinical trial sites.FDA’s regulatory requirements for investigations of medical products are the same for trials that1 This guidance has been prepared by the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) in cooperation with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), and the Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE) at the Food and Drug Administration.2 This guidance is intended to apply to decentralized clinical trials (DCTs) that are required to be conducted under an investigational new drug application (IND) and are subject to the requirements under 21 CFR part 312 and to DCTs that require approval of an investigational device exemption (IDE) application under 21 CFR 812.20(a). However, the considerations in this guidance may be relevant for clinical trials that do not require an IND or an IDE application (such as investigations of “nonsignificant risk” devices conducted under 21 CFR 812.2(b)). FDA recommends that sponsors and investigators of clinical trials that do not require an IND under 21 CFR part 312 or approval of an IDE application under 21 CFR 812.20(a) take the considerations in this guidance into account when implementing decentralized elements in such trials.3 Terms that appear in bold at first mention are defined in the Glossary.4 For research supported or conducted by the Department of Health and Human Services and subject to the requirements under 45 CFR part 46, parties should consider the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) guidance Engagement of Institutions in Human Subjects Research (October 2008) when evaluating whether local health care-providing organizations are engaged in research. The guidance is available at https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/guidance/guidance-on-engagement-of-institutions/index.html. Parties should also consider OHRP’s 2009 clarification of the 2008 engagement guidance and 2011 correspondence on non-engaged scenarios, which are available, respectively, at https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/guidance/determining-when-institutions-are-engaged-in-research/index.html and https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/guidance/september-22-2011-non-engaged-scenarios/index.html.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2include decentralized elements and trials that do not include decentralized elements.5 Section 3606(a) of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 directs FDA to issue a final guidance that includes recommendations to clarify and advance the use of DCTs to support the development of drugs and devices.6 This guidance provides recommendations related to FDA’s requirements for investigations of medical products when applied to DCTs and fulfills the requirement set forth in section 3606(a)(2) of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023. The content described in section 3606(b) of Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023 is further addressed through this guidance’s reference to the guidance for industry, investigators, and other stakeholders entitled Digital Health Technologies for Remote Data Acquisition in Clinical Investigations (December 2023).In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. BACKGROUNDMany clinical trials already include decentralized elements. For example, laboratory tests are often conducted by clinical laboratory facilities at locations remote from traditional clinical trial sites. DCTs have the potential to expand access to more representative patient populations and improve trial efficiencies.7 Advances in using electronic communications and information technology to interact with trial participants in different locations (i.e., telehealth) allow for fewer in-person visits to traditional clinical trial sites. Digital health technologies (DHTs), for example, have expanded the types of trial-related data that can be obtained remotely from trial participants. By enabling remote participation, DCTs may enhance convenience for trial participants, reduce the burden on caregivers, and facilitate research on rare diseases and diseases affecting populations with limited mobility or limited access to traditional clinical trial sites. This may help improve trial participant engagement, recruitment, enrollment, and retention of a more representative trial participant population to improve the strength and generalizability of the evidence produced by the trial.5 See 21 CFR parts 312 and 812.6 See section 201(g) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) (21 U.S.C. 321(g)) for the definition of a drug. In this guidance, all references to drugs include both human drugs and biological products, unless otherwise specified. See section 351(i) of the Public Health Service Act (PHS Act) (42 U.S.C. 262(i)) for the definition of a biological product. See section 201(h)(1) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 321(h)(1)) for the definition of a device.7 See the guidance for industry Enhancing the Diversity of Clinical Trial Populations — Eligibility Criteria, Enrollment Practices, and Trial Designs (November 2020). We update guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3Trials where all activities are decentralized may be appropriate for investigational products (IPs) that have well-characterized safety profiles (see section III.G) and do not require complex preparation, administration, or medical assessments. Alternatively, there may be cases when the administration of an IP or a complex medical assessment needs to be performed at a traditional clinical trial site and some follow-up assessments could be performed remotely through electronic patient-reported outcome measures, via telehealth or in-home visits, or by local HCPs, as appropriate.Challenges related to DCTs may include coordination of trial activities with individuals and facilities in multiple locations that are not traditional clinical trial sites. Specific plans to facilitate decentralization of the trial should include, as appropriate, the use of local HCPs, local clinical laboratory facilities, and local health care facilities; visits to trial participants’ homes; and direct distribution of the IP to trial participants at their locations.8 Specific issues related to the feasibility, design, implementation, or analysis of a DCT should be discussed early with the relevant FDA review divisions.9,10 Appropriate training, oversight, and up-front and continuing risk assessment and management will be key to implementing a DCT successfully.III. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IMPLEMENTING DCTSThe sections below provide guidance on specific topics for implementing decentralized elements in clinical trials.A. DCT Design and ConductIn a DCT, some or all trial-related activities will occur at locations other than traditional clinical trial sites (e.g., the participant’s home, mobile research units, or local health care facilities). DCTs may involve a network of locations where trial personnel and local HCPs work and where trial-related activities (e.g., imaging and laboratory tests) are performed. Whether trial-related activities are performed by local HCPs or trial personnel, the clinical trial should be designed to8 See 21 CFR 312.57(a), 312.60, 312.62(a), 812.100, 812.110, 812.140(a)(2), and 812.140(b)(2) (describing requirements for IP accountability and disposition of the IP).9 See the draft guidance for industry Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or Applicants of PDUFA Products (September 2023) and the draft guidance for industry Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or Applicants of BsUFA Products (August 2023). When final, these guidances will represent FDA’s current thinking on these topics. See also the guidance for industry and FDA staff Requests for Feedback and Meetings for Medical Device Submissions: The Q-Submission Program (June 2023).10 The principles discussed in this guidance may be relevant for bioequivalence studies conducted to support abbreviated new drug applications (ANDAs). If an ANDA applicant is interested in conducting a bioequivalence study using decentralized elements, CDER’s Office of Generic Drugs encourages submission of controlled correspondence or a pre-ANDA meeting request (if applicable) to discuss the design, analysis, and implementation of the study before conducting it. See the guidance for industry Controlled Correspondence Related to Generic Drug Development (March 2024). For submitting a pre-ANDA meeting request, see the guidance for industry Formal Meetings Between FDA and ANDA Applicants of Complex Products Under GDUFA (October 2022).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4limit variability in the data collected by including, as applicable, specific instructions in the protocol for performing these activities.DCTs that permit tests to be performed independently by participants at home (e.g., spirometry) may introduce variability compared to tests performed under supervision at traditional clinical trial sites. Training or video supervision (i.e., during a telehealth visit) may reduce such variability. Likewise, allowing participants to choose whether an assessment will be performed at a traditional clinical trial site or remotely may result in bias (e.g., sicker participants may prefer remote visits). The protocol should specify which visits will be conducted at traditional clinical trial sites, which visits will be conducted remotely, and which visits can be left to participants’ choice. In general, obtaining patient input may be helpful in ensuring that the clinical trial design fits participants’ needs and that remote activities are feasible.When designing a trial with decentralized elements, certain statistical approaches may be challenging to implement. For example, when the effect size of an active control, such as a drug indicated for sleep disorders, has been determined based upon data collected at traditional clinical trial sites, the same effect size may not be seen for the active control assessed remotely in a DCT (e.g., via telehealth or in a participant’s home). This may present challenges in calculating a non-inferiority margin. Sponsors should consult with the relevant FDA review division when planning a non-inferiority trial in a DCT setting.B. Remote Clinical Trial Visits and Clinical Trial-Related ActivitiesRemote clinical trial visits and clinical trial-related activities are important strategies to make trials more convenient and more accessible to trial participants. Remote clinical trial visits may include telehealth visits, participant visits to local HCPs, or in-person visits by trial personnel or local HCPs to participants’ homes. The following should be considered when planning remote clinical trial visits or remote clinical trial-related activities:• When designing a DCT, sponsors can consider telehealth visits instead of in-person visits with trial participants if no in-person interaction is needed. The sponsor should consider the IP and the medical condition of the anticipated trial population when determining whether telehealth visits are appropriate. The protocol should specify when a telehealth visit with a trial participant is appropriate and when a participant should be seen in person.• Investigators should take measures to ensure the privacy of in-home and telehealth visits. For participants sharing their residence with others, this may involve accommodating times most suitable for participants and the possibility of using convenient locations outside of participants’ homes.• In-person visits and trial-related activities can be conducted by trial personnel who are sent to participants’ homes or participants’ preferred locations.• Depending on the trial protocol, in-person visits and trial-related activities may also be conducted by HCPs who are located close to trial participants’ homes. Investigators mayContains Nonbinding Recommendations5use these local HCPs (such as doctors or nurses) to perform certain trial-related activities; for example, on a fee-for-service basis. The trial-related activities local HCPs perform should not differ from those that they are qualified to perform in clinical practice and should not require a detailed knowledge of the protocol, investigator’s brochure, or IP (e.g., performing physical examinations or obtaining vital signs). These local HCPs would not be considered trial personnel, nor would they be considered subinvestigators in a drug trial.11• Trial-related activities that are unique to a research study (i.e., not routine in clinical practice) and/or require a detailed knowledge of the protocol, investigator’s brochure, or IP should be performed by qualified trial personnel who have been appropriately trained on the protocol. When applicable, both trial personnel and trial participants should be trained on how to conduct or participate in a telehealth visit and other visits not conducted at traditional clinical trial sites (e.g., home visits).• Study records should indicate if a visit was conducted via telehealth and should include the date of the visit and the name of the person who conducted the visit.• The trial protocol should specify how adverse events identified remotely will be evaluated and managed. The protocol should describe how care will be provided for adverse events that require urgent or in-person attention.• Sponsors and investigators should ensure that remote clinical trial visits conducted via telehealth comply with laws governing telehealth in the relevant U.S. States or territories and other countries, as applicable.C. Digital Health TechnologiesDHTs may allow transmission of data remotely and securely from trial participants wherever they are located. The sponsor should consider the following information regarding the use of DHTs in a DCT:• The guidance for industry, investigators, and other stakeholders Digital Health Technologies for Remote Data Acquisition in Clinical Investigations provides recommendations to sponsors, clinical investigators, and other parties for measuring clinical events and characteristics of interest using DHTs to acquire data remotely from participants in clinical trials evaluating drugs, biological products, and devices. The guidance discusses, among other things, selection of DHTs for use in clinical trials; verification, validation, and usability evaluations; use of DHTs to collect data for clinical trial endpoints; training on the use of DHTs; and management of risks related to the use11 Local HCPs can also be utilized in clinical trials that are integrated into routine clinical practice. See the draft guidance for industry Integrating Randomized Controlled Trials for Drug and Biological Products Into Routine Clinical Practice (September 2024). When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6of DHTs in clinical trials. Other issues regarding the use of DHTs in clinical investigations are discussed in other FDA guidances.12• Sponsors should ensure that DHTs used in a DCT are available and suitable for use by all trial participants. When a trial permits participants to use their own DHTs, sponsor-provided DHTs should be available as an option to ensure that participants who do not have a protocol-specified DHT are not excluded from the DCT for that reason (e.g., lower socioeconomic groups who cannot afford the DHT). Sponsor-provided telecommunication services should also be made available as needed so that participants who have no or limited access to these services are not excluded from the clinical investigation.D. Roles and ResponsibilitiesThe roles and responsibilities of sponsors and investigators are described below.1. The Sponsor• Sponsor responsibilities are the same for trials that include decentralized elements and trials that do not include decentralized elements.13 Because DCTs may involve many contracted services, sponsors should ensure proper coordination of decentralized elements (e.g., use of remote trial personnel for at-home visits, use of local HCPs, direct shipping of IP to participants) (see sections III.B and III.H). Such contracted services may be performed by networks of local HCPs (e.g., local clinic networks, pharmacy chains). Sponsors should ensure these networks of local HCPs are qualified to perform the contracted activities. Sponsors should also keep a record of these networks and other contracted service providers, including their roles and assigned activities.12 See the revised draft guidance for industry Electronic Systems, Electronic Records, and Electronic Signatures in Clinical Investigations: Questions and Answers (March 2023). When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic. For more information on FDA’s regulation of DHTs, consult the Guidances with Digital Health Content web page, available at https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/digital-health-center-excellence/guidances-digital-health-content.13 See 21 CFR parts 312 and 812.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7• The clinical trial population should reflect the intended patient population for the medical product being studied, including with respect to race, ethnicity, age, sex, and geographic location, as applicable.14 Outreach through local health care institutions (e.g., pharmacies, clinics) may facilitate recruitment of participants with diverse demographic characteristics more reflective of the intended patient population in areas where there are limited or no traditional clinical trial sites. Bringing trial-related activities to participants’ homes may reduce the need for travel and improve engagement, recruitment, and retention amongst potential participants who have challenges accessing traditional clinical trial sites. The use of local HCPs close to potential participants’ homes may further improve engagement, recruitment, and retention of a more representative participant population and reduce cultural or linguistic barriers to participation in clinical trials.• To account for multiple sources of data collection in a DCT, the sponsor should include at least the following in a data management plan or other trial-related documents:- Data origin and data flow from all sources to the sponsor (see section III.J) (e.g., a diagram that depicts the flow of data from creation to final storage)- Methods and technologies used for remote data acquisition from trial participants, trial personnel, and contracted service providers (e.g., local clinical laboratory facilities and local HCPs who perform trial-related activities)15- A list identifying service providers for data collection, handling, and management• Sponsors should describe in the trial protocol or other trial-related documents how operational aspects of the DCT will be implemented. This description should cover, but may not be limited to, the following:- Scheduled and unscheduled clinical trial visits- Activities to be performed by trial personnel and those that may be performed by local HCPs14 See the draft guidance for industry Diversity Action Plans to Improve Enrollment of Participants from Underrepresented Populations in Clinical Studies (June 2024). When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic. See also the guidance for industry Enhancing the Diversity of Clinical Trial Populations — Eligibility Criteria, Enrollment Practices, and Trial Designs and the guidance for industry and FDA staff Evaluation and Reporting of Age-, Race-, and Ethnicity-Specific Data in Medical Device Clinical Studies (September 2017).15 See the revised draft guidance for industry Electronic Systems, Electronic Records, and Electronic Signatures in Clinical Investigations: Questions and Answers and the guidance for industry, investigators, and other stakeholders Digital Health Technologies for Remote Data Acquisition in Clinical Investigations for recommendations related to storage and handling of data.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8- Transmission of reports on activities performed at different locations (e.g., medical imaging; clinical laboratory tests; and procedures performed at trial participants’ homes, work, or other local facilities)- Delivery of IPs to trial participants, if applicable, and accountability for IPs- Safety monitoring and management of adverse events• Study records should capture the visit type (i.e., telehealth or in person), the visit location (e.g., participant’s home, local health care facility, traditional clinical trial site), the date of the visit, and the data originator.16• Sponsors should ensure compliance with local laws, regulations, and licensing requirements governing medical practice and IP administration relevant to the conduct of a DCT. This may involve addressing laws in multiple U.S. States, territories, and other countries.• Sponsors must ensure proper monitoring of an investigation.17 As with any trial, sponsors may use a variety of approaches to monitor DCTs, and the monitoring plan for a trial should be based on the sponsor’s risk assessment.18 A trial monitoring plan should (1) describe how monitoring will be implemented to assess protocol compliance and data quality and integrity, (2) specify the frequency with which trial records and source documents will be reviewed, and (3) note any unique aspects related to the decentralized elements. FDA recommends risk-based monitoring approaches and the use of centralized monitoring to identify and proactively follow up on missing data, inconsistent data, data outliers, and potential protocol deviations that may be indicative of systemic or significant errors.2. The Investigator and Delegation of Trial-Related ActivitiesInvestigators are responsible for the conduct of the DCT and for protecting the rights, safety, and welfare of subjects under their care.19 Investigators must also maintain accurate records of each subject’s case history, including observations and other data pertinent to the investigation.20 Consistent with these responsibilities, investigators should review data from other trial personnel and local HCPs, as applicable, and follow up on any data that are missing, concerning, or appear to be in error. Investigators must also ensure assessments are being completed consistent with16 See the guidance for industry Electronic Source Data in Clinical Investigations (September 2013)17 See 21 CFR 312.50, 312.56(a), 812.40, and 812.46.18 For information on risk-based approaches to monitoring clinical trials, see the guidance for industry A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring of Clinical Investigations: Questions and Answers (April 2023).19 See 21 CFR 312.60, 812.3(i), and 812.100.20 21 CFR 312.62 and 812.140(a)(3).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations9the protocol21 and confirm that participants have received the IP.22 When permitted by the protocol,23 investigators can delegate trial-related activities to appropriate local HCPs. Investigators can work with enrolled participants to identify such providers when appropriate. Investigators must ensure that trial-related activities delegated to local HCPs are conducted according to the investigational plan and applicable regulations and remain responsible for the adequate supervision of those to whom they have delegated these activities.24,25The extent of decentralization in a clinical trial may vary depending on the investigator’s use of telehealth, trial personnel working remotely, local HCPs, and/or DHTs. Whether all activities can be decentralized depends on the types of assessments and procedures needed to collect endpoints and monitor safety. Additional training, coordination, and standard operating procedures may be needed for decentralized elements to ensure consistent implementation.• When permitted by the trial protocol,26 investigators may delegate trial-related activities that require in-person interactions to appropriate local HCPs (e.g., physical examinations and other medical procedures). These procedures may take place at participants’ homes, local health care facilities, or other suitable locations convenient for participants.• As part of the requirement that investigators protect the safety of subjects,27 investigators should evaluate reports from local HCPs of abnormal signs or symptoms detected at in-person visits. Investigators should follow up with participants as appropriate.• Videoconferencing may be useful to allow investigators to oversee trial personnel performing activities described in the trial protocol (e.g., photographing lesions, fitting wearable sensors) at participants’ locations.• Investigators should enroll only as many trial participants as they can appropriately manage to ensure adequate supervision of DCT-related activities.• As for any drug trial required to be conducted under an investigational new drug application (IND) under 21 CFR part 312, Form FDA 1572 must be completed by all investigators.28 The decision to include individuals as subinvestigators in a DCT should21 21 CFR 312.60 and 812.100.22 21 CFR 312.61, 812.100, and 812.110(c).23 21 CFR 312.60 and 812.100.24 Ibid.25 See also the guidance for industry Investigator Responsibilities — Protecting the Rights, Safety, and Welfare of Study Subjects (October 2009).26 21 CFR 312.60 and 812.100.27 See 21 CFR 312.60 and 812.100.28 21 CFR 312.53(c).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations10be based on their assigned responsibilities. When trial personnel contribute directly and significantly to the trial data (e.g., assessing adverse events, performing a clinical outcome assessment, applying a protocol-defined scoring system) or require a detailed knowledge of the protocol, investigator’s brochure, or IP, they should be included on Form FDA 1572 as subinvestigators.29 Individuals who are not subinvestigators should not be listed on Form FDA 1572. In addition, as part of the IND, sponsors must submit a list of all investigators and subinvestigators.30• Investigators do not need to maintain a log of local HCPs performing trial-related activities. However, as part of preparing and maintaining adequate case histories, investigators should ensure that reports from local HCPs include the name of the local HCP and the date when activities were performed.31• For device investigations, investigator and sponsor responsibilities under 21 CFR part 812 include the requirement that there be a signed agreement between the investigator and sponsor (see 21 CFR 812.43(c)(4) and 812.100). A list of all investigators in the study is also required as part of an investigational device exemption (IDE) application (see 21 CFR 812.20(b)(4) and (b)(5) and 812.150(b)(4)). Local HCPs who provide trial-related services that are part of routine clinical practice and where a detailed knowledge of the protocol or IP is not required are not considered investigators and should not be included in the IDE list of investigators.• Investigators should communicate any specific instructions included in the protocol to local HCPs for trial-related activities they are delegated to perform (e.g., having participants rest for 5 minutes before measuring a blood pressure) to limit variability and to ensure consistency and completeness of the data. Investigators should also review data provided by local HCPs regularly to ensure data quality.• Some trial protocols will include designated clinical laboratory facilities32 to perform activities required by the protocol (e.g., phlebotomy, x-rays). Other trial protocols may permit the use of a variety of clinical laboratory facilities close to the trial participant to perform these activities. Use of local clinical laboratory facilities is generally appropriate for routine clinical tests that are well standardized. Designated clinical laboratory29 See 21 CFR 312.3(b) and 312.53(c)(1)(viii) (for a definition of subinvestigator and a more detailed discussion of the list of names of subinvestigators who must be included in Form FDA 1572). For more information on subinvestigators, see questions 31 and 32 in the information sheet guidance for sponsors, clinical investigators, and IRBs Frequently Asked Questions – Statement of Investigator (Form FDA 1572) (May 2010) and the guidance for industry Investigator Responsibilities — Protecting the Rights, Safety, and Welfare of Study Subjects.30 See 21 CFR 312.23(a)(6)(iii)(b).31 See 21 CFR 312.62(b) and 812.140(a)(3).32 See the information sheet guidance for sponsors, clinical investigators, and IRBs Frequently Asked Questions – Statement of Investigator (Form FDA 1572).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations11facilities should be used for tests that are specialized or specific to the trial. If appropriate, specimens from trial participants (e.g., blood, sputum) may be collected by remote trial personnel, local HCPs, local clinical laboratory facilities, or participants using home collection kits and sent to designated clinical laboratory facilities for processing. • For drug trials required to be conducted under an IND, all clinical laboratory facilities must be listed on Form FDA 1572.33 For device trials, clinical laboratories should be identified in the investigational plan as appropriate (e.g., specifying clinical laboratories that are traditional clinical trial sites in in vitro diagnostic device studies,34 identifying use of core labs for performing critical tests, outlining plans to use local labs not associated with traditional clinical trial sites). The investigator should maintain a record of any clinical laboratory facilities used by participants under their supervision that are added during the course of either a drug or device trial. If a network of clinical laboratories is used, the name and address of the network headquarters may be listed instead of individual satellite clinical laboratories.• As in any trial, participants experiencing any health emergency (e.g., hypoglycemia or abnormal cardiac rhythm) should seek medical attention at local health care facilities (such as an emergency room), as appropriate. With the permission of trial participants, investigators should obtain reports from these local health care facilities.E. FDA OversightFDA uses a variety of tools to conduct oversight of regulated entities (e.g., sponsors and clinical investigators). This includes inspections conducted under sections 704(a)(1) or 704(a)(5) of the FD&C Act35 and, when appropriate, remote regulatory assessments.36 For FDA inspections of clinical investigators, the investigator should identify a physical location where a responsible person is available to facilitate the FDA inspectors’ access to trial-related records (either paper or electronic access) for participants under the clinical investigator’s care and to facilitate interviews with trial personnel (either in person or remotely). For INDs, the investigators33 See 21 CFR 312.53(c)(iv).34 For certain device studies, information on the clinical laboratory may need to be included in the IDE application. See, e.g., 21 CFR 812.20(b)(1), (b)(3), (b)(6), and (b)(7). For example, for some in vitro diagnostic studies, a clinical laboratory may be the sponsor of the study or a traditional clinical trial site at which the investigator is located.35 Generally, an inspection, such as described in section 704(a)(1) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 374(a)(1)), involves duly designated officers or employees of the FDA physically entering (at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner) establishments subject to regulation under the FD&C Act to determine compliance with applicable requirements. See section 704(a)(1) of the FD&C Act; see also FDA’s Investigations Operations Manual, Section 2.2.3, Authority to Inspect (2024).36 See section 704(a)(4) of the FD&C Act. See also the draft guidance for industry Conducting Remote Regulatory Assessments: Questions and Answers (January 2024). When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations12generally identify the inspection location for clinical investigators as the address entered under sections 1 or 3 on Form FDA 1572; however, other physical locations may be identified for inspection purposes. For IDE applications, the inspection location for clinical investigators is generally included in the IDE application; however, other physical locations may be identified for inspection purposes.F. Informed Consent and Institutional Review Board OversightObtaining informed consent remotely may be considered as part of a DCT. Institutional review board (IRB) oversight is required to ensure the process is adequate and appropriate.37• Investigators may obtain informed consent (either electronically or on paper) from trial participants at their remote locations provided that all applicable regulatory requirements are met.38 The process of obtaining informed consent from participants at their remote locations can include a remote visit. Obtaining informed consent is an investigator responsibility.39 If the investigator delegates this responsibility, the individual obtaining informed consent should, among other things, have a detailed knowledge of the protocol and have the appropriate training and credentials to be able to address any questions or concerns the subject may have about the trial.40 FDA therefore does not consider obtaining informed consent to be an appropriate activity for a local HCP to perform.• With a DCT, the informed consent process must include notifying participants (or their legally authorized representatives) of whom to contact for answers to pertinent questions about the research and research subjects’ rights and whom to contact in the event of a research-related injury to the subject in accordance with 21 CFR part 50.41• When appropriate, FDA recommends the use of a central IRB in DCTs to facilitate efficient review of the protocol, the informed consent documents, and other relevant trial-related information.4237 21 CFR 56.109, 56.111, 312.66, and 812.42.38 For FDA regulations about informed consent, see 21 CFR part 50 (including the elements of informed consent under 21 CFR 50.25 and the documentation of informed consent under 21 CFR 50.27). For additional information, see the guidance for IRBs, investigators, and sponsors Use of Electronic Informed Consent: Questions and Answers (December 2016). See also the guidance for IRBs, clinical investigators, and sponsors Informed Consent (August 2023).39 21 CFR 50.20, 312.60, and 812.100.40 For additional discussion about delegation of the consent discussion, see the guidance for IRBs, clinical investigators, and sponsors Informed Consent.41 See 21 CFR 50.25(a)(7).42 See 21 CFR 56.114 (for a description of arrangements related to use of a central IRB). For additional information, see the guidance for industry Using a Centralized IRB Review Process in Multicenter Clinical Trials (March 2006).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations13• As applicable, the informed consent process should inform trial participants:− Whether local HCPs will be used in the conduct of the trial− Which trial activities will take place at their homes− Who will have access to their protected health informationG. Investigational Products in a DCT1. Drugs and Biological ProductsThe administration of an IP to participants must be performed under the supervision of the investigator or subinvestigator responsible to the investigator.43 The investigator shall not supply the investigational drug to any person not authorized to receive the IP.44 Sponsors should consider the nature of the IP when determining whether administration outside of a traditional clinical trial site in a DCT is appropriate. Administration of IP that has a high-risk safety profile, especially in the immediate post-administration period; that is in early stages of development such that the safety profile is not well defined; or that requires complex preparation, administration, or medical assessments may need in-person supervision by the investigator at a traditional clinical trial site. Alternatively, it may be appropriate for local HCPs or trial personnel working remotely to administer an IP at, for example, local health care facilities, mobile research units, or participants’ homes if the safety profile of the IP is well characterized and specialized monitoring during the immediate period following administration is not needed.45Depending on the safety profile of the IP (e.g., a class of drug with a risk of hypersensitivity, abuse potential) and the type of trial (e.g., dose escalation trial), sponsors should estimate the urgency and complexity of care that may be needed based upon risks related to the IP and the underlying condition in the population being studied. Investigators should take steps to help ensure that participants have access to an appropriate level of local care.Drugs best suited for direct shipment to the participant’s home include those with good stability profiles. Drugs that involve specialized handling, shipping, and storage conditions may not be suited for direct shipment to locations outside the traditional clinical trial site.43 21 CFR 312.61.44 Ibid.45 The same considerations may apply to administration of the control as part of the clinical trial.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations142. Medical DevicesWhen determining the appropriate use or administration of an investigational device in a DCT, sponsors should consider the type of medical device, its intended use, its instructions for use, and the potential risks of the device for participants.Investigational devices intended for home use may be appropriate for use by trial participants without the investigator’s direct oversight when such direct oversight is not needed to mitigate potential serious risks to trial participants. Investigational devices that are not intended for self-use (i.e., devices used in hospital or ambulatory care settings) should be used or administered by qualified trial personnel with investigator oversight. An investigator shall not supply an investigational device to any person not authorized under 21 CFR part 812 to receive it.46 Certain follow-up assessments or procedures needed after using the investigational device or after surgical implantation of the device in trial participants may be performed by appropriately qualified and trained local HCPs or trial personnel via telehealth visits, at the homes of trial participants, or in local health care facilities. A telehealth visit may be appropriate if an assessment in that setting does not pose significant risk to trial participants and if there are plans in place to ensure that adverse events identified during such visits will be properly assessed, managed, and documented.H. Packaging and Shipping of Investigational ProductsIn some cases, DCTs may involve the direct distribution of IPs to trial participants or local HCPs. In these cases, investigators must remain responsible for supervising the supply of IP to trial participants or local HCPs.47 When applicable, trial personnel should be trained on procedures and appropriate documentation for handling, packaging, shipping, and tracking IPs. When IPs are directly distributed to trial participants or local HCPs, such as through a central distribution service, the investigator must authorize the release of the IP by the distributor; ensure receipt by trial participants or local HCPs, which should be done according to procedures described in the investigational plan or other trial-related documents; and document the return or disposal of any unused product as directed by the sponsor.48 When IPs are shipped directly to participants, investigators should ensure participants have appropriate instructions for use of the product.Sponsors should address the following in trial-related documents:• How the physical integrity and stability of the IP will be maintained during shipment, including appropriate packaging materials and methods (e.g., temperature control).46 See 21 CFR 812.110.47 See 21 CFR 312.61 and 812.110.48 See 21 CFR 312.59, 312.60, 312.61, 312.62(a), 812.100, 812.110(c) and (e), and 812.140(a)(2).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations15Shipping containers should include clear instructions for recipients who are handling and storing IPs and instructions for returning unused IPs.49,50• How investigators will track and document receipt of IPs by participants or local HCPs.• How unused IPs will be returned to the sponsor or disposed of and how this will be documented.51I. Safety Monitoring in DCTsTo protect the safety and welfare of trial participants in a DCT, sponsors should implement a safety monitoring plan that addresses the following:• The safety monitoring plan should take the decentralized nature of the clinical trial into account and ensure that adverse events and medication errors are appropriately collected and adequately addressed.52 Generally, adverse events should be captured during scheduled visits with investigators or trial personnel. However, there may be instances when local HCPs performing trial-related activities become aware of a concerning sign, symptom, or clinical event. The safety monitoring plan should describe how local HCPs will be instructed to report such findings.• As in any clinical trial, the safety monitoring plan should describe how participants are expected to respond to and report adverse events, including where to seek medical assistance locally when necessary and where to receive follow-up care.53• When applicable, the safety monitoring plan should describe the type of information that will be collected by a DHT, how that information will be used and monitored, and what49 For information about packaging, labeling, and distributing phase 1 investigational drugs and biological products, see section V.G in the guidance for industry CGMP for Phase 1 Investigational Drugs (July 2008).50 For information about packaging and labeling operations of phases 2 and 3 investigational drug and biological products, see section VII in the guidance for industry Preparation of Investigational New Drug Products (Human and Animal) (reprinted November 1992).51 See 21 CFR 312.59, 812.110(e), 812.140(a)(2), and 812.140(b)(2) (for requirements related to disposition of the IP).52 Certain late-stage pre-approval or post-approval clinical trials could be able to use selective safety data collection. See the ICH guidance for industry E19 A Selective Approach to Safety Data Collection in Specific Late-Stage Pre-Approval or Post-Approval Clinical Trials (December 2022).53 For information about the medical care of trial participants, see section 2.7.1 in the ICH draft guidance for industry E6(R3) Good Clinical Practice (GCP) (June 2023). When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations16action trial participants or personnel should take in response to abnormal findings or electronic alerts.54Trial participants should have clear instructions about how to contact trial personnel to report adverse events and to have pertinent questions answered. Trial participants should also be able to arrange for an unscheduled visit with trial personnel using telehealth or an in-person visit, as appropriate (see section III.B).If unreasonable and significant safety risks emerge because of use of an IP (e.g., due to remote administration), sponsors must discontinue all or part of the trial presenting the risk (e.g., discontinue remote administration or use) and notify FDA, the IRB, and all investigators who have participated in the trial.55If authorized in the protocol, routine safety monitoring involving laboratory testing and imaging may be performed using local clinical laboratory facilities close to trial participants (see section III.D.2). Investigators should ensure they promptly receive reports of these tests and review them in a timely manner.J. Electronic Systems Used When Conducting DCTs• Electronic systems can be used to perform multiple functions to manage DCT operations, including:- Managing electronic informed consent (e.g., maintaining approved versions of informed consent, documenting IRB approval, archiving signed forms)- Capturing and storing reports from remote trial personnel, local HCPs, and local clinical laboratory facilities- Managing electronic case report forms (eCRFs)- Scheduling trial visits and other trial activities- Tracking IPs that are shipped directly to trial participants- Syncing information recorded by DHTs- Serving as communication tools between trial personnel and trial participants54 For more information on safety monitoring as it relates to DHTs used in clinical investigations, see the guidance for industry, investigators, and other stakeholders Digital Health Technologies for Remote Data Acquisition in Clinical Investigations.55 See 21 CFR 312.56(d) and 812.46.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations17• Training should be provided to all parties (e.g., trial personnel, local HCPs, and trial participants) who are using electronic systems to support the conduct of DCTs.• There are several ways local HCPs can submit trial-related data for inclusion in clinical trial records, including but not limited to the following:- An eCRF can be designed to allow local HCPs to enter trial-related data directly into the eCRF.56- Local HCPs can send forms or documents electronically by methods of secure data transfer (e.g., via secure email or fax) to investigators who are responsible for entering these trial-related data into the eCRF and retaining the trial-related records.57• Remote trial personnel or local HCPs submitting trial data directly into the eCRF should be included in the sponsor’s list of authorized data originators.58• Electronic systems that are used to produce and process trial records required by the FD&C Act and FDA regulations are subject to 21 CFR part 11.59 These systems must ensure data reliability, security, privacy, and confidentiality.60• FDA considers real-time video and audio interactions as a live exchange of information between trial personnel and trial participants. These live interactions are not considered electronic records and, therefore, are not subject to 21 CFR part 11, but other requirements governing telehealth, including local laws, may apply. However, the visits must be documented (e.g., visit notes),61 and if such documents are in electronic form, they must be captured in systems that are subject to the requirements in 21 CFR part 11.62 Investigators should ensure the privacy and security of these real-time visits.56 See the guidance for industry Electronic Source Data in Clinical Investigations.57 See 21 CFR 312.62 and 812.140(a).58 See the guidance for industry Electronic Source Data in Clinical Investigations. As recommended in that guidance, “[a] list of all authorized data originators (i.e., persons, systems, devices, and instruments) should be developed and maintained by the sponsor and made available at each clinical site.”59 See 21 CFR 11.1.60 See 21 CFR part 11. See also the guidance for industry Electronic Source Data in Clinical Investigations and the revised draft guidance for industry Electronic Systems, Electronic Records, and Electronic Signatures in Clinical Investigations: Questions and Answers.61 See 21 CFR 312.62(b) and 812.140(a)(3).62 See 21 CFR 11.1(b).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations18GLOSSARYThe following terms are defined for the purposes of this guidance:clinical laboratory facilities: Clinical laboratories or other testing facilities directly contributing to or supporting the clinical trial (e.g., diagnostic labs performing blood tests, imaging centers, cardiology labs).data management plan: A written document that describes what data a sponsor expects to acquire or generate during the course of a clinical trial; how the sponsor intends to manage, describe, analyze, and store said data; and what mechanisms will be used at the end of the study to preserve and share the research data.decentralized clinical trial (DCT): A clinical trial that includes decentralized elements where trial-related activities occur at locations other than traditional clinical trial sites.digital health technology (DHT): A system that uses computing platforms, connectivity, software, and/or sensors for health care and related uses. These technologies span a wide range of uses, from applications in general wellness to applications as a medical device. They include technologies intended for use as a medical product, in a medical product, or as an adjunct to other medical products (devices, drugs, and biologics). They may also be used to develop or study medical products.investigational product (IP): Human drugs, biological products, or devices that are being investigated in a clinical trial.63telehealth: The use of electronic information and telecommunications technologies to support remote interactions between clinical trial personnel and trial participants.63 See 21 CFR 312.3(b) and 812.3(g).



Assessing COVID-19-Related Symptoms in Outpatient Adult and Adolescent Subjects in Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biological Products for COVID-19 Prevention or TreatmentGuidance for IndustryThis guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on 8 this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You 9 can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. 10 To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for this guidance as listed on the 11 title page. 12131415I. INTRODUCTION 1617This guidance provides sponsors and investigators with considerations for approaches on how 18 common symptoms related to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) can be measured and 19 analyzed in clinical trials evaluating drugs or biological products2 for the prevention or treatment 20 of COVID-19 in outpatient adult and adolescent3 subjects.4 This guidance is not intended for 21 development programs evaluating products to treat or prevent postinfectious COVID-19 22 conditions (e.g., long COVID, multisystem inflammatory syndrome) in children and adults, or 23 development programs for preventative vaccines. This guidance does not address considerations 24 for clinical trial design other than those pertaining to the measurement and analysis of COVID-25 19-related symptoms among outpatients. Considerations for patients with COVID-19 who 26 require hospitalization are out of scope for this guidance. 2728FDA is implementing this guidance without prior public comment because the Agency has 29 determined that prior public participation is not feasible or appropriate (see 21 CFR 10.115(g)(2) 301 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of New Drugs in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research in cooperation with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research at the Food and Drug Administration.2 For the purposes of this guidance, all references to drugs include both human drugs and biological products unless otherwise specified.3 For the purposes of this guidance, adolescents are defined as 12 years of age to younger than 18 years of age.4 For treatment trials, sponsors should document diagnosis of laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2, as well as the duration of symptoms before treatment. Sponsors of clinical trials to evaluate drugs and biological products to treat or prevent COVID-19 should see the guidance for industry, investigators, and institutional review boards Considerations for the Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products During Major Disruptions Due To Disasters and Public Health Emergencies (September 2023) and the guidance for industry COVID-19: Developing Drugs and Biological Products for Treatment or Prevention (November 2023). We update guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2and (g)(3). FDA made this determination because although the COVID-19-related public health 31 emergency under section 319 of the Public Health Services Act has expired, SARS-CoV-2 32 continues to circulate, COVID-19 remains a serious health risk for some individuals, and there is 33 a need to ensure that sponsors are aware of FDA’s recommendations to facilitate timely 34 development of drugs and biological products for treatment and prevention of COVID-19. This 35 guidance supersedes the guidance of the same name issued on September 29, 2020. 3637In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. 38 Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only 39 as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of 40 the word should in Agency guidance means that something is suggested or recommended, but 41 not required. 424344II. BACKGROUND 4546Sponsors continue to conduct outpatient prevention or treatment clinical trials in adult and 47 adolescent subjects that incorporate assessments of COVID-19-related symptoms; however, 48 challenges persist. These challenges include but are not limited to the identification of methods 49 to assess the numerous and heterogenous symptoms across subjects, patient burden, poor 50 compliance with diary completion, and potential missing data. To address these challenges, 51 sponsors should identify key common symptoms for daily assessments based on the program-52 specific context of use (e.g., target population, mechanism of action of the investigational 53 product, underlying pathophysiology of COVID-19, symptomatology associated with the 54 currently circulating variants) to optimize the measurement strategy for symptoms most likely to 55 change while lessening the burden on trial subjects.5 To assist sponsors, this guidance provides 56 an exemplary set of common COVID-19-related symptoms as well as an approach to their 57 measurement for use in clinical trials (see Table 1). The symptom items are derived from 58 existing literature, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),6 and clinical research. 5960615 See the FDA Patient-Focused Drug Development (PFDD) Guidance Series for Enhancing the Incorporation of the Patient’s Voice in Medical Product Development and Regulatory Decision Making, available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/development-approval-process-drugs/fda-patient-focused-drug-development-guidance-series-enhancing-incorporation-patients-voice-medical. The guidance series is part of FDA’s PFDD efforts in accordance with the 21st Century Cures Act and the Food and Drug Administration Reauthorization Act of 2017 Title I. We update guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents. When final, the PFDD guidance series will replace the guidance for industry Patient-Reported Outcome Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling Claims (December 2009).6 For detailed information, see the CDC’s COVID-19 Symptoms of Coronavirus web page, available at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.html?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fcoronavirus%2F2019-ncov%2Fabout%2Fsymptoms.html.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3III. DISCUSSION 6263A. General Recommendations 6465FDA recommends the following for sponsors initiating clinical trials evaluating drugs for the 66 prevention or treatment of COVID-19 in outpatient adult and adolescent subjects: 6768• Use patient-reported outcome (PRO) instruments7 to assess COVID-19-related 69 symptoms; the use of PRO instruments is advised when measuring signs and symptoms best 70 known by the patient or best measured from the patient perspective. 7172• Consult with the appropriate FDA review division regarding PRO instruments proposed 73 for use. 7475• Conduct PRO assessments of COVID-19-related symptoms at least every 24 hours and 76 conduct assessments at the same time each day. 7778• Use electronic data collection systems with reminders to trial subjects to complete the 79 PRO instrument to minimize missing data and provide time stamps of completion. 80 Alternatively, if a paper-based diary is used, sponsors should send reminders (e.g., phone 81 calls, text messages, email) to trial subjects. 8283• Include a set of common COVID-19-related symptoms (for an example, see Table 1) in 84 the daily PRO assessments of all trial subjects regardless of which symptoms a subject 85 had at baseline, as new symptoms may appear following the baseline assessment. 8687• Consider whether a comprehensive set of COVID-19-related symptoms, beyond the set 88 of common COVID-19-related symptoms assessed in the daily PRO instrument, is useful 89 when collected at study baseline and again at landmark time points8 and also whether a 90 transition to weekly PRO assessments later in the study period would be useful, 91 depending on the program-specific context of use (e.g., study duration). 92937 See the FDA PFDD Guidance Series for Enhancing the Incorporation of the Patient’s Voice in Medical Product Development and Regulatory Decision Making, available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/development-approval-process-drugs/fda-patient-focused-drug-development-guidance-series-enhancing-incorporation-patients-voice-medical.8 Landmark times are predefined fixed time points after baseline.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4• Conduct an evaluation to ensure the PRO instrument’s comprehensibility and usability 94 before implementation in a trial to mitigate the risk of poor instrument performance.9,10 95 Such an evaluation should be conducted even if the sponsor chooses to use an approach 96 similar to the example approach shown in Table 1. 9798B. Example Assessment of Key COVID-19-Related Symptoms 99100Given the heterogeneous nature of COVID-19-related symptoms, key COVID-19-related 101 symptoms should be assessed systematically to provide an accurate evaluation of benefit in 102 outpatients. In this guidance we provide an exemplary set of 14 common COVID-19-related 103 symptoms to consider in Table 1 (as described below). Although we recommend assessing these 104 items to capture change in common COVID-19-related symptoms (e.g., emergence, 105 improvement, or worsening) during the clinical trials, a subset of key COVID-19-related 106 symptoms can be used to derive symptom-based efficacy endpoints. Determination of which 107 subset to investigate will depend on what aspect(s) of the condition the study drug is expected to 108 improve as well as symptomatology associated with the currently circulating COVID-19 109 variant(s) of concern. The final assessment plan should be informed by qualitative evidence 110 from patient interviews and/or the literature. 111112• In the example in Table 1, the following applies for rating each symptom: 113114– Items 1 to 10, 13, and 14: Trial subjects rate symptom severity at its worst over a 115 specified recall period (e.g., 24 hours) using a verbal rating scale for severity. 116117– Items 11 (vomiting) and 12 (diarrhea) are each recorded promptly after a vomiting or 118 diarrhea episode occurs. 119120• In the example in Table 1, there is no total score. Each symptom is scored individually 121 using the following response options and/or scoring values: 122123– Items 1 to 10: None = 0, Mild = 1, Moderate = 2, and Severe = 3. 124125– Items 11 and 12: Record the time of event occurrence. 126127– Items 13 and 14: Sense of smell/taste same as usual = 0, Sense of smell/taste less 128 than usual = 1, No sense of smell/taste = 2. 1291301319 See the guidance for industry, Food and Drug Administration staff, and other stakeholders Patient-Focused Drug Development: Methods to Identify What Is Important to Patients (February 2022).10 See the draft guidance for industry, Food and Drug Administration staff, and other stakeholders Patient-Focused Drug Development: Selecting, Developing, or Modifying Fit-for-Purpose Clinical Outcome Assessments (June 2022). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5Table 1. Example Assessment of 14 Common COVID-19-Related Symptoms: Sample of 132 Items and Response Options 133134Example of itemsFor items 1–10, sample item wording could be “What was the severity of your [insert symptom] at its worst over the past 24 hours?”Example of response optionsand scoring*1. Stuffy or runny noseNone = 0Mild = 1Moderate = 2Severe = 32. Sore throat3. Shortness of breath (difficulty breathing)4. Cough5. Low energy or tiredness6. Muscle or body aches7. Headache8. Chills or shivering9. Feeling hot or feverish10. Nausea (feeling like you wanted to throw up)11. If you had vomiting (throwing up)**Record each episode of vomitingContains Nonbinding Recommendations6Example of itemsFor items 1–10, sample item wording could be “What was the severity of your [insert symptom] at its worst over the past 24 hours?”Example of response optionsand scoring*12. If you had diarrhea (loose or watery stools) **Record each episode of diarrhea13. Rate your sense of smell in the past 24 hours†My sense of smell is THE SAME AS usual = 0My sense of smell is LESS THAN usual = 1I have NO sense of smell = 214. Rate your sense of taste in the past 24 hours†My sense of taste is THE SAME AS usual = 0My sense of taste is LESS THAN usual = 1I have NO sense of taste = 2* Note: Score values are included in the table for ease of reference. FDA cautions against including the score 135 values within the verbal rating scale response options presented to trial subjects because these values may distract 136 subjects with unnecessary information. 137** The statements shown for items 11 and 12 are intended for documentation in real-time. For frequent events or 138 episodes, the sponsor should consider an event-driven electronic diary rather than a diary completed once daily with 139 a 24-hour recall.11 140† In lieu of items 13 and 14, sponsors may include optional questions on severity of loss and/or alteration of 141 smell/taste based on the program-specific context of use. The item descriptions should include sufficient detail for 142 the respondent to understand the concept being asked (e.g., loss of smell versus parosmia and/or phantosmia-like 143 alteration of smell). The same recommendation applies to item 14. Understandability of the response options 144 should be supported by qualitative evidence from patient interviews and/or the literature. 145146• Sponsors can consider using alternative items and response options for assessment of 147 common COVID-19-related symptoms. For example, a sponsor can consider using a 4-148 point (none/mild/moderate/severe) or binary response (yes/no) scale for assessment of 149 patient-reported loss and/or alteration of smell and taste; vomiting and diarrhea might 150 also be rated on a verbal rating frequency scale with a 24-hour recall period. 15111 See the draft guidance for industry, Food and Drug Administration staff, and other stakeholders Patient-Focused Drug Development: Incorporating Clinical Outcome Assessments Into Endpoints For Regulatory Decision-Making (April 2023). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7152• According to the mechanism of action of the investigational product and the underlying 153 pathophysiology of COVID-19, clinical manifestations of the currently circulating 154 COVID-19 variant(s) of concern, and program-specific study design, sponsors can also 155 assess additional emerging symptoms (e.g., cognitive dysfunction) if appropriate. 156157When designing and implementing PRO instruments, sponsors should consider the following 158 recommendations: 159160• FDA recommends using response scales that include verbal descriptors (e.g., none, mild, 161 moderate, severe) because the absence of verbal descriptors may create difficulty in 162 interpretation. Accordingly, response scales such as visual analog scales and 0-to-10 163 numeric rating scales are not directly interpretable and may result in interpretation 164 difficulties in this context. 165166• FDA recommends avoiding an excessively large number of items in the PRO 167 instrument(s), which may lead to unnecessary patient burden, poor compliance with diary 168 completion, and missing data. 169170C. Considerations for Outpatient Clinical Trial Endpoint Selection 1711721. Endpoint Selection 173174Sponsors should consider the following: 175176• The selection of time point(s) for clinical endpoint assessments in prevention or treatment 177 trials in outpatient adult and adolescent subjects is dependent on up-to-date knowledge of 178 the time course of COVID-19-related symptom onset or resolution. For example, clinical 179 findings show that certain symptoms (e.g., cough, fatigue, or alterations in taste and 180 smell) may take longer to resolve in comparison to other symptoms.12,13 Furthermore, 181 the CDC has reported findings of COVID-19 rebound, which may be part of the natural 182 history of SARS-CoV-2 infection in some individuals. The rebound included a 183 recurrence of COVID-19 symptoms, but the severity of the illness was mild.14 18418512 Lechien JR, Chiesa-Estomba CM, Place S, Van Laethem Y, Cabaraux P, Mat Q, Huet K, Plzak J, Horoi M, Hans S, Barillari MR, Cammaroto G, Fakhry N, Martiny D, Ayad T, Jouffe L, Hopkins C, and Saussez S, 2020, Clinical and Epidemiological Characteristics of 1420 European Patients With Mild-to-Moderate Coronavirus Disease 2019, J Intern Med, 288(3):335–344.13 Boscolo-Rizzo P, Borsetto D, Fabbris C, Spinato G, Frezza D, Menegaldo A, Mularoni F, Gaudioso P, Cazzador D, Marciani S, Frasconi S, Ferraro M, Berro C, Varago C, Micolai P, Tirelli G, Da Mosto MC, Obholzer R, Rigoli R, Polesel J, and Hopkins C, 2020, Evolution of Altered Sense of Smell or Taste in Patients With Mildly Symptomatic COVID-19, JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg, 146(8):729–732.14 See the CDC Health Alert Network’s Covid 19 Rebound After Paxlovid Treatment, available at https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/2022/pdf/CDC_HAN_467.pdf.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8• Sponsors can use early phase trials in the target patient population to examine the effect 186 of an investigational drug on the time course of symptoms to inform endpoint 187 development for pivotal trials. Sponsors can consider a variety of endpoint definitions to 188 evaluate the effect of a drug on common COVID-19-related symptoms. 189190• FDA encourages sponsors to provide a rationale to support their proposed endpoints, 191 taking into account relevant information from literature sources and any relevant clinical 192 trials. 1931942. Trials of Drugs for Treatment of COVID-19 195196Sponsors should consider the following: 197198• As described in the guidance for industry COVID-19: Developing Drugs and Biological 199 Products for Treatment or Prevention, an appropriate endpoint could be the time to 200 sustained symptom alleviation or resolution assessed over an appropriate duration. 201202• Sustained symptom alleviation or resolution can be defined as occurring when no key 203 COVID-19-related symptom scored higher than a prespecified threshold over a clinically 204 meaningful time period (as documented using a PRO instrument). 205206• To evaluate clinical benefit, sponsors should include trial entry criteria defining the 207 minimal baseline severity score for COVID-19-related symptoms (e.g., at least two 208 symptoms with a score of 2 or higher using the scoring system shown in Table 115). 209210FDA does not recommend the following: 211212• Defining endpoints based on adding scores of the items within a set of common COVID-213 19-related symptoms to form an aggregate score. Given the heterogeneity of COVID-19-214 related symptoms, any single trial subject may only experience a small subset of the 215 common COVID-19-related symptoms described in this guidance. 216217• Calculating an area under the curve of COVID-19-related symptoms, as this metric is not 218 easily interpretable in this context of use. 2192203. Trials of Drugs for Prevention of COVID-19 221222Sponsors should consider the following: 223224• As described in the guidance for industry COVID-19: Developing Drugs and Biological 225 Products for Treatment or Prevention, there is interest in ascertaining whether the 226 severity of COVID-19-related symptoms is milder in trial subjects receiving prophylaxis 227 compared with subjects not receiving prophylaxis. 22815 Note that the example relates to the items using verbal rating scale. For event-driven symptoms, consider a baseline threshold frequency to reflect moderate to severe severity in the target patient population.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations9229• Sponsors should collect data on COVID-19-related symptoms and other endpoints to 230 characterize levels of severity for prevention trials.16 Sponsors can consider using the set 231 of 14 common COVID-19-related symptoms, as described in Table 1, in such data 232 collection. 233234D. Handling Data 235236Sponsors developing drugs for the prevention or treatment of COVID-19 and investigators 237 conducting related clinical trials should consider the following regarding missing data and other 238 related issues for clinical trials: 239240• Sponsors and investigators should make efforts to minimize the amount of missing data. 241 These efforts should generally include providing reminders (e.g., phone calls, text 242 messages, email) to trial subjects to complete PRO instruments, monitoring adherence 243 with PRO instrument completion throughout the assessment period, following up with 244 trial subjects who are not successfully completing PRO instruments (and, where 245 permissible, close contacts if the trial subject is not responding), supplemental training of 246 trial subjects, and recording verbal responses for those who are unable to self-record 247 because of illness or other circumstances. FDA recommends obtaining contact 248 information for close contacts of trial subjects for use in case of nonresponse. If the 249 investigator or a member of the study team plans to contact a family member or other 250 close contact when subjects do not respond to follow-up, this should be described in the 251 informed consent document approved by the institutional review board. The reasons for 252 missing data should be documented. We recommend employing risk-based approaches, 253 including centralized monitoring in clinical trials, to ensure data quality and integrity.17 254255• The informed consent process18 and informed consent document should include 256 information to educate prospective subjects about the continued scientific importance of 257 their follow-up data even if they choose to discontinue treatment. 258259• The sponsor should prospectively plan appropriate methods for handling missing data in 260 the development of endpoints and conduct of analyses, considering the reason for the 26116 See the guidance for industry COVID-19: Developing Drugs and Biological Products for Treatment or Prevention.17 For additional information, see the guidance for industry A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring of Clinical Investigations: Questions and Answers (April 2023).18 For information about the informed consent process, see FDA’s proposed recommendations in the guidance for IRBs, clinical investigators, and sponsors Informed Consent (August 2023). For information about use of electronic systems and processes that may employ multiple electronic media to obtain informed consent, see the guidance for institutional review boards, investigators, and sponsors Use of Electronic Informed Consent: Questions and Answers (December 2016). See also the guidance for industry, investigators, and institutional review boards Considerations for the Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products During Major Disruptions Due To Disasters and Public Health Emergencies, and the guidance for industry COVID-19: Developing Drugs and Biological Products for Treatment or Prevention.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations10missing data.19 Sensitivity analyses considering different approaches to account for the 262 missing data should be specified in the statistical analysis plan.20 263264• Sponsors should prospectively specify how intercurrent events, including hospitalization 265 and death, will be handled in the statistical analysis. 266267• The aim should be to ascertain vital status for all COVID-19 trial subjects even after a 268 subject decides to discontinue treatment or discontinue participation in the trial, including 269 follow-up for key outcomes, while adhering to informed consent requirements.21 270271E. Additional COVID-19-Related Assessments 272273In addition to assessment of key COVID-19-related symptoms, such as by using the assessments 274 provided as an example in Table 1, FDA recommends that sponsors standardize the collection 275 and reporting of other clinical trial assessments for trial subjects. Additional assessments and 276 their associated methods that sponsors can consider include the following: 277278• Use of any medications to treat some of the COVID-19-related symptoms (e.g., 279 analgesics, antipyretics): The name of medication, dose, dosage form, and date and 280 time(s) of administration should be reported. 281282• Body temperature: The timing and the route of the body temperature assessment method 283 (e.g., oral) should be specified in the protocol, and sponsors should provide thermometers 284 to trial subjects. 285286• Oxygen saturation: Pulse oximetry data should be collected, and the sponsor should 287 provide that equipment and provide training or instruction on its use to subjects. 288289• Patient-reported global impression items assessing a) return to usual health, b) return to 290 usual activities, c) overall COVID-19-related symptoms, and d) cluster of COVID-19-291 related symptom (e.g., respiratory, digestive): examples of patient-reported global 292 impression item(s) can include the following: 29329419 For additional information, see the draft guidance for industry, Food and Drug Administration staff, and other stakeholders Patient-Focused Drug Development: Incorporating Clinical Outcome Assessments Into Endpoints for Regulatory Decision-Making.20 For additional information on sensitivity analysis, see the ICH guidance for industry E9(R1) Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials: Addendum: Estimands and Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical Trials (May 2021).21 For example, if a subject withdraws from the interventional portion of a clinical investigation and does not consent to continued follow-up of associated clinical outcome information, the investigator must not access the subject’s medical record or other confidential records that would require additional consent from the subject to obtain the continued follow-up information (21 CFR 50.20 and 50.25(a)(1)). However, an investigator may consult publicly available sources of information to determine a subject’s vital status after a subject withdraws from a clinical trial.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations11– In the past 24 hours, have you returned to your usual health (before your COVID-19 295 illness)? Yes or No 296297– In the past 24 hours, have you returned to your usual activities (before your COVID-298 19 illness)? Yes or No 299300– In the past 24 hours, what was the severity of your overall COVID-19-related 301 symptoms at their worst? None, Mild, Moderate, or Severe 302303– In the past 24 hours, what was the severity of your (cluster name: e.g., respiratory) 304 COVID-19-related symptoms at their worst? None, Mild, Moderate, or Severe 305306Further considerations include the frequency of patient-reported global impression items which 307 may be less frequent (i.e., weekly) with differing recall periods including now, past 24 hours, or 308 past week depending on the intent of the assessment. 309



Considerations for the Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products During Major Disruptions Due to Disasters and Public Health EmergenciesGuidance for Industry, Investigators, and Institutional Review BoardsThis guidance is for immediate implementation.FDA is issuing this guidance for immediate implementation in accordance with 21 CFR 10.115(g)(2). Submit one set of either electronic or written comments on this guidance at any time. Submit electronic comments to https://www.regulations.gov. Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Staff (HFA-305), Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, Rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You should identify all comments with the docket number listed in the notice of availability that publishes in the Federal Register. For questions regarding this document, contact (CDER) Office of Medical Policy, CDEROMP@fda.hhs.gov, 301-796-2500.U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH)Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE)Office of Clinical Policy (OCLiP)September 2023EmergenciesConsiderations for the Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products During Major Disruptions Due to Disasters and Public Health EmergenciesGuidance for Industry, Investigators, and Institutional Review BoardsAdditional copies are available from:Office of Communications, Division of Drug InformationCenter for Drug Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 4th FloorSilver Spring, MD 20993-0002Phone: 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400; Fax: 301-431-6353Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.govhttps://www.fda.gov/drugs/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information/guidances-drugsand/orOffice of Communication, Outreach and DevelopmentCenter for Biologics Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration10903 New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 71, Room 3128Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002Phone: 800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010Email: ocod@fda.hhs.govhttps://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information-biologics/biologics-guidancesand/orOffice of PolicyCenter for Devices and Radiological HealthFood and Drug Administration10903 New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 66, Room 5431Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002Email: CDRH-Guidance@fda.hhs.govhttps://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/device-advice-comprehensive-regulatory-assistance/guidance-documents-medical-devices-and-radiation-emitting-productsU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH)Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE)Office of Clinical Policy (OCLiP)September 2023EmergenciesContains Nonbinding RecommendationsTABLE OF CONTENTSI. INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................. 1II. BACKGROUND ................................................................................................................ 2III. DISCUSSION ..................................................................................................................... 2A. Considerations for Continuing Trials .......................................................................... 2B. Policies and Procedures to Account for Potential Disruptions to Trials ................... 4C. For All Trials That Are Impacted by a Disaster or PHE ........................................... 4APPENDIX: Questions and Answers......................................................................................... 6Contains Nonbinding Recommendations1Considerations for the Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products During Major Disruptions Due to Disasters and Public Health EmergenciesGuidance for Industry, Investigators, and Institutional Review Boards1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONDisasters and public health emergencies (PHEs) have the potential to cause major disruptions in the conduct of clinical trials for medical products.2 Such events can include (but are not limited to) hurricanes, earthquakes, military conflicts, infectious disease outbreaks, or bioterrorist attacks. FDA is issuing this guidance to provide general considerations to assist sponsors, institutional review boards (IRBs), and clinical investigators in assuring the safety of trial participants,3 maintaining compliance with good clinical practice (GCP), and minimizing risks to trial integrity during disasters and PHEs that may lead to major disruption of clinical trial conduct and operations. The appendix to this guidance further explains these general considerations in a question-and-answer format.In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of1 This guidance has been prepared by the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, the Center for Devices and Radiological Health, the Oncology Center of Excellence, and the Office of Clinical Policy at the Food and Drug Administration.2 We note that disasters and PHEs, as those terms are used in this guidance, may include natural catastrophes (e.g., significant earthquakes) and other unanticipated, significant disruptions with the potential to substantially impact the conduct of clinical trials for medical products, including situations where the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services has declared a PHE under section 319 of the Public Health Service Act or has declared that circumstances exist justifying the authorization of medical products for emergency use under section 564(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act).3 In this guidance, the terms trial participant, participant, and subject are interchangeable.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2the word should in Agency guidance means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. BACKGROUNDFDA recognizes that disasters and PHEs can cause major disruptions to the conduct of clinical trials of medical products. For example, disasters or PHEs can lead to population quarantines, trial site closures, travel limitations, interruptions to the supply chain for the investigational product (IP),4 or other challenges related to the type of disaster or PHE (e.g., site personnel or trial participants infected during an outbreak). These challenges can create difficulties in complying with protocol-specified procedures, including administering or using the IP or adhering to protocol-specified visits and laboratory or diagnostic testing.FDA is aware that not all trials can be initiated or continued during disasters and PHEs, and for some trials, there may be no alternative to stopping the trial earlier than planned in order to safeguard participants’ and trial staff’s safety. The determination of whether to continue a trial should be based first and foremost on ensuring that participants will continue to be able to participate safely. The determination should also consider whether the key objectives of the trial can still be met, with appropriate trial modifications implemented. FDA outlines the following general considerations to assist sponsors in ensuring the safety of trial participants, maintaining compliance with GCP, and minimizing risks to trial integrity. The appendix further explains these general considerations by providing answers to questions that the Agency has received about conducting clinical trials during major disruptions.III. DISCUSSIONA. Considerations for Continuing Trials• Ensuring the safety of trial participants is paramount. Sponsors should consider above all whether participants can safely continue in the trial, including necessary modifications and risk mitigation steps to ensure safety. Sponsors should also consider whether the trial can continue to meet its key objectives with modifications that adequately address the disaster or PHE circumstances. Study5 decisions might include those regarding continuing trial recruitment, continuing use of the IP for participants already in the trial, and the need to change participant monitoring during the trial. In all cases, it is critical that trial participants, IRBs/independent ethics committees (IECs), and regulatory agencies are kept informed of changes to the design and conduct of the study as appropriate.4 In this guidance, the term investigational product refers to investigational human drugs and biological products, as well as investigational medical devices.5 In this guidance, the terms trial and study are interchangeable.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3• Sponsors should consider whether the protection of a participant’s safety, welfare, and rights is best served by continuing a study participant in the trial as per the protocol, discontinuing the administration or use of the IP, modifying the assessments or assessment schedule, or discontinuing participation in the trial. Such decisions will depend on specific circumstances, including the nature of the IP, the ability to conduct appropriate safety monitoring, the potential impact of the disaster or PHE on the IP supply chain, and the nature of the disease or condition under study in the trial. Sponsors should work with the investigators conducting the trial to assess the individual participant’s situation and risk profile when considering their status in the trial.• Screening procedures (e.g., testing for an infectious disease) that may be mandated by the health care system in which a clinical trial is being conducted may not need to be included as an amendment to the protocol if the sponsor does not plan to incorporate the data collected as part of a new research objective.• Changes to the protocol or investigational plan to eliminate apparent immediate hazards or to protect the life and well-being of research participants in an emergency may be implemented without IRB approval or before filing an amendment to the investigational new drug application (IND) or investigational device exemption (IDE) but are required to be reported afterwards.6 FDA encourages sponsors and investigators to work with their IRBs to prospectively define procedures as early as possible in response to major disruptions to ensure participant safety and to prioritize reporting of deviations necessitated by the impact of a disaster or PHE.• The implementation of alternative processes for the conduct of the study should be consistent with the protocol to the extent possible, and sponsors and clinical investigators should document the reason for any contingency measures implemented. Sponsors and clinical investigators should document how the disaster or PHE led to the changes in study conduct and the duration of those changes, indicate which trial participants were impacted, and document how those trial participants were impacted.• There may be gaps in data capture, data loss, and difficulties in finalizing and locking datasets because of the disaster or PHE. If changes in the protocol will lead to amending data management, prespecified analyses, and/or statistical analysis plans, the sponsor should consider making such amendments in consultation with the applicable FDA review division. Before locking the database, sponsors should address how protocol deviations related to the disaster or PHE will be handled for the prespecified analyses in the statistical analysis plan.6 See 21 CFR 56.108(a)(4), 56.104(c), 312.30(b)(2)(ii), and 812.35(a)(2).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4B. Policies and Procedures to Account for Potential Disruptions to Trials• Sponsors, clinical investigators, and IRBs should consider establishing and implementing policies and procedures, or revising existing policies and procedures, to describe approaches to be used to protect trial participants and manage study conduct during possible disruption of the study. Changes to policies and procedures may address many issues, including the informed consent process; which participants can continue on the IP; study visits and procedures; data collection; study monitoring; adverse event reporting; study oversight; and changes in investigator(s), site staff, and/or monitor(s) due to travel restrictions, quarantine measures, or other safety measures. Policies and procedures should be compliant with applicable (regional or national) laws and regulations for the management and control of the disaster or PHE. Depending on the nature of the changes described above, a protocol amendment or IDE supplement may be required under the applicable regulations.7C. For All Trials That Are Impacted by a Disaster or PHESponsors should provide a description of the impacts on study conduct of the disaster or PHE in a study-specific document with references to appropriate sections of the clinical study report:1. Contingency measures implemented to manage study conduct during disruption of the study as a result of disaster- or PHE-related control measures2. Specific challenges faced by the sponsor of the clinical trial as a result of the disaster or PHE3. A listing of all participants affected by the disaster or PHE-related study disruption by unique trial participant number identifier and by investigational site and a description of how the individual’s participation was altered, including missed visits and assessments related to the disaster or PHE4. Analyses and corresponding discussions that address the impact of implemented contingency measures (e.g., trial participant discontinuation from IP and/or study, alternative procedures used to collect critical safety and/or efficacy data) on the safety and efficacy results reported for the studyRobust efforts by sponsors, investigators, and IRBs or IECs to maintain the safety of trial participants and study data integrity are expected, and such efforts should be documented. FDA recognizes that protocol modifications might occur, including unavoidable protocol deviations7 See 21 CFR 312.30(b) and 812.35(a). Under applicable Federal regulations, investigators who are conducting research with Schedule I controlled substances under the Controlled Substances Act must request prior approval from the Drug Enforcement Administration when seeking to conduct research beyond that which is described in the approved protocol (see 21 CFR 1301.18).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5due to the disaster or PHE, or control measures implemented in response to the disaster or PHE. Efforts to minimize impacts on trial integrity and to document the reasons for protocol deviations will be important.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6APPENDIX: Questions and AnswersQ1. Deciding whether to suspend, continue, or initiate trials ......................................................7Q2. Managing protocol deviations and amendments ...................................................................8Q3. Submitting changes to IND and IDE protocol.......................................................................9Q4. Capturing data on protocol and process deviations .............................................................10Q5. Conducting remote (virtual) clinic visits .............................................................................10Q6. Remote clinical outcome assessments .................................................................................11Q7. Use of alternative laboratory or imaging centers ................................................................14Q8. Use of video conferencing for trial visits ............................................................................15Q9. Delivering low-risk IPs to home .........................................................................................16Q10. Disposal of unused IP ..........................................................................................................16Q11. Changing site for delivering high-risk IP ............................................................................17Q12. Alternative monitoring approaches .....................................................................................18Q13. Remote site monitoring visits ..............................................................................................20Q14. Obtaining informed consent for patients who are physically isolated ................................21Q15. Collecting electronic signatures and part 11 compliance ....................................................23Q16. Challenges and temporary waivers for eCTDs ....................................................................24Q17. Shipping IP to local provider ‒ Form FDA 1572 and accountability .................................25Q18. Use of commercial versus IPs .............................................................................................26Q19. Scheduling of meetings with review divisions ....................................................................27Q20. Postmarketing requirements for drugs, biologics, and devices ...........................................27Q21. Reporting serious adverse events for approved drugs used to treat conditions related to a disaster or PHE ....................................................................................................................29Q22. Reporting serious adverse events associated with conditions related to a disaster or PHE in a trial not related to the condition ........................................................................................30Q23. Exclusion criteria for investigational medical products ......................................................31Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7Q1. What are some of the key factors that a sponsor should consider when deciding whether to suspend or continue an ongoing study or to initiate a new study during a disaster or public health emergency (PHE)?Central to any decision should be ensuring that the safety of clinical trial participants can be maintained. Sponsors should assess whether the protection of a participant’s safety, welfare, and rights is best served by continuing a study participant in the trial as per the protocol or by discontinuing participation in the trial. Such decisions will depend on specific circumstances, including the nature of the investigational product (IP), the ability to conduct appropriate safety monitoring, the potential impact on the IP supply chain, each participant’s underlying risk profile and situation during the disaster or PHE, and the nature of the disease or condition under study in the trial. As part of this assessment, sponsors should carefully consider the following aspects of clinical trial conduct when deciding how or whether to proceed with a clinical trial:• Assessing whether the limitations imposed by the disaster or PHE on protocol implementation pose new safety risks to trial participants, and whether it is feasible to mitigate these risks by amending study processes and/or procedures.• Assessing the availability of technology to communicate effectively and consistently with participants.• Assessing the continued availability of the clinical investigator/sub-investigators to provide oversight of the trial and properly assess and manage safety issues that may emerge.• Assessing whether there will be sufficient clinical trial support staff given the evolving situation and its impact on staff availability. Important questions to be considered include: Are there appropriately trained staff that could be available to handle the expected tasks? Are there adequate equipment and materials for clinical trial support staff?• Assessing whether clinical investigator sites will remain open to trial participants for required in-person assessments or whether the clinical investigator has the ability to provide required in-person assessments at an acceptable alternate location(s) or whether such protocol-specified, in-person assessments can instead be conducted virtually.• Assessing the continued availability of clinical trial supplies and continued operations of vendors, especially related to supply of the IP and/or to clinical trial supplies that are essential to maintaining appropriate safety monitoring or other key trial procedures. This should include consideration of product stability (shelf life) if the administration schedule is revised or if the clinical site is unable to properly store the product for the needed duration.• Assessing the continued availability of and support for information technology systems and any other technological tools that are needed to support the trial.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8Important questions to be considered include: Are current contingency plans adequate for the types of disruptions that might be anticipated? What other plans can be put in place to minimize disruptions to trial conduct?• Assessing whether there will be continued operations of and adequate communications with institutional review board (IRB) or independent ethics committee (IEC) and data monitoring committee (DMC) staff, if applicable, to support trial needs.• Assessing whether it is feasible to conduct the trial in light of any contingency and/or safety measures implemented by Federal, State, or local authorities.Involvement of a study’s DMC, if one has been established, can provide support for the assessments discussed above. Since a primary responsibility of the DMC is ensuring the safety of trial participants, the DMC’s assessment of the impact of modifications of trial conduct during a disaster or PHE is important to consider.The risks and benefits of continuing a trial are likely different than a decision to initiate a trial. Given an evolving situation, with likely increasing impacts on investigators, staff, and supply chains, sponsors should carefully consider the ability to effectively mitigate risks such that patient safety and trial integrity are assured. In addition, it is important to consider whether initiation of the trial could interfere with public safety measures implemented by Federal, State, or local authorities.Q2. How should sponsors manage protocol deviations and amendments to ongoing trials during a disaster or PHE?FDA recognizes that during disasters or PHEs, sponsors of clinical trials may need to modify protocol-specified procedures. As is discussed in the main body of this guidance, for protocol deviations necessitated by the impact of a disaster or PHE, the sponsor should document the specific protocol deviation and the reason for the deviation. The sponsor can document protocol deviations using its standard processes or, given the larger expected number of such deviations in disaster or PHE circumstances, use alternative documentation approaches. For example, if visits are to be conducted by telephone or video contact rather than at the investigational site as specified in the protocol, documentation that provides a listing of all study visits (e.g., listing study reference number, patient ID, date of visit) that are deviations from the protocol because of the disaster or PHE generally would be acceptable. Protocol deviations should be included in final study reports and may also be included in annual reports.For changes in protocol conduct, under the investigational new drug application (IND) regulations, protocol amendments that are necessary to prevent apparent immediate hazards to trial participants can be immediately implemented with subsequent submission and formal approval by the IRB and notification to FDA through filing a protocol amendment to the IND.11 See 21 CFR 56.108(a)(4) and 312.30(b)(2)(ii).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations9For studies under an IND, 21 CFR 312.30(b) specifies that sponsors must submit a protocol amendment to the IND describing any change in a Phase 1 protocol that significantly affects the safety of trial participants or any change in a Phase 2 or 3 protocol that significantly affects the safety of trial participants, the scope of the investigation, or the scientific quality of the study. Pausing enrollment in a trial to decrease potential exposure to an emerging disease or condition related to the disaster or PHE would not generally be expected to significantly affect trial participant safety, the scope of the investigation, or the scientific quality of the study; therefore, submitting a protocol amendment would not be required under the regulation for such a pause.Prior to IRB approval of an amendment and submission to the FDA, clinical investigators must document as protocol deviations any modifications to protocol-specified procedures.2 Consolidating several protocol modifications in a single protocol amendment generally will be considered acceptable but should be submitted expeditiously.For studies under an investigational device exemption (IDE), 21 CFR 812.35(a) generally requires prior FDA approval before implementing changes to the investigational plan. These requirements do not apply to changes made to protect the life or physical well-being of a trial participant in an emergency, including study-wide changes, but such deviations must be reported to FDA within 5 working days.3 In addition, under 21 CFR 812.35(a)(3), changes to the protocol that the sponsor determines, based on credible information, do not affect the validity of the results from the study; the likely patient risk-to-benefit relationship; the scientific soundness of the investigational plan; or the rights, safety, or welfare of the trial participants may be made without prior FDA approval if the sponsor reports the modifications to the Agency within 5 days of implementing the changes. Because of the unique and evolving circumstances surrounding the impact of a disaster or PHE, we understand that it may be challenging to submit 5-day reports or notices within the required timeframe. Sponsors may consolidate implemented changes when submitting 5-day reports or notices and should update the IDE as soon as possible.Q3. With the rapid changes in clinical trial conduct that may occur due to a disaster or PHE, including multiple deviations to address patient safety, what is the recommended way for sponsors and investigators to capture these data?It is important to capture specific information for individual participants that explains the basis for missing protocol-specified information that includes the relationship to the disaster or PHE (e.g., from missed study visits or study discontinuations due to the event). This information, summarized in the clinical study report, will be helpful to FDA. If it is not possible to immediately capture this information in the case report form(s), sponsors may develop processes that enable systematic capture of these data across the sites in a manner that enables the appropriate analysis when the data are submitted to FDA. Sponsors may also develop processes to capture site-level status, site-level or vendor-level protocol deviations, and process deviations.2 See 21 CFR 312.62.3 See 21 CFR 812.35(a)(2).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations10Q4. How should a sponsor submit a change in protocol that results from challenges related to a disaster or PHE?For IND studies, the sponsor should submit a formal amendment to its IND, with the following information added to the cover letter in the subject line:PROTOCOL AMENDMENT – DISASTER OR PHE TYPE (e.g., HURRICANE, COVID-19)TITLE OF PROTOCOLSponsors should summarize the major changes made to the protocol related to the disaster or PHE in the cover letter and should include a tracked changes version of the protocol to facilitate review. As with other protocol amendments, sponsors may implement protocol amendments due to disasters or PHEs upon submission to FDA if approved by the IRB.4 Sponsors seeking FDA input prior to implementation should indicate that in the cover letter.For IDE studies, the sponsor should make a submission to its existing IDE, with the following information added to the cover letter in the subject line, as applicable:CHANGE IN PROTOCOL SUPPLEMENT – DISASTER OR PHE TYPE (e.g., MILITARY CONFLICT or RADIATION EMERGENCY) orNOTICE OF IDE CHANGE – DISASTER OR PHE TYPE (e.g., EARTHQUAKE or PANDEMIC), as applicableTITLE OF PROTOCOLThe submission to the IDE should contain a tracked changes version of the protocol to facilitate review.Q5. Can a sponsor initiate virtual clinical trial visits for monitoring participants without contacting FDA if there is an assessment by the sponsor and investigator that these visits are necessary for the safety of trial participants, and it will not impact data integrity?FDA regulations allow for changes to be made to the protocol without prior FDA review or approval if the change is intended to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard or to protect the life and well-being of trial participants in an emergency.5 Therefore, changes in protocol conduct necessary to immediately assure patient safety, such as conducting telephone or video contact4 As noted in the response to Q2 above, changes to a protocol necessary to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to trial participants may be implemented before FDA and IRB review and approval (see 21 CFR 56.108(a)(4) and 21 CFR 312.30(b)(2)(ii)).5 See 21 CFR 56.108(a)(4), 312.30(b)(2)(ii), and 812.35(a)(2).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations11visits for safety monitoring rather than on-site visits, can be immediately implemented with subsequent review by the IRB and notification to FDA. Since this reflects a protocol deviation (until the amendment is approved), documentation of such deviations, as described above, would generally be acceptable (i.e., a document that lists each deviation, study reference ID, patient ID, and date). For example, this could include documentation that all protocol-specified visits will be done by telephone contact rather than on-site visits and that procedures requiring in-person visits will either not be conducted or will be performed by other means (specified, as appropriate). Since the change to telephone or video contact visits would likely result in some protocol-required procedures not being conducted (e.g., vital signs, blood samples for safety laboratory studies), it is critical that the sponsor evaluate the potential impact of alternative approaches on participant safety and consider how to mitigate risks to participants, including whether to discontinue the IP.6For IDE studies, sponsors are required to report deviations implemented to protect the life or physical well-being of a participant in an emergency to FDA within 5 working days after learning of the deviations.7 We recognize that challenges related to the disaster or PHE may make it difficult to meet this time frame. Sponsors may consolidate implemented deviations when submitting 5-day reports and should update FDA as soon as possible.Q6. What factors should sponsors consider when deciding whether to change their clinical trial protocol to include remote clinical outcome assessments during a disaster or PHE?Some clinical outcome assessments (COAs)8 can be conducted remotely in clinical trials, including COAs for performance outcome (PerfO), interview-based clinician-reported outcome (ClinRO),9 patient-reported outcome (PRO), and observer-reported outcome (ObsRO). During a disaster or PHE, investigators might still be conducting in-person assessments on some trial participants, whereas remote assessments may be recommended for others to protect their safety or to respond to measures implemented by Government authorities to protect the public. When6 See 21 CFR 312.23(a)(6) and 812.25(c).7 21 CFR 812.35(a)(2).8 In this guidance, a COA is an assessment of a clinical outcome (i.e., an outcome that describes or reflects how a patient feels, functions, or survives); a PerfO is a measurement based on a standardized task performed by a participant that is administered and evaluated by an appropriately trained individual or is individually completed; a ClinRO is a measurement by a trained health care professional after observing a trial participant’s health condition; a PRO is a measurement based on a report that comes directly from the participant about the status of a patient’s health condition without amendment or interpretation of the participant’s response by a clinician or anyone else; and an ObsRO is a measurement based on a report of observable signs, events, or behaviors related to a participant’s health condition by someone other than the participant or a health professional (e.g., a parent or caregiver). See FDA-NIH Biomarker Working Group BEST (Biomarkers, Endpoints, and other Tools) Resource, available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK326791.9 Non-interview-based ClinRO assessments, such as those reliant on diagnostic imaging or physical examination, present a distinct set of challenges and are not addressed in this guidance.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations12deciding whether to change their clinical trial protocols to include remote COAs, sponsors should evaluate the general and specific considerations outlined below.General considerations regarding (1) prioritization of trial participant safety and privacy; (2) maintenance of data quality and integrity, including minimizing missing data; and (3) appropriate training for personnel and trial participants, which are discussed elsewhere in this guidance, are also common to all COAs. Other general considerations that are common to all COAs include attention to (1) the potential for increased variability in trial data; (2) the feasibility of conducting a specific type of COA remotely, depending on the context of use; (3) documentation and audit trails; and (4) availability of technology and technical support required for remote assessment. These considerations are explained in more detail below.Increased Variability in Data: When switching from in-person to remote assessments, sponsors should perform remote assessments in a manner as similar as possible to those done in-person, while protecting trial participant safety and privacy. To the extent feasible, sponsors should ensure that the methods and conduct of remote assessments are consistent across sites, trial participants, and visits to minimize variability in the data. For example, if a sponsor decides that video is their preferred method of remote assessment in a clinical trial, then using different methods to conduct assessments (e.g., both telephone and video in the same trial) may increase variability. Maintaining consistency in assessment methods should be balanced, however, against the need to minimize missing data, and the decision to use different methods should be justified in study documentation.Feasibility of the Assessment Method Within the Context of Use: Investigators should assess the feasibility of conducting a specific type of COA remotely, which will depend on corresponding trial goals and needs (e.g., ability to conduct the assessment in a way that captures all the data needed to evaluate the endpoint in the trial), given that not all assessments can provide an accurate assessment when done remotely.Documentation and Audit Trails: Investigators should document and sponsors should include in the clinical trial datasets (1) data on variables related to the trial, (2) whether an assessment was conducted in-person or remotely (including type of technology used), and (3) the date of the assessment and the name of the person who conducted the assessment. Sponsors also should ensure that remote data acquisition, transmission, and storage are secure and that the privacy of trial participants is protected. When sponsors use electronic platforms to perform remote assessments that transmit data directly into trial records, these platforms should use automated audit trails.10Technology and Technological Support: Sponsors planning to use remote electronic assessments as part of a clinical investigation should use appropriate technology and develop procedures for provision of technology and technical support to trial participants, investigators, and/or other trial personnel to facilitate those assessments. For example, sponsors could develop10 See the guidance for industry Computerized Systems Used in Clinical Investigations (May 2007). We update guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations13a plan to accommodate trial participants who are either already enrolled in a trial or may be enrolled in a trial in the future but who do not have access to appropriate communication technology (e.g., cell phones or Internet) by providing trial participants with these technologies.Specific considerations for certain COA types are explained below.PerfO- and Interview-Based ClinRO-Specific Considerations: For these types of assessments, sponsors should consider (1) appropriateness of remote assessment for the type of clinical data to be collected; (2) special investigator training to administer the PerfO or interview-based ClinRO assessments remotely; and (3) procedures for assessing and confirming the safety of trial participants, their privacy, and appropriate setting and resources to adequately complete the assessment.Recognizing that components of the PerfO and interview-based ClinRO assessment for some trials may specify visualization or in-person interactions with trial participants that may be difficult to replicate through remote interactions, sponsors should assess whether these components can be evaluated in an alternative way that still permits an accurate clinical assessment. When components of the assessment cannot be accomplished in a remote encounter, investigators should document and sponsors should report in the clinical trial datasets any aspects of the assessment they are unable to accomplish remotely. Sponsors should consider whether the information that can be collected remotely will be sufficient to reliably assess the clinical outcome and support robust conclusions for the study.PRO- and ObsRO-Specific Considerations: For these types of assessments, sponsors should consider (1) potential for missing data when switching from in-person assessment to remote assessment; (2) whether switching from use of paper- or electronic-based PRO and ObsRO assessments completed independently to assessments administered verbally by another person may lead to bias of scores (e.g., if trial participants try to please the site staff by offering ratings that might not truly reflect their experience); and (3) that data collected with PROs and ObsROs through verbal administration should not be considered a substitute for required safety monitoring throughout the trial.11To minimize potential bias resulting from verbal administration of PRO and ObsRO assessments, sponsors should ensure interviewer training and use of an interview script. Sponsors may also consider using automated virtual interviewers or a trained, neutral third-party interviewer to administer the assessments remotely.The potential for missing data is also a limitation when switching from in-person to remote assessment using paper-based PRO or ObsRO assessments if the trial participant or observer fails to complete all or part of the questionnaire within a given timeframe. To mitigate potential for missing data, sponsors should consider remote electronic capture of these assessments through technologies that can remind trial participants to complete the questionnaires and/or verbal administration at the time instructed (assuming appropriate steps are taken to minimize11 See 21 CFR 312.32(b), 312.56(c), and 812.46.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations14bias from verbal administration). Investigators should record which assessments were conducted by alternative means on a participant level.Q7. I am a sponsor and would like to use an alternate laboratory or imaging center12 for protocol assessments. What should I consider regarding when this approach would be appropriate and how to select alternate laboratories or imaging facilities?Given that trial participants may not be able to come to the investigational site for protocol-specified visits at which laboratory tests or imaging would be conducted, sponsors should evaluate whether it is feasible to use alternative laboratories or imaging centers. The suitability of such alternative arrangements may vary depending on whether the protocol-specified procedures are related to eligibility criteria, safety evaluations, or endpoint assessments.In general, if trial participants cannot access a clinical trial site, alternative sites may be used for laboratory tests or imaging assessments that focus on the safety of trial participants when such tests and assessments are routinely performed in those settings (e.g., routine chemistries, blood counts, chest radiographs).13However, if the results of laboratory tests or imaging assessments are the basis for evaluating important (e.g., primary or secondary) efficacy or safety endpoints, sponsors should consult with the relevant FDA review division before considering an alternative site. For example, differences in laboratory measurements or imaging protocols may introduce increased variability in analyses, which should be considered.When baseline tests are necessary to characterize the eligible study population, potential variation in test performance or precision related to use of an alternative laboratory or imaging center may also warrant discussion with the relevant FDA review division. For example, an inclusion criterion based on a commonly available, routine test performed as a safety screen (e.g., renal function on a metabolic panel) might be amenable to alternative laboratory collection with minimal impact on study results. Using an alternative laboratory for tests related to other eligibility factors could be more likely to affect study integrity (e.g., laboratory tests to identify a tumor biomarker required for inclusion, genetic test to identify a marker that is a critical inclusion criterion). It may be important for such assessments to be standardized at a single site or a few sites. Based on the nature of laboratory tests conducted for the purpose of protocol assessments, the alternative laboratory conducting such tests for investigational purposes will likely be subject to certification and other requirements under the Clinical Laboratory12 For IND studies, this would be laboratories and imaging centers not listed on Form FDA 1572.13 If a local laboratory or imaging center will be used for certain patients and will not replace the laboratory and imaging center specified in Form FDA 1572 for all patients, these alternative facilities do not need to be listed on Form FDA 1572; it is sufficient to retain documentation of when such facilities were used for protocol specified tests. The sponsor can accumulate these changes and submit this information to the IND, in for example, an information amendment or a protocol amendment.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations15Improvement Amendments (CLIA).14 Alternative laboratory and imaging centers may also be subject to additional laws governing their operations. Investigators should record which assessments were conducted by alternative means on a participant level.Q8. We are instituting trial participant visits remotely through video conferencing. Are there recommendations regarding best practices?With the increasing use of telemedicine in clinical practice, a number of resources may be available to provide recommendations on best practices. FDA does not endorse any particular telemedicine best practices. However, from an FDA regulatory perspective, important considerations for trial visits through video conferencing include:• The investigator or study personnel who will conduct remote visits should be trained on how to conduct real-time video conferencing visits (e.g., training on the use of telemedicine for remote clinical trial visits).• Procedures should be put in place to maintain a trial participant’s privacy, as would be done for a clinical visit.• Both the investigator and the trial participant should confirm their respective identities with one another before engaging in a real-time video conference visit according to an identity verification plan developed by the sponsor.15To provide the same information that would be documented during a face-to-face visit, the date of a real-time video conference visit should be documented in the trial records and, if specified in the protocol, the time of the visit. Investigators should consider asking for the trial participant’s location during a video conference visit in case a medical emergency arises during the visit.FDA considers real-time video interactions, including telemedicine, as a live exchange of information between the trial personnel and trial participants. These interactions are not considered electronic records and therefore are not subject to 21 CFR part 11.1614 For more information on the CLIA, see https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/CLIA/Downloads/Research-Testing-and-CLIA.pdf.15 FDA does not endorse any specific identification method. Sponsors may consider the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication 800-63A, Digital Identity Guidelines: Enrollment and Identity Proofing Requirements, available at https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63a.16 See 21 CFR 11.1(b). See also the guidance for industry Part 11, Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures—Scope and Application (August 2003).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations16Q9. If patients are currently dispensed IP through a pharmacy at the clinical trial site for self-administration at home, can a sponsor switch that to home delivery without amending the protocol?Home delivery of IP that would not raise any new safety risks may be implemented to protect patients from risks associated with coming to clinical trial sites. In all cases, requirements under FDA regulations for maintaining IP storage conditions in accordance with the investigational plan and for IP accountability remain; these requirements must be addressed and documented.17 If the protocol indicates pharmacy dispensing for self-administration at home and this is changed to direct-to-patient shipments, then a protocol amendment18 or change to the investigational plan19 would be required to permit home delivery of the IP. If the extent of home delivery is limited to certain participants and not the entire population described in the protocol, documenting the change in the mechanisms of distribution of IP administration through protocol deviations may also be acceptable.20 If the change in the mechanisms of IP distribution is then included in a submission to the existing IND or IDE, such a change may be part of a cumulative submission that includes a number of changes that accrue, rather than an urgent protocol change.21 Sponsors are also responsible for ensuring that home delivery does not compromise the quality of the product supplied.Q10. How can the sponsor ensure proper disposal of unused investigational drug product if the participant cannot return to the study site?FDA regulations outline sponsor and investigator responsibilities for storage conditions and accountability of investigational drug products, including disposition of unused IPs.22 Under 21 CFR 312.59, the sponsor shall assure the return of all unused supplies of the investigational drug from each individual investigator. The regulation further provides that the sponsor may authorize alternative disposition of unused supplies of the investigational drug, provided this alternative does not expose humans to risks from the drug. The procedure for disposition is generally considered part of the investigational plan and is normally described in the study protocol as a study-specific plan for handling the IPs. In most protocols, such plans involve the participant bringing the unused IP to the clinical trial site and then the investigator returning the unused IP to the sponsor or its designee. During a disaster or PHE, if appropriate, a prepaid shipping package can be used by the participant to return IP back to a central location where it17 See 21 CFR 312.60, 312.62, 812.100 and 812.140.18 See 21 CFR 312.30(b).19 See 21 812.35(a).20 Investigators must not make any changes in the research without IRB approval, except where necessary to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to human subjects (21 CFR 56.108(a)(4), 312.66, and 812.35(a)). An amendment to the protocol should be considered if a protocol deviation is not isolated or transient. When impacting only a specific region or country, a country-specific amendment may be appropriate.21 See 21 CFR 312.30(b), 812.35(a), and 812.150(a)(4).22 See 21 CFR 312.57, 312.59, 312.60, and 312.62.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations17can be accounted for and disposed of per the protocol, but this approach is not the only way to satisfy the regulatory requirements for disposition of unused IP. Regardless of the chosen disposition method, sponsors and investigators must maintain adequate records regarding the disposition of the IP.23Sponsors may consider adopting alternative procedures for disposition of IP that permit sponsors and investigators to fulfill their requirements for maintaining adequate records of IP disposition (including documenting dates, quantity, and use by participants), provided such procedures do not expose humans to risks from the IP.24 For example, it may be possible to provide the participants with a way to dispose of the IP at their home (such as with a drug disposal pouch) and document such disposal through photo or video that can be transmitted to the investigator or sponsor. FDA does not endorse a particular approach, but relevant considerations (e.g., environmental) associated with specific IPs should be considered when selecting a method for disposal. FDA has provided a consumer update Where and How to Dispose of Unused Medicines25 that provides recommendations to consumers about how to safely dispose of unused FDA-approved medication at home. Sponsors can consider whether any of those recommended methods of disposition are appropriate for approved drugs being studied for a new use in a clinical investigation. As noted in the consumer update, FDA only recommends flushing medications that are on the FDA flush list, which currently does not include unapproved IP.Investigators proposing alternative disposition methods must obtain authorization of those methods from the sponsor of the trial.26 Additional restrictions may apply to IPs subject to the Controlled Substances Act.27Q11. If participants are currently receiving an IP at the clinical trial site, can a sponsor switch to use at home?Sponsors should consider the safety risk to trial participants who would miss receiving an IP because of the inability to come to the clinical trial site during a disaster or PHE. If a sponsor is considering providing alternative arrangements for administration of the IP (e.g., home nursing or alternative sites by trained but non-study personnel), the sponsor is expected to perform a risk assessment that considers the nature of the IP and the potential risks to both the trial participants and the health care providers (HCPs) responsible for administering the product at the alternative site. This risk assessment should include evaluation of risk mitigation steps. Based on this risk assessment, sponsors should consider consulting the appropriate FDA review divisions regarding alternative plans for the administration of IP that is usually administered in a health care setting.23 See 21 CFR 312.57 and 312.62.24 Sponsors should consider whether an information amendment should be submitted pursuant to 21 CFR 312.31.25 See https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/where-and-how-dispose-unused-medicines.26 See 21 CFR 312.59 and 21 CFR 312.62.27 See 21 CFR 312.58(b) and 312.69.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations18Consulting FDA is strongly advised for complex IPs (e.g., cellular therapy and gene therapy products), where potentially altered storage and handling conditions could adversely affect product stability. However, in all cases, applicable requirements for maintaining IP storage conditions in accordance with the investigational plan (before and after reconstitution, if applicable), IP reconstitution specifications per the investigator’s brochure, and IP accountability remain and must be addressed and documented.28 Storage conditions and IP accountability should be considered if the protocol is amended to permit alternative site infusions. Defining circumstances when discontinuing IP administration, while continuing study participation, albeit with potentially delayed assessments, may be an appropriate option when suitable alternative arrangements for administration of the IP cannot be made.Q12. Considering that there may be delays to on-site monitoring of clinical trials during a disaster or PHE, what are FDA’s recommendations, including for remote monitoring, in such circumstances?FDA recognizes that study monitors may not be able to access the trial sites for on-site visits in a timely manner during a disaster or PHE. Sponsors should work to find alternative approaches to maintain trial participant safety and trial data quality and integrity, such as enhanced central monitoring, telephone contact with the sites to review study procedures, or remotely tracking trial participant status and study progress where appropriate and feasible.Sponsors should carefully document situations where monitors were unable to access or had to delay monitoring of a clinical site. Sponsors or monitors should also include in their documentation of protocol deviations, or other GCP non-compliance issues identified at clinical sites, whether delayed identification was due to postponed monitoring. FDA recognizes that unique situations at clinical sites may occur due to contingency and safety measures implemented and will consider these circumstances when evaluating inspectional observations.FDA regulations require sponsors to monitor the conduct and progress of their clinical investigations.29 The regulations are not specific about how sponsors must conduct such monitoring and are therefore compatible with a range of approaches to monitoring that may vary depending on multiple factors. Therefore, certain aspects of site monitoring visits can be done remotely if technically feasible. FDA understands that during a disaster or PHE, there may be deviations from the timing of on-site monitoring visits set forth in the trial monitoring plan and procedures and that sponsors may consider ways to replace on-site monitoring visits with remote monitoring visits. Further, there may be components of an on-site monitoring visit, as outlined in the trial monitoring plan, that cannot be completed remotely.During a disaster or PHE, traditional on-site monitoring might be difficult for reasons such as (1) sites may not be able to accommodate monitoring visits (e.g., due to staffing limitations or site closures) or (2) monitors may not be able to travel to trial sites. When planned on-site28 See 21 CFR 312.60, 312.62, 812.100 and 812.140.29 See 21 CFR 312.50, 312.53(d), 312.56(a), 812.40, 812.43(d), and 812.46.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations19monitoring visits are not possible, the reason should be documented and available for review by the sponsor and during FDA inspections.The sponsor should consider using a risk-based approach to prioritize sites for remote monitoring, including as many study sites as feasible (and with a frequency as close to that described in the site monitoring plan as feasible).30,31 The sponsors should also consider additional factors in any risk-based approach (e.g., underlying participant risk profile, type of medical product, ability to obtain the required data remotely). The decision regarding which sites to prioritize for remote monitoring should be guided by centralized monitoring or other information available about site performance (e.g., frequency and severity of protocol deviations previously identified during monitoring visits or currently identified by centralized monitoring, number of randomized active trial participants, experience of site staff, known history of prior major audit or inspection findings).Remote monitoring should be focused on review of critical study site documentation and source data. If the materials identified for review include participants’ medical records that are normally reviewed at the site (and such a review is consistent with the trial participants’ informed consent documents), then, to complete source document review, remote review of medical records may be explored. When the study monitor cannot access the site to review critical source documents, requests for review of source documents that may include private health information should be consistent with requirements for source document validation and review as described in the current study monitoring plan or other appropriate study-specific document. When remote monitoring processes and procedures have not previously been described by the sponsor, these processes and procedures should be established (e.g., in a revised study monitoring plan or in updates to existing sponsor policies and procedures).During remote monitoring, the study monitor should focus on trial activities that are essential to the safety of trial participants and/or data reliability. Sponsors and monitors may wish to consider one or more of the following options to facilitate remote monitoring access to clinical site records:• If the site can provide appropriate resources and technical capabilities, consider establishing a secure remote viewing portal that would permit site staff to provide access to the site’s study documentation and/or trial participants’ source documents for the study monitor’s review. In addition, the potential for remote access to trial participants’ electronic health records can be explored with trial sites.30 See the guidance for industry A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring of Clinical Investigations: Questions and Answers (April 2023).31 See the guidance for industry Oversight of Clinical Investigations — A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring (August 2013).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations20• Sites could upload certified copies32 of source records to a sponsor-controlled electronic system or other cloud-based repository that contains appropriate security controls. In the setting of a blinded or partially blinded study, if source documents may contain unblinded information, controls to protect the study blind should be in place prior to transfer of source documents (e.g., use of an unmasked study monitor to review source documents, restricted access to folders containing copies of source documents). It is not necessary for the clinical site to have control of certified copies of source documents uploaded to such a repository; however, the clinical investigator should maintain control of the original source records.Regarding retention of copies of source documents used for remote review, it would not be necessary to retain the certified copies of source documents used for remote review, provided the clinical investigator retains the original source documents according to FDA regulations for the retention of records.33In addition, processes and procedures should be established for the handling of source document copies that were placed in temporary storage locations for remote review and that are no longer needed after the remote monitoring has concluded.Remote monitoring activities, including remote review of source documents, should be documented in the same level of detail as on-site monitoring activities, and any resulting actions to address issues identified from the remote source document review should be consistent with procedures and processes described in the study monitoring plan.Q13. During a disaster or PHE, some sponsors have used remote monitoring to oversee study conduct at clinical trial sites, including remote review of source data. Should data that have been remotely monitored be re-monitored during an on-site monitoring visit once the disaster- or PHE-related restrictions that prevented on-site monitoring visits have been lifted?FDA regulations require sponsors to monitor the conduct and progress of their clinical investigations.34 These regulations are not specific about how sponsors must conduct such monitoring and are therefore compatible with a range of approaches that may vary depending on multiple factors. The guidances for industry Oversight of Clinical Investigations – A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring (August 2013) and A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring of Clinical32 FDA guidance on good clinical practice, developed with the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), defines a certified copy as “[a] copy (irrespective of the type of media used) of the original record that has been verified (i.e., by a dated signature or by generation through a validated process) to have the same information, including data that describe the context, content, and structure, as the original.” See the ICH guidance for industry E6(R2) Good Clinical Practice: Integrated Addendum to ICH E6(R1) (March 2018).33 See 21 CFR 312.62 and 812.140(a).34 See 21 CFR 312.50, 312.53(d), 312.56(a), 812.40, 812.43(d), and 812.46.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations21Investigations: Questions and Answers (April 2023) clarify that sponsors can use a variety of approaches to fulfill their responsibilities for monitoring clinical investigations; these guidance documents also describe monitoring activities that reflect modern, risk-based approaches, including remote monitoring when appropriate.The decision as to whether remote monitoring conducted for a given site or clinical investigation was adequate or should be followed up with additional on-site monitoring visits should be based on the sponsor’s ongoing risk assessment. The sponsor may determine that on-site follow-up of remote monitoring activities is appropriate based on a risk assessment (e.g., sites with certain data anomalies or a higher frequency of errors, important protocol violations, or dropouts relative to other sites). As with on-site monitoring, remote monitoring should be focused on critical data and processes for human subject protection and trial integrity, such as the site’s conduct of key study procedures and documentation related to important efficacy endpoints and safety assessments.Q14. How do I obtain signed informed consent from a hospitalized patient who is in isolation during the disaster or PHE and is physically inaccessible because policies prevent trial staff from entering the patient’s room due to a disaster or PHE?FDA regulations generally require that the informed consent of a trial participant be documented by the use of a written consent document that typically includes the elements of informed consent, as described under 21 CFR 50.25, and that has been approved by the IRB and signed and dated by the trial participant or their legally authorized representative at the time of consent (21 CFR 50.27(a)). When feasible, we recommend a traditional method of obtaining and documenting informed consent using a signed paper copy of the consent form or use of electronic informed consent.35,36 If neither of these approaches are possible, the following procedures would be considered to satisfy FDA’s informed consent documentation requirement.37Method 1: A photograph of the signed informed consent document can be transmitted to the trial staff1. An unsigned consent form is provided to the patient (e.g., by a health care worker who has entered the room).2. The investigator or designee arranges a telephone call or video conference call with the patient (and, if desired and feasible, additional individuals requested by the patient (e.g., next of kin)).35 See the guidance for institutional review boards, investigators, and sponsors Use of Electronic Informed Consent: Questions and Answers (December 2016).36 See Q15.37 The procedures suggested do not apply to the exception from general informed consent requirements under 21 CFR 50.23 or the exception from informed consent requirements for emergency research under 21 CFR 50.24.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations223. To ensure that prospective participants are approached in a consistent fashion, a standard process should be used that will accomplish the following:• Identification of who is on the call.• Review of the informed consent document with the patient by the investigator or designee and response to any questions the patient may have.• Verbal confirmation by the patient that their questions have been answered, that they would like to participate in the trial, and that they have signed and dated the informed consent document that is in their possession.4. The patient (or an individual in the room) takes a photograph of the signed informed consent document and sends it to the investigator/designee.5. A trial team member enters the photograph into the trial records along with an attestation that states how that photograph was obtained and that it is a photograph of the informed consent document signed by the patient.Method 2: A witness can attest to the signature or a recording can be obtained, but a photograph of the signed informed consent document cannot be transmitted1. An unsigned consent form is provided to the patient (e.g., by a health care worker who has entered the room).2. The investigator or designee arranges a three-way telephone call or video conference call with the patient, a witness who is not otherwise connected with the clinical investigation, and, if desired and feasible, additional individuals requested by the patient (e.g., next of kin). Alternatively, in lieu of using a witness, a recording of the conversation can be made.383. To ensure that prospective participants are approached in a consistent fashion, a standard process should be used that will accomplish the following:• Identification of who is on the call.• Review of the informed consent document with the patient by the investigator or designee and response to any questions the patient may have.• Verbal confirmation by the patient that their questions have been answered, that they would like to participate in the trial, and that they have signed and dated the informed consent document that is in their possession.38 If an investigator wants to record the telephone or video conference call, the investigator or designee should ensure that the recording is done in a manner consistent with applicable State and local laws and that all parties agree to being recorded.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations234. When using a witness, documentation in the trial records includes (1) a signed and dated attestation by the witness who participated on the call that the patient confirmed their agreement to participate in the trial and signed the informed consent document and (2) a signed and dated attestation by the investigator or designee stating why the informed consent document signed by the patient was not retained (e.g., due to potential contamination of the document by infectious material).When using a recording in lieu of a witness, documentation in the trial records includes (1) the recording of the conference call and (2) a signed and dated attestation by the investigator or designee who participated on the call stating why the informed consent document signed by the patient was not retained (e.g., due to potential contamination of the document by infectious material).When either method 1 or 2 is used to document informed consent, the resulting documentation should be (1) collected and archived, as either original paper copies or appropriately certified electronic copies (e.g., using a validated process for scanning paper copies)39 and (2) retained according to applicable FDA record retention requirements as part of the trial record.40If the patient is unable to provide informed consent and there is a legally authorized representative, investigators must obtain written consent from the patient’s legally authorized representative in accordance with 21 CFR 50.27(a).Q15. What considerations apply to the electronic systems used to generate electronic signatures on electronic clinical trial records, including informed consent documents, during a disaster or PHE?Electronic systems41 used to generate electronic signatures42 on electronic clinical trial records, including informed consent documents, generally must comply with the requirements outlined in39 See footnote 32.40 See 21 CFR 312.57, 312.62, and 812.140.41 For the purposes of this guidance, the term electronic systems means systems, including hardware and software, that create, modify, maintain, or transmit electronic records.42 For the purposes of this guidance, the term electronic signature means a computer data compilation of any symbol or series of symbols executed, adopted, or authorized by an individual to be the legally binding equivalent of the individual’s handwritten signature (21 CFR 11.3(b)(7)).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations24FDA regulations under 21 CFR part 11 (part 11).43,44FDA is aware that there are multiple commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) software systems providing electronic signature services for electronic clinical trial records. FDA does not certify individual electronic systems or methods to obtain part 11-compliant electronic signatures on electronic records, but COTS vendors may be able to provide sponsors and other regulated entities with information regarding whether their systems are part 11-compliant. Sponsors and other regulated entities should work with COTS vendors to ensure compliance with part 11. For further information regarding part 11 compliance, see the guidance for industry Part 11, Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures—Scope and Application (August 2003) and the additional recommendations proposed in the draft guidance for industry Electronic Systems, Electronic Records, and Electronic Signatures in Clinical Investigations Questions and Answers (March 2023).45When a part 11-compliant electronic system used to create electronic signatures is not available, regulated entities must have an alternate means of obtaining required signatures46 (e.g., handwritten47 wet ink signatures executed on documents, handwritten stylus or finger-drawn signatures executed on electronic documents that are then printed or appropriately witnessed). Alternative methods for obtaining signatures on informed consent documents are described in Q14 of this guidance. When handwritten methods are used, the sponsor and other regulated entities should ensure that all records containing original handwritten signatures are (1) collected and archived, as either original paper copies or appropriately certified electronic copies (e.g., using a validated process for scanning paper copies) and (2) retained according to applicable FDA record retention requirements.48Q16. I am a sponsor of commercial INDs, and electronic common technical document (eCTD) requirements cannot be met due to a disaster or PHE. Whom do I contact for assistance?Commercial sponsors may qualify for a short-term waiver from the eCTD requirements under section 745A of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) in unique and rare circumstances and for a limited duration. During a disaster or PHE, rare circumstances may43 See 21 CFR 11.1(b), 11.10, and 11.30. See also the guidance for industry Part 11, Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures—Scope and Application (August 2003) and the draft guidance for industry Electronic Systems, Electronic Records, and Electronic Signatures in Clinical Investigations Questions and Answers (March 2023). When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic.44 For electronic records that are not subject to part 11, sponsors and other regulated entities should rely on their internal business practices to determine acceptable electronic signature methods and controls.45 When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic.46 See 21 CFR 50.27(a).47 See 21 CFR 11.3(b)(8) for the definition of a handwritten signature.48 See 21 CFR 312.57, 312.62, and 812.140.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations25arise in which a sponsor cannot meet eCTD requirements (e.g., if computer operations are impacted). For information on requesting a short-term waiver from eCTD requirements, see section III.E of the guidance for industry Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic Format — Certain Human Pharmaceutical Product Applications and Related Submissions Using the eCTD Specifications (eCTD guidance) (February 2020).Companies experiencing technical difficulties with transmission of their electronic submissions to FDA should consult FDA’s electronic submission staff for technical assistance, rather than submitting a waiver request, as described in section III.E of the eCTD guidance.Q17. During a disaster or PHE, participants may no longer be able to travel to a central location for administration of an investigational drug that is scheduled on a recurring basis. Can the IP be shipped to a local HCP who is not a sub-investigator to administer the product to a participant while still maintaining integrity of the trial? If so, what else would be needed regarding trial monitoring and IRB oversight?Specific circumstances for a given clinical trial would affect the feasibility and appropriateness of shipping IP to locations other than clinical trial sites as specified under an IND, as well as administering the IP. Depending on how the IP(s) being evaluated in the trial are administered, it would be important that any alternative location have appropriately trained personnel and oversight by physicians with sufficient experience regarding the class of products involved to assure trial participant safety comparable to administration at a trial site.In this guidance, local HCPs who are administering drugs in a manner that does not differ from their normal clinical practices would not be considered sub-investigators and need not be listed on Form FDA 1572.49 FDA recommends that these HCPs be listed in site records, such as a log of activities delegated by the investigator. Any changes to a trial protocol to permit HCPs to administer the investigational drug generally must be reviewed and approved by an IRB.50The above paragraph describes administration of the IP by local HCPs who are practicing medicine within their scope of practice. In contrast, if a sponsor will be asking local HCPs to perform study-specific research procedures or assessments that represent a direct and significant contribution to the clinical data for the study (e.g., assessing drug response for a patient or performing a procedure unique to the study and not part of routine medical care), these HCPs would be considered sub-investigators that must be listed on Form FDA 1572.5149 For the definition of a sub-investigator, see 21 CFR 312.3(b); for the requirement to list sub-investigators on the FDA Form 1572, see 21 CFR 312.53(c)(1)(viii).50 As noted in the response to Q2 above, changes to a protocol necessary to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to trial participants may be implemented before FDA and IRB review and approval (see 21 CFR 56.108(a)(4) and 21 CFR 312.30(b)(2)(ii)).51 21 CFR 312.53(c)(1)(viii).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations26IP may be shipped from a central distribution site directly to an HCP, provided that such shipping is done under the supervision of the investigator using procedures that ensure accountability and product quality (i.e., that storage conditions, as defined in the protocol, for the IP were maintained during shipping, and the drug packaging was intact upon receipt).If the HCP administering the IP is not considered a sub-investigator, the investigator should ensure that they can obtain records regarding administration of the IP by requesting that the trial participants provide consent to allow access to medical records from their local HCPs involving trial-related data, such as measuring vital signs, and results of evaluations of any symptoms or signs occurring with receiving the product. Communicating to the HCP the intent to request such records in advance may facilitate this process.Consulting the appropriate FDA review division on plans for alternative administration is also recommended as per Q11 above.Q18. If a trial participant is unable to receive the IP from the trial site but the medical product is legally marketed in the United States for other uses, can the participant or HCP secure the product commercially? Can the sponsor reimburse trial participants for their out-of-pocket expenses in getting the product commercially?If the product under investigation in a clinical trial is legally marketed and the study does not require blinding, then local sourcing of the product would be acceptable to FDA (e.g., by having the local physician write a prescription for the product instead of shipping the product directly to the participant). Depending on the circumstances for providing the commercially obtained drug to the participant, the sponsor may need to submit a request to charge for the investigational drug under 21 CFR 312.8(a)(3) and satisfy other applicable requirements under 21 CFR 312.8. FDA also would not object if the sponsor reimburses the participant for any costs incurred by commercially purchasing the product or for charges related to the use of the product (e.g., charges related to an infusion).Per FDA regulations under 21 CFR 312.6, the immediate package of an investigational new drug intended for human use must include a label with the statement “Caution: New Drug—Limited by Federal (or United States) law to investigational use.” Per FDA regulations under 21 CFR 812.5, an investigational device or its immediate package for human use must include a label with the statement “CAUTION—Investigational device. Limited by Federal (or United States) law to investigational use.” FDA recognizes that a commercially obtained product will not have this statement on its container. In the setting of a disaster or PHE, where alternative arrangements are being made to provide a commercially obtained investigational drug to a participant who is unable to come to the trial site, FDA does not intend to object to the labeling of the investigational drug because it does not include the statement required under 21 CFR 312.6 and the sponsor has not obtained a waiver of that requirement under 21 CFR 312.10. In addition, FDA similarly does not intend to object to the labeling of a commercially obtained investigational device because it does not include the statement required under 21 CFR 812.5 and the sponsor has not obtained a waiver under 21 CFR 812.10.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations27Q19. Throughout the guidance, FDA recommends that sponsors consult with the review division for certain changes to ongoing clinical trials. For drugs and biological products, is this a reference to scheduling a Type A or Type 1 meeting? How should sponsors contact FDA regarding device clinical trials?As stated in our guidance for industry and review staff Best Practices for Communication Between IND Sponsors and FDA During Drug Development (December 2017), review division regulatory project managers (RPMs) are the primary point of contact for communications between a sponsor and FDA. Both FDA and sponsors use various communication methods to focus discussions to exchange information and resolve issues efficiently. For example, telephone communication between a sponsor and FDA RPM may be more effective for time-sensitive matters. FDA staff try to respond to sponsor questions promptly, while balancing FDA public health priorities and other work obligations. Note that to ensure participant safety, responses to safety-related inquiries will be prioritized over other inquiries. More generally, FDA understands that many questions that arise regarding changes in trial conduct due to a disaster or PHE will need to be addressed expeditiously. RPMs will work with sponsors to determine the best path forward to answer their questions for certain changes in an expedited manner.To discuss urgent issues related to IDEs managed in CDRH, sponsors should contact the lead reviewer. For IDEs managed in CBER, sponsors should contact the RPM. For FDA feedback on a proposed future IDE study or regarding modifications to ongoing studies that are not urgent (such as a statistical analysis plan to address missing data), a Pre-Submission is recommended. For additional information on Pre-Submissions, please refer to the guidance for industry Requests for Feedback and Meetings for Medical Device Submissions: The Q-Submission Program (June 2023).For general questions regarding FDA policy on clinical trial conduct during a disaster or PHE, sponsors should contact CTconductquestions@fda.hhs.gov.Q20. How are drug and biological product clinical trials required as postmarketing requirements (PMRs) affected during disasters or PHEs? What about required postmarket device studies?The information in this guidance applies to all clinical trials, including those postmarketing clinical trials that FDA requires an applicant52 to conduct53 for drugs and biological products.52 After a company submits a marketing application (e.g., new drug application (NDA), biologics license application (BLA), premarket approval application (PMA), De Novo classification request, or premarket notification (510(k)) for review, the company is referred to as the applicant. The person who initiates a clinical investigation is referred to as the sponsor (see 21 CFR 312.3 and 812.3(n)).53 Specifically, this response is intended to apply to studies or clinical trials required under 505(o)(3) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 355(o)(3)), confirmatory trials for drugs approved under the accelerated approval pathway (21 U.S.C. 356(c)(2)(A)), deferred pediatric studies (21 U.S.C. 355B), and postmarketing studies required for drugs and biological products developed under the Animal Rule (see 21 CFR 314.610(b)(1) and 610.91(b)(1)); see also the FDA guidance for industry Product Development Under the Animal Rule (November 2015).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations28Many of the considerations outlined in this guidance may also be relevant to postmarket device studies.54Applicants who are required to complete postmarketing clinical trials for drugs or biological products follow a timetable that includes due dates for completing certain milestones in the trial. FDA encourages applicants to inform FDA as soon as possible if they experience delays due to a disaster or PHE that may affect the applicant’s ability to meet the applicable interim,55 trial completion, and/or final report submission milestones. These applicants should propose feasible revised milestones for interim, trial completion, and/or final report submission milestones.56For postmarket device studies, the approved postapproval study protocol or postmarket surveillance plan generally includes due dates for completing certain study milestones. Due dates for certain milestones may also be listed expressly in the order requiring the postmarket study. Applicants required to complete such studies should similarly inform FDA as soon as possible of delays due to a disaster or PHE that may affect the applicant’s ability to meet those milestones and propose feasible revised milestones.57Applicants with PMRs or required postmarket device studies should also provide an explanation to FDA of how the disaster or PHE impacts the ability to meet the original milestones. FDA will evaluate the facts and circumstances of the explanation provided, as well as the conduct of the applicant, in determining whether the applicant is in compliance with the applicable authority requiring the postmarketing trial or postmarket device study after an original milestone has been missed.Additional considerations for drug and biological product PMRs include:• PMRs Under Section 505(o)(3) of the FD&C Act: FDA will continue to make “good cause” determinations on a case-by-case basis for all missed milestones, including those where the applicant asserts that its failure to meet a PMR interim,54 For devices subject to premarket approval, FDA may require postapproval studies as a condition of approval (21 CFR 814.82(a)(2)). FDA may also require manufacturers to conduct postmarket surveillance studies of certain Class II and Class III devices under section 522 of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 360l).55 Interim milestones refer to those due dates scheduled to occur between the final protocol submission and trial completion milestones.56 Although a revised trial completion date may be acknowledged by FDA, for drugs and biological product PMRs, the original projected completion date will continue to be displayed on the FDA’s Postmarket Requirements and Commitments web page. In the case of Pediatric Research Equity Act postmarketing requirements, if a deferral extension is granted and the final report submission date has been deferred, the new final report submission date will replace the original or previously granted final report submission date.57 See the guidance for industry and FDA staff Postmarket Surveillance Under Section 522 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (October 2022). See also the guidance for industry and FDA staff Procedures for Handling Post-Approval Studies Imposed by PMA Order (October 2022).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations29trial completion, and/or final report submission milestone is related to the disaster or PHE.58• Deferred Pediatric Study PMRs Under the Pediatric Research Equity Act (PREA):59 If circumstances involving a disaster or PHE have affected an applicant’s ability to complete a PREA PMR, applicants may request a deferral extension of the timeline for a deferral granted by FDA. If an applicant has not obtained a deferral extension and fails to submit required PREA studies by the final report submission date listed in the PREA PMR, FDA is required to issue a noncompliance letter to the applicant.60• PMRs Under Accelerated Approval: For confirmatory trials, if an applicant misses an interim, trial completion, and/or final report submission milestone, FDA will review the applicant’s explanation for the delay, as well as assess the trial’s progress before the disaster or PHE, before determining whether or not the applicant has been compliant with its milestone obligations.• Annual Status Reports of PMRs: Applicants must continue to follow the annual reporting requirements for PMRs61 and should document in their annual status report the disaster or PHE-related reasons for missing interim, trial completion, and/or final report submission milestones, the reasons for the non-compliance with the milestones, and any steps taken to address factors specific to the disaster or PHE.Q21. My company is the holder of an approved marketing application for an FDA-approved drug for a specific indication and is also the sponsor of an IND for the same drug being investigated for a new indication to prevent conditions related to a disaster or PHE. If I receive a spontaneous report of a serious adverse event (SAE) that occurred with the approved drug being used in clinical practice for the prevention of the disease or condition related to the disaster/PHE, do I report that event to the IND?Reports of SAEs that occur in clinical practice with the use of an approved drug or biological product, whether or not the use is included in the approved labeling for that product, must be reported in accordance with the applicable postmarketing reporting requirements under 21 CFR 314.80 and 600.80. Reports of SAEs for approved vaccines are submitted to the Vaccine58 See the FDA guidance for industry Postmarketing Studies and Clinical Trials—Implementation of Section 505(o)(3) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (October 2019).59 Section 505B(a)(4)(B) of the FD&C Act governs the process and timelines required for requests for a deferral extension for deferred pediatric studies required under section 505B of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 355c) (often referred to as PREA PMRs).60 See section 505B(d)(1) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 355c(d)(1)).61 See section 506B of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 356b) and 21 CFR 314.81(b)(2)(vii) and 601.70(b).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations30Adverse Events Reporting System (VAERS), while reports of SAEs for other approved drugs and biological products are submitted to the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS).62Serious adverse events that occur during a clinical trial under an IND for an approved drug or biological product being investigated for a new use to treat or prevent a disaster- or PHE-related disease or condition must be reported as an IND safety report per FDA regulations under 21 CFR 312.32 if (1) they are unexpected and (2) the sponsor determines that there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the SAE.Regardless of whether an SAE occurs in the course of clinical practice or during a clinical trial and regardless of where it is first reported, an NDA or BLA holder who is also the sponsor of an IND investigating the same drug for treatment or prevention of a disaster- or PHE-related disease or condition is responsible for monitoring the safety of its drug and evaluating all accumulating safety data.63 If accumulating safety data, including use in clinical practice, indicates a new potential serious risk associated with the drug, an IND safety report will need to be filed to the IND, and updates will likely need to be made to the investigator brochure and/or the informed consent document.64 For more information, see the guidance for industry and investigators Safety Reporting Requirements for INDs and BA/BE Studies (December 2012).Q22. If a trial participant experiences an SAE that may be associated with a disease or condition related to the disaster or PHE, should that be reported as an IND safety report? Should these events be reported to the IRB?Under 21 CFR 312.32, a sponsor must report to FDA any SAE that is both unexpected and for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the SAE (i.e., there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event).Participants in a clinical trial may be diagnosed with a PHE- or disaster-related disease or condition and experience SAEs associated with the disease or condition that are not causally related to the investigational drug. However, it is possible that such SAEs could be causally related to the investigational drug. Establishing a potential causal relationship likely requires more than a single or even a few cases.FDA had provided additional information about aggregate safety assessment and reporting for INDs in the guidance for industry and investigators Safety Reporting Requirements for INDs and BA/BE Studies (December 2012) and has proposed recommendations in the draft guidance for62 For more information, see the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System, available at https://vaers.hhs.gov/reportevent.html, and the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) Public Dashboard, available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/questions-and-answers-fdas-adverse-event-reporting-system-faers/fda-adverse-event-reporting-system-faers-public-dashboard.63 See 21 CFR 312.32(b).64 See 21 CFR 312.32(c).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations31industry Sponsor Responsibilities—Safety Reporting Requirements and Safety Assessment for IND and Bioavailability/Bioequivalence Studies (June 2021).65Where an IND safety report is required to be submitted to FDA under 21 CFR 312.32, the investigator must also send that IND safety report to the IRB.66 The IRB may have additional reporting requirements regarding the disaster or PHE that apply during the clinical trial.Q23. Certain clinical trial protocols have an exclusion criterion for receipt of another investigational medical product. If a participant receives a vaccine or other medical product authorized under an emergency use authorization (EUA), would FDA consider this receipt of an investigational medical product?When a medical product is being used under an EUA, it is an authorized (though not an approved or cleared)67 medical product for use in clinical care that has met the statutory criteria under section 564 of the FD&C Act.68 The product is not being studied under an IND or IDE when used pursuant to an EUA, and FDA therefore does not consider an individual’s receipt of the product under an EUA as receipt of an IP. In contrast, when the same product is used in a clinical investigation under an IND or IDE, the product’s safety and/or effectiveness is being studied for investigational uses, and FDA would consider receipt in this situation to be receipt of an IP.In the design of a clinical investigation, there may be valid scientific reasons to have an exclusion (and even a discontinuation of study treatment) criterion for receipt of a medical product — a monoclonal antibody or vaccine, for example — whether that product was used under an EUA or not. These scientific reasons may include risks to an individual if they enroll or continue to receive study treatment in a clinical trial after receiving (or having received) the excluded product or the potential impact of the use of the excluded product on trial objectives, such as confounding the determination of effectiveness of the product under investigation.65 When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic.66 See 21 CFR 312.53(c)(1)(vii) and 312.66. See also the guidance for clinical investigators, sponsors, and IRBs Adverse Event Reporting to IRBs — Improving Human Subject Protection (January 2009).Adjusting for Covariates in Randomized Clinical Trials for Drugs and Biological ProductsGuidance for IndustryU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE)May 2023BiostatisticsAdjusting for Covariates in Randomized Clinical Trials for Drugs and Biological ProductsGuidance for IndustryAdditional copies are available from:Office of Communications, Division of Drug InformationCenter for Drug Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 4th FloorSilver Spring, MD 20993-0002Phone: 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400; Fax: 301-431-6353Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.govhttps://www.fda.gov/drugs/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information/guidances-drugsand/orOffice of Communication, Outreach and DevelopmentCenter for Biologics Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration10903 New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 71, Room 3128Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002Phone: 800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010Email: ocod@fda.hhs.govhttps://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information-biologics/biologics-guidancesU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE)May 2023BiostatisticsContains Nonbinding RecommendationsiTABLE OF CONTENTSI. INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1II. BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................... 2III. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR COVARIATE ADJUSTMENT IN CLINICAL TRIALS .............................................................................................................................. 3A. General Considerations ................................................................................................................. 3B. Linear Models ................................................................................................................................ 4C. Nonlinear Models ........................................................................................................................... 5IV. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 8Contains Nonbinding Recommendations1Adjusting for Covariates in Randomized Clinical Trials for Drugs and Biological ProductsGuidance for Industry1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONThis guidance describes FDA’s current recommendations regarding adjusting for covariates in the statistical analysis of randomized clinical trials in drug2 development programs. This guidance provides recommendations for the use of covariates in the analysis of randomized, parallel group clinical trials that are applicable to both superiority trials and noninferiority trials. The main focus of the guidance is on the use of prognostic baseline covariates3 to improve statistical efficiency for estimating and testing treatment effects. This guidance does not address use of covariates to control for confounding variables in non-randomized trials, the use of covariates in models to account for missing outcome data (National Research Council 2010), the use of covariate adjustment for analyzing longitudinal repeated measures data, the use of Bayesian methods for covariate adjustment, or the use of machine learning methods for covariate adjustment.In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Biostatistics in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research in cooperation with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research at the Food and Drug Administration.2 The term drug used in this guidance refers to both human drugs and biological products.3 The term prognostic baseline covariates used in this guidance refers to baseline covariates that are likely to be associated with the primary endpoint. Use of predictive baseline covariates to identify groups more likely to benefit from treatment is beyond the scope of this guidance.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2II. BACKGROUNDBaseline covariates in this guidance refer to demographic factors, disease characteristics, or other information collected from participants before the time of randomization. Covariate adjustment refers to the use of baseline covariate measurements for estimating and testing population-level treatment effects between randomized groups.In many randomized controlled trials, the primary analysis used to estimate treatment effects of a new drug might not adjust for baseline covariates (through what is termed an unadjusted analysis). However, incorporating prognostic baseline covariates in the design and analysis of clinical trial data can result in a more efficient use of data to demonstrate and quantify the effects of treatment. Moreover, this can be done with minimal impact on bias or the Type I error rate.The ICH guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (September 1998)4 addresses these issues briefly. The ICH E9 guidance encourages the identification of “covariates and factors expected to have an important influence on the primary variable(s).” The ICH E9 guidance strongly advises prespecification of “the principal features of the eventual statistical analysis,” including “how to account for [covariates] in the analysis to improve precision and to compensate for any lack of balance between treatment groups.” The ICH E9 guidance also cautions against adjusting for “covariates measured after randomization because they could be affected by the treatments.”This guidance is consistent with the ICH guidance for industry E9(R1) Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials: Addendum: Estimands and Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical Trials. After specifying the treatment condition of interest, target population, and endpoint variable — the treatment effect estimated by covariate adjustment is a population summary measure defining an estimand.This guidance provides general considerations and additional recommendations for covariate adjustment using linear and nonlinear models.5 In linear models, adjustment for prognostic baseline covariates often leads to improved precision by reducing residual variance. When adjusting for covariates based on fitting nonlinear regression models, such as logistic regression models in studies with binary outcomes, there are additional considerations that arise because inclusion of baseline covariates in a regression model can change the treatment effect that is being estimated. As explained below, after suitably addressing the treatment effect definition, covariate adjustment using linear or nonlinear models can be used to improve statistical efficiency.4 We update guidances periodically. To make sure you have the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents.5 For this guidance, nonlinear models can include generalized linear models with nonlinear link functions.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3III. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR COVARIATE ADJUSTMENT IN CLINICAL TRIALSA. General Considerations• An unadjusted analysis is acceptable for the primary analysis of an efficacy endpoint.• Sponsors can adjust for baseline covariates in the analyses of efficacy endpoints in randomized clinical trials. Doing so will generally reduce the variability of estimation of treatment effects and thus lead to narrower confidence intervals and more powerful hypothesis testing.• Sponsors should prospectively specify the detailed procedures for executing covariate-adjusted analysis before any unblinding of comparative data. FDA review will emphasize the prespecified primary analysis rather than post-hoc analyses using different models or covariates.• Covariate adjustment leads to efficiency gains when the covariates are prognostic for the outcome of interest in the trial. Therefore, FDA recommends that sponsors adjust for covariates that are anticipated to be most strongly associated with the outcome of interest. In some circumstances these covariates may be known from the scientific literature. In other cases, it may be useful to use previous studies (e.g., a Phase 2 trial) to select prognostic covariates or form prognostic indices.• Covariate adjustment can still be performed with covariates that are not prognostic, but there may not be any gain in precision (or may be a loss in precision) compared with an unadjusted analysis.• Covariate adjustment is acceptable even if baseline covariates are strongly associated with each other (e.g., body weight and body mass index). However, adjusting for less correlated baseline covariates generally provides greater efficiency gains.• Randomization is often stratified by baseline covariates. A covariate adjustment model should generally include strata variables and can also include covariates not used for stratifying randomization. In some cases, incorrect stratification may occur and result in actual and as-randomized baseline strata variables. A covariate adjustment model can use either strata variable definition as long as this is prespecified.• Sponsors can conduct randomization/permutation tests with covariate adjustment (Rosenbaum 2002).• In a trial that uses covariate adjustment, the sample size and power calculations can be based on adjusted or unadjusted methods. The latter will often lead to a more conservative sample size.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4• Clinical trials often record a baseline measurement of a defined characteristic and record a later measurement of the characteristic to be used as an outcome. Adjusting for the baseline value rather than (or in addition to) defining the primary endpoint as a change from baseline is generally acceptable. Sponsors proposing to define the outcome as a percentage change rather than an absolute change from baseline should discuss the outcome definition and use of covariate adjustment with the relevant review division. Sponsors proposing to perform noninferiority testing on ratios of treatment group means rather than differences of treatment group means should also discuss change from baseline outcome definitions and use of covariate adjustment with the relevant review division.• Sponsors should discuss proposals for complex covariate-adaptive randomization, data-adaptive covariate selection, or use of covariate adjustment in an adaptive design with the relevant review division.• The statistical properties of covariate adjustment are best understood when the number of covariates adjusted for in the study is small relative to the sample size (Tsiatis et al. 2008). Therefore, sponsors should discuss their proposal with the relevant review division if the number of covariates is large relative to the sample size or if proposing to adjust for a covariate with many levels (e.g., study site in a trial with many sites).B. Linear Models• Covariate adjustment through a linear model is an acceptable method for estimating the average treatment effect, which is the difference in expected outcomes between subjects assigned to treatment and control groups. Generally, the outcome is regressed on an intercept, treatment assignment indicator, and baseline covariates, and the model is estimated using ordinary least squares. The resulting estimated regression coefficient for the treatment indicator is the estimate of the average treatment effect.• The average treatment effect is an example of an unconditional treatment effect, which quantifies the effect at the population level of moving a target population from untreated to treated.• Even when the linear regression model is misspecified and does not accurately capture the relationships between the outcome, covariates, and treatment, covariate adjustment through a linear model is a valid method for estimating and performing inference for the average treatment effect (Lin, 2013). However, the power of hypothesis tests and precision of estimates generally improves if the model more closely approximates the true relationships among the outcome, covariates, and treatment.• Nominal standard errors are often the default method in most statistical software packages. Even if the model is incorrectly specified, they are acceptable in two arm trials with 1:1 randomization. However, in other settings, these standard errors can be inaccurate when the model is misspecified. Therefore, the Agency recommends that sponsors consider use of a robust standard error method such as the Huber-White “sandwich” standard error when the model does not include treatment by covariate interactions (Rosenblum and van der LaanContains Nonbinding Recommendations52009; Lin 2013). Other robust standard error methods proposed in the literature can also cover cases with interactions (Ye et al. 2022). An appropriate nonparametric bootstrap procedure can also be used (Efron and Tibshirani 1993).• An analysis ignoring stratified randomization is likely to overestimate standard errors and can be unduly conservative when performing inference for the average treatment effect. The Agency recommends that the standard error computation account for stratified randomization. There are several methods for computing standard errors when combining stratification with covariate adjustment and possible model misspecification (Bugni et al. 2018; Ye et al. 2021). The statistical properties of such methods are best understood when the number of strata is small relative to the sample size. Sponsors can propose methods to account for stratified randomization in computing standard errors, confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing.• The linear model may include treatment by covariate interaction terms. However, when using this approach, the primary analysis can still be based on an estimate from the model of the average treatment effect (Tsiatis et al. 2008; Ye et al. 2021). As noted in the ICH E9 guidance, interaction effects may be important to assess in supportive analysis or exploratory analysis. This is because differences in treatment effects across subgroups defined by baseline covariates could be relevant to prescribers, patients, and other stakeholders and can imply that the average treatment effect gives an incomplete summary of efficacy.C. Nonlinear Models• Covariate adjustment with nonlinear models is often used in the analysis of clinical trial data when the primary outcome of interest is not measured on a continuous scale or is right censored (e.g., binary outcome, ordinal outcome, count outcome, or time-to-event outcome). Adjustment using nonlinear models is a potentially acceptable method for analyzing these data from a clinical trial. However, there are additional issues described below that should be considered before using nonlinear models.• In general, treatment effects may differ across subgroups. However, with some parameters such as odds ratios, even when all subgroup treatment effects are identical, this subgroup-specific conditional treatment effect can differ from the unconditional treatment effect (i.e., the effect at the population level from moving the target population from untreated to treated) (Gail et al. 1984). This is termed non-collapsibility (Agresti 2002), which is distinct from confounding and can occur despite randomization and large sample sizes. An example of non-collapsibility of the odds ratio for a hypothetical clinical trial is illustrated in Table 1 below. The unconditional odds ratio in the hypothetical target population is 4.8, which is lower than the conditional odds ratio of 8.0 in each of the biomarker-positive and biomarker-negative subgroups. In trials with time-to-event outcomes, the hazard ratio can also be non-collapsible. Unlike the odds ratio or hazard ratio, the risk difference and relative risk are collapsible.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6Table 1: Non-collapsibility of the Odds Ratio in a Hypothetical Target PopulationPercentage of target populationSuccess rateOdds ratioNew drugPlaceboBiomarker-positive50%80.0%33.3%8.0Biomarker-negative50%25.0%4.0%8.0Combined100%52.5%18.7%4.8• As part of the prespecification of the estimand of interest, sponsors should specify whether the treatment effect of interest in an analysis is a conditional or unconditional treatment effect.• Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel methods (Mantel and Haenszel 1959) are acceptable for the analysis of clinical trial data with binary endpoints if there is interest in estimating a conditional treatment effect, which is assumed to be constant across subgroups defined by a covariate taking a discrete number of levels (e.g., the value 8.0 in Table 1).• Fitting a nonlinear regression of the outcome on treatment and baseline covariates similarly attempts to estimate a conditional treatment effect. Nonlinear models extend Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel methods by allowing adjustment for continuous covariates, such as age. In nonlinear regression models (without treatment by covariate interactions), the treatment effect is assumed to be approximately constant across subgroups defined by baseline covariates in the model and can provide more individualized information than the unconditional treatment effect if the assumption holds (and not otherwise). Nonlinear models such as logistic regression or proportional hazards regression (which can include stratification of the baseline hazard) are commonly used in many clinical settings.• Sponsors should discuss with the relevant review divisions specific proposals in a protocol or statistical analysis plan containing nonlinear regression to estimate conditional treatment effects for the primary analysis. When estimating a conditional treatment effect through nonlinear regression, the model assumptions will generally not be exactly correct, and results can be difficult to interpret if the model is misspecified and treatment effects substantially differ across subgroups. Interpretability increases with the quality of model specification. Sponsors should discuss any planned assessments of model assumptions and implications for analyses with the relevant review division.• Sponsors can perform covariate-adjusted estimation and inference for an unconditional treatment effect (e.g., the odds ratio of 4.8 in Table 1) in the primary analysis of data from a randomized trial. The method used should provide valid inference under approximately the same minimal statistical assumptions that would be needed for unadjusted estimation in a randomized trial. With nonlinear models using a covariate-adjusted estimator for an unconditional treatment effect, sponsors can use an appropriate bootstrap method or standard error formulas justified in the statistical literature for confidence interval construction. AContains Nonbinding Recommendations7variety of statistically reliable methods have been proposed in the literature for covariate adjustment with unconditional treatment effects (Colantuoni and Rosenblum 2015).• Covariate-adjusted estimators of unconditional treatment effects that are robust to misspecification of regression models have been proposed for randomized clinical trials with binary outcomes (e.g., Steingrimsson et al. 2017), ordinal outcomes (e.g., Díaz et al. 2016), count outcomes (e.g., Rosenblum and van der Laan 2010), and time-to-event outcomes (e.g., Tangen and Koch 1999; Lu and Tsiatis 2008). If a novel method is proposed and statistical properties are unclear, the specific proposal should be discussed with the review division.• As an example, the following are steps for one reliable method for covariate adjustment for unconditional treatment effects with binary outcomes that produces a resulting estimator (Steingrimsson et al. 2017; Freedman 2008) termed the “standardized,” “plug-in,” or “g-computation” estimator:(1) Fit a logistic model with maximum likelihood that regresses the outcome on treatment assignments and prespecified baseline covariates. The model should include an intercept term.(2) For each subject, regardless of treatment group assignment, compute the model-based prediction of the probability of response under treatment using the subject’s specific baseline covariates.(3) Estimate the average response under treatment by averaging (across all subjects in the trial) the probabilities estimated in Step 2.(4) For each subject, regardless of treatment group assignment, compute the model-based prediction of the probability of response under control using the subject’s specific baseline covariates.(5) Estimate the average response under control by averaging (across all subjects in the trial) the probabilities estimated in Step 4.(6) The estimates of average responses rates in the two treatment groups from Steps 3 and 5 can be used to estimate an unconditional treatment effect, such as the risk difference, relative risk, or odds ratio.• Inverse probability of treatment weighting is another reliable method of covariate adjustment for unconditional treatment effects in randomized trials (Williamson et al. 2013).• An analysis ignoring stratified randomization is likely to overestimate standard errors and can be unduly conservative when performing inferences for an unconditional treatment effect. The Agency recommends that the standard error computation account for stratified randomization. There are several methods for computing standard errors when combining stratification with covariate adjustment and possible model misspecification (e.g., Wang et al. 2021). The statistical properties of such methods are best understood when the number ofStudying Multiple Versions of a Cellular or Gene Therapy Product in an Early-Phase Clinical TrialGuidance for IndustryAdditional copies of this guidance are available from the Office of Communication, Outreach and Development (OCOD), 10903 New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 71, Rm. 3128, Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002, or by calling 1-800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010, or email ocod@fda.hhs.gov, or from the Internet at https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information-biologics/biologics-guidances.For questions on the content of this guidance, contact OCOD at the phone numbers or email address listed above.U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Biologics Evaluation and ResearchNovember 2022Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsiTable of ContentsI. INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1II. BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................... 2III. SCOPE ............................................................................................................................... 2IV. SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION TO INDS ............................................................. 3A. Overview ................................................................................................................ 3B. Adding Arms to the Study .................................................................................... 5C. Submitting Other Types of Changes or New Information ................................ 6D. Clinical Holds and Responses to Hold ................................................................ 6E. Reporting ............................................................................................................... 6F. Completion of Study or Arm(s) ........................................................................... 7V. ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES ................................................................................... 8APPENDIX .................................................................................................................................... 9Contains Nonbinding Recommendations1Studying Multiple Versions of a Cellular or Gene Therapy Product in an Early-Phase Clinical TrialGuidance for IndustryThis guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONThe purpose of this guidance is to provide recommendations to sponsors interested in studying multiple versions of a cellular or gene therapy1 product in an early-phase clinical trial2 for a single disease. Sponsors have expressed interest in gathering preliminary evidence of safety and activity using multiple versions of a cellular or gene therapy product in a single clinical trial. Although multiple versions of a product can be studied together in a single clinical trial, each version of the product is distinct and is generally submitted to FDA in a separate investigational new drug application (IND). The objective of these early-phase clinical studies is to guide which version(s) of the product to pursue for further development in later-phase studies. Thus, these studies are not intended to provide primary evidence of effectiveness to support a marketing application and generally are not adequately powered to demonstrate a statistically significant difference in efficacy between the study arms. In this guidance, we, FDA, provide recommendations for studies that evaluate multiple versions of a cellular or gene therapy product, including how to organize and structure the INDs, submit new information, and report adverse events. This guidance finalizes the draft guidance of the same title dated September 2021.In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of1 This guidance does not apply to vaccines intended to prevent infectious diseases, bacteriophage products, live biotherapeutic products, fecal microbiota for transplantation (FMT) products and allergenic products.2 This guidance applies only to early-phase clinical trials of cellular or gene therapy products. Later-phase clinical trials raise different and additional considerations, including those pertaining to subject selection, safety monitoring, and effectiveness evaluation. For additional information on early-phase clinical trials of cellular and gene therapy products, see Considerations for the Design of Early-Phase Clinical Trials of Cellular and Gene Therapy Products; Guidance for Industry, June 2015, https://www.fda.gov/media/106369/download.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. BACKGROUNDClinical trials that study multiple products in parallel for a particular disease or condition under a master protocol are commonly referred to as “umbrella” trials. In contrast to traditional trial designs where only one product is evaluated in a single clinical trial, umbrella trials use a single-trial infrastructure, design, and master protocol to simultaneously evaluate multiple products for a specific disease or condition, allowing for more efficient product development.This guidance focuses on a certain type of umbrella trial, where the products are multiple versions of a cellular or gene therapy product being studied in a single disease. The differences between the product versions are intended to yield differences in safety or activity, and therefore the product versions are generally submitted in separate INDs that are cross-referenced among each other. For example, a sponsor investigating an autologous chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell product may wish to also investigate a different version of the product (e.g., an altered CAR protein domain to increase CAR activity, or a new cell source such as an allogeneic donor). In this situation, the different product versions are considered individual investigational drugs, but they could be simultaneously evaluated within the same overall trial, as described further in this guidance. Refer to the Appendix for additional examples of versions of a cellular or gene therapy product that would be within the scope of this guidance.The potential benefits of this type of umbrella trial include flexibility and efficiency in product development. Instead of an iterative approach to clinical studies, multiple versions of a cellular or gene therapy product can be studied in parallel, which may streamline early clinical development by expeditiously identifying alternative versions of a product that may be safer or more effective. Such comparisons can be facilitated by randomization between the study arms, if feasible. Additionally, this trial design may facilitate sharing of the control group, potentially facilitating investigator participation and subject enrollment, and may simplify study management, relative to conducting a separate clinical trial for each product version.III. SCOPEThe scope of this guidance is limited to early-phase studies of multiple versions of a cellular or gene therapy product being studied in a single disease. We recommend that sponsors contact the Center for Biologics Evaluations and Research (CBER) if they wish to apply this framework to other types of products.This guidance applies to studies where the IND sponsor is responsible for manufacturing all versions of the cellular or gene therapy product (either directly or through a contract manufacturer) and the IND sponsor is able to provide the required chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC) and pharmacology/toxicology (P/T) information for those products either in the IND submissions or through cross-reference. Situations where the IND sponsor does not haveContains Nonbinding Recommendations3complete access to proprietary information for those products being studied raise additional considerations beyond those described in this guidance.This guidance does not apply to sponsors conducting studies that are outside the scope of this guidance (e.g., a trial designed to evaluate a single cell or gene therapy product in different populations, otherwise known as a “basket” trial). If a sponsor is interested in conducting a study that is outside the scope of this guidance, we recommend that the sponsor request a pre-IND meeting with the Office of Tissues and Advanced Therapies (OTAT), CBER, to discuss their proposed clinical trial design.IV. SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION TO INDSAs noted in sections I and II of this guidance, the purpose of this guidance is to recommend a more efficient and flexible model to evaluate multiple versions of an investigational product that would otherwise be evaluated in separate clinical studies. For a single clinical study of different versions of an investigational product where each version is submitted in a separate IND, it may be challenging to determine how to structure and organize the INDs, and how to submit changes or new information as the study progresses. The framework described here is intended to provide clarity on these topics and, as feasible, to minimize submission of the same information to multiple INDs by facilitating cross-referencing to shared information in the INDs. Sponsors may discuss their specific clinical study and planned submission approach with OTAT, CBER prior to submitting an IND (e.g., by requesting an INitial Targeted Engagement for Regulatory Advice on CBER producTs (INTERACT)3 or pre-IND meeting4).A. Overview• For purposes of the framework outlined in this guidance, we refer to INDs either as “Primary” or “Secondary”. The purpose of this nomenclature is to distinguish which INDs will include clinical information about the umbrella trial (Primary INDs) and which INDs will not include clinical information about the umbrella trial (Secondary INDs). For example, an IND amendment that contains only clinical information about the umbrella trial (e.g., no CMC or P/T information) would only need to be submitted to the Primary IND.• For a clinical study with two different versions of the investigational product (Product A and Product B), we recommend that the sponsor submit two separate INDs, IND A and IND B. One of the INDs, IND A, will be considered the “Primary” IND, and should include CMC and P/T information for Product A. IND B will be considered a “Secondary” IND, and will include CMC and P/T information for Product B. Primary IND A should also include complete clinical information for the umbrella3 For additional information about INTERACT meetings, please see https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/industry-biologics/interact-meetings.4 See Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or Applicants of PDUFA Products, Draft Guidance for Industry, December 2017, https://www.fda.gov/media/109951/download. When finalized, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4trial, including the clinical protocol and supporting documents (e.g., investigator brochure, informed consent form, Form FDA 1572), and a summary of the similarities and differences between the product versions. This framework can be further extended to additional versions of the product; if the clinical study includes three different products (Products A, B, and C), then the CMC and P/T information for Product C should be provided in Secondary IND C.• Sponsors should consult FDA’s Guidance for Industry: Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic Format – Certain Human Pharmaceutical Product Applications and Related Submissions Using the eCTD Specifications, February 2020,5 for information regarding electronic common technical document (eCTD) format for IND submissions.Figure 1: Schematic Representation of the Primary and Secondary IND Framework6• For the Primary IND (including any amendments), we recommend that the cover letter clearly state that the IND is a Primary IND and specify the Secondary IND number(s). For any Secondary IND (including any amendments), we recommend that the cover letter clearly state that the IND is a Secondary IND and specify the Primary IND number. We recommend that sponsors request pre-assigned IND numbers prior to submitting the INDs, so that the cover letter and cross-references for each IND can include the IND numbers for the other INDs that support the study.• For sponsors adopting the approach described in this guidance, the Primary IND should cross-reference the Secondary IND(s) for the CMC and P/T information contained in those INDs. The Secondary IND(s) should cross-reference the Primary IND for clinical information. If desired, CMC or P/T information that is identical5 Available at: https://www.fda.gov/media/135373/download.6 In Figure 1, “Xref” is an abbreviation for cross-reference.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5between the product versions may be submitted solely to the Primary IND and incorporated into the Secondary IND(s) by cross-reference.• In some cases, sponsors may decide to develop additional versions of a product after an IND has already been submitted. If the sponsor wishes to evaluate the original and additional versions of a product together in an umbrella trial, we recommend that sponsors submit an amendment to the existing IND specifying that it is a Primary IND and follow the steps in the section IV.B of this guidance to submit Secondary IND(s) and add arm(s) to the study.B. Adding Arms to the Study• If the arm to be added includes a new version of the investigational cellular or gene therapy product, (e.g., Product C), we recommend that the sponsor submit:- IND C with CMC and P/T information for Product C. IND C will be considered a Secondary IND. We recommend that the cover letter for a Secondary IND clearly state that the IND is a Secondary IND and specify the Primary IND number. The Secondary IND should cross-reference the Primary IND for clinical information.- An amendment to IND A with the updated clinical protocol, which now includes an arm for Product C. We recommend that the cover letter for the amendment to IND A clearly state that the IND is a Primary IND and specify the Secondary IND number(s), including IND C. We recommend that the Primary IND also be updated to include a cross-reference to the Secondary IND for CMC and P/T information related to Product C. It should be noted that the new Secondary IND C cannot go into effect until 30 days after FDA receives the new IND (21 CFR 312.40(b)(1)), unless FDA provides earlier notification that the clinical investigations in the IND may begin (21 CFR 312.40(b)(2)). Administration of Product C cannot begin until IND C goes into effect and IRB approval of the modified protocol has been granted (21 CFR 56.103).• If the arm to be added does not include a new version of the investigational cellular or gene therapy (e.g., a new arm that will study Product B in combination with a marketed product, or a new arm that will study investigational Products A and B together), then we recommend that the sponsor submit:- An amendment to the Primary IND with the updated clinical protocol (i.e., with the new arm); and- Any additional P/T information supporting the new arm, if applicable, submitted to the relevant IND(s).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6C. Submitting Other Types of Changes or New Information• For revisions to the umbrella trial clinical protocol that do not add a new arm or for other types of new clinical information, the sponsor should submit the revised protocol or new clinical information to the Primary IND. The sponsor does not need to submit any information to the Secondary INDs.• For new CMC or P/T information (e.g., changes to the CMC information, new P/T study report): if the new information is specific to one product (e.g., Product B), then that information should be submitted to IND B only. If the new information is for multiple products (e.g., Products A and B), then the new information should be submitted to INDs A and B (or submitted to IND A and cross-referenced by IND B, as mentioned previously). For new P/T information, the sponsor should also submit an updated investigator brochure to the Primary IND.D. Clinical Holds and Responses to Hold• If only one arm (e.g., arm studying Product B) will be placed on hold, then the Primary IND would be placed on partial hold and the relevant Secondary IND would be placed on hold (or partial hold, if appropriate).• In the event that FDA issues an order placing the entire study on clinical hold (e.g., due to a safety issue that applies to all product versions), then all Primary and Secondary INDs would be placed on hold (or partial hold, if appropriate). 21 CFR 312.42(a).• To respond to a clinical hold, the sponsor will need to submit a response to each IND that was placed on hold. However, detailed information responding to each hold comment does not need to be submitted to multiple INDs. For example, if the Primary IND was placed on partial hold due to CMC concerns with a product in a Secondary IND, the sponsor should submit the CMC information responding to the hold comments to the Secondary IND. The response to hold for the Primary IND can refer to the Secondary IND for detailed information.E. Reporting• IND safety reporting must be performed in accordance with 21 CFR 312.32.7 The sponsor must submit safety reports for an investigational product to all of the sponsor’s INDs that are relevant to that product. At a minimum, safety reports must be submitted to both the Primary IND and any Secondary IND that contains the CMC and P/T information for that product. In cases where a safety report for one product is relevant to the safety of multiple related products, the safety report must be submitted to all of the relevant INDs (21 CFR 312.32(c)). The report submitted to the7 See Guidance for Industry and Investigators: Safety Reporting Requirements for INDs and BA/BE Studies, December 2012, https://www.fda.gov/media/79394/download.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7Primary IND should be considered the original report, and reports submitted to the Secondary IND(s) should be clearly identified as duplicates to ensure that the same adverse event is not counted more than once. If a report is submitted to multiple INDs, each IND safety report should identify all INDs to which the report is submitted.• Sponsors must submit Annual Reports to each IND (21 CFR 312.33).8 If desired, the sponsor can submit an integrated Annual Report that includes the clinical information and the CMC and P/T information for all products to the Primary IND, and simultaneously submit an amendment to each of the Secondary INDs cross-referencing the integrated Annual Report in the Primary IND.F. Completion of Study or Arm(s)• The Primary IND (e.g., IND A) includes CMC and P/T information for Product A along with the clinical information for the umbrella trial. If the sponsor would like to discontinue studying Product A, we do not recommend that the sponsor withdraw Primary IND A because it contains the relevant clinical information. Instead, we recommend that the sponsor submit an updated protocol to Primary IND A that no longer includes the arm with Product A.• If the Primary IND A is withdrawn for any reason, but the sponsor intends to continue studying products other than Product A under the clinical protocol, then the sponsor would need to do the following:- Designate another IND (e.g., IND B or IND C) as the new Primary IND;- Submit complete, up-to-date clinical information to the new Primary IND;- Submit any essential CMC or P/T information from the old Primary IND to the new Primary IND; and- Update all cross-references so that the Secondary INDs now cross-reference the new Primary IND, and the new Primary IND cross-references the Secondary INDs. We recommend that the cover letters for each IND amendment clearly specify the new Primary IND and Secondary INDs.• If the sponsor decides to study one of the products (e.g., Product C) in a later-phase study (e.g., a Phase 3 study), then the sponsor should submit the Phase 3 protocol to the IND that contains the CMC and P/T information for Product C (i.e., IND C), along with any updates to the CMC information for the Phase 3 study. If the sponsor is interested in continuing the umbrella trial with the remaining product versions (e.g., Products A and B), the sponsor may do this by removing the cross-reference from the Primary IND to IND C and by updating the clinical protocol in the Primary IND to no8 See Guidance for Industry: E2F Development Safety Update Report, August 2011, https://www.fda.gov/media/71255/download.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8longer include the Product C arm. Once these changes have been made, IND C will no longer be considered a Secondary IND and will no longer be part of the umbrella trial.V. ALTERNATIVE APPROACHESThere may be alternative approaches to structuring and organizing INDs for studies in a single disease of multiple versions of an investigational product. For example, sponsors may choose to submit a stand-alone IND that includes only clinical information, with CMC and P/T information from other INDs incorporated by cross-reference. In this case, the Primary IND would still include the clinical information for the umbrella trial (including the clinical protocol), but the Primary IND would cross-reference the Secondary INDs for CMC and P/T information for all the products studied under the umbrella trial protocol. We recommend that sponsors considering alternative approaches contact OTAT, CBER to discuss the proposed IND organization and clinical study.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations9APPENDIX: CLARIFICATION ON “VERSIONS OF A CELLULAR OR GENE THERAPY PRODUCT”A. Changes that Result in “Versions of a Cellular or Gene Therapy Product” (i.e., within the scope of this guidance)The following are examples of changes that result in “versions of a cellular or gene therapy product.” 9 The different product versions would generally be submitted to separate INDs, even when they are being studied in the same clinical trial for a single disease.• Changing a cellular product from bulk tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) to purified CD8+ TILs.• Changing from dendritic cells (DCs) pulsed with a recombinant tumor antigen to DCs pulsed with immunodominant peptides from the same antigen.• Altering the differentiation state of a stem cell product to a more mature cell type along the same lineage (e.g., neural progenitor cells vs. neurons).• Changing the cell source (e.g., allogeneic vs. autologous, or cord blood vs. bone marrow) for a mesenchymal stromal cell product.• Changing from an embryonic stem cell bank to an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) bank to produce the same cell type (e.g., retinal pigment epithelial cells).• Replacing the CAR transgene of a CAR T cell product with a new CAR transgene.• Modifying a CAR T cell product by adding a second transgene that expresses a costimulatory protein.• Modifying a gene therapy vector to express the same transgene with a different codon usage, promoter, enhancer, microRNA (miRNA) target or other control element.• Deleting one or more genes from a viral-based or bacterial-based gene therapy vector.• Modifying the transgene sequence in a gene therapy vector, resulting in a change to the amino acid sequence of the encoded protein.• Changing a capsid protein of a viral-based gene therapy vector.B. Changes that Do Not Result in “Versions of a Cellular or Gene Therapy Product” (i.e., not within the scope of this guidance)Changes to the manufacturing process may occur as product development proceeds. In many cases, these changes can be submitted as an amendment to the existing IND. These changes are often made in the course of manufacturing process improvement and optimization and/or preparation for commercial manufacturing and are generally not expected to impact product safety or effectiveness. Products with these types of manufacturing process changes are not typically studied in an umbrella trial. Examples may include:• Changing from serum-containing media to serum-free media during cell expansion.• Changing from adherent to suspension cell culture.• Scaling up or scaling out the manufacturing process (e.g., increasing the capacity and/or number of cell culture containers).• Adding a new manufacturing site.9 This is not intended to be an all-inclusive list of examples.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations10C. Unrelated ProductsUnrelated products (e.g., TILs versus CAR T cells) are not “versions of a cellular or gene therapy product,” and umbrella trials that include unrelated products are not within the scope of this guidance. These trials may be considered on a case-by-case basis; we recommend that sponsors contact OTAT, CBER to discuss the appropriate regulatory path for such a proposed trial.




Cancer Clinical Trial Eligibility Criteria: Available Therapy in Non-Curative SettingsGuidance for IndustryU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationOncology Center of Excellence (OCE)Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)Cancer Clinical Trial Eligibility Criteria: Available Therapy in Non-Curative SettingsGuidance for Industry1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONThis guidance provides recommendations to clinical investigators and sponsors regarding the inclusion of patients who have not received available therapy2 (commonly referred to as existing treatment options) for their cancer in clinical trials of drugs3 and biological products for the treatment of cancer in the non-curative setting (i.e., when there is no potential for cure or prolonged/near normal survival). For the purpose of this guidance, non-curative is generally defined as 1) unresectable, locally advanced, or metastatic disease in solid tumors or 2) hematologic malignancies with unfavorable long-term overall survival.The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way, unless specifically incorporated into a contract. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law. FDA guidance documents, including this guidance, should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidance means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.1 This guidance has been prepared by the Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE), Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), and Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) at the Food and Drug Administration.2 Refer to the guidance for industry Expedited Programs for Serious Conditions – Drugs and Biologics (May 2014) for a description of available therapy. We update guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents.3 For the purpose of this guidance, references to drugs include drugs approved under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) and biological products licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2II. BACKGROUNDUnder 21 CFR part 312, which applies to clinical investigations of drugs and biological products, FDA must determine that study subjects are not or would not be exposed to an unreasonable and significant risk of illness or injury (312.42(b)(1)(i) and (b)(2)(i)) to allow such trials to proceed. Therefore, in clinical trials evaluating investigational cancer drugs, eligibility criteria should generally include that patients should have received available therapy(ies) that offer the potential for cure in a substantial proportion of patients (e.g., available treatment for pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia, classic Hodgkin lymphoma, or testicular cancer). Alternatively, such available therapy should be administered to all patients in the trial, where the investigational drug is added to such therapy (i.e., add-on trial).Particularly in the early stages of oncology drug development, eligiblity criteria have historically included that patients should have received a certain number of available therapy(ies) or all available treatment options considered clinical standard of care. This type of requirement can inadvertently limit patient access to clinical trials and preclude patients from participating. In the non-curative setting, it is reasonable for patients to receive an investigational drug(s) in lieu of available therapy, as long as patients have been provided adequate information about all therapeutic options to make an informed decision on trial participation.III. RECOMMENDATIONSWhen planning cancer clinical trials in the non-curative setting, sponsors should consider eligibility criteria as it pertains to available therapy(ies). FDA encourages sponsors to discuss their drug development plan with FDA early in development, including their approach to available therapy(ies) when developing eligibility criteria. In certain circumstances, FDA may request a specific approach for drug development. When designing cancer clinical trials, the following should be considered in the non-curative setting:• Patients may be eligible for inclusion in trials of investigational drugs, including first-in-human trials, regardless of whether they have received available therapy in the non-curative setting. Among other considerations, sponsors must ensure the elements of informed consent, as required by 21 CFR part 50.25, are addressed, including “a disclosure of appropriate alternative procedures or courses of treatment, if any, that might be advantageous to the subject”.4 The informed consent must clearly state that other treatment options known to confer clinical benefit exist, and must include discussion of reasonably foreseeable risks and any potential benefits associated with the investigational drug.54 For additional information, see the guidance for industry Placebos and Blinding in Randomized Controlled Cancer Clinical Trials for Drug and Biological Products (August 2019).5 For additional information on informed consent, see 21 CFR part 50 and the draft guidance for IRBs, clinical investigators, and sponsors Informed Consent Information Sheet (July 2014). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3• If interpretation of efficacy results requires a homogeneous patient population, evaluate patients who have received available therapy(ies) and patients who have not in separate cohorts. Alternatively, analyses of efficacy may be performed in pre-specified subgroup analyses, defined by prior receipt of available therapy(ies).• In early stage dose escalation studies, it may be reasonable to evaluate safety in all patients without stratifying for prior receipt of available therapy(ies), if the potential toxicities of the investigational oncology product are not expected to differ across these patient subgroups.


Inclusion of Older Adults in Cancer Clinical TrialsGuidance for IndustryU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationOncology Center of Excellence (OCE)Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)March 2022Clinical/MedicalInclusion of Older Adults in Cancer Clinical TrialsGuidance for IndustryAdditional copies are available from:Office of Communications, Division of Drug InformationCenter for Drug Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 4th FloorSilver Spring, MD 20993-0002Phone: 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400; Fax: 301-431-6353; Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.govhttps://www.fda.gov/drugs/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information/guidances-drugsand/orOffice of Communication, Outreach, and DevelopmentCenter for Biologics Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration10903 New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 71, rm. 3128Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002Phone: 800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010; Email: ocod@fda.hhs.govhttps://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information-biologics/biologics-guidancesU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationOncology Center of Excellence (OCE)Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)Inclusion of Older Adults in Cancer Clinical TrialsGuidance for Industry1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONThis guidance provides recommendations regarding the inclusion of older adult patients in clinical trials of drugs2 for the treatment of cancer. For the purpose of this guidance, older adults are those 65 years of age and older. Specifically, this guidance includes recommendations for including an adequate representation of older adults in cancer clinical trials to better enable evaluation of the benefit-risk profile of cancer drugs in this population. Most cancer trials do not have an upper age limit for exclusion; however, adults 75 years of age and older are underrepresented in cancer clinical trials.3 The guidance emphasizes the particular importance of including adults 75 years of age and older in cancer clinical trials. This guidance is intended to assist stakeholders, including sponsors and institutional review boards, responsible for the development and oversight of cancer clinical trials.Enrolling an adequate representation of the range of patients in a clinical trial that may be exposed to a drug after approval is important. It provides the ability to understand the drug’s benefit-risk profile across the patient population likely to use the drug in clinical practice (e.g., to identify whether there are differences in the benefits and/or risks of the drug in different populations). Including information in the labeling describing use in older adults may help promote the safe and effective use of these products in older adults and better inform treatment decisions in clinical practice.41 This guidance has been prepared by the Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE), Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), and Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) at the Food and Drug Administration.2 For the purposes of this guidance, references to drugs includes drugs approved under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) and biological products licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262).3 Singh H, Kanapuru B, Smith C, et al., 2017, FDA Analysis of Enrollment of Older Adults in Clinical Trials for Cancer Drug Registration: A 10-Year Experience by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, JCO, 35:15 suppl, 10009-10009.4 See the draft guidance for industry Geriatric Information in Human Prescription Drug and Biological Product Labeling (September 2020). When final this guidance, will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way, unless specifically incorporated into a contract. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law. FDA guidance documents, including this guidance, should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidance means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. BACKGROUNDAdults 65 years of age and older, and especially those 75 years of age and older, are underrepresented in cancer clinical trials despite representing a growing segment of the population of cancer patients.5,6 Therefore, obtaining more information is important to better inform treatment decisions for older adults with cancer. Cancer is a disease generally associated with age, with the number of cancer cases projected to multiply due to a rapidly aging U.S. population.7 FDA is engaged with stakeholders to improve the representation of older adults in cancer trials.The issue of older adults being underrepresented in clinical trials persists in oncology despite FDA’s efforts to increase their inclusion in clinical trials. FDA has encouraged the inclusion of older adults in clinical trials, including through interaction with sponsors and through several guidance documents.8, In addition, FDA published a series of guidances that encourages sponsors to broaden cancer clinical trial eligibility criteria to enhance the generalizability of trial results and the ability to understand the drug’s benefit-risk profile across the patient population likely to use the drug in clinical practice. One guidance in the series, Cancer Clinical Trial Eligibility Criteria: Patients with Organ Dysfunction or Prior or Concurrent Malignancies (July 2020) is particularly relevant to older adults. This guidance encourages the inclusion of patients with organ dysfunction and with prior or concurrent malignancies, as appropriate, to better reflect the population that will use the drug in clinical practice. It also includes specific recommendations regarding the inclusion of patients with renal, cardiac, and hepatic dysfunction and of patients with prior or concurrent malignancy, all of which may increase with age.Differences may exist between younger and older adult patients in drug response and toxicity due to age-related physiologic changes. For example, the pharmacokinetics of the drug, or the pharmacodynamic response to the drug, or both may vary between younger and older adult5 Singh H, Kanapuru B, Smith C, et al., 2017, FDA Analysis of Enrollment of Older Adults in Clinical Trials for Cancer Drug Registration: A 10-Year Experience by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, JCO, 35:15 suppl, 10009-10009.6 Smith BD, Smith GL, Hurria A, et al., 2009, Future of Cancer Incidence in the United States: Burdens Upon an Aging, Changing Nation, JCO, 27(17): 2758-65.7 Levit L, Singh H, Klepin H, Hurria A, 2018, Expanding the Evidence Base in Geriatric Oncology: Action Items from an FDA-ASCO Workshop, JNCI, 110(11): djy169.8 See the guidance for industry Studies of Drugs Likely to be used in the Elderly (November 1989), E7Studies in Support of Special Populations: Geriatrics (August 1994) and E7 Studies in Support of Special Populations: Geriatrics Questions and Answers (March 2012) and Enhancing the Diversity of Clinical Trial Populations – Eligibility Criteria, Enrollment Practices, and Trial Designs (November 2020).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3patients. In addition, older adults often have comorbidities and may be taking concomitant medications that could impact the efficacy of the cancer drug and may also impact the incidence and the severity and seriousness of an adverse reaction. It is important that the spectrum of older adults included in clinical trials are representative of the intended population, including those with physiological decline (e.g., frailty). Furthermore, there may be important differences in efficacy in older adult patients compared to the younger or general population, and information describing such differences should be conveyed to patients and healthcare providers where appropriate.Geriatric (i.e., older adult) use information must be included in labeling, unless clearly inapplicable.9 FDA’s draft guidance for industry: Geriatric Information in Human Prescription Drug and Biological Product Labeling (September 2020)10 assists applicants in determining the appropriate placement and content of geriatric information in labeling so that the information is clear and accessible to health care practitioners and includes content that guides the safe and effective use in geriatric patients. In addition, FDA’s Drug Trials Snapshots11 provides consumers with relevant information about the demographic profile of participants in key clinical trials that supported the original approval of new molecular entities and new biological products since 2015. Snapshots can also highlight differences, if applicable, in benefits and side effects among demographic groups, including, for example, differences based on age when a clinical trial includes a representative population of older adults. Demographic information may also be available on FDA’s website within the posted product approval information.12III. RECOMMENDATIONSClinical trials should include study populations reflecting the intended population that may receive the intervention being evaluated, if approved. In general, to achieve an unbiased estimate of treatment effect in the general population, sponsors should develop a strategy to enroll diverse populations, including different age groups, that are consistent with the intended use population. For most cancers, clinical trials should include a representative population of older adults.13 Older adults, including those with physiological decline, should be enrolled in all phases of clinical trials when they can be safely and ethically enrolled.Sponsors of cancer trials should consider the expected age range of their target population early in development. CDER and CBER are available to discuss plans for enrollment of older adults in cancer clinical trials, particularly when enrollment of adequate representation of older adults may be challenging.9 See 21 CFR sections 201.56(d)(4), 201.57(c)(9)(v), and 201.80(f)(10).10 When final, this guidance will reperesent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.11 Available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-approvals-and-databases/drug-trials-snapshots12 See Drugs@FDA.13 One source of data that may be considered when estimating the incidence of a cancer in older adults is the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program, SEER Incidence database, available at https://seer.cancer.gov/data/.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4A strategy regarding inclusion of older adults should include all known information including for example, prevalence of the condition, diagnosis and treatment patterns, prior relevant studies, and differences in outcomes related to safety or efficacy. The guidance for industry Enhancing the Diversity of Clinical Trial Populations – Eligibility Criteria, Enrollment Practices, and Trial Designs (November 2020) includes recommendations for inclusive trial practices, trial design and methodological approaches, and other study design and conduct considerations for improving enrollment that sponsors should consider regarding older adults.To understand potential age-related differences that may be relevant to the clinical development of a cancer drug, FDA recommends the following:A. Early Clinical Development• Sponsors should enroll older adults, if appropriate, in early phase studies to obtain information on safety, exposure, and response to better inform the study design and dose selection of later phase studies.• Sponsors should evaluate drug interactions early in drug development to allow enrollment of older adults who may otherwise be excluded because of their concomitant medication use.• Sponsors should document co-morbidities and make every effort to safely include these patients as well as those with organ dysfunction and prior/concurrent malignancies.14B. Clinical Trials• Trial designSponsors should make every effort to enroll a representative population of older adults in their pivotal randomized trials. To facilitate the enrollment of older adults in cancer trials, sponsors may consider flexible approaches to trial design, such as age-based stratification or analyses based on hypothesized efficacy differences in older adults compared to the younger adults participants (≤65 years) to allow a focused benefit/risk assessment. If the pivotal trials are not able to enroll a representative sample of older adult patients, alternative trial designs should be proposed. This may include an open-label safety study that can enroll and analyze an older adult population separately in a parallel arm of a trial. Additional considerations for this particular trial design can be found in the guidance for industry Placebos and Blinding in Randomized Controlled Cancer Trials for Drug and Biological Products (August 2019). In some cases, the older adult arm(s) can be actively accruing at the time of new drug application (NDA) or biologics license application (BLA) or supplement submission.14 See guidance for industry Cancer Clinical Trial Eligibility Criteria: Patients with Organ Dysfunction or Prior or Concurrent Malignancies (July 2020).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5An example of a possible trial design approach is a randomized controlled trial that enrolls younger and older adults and stratifies by age. The intent-to-treat (ITT) population consists of all enrolled patients, with the primary study hypothesis evaluating effectiveness in randomized patients under 75 years of age. Using a hierarchical testing strategy, after the primary analysis in patients under 75 years of age, subsequent analyses would be done in the ITT population to provide safety and efficacy information about all patients. If the size of the older patient population is adequate and powered to address the hypothesis, results in the older population can also be analyzed separately.The design of the development program should reflect any important differences in a drug’s benefit-risk balance in older adults compared to younger adults. In the design of the clinical development program, we recommend that sponsors consider perspectives of older adults, seeking input from patients and advocacy groups, as well as input from those caring for older adults such as clinicians and caregivers. This information can inform the design of the clinical trials, such as in assuring meaningful endpoints are selected, as well as in the conduct of the trial, such as in facilitating enrollment and retention of older adults.15• Develop recruitment strategies targeted to older adultsClinical trials do not have an upper age limit for exclusion, however adults 75 years of age and older, continue to be underrepresented. FDA encourages sponsors and clinical trial cooperative groups to develop strategies to recruit patients that are reflective of the intended population. Possible challenges with recruiting older adults that could be mitigated, particularly among patients 75 years of age and older, include: location of clinical trial sites (e.g., sites in community-based settings may be more accessible to older adults than sites located in urban academic centers), format (e.g. digital) and content of informational material for the trial, caregiver support, accommodations needed for impairment (e.g., visual, mobility, etc.), and travel and other logistics. Where feasible, remote monitoring approaches should be considered.Sponsors should discuss specific goals for enrollment of older adults with clinical investigators and keep the clinical trial sites updated on the progress of enrolling older adults in the trial. Sponsors should discuss the importance of enrolling older adults during study training provided to the clinical sites. In addition, sponsors should consider getting input on trial design, trial conduct and recruitement strategies from geriatricians, geriatric oncologists, social and behavioral scientists with expertise in treating older adults. Additional input from patient advocates/navigators should also be sought.• Consider collecting additional information for older adults15 See guidance for industry Patient-Focused Drug Development: Collecting Comprehensive and Representative Input (June 2020).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6Sponsors should prospectively consider information that should be collected for older adults that will be clinically informative and will provide an understanding of clinical outcomes in older adults. For example, in addition to collection of age and performance status, elements from geriatric assessment tools (e.g. functional status, cognitive function), and a comprehensive assessment of comorbidities should be considered during trial design.16 Incorporating a patient reported outcome instrument(s) in cancer trials may encourage older adults to participate in clinical trials and the information obtained may inform future research.17• Consider additional strategies in adverse event monitoring and managementOlder adult patients’ experience with adverse events may differ from younger patients. Developing strategies to capture and manage adverse events in older patients (e.g., supportive care measures, involvement of geriatric oncologists and other health care professionals with expertise in treating older adults) may facilitate older patients completing the trial.• Report more discrete age subgroupsBecause outcomes may differ by increasing age group in patients 65 years of age and older, sponsors should identify further age subgroups to understand the drug’s benefits and risks.18 For example, subgroups such as age 65 years to 74 years of age and 75 years of age and older may be relevant. A particular need exists for information in patients 75 years of age and older. Sponsors may consider combining data across trials of similar design to ensure adequate representation of older adults across discrete age subgroups. Reporting clinical trial data from older adults in a more standardized and granular way can be more clinically useful19. FDA’s guidance for industry Integrated Summary of Effectiveness (October 2015) includes recommendations regarding subpopulation assessment and reporting in the NDA or BLA that are applicable to subgroups of older adults in cancer trials (see section III.D of that guidance).C. Postmarket• Ideally, adequate information on older adults should be captured in the premarket clinical trials. However, if older adults are not adequately represented in pre-market clinical trials, it may be appropriate to develop a plan to collect data on older adults in the postmarket setting. This could be accomplished with post-marketing trials examining a broader population, or through collection of real16 Singh H, Beaver JA, Kim G, Pazdur R, 2016, Enrollment of Older Adults on Oncology Trials: An FDA Perspective, JGO, 8: 149-50.17 See the guidance for industry Patient-Reported Outcome Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling Claims (December 2009).18 See the guidance for industry E7 Studies in Support of Special Populations: Geriatrics Questions and Answers (March 2012).19 See footnote 16.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7world data in an observational study or registry. In certain situations, FDA may require postmarket studies and clinical trials.20 Sponsors should prospectively discuss their plan for collecting additional information in the postmarket setting with the CDER or CBER review division or office. Postmarket data may provide clinically useful information, that when appropriate, can be added to the Geriatric Use subsection of the labeling or other parts of the labeling.2120 See section 505(o)(3)(B) of the FD&C Act and draft guidance for industry Postmarketing Studies and Clinical Trials-Implementation of 505(o)(3) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (October 2019). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic21 See draft guidance for industry: Geriatric Information in Human Prescription Drug and Biological Product Labeling (September 2020). When final this guidance, will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.


Placebos and Blinding in Randomized Controlled Cancer Clinical Trials for Drug and Biological ProductsGuidance for Industry1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONThis guidance provides recommendations to industry about the use of placebos and blinding in randomized controlled clinical trials in development programs for drug or biological products2 to treat hematologic malignancies and oncologic diseases. This guidance does not address the statistical analyses that can be considered when data are unblinded in these trials.In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. BACKGROUNDPlacebos, defined as inert substances with no pharmacologic activity, are commonly used in double-blind, randomized controlled clinical trials. Blinding investigators and patients in these trials to the treatment patients are receiving decreases the likelihood of biased observations of the effectiveness outcomes, may decrease differential patient drop out, and allows for unbiased observation of outcome measures, which are particularly important when the assessment includes subjective endpoints. For example, a placebo-controlled study design may be useful or preferred in maintenance therapy, in add-on trial designs, in trials of adjuvant therapies (for which standard1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Hematology and Oncology Products in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) in cooperation with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) at the Food and Drug Administration.2 For the purposes of this guidance, all references to drugs or drug products include both human drugs and biological products and drug-led and biologic-led combination products regulated by CDER and CBER, unless otherwise specified. This guidance does not apply to medical devices or device-led combination products regulated by the Center for Devices and Radiological Health.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2of care is surveillance), and for indications where no treatment is available (best supportive care can be added to both arms to ensure all available care is provided to patients). However, in development programs for malignant hematologic and oncologic disease, the use of a placebo in double-blind, randomized controlled clinical trials may present practical and ethical concerns.In many cases, because of the toxicity profile of the active treatment, patients and investigators may infer which treatment patients are receiving, so using a placebo control may not blind the treatment. For patients with hematologic malignancies and oncologic diseases that have standard effective therapy available, using a placebo (not an active treatment) generally would not be considered ethical, so an active control trial should be conducted. One such active control superiority trial design option is to conduct an open-label trial with a physician’s choice of one of a few standard therapies as the comparator. In open-label comparative trials for which investigator bias may be of concern, a blinded central independent review of scans may mitigate bias regarding endpoint assessment.3 Another option has been to compare the investigational drug product with the placebo, with each added to the standard of care (an add-on trial).Continued blinding of patients and investigators at the time of disease progression or occurrence of serious adverse events is usually not acceptable. In a blinded immunotherapy trial, for example, a patient who develops suspected drug-related serious adverse events on the control arm may receive unnecessary treatments (e.g., immunosuppressive drug products including a high dose of glucocorticoids, cyclophosphamide, interleukin-6 antagonist, or infliximab) for management of adverse events incorrectly attributed to the investigational drug product.Maintaining the blind after disease progression could also affect the selection and timing of a patient’s subsequent therapy, potentially preventing a patient who had been on a placebo arm from receiving an approved therapy or delaying or preventing the patient’s entry into other clinical trials (for those trials of similar drug products that may have specific exclusion criteria based on prior treatment with an active drug or class of drugs). Unblinding in those cases would therefore allow informed decision-making about additional treatment options (see below).III. CONSIDERATIONS FOR USING PLACEBOS AND BLINDINGGiven that using a placebo in randomized controlled clinical trials of therapies to treat hematologic malignancy and oncologic disease for which there is known effective therapy is ethically unacceptable, sponsors should consider using a placebo-controlled design only in selected circumstances (e.g., when surveillance is standard of care) or with certain trial design features (e.g., when the trial uses an add-on design). When considering a placebo control, sponsors should take the following into account:• Sponsors should provide the rationale for the trial design. Justification is particularly important in the setting of a sham surgical procedure, when invasive methods are required to administer a placebo (e.g., intrathecal administration, intratumoral3 See the guidance for industry Clinical Trial Endpoints for the Approval of Cancer Drugs and Biologics (December 2018). We update guidances periodically. To make sure you have the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3administration, repeated intravenous administration via an indwelling catheter), when primary adverse event prophylaxis is required (e.g., antihistamine, acetaminophen, and/or corticosteroids to prevent infusion reaction), when there is an available therapy, or when a placebo is given as monotherapy and not combined with an active drug or drugs.4• FDA does not require patient-level maintenance of blinding at the time of disease recurrence or progression. Unless there are no available appropriate treatment alternatives, FDA recommends unblinding only the patient and the investigator at the time of documented disease recurrence or progression by an objective measurement or measurements to ensure optimal patient management. If sponsors intend to maintain patient-level blinding when disease recurs or progresses and there are existing available treatments, the informed consent document should acknowledge the risks of this approach, and the protocol should include justification for the potential added risk.• As stated in the guidance for industry and investigators Safety Reporting Requirements for INDs and BA/BE Studies (December 2012), FDA recommends unblinding the patient and the investigator when the patient has an adverse event suspected to be related to the investigational drug product and for which management of the adverse event with one or more drug products with substantial toxicity or invasive procedures is being considered. In such cases of unblinding, the patient can be removed from treatment based on benefit-risk analysis, but the patient data should not be removed from the trial. If sponsors intend to maintain patient-level blinding when a suspected drug-related serious adverse event occurs, the informed consent document should acknowledge the risks of this approach, and the protocol should include justification for the potential added risk.• Sponsors should provide a detailed description in the protocol and in the statistical analysis plan of the proposal for blinding (including whether the physiological effects or adverse events associated with the investigational drug product would lead to some degree of unblinding) and planned unblinding (unblinding driven by potential need for medicines with substantial toxicity or invasive procedures for managing adverse events).



Considerations for the Inclusion of Adolescent Patients in Adult Oncology Clinical TrialsGuidance for IndustryU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE)March 2019Clinical/MedicalConsiderations for the Inclusion of Adolescent Patients in Adult Oncology Clinical TrialsGuidance for IndustryAdditional copies are available from:Office of Communications, Division of Drug InformationCenter for Drug Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 4th FloorSilver Spring, MD 20993-0002Phone: 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400; Fax: 301-431-6353; Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.govhttps://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htmand/orOffice of Communication, Outreach, and DevelopmentCenter for Biologics Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration10903 New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 71, Room 3128Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002Phone: 800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010; Email: ocod@fda.hhs.govhttps://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htmU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE)March 2019Clinical/MedicalTABLE OF CONTENTSI. INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1II. BACKGROUND............................................................................................................... 2III. CRITERIA FOR INCLUDING ADOLESCENT PATIENTS IN ADULT ONCOLOGY CLINICAL TRIALS................................................................................ 2IV. DOSE SELECTION FOR ADOLESCENT PATIENTS IN ADULT ONCOLOGY CLINICAL TRIALS......................................................................................................... 3V. SAFETY MONITORING................................................................................................ 4VI. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS..................................................................................... 4Contains Nonbinding Recommendations1Considerations for the Inclusion of AdolescentPatients in Adult Oncology Clinical TrialsGuidance for Industry1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONThe purpose of this guidance is to provide the pharmaceutical industry, clinical investigators, and institutional review boards with information to facilitate the inclusion of adolescent patients (for purposes of this guidance, defined as ages 12 to 17) in relevant adult oncology clinical trials. FDA recommends the inclusion of adolescent patients in disease- and target-appropriate adult oncology clinical trials to enable earlier access to investigational and approved drugs2 for adolescent patients with cancer. Topics that are discussed in this guidance include the following:• Appropriate criteria for the inclusion of adolescent patients in adult oncology clinical trials at various stages of drug development• Dosing and pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic evaluations• Safety monitoring• Ethical considerationsThe information in this guidance is meant to serve as a general guideline for sponsors considering this approach. Because specific details of an adult oncology drug development program that includes adolescent patients will vary depending on the characteristics and development stage of the drug and disease(s) under evaluation, sponsors are encouraged to1 This guidance has been prepared by the Divisions of Hematology and Oncology Products and Clinical Pharmacology V in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research and the Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE) in cooperation with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) at the Food and Drug Administration.2 For purposes of this guidance, references to drugs includes drugs and biological products approved under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) and biological products licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262) that are drugs.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2contact the responsible FDA review division to discuss details of the program before implementation.In addition, enrolling adolescent patients in adult oncology clinical trials may contribute toward addressing pediatric regulatory requirements under section 505A or 505B of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. Details of these requirements should be discussed with the responsible FDA review division.In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. BACKGROUNDCancers in young pediatric patients are often different from those in adult patients and require unique treatment approaches; however, some cancers found in adolescent patients—such as some soft tissue and bone sarcomas, central nervous system tumors, leukemias and lymphomas, and melanoma—are similar in histology and biologic behavior to those found in adults. Adolescent patients, because of their age, have historically been ineligible for enrollment in adult oncology clinical trials, and the initial pediatric trials for many drugs are conducted years later, often after the drug is approved in adults. As a result, adolescent patients may have delayed access to potentially effective therapies. In addition, accrual of adolescent patients to pediatric trials evaluating approved drugs may be difficult because patients can receive the drug through off-label use.III. CRITERIA FOR INCLUDING ADOLESCENT PATIENTS IN ADULT ONCOLOGY CLINICAL TRIALSAdolescent patients should be eligible for enrollment in adult oncology clinical trials at all stages of drug development when the histology and biologic behavior of the cancer under investigation is the same in, or the molecular target of the drug is relevant to, cancers in both adult and adolescent patients.The following are recommendations regarding including adolescent patients by stage of drug development:• First-in-human or dose-escalation trials:‒ Adolescent patients may be enrolled after some initial adult pharmacokinetic and toxicity data are obtained. The sponsor should consult with the responsible FDA review division to determine the amount and type of adult data needed before enrolling adolescent patients.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3‒ In general, adolescent patients enrolled in these early phase trials should have cancers that are relapsed after or refractory to standard therapy with no curative options or for which no standard therapies with curative intent exist.• Activity-estimating or confirmatory trials:‒ Adolescent patients can be enrolled simultaneously with adultsIV. DOSE SELECTION FOR ADOLESCENT PATIENTS IN ADULT ONCOLOGY CLINICAL TRIALSSystemic exposure and clearance of drugs are generally similar in adolescent and adult patients after accounting for the effect of body size on pharmacokinetics. Selection of an appropriate dose for adolescent patients in clinical trials should be based on pharmacokinetic and/or pharmacodynamic characteristics of the investigational drug with consideration of body size effect on drug exposure, toxicity, and activity data (if available); the therapeutic index of the drug; and dose- and exposure-response relationships in adults.3The following are recommendations for dosing based on how the drug is dosed in adults:• For drugs with body size-adjusted dosing for adults, adolescent patients should receive the same body size-adjusted dose (mg/kg or mg/m2) that is administered in adults.• For drugs administered as a fixed dose based on data showing no clinically meaningful body size effect on drug exposure and toxicity in adults, a minimum body weight threshold should be defined to prevent adolescent patients who have a lower body weight than average from exceeding adult exposures.‒ An FDA analysis of adult population pharmacokinetics of oncology drugs suggested that 40 kg (the approximate median body weight of a 12-year-old4) is generally the lower end of the body weight range that has no clinically relevant effect on drug pharmacokinetics or safety. (This cutoff may change based on the characteristics of the drug, including the effect of body size on pharmacokinetics, the therapeutic index, and dose- and exposure-response relationships.)‒ In general, adolescent patients who weigh at least 40 kg can receive the same fixed dose administered in adults.3 Selection of an appropriate dose for adolescent patients may be more complex for certain biological products that are regulated by CBER. Sponsors of such products should consult with the relevant review division in CBER to determine if there are specific considerations they should take into account with respect to their products.4 See the Clinical Growth Charts web page under National Center for Health Statistics at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website (https://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/clinical_charts.htm).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4‒ In general, adolescent patients who weigh less than 40 kg should switch to a body weight (mg/kg) or body surface area (mg/m2) adjusted dose. This adjusted dose should be based on an adult reference body size (e.g., the average adult body weight of 70 kg or median body weight or surface area of the adult patient population determined from existing data).• Pharmacokinetic and/or pharmacodynamic (if available) samples should be collected from adolescent patients included in the adult oncology drug development program.V. SAFETY MONITORINGSafety data collected during the trial should be examined for any age-related differences.The evaluation of developmental toxicities (e.g., growth derangements, fertility issues) that require a long duration of follow-up may not be possible in the context of early phase trials; however, the sponsor should develop a plan for longitudinal evaluation of potential developmental toxicities when it is feasible, particularly in trials enrolling patients in earlier lines of therapy.Adolescent patients enrolled in adult oncology clinical trials should have access to appropriate care providers and facilities necessary to address the clinical management of potentially unique toxicities in this patient population, which may require pediatric oncology expertise.Juvenile animal studies are not routinely needed before the enrollment of adolescent patients in adult oncology clinical trials, unless clinical and/or nonclinical data do not provide sufficient information on toxicities.5VI. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONSUnder 21 CFR 50.50, institutional review boards reviewing adult oncology clinical trials that allow for the enrollment of adolescent patients must ensure that the provisions of 21 CFR part 50, subpart D, Additional Safeguards for Children in Clinical Investigations, and, specifically, 21 CFR 50.52, Clinical investigations involving greater than minimal risk but presenting the prospect of direct benefit to individual subjects, are satisfied before approving the studies. Considerations should include disease and/or molecular target, available therapeutic options, and dose level for first-in-human trials.Enrollment of appropriately selected adolescent patients in relevant adult oncology clinical trials with appropriate dose considerations and adequate safety monitoring is justified given the severe and life-threatening nature of their disease.5 Leighton, JK, Saber H, Reaman G, and Pazdur R, 2016, An FDA Oncology View of Juvenile Animal Studies in Support of Initial Pediatric Trials for Anticancer Drugs, Regul Toxicol Pharmacol, Aug; 79:142–143.E17 General Principles for Planning and Design of Multiregional Clinical TrialsGuidance for Industry1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTION (1)2A. Objectives of the Guidance (1.1)With the increasing globalization of drug development, it has become important that data from multiregional clinical trials (MRCTs) can be accepted by regulatory authorities across regions and countries as the primary source of evidence to support marketing approval of drugs (medicinal products). The purpose of this guidance is to describe general principles for the planning and design of MRCTs with the aim of increasing the acceptability of MRCTs in global regulatory submissions. The guidance addresses strategic program issues and issues that are specific to the planning and design of confirmatory MRCTs, and it should be used together with other ICH guidances for industry, including E5 Ethnic Factors in the Acceptability of Foreign Clinical Data, E6 Good Clinical Practice, E8 General Considerations for Clinical Trials, E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials, E10 Choice of Control Group and Related Issues in Clinical Trials, and E18 Genomic Sampling and Management of Genomic Data.3In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.1 This guidance was developed within the Efficacy Implementation Working Group of the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) and has been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH process. This document has been endorsed by the ICH Assembly at Step 4 of the ICH process, November 2017. At Step 4 of the process, the final draft is recommended for adoption to the regulatory bodies of the European Union, Japan, and North America.2 Arabic numbers reflect the organizational breakdown of the document endorsed by the ICH Assembly at Step 4 of the ICH process, November 2017.3 We update guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2B. Background (1.2)In the era of globalization of drug development, it may be challenging to conduct a drug development program globally, in part because of distinct and sometimes conflicting requirements from regulatory authorities. At the same time, regulatory authorities face increasing challenges in evaluating data from MRCTs for drug approval. Data from MRCTs are often submitted to multiple regulatory authorities without a previously harmonized regulatory view on the drug development program. Currently, no ICH guidances deal specifically with the planning and design of MRCTs, although the ICH E5 guidance covers issues relating to the bridging of results from one region to another.MRCTs conducted according to this guidance will allow investigation of treatment effects, including safety evaluations in the overall population, as well as investigation of the potential impact of intrinsic and extrinsic factors (described as ethnic factors in the ICH E5 guidance) on the treatment effect. MRCTs, which are properly designed and executed according to this guidance, may facilitate more efficient drug development and increase the possibility of submitting marketing authorization applications to multiple regulatory authorities in different regions simultaneously, thus providing earlier access to new drugs worldwide. In addition, MRCTs conducted according to this guidance may enhance scientific knowledge about how treatment effects vary across regions and populations under the umbrella of a single-study protocol, and how this variation may be explained by intrinsic and extrinsic factors.C. Scope of the Guidance (1.3)In this guidance, MRCT is defined as a clinical trial conducted in more than one region under a single protocol. In this context, a region may refer to a geographical region, country, or regulatory region (see section III (3) Glossary). The primary focus of this guidance is on MRCTs designed to provide data that will be submitted to multiple regulatory authorities for drug approval (including approval of additional indications, new formulations, and new dosing regimens) and for studies conducted to satisfy postmarketing requirements. Certain aspects of this guidance may also be relevant to studies conducted early in clinical development or in later phases. This guidance mainly covers drugs, including biological products, although some sections may not be applicable to all drug development programs (e.g., pharmacokinetics not used for preventive vaccine dose-finding).D. Basic Principles (1.4)Basic principles for designing MRCTs are described below. Subsequent sections expand on these principles in more detail.1. Strategic use of MRCTs in drug development programs, properly designed and executed according to this guidance, can increase efficiency of drug development. MRCTs may enable simultaneous submission of marketing authorization applications and support regulatory decision-making in multiple regions, allowing earlier access to new drugs worldwide. Although MRCTs may generally become the preferred option forContains Nonbinding Recommendations3investigating a new drug for which regulatory submission is planned in multiple regions, the potential for regional differences to have an impact on the interpretability of study results should be carefully considered.2. The intrinsic and extrinsic factors important to the drug development program should be identified early. The potential impact of these factors could be examined in the exploratory phases before the design of confirmatory MRCTs. Information about them should also be collected during the confirmatory trial for evaluation of their impact on treatment effects.3. MRCTs are planned under the assumption that the treatment effect applies to the entire target population, particularly to the regions included in the trial. Strategic allocation of the sample size to regions allows an evaluation of the extent to which this assumption holds.4. Prespecified pooling of regions or subpopulations, based on established knowledge about similarities, may help provide flexibility in sample-size allocation to regions, facilitate the assessment of consistency in treatment effects across regions, and support regulatory decision-making.5. A single primary analysis approach for hypothesis testing and estimation of the overall treatment effect should be planned so that it will be acceptable to all concerned regulatory authorities. A structured exploration to examine the consistency of treatment effects across regions and subpopulations should be planned.6. In light of diverse regional practices, ensuring high quality of study design and conduct in accordance with ICH E6 in all regions is of paramount importance to ensure the study results are interpretable. Careful attention to quality during trial planning, investigator training, and trial monitoring will help achieve consistently high trial quality required for a successful MRCT.7. Efficient communication among sponsors and regulatory authorities is encouraged at the planning stage of MRCTs, with the goal of obtaining acceptance of a global approach to study design across the different regulatory regions.II. GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE PLANNING AND DESIGN OF MRCTs (2)A. Strategy-Related Issues (2.1)1. The Value of MRCTs in Drug Development (2.1.1)Historically, drug development focused on regulatory strategies designed for specific regulatory regions. In that context, MRCTs had been recognized as an efficient way to enable recruitment of the planned number of trial subjects within a reasonable time frame when the disease and/orContains Nonbinding Recommendations4condition was rare (e.g., an enzyme deficiency disorder), when the disease and/or condition was for special (e.g., elderly, pediatric) populations, or when very large numbers of subjects were required (e.g., cardiovascular outcome studies, vaccine efficacy studies). More recently, global regulatory strategies are also used to plan and conduct studies more efficiently to facilitate more rapid availability of drugs to patients worldwide.MRCTs allow for an examination of the applicability of a treatment to diverse populations. The intrinsic and/or extrinsic factors that are believed or suspected to have an impact on responses to the drug can be further evaluated based on data from various regions using a single protocol. For example, the impact on the treatment effect of genetic differences or different distribution of gene polymorphisms in drug metabolizing enzymes or the molecular target of a drug can be examined in exploratory and/or confirmatory MRCTs that include subjects with different intrinsic factors across regions. Accumulated knowledge of the impact of intrinsic and extrinsic factors and global sharing of experiences in various regions may promote inclusion of additional regions in MRCTs.The primary reason for performing MRCTs is to evaluate the overall treatment effect based on data from subjects in all regions. However, intrinsic and/or extrinsic factors may be expected to have an impact on subjects’ responses to drugs differently across regions and should be considered when planning MRCTs. If major differences in treatment effects are expected, available data should be assessed to decide whether it is appropriate and feasible to conduct the MRCT. Even in the case of expected major differences in treatment effects, it may still be possible to conduct MRCTs by excluding some regions or a defined subgroup within a region after careful consideration. Additional strategies to study a disease and/or drug in the excluded regions should be considered (see ICH E5). If MRCTs are the source of data in the bridging strategy based on the ICH E5 guidance, MRCTs could provide more robust evidence than single regional trials for extrapolation of study results. In some cases, single-region studies may be appropriate, such as in the evaluation of drugs to treat or prevent a disease that is prevalent in a single region (e.g., anti-malarial drugs, vaccines specific to local epidemics, or antibiotics for region-specific strains).MRCTs can facilitate simultaneous global development of a drug and reduce the number of clinical studies conducted separately in each region, thereby minimizing unnecessary duplication of studies. Although MRCTs require more coordination during the planning stage and possibly increased start-up time, their use may provide a pathway for earlier access to new drugs worldwide by facilitating earlier approval across regions, thereby avoiding significant lag in the availability of new drugs in some regions.As shown in the illustrative examples in Figure 1, the timing of clinical drug development across different regions can be synchronized by the use of MRCTs, in comparison to local studies conducted independently in each region. Figure 1 also illustrates the use of MRCTs in the overall design of the drug development program, not only in the confirmatory stage but also as an option in the exploratory stage, where it is feasible. Early identification of relevant intrinsic and extrinsic factors could set a good foundation for planning confirmatory MRCTs.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5Figure 1. Illustrations of clinical drug development workflow across regions for drug submission and regulatory review in independent and global strategiesIt may be plausible and efficient for an MRCT to be the single pivotal trial to support regulatory submission, and if this is the case, the MRCT should be designed to provide sufficient and robust evidence to support approval.In summary, strategic use of MRCTs, properly designed and executed according to this guidance, can increase efficiency of drug development, allow for exploration of the treatment effect to diverse populations, and enable simultaneous submission of marketing authorization applications and regulatory decision-making in multiple regions. Therefore, MRCTs may generally become the preferred option for investigating a new drug for which regulatory submission is planned in multiple regions.2. Good Clinical Practice Standards and MRCTs (2.1.2)All sites participating in MRCTs should meet applicable quality, ethical, and regulatory standards. Specifically, MRCTs should be conducted in compliance with ICH E6 good clinical practice (GCP) standards in all regions and sites, including making sites available for GCP inspections by regulatory authorities. Monitoring plans and other quality checks should be prespecified and implemented to address potential risks to subject rights, safety and well-being,*: Marketing Authorization Application/New Drug Application**: Could be parallel single region trials or MRCTsContains Nonbinding Recommendations6and the reliability of study results. Centralized and risk-based monitoring may be particularly useful for MRCTs to monitor and mitigate the impact of emerging regional differences in, for example, trial subject retention or adverse event reporting (ICH E6). Timely and accurate flow of information should occur between the sponsor, the trial management team, and the participating sites.3. Scientific Consultation Meetings With Regulatory Authorities (2.1.3)Sponsors of MRCTs are encouraged to have scientific consultation meetings with relevant regulatory authorities. These interactions should take place during the planning stage of MRCTs to discuss the regulatory requirements for the overall development plan and the acceptability of MRCT data to support marketing authorization. Conducting such consultation meetings early in the planning stage of MRCTs will enable the comments received from regulatory authorities to be taken into consideration. The sponsor should prepare the protocol and other relevant documents, and it may be beneficial to include information about which authorities are providing regulatory advice, and how that advice is being taken into consideration. Consultation with authorities may happen at various stages, affecting different aspects of protocol development. Inter-authority scientific discussions are encouraged to allow for harmonization of study requirements.B. Clinical Trial Design and Protocol-Related Issues (2.2)1. Preconsideration of Regional Variability and Its Potential Impact on Efficacy and Safety (2.2.1)At the planning stage, regional variability, the extent to which it can be explained by intrinsic and extrinsic factors, and its potential to influence the study results should be carefully considered in determining the role MRCTs can play in the drug development strategy. To facilitate taking into consideration differences among regions in intrinsic and extrinsic factors, we recommend that investigators and experts representing participating regions be consulted in the planning and design of MRCTs.The most current and relevant data should be used to understand the potential sources of regional variability (e.g., early trials, previous experience of the drug class). If historical data are used, the sponsor should consider whether these data are still relevant in terms of scientific and methodological validity and in the current treatment context. The magnitude of such variability could be examined in exploratory studies before the planning and design of confirmatory MRCTs.The intrinsic and extrinsic factors important to the drug development program should be identified during the planning stage of an MRCT, and information about these factors should be collected during the confirmatory trial for later evaluation of their impact on treatment effects. The ICH E5 guidance describes intrinsic and extrinsic factors that may affect the treatment effect. In the MRCT setting, the following factors are particularly important and should be considered to identify regions that are suspected to show differences in treatment effects compared to the overall trial results.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations71. Disease definitions, methods of diagnosis, and the understanding of certain endpoints may vary between regions. These differences could be mitigated by precisely defining inclusion and exclusion criteria as well as study procedures.2. There may be differences in medical practices and treatments across regions. Such differences may have an impact on the trial results and/or their interpretation. Standardized protocol and training for investigators and study personnel in each region before initiating the trial in that region may reduce some of the impact of this variability.3. Diet, environmental factors, cultural or socioeconomic factors (e.g., contraceptive use, preferences for a particular route of administration), and access to health care may have an impact on trial results. They may also have an impact on recruitment, compliance, and study subject retention, and may inform relevant mitigation strategies.4. Subjects’ responses to different drugs may be more or less sensitive to intrinsic factors, leading to regional variability. For example, genetic polymorphisms in drug metabolism or receptor sensitivity (described in ICH E5, Appendix D) or body weight and age may have an impact on pharmacokinetics-pharmacodynamics, as well as efficacy and safety of the drug. This impact applies not only to the investigational drug but also to comparators and concomitant medications and should be taken into account during planning of MRCTs.Some sensitivity of the treatment effect to intrinsic and/or extrinsic factors may be expected in different regions, but should not preclude consideration of MRCTs. Often, the degree of variability based on the factors mentioned above can be mitigated by proper design and execution of MRCTs. Providing additional support as needed (e.g., logistical, infrastructure, laboratory) for specific regions or other mitigation strategies should be considered and implemented to reduce variability. However, it is important to consider whether the degree of mitigation may have an impact on the generalizability of the study results.Even with the mitigation strategies described above, regional differences may still exist, and these differences are usually because of underlying intrinsic and extrinsic factors. In this sense, region is an indicator for other, often unknown (or unanticipated) factors causing regional differences in treatment effects. For this reason, MRCTs are usually stratified by region (see section II.B.5 (2.2.5)). Figure 2 illustrates the way in which intrinsic and/or extrinsic factors such as disease severity (Figure 2a) or ethnicity (Figure 2b) may manifest as regional differences in treatment response. However, these factors may explain such apparent differences across regions. In Figure 2a, response to treatment increases with disease severity, and disease severity differs by region. This scenario is manifested by observed regional differences in response to treatment that are explained by differences in the distribution of the underlying factor (disease severity) among regions. The same phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 2b, where regional differences in response to treatment can be explained by differences in the ethnic distribution of the regions. This type of investigation is dependent on appropriate stratification and sample size allocation to regions (see section II.B.5 (2.2.5)).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8Figure 2. Illustration: primary endpoint modulated by intrinsic and extrinsic factors across regions; (2a) by severity of disease, (2b) by ethnic group.2. Subject Selection (2.2.2)In MRCTs, subject selection should be carefully considered to better understand and possibly mitigate potential sources of regional variability and their impact on trial results. Clear and specific inclusion and exclusion criteria that are acceptable and can be applied across regions should be included in the protocol.To harmonize subject selection, uniform classification and criteria for diagnosis of the disease or definition of the at-risk population should be implemented, such as the use of relevant guidelines for disease definitions. When diagnostic tools (e.g., biochemical testing, genetic testing) are needed for the selection of subjects, these tools should be clearly specified including the degree to which local validated tools and qualified laboratories may be used. In particular, when subject selection is based on subjective criteria (e.g., use of symptom scales in rheumatoid arthritis), the same methods (e.g., validated symptom scales and/or scores in the appropriate language) should be used uniformly across regions. Even so, reporting of symptoms may vary by region and may lead to differences in the types of subjects included in the studies. This aspect should be considered in the planning stage to implement training requirements and other strategies for potential mitigation of the impact.Recommended tools, such as validated imaging instruments and measurements of biomarkers, should be available or made available in all regions when these tools are used for subject selection. Imaging methods, as well as methods for specimen collection, handling, and storage, should be clearly defined and standardized across regions to the degree required.3. Selection of Doses for Use in Confirmatory MRCTs (2.2.3)It is important to execute well-planned early development programs that include pharmacokinetic (PK) and/or pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PK-PD) studies of applicable parameters to identify regional differences that may have an impact on dose selection. To understand the impact of ethnicity on pharmacokinetics and/or pharmacokinetics-Contains Nonbinding Recommendations9pharmacodynamics, data may be obtained from single-region trials in multiple regions or from a trial with multiple ethnicities conducted in one region. Alternatively, early phase MRCTs may be considered if they aid in efficiently gathering such data and improve the understanding of regional differences in pharmacokinetics-pharmacodynamics.PK studies should be conducted in the major ethnic groups most relevant to the regions to be included in MRCTs, if differences are expected that are not yet adequately understood (see ICH E5). Adequate PK comparisons between subpopulations known to be associated with differences in pharmacokinetics will allow for decisions with respect to the need for pharmacodynamic studies and dose-response studies in different regions and/or subpopulations.We encourage sponsors to collect genetic data (e.g., genotypes of drug metabolizing enzymes) from subjects enrolled in the early studies to examine the effects of genetic factors on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Such early data may provide useful information when determining dosing regimen or regimens for future studies in which subjects with specific genotypes may be considered a subpopulation.A strategy for dose-selection involving population PK approaches and/or model-based approaches (e.g., exposure-response models) may be useful to identify important factors affecting drug responses in different populations, and to set an appropriate dose range for further dose-response studies. Dose-response studies should cover a broad range of doses and generally include the populations to be enrolled in confirmatory MRCTs. However, it may not be necessary to obtain PK-PD or dose-response data from subjects in all regions planned to be included in confirmatory MRCTs, if important regional differences in pharmacokinetics and/or pharmacodynamics and dose-response are not anticipated (e.g., response to the drug is unlikely to be sensitive to intrinsic and extrinsic factors) (see ICH E5, Appendix D).The acceptability of dose-selection strategies should be discussed with the relevant regulatory authorities in advance. If substantial differences are anticipated (e.g., the drug response is sensitive to intrinsic and/or extrinsic factors), further investigations may be needed. These could include a PK-PD or dose-response study conducted in a particular ethnic population or studies conducted for a broader population that would allow further evaluation of the impact of intrinsic and extrinsic factors on dose-response.The dose regimens in confirmatory MRCTs (based on data from studies mentioned above) should, in principle, be the same in all participating ethnic populations. However, if earlier trial data show a clear difference in dose-response and/or exposure-response relationships for an ethnic population, it may be appropriate to use a different dosing regimen, provided that the regimen is expected to produce similar therapeutic effects with an acceptable safety margin, and provided it is scientifically justified in the study protocol. Prospective careful planning of assessment strategies for which different doses are used should be tailored to each case and described in the analysis plans.4. Choice of Endpoints (2.2.4)The general principles for endpoint selection and definitions that are provided in ICH E9 apply.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations10The aspects of particular importance to MRCTs are described in the following subsections.Primary EndpointThe primary endpoint should be relevant to the target population. In MRCTs, this relevance should be considered for all regions in the trial and with respect to the various drug, disease, and population characteristics represented in those regions (see section II.B.1 (2.2.1)). An ideal clinical trial endpoint is one that is clinically relevant, accepted in medical practice (e.g., by regulatory guidance or professional society guidelines), and sufficiently sensitive and specific to detect the anticipated effect of the treatment. For MRCTs, the primary endpoint, whether efficacy or safety, should satisfy these criteria, as well as be acceptable to all concerned regulatory authorities, to ensure that interpretation of the success or failure of the MRCT is consistent across regions and among regulatory authorities. Agreement on the primary endpoint ensures that the overall sample size and power can be determined for a single (primary) endpoint based on the overall population and also agreed upon by the regulatory authorities. If agreement cannot be reached because of well-justified scientific or regulatory reasons, a single protocol should be developed with endpoint-related subsections tailored to meet the respective requirements of the regulatory authorities. In this case, because regulatory approvals are based on different primary endpoints by different authorities, no multiplicity adjustment is needed for regulatory decision-making.Using MRCTs may introduce the need for further consideration regarding the definition of the primary endpoint. Although endpoints like mortality or other directly measurable outcomes are self-explanatory, other endpoints may require precise and uniform definitions (e.g., progression-free survival). Of specific concern in MRCTs are those endpoints that could be understood and/or measured differently across regions. Examples are hospitalization, psychometric scales, assessment of quality of life, and pain scales. To guarantee that such scales can be properly interpreted, the scales should be validated and their applicability to all relevant regions justified before starting the MRCT.The primary endpoint of MRCTs should be one for which experience is already available in the participating regions. In cases where prior experience with an endpoint only exists in one or a subset of regions involved in the MRCT, its adoption as primary endpoint will require discussion and agreement with regulatory authorities regarding the basis for the evidence, keeping in mind that the forthcoming trial can add information about clinical relevance of the agreed-upon endpoint.In addition to endpoint selection and definition, regulatory agreement should also be obtained on the timing and methods of the primary endpoint assessment.Secondary EndpointsWhen possible, harmonization of secondary endpoints is encouraged to maintain the feasibility and improve the quality of trial conduct. However, in some cases, individual regulatory authorities may propose different secondary endpoints relevant to their interests and experience. Even in such cases, all secondary endpoints, including those selected only for a particular local stakeholder (e.g., regulatory authority), should be described in the protocol. It is in the interestContains Nonbinding Recommendations11of the sponsor to describe the specific advantages of the investigational drug, in terms of secondary endpoints, as precisely as possible during the planning stage of MRCTs to reduce the need for (and impact of) multiplicity adjustments for multiple endpoints, thereby improving the chance for successfully demonstrating the intended effect.Other ConsiderationsAlthough endpoints may not require formal validation, some endpoints may be subject to subtle differences in understanding when used in different cultural settings. For example, certain types of adverse events may be more sensitively reported (e.g., more or less frequently) in some regions than others, resulting in differences in reporting patterns because of cultural variation rather than true differences in incidence. Use of these variables as endpoints in MRCTs will require careful planning. Approaches to minimize the impact of this variation in data collection and interpretation of the trial results should be described and justified in the study protocol.Endpoints that are only of interest to one or a few regions could be considered for a regional subtrial of the MRCT. However, sponsors should take care to ensure that ascertainment of regional subtrial endpoints do not hamper the conduct of the main trial. In particular, they should consider the impact of additional burden to study subjects and study personnel, and the potential to induce reporting bias with respect to other endpoints, in determining whether regional subtrials can be conducted or whether a separate trial is needed.5. Sample-Size Planning (2.2.5)General ConsiderationsThe key consideration for sample-size planning is ensuring sufficient sample size to be able to evaluate the overall treatment effect, assuming that the treatment effect applies to the entire target population, particularly to the regions included in the trial. MRCTs offer a unique opportunity to evaluate the extent to which this assumption holds true. MRCTs are usually stratified by region for both randomization and analysis. Consistency of treatment effects across regions is evaluated, and if clinically relevant differences are observed, there should be further exploration to determine whether these differences can be attributed to differences in intrinsic or extrinsic factors (see section II.B.7 (2.2.7)). These considerations should be reflected in the overall design of the MRCT and will influence the sample-size planning and allocation to regions.Overall Sample SizeThe primary objective of an MRCT generally corresponds to an evaluation (estimation and testing) of the treatment effect averaged across all subjects in all regions of the MRCT. The overall sample size is determined to ensure that this objective can be met. Examples of commonly defined treatment effects also used in MRCTs are hazard ratios for morbidity or mortality, differences between treatment groups in average blood pressure levels (adjusted for baseline), and relative risks of either favorable or adverse events.The same general principles provided in ICH E9 for determining sample sizes of clinical trialsContains Nonbinding Recommendations12apply to MRCTs. Two additional factors are particularly important in the MRCT setting: (1) the size of the treatment effect that is considered clinically relevant to all regions in the trial, and (2) the expected variability of the primary outcome variables based on combining data across regions. These factors may result in a sample-size increase for an MRCT compared to a single trial in one region. The extent of this increase will depend on the specific disease and the mechanism of action of the drug, as well as the intrinsic and extrinsic factors and their potential impact on drug response in each region. Data from early exploratory trials with the investigational drug in relevant populations may inform sample-size determination.Sample-Size Allocation to RegionsThe MRCT should be planned to include an evaluation of the consistency of treatment effects among regions, when consistency is defined as a lack of clinically relevant differences. If clinically relevant differences among regions are observed, then the MRCT provides a unique opportunity for additional learning about the factors that may explain these differences. Regional allocation should have a scientific basis (rather than arbitrary targets), support the evaluation of consistency, and provide the information needed to support regulatory decisions.Sample-size allocation to regions should consider patterns of disease prevalence across regions, the size and expected accrual rate of each region, the intrinsic and extrinsic factors understood (or hypothesized) to influence treatment effects, the prevalence of those factors in each region, and other logistical considerations thought to have an impact on accrual. A regional allocation strategy that balances these considerations will help to ensure that enrollment can be completed in a timely fashion and that the MRCT objectives are met.There is no uniformly acceptable or optimal approach to sample-size allocation in an MRCT. Some approaches currently in use include:1. Proportional Allocation: Allocation of subjects to regions in proportion to size of region and disease prevalence.2. Equal Allocation: Allocation of equal numbers of subjects to each region.3. Preservation of Effect: Allocation of subjects to one or more regions based on preserving some specified proportion of the overall treatment effect.4. Local Significance: Allocation of a sufficient number of subjects to be able to achieve significant results within each region.5. Fixed Minimum Number: Allocation of a fixed minimum number of subjects to a region.Proportional allocation facilitates recruitment by allocating subjects to the regions with the greatest disease burden and, absent other impediments, will generally minimize the time needed to complete enrollment. The disadvantage is that some regions may end up with too few or no subjects, while other regions may dominate the outcome of the trial. Equal allocation has the advantage of optimizing the power available to detect differences in treatment effects betweenContains Nonbinding Recommendations13regions for a given overall sample-size target. The disadvantage is that recruitment may be slowed to a possibly unacceptable level, particularly if disease prevalence or ease of recruitment varies substantially among the regions in the MRCT. A balance between proportional and equal allocation is recommended to ensure that recruitment is feasible and able to be completed in a timely fashion, but also to provide sufficient information to evaluate the drug in its regional context.Allocation to preserve a proportion of the overall effect is not practical if many regions in the trial have this requirement. Allocation based on achieving local significance of regional treatment effects is also not practical, because this strategy may inflate the sample size beyond feasibility and brings into question the concept of conducting an MRCT. Allocating a fixed-minimum sample size for regions is not recommended, if there is no scientific justification for selecting the minimum.In practice, sample-size allocation deliberations will reflect both scientific and logistical considerations. For example, an initial allocation may be determined that targets the population affected by the disease, taking disease prevalence and regional size into account. This initial allocation should ensure that the overall sample size can be achieved. The allocation would then be modified to reduce any large imbalances in regional sample sizes and to support an evaluation of consistency of treatment effects across regions. This modification could entail pooling some regions (as described below) to provide flexibility in sample-size allocation. Minimum regional sample-size targets that are scientifically justified could also be considered at this step. One example would be to specify a minimum sample size to provide meaningful descriptive summaries (e.g., forest plots) with sufficient accuracy and precision.Alternatively, an equal allocation to regions could be planned as the first step, with modification to better reflect regional sample sizes, disease prevalence, and trial logistics at the second step. With either strategy, care should be taken to ensure that no single region or regions dominate enrollment, thereby dominating the trial outcome.The five approaches discussed above are not exhaustive. New approaches for sample-size allocation in MRCTs may be developed in the future, and innovation in this area is encouraged.Pooled Regions and Pooled SubpopulationsPrespecified pooling of regions or subpopulations may help provide flexibility in sample size allocation to regions, facilitate the assessment of consistency in treatment effects across regions, and support regulatory decision-making. For definitions of pooled regions and pooled subpopulations, see 3. Glossary. The pooling strategy should be justified based on the distribution of the intrinsic and extrinsic factors known to affect the treatment response, and the disease under investigation and similarity of those factors across regions. For example, pooling Canada and the United States into a North American region is often justified because of similar medical practices and similar use of concomitant medications. Pooling strategies should be specified in the study protocol and statistical analysis plan, if applicable.As discussed earlier, region is often a surrogate for the underlying intrinsic and extrinsic factorsContains Nonbinding Recommendations14that tend to differentiate regions or populations from each other. If there is sufficient knowledge about these factors at the trial design stage, it may be possible to define subpopulations based on those factors, and then incorporate these newly defined subpopulations in the stratification and analysis, in addition to region. Formally, the term pooled subpopulation refers to pooling of a subset of the subjects from one region with similarly defined subsets from other regions whose members share one or more intrinsic or extrinsic factors important for the drug development program.Ethnicity usually crosses regional boundaries and can be an important risk factor for the disease or related to treatment response (as the example in Section 2.2.1. Figure 2b illustrates). Pooling ethnic subpopulations across regions in an MRCT provides an opportunity to evaluate the impact of ethnicity on treatment effects. Examples include Hispanics living in North and South America, or Caucasians living in Europe and North America. Pooling across regional boundaries by other intrinsic or extrinsic factors may also be considered (e.g., by genotype).The sample size allocation should consider the planned analysis of variability of treatment effect among pooled subpopulations, and the principles described above for allocation to regions may also apply to pooled subpopulations. Note that information about the extrinsic and intrinsic factors used to define pooling strategies should be collected for subjects enrolled in the trial to be able to monitor the recruitment strategy and ensure adequate regional and subpopulation representation.Other Sample Size ConsiderationsThe factors that influence sample size and sample size allocation should be agreed upon in advance with the different regulatory agencies governing the regions represented in the trial. For non-inferiority or equivalence trials, regulatory agreement is also needed on the relevant margin. If, after extensive attempts to reach consensus among regulatory authorities, it is the case that different regulatory requirements remain due to well-described scientific arguments, the most stringent margin should be considered for sample size calculation.There are some situations that do not fit into the framework for sample size allocation described above and where more flexibility will be required. In studies of rare diseases or an infectious disease outbreak, for example, disease prevalence may differ substantially between regions, and it may be necessary to allow one or more regions to dominate the trial for recruitment to be feasible. The recruitment strategy should be discussed with the regulatory authorities during planning.In summary, comparing with sample size requirements in regional or local studies, the potential increase of the overall sample size in MRCTs should be due primarily to the increased variability anticipated for a multiregional population and not due to overly stringent or arbitrary regional sample size requirements. The use of a well-justified and prespecified strategy for pooling regions and/or subpopulations in conjunction with a carefully thought out sample allocation plan can facilitate meeting the objectives of the MRCT.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations156. Collecting and Handling Efficacy and Safety Information (2.2.6)Adherence to GCP, as described in ICH E6, is critical for any clinical trial to meet its stated objectives and is particularly important in an MRCT, because of the coordination required to conduct a trial in diverse geographic regions. Methods of collecting and handling efficacy and safety information should be standardized across participating regions. It is also important to provide standardized training for investigators and study personnel in each region before initiating the trial in that region to ensure that the trial objectives are met through standardized implementation of the study protocol.Safety reporting should be conducted in accordance with ICH E2. When local regulations specify different requirements, such as timelines and criteria for expedited reporting, these regulations should also be adhered to locally. The specific time frame for safety reporting should be described in the protocol, and the investigators should receive sufficient training in accordance with ICH E6 and other relevant guidelines. In the case of MRCTs, important safety information should be handled with adherence to any local regulations and adherence to ICH E2A. Important safety information should always be provided to the relevant stakeholders (e.g., investigators, ethics committees) in a timely manner.In MRCTs of long duration, when special concerns (e.g., serious adverse events) have been identified and/or when operational regions are quite large (usually phase 3 confirmatory studies), the use of a central independent data monitoring committee (with representation from participating regions to adequately assess the context of the trial) should be considered to monitor the accumulating efficacy and/or safety information from the MRCT while maintaining integrity of the ongoing trial. If adjudication of endpoints and/or events is planned, a centralized assessment by a single adjudication committee should be considered.For endpoints based on laboratory or imaging assessments, it is generally recommended that a centralized laboratory or centralized adjudication of imaging be used. If multiple laboratories are used, appropriate cross-validation of methods between laboratories should be conducted before testing clinical samples.Coordinated site initiation is particularly important in MRCTs to ensure proper conduct, completion, and reporting of results without any delays among regions. To comply with the quality management described in ICH E6, the sponsor should implement a system to manage quality in design, conduct, oversight, recording, evaluation, reporting, and archiving of MRCTs. In this aspect, centralized and risk-based monitoring may be particularly useful for MRCTs to identify variability across regions and sites in protocol compliance (e.g., differences in follow-up, compliance with study medications, adverse event reporting and/or extent of missing data). Mitigation approaches should take regional variations into consideration. Using electronic data capturing and reporting could also be considered to gather information and data (including relevant intrinsic and extrinsic factors) from all regions in a standardized way without delays. If trial-related documents (e.g., a case report form) are translated to local languages, consistency of documents between languages should be ensured (e.g., by reverse translation). As described above, careful attention to quality during trial planning, investigator training, and trial monitoring will help achieve the consistently high trial quality required for a successful MRCT.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations167. Statistical Analysis Planning (2.2.7)ICH E9 provides general statistical principles for planning and conducting statistical analyses of randomized clinical trials. Aspects of analysis planning that are particularly important for MRCTs are described below. The analysis strategy should be planned to enable the qualitative and/or quantitative evaluation of benefit/risk (ICH M4E) across regions or important subpopulations represented in the MRCT.Obtaining Regulatory Input on Analysis StrategyIt is recommended that the sponsor have early discussions with the regulatory authorities involved in the MRCT, and that the sponsor obtain the authorities’ agreement on the proposed analysis strategy. The standard is to specify a single primary analysis approach in the statistical section of the study protocol to be agreed upon with the authorities in advance of initiating the trial. If in an MRCT, regulatory requirements for the primary analysis strategy differ because of well-justified scientific or regulatory reasons, the analysis strategies planned to satisfy the different requirements should be described in the study protocol. If, in addition, a statistical analysis plan is required as a separate document by more than one regulatory authority, a single analysis plan integrating the different regulatory requirements should be developed. The analysis strategy for an MRCT should be finalized before unblinding of treatment assignments, if applicable, to ensure trial integrity.Primary AnalysisIn planning an MRCT, the primary analysis strategy should carefully consider: (1) the target population, (2) the endpoints/variables of primary interest, (3) the relevant intrinsic and extrinsic factors in the multiregional, multi-subpopulation context, and (4) the population-level summary of data required to describe the treatment effect. For most MRCTs, the primary analysis will correspond to a test of the hypothesis about the treatment effect and the estimation of that effect, considering data from all regions and subpopulations included in the trial.If randomization is stratified by region, the primary analysis should adjust for regions using appropriate statistical methods. If some regions were pooled based on intrinsic and/or extrinsic factors, or if pooled subpopulations were defined for stratification purposes during trial planning, then this pooling should be reflected in the analysis.Examination of Consistency Across Regions and SubpopulationsThe statistical analysis strategy should include the evaluation of the consistency of treatment effects across regions and subpopulations. For this purpose, consistency in treatment effects is defined as a lack of clinically relevant differences between treatment effects in different regions or subpopulations. Various analytical approaches to this evaluation (possibly used in combination) include, but are not limited to: (1) descriptive summaries; (2) graphical displays (e.g., forest plots); (3) model-based estimation, including covariate-adjusted analysis; and (4) test of treatment-by-region interaction. There are strengths and limitations to any method (e.g., interaction tests often have very low power), and these strengths and limitations should beContains Nonbinding Recommendations17carefully considered during analysis planning.If clinically relevant differences in treatment effects among regions are observed, a structured exploration of these differences should be planned. The exploration could proceed in the following steps:1. Factors known a priori to vary among regions and hypothesized to be prognostic or predictive should be planned for and evaluated in the analysis model. Examples of intrinsic and extrinsic factors likely to be prognostic include disease severity, race, other subject characteristics (e.g., smoking status, body mass index), medical practice/therapeutic approach (e.g., different doses of concomitant medications used in clinical practice), or genetic factors (e.g., polymorphisms in drug metabolising enzymes) that are well-established for the disease or therapy and suggested from early stages of investigation.2. Even with careful planning, unexpected regional differences may be observed, and post-hoc analyses should be used for further investigation. Factors known to be prognostic for the disease would be examined first, because they are often found to be predictive of differential treatment effects as well. If the distribution of a prognostic factor is found to differ between regions, then apparent regional differences in treatment effects may be explained by differences in the prognostic factors.3. Regional differences not explained by examination of known factors may require further post-hoc investigation to either identify plausible reasons for the differences or to better understand the observed heterogeneity. In some cases, additional data, including data from other clinical trials, or supportive evidence from other sources, may be needed to understand the regional differences observed.These eventualities should be carefully considered at the planning stage.Planned Subgroup AnalysesIn addition to analyses intended to investigate any regional or pooled subpopulation differences in treatment effects that may be observed in an MRCT, other subgroup analyses will usually also be of interest, just as they are for any clinical trial (e.g., analyses to investigate differential treatment effects by sex and age) and should be planned. If subgroup differences in overall treatment effects are observed, then exploring whether the subgroup differences are consistent across regions or pooled regions may be informative.In summary, the assessment of consistency of treatment effects should be done with diligence to inform regulatory decision-making. The credibility of regional, pooled subpopulation, or subgroup findings should consider biological plausibility, internal consistency (e.g., similar patterns of regional variability observed for other secondary endpoints) and/or external consistency (e.g., similar patterns observed in another clinical trial of the same drug), the strength of evidence, the clinical relevance, and the statistical uncertainty. The more the aforementioned considerations support a potential finding, the greater the likelihood the findingContains Nonbinding Recommendations18is not false. The evaluation of consistency will benefit from joint clinical and statistical perspectives.Estimation of Regional Treatment EffectsThe statistical analysis section of the protocol should describe appropriate statistical methods for estimating and reporting treatment effects and measures of their uncertainty for individual regions. This plan should include a determination of the adequacy of sample sizes to support robust estimation within each region or pooled region for which reporting of treatment effect is of interest. If the sample size in a region is so small that the estimates of effect will likely be unreliable, the use of other methods should be considered, including the search for options for additional pooling of regions based on commonalities, or borrowing information from other regions or pooled regions using an appropriate statistical model. Covariate adjusted models may be especially important in this setting as a way to account for intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Methods using weighted averages of the overall effect estimate and the estimate using data from individual regions (shrinkage estimates) may be considered, particularly when regional sample sizes are small and outlying values may be overly influential. The choice of model should reflect an understanding of how intrinsic/extrinsic factors affect the regional estimates and should be based on appropriate statistical methods. Sensitivity analyses should be planned that vary the assumptions required for the model.Impact of Trial Quality on AnalysisDifferences in trial conduct across regions can negatively have an impact on the power to detect an overall treatment effect, as well as the ability to examine consistency of treatment effects at the analysis stage. Important factors having an impact on the quality of the trial, such as follow-up of study subjects, should be managed consistently across regions, and issues identified during the trial should be corrected as early as possible.During the conduct of an MRCT, trial monitoring and blinded data review may uncover various issues that require modifications be made to the analysis plan for the trial. For example, for better assessment, it might be necessary in an MRCT to modify pooling strategies for regions or subpopulations, which were carefully defined during trial planning, after sufficient data have been accumulated on the baseline characteristics (e.g., intrinsic and extrinsic factors) of the multiregional population. However, such changes should be justified, discussed with the relevant regulatory authorities, and carried out in a way that preserves trial integrity.8. Selection of Comparators (2.2.8)The choice of control groups should be considered in the context of the available standard therapies, the adequacy of the evidence to support the chosen design, and ethical considerations. The selection of comparators should be discussed and agreed upon with the relevant regulatory authorities. Comparators in MRCTs should, in principle, be the same in all participating regions. Because of the complexity in setting up MRCTs, some key points are addressed in the following paragraphs, focusing on practical and ethical issues associated with the use of comparators:Contains Nonbinding Recommendations19• The choice of comparators should be justified in the study protocol based on scientific and other relevant information, including international treatment guidelines.• Active controls should, in principle, be dosed and administered in the same way in all regions. If the approved dosing regimen of active comparators are different among regions, the proposed study dosing regimen should be justified by available data, and the justification should be included in the study protocol. Additionally, the impact of such a dosage difference on analysis and evaluation of MRCT data should be considered in the planning stage.• The same dosage form (e.g., liquid drugs versus tablets) for active comparators should generally be used among regions participating in MRCTs to ensure consistency of treatment effects and data interpretability. Different dosage forms could be used if the dissolution profiles and bioavailability are well characterized, and differences are negligible.• To ensure the consistent quality of the active comparators, it is recommended that the same source be used in all participating regions. When active comparators from different sources are used in MRCTs, justification should be provided (e.g., in form of Certification of Analysis or report from the manufacturer on equivalence or dissolution studies) to ensure that the comparator has the same quality in all participating regions.• It is recommended that the most comprehensive product information in a region be used consistently in all participating regions. If the product information differs from local product information (e.g., differences in the warnings, adverse reactions), this difference should be explained in the local informed consent form.• If different drugs in the same or similar drug class are proposed to be used as active comparators, justification should be provided in the protocol based on available scientific evidence.The above considerations may also be applicable in cases where comparators are selected based on investigator’s choice of local standard care.Active comparators in MRCTs should ideally be approved in all participating regions. However, there could be situations where active comparators used in MRCTs are not approved or not available in specific regions, but have been approved and available in some ICH regions. The justification (including safety considerations) for the use of an unapproved drug should therefore be described in the protocol based on scientific information, treatment guidelines, and other relevant documents. Development status (e.g., no plan for development, under development, under regulatory review) of the unapproved drug in the region should also be described in the protocol. Plans for post-study treatment, including continued access to unapproved comparator, should be considered and provided to the patient in the informed consent.9. Handling Concomitant Medications (2.2.9)Contains Nonbinding Recommendations20In general, drugs used concomitantly with the investigational drug should be the same throughout the regions to the extent possible, but there may be some differences in the drugs and/or doses actually used because of variations in medical practices. This difference could be acceptable if not expected to substantially have an impact on trial results. The clinical trial protocol should specify allowable and not allowable concomitant medications and doses.Concomitant medications may be required in the protocol as an important part of the treatment. In circumstances where approved drugs are combined with an investigational drug (e.g., a combination regimen of anticancer drugs), the same dosage regimen in all regions should generally be applied. If required by protocol, concomitant medications that are not approved in a region should have their use justified based on scientific information, treatment guidelines, and other relevant documents. This justification could include documentation that the concomitant medication is approved in at least one of the ICH regions. It should generally be allowed to use an unapproved concomitant medication; however, the impact of using the unapproved concomitant medication in the relevant regions should be discussed with regulatory authorities and described in the protocol. The medication will need to be supplied in regions in which it is otherwise not available or only available in a different strength and/or dosage form, or in regions that cannot secure continuous supply during the course of the trial.Regional differences in the use and dosing of concomitant medications that may have an impact on drug responses should be considered in advance, and these medications, including changes in doses, should be documented during the trial. The previous considerations may also be applicable to concomitant therapy other than medications (e.g., compression stockings in the post-operative setting, medical devices).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations21III. GLOSSARYConsistency of treatment effect: A lack of clinically relevant differences between treatment effects in different regions or subpopulations of an MRCT.Multiregional Clinical Trial, MRCT: A clinical trial conducted in more than one region under a single protocol.Region: A geographical region, country, or regulatory region.Regulatory Region: A region comprised of countries for which a common set of regulatory requirements applies for drug approval (e.g., European Union).Pooled regions: Pooling some geographical regions, countries, or regulatory regions at the planning stage, if subjects in those regions are thought to be similar enough with respect to intrinsic and/or extrinsic factors relevant to the disease and/or drug under study.Pooled subpopulations: Pooling a subset of the subjects from a particular region with similarly defined subsets from other regions whose members share one or more intrinsic or extrinsic factors important for the drug development program at the planning stage. Pooled subpopulations are assumed to be ethnicity-related subgroups and are particularly important in the MRCT setting.



Non-Inferiority Clinical Trials to Establish EffectivenessGuidance for IndustryU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)November 2016Clinical/MedicalNon-Inferiority Clinical Trials to Establish EffectivenessGuidance for IndustryAdditional copies are available from:Office of Communications, Division of Drug InformationCenter for Drug Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 4th FloorSilver Spring, MD 20993-0002Phone: 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400; Fax: 301-431-6353Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.govhttp://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htmand/orOffice of Communication, Outreach and DevelopmentCenter for Biologics Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration10903 New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 71, Room 3128Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002Phone: 800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010Email: ocod@fda.hhs.govhttp://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htmU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)November 2016Clinical/MedicalContains Nonbinding RecommendationsTABLE OF CONTENTSI. INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1II. BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................... 2III. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR NON-INFERIORITY STUDIES ................. 3A. The Non-Inferiority Hypothesis .................................................................................................... 3B. Reasons for Using a Non-Inferiority Design ................................................................................ 7C. The Non-Inferiority Margin .......................................................................................................... 8D. Assay Sensitivity ........................................................................................................................... 11E. Statistical Inference ..................................................................................................................... 14F. Regulatory Conclusions ............................................................................................................... 15G. Alternative Designs ...................................................................................................................... 16H. Number of Studies Needed .......................................................................................................... 17I. Choice of Active Control ............................................................................................................. 18IV. CHOOSING THE NON-INFERIORITY MARGIN AND TESTING THE NON-INFERIORITY HYPOTHESIS .................................................................................... 19A. Introduction .................................................................................................................................. 19B. Statistical Uncertainties and Quantification of the Active Control Effect .............................. 20C. Fixed Margin and Synthesis Methods ........................................................................................ 27D. Considerations for Selecting the Clinical Margin (M2) ............................................................ 30E. Estimating the Sample Size ......................................................................................................... 30F. Study Quality and Choice of Analysis Population .................................................................... 31G. Testing Non-Inferiority and Superiority in a Single Trial ....................................................... 31V. FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS AND GENERAL GUIDANCE .................. 32APPENDIX — EXAMPLES ...................................................................................................... 37REFERENCES FOR EXAMPLES ........................................................................................... 48REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................ 51Contains Nonbinding Recommendations1Non-Inferiority Clinical Trials to Establish EffectivenessGuidance for Industry1This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONThis document provides guidance to sponsors and applicants submitting investigational drug applications (INDs), new drug applications (NDAs), biologics licensing applications (BLAs), or supplemental applications on the appropriate use of non-inferiority (NI) study designs to provide evidence of the effectiveness of a drug or biologic, usually because a superiority study design (drug versus placebo, dose response, or superiority to an active drug) cannot be used.2 The guidance gives advice on when NI studies intended to demonstrate effectiveness of an investigational drug can provide interpretable results, how to choose the NI margin, and how to test the NI hypothesis.This guidance does not provide recommendations for the use of NI study designs to evaluate the safety of a drug.In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidance documents describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in FDA guidance documents means suggested or recommended, but not required.This guidance finalizes the draft guidance for industry, Non-Inferiority Clinical Trials, published in 2010. In addition, it supersedes the guidance for industry, Antibacterial Drug Products: Use of Noninferiority Trials to Support Approval, also published in 2010, which will be withdrawn.1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Biostatistics and the Office of New Drugs in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) and the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) at the Food and Drug Administration.2 For the purposes of this guidance, all references to drugs include both human drugs and therapeutic biologic products unless otherwise specified. While most concepts discussed will be broadly applicable, certain issues related to vaccines, such as the choice of the NI margin when the study endpoint is the level of antibodies, would call for consultation from CBER.2II. BACKGROUNDFDA’s regulations on adequate and well-controlled studies (21 CFR 314.126) describe four kinds of concurrently controlled trials that provide evidence of effectiveness. Three of them — placebo, no treatment, and dose-response controlled trials — are superiority trials that seek to show that a test drug is superior to the control (placebo, no treatment, or a lower dose of the test drug). The fourth kind, comparison with an active treatment (active control), can also be a superiority trial, if the intent is to show that the new drug is more effective than the control. More commonly, however, the goal of such studies is to show that the difference between the new and active control treatment is small — small enough to allow the known effectiveness of the active control, based on its performance in past studies and the assumed effectiveness of the active control in the current study, to support the conclusion that the new test drug is also effective. How to design and interpret the results of such studies so that they can support a conclusion about effectiveness of the new drug is challenging.Active controlled trials that are not intended to show superiority of the test drug but rather to show that the new treatment is not inferior to an unacceptable extent were once called clinical equivalence trials. The intent of an NI trial, however, is not to show that the new drug is equivalent, but rather that it is not materially worse than the control. Therefore, the interest is one-sided. The new drug could be better than the control, and therefore at a minimum non-inferior, but it would not be equivalent.The critical difference between superiority and NI trials is that a properly designed and conducted superiority trial, if successful in showing a difference, is entirely interpretable without further assumptions (other than lack of bias) — that is, the result speaks for itself and requires no extra-study information. In contrast, the NI study is dependent on knowing something that is not measured in the study, namely, that the active control had its expected effect in the NI study. When this occurs, the trial is said to have assay sensitivity, defined as the ability to have shown a difference from placebo of a specified size. A “successful” NI trial, one that shows what appears to be an acceptably small difference between treatments, may or may not have had assay sensitivity and therefore may or may not support a conclusion that the test drug was effective. Thus, if the active control had no effect at all in the NI trial (i.e., did not have any of its expected effect), then even ruling out a very small difference between control and test drug is meaningless and provides no evidence that the test drug is effective. (See Section III.D. for further discussion on assay sensitivity.) In the absence of a placebo arm, knowing whether the trial had assay sensitivity relies heavily on external (not within-study) information, giving NI studies some of the characteristics of a historically controlled trial.FDA regulations have recognized since 1985 the critical need to know, for an NI trial to be interpretable, that the active control had its expected effect in the trial. Thus, 21 CFR 314.126(a)(2)(iv), unchanged since 1985, says:If the intent of the trial is to show similarity of the test and control drugs, the report of the study should assess the ability of the study to have detected a difference between treatments. Similarity of test drug and active control can mean either that both drugs were effective or that neither was effective. The analysis of the study should explain why the3drugs should be considered effective in the study, for example, by reference to results in previous placebo-controlled studies of the active control drug.This guidance consists of four parts:• A general discussion of regulatory, study design, scientific, and statistical issues associated with the use of NI studies to establish the effectiveness of a new drug• A focus on some of these issues in more detail, notably the statistical approaches used to determine the NI margin and to test for non-inferiority• Commonly asked questions about NI studies• Four examples of successful and unsuccessful efforts to define NI margins and test for non-inferiority3III. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR NON-INFERIORITY STUDIESA. The Non-Inferiority HypothesisIn a placebo-controlled trial, the null hypothesis (Ho) is that the beneficial response to the test drug (T) is less than or equal to the response to the placebo (P); the alternative hypothesis (Ha) is that the response to the test drug is greater than P. Thus:Ho: T ≤ P; T – P ≤ 0Ha: T > P; T – P > 0In most cases, the test for a treatment effect corresponds to showing that the lower bound of the two-sided 95% confidence interval (equivalent to the lower bound of a one-sided 97.5% confidence interval) for T-P is > 0. This result shows that the effect of the test drug is greater than 0 (see Figure 1).3 References: In this guidance, references to methods or studies are not included in the text; rather they are included in the general references section in the Appendix and are grouped by topic. A separate references section is also provided for the examples in the Appendix.4Figure 1. Possible Results of a Placebo-Controlled Superiority Study(Point Estimate and 95% Confidence Interval (CI))Test – Placebo (T-P)1. Point estimate of effect is 2; 95% CI lower bound is 1. Conclusion: Drug is effective and has an effect of at least 1.2. Point estimate of effect is 2; 95% CI lower bound is <0. Conclusion: Drug is not shown to be effective.3. Point estimate of effect is 0; 95% CI lower bound is well below 0. Conclusion: Drug is not shown to be effective.Although there is no difference in the conclusions of scenarios 2 and 3, the magnitude of the treatment difference and width of the confidence interval in scenario 2 may encourage the conduct of another study (possibly larger) before deciding that the test drug has no effect.In an NI study, the goal is to demonstrate that the test drug has an effect by showing that its effect is sufficiently close to the effect of an active control. There is no placebo arm in the study; therefore, the effect of the active control is not measured in the study but must be assumed. The goal of the study is to show that the effect of the test drug (T) is not inferior to the effect of the active control (C) by a specified amount, called the NI margin, or M.The null and alternative hypotheses correspond to a null hypothesis of inferiority and an alternative hypothesis of non-inferiority, as follows:Ho: C – T ≥ M (T is inferior to the control (C) by M or more)Ha: C – T < M (T is inferior to the control (C) by less than M)5A statistical test of the above hypothesis is provided by comparing the upper bound of the two-sided confidence interval for C-T with the NI margin, M, which is specified in advance. If the upper bound is less than M, non-inferiority of T relative to C is established.One choice for M (the largest possible value) is to set it equal to the entire known effect of the active control relative to placebo, based on past randomized controlled trials. With this choice for M, called M1, and assuming the control drug attains this level of efficacy in the NI study, a finding of non-inferiority means that the test drug has an effect greater than 0 (see Figure 2). A more usual choice is to set M equal to some clinically relevant portion of M1, namely, the portion of the control drug effect it is important to preserve with the test drug, based on clinical judgment.6Figure 2. Possible Results of an NI Study Showing Control Drug–Test Drug Differences(Point Estimate and 95% CI)Control – Test (C-T)1. Point estimate of C-T is 0, suggesting equal effect of C and T; upper bound of the 95% CI for C-T is 1, well below M1; NI is demonstrated.2. Point estimate of C-T favors C; the upper bound of the 95% CI for C-T is >2, above M1; NI is not demonstrated.3. Point estimate of C-T is zero, which suggests an equal effect; but the upper bound of the 95% CI for C-T is >2 (i.e., above M1), so that NI is not demonstrated.4. Point estimate favors T; NI is demonstrated, but superiority is not demonstrated.5. Point estimate favors T; superiority and NI are demonstrated.6. Point estimate of C-T is 1, favoring the control. The upper bound of the 95% CI for C-T is <M1, demonstrating NI (the entire effect of C has not been lost) but at the same time the 95% CI for C-T is above zero, indicating that T is actually inferior to C, even while meeting the NI standard.The determination of M1 is a critical step in designing an NI trial and is often difficult; this determination is therefore a major focus of this guidance. M1 cannot be directly measured in the NI study, because there is no concurrent placebo group. It must be estimated based on the past performance of the active control, preferably in placebo-controlled trials, and then assumed to hold for the NI study based on a comparison of prior test conditions to the current test environment (see section III.D).7The choice of the margin M1 has important practical consequences. The smaller the margin, the lower the upper bound of the 95% two-sided confidence interval for C-T must be, and the larger the sample size needed to establish non-inferiority. Showing that the upper bound of the 95% CI of C-T is less than M1 demonstrates that the test drug has some effect (i.e., an effect > 0). The margin of interest, however, as noted above, is usually smaller than M1 (to show that an adequate portion of the clinical benefit of the control is preserved), in which case it is called M2. The basis for this expectation is described below in section III.C.4.B. Reasons for Using a Non-Inferiority DesignThe usual reason for using an NI active control study design instead of a superiority design is an ethical one. Specifically, this design is chosen when it would not be ethical to use a placebo, or a no-treatment control, or a very low dose of an active drug, because there is an effective treatment that provides an important benefit (e.g., life-saving or preventing irreversible injury) available to patients for the condition to be studied in the trial. Whether a placebo control can be used depends on the nature of the benefits provided by available therapy. The International Conference on Harmonisation guidance E10: Choice of Control Group and Related Issues in Clinical Trials (ICH E10) states:In cases where an available treatment is known to prevent serious harm, such as death or irreversible morbidity in the study population, it is generally inappropriate to use a placebo control. There are occasional exemptions, however, such as cases in which standard therapy has toxicity so severe that many patients have refused to receive it.In other situations, where there is no serious harm, it is generally considered ethical to ask patients to participate in a placebo-controlled trial, even if they may experience discomfort as a result, provided the setting is non-coercive and patients are fully informed about available therapies and the consequences of delaying treatment [ICH E10; pps.13-14].Aside from this ethical reason, there may be other reasons to include an active control, possibly in conjunction with a placebo control, either to compare treatments or to assess assay sensitivity (see section III.D). Caregivers, third party payers, and some regulatory authorities have increasingly placed an emphasis on the comparative effectiveness of treatments, leading to more studies that compare two treatments. Such studies can provide information about the clinical basis for comparative effectiveness claims, which may be helpful in assessing cost effectiveness of treatments. If a placebo group is included in addition to the active comparator, it becomes possible to judge whether the study could have distinguished treatments that differed substantially, e.g., active drug versus placebo. Such comparative effectiveness studies must be distinguished from NI studies, which are the main focus of this document. The word non-inferior is used here in a special sense. The methods described in this document are intended to show that a new treatment that demonstrates non-inferiority is effective, not that it is as effective as the active comparator. A new treatment may meet the standard of effectiveness (that it is superior to placebo) without justifying a conclusion that it is as effective or even nearly as effective as the active comparator.8C. The Non-Inferiority MarginAs described above, the NI study seeks to show that the amount by which the test drug (T) is inferior to the active control (C), C-T, is less than some prespecified NI margin (M). M can be no larger than the presumed entire effect of the active control in the NI study, and the margin based on the entire active control effect is generally referred to as M1. It is critical to recognize that M1 is not measured in the NI trial (in the absence of a placebo arm), but rather is estimated based on past performance of the active control. The effect is assumed to be present in the current study based on a thorough comparison of the characteristics of the current NI study with those of prior studies and assessment of the quality of the NI study. The validity of any conclusion from the NI study depends on the choice of M1 and its relevance to the current NI study. If, for example, the NI margin is chosen as 10, and the study does indeed rule out a difference of 10 (but not a smaller difference), seeming to demonstrate effectiveness of T, but the true effect of C in this study was actually less than 10, then a conclusion that the study demonstrated non-inferiority would have been incorrect. The choice of M1, together with reasonable assurance that this effect occurred in the trial (i.e., the presence of assay sensitivity), is thus critical to obtaining a meaningful, correct answer in an NI study. Because assay sensitivity can never be proven in the absence of a placebo group, historical evidence of assay sensitivity is essential, but measures should be taken to make it likely that the active control will have the presumed effect in the NI study (see section III.A.5). This, together with careful selection of the NI margin, will increase the likelihood of valid and interpretable results.Because the consequence of choosing a margin greater than the actual treatment effect of the active control in the study may be a false conclusion that a new drug is effective, an undesirable public health outcome, there is a powerful tendency to be conservative both in the choice of margin and in the statistical analysis used to rule out a degree of inferiority of the test drug to the active control of more than that margin. This is generally done by ensuring that the upper bound of the 95% two-sided confidence interval for C-T in the NI trial is smaller than M1. Use of this interval corresponds to a one-sided test size (alpha level) of 0.025 in testing the NI hypothesis stated above. The upper bound of the confidence interval for C-T is not, however, the only measurement of interest, just as the lower bound of a 95% confidence interval for the effect of drug versus placebo in a superiority trial is not the only value of relevance. The point estimate of the treatment effect and the width of its confidence interval are also relevant. Nonetheless, the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval is typically used to judge the effectiveness of the test drug in the NI study, just as a two-sided test size (alpha level) of 0.05 is traditionally the standard used for defining success in a superiority trial. The 95% confidence interval upper bound for C-T is used, in conjunction with M1, to provide a reasonably high level of assurance that the test drug does, in fact, have an effect greater than zero (i.e., ruling out loss of all the effect of the active control).Although the NI margin used in a trial can be no larger than the entire assumed effect of the active control in the NI study (M1), it is usual and generally desirable to choose a smaller value, called M2, for the NI margin. Showing non-inferiority to M1 would provide assurance that the test drug had an effect greater than zero, but in many cases that would not be sufficient to conclude that the test drug had a clinically acceptable effect. Recall that the main reason an NI study is conducted is that it is not ethical to include a placebo arm. The active control has a9beneficial effect, and denying that benefit to subjects with a serious illness is not ethical. For the same reason, it would not usually be acceptable for a test drug to lose most of that active control’s effect. It is therefore usual in NI studies to choose a smaller margin (M2) that reflects the largest loss of effect that would be clinically acceptable. This can be described as an absolute difference in effect (typical of antibiotic trials) or as a fraction of the risk reduction provided by the control (typical in cardiovascular outcome trials). Note that a larger value for M2 may be justified clinically, if the test drug were shown to have some important advantage (e.g., on safety or on a secondary endpoint).Concern has been expressed that use of M2 represents an FDA “comparative effectiveness” standard that is not included in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. In explaining the role of relative effectiveness under law in April 1995, President Clinton and Vice President Gore (“Reinventing Regulation of Drugs and Medical Devices,” part of the National Performance Review) stated the following:In certain circumstances, however, it may be important to considerwhether a new product is less effective than available alternative therapies,when less effectiveness could present a danger to the patient or tothe public. For example, it is essential for public health protectionthat a new therapy be as effective as alternatives that are already approvedfor marketing when:1. the disease to be treated is life-threatening or capable of causingirreversible morbidity (e.g., stroke or heart attack); or2. the disease to be treated is a contagious illness that poses seriousconsequences to the health of others (e.g., sexually transmitted disease).The reinvention statement was placed in the Federal Register of August 1, 1995 (60 FR 39180 at 39181), as an FDA position by FDA’s Deputy Commissioner for Policy, William Schultz.The definitions used to describe these two versions of M are:M1 = the entire effect of the active control assumed to be present in the NI studyM2 = the largest clinically acceptable difference (degree of inferiority) of the test drug compared to the active controlM1 is estimated based on the historical experience with the active control drug. Its relevance to the current NI trial is based on:1. Assessment of the likelihood that the current effect of the active control is similar to that observed in the past studies used to estimate the active control effect (the constancy assumption)2. Assessment of the quality of the NI trial, particularly looking for deficiencies in study design and/or conduct that could reduce a difference between the active control and the new drugNote that in a trial seeking to show a difference (i.e., superiority), this diminution of the between-treatment difference in the second element is a “bias toward the null,” but in a non-inferiority10trial, it is a “bias toward the alternative” (i.e., non-inferiority). Because of this second element, in some situations M1, although prespecified, has to be “discounted” (i.e., a smaller value would be used), but the amount of discounting needed may not be known until the NI study has been completed.The choice of M2 is a matter of clinical judgment, but M2 can never be greater than M1, even for a situation in which the active control drug has a small effect, and clinical judgment might argue that a larger difference is not clinically important. Even if that clinical judgment were reasonable, choosing an M2 greater than M1 as the NI margin would not allow a conclusion that the test drug has any effect. As explained above, ruling out a difference between the active control and test drug larger than M1 is the critical finding that supports a conclusion of effectiveness. This analysis is approached with great rigor; that is, a difference (C-T) larger than M1 needs to be ruled out with a high degree of statistical assurance. As M2 represents a clinical judgment, there may be a greater flexibility in interpreting a 95% upper bound for C-T that is slightly greater than M2, as long as the upper bound is still well less than M1 (see Figure 3).11Figure 3. Possible Results of an NI Study Showing Active Control – Test Drug Differences(Point Estimate and 95% CI)Control – Test (C-T); (degree of inferiority of test drug)1. C-T point estimate = 0 and upper bound of 95% CI < M2, indicating testdrug is effective and adequately rules out an unacceptable loss of the control effect (NI demonstrated).2. Point estimate of C-T favors C; upper bound of 95% CI < M1 but> M2, indicating test drug effect > 0 but an unacceptable loss of the control effect has not been ruled out.3. Point estimate of C-T is zero and upper bound of 95% CI < M1 but it isslightly greater than M2. Loss of the pre-specified M2 has thus not been ruled out, but whether the study has shown adequate preservation of the control effect would be a matter of clinical judgment.4. C-T point estimate favors C and upper bound of 95% CI > M1, indicatingthe study does not provide evidence of effectiveness for test drug.D. Assay SensitivityAssay sensitivity is an essential property of an NI clinical trial. Assay sensitivity is the ability of the trial to have detected a difference between treatments of a specified size. Stated in another way, assay sensitivity means that had the study included a placebo, a control drug-placebo difference of at least M1 would have been present.12As explained above, the choice of M1, and the conclusion that a trial has assay sensitivity (i.e., the active control would have had an effect of at least M1), is based on three considerations:1. Historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects2. The similarity of the new NI trial to the historical trials (the constancy assumption)3. The quality of the new trial (ruling out defects that would tend to minimize differences between treatments)1. Historical Evidence of Sensitivity to Drug Effects (HESDE)HESDE means that prior studies, which were appropriately designed and conducted trials in the past and that used a specific active treatment (generally the one that is to be used in the new NI study or, in some cases, one or more pharmacologically closely related drugs), regularly showed this treatment to be superior to placebo (or some other treatment). Consistent findings in past studies allow for a reliable estimate of the drug’s effect compared to placebo. The estimate of the size of the effect must take the variability of past results into account; one should not presume that the largest effect seen in any trial, or even the point estimate of a meta-analysis of all relevant trials, is certain to be repeated. Analysis of historical data will be discussed further in section IV.HESDE cannot be determined for many symptomatic treatments (e.g., treatments for depression, anxiety, insomnia, angina, symptomatic heart failure, symptoms of irritable bowel disease, and pain), as even well-designed and conducted studies for such indications often fail to distinguish an effective drug from placebo. In those cases, it cannot be assumed that an active control would have shown superiority to a placebo (had there been one) in any given NI study, and NI studies of drugs for these indications may therefore be non-informative. These issues can also negatively affect the assessment of effectiveness in outcome studies. For example, in the case of aspirin, the largest placebo-controlled trial (AMIS, the Aspirin Myocardial Infarction Study; see Example 2) did not show an effect of aspirin even though other trials all favored aspirin. Similarly, of more than 30 post-infarction beta-blocker trials, only a small number showed significantly improved survival or other cardiovascular benefit.2. Similarity of the Current NI Trial to the Historical Studies and Its Relationship to the “Constancy Assumption”The conclusion that HESDE can be used to estimate the effect of the active control, which will then serve as the basis for choosing M1 for the new NI study, can be reached only when it is appropriate to conclude that the NI study is sufficiently similar to the past studies with respect to all important study design and conduct features that might influence the active control effect. This conclusion is referred to as the “constancy assumption.” The design features of interest include:• The characteristics of the patient population• Important concomitant treatments• Definitions and ascertainment of study endpoints• Dose of active control13• Entry criteria• Analytic approachesFor example, the effect of an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor on heart failure mortality has repeatedly been shown in studies where the drugs were added to diuretics and (frequently) digoxin, establishing HESDE, but evolution in treatment since those studies were conducted raises questions about our understanding of the present-day effect of ACE inhibitors. Since the time of those studies, other medications (beta blockers, spironolactone) have come into standard use. We do not know whether the past effect would still be present when ACE inhibitors are added to a regimen including drugs from these two classes. Similarly, the effect of a thrombolytic on cardiovascular mortality could depend on how soon after symptoms the drug was given, concomitant use of anticoagulants and platelet inhibitors, and use of lipid-lowering drugs. To provide a sound basis for choosing M1, the historical studies and the new NI study should be as nearly identical as possible in all important respects.Providing reasonable assurance that endpoints in the historical trial will be similar to, and will have been evaluated similarly to, endpoints in the new trial is easier when the endpoints are standardized and objective. The effect of the active control could be on a single endpoint (e.g., mortality) or on a composite (e.g., death, heart attack, and stroke), but, again, it is critical that measurement and assessment of these be reasonably consistent over time. The endpoint used in the NI study need not necessarily be the one used in the original trials of the active control if data from the historical studies are available to estimate the size of the effect of the active control on the new endpoint used in the NI study. For example, even if the historical studies used a mortality endpoint, the studies could be used, if high quality data could be obtained, to calculate the magnitude of an effect for an endpoint of death plus hospitalization, as long as it was possible to be confident that the circumstances leading to the hospitalization were similar in the historical studies and the NI study. Note, however, that it would not be acceptable to search through a range of endpoints to find the largest historical effect, as this could represent an overestimate of the effect to be expected in the NI study.In general, where there has been substantial evolution over time in disease definition and treatment, or where the methodology used in the historical trials has become outdated, the assumption of constancy may not be supported, and, therefore, the use of an NI design may not be justified.Although an NI study can be designed to be similar in most aspects to the historical studies, it may not be possible to assess that similarity fully until the NI study is completed and various characteristics of the study population and response are evaluated. When there is known heterogeneity of the active control treatment effect related to patient characteristics (e.g., age, sex, severity) and that heterogeneity can be quantified, it may be necessary to adjust the estimate of the size of the active control effect in the NI study if the mix of patient characteristics in the historical studies and the NI study differ substantially.The property of constancy of the treatment effect may depend on which metric is chosen to represent the treatment effect. This issue is discussed in more depth in section IV.B.2.c. Experience suggests that when background rates of outcome events differ among study14populations, metrics like hazard ratio or relative risk may be more stable than metrics like absolute risk difference, which are more sensitive to changes in event rates in the population.3. Good Study QualityConducting any poor quality studies should always be avoided, but with NI studies, sloppiness in study design/conduct is particularly problematic, because it introduces bias towards the alternative hypothesis of non-inferiority (see ICH E10; pp. 11-12 and section IV.F for further discussion). Deficiencies such as imprecise or poorly implemented entry criteria, poor compliance, use of concomitant treatments whose effects may overlap with the drugs under study, inadequate measurement techniques, errors in delivering assigned treatments, high attrition, or poor follow-up may reduce the difference C-T observed in the study, potentially leading to a false conclusion of non-inferiority. It should also be appreciated that intent-to-treat approaches, which preserve the principle that all patients are analyzed according to the treatment to which they have been randomized even if they do not receive it, although conservative in superiority trials, are not necessarily conservative in an NI study and can lead to an incorrect finding of non-inferiority.In a superiority trial, sloppiness can lead to study failure. In contrast, poor quality in an NI trial can sometimes lead to an apparent finding of non-inferiority that is incorrect. Therefore, particular attention to quality is critical when planning and conducting an NI study. Adjustment for poor quality after the fact is usually not possible.E. Statistical InferenceThe various approaches to calculating the NI margin and analyzing an NI study will be discussed in detail in section IV. A commonly used fixed margin method is generally referred to as the 95%-95% method. The first 95% refers to the confidence interval of the estimated effect of the control based on the historical studies demonstrating the effect, and the second 95% refers to the confidence interval used to test the null hypothesis in the NI study. Note that the first 95% lower confidence bound discussed here is a bound for the average effect of the active comparator in historical studies, or the true effect in the NI study if the constancy assumption holds. It is sometimes supposed that this is a lower bound for the actual effect of the comparator in the NI study, and the draft guidance (issued in 2010) suggests this, but this is not correct. The 95% lower bound does indeed define a lower bound for the true control effect, but the actual effect in the NI study would still be liable to sampling variation. To bound the actual effect, a different type of interval would be required; these intervals are known as prediction intervals and are much wider than the corresponding confidence intervals. Confidence intervals nevertheless suffice for the present purpose, because the confidence interval from the historical studies bounds the true effect of the comparator relative to placebo, and the confidence interval from the NI study bounds the true effect of the test drug relative to the comparator. Relying always on the constancy assumption, these can be combined to infer a positive effect of the test drug relative to placebo.The 95%-95% fixed margin approach (using in this case a risk difference rather than a risk ratio for the margin) can be illustrated by FDA’s evaluation of a new thrombolytic product, reteplase,15for treatment of acute myocardial infarction (AMI). To calculate the NI margin, results of all available placebo-controlled trials of streptokinase, the active comparator (control) for the NI study, were pooled by means of an appropriate meta-analytic method. The pooled results provided a point estimate for the effect on survival of an absolute 2.6% difference in mortality rates, with a 95% lower bound of 2.1% (i.e., M1). A clinical decision was made that any new thrombolytic should rule out a loss of more than half of the benefit of streptokinase to be regarded as an acceptable alternative. The NI study would therefore have had to rule out an absolute 1.05% increase in mortality rate (i.e., M2) in the reteplase-treated patients compared to those treated with streptokinase. The NI analysis for this study was to show that the 95% confidence interval (one-sided for this particular case) of the difference in mortality rates excluded an increase of 1.05%. The INJECT study accomplished this, and the product was approved for marketing.An alternative to the fixed margin approach is known as the synthesis approach because it combines or synthesizes the data from the historical trials and the current NI trial, reflecting the variability in both data sources. Although the 95%-95% method was developed in a different way, it has been noted that it can be viewed as mathematically equivalent to the synthesis method but with the standard error of the effect of the test drug relative to placebo, estimated by𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐻𝐻+𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑁𝑁 ,where SEH and SEN are the standard errors from the historical studies and the NI study, respectively, rather than by􀶥𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐻𝐻2+𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑁𝑁2 ,which is the standard error for the synthesis method. The first formula always gives a larger standard error than the second. Thus, compared to the synthesis method, the 95%-95% method is conservative. Both methods rely crucially on the assumption of constant effect of the control (on average) between the historical studies and the NI study. The use of the 95%-95% method might be seen as an allowance for possible deviation from this assumption, a desirable feature for evaluating whether loss of M1 (the whole effect of the control) has been ruled out. Use of the synthesis method, along with a careful justification of the constancy assumption and, when appropriate, an explicit allowance for deviation from it, would also be acceptable and may be recommended for determining whether a loss of effect greater than M2 has been ruled out (see Section IV.C and Example 1(B) for more detail).F. Regulatory ConclusionsA successful NI study shows rigorously that the test drug has an effect greater than zero if it excludes an NI margin of M1, as long as M1 is well chosen and represents an effect that the control drug actually would have had (versus a placebo, had there been a placebo group). The NI study can also be used to show that the test drug had an effect greater than some fraction of the control drug effect, depending on the M2 that is used. Note, however, that although a successful NI study supports effectiveness of the test drug, it will only rarely support a conclusion that the drug is “equivalent” or “similar” to the active control, a concept that has not16been well defined for these situations. It should be appreciated that in addition to the rigorous demonstration of effectiveness based on significance testing, the trial provides additional information, just as a placebo-controlled trial supporting the effectiveness of a drug does. The point estimate of the drug effect and its confidence interval provide information about how large the difference between the test and control drug is likely to be.As noted before, a successful NI study will usually not be sufficient to support a conclusion that the test drug is equivalent or similar to the active control. The methods discussed in this document, especially with regard to choosing the margin, are not intended to demonstrate equivalence or similarity but only to show that the test drug is effective. However, if the lower bound of the confidence interval for the effect of the test drug relative to the active control were only slightly negative, a judgment that similarity had been shown would be possible. If studies are intended to support equivalence, the margin against which the confidence interval is to be judged should be justified in advance, and the margin will usually be smaller than M2.G. Alternative DesignsICH E10 identifies a wide variety of study designs that may be better than an NI design in situations where there is difficulty or uncertainty in setting the NI margin or where the NI margin needs to be so small that the NI study sample size becomes impossibly large.1. Add-on StudyIn many cases, for a pharmacologically novel treatment, the most interesting question is not whether it is effective alone but whether the new drug can add to the effectiveness of treatments that are already available. The most pertinent study would therefore be a comparison of the new agent and placebo, each added to established therapy. Thus, new treatments for heart failure have added new agents (e.g., ACE inhibitors, beta blockers, and spironolactone) to diuretics and digoxin. As each new agent became established, it became part of the background therapy to which any new agent and placebo would be added. This approach is also typical in oncology, in the treatment of seizure disorders, and, in many cases, in the treatment of AIDS.2. Identifying a Population Not Known to Benefit From Available Therapy in Which a Placebo-Controlled Trial Is AcceptableIn many outcome study settings, effectiveness is established for some clinical settings (e.g., severe disease) but not others. Therefore, it may be possible to study less severely ill patients in placebo-controlled trials. The demonstration that simvastatin was effective in hypercholesterolemic post-infarction patients (4S), for example, did not preclude studies of statins in hypercholesterolemic non-infarction patients (WOSCOPS) or in patients with lesser degrees of hypercholesterolemia (TEXCAPS). This approach is appropriate as long as there is uncertainty as to whether the treatment is of value in the new study population. It may also be possible to study patients intolerant to the known effective therapy. For example, it was possible to study angiotensin receptor blockers in a placebo-controlled trial in heart failure patients intolerant of ACE inhibitors, but it would not have been possible to deny a more general17population of heart failure patients an ACE inhibitor, as it had already been established that ACE inhibitors improved survival in a general heart failure population.3. Early Escape, Rescue Treatment, Randomized WithdrawalIn symptomatic conditions, there may be reluctance to leave people on placebo for prolonged periods when effective therapy exists. It is possible to incorporate early escape/rescue provisions for patients who do not respond by a particular time, or to use a design that terminates patients on first recurrence of a symptom such as unstable angina, grand mal seizure, or paroxysmal supra-ventricular tachycardia. To evaluate the persistence of effects over time, where conducting a long-term placebo-controlled trial would be difficult, a randomized withdrawal study can be used. In these studies, patients successfully treated with a drug are randomly assigned to placebo or continued drug treatment. As soon as symptoms return, the patient is considered to have had an endpoint.H. Number of Studies NeededOrdinarily, with exceptions allowed by the FDA Modernization Act of 1997 (the Modernization Act), FDA expects that there will be more than one adequate and well-controlled study supporting effectiveness. The Modernization Act allows one study plus confirmatory evidence to serve as substantial evidence in some cases, and FDA has issued a guidance that discusses when a single study might be sufficient.2Where there is uncertainty about the magnitude of the historical treatment effect (and thus M1) because of variability or reliance on a single historical study, more than one NI study is usually needed to support effectiveness.Where the studies are of relatively modest size, there is usually no impediment to conducting more than one NI trial if that appears necessary. Conducting two trials that are very large (to have adequate statistical power), however, may be infeasible, and it is worth considering what might make a single trial persuasive. Generally, two considerations might do so: (1) availability of other relevant information and (2) a statistically persuasive result.1. Other Relevant InformationIn NI trials, the test drug is generally pharmacologically similar to the active control (i.e., if they were not pharmacologically similar, an add-on study would usually have been more persuasive and more practical). In these cases, the expectation of similar performance (but still requiring confirmation in a trial) might make it possible to accept a single trial and perhaps could also2 See the guidance for industry Providing Clinical Evidence of Effectiveness for Human Drug and Biological Products (Providing Clinical Evidence of Effectiveness guidance), available on the FDA Drug Web page at http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm. We update guidances periodically. To make sure you have the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA Drug Web page.18allow less conservative choices in choosing the NI margin. A similar conclusion might be reached when other types of data are available, for example:• If there were a very persuasive biomarker confirming similar activity of the test drug and active control (e.g., tumor response, ACE inhibition, or extent of beta blockade)• If the drug has been shown to be effective in closely related clinical settings (e.g., effective as adjunctive therapy with an NI study of monotherapy)• If the drug has been shown to be effective in distinct but related populations (e.g., adult versus pediatric)2. Statistically Persuasive ResultA conclusion that an NI trial can be considered statistically persuasive may be based on the internal consistency of the NI finding or on the margin that is ruled out with a two-sided 95% confidence interval. It is important to recognize that there are two margins of interest, M1 and M2. In an NI study, the clinically determined margin M2 is smaller, often considerably smaller, than M1, which is used to determine whether the test drug has any effect. For example, M2 might be chosen to be 40% of M1. By meeting this M2 criterion, ruling out a loss of 40% of the effect of the control, a single NI study provides reasonable assurance that the test drug preserves a clinically sufficient fraction (at least 60%) of the effect of the control treatment. At the same time, it provides strong assurance that the test drug has an effect greater than zero. In such cases, a single trial would usually be a sufficient basis for approval. Where the preservation of effect is particularly critical, of course, demonstrating that loss of M2 has been ruled out in more than one study might be considered necessary.In some cases, a study planned as an NI study may show superiority to the active control. Recommendations in International Conference on Harmonisation guidance E9: Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (ICH E9) and FDA policy have been that this superiority finding arising in an NI study can be interpreted without adjustment for multiplicity. Showing superiority to an active control is a very persuasive demonstration of the effectiveness of the test drug, because demonstrating superiority to an active drug is much more difficult than demonstrating superiority to placebo. Similarly, a finding of less than superiority, but with a 95% confidence interval upper bound for C-T considerably smaller than M2, is also statistically persuasive for demonstrating effectiveness.I. Choice of Active ControlThe active control must be a drug whose effect is well-defined. The most obvious choice is a single drug for which historical placebo-controlled trials are available to define the active control effect assumed for the NI trial. When there are several pharmacologically similar drugs, it may be possible to use a combined analysis to choose an NI margin, and in that case, any one of the related drugs may be considered as the active control in the NI trial (see section IV.B.2.b).19IV. CHOOSING THE NON-INFERIORITY MARGIN AND TESTING THE NON-INFERIORITY HYPOTHESISA. IntroductionIn this section, various sources of uncertainty that come into play for NI trials are discussed, with particular emphasis on those affecting the choice of margin. We also discuss in more detail the choice of statistical test for the NI hypothesis. As described briefly in section III, there are two different approaches to analysis of the NI study, one called the fixed margin method and the other called the synthesis method. Both use the same data from the historical studies and NI study, but in different ways.● With the fixed margin method, the margin M1 is based upon estimates of the effect of the active comparator in previously conducted studies. The NI margin to be ruled out in the NI study is then prespecified, and it is usually chosen as a quantity smaller than M1 (i.e., M2) to ensure that a reasonable fraction of the effect of the control is preserved. The NI study is successful if the results rule out with a sufficient level of confidence (e.g., 97.5%) inferiority of the test drug to the control by an amount equal to the NI margin or more. It is referred to as a fixed margin method because the past studies comparing the control drug with placebo are used to derive a single fixed value for M1. The value typically chosen is the lower bound of the 95% confidence interval about the treatment effect of a single placebo-controlled trial or meta-analysis of such trials and represents a conservative estimate of the effect the active control drug is expected to have in the NI study. If M1 is ruled out by the 95% confidence interval upper bound for C-T, then the conclusion is made that the test drug has an effect. If M2 is ruled out, then the effect of the test drug has been shown to preserve a clinically important fraction of the effect of the control drug.● The synthesis method, derived from the same data, combines (or synthesizes) the estimate of treatment effect relative to the control from the NI trial with the estimate of the control effect from a meta-analysis of historical trials. This method treats both sources of data as if they came from the same randomized trial, to project what the placebo effect would have been had the placebo been present in the NI trial. The process makes use of the variability from both the NI trial and the historical trials and yields one confidence interval for testing the NI hypothesis that the treatment rules out loss of a prespecified fixed fraction of the control effect without actually specifying that control effect or a specific fixed NI margin based on the control effect. In other words, the fraction M2/M1 of the control effect that is to be preserved in evaluating NI is specified in advance, but neither quantity (M1 or M2) is specified.The multiple steps involved and assumptions made in evaluating the NI hypothesis using either the fixed-margin or synthesis approach are all potential sources of uncertainty that may be introduced into the results and conclusions of an NI study. In section IV.B, we attempt to identify these sources and suggest approaches to accounting for uncertainty to reduce the possibility of drawing false conclusions from an NI study. Section IV.C provides further discussion of the statistical analysis methods for evaluating non-inferiority.20B. Statistical Uncertainties and Quantification of the Active Control Effect (M1)1. What Are the Sources of Uncertainty in an NI Study?The interpretation of an NI study depends on three linked critical conclusions:1. That there is reliable information about the effect the active control drug had in past studies2. That there is reason to believe the effect the active control drug has in the current NI study is similar to the effect observed in past studies3. That the NI study provides reliable information about the effect of the test drug relative to the comparatorAll three sources of information are subject to uncertainty. For the first and third, the uncertainty is largely of a statistical nature, measured by standard errors (for the synthesis method) and confidence intervals (for the fixed margin method). The second conclusion is subject to scientific uncertainty that is largely unquantifiable.The first source of uncertainty is the estimation of the effect of the active control in past studies. Particular problems arise when there is only a single historical study of the active control versus placebo because there is then no information about study-to-study variability; when there are multiple studies but substantial inconsistency in the estimates of the size of the effect among them; and when data from several pharmacologically related drugs are used to develop the estimate for the effect of the active control. All three of these potential problems need to be considered when choosing M1.The second source of uncertainty is not statistically based but rather arises from the concern that the magnitude of effect estimated from past studies will be larger than the effect of the active control in the current NI study. Assuming that the effect will be unchanged is often referred to as the “constancy assumption.” If the assumption is incorrect and the magnitude of the effect in the current NI study is smaller than the estimated effect from historical studies, M1 will have been incorrectly chosen (too large) and an apparently successful study showing NI could have given an erroneous result. Lack of constancy can occur for many reasons, including advances in adjunctive medical care, differences in the patient populations, or changes in the assessment of the endpoints under study. As discussed in section IV.B.2.c, there is some experience to support the view that in cardiovascular outcome studies, the absolute size of the treatment effect is more likely to be variable and sensitive to the background rates in the control group than is the risk reduction. The risk reduction may thus be a more constant measure of control drug effect than the absolute effect. How to adjust the NI margin for concerns about constancy is inevitably a matter of judgment.The third source of uncertainty involves the risk of making a false conclusion based on the results of the test of the NI hypothesis in the NI study (i.e., concluding that C-T < M1 when it is not). This uncertainty is referred to as the Type I error, or the false positive conclusion risk, and is similar to the concern in a placebo-controlled superiority trial that one might mistakenly conclude that a drug is more effective than placebo. It is, in other words, present in any21hypothesis-testing situation. In the NI case, the statistical test is intended to ensure that the difference between control and test drug (C-T, the degree of superiority of the control over the test drug) is smaller than the NI margin, meaning that some of the effect of the control is preserved (if C-T < M1) or that a sufficient amount is preserved (if C-T < M2). Typically, the one-sided Type I error is set at 0.025 by asking that the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval for C-T be less than the NI margin; this is roughly similar to the usual statistical test of superiority in a placebo-controlled trial. If only one NI study is going to be conducted, the probability of a Type I error can be made smaller by requiring that the upper bound of a confidence interval greater than 95% (e.g., 99%) be calculated and be less than the margin. This approach is similar to what is a commonly done for a single placebo-controlled trial (e.g., testing at an alpha of 0.01 - 0.001 instead of 0.05). As noted earlier, however, there may be prior information that eases this concern, and a single study at the usual Type I error boundary (0.025) may be considered sufficient if, for example, the drug and active control are pharmacologically similar.In the following subsections, we elaborate on the impact of the first two sources of uncertainty as well as the choice of margin to use in hypothesis testing.2. Quantification of the Active Control EffectPast controlled studies provide the empirical data for estimating the treatment effect of the active control. The magnitude of that treatment effect, which will be the basis for determining the control drug effect that can be assumed to be present in the NI study, is critical to determining whether conducting an NI study is feasible. If the active control has a small treatment effect, an effect only marginally distinguishable from placebo, or an inconsistent effect, an active controlled study designed to show non-inferiority is likely to require a very large sample size or may not be practical at all.The magnitude of the treatment effect of the active control may be determined in several ways, depending upon the amount of data and the number of separate studies of similar design available to support this determination. Having many independent historical studies is generally more informative than having only one or two, because the estimate of the active control effect can be more precise and less subject to uncertainty, and because it becomes possible to judge the constancy of the effect for at least the time period spanned by the studies.a. Determining HESDE from a single studyThe most common situation in which an NI design is used to demonstrate effectiveness involves outcome studies where the active control drug has been approved for use to reduce the risk of major events (e.g., death, stroke, heart attack, continued infection, or tumor progression). It is not unusual for such approval to have been based on a single study in a specific setting, although there may be other pertinent data in related conditions or in different populations, or with pharmacologically similar drugs. Generally, basing an NI margin on a single randomized placebo-controlled superiority study would need to take into account the variability of the data in that study. The estimate of the treatment effect is usually represented by some metric such as the difference between the event rate in the active treatment group and the placebo control group,22which can be a difference in event rates or a risk ratio. The treatment effect has an uncertainty that is usually represented by the confidence interval. The lower bound of the 95% confidence interval provides a conservative estimate of the effect the active control had in the historical study and can be assumed to have in a future NI study, recognizing the possibility that changes in practice could reduce the historical effect somewhat. It is critical that a conservative estimate of the effect of the active control be used as the basis of the NI margin, because the logic of the NI study depends on the assumption that the active control has an effect at least equal to M1 in the NI study.If the p-value of the estimated treatment effect is much smaller than 0.05, for instance in the range of 0.01 or 0.001 or even smaller, the lower bound of the 95% confidence interval will generally be well above zero (in absolute value) or well below 1.0 (for hazard ratio and other risk estimates). In this case, we are more certain that the treatment effect is real and that the effect of the control in the NI study will be of reasonable size.When there is only a single placebo-controlled trial of the active control, there is no objective assessment of study-to-study variability of the treatment effect and, inevitably, there is concern about the level of assurance we can have that the control will have an effect of a particular size in the NI study. A potential cautious approach to account for this situation is to use the lower bound of a wider confidence interval, such as the 99% confidence interval. This approach is possible where the effect is very large, but will often yield an M1 that necessitates a very large NI trial. It may be reassuring in these cases if closely related drugs, or the control drug in closely related diseases, have similar effects. A high level of internal consistency in subpopulations (e.g., if the effect of the control drug is similar in subgroups based on sex or age) could also provide some reassurance about the reproducibility of the result. These findings might support use of the 95% confidence interval lower bound even if only a single study of the active control drug in the population is available for the NI trial.b. Determining HESDE from multiple trialsIdentical clinical trials in identical populations can produce different estimates of treatment effect by chance alone. The extent to which two or more studies produce estimates of treatment effect that are close is a function of the sample size of each study, the similarity of the study populations, the conduct of the studies (e.g., dropout rates), and other factors that are probably not measurable. Therefore, another source of uncertainty to be considered when choosing a margin for the current NI study is the study-to-study variability in the estimate of the active control treatment effect.Multiple studies of the active control relative to a placebo, ineffective treatment, or no treatment provide an opportunity to obtain not only an estimate of the average effect of the active control and its uncertainty, but also a measure of the study-to-study variability of the effect. Study-to-study variability in the active control effect is a critical consideration because one of the basic assumptions in NI studies is the consistency of the effect between the historical studies and the current NI study.23Several cases illustrate the use of multiple studies to estimate the active control effect and problems that can arise.• The ideal case is one where (1) there are a number of studies, each of sufficient size to demonstrate the effect of the active control and (2) the effects derived from these studies are reasonably consistent, so that an average effect derived from a meta-analysis provides a reasonable estimate of the control effect and supports a credible choice of M1.• If there are many small studies, some of which have not demonstrated an effect of the active control, it may still be possible to estimate the active control effect combining the studies using appropriate meta-analysis methods, but care should be taken if there is evidence of a large amount of study-to-study heterogeneity in the treatment effects.• If there are multiple large studies, it would be troublesome if one or more of the studies showed little or no effect. Unless there is a convincing explanation as to why one of the studies did not demonstrate an effect, a failed study may argue against use of an NI design.• There are sometimes several trials of different drugs in the same pharmacologic class. Pooling them with appropriate meta-analytic methods may allow calculation of a 95% confidence interval that is narrower than that from any single study. The presumption that the pharmacologically similar drugs would have similar effects may be reasonable, but care should be exercised in extending this assumption too far. If the effects of these different drugs vary considerably in the trials, it may be reasonable to use the combined data to estimate the average effect with a meta-analysis and then select the drug with the largest effect (point estimate) as the active control in the NI study.When multiple studies of the active control are available, it is important to consider all studies and all patients when estimating the average effect. Dropping a study that does not show an effect, unless there is a very good reason, can overestimate the control drug effect and give a falsely high M1. As noted above, the existence of properly designed and sized studies that show no treatment effect of the active control may preclude conducting NI studies with that control unless there are valid reasons to explain the disparate results.When combining data from multiple studies to estimate the active control effect, some variation of effect is expected. Random-effects meta-analysis can be used that allow for both between-study and within-study heterogeneity. Both frequentist and Bayesian methods are available that differ in the assumptions made about the distribution of the random effects. These methods should be used to explore whether the variation between studies is more than would be expected by chance. If so, the between-study variation should be taken into account and will result in a more conservative margin for the NI study.Examples 1 and 2 in the Appendix illustrate in more detail how multiple historical placebo-controlled trials of the active control are evaluated in designing an NI trial.c. Metrics24As previously discussed, the assumption of constancy of the effect of the active comparator between the historical studies and the NI study is crucial to a conclusion of efficacy based on non-inferiority. There are, however, technical difficulties in defining what is meant by a constant effect across studies in different populations and at different times. The mathematical way in which the treatment effect is formulated will affect the meaning and plausibility of the constancy assumption.Consider, for example, studies of fairly infrequent, binary outcomes, typical of most cardiovascular studies, a situation in which NI trials have been successfully employed. Suppose the chance of an event in the placebo group of a historical study was p1, and in the active treatment group p2. Then the treatment effect in the historical study can be expressed in several ways:1. The ratio p2/p1, called the relative risk or risk ratio2. The relative risk reduction 1 – p2/p13. The odds ratio [p2/(1 – p2)]/[p1/(1 – p1)]4. The risk difference p1 – p25. The number needed to treat (NNT), 1/(p1 – p2)If p1 and p2 vary across studies, they might nevertheless vary in such a way that p2/p1 is constant. For example, if p1 and p2 are 0.10 and 0.05 in one study, and 0.06 and 0.03 in another study, the ratio p2/p1 is 0.5 in both studies. The relative risk reduction will then also be the same in both studies, and the odds ratio will be approximately the same. The risk difference, however, is 0.05 in one study and 0.03 in the other, and the numbers needed to treat are 20 and 33.In contrast, if two studies have different p1 and p2 but the same risk difference, they will have the same NNT but cannot have the same relative risk, relative risk reduction, or odds ratio. Thus, the very definition of constancy depends on how the effect is formulated mathematically. Because the interpretation of a NI study relies crucially on the assumption of constancy, careful consideration must be given to the question of what, if anything, is likely to be constant across historical studies and between the historical studies and the NI study. As noted, based on both experience and expectation, the constancy assumption for outcome studies has generally been based on expected constancy of relative and not absolute effects.The difference between expressing the treatment effect as the absolute difference between success rates in treatment groups and as the relative risk or risk ratio for success on the test treatment relative to the active comparator is illustrated in the following two examples.For the first example, consider a disease where the cure rate is at least 40% in patients receiving the selected active control and 30% for those on placebo, a 10% difference in cure rates. If the purpose of an NI study is to demonstrate that the test product is effective (i.e., superior to a placebo), then the difference between the test product and active control in the NI study must be less than 10%. The margin M1 would then be 10%. If the additional clinical objective is to establish that the test product preserves at least half of the active control’s effect, then the cure rate of the test product must be shown to be less than 5% lower than the control, the M2 margin.25This approach requires that the control drug have an effect of at least 10% relative to placebo (had there been one) in the NI study. If the population in the NI study did not have such a benefit (e.g., if the patients all had illnesses not susceptible to the test drug such that the benefit was less than 10%), then even if the 5% difference were ruled out, that would not demonstrate the desired effectiveness (although it would seem to). Note that in this case, if the true effect of the control in the study were 8%, then ruling out a 5% difference would in fact show some effect of the test drug, just not the desired 50% of control effect.The second example illustrates a NI margin selected for the risk ratio (test/control) metric. Let C and P represent the true rates of an undesirable outcome for the control and a placebo, respectively. The control’s effect compared to placebo is expressed by the risk ratio, C/P. A risk ratio of 1 represents no effect; a ratio of less than 1 shows an effect, a reduction in rate of undesirable outcomes.Metrics like the risk ratio may be less affected by variability in the event rates in a placebo group that would occur in a future study. For example, a risk ratio for the event of interest of 3/4 =0.75 can be derived from very different absolute failure rates from different studies, as shown in the table below. While the risk ratio is similar in all four hypothetical studies, the absolute difference in failure rates ranges from 5% to 20%. Suppose that the NI margin were based on historical studies showing control drug effects like those in the fourth study. The NI margin (M1) would then be chosen as 20%. Now suppose that under more modern circumstances the NI study had a control rate more like Study 1 and the size of the treatment effect compared to placebo is far less than 20%. An NI margin (M1) of 20% would then be far greater than the drug effect in the NI study, and ruling out a difference of 20% would not demonstrate effectiveness at all. Thus, if the NI margin were chosen as ruling out an inferiority of 33% (or a relative risk of 1.33, i.e., 1 ÷ 0.75), and the control rate were 15%, the difference (M1) between test and control would need to be less than 5% (15% x 1.33 = 20%, or 5% > the 15% rate in the active control group).Study NumberRisk Ratio (C/P)Control ratePlacebo rateStudy 1¾15%20%Study 2¾30%40%Study 3¾45%60%Study 4¾60%80%In this case, where absolute effect sizes vary but risk reductions are reasonably constant, the risk ratio metric provides a better adjustment to the lower event rate in the NI study.Revisiting the example from section III.E, it was clear in the placebo-controlled trials of streptokinase that the mortality rate in the placebo group was decreasing, so that even if the mortality reduction were constant as a relative reduction, the absolute reduction would decrease and the expected size of the treatment effect (M1) would no longer be an absolute 2.1% reduction. The relative risk of mortality (ratio of mortality rates) was therefore used for subsequent thrombolytic product development programs because thrombolytic efficacy expressed as the relative mortality rates appeared to be more stable over time as improved standards of care were provided to all patients in a study.26For the development of tenecteplase in the treatment of AMI, evaluation of the relevant historical studies led to the conclusion that the comparator (90 minute infusion of alteplase) would reduce the relative risk of mortality compared to placebo by at least 0.22 (to about 0.78, upper limit of the relative risk confidence interval). The NI margin was chosen, again based upon clinical judgment, so the new drug would retain at least half of the efficacy of the comparator (M1 = 0.22), i.e., at least 0.11 (M2). The relative mortality risk of tenecteplase compared to placebo should be not greater than 0.89. This provided a value for the limit of the relative risk comparison of tenecteplase to alteplase of 1.14 ([tenecteplase/placebo]/[alteplase/placebo] = 0.89/0.78), which had to be excluded by the 95% confidence interval (one-sided in this case) of the ratio of mortality rates in the NI study. The ASSENT II study results provided a 95% one-sided upper limit of relative risk of 1.104, which led to the marketing approval of tenecteplase.These examples illustrate the importance of understanding how a particular metric will perform. The choice between a relative metric (e.g., risk ratio) and an absolute metric (e.g., a difference in rates) in characterizing the effects of treatments may also be based upon clinical interpretation, medical context, and previous experience with the behavior of the rates of the outcome.d. DiscountingOne strategy employed in choosing the margin M1 for the NI study design is “discounting” or reducing the magnitude of the active control’s effect that is estimated from the HESDE analysis. Such discounting is done to account for the uncertainties in the assumptions that need to be made in estimating, based on past performance, the effect of the active control in the NI study. This concept of discounting focuses on M1 determination and is distinct from a clinical judgment that the effect that can be lost on clinical grounds should be some fraction of M1 (i.e., M2). As discussed above, there are uncertainties associated with translating the historical effect of the active control (HESDE) to the new situation of the active control NI trial, and it is tempting to deal with that uncertainty in the constancy assumption by discounting the effect (e.g., “take half”). Rather than applying “automatic” discounting in choosing M1, concerns about the active control effect should, to the extent possible:• Be specific• Make use of available data (e.g., magnitude of possible differences in effect in different patient populations, consistency of past studies, and consistency within studies across population subsets)• Take into account factors that reduce the need for a conservative estimate, such as the pharmacologic similarity of the test and control drugs and pharmacodynamic effects of the new drugA closely related issue is the possible need for adjustment of M1 to reflect any differences that were observed between the population in the NI study and the historical study. For example, a finding of a smaller effect in women than in men in the historical studies would need to be considered in assessing the validity of M1 if the NI study had a substantially greater proportion of women than the historical studies. In general, the assessment of the historical data should identify differences in the outcomes for important subgroups so that the statistical analysis plan27for the NI study can be designed prospectively to take these factors into account (e.g., through covariate adjustments) or so that the value of M1 can be revisited in light of the baseline characteristics of the study population that was enrolled in the NI study.C. Fixed Margin and Synthesis MethodsConceptually, the conclusion of non-inferiority is a synthesis of information from the NI trial itself and the historical evidence that the comparator in that trial was effective. The historical trials assessed Ch – P, the effect of the active control compared to placebo. The NI trial assesses T – Cn , the effect of the test drug compared to active control. If the outcome for the active control is constant across studies, then Cn = Ch, and the sum T – Cn + Ch – P = T – P represents the effect of the test drug compared to placebo. The indispensable purpose of a NI trial is to show with high confidence that this effect is positive. Additionally, NI trials are usually intended to estimate this effect, at least roughly, in comparison to the historical effect of the active control.The historical studies will furnish an estimate of Ch – P with an associated standard error SEH. Similarly, the NI study will estimate T – Cn with a standard error SEN. The two estimates are independent, so that the standard error of the sum is given by􀶥𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐻𝐻2+𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑁𝑁2 .Notwithstanding that the interpretation of an NI study is fundamentally a synthesis, we recommend a statistical method, the fixed-margin method, that treats the problem in two separate steps. This approach offers two practical advantages. First, it allows separation of the problem of calculating, justifying, and possibly adjusting the NI margins M1 and M2 from the problem of analyzing the NI study. Second, it is equivalent to applying a somewhat larger standard error to the synthesized estimate, which can be seen as an allowance for the possibility of minor deviations from constancy.1. The Fixed Margin ApproachThe fixed margin approach to analysis in an NI trial is well known (see, e.g., ICH E9, section 3.3.2). This approach relies upon the choice of a fixed NI margin that is prespecified at the design stage of the NI trial and used to determine the sample size needed to provide sufficient power for a test of the hypothesis of non-inferiority. Operationally, the fixed margin approach usually proceeds in the following manner.First, the active control effect is estimated from an analysis of past placebo-controlled studies of the active control (see section IV.B.2.a-b). The goal of this analysis is to define the margin M1, a fixed value based on the past effect of the active control that is intended to be no larger than the effect the active control is expected to have in the NI study. The variability of the treatment effects observed across past studies as well as the constancy assumption should be taken into account in choosing M1.28The selection of M2 is then based on clinical judgment regarding how much of the active comparator treatment effect needs to be retained to demonstrate sufficient benefit for drug approval. The exercise of clinical judgment for the determination of M2 should be applied after the determination of M1 has been made. All relevant studies of the active comparator and all randomized patients within these studies should generally be used in determining the margin M1 because that provides a more reliable estimate of the active control effect and avoids any potential for prejudice in selecting which historical studies to include. Determination of the relevance of past studies, however, may not be straightforward, and Examples 1(A) and 2 in the Appendix illustrate this point.The lower bound of the confidence interval of the estimated active control effect based on past studies is typically selected as M1. Concerns about past variability and constancy may lead to a determination to discount this lower bound in choosing M1 to account for any sources of uncertainty and dissimilarities between the historical data and the NI study to be conducted, as discussed in earlier sections. Following this, a clinical judgment is made as to how much of this effect should be preserved. Choosing M2 as 50% of M1 has become usual practice for cardiovascular (CV) outcome studies, where effects may be small, and it is important to retain at least half of the effect of the original treatment. In antibiotic trials, effects tend to be quite large relative to placebo or ineffective treatments, and as a result, a 10-15% NI margin for the treatment difference (M2) is commonly chosen. Note that the M2 of 50% of M1 is on a relative scale, whereas the 10-15% is on the risk difference scale for antibiotic drugs.The formal test of the NI hypothesis also involves the use of a 95% confidence interval (i.e., to rule out C-T > M2). Thus, there are two confidence intervals involved in the fixed margin approach, one for the historical data, where the lower bound is selected as M1, and one for the NI study (to rule out C-T > M2); both intervals are typically 95% confidence intervals. That is why this fixed margin approach is sometimes called the 95%-95% method.Separating the process of estimating the treatment effect of the active comparator based upon the historical data (i.e., choice of M1) from the analysis of the NI study has two advantages. It gives a single number that is clinically understandable for M1 (and derived M2) and provides a basis for planning the sample size of the NI study to achieve control of Type I error and the power needed for the NI study to meet its objective for the prespecified NI margin. Decisions to discount M1 further or, where appropriate, to use a narrower confidence interval, are easily explained, and will make the fixed margin approach either more or less conservative.Deciding on the NI clinical margin M2 is a matter of judgment about how large a loss of the control treatment effect would be acceptable, a consideration that may reflect the seriousness of the outcome, the benefit of the active comparator, and the relative safety profiles of the test and comparator. Choice of M2 also has major practical implications. For example, in large cardiovascular studies, it is unusual to have an M2 that reflects a loss of less than 50% of the control drug effect, even if this might be clinically reasonable, because doing so will usually make the study size infeasible. Of course, allowing too much inferiority of the test drug to the standard, especially for endpoints of mortality and serious morbidity, would clearly not be acceptable.29The fixed margin approach considers the NI margin as a single number, fixed in advance of the NI study. The hypothesis tested in the NI study determines whether the comparison of the test drug to the active control meets the specified NI criterion, assuming, of course, that the active control had at least its expected effect (equal to M1) (that is, the study had assay sensitivity). A successful NI conclusion, ruling out a difference > M1, shows that the test drug is effective (just as a superiority study showing a significant effect at p ≤ 0.05 does) and, if a difference > M2 is also ruled out, shows that the new drug preserves the desired fraction of the control drug’s effect.2. The Synthesis ApproachAn alternative statistical approach is known as the synthesis approach because it combines or synthesizes the data from the historical trials and the current NI trial, reflecting the variability in the two sources of data (the current NI study and the past studies used to determine HESDE). The synthesis method is designed to directly address the question of whether the test product would have been superior to a placebo had a placebo been in the NI study and also to address the related question of what fraction of the active control’s effect is maintained by the test product. In the synthesis approach, M1 is not prespecified, but the percent of active control effect to be preserved is prespecified. Based on the observed outcome of the test drug vs. active control comparison in the NI study, an evaluation is made as to whether the test agent has demonstrated preservation of the clinically relevant effect of the active control, without determining M1.Although the synthesis approach combines the data from the historical trials into the comparison of the concurrent active control and the test drug in the NI study, a direct randomized concurrent comparison with a placebo is of course not possible, because the placebo group is not a concurrent control and there is no randomization to such a group within the NI study. The imputed comparison with a placebo group that is not part of the NI study thus rests on the validity of several assumptions, just as the fixed margin approach does. The critical assumption of the constancy of the active control effect derived from the historical placebo-controlled trials is just as important when the synthesis method is used as when the fixed margin method is used.The use of the synthesis approach can lead to a more efficiently designed study (e.g., by allowing for a reduction in sample size or achieving greater power for a given sample size) than the fixed margin approach, provided the constancy assumption holds. The greater statistical efficiency of the synthesis approach derives from how this method deals with the standard error of the comparison of test product to active control. See Appendix, Example 1(B), for a comparison of the two methods and the variance calculations.The synthesis approach does not specify a fixed NI margin. Rather, the method combines (or synthesizes) the estimate of the treatment effect relative to the control from the NI trial with the estimate of the control effect from a meta-analysis of historical trials. The synthesis process makes use of the variability from the NI trial and the historical trials and yields one confidence interval for testing the NI hypothesis that the treatment preserves a fixed fraction of the control effect, without actually specifying that control effect or a specific fixed NI margin based on the control effect. Clinical judgment is used to prespecify an acceptable fraction of the control therapy’s effect that should be retained by the test drug, regardless of the magnitude of the30control effect. The disadvantage of the synthesis approach is that it is not possible to use clinical judgment to choose M2, based on the magnitude of M1, in advance of the NI trial.D. Considerations for Selecting the Clinical Margin (M2)M2 is the prespecified NI margin that is to be ruled out in an NI study. The determination of M2 is based on clinical judgment and is usually calculated by taking a percentage or fraction of M1. The clinical judgment in determining M2 may take into account the actual disease incidence or prevalence and its impact on the practicality of sample sizes that would have to be accrued for a study, as noted above with respect to cardiovascular outcome studies. There can be flexibility in selecting the M2 margin, choosing a wider margin, for example, when:1. The primary endpoint does not involve an irreversible outcome such as death (in general, the M2 margin will be more stringent when treatment failure results in an irreversible outcome)2. The test product is associated with fewer serious adverse effects or better tolerability than other therapies already available3. The test product has another advantage over available therapies that warrants use of a less stringent margin (M2)A more stringent choice for M2 may be required, however, when the difference between the active comparator response rate and the untreated response rate is large, making it feasible to demonstrate retention of a larger fraction of M1 without requiring an impractical sample size for the NI study.The implication of failing to rule out inferiority relative to M1 and M2 differs. Failure to exclude inferiority relative to M1 means there is no assurance of any effect. Just as it would be unusual to accept a placebo-controlled study as positive (i.e., a finding of superiority) with p > 0.05, it would be unusual to accept an NI study as positive (i.e., a finding of non-inferiority) where the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval was > M1. On the other hand, failing to exclude M2 by a small amount (e.g., ruling out a loss of 52% of M1 rather than a prespecified loss of 50% of M1) may be acceptable, as the small amount would not suggest the absence of an effect of the drug.E. Estimating the Sample SizeIt is important to plan the sample size for an NI clinical trial so that the trial will have adequate statistical power to conclude that the NI margin is ruled out if the test drug is truly non-inferior. At the protocol planning stage, using the fixed margin approach, the NI margin (M2) will be specified, and the sample size will be based on the need to rule out that margin. Both the size of the margin and the estimated variance of the treatment effect (T vs C) will affect the sample size determination. For event-driven trials, if the event rate in the NI study is lower than anticipated, power to demonstrate non-inferiority will be reduced. It may be important, therefore, to monitor overall (blinded) event rates during the study and to adjust the sample size if the interim event rates are unexpectedly low, a practice that is common in superiority trials. There is one further consideration in sample size planning. If, in reality, the test drug is somewhat more effective31than the control, it will be easier to rule out any given NI margin than if the test drug is equivalent or slightly inferior to the control, and a smaller sample size could be used. A somewhat less effective test drug will, of course, require a larger sample size.It may be difficult to adequately plan the sample size for any study, including an NI study, because of uncertainty about assumptions such as event rates or endpoint variability at the time of study planning. For this reason, adaptive study designs that can allow for the prospective re-estimation of a larger sample size at one or more planned interim looks may be considered.F. Study Quality and Choice of Analysis PopulationTraditionally, the primary analysis of a randomized clinical superiority trial follows the intention-to-treat (ITT) principle, namely, all randomized patients are analyzed according to the treatment to which they were randomized, including patients who leave the study prematurely. This approach is intended to avoid various biases associated with patients switching treatment or patients being excluded from the analysis because of protocol violations or attrition. Adhering to the ITT principle in superiority trials is generally considered conservative, in that poor study quality resulting in a large number of protocol violations will tend to bias the results towards the null hypothesis of no difference between treatments. The opposite is true for NI trials. Quality issues could result in treatment groups appearing similar (i.e., biasing the results towards the alternative hypothesis for NI trials), when, in fact, the test drug may be inferior, as mentioned in section III.D.3. Many problems that may cause a superiority trial to fail, such as non-adherence, misclassification of the primary endpoint, or attrition, can bias the results toward no treatment difference (success) and undermine the validity of the trial, creating apparent non-inferiority when the test drug is in fact inferior. Imputation of missing data under the inferiority null hypothesis is one possible approach to countering the bias due to attrition.The best advice for conducting an NI study is to emphasize study quality at the planning stage and continuously monitor the trial during the conduct and analysis stages to minimize the problems described above. If the NI trial is open label, attention to quality is all the more important because it may be very difficult to prove, after the fact, that enrollment, assessment of endpoints, and other study procedures were conducted in an unbiased way.G. Testing Non-Inferiority and Superiority in a Single TrialIn general, when there is only one primary endpoint and one dose of the test treatment, a trial that is planned to demonstrate non-inferiority may also be used to test for superiority without concern about inflating the Type I error rate. This sequential testing procedure has the Type I error rates for tests of both non-inferiority and superiority controlled at the 2.5% level. A study designed primarily to show superiority, however, would yield credible evidence of non-inferiority only if the study had the key features of a NI study (e.g., the NI margin must be prespecified, and assay sensitivity and HESDE must be established). An unplanned determination of non-inferiority following failure to show superiority, when the margin was not determined until results of the trial were known, would not be sufficient for demonstrating non-inferiority of the test drug.32When multiple endpoints or multiple doses of the test treatment are to be evaluated in an NI study that also includes a test for superiority, careful planning of the order in which hypothesis tests are to be carried out is needed. For example, will superiority of the primary endpoint be tested before or after non-inferiority of a key secondary endpoint? A decision tree can be helpful in determining whether adjustments for multiplicity are needed and to what tests they should be applied to ensure that adequate control of the Type I error rate is achieved for the trial. In general, it would not be appropriate to apply 95% confidence intervals for multiple tests of non-inferiority and superiority across multiple endpoints or multiple doses because of the potential to inflate the Type I error rate for the trial; use of larger intervals that reflect adjustment for multiple tests (e.g., 97.5% confidence intervals or higher) may be needed.V. FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS AND GENERAL GUIDANCE1. Can a margin be defined when there are no historical placebo-controlled trials of the active control for the disease being assessed in the NI study?If the active control has shown superiority to other active treatments in the past, the difference demonstrated represents a conservative estimate of HESDE, one that can certainly serve as a basis for choosing M1. It may also be possible that trials of the active control in related diseases are relevant. The more difficult question is whether historical experience from nonconcurrently controlled trials can be used to define the NI margin. The answer is that it can, but only in situations that meet the following three general criteria for assessing the persuasiveness of a historically controlled trial (see ICH E10).• First, there should be a good estimate of the historical untreated response rate or outcome without treatment. Examination of medical literature and other sources of information may provide data upon which to base these estimates (e.g., historical information on natural history or the results of ineffective therapy).• Second, the cure rate of the active control should be estimated from historical experience, preferably from multiple experiences in various settings and possibly including observational studies.• Third, the untreated and treated patients should be comparable.Then, if the treated and untreated response rates are substantially different, it may be possible to determine a NI margin. For example, if the spontaneous cure rate of a disease is 10-20% and the cure rate with an active control is 70-80%, these rates are substantially different and can be used to determine M1. The clinically acceptable loss of this effect can then be determined for M2. Some examples of margins determined in this way have been presented in guidance on antibiotic trials, e.g., trials in community-acquired bacterial pneumonia (see Example 4 in the Appendix). Identifying a margin is more difficult when the difference between the spontaneous cure rate and active drug cure rate is smaller. For example, if the historical spontaneous cure rate is 40% and the active control rate is 55%, identifying the NI margin in this case as 15% would not be reasonable because such a small difference could easily be the result of a different disease definition or ancillary therapy. When the historical cure rates for the active control and the cure rate in patients who receive no treatment are not known at all from actual studies (i.e., are just based on clinical impressions), it will be difficult or impossible to define an NI margin.332. Can the margin M2 be flexible?As discussed in detail in sections III and IV, there is a critical difference between demonstrating that the margins M1 and M2 have been met. M1 is used to determine whether the NI study shows that the test drug has any effect at all. Accepting a result in which the 95% confidence interval did not rule out a loss of M1 or greater would be similar to accepting as evidence of effectiveness a superiority study whose estimated treatment effect was not significant at p ≤ 0.05. M2, in contrast, represents clinical judgment about the amount of the active control effect that must be retained. A typical value for M2 is often 50% of M1, at least partly because the sample sizes needed to retain a larger amount, e.g., 60% or more, of the active control effect become impractically large. In this case, there is a better argument for some degree of flexibility if the study did not quite rule out the M2 margin; there might be reason to consider, for example, assurance of 48% retention as acceptable. We have also concluded that the more conservative fixed margin method should generally be used in ensuring that M1 is ruled out, but that the synthesis method can be used to assess non-inferiority with respect to M2. Of course, allowing the test drug to be inferior to the standard by too large an amount, especially for endpoints of mortality and serious morbidity, would not be acceptable.3. Can prior information or other data (e.g., studies of related drugs, pharmacologic effects) be considered statistically in choosing the NI margins or in deciding whether the NI study has demonstrated its objective?Prior information can be incorporated into a statistical model or within a Bayesian framework to take into account such factors as evidence of effects in other related indications or on other endpoints. As discussed in section IV.B.2.b, a meta-analysis is often used to estimate the average effect of the active control for purposes of setting the NI margin, and in certain circumstances, trials from related indications or for other drugs in the same class may be included in the meta-analysis conducted for this purpose. Some methods of meta-analysis allow the down-weighting of less relevant studies or studies that are not randomized or controlled (e.g., observational studies), which can be particularly important if few placebo-controlled trials are available.Bayesian methods that incorporate historical information from past active control studies through the use of prior distributions of model parameters provide an alternative approach to evaluating non-inferiority in the NI trial itself. Although discussed in the literature and used in other research settings, CDER and CBER have not had much experience to date in evaluating NI trials of new drugs or therapeutic biologics that make use of a Bayesian approach for design and analysis. If a sponsor is planning to conduct a Bayesian NI trial, early discussions with the Agency are advised.If important covariates are distributed differently in the historical studies than in the current NI study, model-based approaches may be used to adjust for these covariates in the NI analysis. Such covariates should be identified prior to the NI trial, and the methods for covariate adjustment should be specified prospectively in the NI trial protocol. Applying34post-hoc adjustments developed at the time of analyzing the NI trial would not be appropriate.4. Can a drug product be used as the active comparator in a study designed to show non-inferiority if the product’s labeling does not have the indication for the disease being studied, and could published reports in the literature be used to support a treatment effect of the active control?The active control does not have to be labeled or approved in the United States for the indication being studied in the NI study as long as there are adequate data that are reliable and reproducible to support the chosen NI margin. FDA does, in some cases, rely on published literature and has done so in carrying out the meta-analyses of the effect of the active control that are used to define NI margins. The FDA guidance, “Providing Clinical Evidence of Effectiveness,” describes the approach to considering the use of literature in providing evidence of effectiveness, and similar considerations would apply here. Among these considerations are:• The quality of the publications (the level of detail provided)• The difficulty of assessing the endpoints used• Changes in practice between the present and the time of the studies• Whether FDA has reviewed some or all of the studies• Whether FDA and the sponsor have access to the original dataAs noted above, the endpoint for the NI study could be different (e.g., death, heart attack, and stroke) from the primary endpoint (cardiovascular death) in the studies if the alternative endpoint is well assessed and data on that endpoint are available for determining M1 (see also question 6).5. If the active control drug is approved for the indication that is being studied, does the margin need to be justified, or if the active control drug has been used as an active comparator in the past in another study of design similar to the current study and a margin has been justified previously, can one simply refer to the previous margin used?When an active control drug is approved for the same indication as that of the NI trial, the size of the effect appearing in the label of the active control is usually based on the pivotal trials rather than a meta-analysis of all past studies. Further, the variability of the effect across past studies may not be available. In general, approval of a drug is based on showing superiority to placebo, usually in at least two studies, but FDA may not have critically assessed whether the effect is consistent across past studies and may not have analyzed any “failed” studies. It is therefore essential to use the data from all available controlled trials (unless a trial has a significant defect), including trials conducted after marketing, to calculate a reasonable estimate of the actual control effect. If the active control data have been used to define the NI margin for another study of the same indication, and if a determination is made that the trials involved are relevant to the new trial, then use of the same margin in the new trial should be acceptable.356. What factors should be considered when selecting an endpoint for a NI trial?The endpoints chosen for clinical trials (superiority or non-inferiority) should be clinically meaningful measures of the way patients feel, function, or survive that can be reliably assessed in the target population. The endpoints generally reflect the event rate or other measure of disease in the population but also must take into account practical considerations, such as the size of the study required to demonstrate superiority or non-inferiority with respect to the endpoint. In NI studies, the endpoint must be one for which there is a good basis for knowing the effect of the active control. The endpoint need not necessarily be the endpoint used in the historical trials or the effectiveness endpoint appearing in labeling of the active control. Past trials that were successful in showing an effect on a mortality endpoint could, for example, serve as the basis for estimating an effect on a composite endpoint (cardiovascular mortality, myocardial infarction, and stroke), if that were the desired endpoint for the NI study. The use of a different endpoint in the NI study might be desirable because it would permit a smaller study, but it would be important not to include components that were not affected by the active control or did not represent an important clinical benefit.7. Are there circumstances where conducting an NI study may not be feasible?Unfortunately, these are several, including some where a placebo-controlled study would not be considered ethical. Some examples include the following:• The treatment effect of the active comparator may be so small that the sample size required to conduct a NI study may not be feasible (unless the test drug is assumed to be superior).• There is large study-to-study variability in the treatment effect. In this case, the treatment effect may not be sufficiently reproducible, calling into question the assumption of assay sensitivity. This is often the case for symptomatic treatments (e.g., treatments for depression, anxiety, insomnia, angina, symptomatic heart failure, symptoms of irritable bowel disease, and pain).• There is no historical evidence available to determine a NI margin, and assuming a zero response rate for untreated patients is not reasonable.• Medical practice has changed so much (e.g., the active control is always used with additional drugs) that the effect of the active control in the historical studies is not relevant to the current study.8. In a situation where a placebo-controlled trial would be considered unethical, but a NI study cannot be performed, what are the options?In that case it may be possible to design a superiority study in an appropriate population that would be considered ethical. Several possibilities are discussed in ICH E10 and include the following:36• When the new drug and an established treatment are pharmacologically distinct, an add-on study where the test drug and placebo are each added to the established treatment.• A study in patients who do not respond to the established therapy. It may be possible to conduct a placebo-controlled trial in these patients. Alternatively, nonresponders could be randomly assigned to the test drug or the failed therapy, and superiority assessed to demonstrate effectiveness in the nonresponder population.• A study in patients who cannot tolerate the established effective therapy.• A study of a population for which there is no available effective therapy.• A dose-response study without placebo, if the new drug is known to have dose-related side effects, and a dose lower than the usual dose would be considered ethical.9. When can a single NI study be sufficient to support effectiveness?Several sections above touch on this question, notably section III.H, which discusses this issue in detail. Briefly, reliance on a single study in the NI setting is based on considerations similar to reliance on a single study in the superiority setting, with the additional consideration of the stringency of showing non-inferiority using the M2 margin. Many of these considerations are described in the FDA guidance, “Providing Clinical Evidence of Effectiveness”, and include supportive information, such as results with pharmacologically similar agents (a very common consideration, because the NI study will often compare drugs of the same pharmacologic class), support from credible biomarker information (tumor responses, ACE inhibition, beta blockade), and a statistically persuasive result from the single NI study. With respect to the latter, it is noted above that a finding of NI based on excluding a treatment difference > M2 provides very strong evidence that the test treatment has an effect > 0 when M2 is substantially smaller than M1. For all these reasons, most NI studies with mortality or serious morbidity as endpoints, if clearly successful, will be sufficient to demonstrate NI as single studies.37APPENDIX — EXAMPLESThe following four examples derived from publicly available information (see references following examples) illustrate determination of the NI margin, application of methods of NI analysis, and other considerations relevant to determining whether it is possible to conduct and interpret the results of an NI study.Example 1(A): Determination of an NI Margin for a New Anticoagulant — Fixed Margin ApproachThis example will demonstrate the following:• Determination of the NI margin (M1) using the fixed margin approach• How to select and assess the randomized trials of the active control on which to base the estimate of active control effect• How to assess whether the assumption of assay sensitivity is appropriate and whether the constancy assumption is reasonable for this drug class• The use of 95% confidence intervals for both margin determination and in the NI study for C-T to demonstrate non-inferiority, i.e., the 95% - 95% methodSPORTIF V is an NI study that tested the novel anticoagulant ximelagatran against the active control warfarin. Warfarin is a highly effective, orally active anticoagulant that is approved in the United States for the treatment of patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation at risk of thromboembolic complications (e.g., stroke, TIA). There are six placebo-controlled studies of warfarin involving the treatment of patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation, all published between the years 1989 and 1993. The primary results of these studies are summarized in Table 1 and provide the basis for choosing the NI margin for SPORTIF V.The point estimate of the event rate (ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes plus systemic embolic events) on warfarin compared to placebo is favorable to warfarin in each of the six studies. The upper bound of the 95% confidence interval of the risk ratio calculated in each study is less than one in five of the six studies, indicating a significant treatment effect in favor of warfarin. The one exception is the CAFA study. However, this study was reportedly stopped early because of favorable results published from the AFASAK and SPAF I studies (Connolly et al. 1991). Although the CAFA study was stopped early, a step that can sometimes lead to an overestimate of effect, the data from this study appear relevant in characterizing the overall evidence of effectiveness of warfarin because there is no reason to think it was stopped for early success, which might have introduced a favorable bias. These placebo-controlled studies of warfarin in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation show a fairly consistent effect. Based on the positive results from five of the six studies, it can reasonably be assumed that were placebo to be included in a warfarin-controlled NI study involving a novel anticoagulant, warfarin would have been superior to placebo.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations38Table 1. Placebo-Controlled Trials of Warfarin in Nonvalvular Atrial FibrillationStudySummaryEvents/Patient YearsRisk Ratio (95% CI)WarfarinPlaceboAFASAKopen label. 1.2 yr follow-up9/413 = 2.18%21/398 = 5.28%0.41 (0.19, 0.89)BAATAFopen label. 2.2 yr follow-up3/487 = 0.62%13/435 = 2.99%0.21 (0.06, 0.72)EAFTopen label. 2.3 yr follow-up patients with recent TIA21/507 = 4.14%54/405 = 13.3%0.31 (0.19, 0.51)CAFA*double blind. 1.3 yr follow-up7/237 = 2.95%11/241 = 4.56%0.65 (0.26, 1.64)SPAF Iopen label. 1.3 yr follow-up8/260 = 3.08%20/244 = 8.20%0.38 (0.17, 0.84)SPINAFdouble blind. 1.7 yr follow-up9/489 = 1.84%24/483 = 4.97%0.37 (0.17, 0.79)* CAFA was stopped early because of favorable results observed in other studies.As can be seen from the summary table, most of these studies were open label. It is not clear how great a concern this should be given the reasonably objective endpoints in the study (see Table 2), but to the extent there was judgment involved in assessing the endpoints, there may have been the potential for bias to be introduced. The event rate for placebo in the EAFT study was strikingly high, perhaps because the patient population in that study was different from the patient population in the remaining five studies, in that only patients with a recent TIA or stroke were enrolled in EAFT. That factor would clearly increase the event rate, but in fact the risk reduction in EAFT was very similar to the four trials other than CAFA, which is relatively reassuring with respect to constancy of risk reduction in various AF populations.Even if the historical studies are consistent, a critical consideration in deciding upon the NI margin is whether the constancy assumption is reasonable. That is, we must consider whether the magnitude of the effect of warfarin relative to placebo in the previous studies would be present in the new NI study, or whether changes in medical practice (e.g., concomitant medications, skill at reaching the desired International Normalised Ratio (INR)), or changes in the population being studied may make the effect of warfarin estimated from the previous studies not relevant to the current NI study.To evaluate the plausibility of this constancy assumption, one might compare some features of the six placebo-controlled warfarin studies with the NI study, SPORTIF V. There is considerable heterogeneity in the demographic characteristics of these studies. While some characteristics can be compared across the studies (e.g., age, race, and target INR), some cannot (e.g., concomitant medication use, race, mean blood pressure at baseline) if they are not consistently reported in the study publications. Whether these are critical to outcomes is the question. Table 2 shows that for some characteristics, such as a history of stroke or TIA, there are some differences across the studies. An important inclusion criterion in the EAFT study was that subjects have a prior history of stroke or TIA. None of the other studies had such a requirement. Subjects enrolled into the EAFT study were thus at higher risk than subjects in the other studies, presumably leading to the higher event rates in both the warfarin and placebo arms, shown in Table 1. The higher event rates in the EAFT study may also have been influenced by the relatively long duration of follow-up or the fact that the primary endpoint definition was broader (including vascular deaths and nonfatal myocardial infarctions), or both. Even with the39higher event rates observed in this one study, however, the risk ratios are quite consistent (with the exception of CAFA), a relatively reassuring outcome.Table 2. Demographic Variables, Clinical Characteristics, and Endpoints ofWarfarin Atrial Fibrillation StudiesAFASAKBAATAFCAFASPAFVAEAFTSPORTIF VAge years (mean)73696865677172Sex (%) Male53%75%76%74%100%59%70%h/o stroke or TIA (%)6%3%3%8%0%100%18.3%h/o HTN (%)32%51%43%49%55%43%81%>65 years old & CAD (%)*8%10-16%12-15%7%17%7%41%>65 years old & DM (%)*7-10%14–16%10-14%13%17%12%19%h/o LV dysfunction (%)*50%24-28%20-23%9%31%8%39%Mean BP at BL (mm Hg)NANANA130/78NA145/84133/77Target INR2.8-4.21.5-2.72-32-4.51.4-2.82.5-4.02-3Primary endpointStroke, TIA, systemic embolismIschemic strokeIschemic stroke and systemic embolismIschemic stroke and systemic embolismIschemic strokeVascular death, NF MI, stroke, systemic embolismStroke (ischemic + hemorrhagic) and systemic embolism* = Not possible to verify whether definitions of CAD, DM, and LV dysfunction were the same in comparing the historic studies and SPORTIF V.NA = Not availableTo calculate M1, the relative risks in each of the six studies were combined using a random effects meta-analysis to give a point estimate of 0.361 for the relative risk with a confidence interval of (0.248, 0.527). The 95% confidence interval upper bound of 0.527 represents a 47% risk reduction, which translates into a risk increase of about 90% from not being on warfarin (1/0.527 = 1.898) (i.e., what would be seen if the test drug had no effect). Thus, M1 (in terms of the hazard ratio favoring the control to be ruled out) is 1.898.It was considered clinically important to show that the test drug preserved a substantial fraction of the warfarin effect. The clinical margin M2 representing the largest acceptable level of inferiority was therefore set at 50% of M1. M2 was calculated on the log hazard scale as 1.378, so that NI would be demonstrated provided the upper bound for the 95% confidence interval for C vs. T < 1.378.In the SPORTIF V study, the point estimate of the relative risk was 1.39, and the two-sided 95% confidence interval for the relative risk was (0.91, 2.12). Thus, in this example, the non-inferiority of ximelegatran to warfarin is not demonstrated because the upper limit (2.12) is greater than M2 (=1.378). Indeed, it does not even demonstrate that M1 (=1.898) has been excluded.40Example 1(B): Application of the Synthesis Method to Example 1(A)This example demonstrates the following:• The critical features of the synthesis method for demonstrating non-inferiority of a new anticoagulant• The calculations and sources of statistical variability that are incorporated in the synthesis approach• The main differences in interpretation of results from the fixed margin and the synthesis approaches when applied to the same set of studies and dataIn this example, we illustrate the synthesis method using the same data as Example 1(A), which consist of six studies comparing warfarin to placebo and one NI study comparing ximelegatran to warfarin. In contrast to the fixed margin method in Example 1(A), the synthesis method does not use a separate 95% confidence interval for this historical estimate of the effect of warfarin versus placebo and for the comparison in the NI study. Rather, the synthesis method is constructed to address the questions of whether ximelegatran preserves a specified percent, in this case 50% of the effect of warfarin, and whether ximelegatran would be superior to a placebo, if placebo had been included as a randomized treatment group in the NI study. To accomplish this goal, the synthesis method makes a comparison of the effect of ximelegatran in the NI study to historical placebo data, an indirect comparison that is not based upon a randomized concurrent placebo group. The synthesis method combines the data from the placebo-controlled studies of warfarin with the data from the NI study in such a way that a test of hypothesis is made to demonstrate that a certain percent of the effect of warfarin is retained in the NI study. A critical point distinguishing the synthesis method from the fixed margin method is that the effect (M1) of warfarin is not specified in advance. But to carry out the analysis, an assumption needs to be made regarding the placebo comparison, namely, that the difference between control drug and placebo (had there been one) in the NI trial is the same as that seen in the historical placebo-controlled trials of warfarin. The assumption is needed because there is no randomized comparison of warfarin and placebo in the NI trial. As a point of reference, we know from example 1(A) that the warfarin effect M1 was estimated from the historical placebo-controlled studies to be a 47% risk reduction.In this case, the synthesis method statistically tests the null hypothesis that the inferiority of ximelegatran compared to warfarin is less than 50% or one half of the risk reduction of warfarin compared to placebo, a question that the fixed margin method does not directly address because in the fixed margin method, the placebo is only present in the historical studies and not in the NI study. We carry out this test on the log relative risk scale, so that the null hypothesis can be written as:41H0: {log-relative risk of ximelegatran versus warfarin} ≥− ½ {log-relative risk of warfarin versus placebo}A test of this hypothesis is performed by the expression below (the statistical test) that has the form of a quotient where the numerator is an estimate of the parameter defined in the null hypothesis by {log-relative risk of ximelegatran versus warfarin} + ½ {log-relative risk of warfarin versus placebo} and the denominator is an estimate of the standard error of the numerator. In this case, the estimated log-relative risk of ximelegatran versus warfarin is 0.329 (log of 1.39) with a standard error of 0.216 while the estimated log-relative risk of warfarin versus placebo is − 1.02 (log of .361) with a standard error of 0.154. These estimates are combined, and the synthesis test statistic is calculated as:()()[]789.0154.021216.002.121329.022−=+−+Assuming the statistic is normally distributed, it is then compared to − 1.96 (for a one-sided Type I error rate of 0.025). For this case, the value, − 0.789, is not less (more negative) than − 1.96, so we cannot reject the null hypothesis. Therefore, it cannot be concluded that an NI margin of 50% retention is satisfied using the synthesis method.The fixed margin test statistic for this example is:()()618.0154.021216.002.121329.0−=+−+This value, -0.618, is also greater than -1.96. Neither method leads to a conclusion of non-inferiority for this example.42Example 2: Aspirin to Prevent Death or Death/MI After Myocardial InfarctionThis example demonstrates the following:• When it may not be possible to determine the NI margin because of the limitations of the data availableBy 1993, the effect of aspirin in preventing death after myocardial infarction had been studied in six large randomized placebo-controlled clinical trials. A seventh trial, ISIS-2, gave the drug during the first day after the AMI and is not included because it addressed a different question. The results are summarized and presented in Table 3.Table 3. Results of Six Placebo-Controlled Randomized Studies of the Effect of Aspirin in Preventing Death After Myocardial InfarctionStudyYear publishedAspirinPlaceboRelative Risk (95% CI)NDeath rateNDeath rateMRC-119746158.0%62410.7%0.74 (0.52, 1.05)CDP19767585.8%7718.3%0.70 (0.48, 1.01)MRC-2197983212.2%85014.8%0.83 (0.65, 1.05)GASP197831710.1%30912.3%0.82 (0.53, 1.28)PARIS198081010.5%40612.8%0.82 (0.59, 1.13)AMIS1980226710.9%22579.7%1.12 (0.94, 1.33)The results suggest:1. The effect of aspirin on mortality as measured by the relative risk appears to diminish over the years in which the studies were conducted.2. The largest trial, AMIS, showed a numerically higher mortality rate in the aspirin-treated group.The relative risk in the AMIS study is significantly different from the mean relative risk in the remaining studies (p ≤ 0.005). The validity of pooling the results of AMIS with those of the remaining studies is therefore a concern. It would be invalid to exclude AMIS from the meta-analyses because the effect in AMIS differed from the effect in the remaining studies unless there were adequate clinical or scientific reasons for such exclusion. At a minimum, any meta-analysis of all studies would need to reflect this heterogeneity by using a random effects meta-analysis.Although a fixed effects meta-analysis of the six studies gives a point estimate of 0.91 (95% confidence interval 0.82 to 1.02), the random-effects analysis gives a point estimate of 0.86 with 95% confidence interval (0.69, 1.08). The effect of aspirin on prevention of death after myocardial infarction in these historical studies is thus inconclusive (i.e., the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval for effect is > 1.0). Therefore, it is not possible to select aspirin as the active control for evaluating the mortality effect of a test drug in an NI trial. Even if the upper43bound excluded 1.0, it would be difficult to rely on an NI margin that is not supported by AMIS, the largest of the six trials.The same six studies can also be examined for the combined endpoint of death plus AMI in patients with recent AMI. This endpoint reflects the current physician-directed claim for aspirin based on the positive finding in two studies (MRC-2, PARIS).Table 4. Results of Six Placebo-Controlled Randomized Studies of the Effect of Aspirin in Secondary Prevention of Death or MI After Myocardial InfarctionStudyYearpublishedAspirinPlaceboRelative Risk (95% CI)NEvent rate*NEvent rate*MRC-119746159.9%62413.1%0.75 (0.55, 1.03)CDP19767589.5%77112.5%0.76 (0.57, 1.02)MRC-2197983216.0%85022.2%0.72 (0.59, 0.88)GASP197831713.6%30917.5%0.78 (0.54, 1.12)PARIS198081017.4%40622.7%0.77 (0.61, 0.97)AMIS1980226718.6%225719.2%0.97 (0.86, 1.09)*The event rates of both groups need further verification from each article.The results indicate that the effect of aspirin on death or MI after myocardial infarction is small to absent in the latest trial (AMIS). Random effects meta-analyses give point estimates of the relative risk of approximately 0.8 with 95% confidence interval upper bounds of approximately 1.0. The NI margin based on these six studies is close to zero (without reducing it further to represent M2) and is so small that an NI trial would be unrealistically large. Again, as with the mortality endpoint, it would be troubling even to consider an NI approach when the largest and most recent trial showed no significant effect.44Example 3: Xeloda to Treat Metastatic Colorectal Cancer — the Synthesis MethodThis example of Xeloda for first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer illustrates:• The use of the synthesis method to demonstrate a loss of no more than 50% of the historical control treatment’s effect and a relaxation of this criterion when two NI studies are available• The use of additional endpoints in the decision-making process• The use of a conservative estimate of the active control effect because (1) a subset of the available studies to estimate the margin was selected and (2) the effect was measured relative to a previous standard of care instead of placeboThe U.S. regulatory standard for first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer, the use sought for Xeloda, is the demonstration of improvement in overall survival. Two separate clinical trials, each using an NI study design, compared Xeloda to a Mayo Clinic regimen of 5-fluorouracil with leucovorin (5-FU+LV), the standard of care at the time. Xeloda is an oral fluoropyrimidine, while 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is an infusional fluoropyrimidine.By itself, bolus 5-FU had not demonstrated a survival advantage in first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer. But with the addition of leucovorin to bolus 5-FU, the combination had demonstrated improved survival. A systematic evaluation of approximately 30 studies that investigated the effect of adding leucovorin to a regimen of 5-FU identified 10 clinical trials that compared a regimen of 5-FU+LV similar to the Mayo Clinic regimen to 5-FU alone, thereby providing a measure of the effect of LV added to 5-FU — a conservative estimate of the overall effect of 5-FU+LV as it is likely 5-FU has some effect.Table 5 summarizes the overall survival results, using the metric “log hazard ratio” for the 10 studies identified that addressed the comparison of interest.Table 5. Selected Studies Comparing 5-FU to 5-FU+LVStudyHazard Ratio1Log Hazard Ratio1Standard ErrorHistorical Study 11.35.301.232Historical Study 21.26.235.188Historical Study 30.78-.253.171Historical Study 41.15.143.153Historical Study 51.39.329.185Historical Study 61.35.300.184Historical Study 71.38.324.166Historical Study 81.34.294.126Historical Study 91.03.0296.165Historical Study 101.95.670.1721 All log hazard ratios are 5-FU/5-FU+LVA random effects model applied to the survival results of these 10 studies yielded the historical estimate of the 5-FU versus 5-FU+LV survival comparison of a hazard ratio of 1.264 with a 95%45confidence interval of (1.09, 1.46) and a log hazard ratio of 0.234. The NI margin is therefore 1.09 for a fixed margin approach ruling out M1.A summary of the survival results based on the intent-to-treat populations for each of the two Xeloda NI trials is presented in Table 6. Study 2 rules out M1 using a fixed margin approach, but Study 1 does not.Table 6. Summary of the Survival ResultsStudyHazard Ratio1Log Hazard Ratio1Standard Error95% confidence interval for theHazard Ratio1NI Study 11.00-0.00360.0868(0.84, 1.18)NI Study 20.92-0.08440.0867(0.78, 1.09)1 Hazard ratios and log hazard ratios are Xeloda/5-FU+LVThe clinical choice of how much of the effect on survival of 5-FU+LV should be retained by Xeloda was determined to be 50%. The synthesis approach was used to analyze whether the NI criteria of 50% loss was met. This synthesis approach for each study combines the results of that NI study with the results from the random effects meta-analysis to produce a normalized test statistic.Based on this NI synthesis test procedure, NI Study 1 failed to demonstrate that Xeloda retained at least 50% of the historical effect of 5-FU+LV versus 5-FU on overall survival, but NI Study 2 did demonstrate such an effect. It was then decided to determine what percent retention was demonstrated. By adapting the synthesis test procedure for retention of an arbitrary percent of the 5-FU+LV historical effect, it was determined that NI Study 1 demonstrated that Xeloda lost no more than 90% of the historical effect of 5-FU+LV on overall survival and that NI Study 2 demonstrated no more than a 39% loss of the historical effect.The evidence of effectiveness of Xeloda was supported by the observation that the tumor response rates were statistically significantly greater for the Xeloda arm and the fact that Xeloda and 5-FU were structurally and pharmacologically very similar.46Example 4: Determination of an NI margin for Community-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonia (CABP) When No Historical Trials Are AvailableThis example illustrates the following points:• The use of risk differences as the metric for estimated treatment effects• The determination of the NI margin using observational data when no randomized, placebo-controlled trials of active control drugs are availableCommunity-acquired bacterial pneumonia (CABP) is an acute bacterial infection of the pulmonary parenchyma associated with chest pain, cough, sputum production, difficulty breathing, chills, rigors, fever, or hypotension, and is accompanied by the presence of a new lobar or multi-lobar infiltrate on a chest radiograph. FDA issued revised draft guidance for developing treatments of CAPB in 2014, and the appendix in that guidance describes in detail the justification for NI margins with respect to two endpoints: clinical response and mortality.3 Historical data from nonrandomized studies of bacteremic and nonbacteremic patients with pneumococcal or lobar pneumonia were evaluated to justify NI margins for use in future CABP studies. For the clinical response endpoint, historical data are relied upon not only to determine an acceptable NI margin but also to decide the time point following treatment at which non-inferiority should be assessed. For the mortality endpoint, margin determination is more straightforward and provided here for illustration.An area of uncertainty in evaluating historical data is the spectrum of bacterial pathogens that cause CABP today. In most of the historical studies, CABP was considered synonymous with pneumococcal pneumonia because S. pneumoniae was regularly identified. CABP is also caused by other pathogens such as H. influenzae, H. parainfluenzae, S. aureus, and M. catarrhalis, as well as atypical bacteria such as M. pneumoniae, C. pneumoniae, and Legionella species. A fundamental assumption is that historical response rates in infections such as S. pneumoniae CABP are relevant to response rates in modern infections with sensitive organisms.Table 7 provides an overview of the historical studies available for estimation of mortality rates among both treated and untreated patients with pneumococcal pneumonia. In all of the studies, a significant mortality benefit was shown for patients treated with antibacterial drugs (including sulfonamides, penicillin, and tetracyclines) compared to patients who received no specific therapy (untreated).3 See the revised draft guidance for industry Community-Acquired Bacterial Pneumonia: Developing Drugs for Treatment. When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on this topic.47Table 7. Mortality in Observational Studies of Pneumococcal PneumoniaPublicationPopulationMortality (%):Untreated Patients(Study Years)Mortality (%):Antibacterial-Treated Patients(Study Years)Treatment DifferenceUntreated-Treated (95% CI)Finland (1943)≥ 12 years oldbacteremic and nonbacteremicN=2,832(1929-1940)*41%N=1,220(1939-1941)17% (sulfonamides)24% (21%, 27%)Dowling and Lepper (1951)≥ 10 years oldbacteremic and nonbacteremicN=1,087(1939, 1940)*30.5%N=1,274(1938-1950)12.3% (sulfonamides)N=920(1938-1950)5.1%(penicillins and tetracyclines)18.2% (15%, 21%)25.4% (22%, 28%)Austrian and Gold (1964)≥ 12 years oldbacteremicN=17(1952-1962)82%N=437(1952-1962)17%65% (41%, 79%)* Historical control patientsThere are two limitations in the use of these data to determine an NI margin. First, only observational data are presented, and second, no recent studies were available, with the most recent dating to the 1960s. Significant improvements in the standard of care and the availability of better treatment options for patients with CABP compared to the preantibiotic era bring into question the relevance of these historical studies in estimating an active control effect with respect to mortality. In spite of these limitations, the mortality rates among the treated patient cohorts are reasonably consistent, ranging from 5% to 17% across the three decades represented. Mortality rates in the untreated cohorts are more variable. The older references provide estimates of 31% and 41%, while the more recent study gives an estimated mortality rate of 82%, but this estimate is based on a very small sample size (n=17).In the absence of any placebo-controlled trials of active control drugs in this disease area, it is not possible to estimate M1 using the methods advocated in this guidance document (e.g., the 95%-95% method), but it is clear that the untreated mortality is substantial. Thus, based on the historical evidence described above, with the caveats noted about the nature and age of the studies, it is reasonable to assume that the mortality rate due to CABP, if left untreated, will be substantially higher than the rates observed among the treated cohorts. Use of an NI margin (M2) of approximately 10% is therefore a valid approach for evaluating new treatments of CABP and would clearly represent an effect superior to no treatment as well as, based on clinical judgment, an appropriate clinical margin.Collection of Race and Ethnicity Data in Clinical TrialsGuidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff1I. INTRODUCTIONThe purpose of this guidance is to provide FDA expectations for and recommendations on use of a standardized approach for collecting and reporting race and ethnicity data in submissions for clinical trials for FDA regulated medical products conducted in the United States and abroad. Using standard terminology for age, sex, race, and ethnicity helps ensure that subpopulation data is collected consistently. The recommended standardized approach is based on the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Directive 152 and developed in accordance with section 4302 of the Affordable Care Act3, the HHS Implementation Guidance on Data Collection Standards for Race, Ethnicity, Sex, Primary Language, and Disability Status4, and the Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act5 (FDASIA) Section 907 Action Plan6. This guidance lists the OMB1 This guidance has been developed by the Agency-wide Race and Ethnicity Working Group from the Office of the Commissioner (OC), the Office of Minority Heath (OMH), the Office of Women’s Health (OWH), the Office of Public Health Strategy and Analysis (OPHSA), the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), and the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).2 Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Directive No. 15 Revisions to the Standards for the Classification of Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity (October 30, 1997), available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/fedreg_1997standards3 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Public Law 111-148, Section 4302 (42 U.S.C. § 300kk) (March 23, 2010), available at https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CREC-2009-11-19/pdf/CREC-2009-11-19-pt1-PgS11607- 3.pdf#page=1274 HHS Implementation Guidance on Data Collection Standards for Race, Ethnicity, Sex, Primary Language, and Disability Status (October 31, 2011), available at https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/76331/index.pdf5 Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA), Public Law 112-144 (July 9, 2012), available at https://www.congress.gov/bill/112th-congress/senate-bill/3187This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, please contact the relevant FDA review division for your medical product.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2categories for race and ethnicity and describes FDA's reasons for recommending the use of these categories in medical product (drugs, biologics, and devices) applications. In addition, this guidance recommends a format for collection of race and ethnicity clinical trial data that are submitted in standardized data sets per the Study Data Tabulation Model7, in the electronic Common Technical Document (eCTD)8, and as specified in FDA’s Guidance on providing regulatory submissions in electronic format9.This document is intended to provide guidance on:• Meeting the requirements set forth in the 1998 final rule10 regarding presentation of demographic data on investigational new drug (IND) applications and new drug applications (NDAs) (known as the “Demographic Rule”) and collection of race and ethnicity data in biologics license applications (BLAs) and medical device applications• Addressing the FDA Safety and Innovation Act, Section 907 Action Plan6 to improve demographic subgroup gaps in data qualityFDA's guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency's current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. SCOPEThis document is intended to provide guidance on the collection of race and ethnicity in clinical trials. This guidance provides clarifying recommendations on the two step collection process of race and ethnicity data and has been developed in support of the FDASIA 907 Action Plan to improve the completeness and quality of demographic subgroup data. This guidance replaces the 2005 FDA guidance on Collection of Race and Ethnicity in Clinical Trials11.6 FDA Action Plan To Enhance The Collection and Availability of Demographic Subgroup Data (August 2014), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Lefislation/SignificantAmendmentstothe FDCAct/FDASIA/UCM410474.pdf7 CDISC standardized Study Data Tabulation Model (SDTM), Analysis Data Model (ADaM), Operational Data Model (ODM), http://www.cdisc.org/system/files/members/standard/study_data_tabulation_model_v1_4.pdf8 Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic Format – Certain Human Pharmaceutical Product Applications and Related Submissions Using the eCTD Specifications: Guidance for Industry (May 2015), available at http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/FormsSubmissionRequirements/ElectronicSubmissions/uc m153574.htm9 Providing Regulatory Submissions In Electronic Format - Standardized Study Data: Guidance for Industry (December 2014), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/.../Guidances/UCM292334.pdf10 63 FR 6854 (February 11, 1998) (codified at 21 CFR 312.33(a)(2) and 21 CFR 314.50(d)(5)),https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-1998-02-11/pdf/98-3422.pdf11 Collection of Race and Ethnicity in Clinical Trials (September 2005), http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm126396.pdfContains Nonbinding Recommendations3For drugs, the Demographic Rule requires IND holders to tabulate in their annual report the number of participants enrolled in clinical trials by age, race, and sex and requires sponsors of NDAs to include summaries of effectiveness and safety data for important demographic subgroups, including racial subgroups13. FDA also strongly recommends the collection and reporting of ethnicity data (Hispanic-Latino/not Hispanic-Latino) consistent with OMB standards and guidelines2.This guidance is also intended to help applicants in preparing BLAs.For medical devices, FDA also recommends application sponsors collect ethnicity and race data in accordance with the OMB recommendations2, the information collection standards discussed in this guidance document and, when finalized, the Center for Devices and Radiologic Health (CDRH) and Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) Age/Race/Ethnicity draft guidance document14.FDA expectations are that sponsors enroll participants who reflect the demographics for clinically relevant populations with regard to age, sex, race, and ethnicity13. A plan to address inclusion of clinically relevant subpopulations should be submitted for discussion to the Agency at the earliest phase of development and, for drugs and biologics, no later than the end of the phase 2 meeting. Inadequate participation and/or data analyses from clinically relevant subpopulations can lead to insufficient information pertaining to medical product safety and effectiveness for product labeling. Patient characteristics such as age, sex, geographic location (e.g. rural), emotional, physical, sensory, and cognitive capabilities can often be important variables when evaluating medical product safety and efficacy. However, these will not be addressed within this guidance.This guidance does not address the level of participation of racial and ethnic groups in clinical trials. For questions related to the level of participation or the size of a trial, sponsors should13 21 CFR § 312.33(a)(2) (April 1, 2015). See also 21 CFR § 314.50(d)(5)(v) and (vi)(a) regarding demographic data submission in NDAs, available at http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/textidx?SID=41aa69ac1cd29cf7eb1c3b24d764f310 &mc=true&node=se21.5.314_150&rgn=div814 Draft Guidance: Evaluation and Reporting of Age, Race, and Ethnicity Data in Medical Device Clinical Studies (June 2016), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/ GuidanceDocuments/UCM507278.pdf. Draft guidances are included for completeness only. As draft documents, they are not intended to be implemented until published in final form.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4consult with the review division of the appropriate centers and office15 16 17for guidance on clinical trial design and demographic sub-groups prior to the start of a trial.III. BACKGROUNDOver recent decades the Agency’s views, as well as those of the medical community, have evolved regarding the collection of race and ethnicity information in clinical studies.Prior to developing the recommendations set forth in this guidance, FDA publicly sought input from a variety of experts and stakeholders regarding the study and evaluation of age, race, and ethnicity in clinical studies for medical products. On April 1, 2014, FDA convened a public hearing18 for feedback19 on the findings of the FDASIA 907 Report, to obtain input on the issues and challenges associated with the collection, analysis, and availability of demographic subgroup data (i.e., age, sex, race, and ethnicity) in applications for approval of FDA‐regulated medical products. FDA also opened a public docket for further input18. On April 9, 201520 and December 2, 201521, various government agencies, physician professional societies, and patient advocacy groups participated in public workshops to discuss strategies for ensuring diversity, inclusion, and meaningful participation in clinical trials. This guidance reflects the concerns and recommendations generated in these and other public fora. The following is a brief history of the adoption of the OMB categories for reporting of race and ethnicity data by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and FDA.A. Department of Health and Human Services Report and GuidanceIn 1999, HHS issued a report, Improving the Collection and Use of Racial and Ethnic Data in HHS22. The report describes HHS policy on collecting and reporting data on race and15 Center for Devices and Radiological Health Organization, http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/OrganizationCharts/ucm347835.htm16 CBER Offices and Divisions, http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/OfficeofMedicalProductsandTobacco/CBER/ucm122875.htm17 CDER Offices and Divisions, http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/OfficeofMedicalProductsandTobacco/CDER/ucm075128.htm18 Notice of Public Hearing: Action Plan for the Collection, Analysis, and Availability of Demographic Subgroup Data in Applications for Approval of Food and Drug Administration-Regulated Medical Products, 79 FR 42, 12134 (March 4, 2014), available at https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2014/03/04/2014-04625/action-plan-for-the- collection-analysis-and-availability-of-demographic-subgroup-data-in19 http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Legislation/SignificantAmendmentstotheFDCAct/FDASIA/UCM397391.pdf (April 1, 2014)20 Institute of Medicine Workshop: Strategies for Ensuring Diversity, Inclusion, and Meaningful Participation in Clinical Trials (April 9, 2015), available at http://www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/Activities/SelectPops/HealthDisparities/2015-APR-09.aspx21 FDA Public Meeting: Clinical Trials-Assessing Safety and Efficacy for Diverse Populations, 80 FR 210, 66909 (October 30, 2015), available at https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2015/10/30/2015-27728/clinical-trials- assessing-safety-and-efficacy-for-diverse-populations-public-meeting-request-for22 Improving the Collection and Use of Racial and Ethnic Data in HHS (December 1, 1999), available at https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/improving-collection-and-use-racial-and-ethnic-data-hhsContains Nonbinding Recommendations5ethnicity for HHS programs. The report asks for the inclusion of race and ethnicity categories in HHS funded and sponsored data collection and reporting systems in all HHS programs, including in both health and human services. The policy was developed to (1) help monitor HHS programs, (2) determine whether Federal funds are being used in a nondiscriminatory manner, and (3) promote the availability of standard race and ethnicity data across various agencies to facilitate HHS responses to major health and human services issues. This policy, updated in 20114, clearly states that the minimum standard categories in OMB Policy Directive 152 should be used when collecting and reporting data in HHS data systems or reporting HHS funded statistics23.B. ICH E5 - Guidance on Ethnic Factors in the Acceptability of Foreign Clinical DataIn 1999, as part of an international effort by the United States and others to harmonize technical requirements for pharmaceutical drug development and regulation (the International Conference on Harmonization (ICH)), the FDA published a guidance entitled E5 Guidance on Ethnic Factors in the Acceptability of Foreign Clinical Data24 (63 FR 31790, June 10, 1998), that described how clinical data collected in one region could be used in the registration or approval of a drug or biological product in another region, taking into account the influence of ethnic factors. The E5 guidance defines ethnic factors that affect response in terms of both intrinsic and extrinsic issues. Because differences in ethnic factors have the potential to affect responses in some subpopulations, the E5 guidance provides a general framework for evaluating medicines with regard to their sensitivity to ethnic factors. In particular, the Question and Answer Addendum to E5 introduces the multi-regional clinical trial study design as one means to evaluate treatment response heterogeneity and extrapolation. Multi-regional clinical trials may present special situations for the collection and self-reporting of race and ethnicity.C. National Institutes of Health Initiatives, Revitalization ActIn 1993, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Revitalization Act25 directed NIH to establish guidelines for including women and minorities in NIH-sponsored clinical research26. In 2001, NIH was directed27 to ensure that women and minorities were included as participants, unless their exclusion was justified due to circumstances specified by NIH guidelines. Furthermore, clinical trials were to be designed and carried out in a23 On September 21, 2016, HHS issued the final rule on Clinical Trials Registration and Results Information Submission (42 CFR Part 11). When fully implemented, the final rule will require the submission of race and ethnicity information with summary results information, if it is collected during the trial. Available at https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2016-09-21/pdf/2016-22129.pdf24 E5 Guidance on Ethnic Factors in the Acceptability of Foreign Clinical Data, available at http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web_Site/ICH_Products/Guidelines/Efficacy/E5_R1/Step4/E5_R1 Guideline. pdf25 NIH Revitalization Act of 1993, (PL 103-43) (June 10, 1993), available at https://grants.nih.gov/grants/olaw/pl103- 43.pdf26 NIH Revitalization Act of 1993, (PL 103-43), Subtitle B (June 10, 1993), available at http://orwh.od.nih.gov/about/pdf/NIH-Revitalization-Act-1993.pdf27 NIH Policy and Guidelines on The Inclusion of Women and Minorities as Subjects in Clinical Research (October 2001), available at https://grants.nih.gov/grants/funding/women_min/guidelines_amended_10_2001.htmContains Nonbinding Recommendations6manner that would elicit information across either sex and diverse racial and ethnic subgroups to examine differential effects on such groups.NIH guidelines stipulate that when proposing a phase 3 clinical trial, evidence must be reviewed to establish whether or not there are potentially clinically important sex- and racial/ethnic-based differences in the anticipated effects of the intervention. If previous studies support the existence of significant differences, the primary questions and design of the trial must specifically accommodate this. For example, if men and women are thought to respond differently to an intervention, then the phase 3 clinical trial must be designed to answer two separate primary questions, one for men, and the other for women. When prior studies support no significant differences for either sex or racial/ethnic subgroups with a given intervention, then sex and racial/ethnic status will not be required as subject selection criteria, although the inclusion and analysis by sex and racial/ethnic groups is strongly encouraged. When prior studies neither support nor negate significant differences, then the design of the phase 3 clinical trial will be required to include sufficient and appropriate entry of sex and racial/ethnic participants so that valid analysis of the intervention effects can be performed. However, the trial will not be required to provide high statistical power for these comparisons.D. FDA Regulations, Guidances, and Section 907 of the Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act of 2012 (FDASIA)In 1997, OMB issued its revised recommendations for the collection and use of race and ethnicity data by Federal agencies (Policy Directive 15)2. OMB stated that its race and ethnicity categories were not anthropologically or scientifically-based designations, but instead were categories that described the sociocultural construct of our society.As outlined in FDA’s 2005 Guidance on Collection of Race and Ethnicity in Clinical Trials11, FDA recommended the use of the standardized OMB race and ethnicity categories for data collection in clinical trials for two reasons. First, the use of the recommended OMB categories will help ensure consistency in demographic subset analyses in applications submitted to FDA13 and in data collected by other government agencies. Second, consistency in these categories may make the demographic subset analysis more useful in evaluating potential differences in the safety and effectiveness of medical products among population subgroups. To assess potential subgroup differences in a meaningful way, it is important to use uniform, standard methods of defining racial and ethnic subgroups.FDA regulations require sponsors of Investigational New Drugs (INDs)28 to report the total number of subjects initially planned for inclusion in the study; the number entered into the study to date, tabulated by age group, sex, and race; the number whose participation in the study was completed as planned; and the number who dropped out of the study for any28 21 CFR § 312.33(a)(2), available at https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=312.33Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7reason. FDA regulations for NDAs require sponsors to present a summary of safety and effectiveness data by demographic subgroups (age, sex, race, and other subgroups as appropriate)29, as well as an analysis of whether modifications of dose or dosage intervals are needed for specific subgroups30. FDA recommends the identification of a subject’s race and/or ethnicity in such summaries.Section 907 of FDASIA directed the Agency to develop a report31 “addressing the extent to which clinical trial participation and the inclusion of safety and effectiveness data by demographic subgroups, including sex, age, race, and ethnicity, is included in applications submitted to the Food and Drug Administration.” Section 907 also directed FDA to develop an action plan outlining “recommendations for improving the completeness and quality of analyses of data on demographic subgroups in summaries of product safety and effectiveness data and in labeling; on the inclusion of such data, or the lack of availability of such data, in labeling; and on improving the public availability of such data to patients, health care providers, and researchers.” In support of that Action Plan, FDA has developed this guidance as one of the actions to improve the completeness and quality of demographic subgroup dataRelevance of Population Subgroup StudiesDifferences in response to medical products have already been observed in racially and ethnically distinct subgroups of the U.S. population32. These differences may be attributable to intrinsic factors (e.g., genetics, metabolism, elimination), extrinsic factors (e.g., diet, environmental exposure, sociocultural issues), or interactions between these factors (Huang 2008)33.An FDA review of drug approvals between 2008 and 2013 found that approximately one-fifth of new drugs demonstrated some differences in exposure and/or response across racial/ethnic groups (Ramamoorthy 2015)34. For example, racial differences29 21 CFR § 314.50(d)(5)(v) and (vi)(a) (October 2015). See also Integrated Summary of Effectiveness Guidance for Industry, available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/ guidances/ucm079803.pdf30 Under 21 CFR 314.101(d)(3), the Agency may refuse to file an NDA if it is incomplete because it does not contain information required by 21 CFR 314.50. Thus, if there is an inadequate evaluation for safety and/or effectiveness of the population intended to use the drug, including pertinent subsets, such as sex, age, and racial subsets the Agency may refuse to file the application. See FDA's Manual of Policies and Procedures, Office of New Drugs, Good Review Practice: Refuse to File (October 10, 2013), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/ CentersOffices/OfficeofMedicalProductsandTobacco/CDER/ManualofPoliciesProcedures/UCM370948.pdf31 FDA Report Collection, Analysis, and Availability of Demographic Subgroup Data for FDA-Approved Medical Products (August 2013), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Legislation/ SignificantAmendmentstotheFDCAct/FDASIA/UCM365544.pdf32 In fact, in June of 2005, FDA approved BiDil, the first drug approved by the Agency to treat a disease in patients identified by race. The drug was approved for the treatment of heart failure in Black patients. The sponsor conducted two trials in the general population that failed to show a benefit, but suggested a benefit of BiDil in Black patients. The company then studied the drug in 1,050 self-identified Black patients and it was shown to be safe and effective.33 Huang SM & Temple R, 2008, “Is this the drug or dose for you? Impact and consideration of ethnic factors in global drug development, regulatory review, and clinical practice,” Clin Pharmacol Ther, 84: 287-29434 Ramamoorthy A, Pacanowski MA, Bull, J, and Zhang L, 2015, "Racial/ethnic differences in drug disposition and response: review of recently approved drugs," Clin Pharmacol Ther, 97: 263-273.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8in skin structure and physiology can affect response to dermatologic and topically applied products (Taylor 2002)35. Mortality rates of patients on dialysis have been shown to differ across race and ethnicity groups36. Several studies have also shown that Blacks respond less well to several classes of antihypertensive agents (beta blockers and angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors) (Exner 200137 and Yancy 200138). For cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6), an important enzyme that metabolizes drugs belonging to a variety of therapeutic areas such as antidepressants, antipsychotics, and beta blockers, the frequency of poor metabolizers is higher in Whites39 (7-10%) and Blacks or African Americans (3-8%) than in persons of Asian heritage (Xie 2001)40. The incidence of anticonvulsant carbamazepine41-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis has shown a strong association with HLA-B*1502 (Chung 200442), an allele that is highly prevalent in Asian populations (particularly Chinese) when compared to non-Asian populations (Hung 200643and Alfirevic 200644).Collecting data on race and/or ethnicity is critical to identifying population-specific signals. As illustrated above, genetic studies may explain the basis for observed differences in pharmacokinetics, efficacy, or safety across racial or ethnic subgroups, and FDA has recommended collection of DNA samples in clinical trials for such purposes45. FDA has also published guidance on enrichment strategies for selecting participants for clinical trials based on prognostic or predicative biomarkers (such as genotype)46.35 Taylor S, 2002, “Skin of Color: Biology, Structure, Function, and Implications for Dermatologic Disease,” Journal of American Academy of Dermatology, 46: S41-6236 Yan, Guofen, et al., 2013, "The relationship of age, race, and ethnicity with survival in dialysis patients," Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology, 8.6: 953-961.37 Exner D, Dries D, Donamski M, and Cohn J, 2001, “Lesser Response to Angiotensin Converting-Enzyme Inhibitor Therapy in Black as Compared with White Patients With Left Ventricular Dysfunction,” N Engl J Med, 344: 1351- 135738 Yancy C, Fowler M, Colucci W, Gilbert E, Bristow M, et al., 2001, “Race and the Response to Adrenergic Blockade with Carvedilol in Patients with Chronic Heart Failure,” N Engl J Med, 344: 1358-1365.39 The terms used in this guidance to describe the various racial and ethnic groups are those used by OMB40 Xie H, Kim R, Wood A, and Stein C, 2001, “Molecular Basis of Ethnic Differences in Drug Disposition and Response,” Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol, 41: 815-850.41 Carbamazepine postmarket drug safety and information (December 12, 2007), available at http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/PostmarketDrugSafetyInformationforPatientsandProviders/ucm124718.htm42 Chung, WH, Hung, SI, Hong, HS, Hsih, MS, Yang, LC, et al, 2004, “A Marker for Stevens-Johnson Syndrome,” Nature, 428: 486.43 Hung SI, Chung WH, Jee SH, Chen WC, Chang YT, et al, 2006, “Genetic Susceptibility to Carbamazepine-Induced Cutaneous Adverse Drug Reactions,” Pharmacogenetics and Genomics, 16: 297-30644 Alfirevic A, Jorgensen AL, Williamson PR, Chadwick DW, Park BK, Pirmohamed M. 2006, “HLA-B locus in Caucasian patients with carbamazepine hypersensitivity,” Pharmacogenomics, 7:813-81845 Guidance for Industry: Clinical Pharmacogenomics: Premarket Evaluation in Early-Phase Clinical Studies and Recommendations for Labeling (January 2013), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidances/ucm337169.pdf46 Draft Guidance: Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials to Support Approval of Human Drugs and Biological Products (December 2012), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidances/ucm332181.pdfContains Nonbinding Recommendations9IV. COLLECTING RACE AND ETHNICITY DATA IN CLINICAL TRIALSThe classifications discussed below provide a minimum standard for maintaining, collecting, and presenting data on race and ethnicity for Federal reporting purposes. Consistent with OMB Policy Directive 15, the categories in this classification are social-political constructs and should not be interpreted as being scientific or anthropological in nature. They are not to be used as determinants of eligibility for participation in any Federal program. The standards have been developed to provide a common framework for uniformity and consistency in the collection and use of data on race and ethnicity by Federal agencies.The recommendations in this section reflect the Agency's commitment to and expectations for more consistent demographic subgroup data collection. For studies conducted both inside and outside the United States, the Agency recommends the following process, which is based on the current OMB Directive for collecting racial and ethnic data. These recommendations are also consistent with the format for collecting race and ethnicity data set forth in NIH guidance47.A. Two-Question FormatIn order to be consistent with OMB and other recommended best practices, FDA recommends using the two-question format for requesting race and ethnicity information, with the ethnicity question preceding the question about race. Example:Question 1 (answer first): Do you consider yourself Hispanic/Latino or not Hispanic/Latino?Question 2 (answer second): Which of the following five racial designations best describes you? More than one choice is acceptable.B. Self-ReportingFDA recommends that trial participants self-report race and ethnicity information and those individuals be permitted to designate a multiracial identity. When the collection of self-reported designations is not feasible (e.g., because of the subject’s inability to respond), we recommend that the information be requested from a first-degree relative or other knowledgeable source. Race and ethnicity should not be assigned by the study team conducting the trial.C. EthnicityFor ethnicity, we recommend the following minimum choices be offered:47 NIH Policy and Guidelines on The Inclusion of Women and Minorities as Subjects in Clinical Research (Amended, October 2001), available at https://grants.nih.gov/grants/funding/women_min/guidelines_amended_10_2001.htmContains Nonbinding Recommendations10Hispanic or Latino: A person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race. The term, “Spanish origin,” can be used in addition to “Hispanic or Latino.”Not Hispanic or LatinoD. RaceFor race, we recommend the following minimum choices be offered:American Indian or Alaska Native: A person having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America (including Central America), and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment.Asian: A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent, including, for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam.Black or African American: A person having origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa. Terms such as “Haitian” or “Negro” can be used in addition to “Black or African American.”Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander: A person having origins in any of the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.White: A person having origins in any of the original peoples of Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa.We recommend offering an option of selecting one or more racial designations or additional subgroup designations. Recommended forms for the instruction accompanying the multiple response questions are “Mark one or more” and “Select one or more.”Sponsors should report the number of respondents in each racial category who self- reported as Hispanic or Latino. When aggregate data are presented, data producers should provide the number of respondents who marked (or selected) only one category, separately for each of the five racial categories. In addition to these numbers, data producers are encouraged to provide the detailed distributions, including all possible combinations of multiple responses to the race question. If data on multiple responses are collapsed, at a minimum the total number of respondents reporting “more than one race” shall be made available (see attached NIH PHS Inclusion Enrollment Report form48)48 NIH PHS Inclusion Enrollment Report Form (March 25, 2015), available at http://grants.nih.gov/grants/forms/inclusion-enrollment-report.pdfContains Nonbinding Recommendations11E. Use of More Detailed Racial and Ethnic CategoriesIn certain situations, as recommended in OMB Policy Directive 15, more detailed race and ethnicity information may be desired. For example, for clinical trials conducted outside the United States, FDA recognizes that the recommended categories for race and ethnicity were developed in the United States and that these categories may not adequately describe racial and ethnic groups in foreign countries. Furthermore, White can reflect origins in Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa; Asian can reflect origins from areas ranging from India to Japan.In situations where appropriate, FDA recommends using more detailed categories by geographic region to provide sponsors the flexibility to adequately characterize race and ethnicity. As outlined in the 2011 HHS Implementation Guidance on Data Collection Standards for Race, Ethnicity, Sex, Primary Language, and Disability Status4, if additional granularity or more detailed characterizations of race or ethnicity are collected to enhance understanding of the trial participants, FDA recommends these characterizations be traceable to the five minimum designations for race and two designations for ethnicity listed in sections D and C above. Example (from the above referenced 2011 HHS Guidance4):Ethnicity Data StandardAre you Hispanic, Latino/a, or of Spanish origin? (One or more categories may be selected)a. No, not of Hispanic, Latino/a, or Spanish originb. Yes, Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano/ac. Yes, Puerto Ricand. Yes, Cubane. Yes, Another Hispanic, Latino/a or Spanish originRace Data StandardWhat is your race? (One or more categories may be selected)a. Whiteb. Black or African Americanc. American Indian or Alaska Natived. Asian Indiane. Chinesef. Filipinog. Japaneseh. Koreani. Vietnamesej. Other Asiank. Native Hawaiianl. Guamanian or Chamorrom. Samoann. Other Pacific IslanderThese categories roll-up to the Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander category of the OMB standardThese categories roll up to the Asian category of the OMB standardThese categories are part of the current OMB standardThese categories roll up to the Hispanic or Latino category of the OMB standardContains Nonbinding Recommendations12Where concerns exist in the representation of race or ethnicity categories, sponsors are encouraged to discuss the race or ethnicity issues with the appropriate review division.F. Use of the term “nonwhite”The term “nonwhite” is not acceptable for use in the presentation of Federal Government data. It should not be used in publication or text of any report.V. PRESENTATION OF CLINICAL TRIAL RACE AND ETHNICITY DATAFor INDs, NDAs, and BLAs, we recommend the submission of tabulated demographic data based on the Demographic Rule10 13 for all clinical trials using the characterizations of race and ethnicity described in this guidance. Beginning in May 2017, CDER and CBER will require marketing applications to be submitted electronically49. CDER and CBER use the eCTD as the standard for their electronic applications. When submitting an electronic application, presentation of demographic data is described in ICH M4E eCTD Guidance (section 2.7.4.1.3 and table 2.7.4.2)50, which suggests a tabular display of demographic characteristics (e.g., age, sex, race) by treatment group (e.g., active drug, placebo)51. With regard to the description of race and ethnicity, the categories that are suggested previously in this document (Section IV) provide more detail than those suggested in the ICH M4E eCTD guidance. FDA recommends that sponsors provide the level of detail described in Section IV of this guidance. For relevant device submissions, we recommend following the guidance presented here and, when finalized, the recommendations in the draft guidance documents Evaluation and Reporting of Age, Race, and Ethnicity Data in Medical Device Clinical Studies14.49 Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic Format – Certain Human Pharmaceutical Product Applications and Related Submissions Using the eCTD Specifications: Guidance for Industry (May 2015), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM333969.pdf50 Revision of M4E Guideline on Enhancing the Format and Structure of Benefit-Risk Information on ICH Efficacy – M4E(R2) (June 15, 2016), available at http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web_Site/ICH_Products/CTD/M4E_R2_Efficacy/M4E_R2 Step_4.pdf51 The ICH M4 eCTD document suggests specific kinds of demographic information to be collected as a part of a clinical trial, but does not provide rigid specifications on how the data should be presented, noting, for example, that “if relative exposure of demographic groups in the controlled trials differ from the overall exposure, it may be useful to provide separate tables.” Choices of how best to summarize demographic data depend on the nature of the data to be conveyed. For some trials, it may be useful to show the distribution of one demographic characteristic within a second demographic (e.g., the age distribution of men and women enrolled in a set of controlled trials).



Early Clinical Trials with Live Biotherapeutic Products: Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Control InformationGuidance for IndustryThis guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.I. INTRODUCTIONA. Purpose and ScopeWe, FDA (or Agency), are providing you, Investigational New Drug Application (IND) sponsors, with recommendations regarding IND submissions for early clinical trials with live biotherapeutic products (LBPs) in the United States (U.S.), including LBPs lawfully marketed as foods (such as conventional foods and dietary supplements) in the U.S. and proposed for clinical uses regulated under section 351 of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act (42 U.S.C. 262).1This guidance focuses on the chemistry, manufacturing, and control (CMC) information that you should submit in an IND for an LBP. This guidance is applicable to all INDs of LBPs, whether clinical trials are conducted commercially, in an academic setting, or otherwise under Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations Part 312 (21 CFR Part 312).21The term “live biotherapeutic product” is defined in the “definitions” section (section I.B.) of this document.2 This guidance is not intended to address when an IND is required prior to conducting clinical trials. For further discussion of that subject see “Guidance for Clinical Investigators, Sponsors, and IRBs: Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs) – Determining Whether Human Research Studies Can Be Conducted Without an IND” dated September 2013, available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM229175.pdf. A stay is in effect for parts of this guidance document. See “Investigational New Drug Applications – Determining Whether Human Research Studies Can Be Conducted Without an Investigational New Drug; Guidance for Clinical Investigators, Sponsors, and IRBs; Partial Stay and Republication of Guidance” (80 FR 66907, October 30, 2015).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2This guidance is not applicable to LBPs intended as gene therapy vectors, to oncolytic bacteria, or to oncolytic viruses.3This guidance updates the guidance of the same title dated February 2012 (February 2012 guidance) by including the new section IV.D to address when the label on commercially available product(s) would be considered adequate to satisfy the purpose of the CMC information requirements under 21 CFR 312.23(a)(7). In addition, this guidance updates the February 2012 guidance by removing the General Safety Test (21 CFR 610.11) as an example of a test method in section IV.C and by updating certain footnotes, references, and addresses.4FDA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe FDA’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in FDA’s guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.B. DefinitionsFor purposes of this guidance:A drug includes, but is not limited to, articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in man or other animals. (see section 201(g)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)) for the full definition).A biological product means a virus, therapeutic serum, toxin, antitoxin, vaccine, blood, blood component or derivative, allergenic product, protein (except any chemically synthesized polypeptide), or analogous product, or arsphenamine or derivative of arsphenamine (or any other trivalent organic arsenic compound) applicable to the prevention, treatment, or cure of a disease or condition of human beings (see section 351(i) of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act (42 U.S.C. 262(i)). The FD&C Act applies to a biological product subject to regulation under 42 U.S.C. 262, except that, under 42 U.S.C. 262(j), a product for which a license has been approved under subsection (a) of 42 U.S.C. 262 shall not be required to have an approved application under section 505 of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 355).3As a general matter, the Office of Vaccines Research and Review in the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) reviews the clinical studies for the LBPs described in this guidance. CBER’s Office of Cellular, Tissue and Gene Therapies (OCTGT) reviews the clinical studies for certain microbial products, such as microbial vectors for gene therapy (MVGT), oncolytic bacteria and oncolytic viruses. OCTGT encourages potential sponsors of INDs for such products to contact its office for additional guidance prior to submission of their IND.4 We are removing reference to the General Safety Test because the underlying regulations were revoked in 2015. See “Revocation of General Safety Test Regulations That Are Duplicative of Requirements in Biologics License Applications” (80 FR 37971, July 2, 2015).Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3A virus as used in the PHS Act, is understood to be a product containing the minute living cause of an infectious disease and includes but is not limited to filterable viruses, bacteria, rickettsia, fungi, and protozoa (21 CFR 600.3(h)(1)).The sponsor of an IND is a person who takes responsibility for and initiates a clinical investigation. The sponsor may be an individual or pharmaceutical company, governmental agency, academic institution, private organization, or other organization (21 CFR 312.3(b)).An LBP, for the purposes of this guidance document, is a biological product that:1) contains live organisms, such as bacteria; 2) is applicable to the prevention, treatment, or cure of a disease or condition of human beings; and 3) is not a vaccine. For the purposes of this document, LBPs are not filterable viruses, oncolytic bacteria, or products intended as gene therapy agents and, as a general matter, are not administered by injection. An example of an LBP, for the purposes of this document, would be one or more strains of lactobacilli administered orally to treat patients with ulcerative colitis, or administered vaginally to prevent bacterial vaginosis.A recombinant LBP is a live biotherapeutic product composed of microorganisms that have been genetically modified through the purposeful addition, deletion, or modification of genetic material. A recombinant LBP which is subject to this guidance is likely to raise additional considerations and thus would require additional information to be submitted in an IND. Potential sponsors of an IND for a recombinant LBP are encouraged to contact FDA to obtain additional guidance prior to submission of their IND.The drug substance is the unformulated active substance that may be subsequently formulated with excipients to produce the drug product (Refs. 1 and 5). The microorganisms contained in an LBP are typically cellular microbes such as bacteria and yeast. Thus, the drug substance for an LBP is typically the unformulated live cells.The drug product is the finished dosage form of the product (Refs. 1 and 5).A clinical investigation means any experiment in which a drug is administered or dispensed to, or used involving, one or more human subjects (21 CFR 312.3(b)).An experiment is any use of a drug except for the use of a marketed drug in the course of medical practice (21 CFR 312.3(b)).II. BACKGROUNDProposed clinical trials to evaluate LBPs vary in design, depending on the product, proposed use, and intended population for enrollment. For example, live microorganisms contained in LBPs may be isolated from human hosts, genetically modified for use as vectors, and/or engineered to exhibit enhanced functions or new characteristics. Dosage forms and routes of administrationContains Nonbinding Recommendations4can vary from ready-mixed oral preparations with the appearance of a traditional food or drink to pre-filled vaginal applicators. The proposed mechanisms of action are generally to interfere with the growth of a pathogenic or potentially pathogenic microorganism in the body or to stimulate other potentially beneficial cellular processes as a result of transient persistence and/or long-term colonization with the microorganisms contained in the LBP. Investigational objectives vary with respect to prevention versus treatment, and stand-alone therapy versus adjunct therapy to antimicrobial, or other therapy. For example, potential indications include treatment of bacterial vaginosis in combination with antibiotics, prevention of necrotizing enterocolitis, prevention of allergic rhinitis, and maintenance of remission of acute pouchitis. Intended study populations vary from premature neonates to older adults, and from healthy individuals who may be at risk for specific diseases to individuals severely afflicted with particular diseases or conditions.Regulations applicable to investigational biological products that meet the FD&C Act’s definition of “drug” can be found at 21 CFR Part 312. Except as provided under the limited exemptions set out at 21 CFR 312.2(b), these requirements apply to all clinical investigations of products that are subject to section 505 of the FD&C Act or to section 351 of the PHS Act (see 21 CFR 312.2(a)). The intended use of a product plays a central role in how it is regulated. For example, products that contain live microorganisms may be regulated as dietary supplements, conventional foods, or drugs under the FD&C Act, depending on the product’s intended use and other factors relevant to the statutory definition of the product category.5 The intended use of a product in a clinical investigation determines whether IND requirements for clinical investigation of the product are applicable.6 Note that under section 201(ff)(3)(B)(ii) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 321(ff)(3)(B)(ii)), if an LBP that meets the other parts of the dietary supplement definition in section 201(ff) is authorized for investigation under an IND, and was marketed as a dietary supplement or conventional food before the IND was authorized, it may continue to be marketed as a dietary supplement despite the existence of the IND.7 Under section 301(ll) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 331(ll)), if substantial clinical investigations of an LBP as a drug or biologic were instituted before the LBP was marketed in food, a food5 See “Draft Guidance for Industry: Complementary and Alternative Medicine Products and Their Regulation by the Food and Drug Administration” dated December 2006 at page 4, issued for public comment and available at http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm144657.htm.6 See also “Guidance for Clinical Investigators, Sponsors, and IRBs: Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs) – Determining Whether Human Research Studies Can Be Conducted Without an IND” dated September 2013, available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM229175.pdf. A stay is in effect for parts of this guidance document. See “Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs) – Determining Whether Human Research Studies Can Be Conducted Without an IND; Guidance for Clinical Investigators, Sponsors, and IRBs; Partial Stay and Republication of Guidance” (80 FR 66907, October 30, 2015).7 If an LBP was not marketed as a dietary supplement or conventional food before the IND was authorized, the LBP may only be marketed as a dietary supplement if one or more of the following is true: (1) substantial clinical investigations of the LBP have not been instituted; (2) the existence of substantial clinical investigations of the LBP (if such clinical investigations were instituted) has not been made public; or (3) the Secretary has issued a regulation, after notice and comment, finding that the article would be lawful under the FD&C Act(21 U.S.C. 321(ff)(3)(B)(ii)). As of the date of issuance of this guidance, no such regulations have been issued.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5containing the LBP may continue to be marketed only if the existence of such investigations has not been made public, or if one of the exceptions in section 301(ll)(2)-(3) of the FD&C Act applies.8FDA’s primary goals in reviewing an IND are, in all phases of the investigation (phases 1, 2, and 3), to assure the safety and rights of subjects, and in Phases 2 and 3, to help assure that the quality of the scientific evaluation of drugs is adequate to permit an evaluation of the drug’s effectiveness and safety (21 CFR 312.22(a)). The general principles of the IND submission and IND content and format are contained in 21 CFR 312.22 and 312.23, respectively. This guidance describes information that should be provided in an IND in order to meet the requirements under 21 CFR 312.23 for early clinical trials evaluating LBPs.III. ADMINISTRATIVE AND REGULATORY PROCEDURESA. Pre-IND Advice and MeetingsFormal communication with FDA representatives before submission of an IND may be helpful, especially for sponsors that have not previously interacted with CBER, for sponsors who have limited experience with IND submissions, or for sponsors who have new products, technology, or assays under development. The purpose of a “pre-IND meeting” is generally to discuss information required under an IND, such as product characterization, final and in-process testing of the product, any animal data, and the proposed clinical protocol (see 21 CFR 312.23). For information on how to request, schedule, conduct, and document pre-IND meetings, please refer to the FDA document entitled “Guidance for Industry: Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or Applicants” dated May 2009 (Ref. 2).B. Address for Submission of INDsAn original IND submission, as well as IND amendments, must be submitted in triplicate (21 CFR 312.23(d)). Each submission should be accompanied by a cover letter and must include Form FDA-1571 (21 CFR 312.23(a)(1)). You should sequentially number all pages of the entire submission, including its attachments and appendices. The mailing address for submission of INDs to CBER is (21 CFR 312.140(a)(3)):Food and Drug AdministrationCenter for Biologics Evaluation and ResearchDocument Control Center10903 New Hampshire Ave.Bldg. 71, Rm. G112Silver Spring, MD 20993–0002.8 See Footnote 6.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6For information on the submission of electronic INDs, please refer to the following FDA guidance documents: “Guidance for Industry: Providing Regulatory Submissions to CBER in Electronic Format — Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs)” dated March 2002 (Ref. 3), “Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic Format — Standardized Study Data; Guidance for Industry” dated December 2014 (Ref. 16), “Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic Format — Submissions Under Section 745A(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; Guidance for Industry” dated December 2014 (Ref. 17) and “Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic Format — Certain Human Pharmaceutical Product Applications and Related Submissions Using the eCTD Specifications; Guidance for Industry” dated May 2015 (Ref. 18).C. Drug Master FilesAn IND sponsor who does not manufacture the product proposed for use in a clinical trial may ask the manufacturer of the product to submit a Drug Master File (DMF). A DMF is a submission of information to FDA that may be used to provide confidential information about the methods used in the manufacturing, processing, packaging, or storing of a drug product. DMFs can be used by a commercial entity to allow an IND sponsor to reference the information in the DMF in support of the IND, without disclosure of the contents of the DMF to the IND sponsor. The DMF holder submits to FDA written authorization permitting the IND sponsor to reference the DMF.9 When submitted in support of an IND reviewed by CBER, original DMF submissions and updates should be sent to CBER (to the same address in section III.B of this document) rather than to the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. If a DMF will be submitted or substantially updated, the DMF holder should alert the appropriate review division and relevant IND sponsors.IV. CHEMISTRY, MANUFACTURING, AND CONTROL (CMC) INFORMATIONA. Regulatory ConsiderationsIn 2008, FDA issued a guidance entitled, “Guidance for Industry: CGMP for Phase 1 Investigational Drugs” dated July 2008 (Ref. 4). The approach described in this guidance recognizes that both manufacturing controls and the extent of such manufacturing controls needed to achieve appropriate product quality differ not only between investigational and commercial manufacture, but also among the various phases of clinical trials.Production of investigational drug and biological products is subject to section 501(a)(2)(B) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 351(a)(2)(B)) and the IND regulations at21 CFR Part 312. During Phase 1 studies, emphasis should generally be placed on elements to assure the safety of subjects (see 21 CFR 312.22). This should include9 For more information on DMFs, see the FDA guidance entitled “Guideline for Drug Master Files,” dated September 1989, available at http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm122886.htm.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7identification and control of the raw materials and the drug substance, stability assurance, and, where appropriate, non-clinical safety assessments (see, e.g., 21 CFR 312.23(a)(8)). Quality control and quality assurance should be refined as product development proceeds. Although in each phase of the investigation, sufficient information is required to assure the proper identification, quality, purity, and strength of the investigational drug, the amount of information necessary to make that assurance will vary with the phase of the investigation, proposed duration, dosage form and amount of information otherwise available (21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)). In preparing your IND, you should refer to the FDA guidance on the content and format of INDs for Phase 1 studies entitled, “Guidance for Industry: Content and Format of Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs) for Phase 1 Studies of Drugs, Including Well-Characterized, Therapeutic, Biotechnology-derived Products” dated November 1995 (Ref. 5).Section IV.B (Drug Substance) and section IV.C (Drug Product) of this guidance detail the information that should be included in the CMC section of an IND in order to support proceeding to clinical evaluation of an LBP’s safety in human subjects. The terms “drug substance” and “drug product” are used in this guidance document for consistency with documentation on traditional drug products and biological products regulated under the PHS Act (Ref. 1). The CMC information detailed in the drug substance and drug product sections may be submitted in the IND or in a supporting DMF.B. Drug Substance1. DescriptionA description of the LBP’s drug substance, including its physical, chemical, or biological characteristics, must be included in the IND(21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(a)). A description of the drug substance should include the following:• Biological name and strain designations;• Original source of cells from which the drug substance was derived;• Culture/passage history of the strains;• If cells were obtained from a clinical specimen, a description of the clinical health of the donor(s), if known (merely noting procurement from a commercial provider would not permit a conclusion that the product is adequately safe);• Summary of the phenotype and genotype of the product strains, with special attention to biological activity or genetic loci that may indicate activity or potency; and• Documentation and summary of modifications, if any, to the LBP, e.g., intentional introduction of foreign genes or mutations, along with details of the genetic construction.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations82. CharacterizationCharacterization of an LBP must include a description of the acceptable limits and analytical methods used to assure the identity, strength, quality, and purity of the drug substance (21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(a)). Test results should contain actual laboratory data in tabulated form rather than summaries. Results for quantitative assays should be presented as actual data and not simply as “Pass,” “Satisfactory,” or “Within Specification.” Additionally, you should submit in your IND detailed descriptions of the methods and assays used to develop and initially characterize your LBP, such as the following:• You should provide identification of the cells used to establish the Master Cell Bank (MCB), as described in section IV.B.4.c. of this guidance. This information should be at the species and strain level. We recommend that you use at least two complementary methods of identification, e.g., biochemical identification and genetic identification.• You should determine minimum inhibitory or minimum bactericidal concentrations for a panel of antibiotics proposed by the investigator and include your assessment of whether the product strains are sensitive or resistant to each of the antibiotics in the panel.• You may need to develop an assay to determine whether or to what extent antibiotic resistance is transferable from a product strain to relevant microbial flora.• When an antibiotic resistance gene has been intentionally introduced in the product strain(s) for selection or maintenance of genetic modifications, you should discuss the need for such a gene and any possible alternative approaches.• You should provide the methods you used to attenuate an otherwise virulent strain, as well as documentation addressing the stability of such attenuation.• If the ability of the product strain(s) to cross a mucosal barrier is a critical safety concern, you should use a reproducible assay for translocation, preferably in an appropriate animal model, such as germ-free mice, for oral products.• If the product’s mechanism(s) of action(s) is known, you should submit data in the IND to support the mechanism(s) of action(s). Investigating the mechanism(s) of action(s) can be valuable for developing quality assurance criteria. For example, if you are able to identify a limited number of genes that may be potency-indicating, we recommend that you investigate the genetic stability of those genes.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations93. ManufacturerThe IND submission must contain the name and address of the manufacturer(s) of the drug substance (21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(a)). You should include any other pertinent organizational information. You should also provide a comprehensive list of all additional products that are manufactured or manipulated in the same or adjacent areas used to produce the drug substance. In addition, you should indicate whether the production of other products will utilize the same product contact equipment and, if so, how that equipment will be cleaned between operations for the manufacturing of different products. A floor diagram is suggested as the most effective presentation to enable visualization of the production flow and to identify adjacent operations that may create particular concerns, such as contamination by extraneous microorganisms.4. Method of Manufacturea. Raw MaterialsYou should provide a list of all materials (e.g., culture media, buffers, etc.) used in the manufacture of the drug substance, and their tests and specifications, or reference(s) to official compendia. For purchased materials, you should provide representative certificates of analysis from the supplier(s) and/or manufacturer’s acceptance criteria. The source and quality of materials of ruminant origin are of particular importance and you should provide the appropriate documentation.10b. Flow ChartsYou should provide a flow chart of the manufacturing process for each drug substance. For drug substances prepared from more than a single microbial strain, a common flow chart is acceptable, with indications of where the processing diverges. A flow chart should show the steps in production, equipment and materials used, the room or area where the operation is performed, and a complete list of the in-process controls and tests performed on the product at each step. You should include in-process holding steps and indicate time and temperature limits. Your flow chart should also identify manufacturing steps that10 Many medical products are manufactured with, or otherwise use, ruminant-derived material because this material can provide necessary nutrients for cell growth. Bovine derived materials are frequently used. If a proposed rule published in 2007 entitled “Use of Materials Derived from Cattle in Medical Products Intended for Use in Humans and Drugs Intended for Use in Ruminants” (72 FR 1583, January 12, 2007), is finalized as proposed, drugs for humans could not be manufactured from, or otherwise contain, prohibited cattle materials without written permission from FDA.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations10are computer controlled. You may reference other sections of your IND for more detailed process information. You should also document equipment dedicated to specific areas or products.c. Cell Bank SystemThe cell bank system generally consists of two tiers: an MCB; and Working Cell Banks (WCBs) generated from the MCB for product manufacturing (although a WCB may not have been generated prior to Phase 1 studies). You should provide a detailed description of the cell banking procedures you have used including: the banking system; the size of the cell banks; the methods, reagents, and media used for preparation of the cell banks; the conditions employed for cryopreservation and storage; in-process controls; and storage conditions. You should provide a description of the procedures used to avoid extraneous microbial contamination. You should also include a discussion of precautions (e.g., storage of cell banks in multiple freezers or at different sites) taken to prevent any event that could render the cell banks unusable.You should identify the cells comprising the MCB and provide a complete history and characterization of the MCB (see section IV.B.2 on “Characterization”). The history and characterization should include: the original source of cells used in the establishment of the cell banks and the culture/passage history of the cells; the method used to derive the cell bank; phenotypic and genotypic characterization as a means for identification; biochemical and/or genetic markers that may be potency-indicating; purity of culture (screening procedures for adventitious agents); and a description of all media components.You should provide the same information for any WCBs that you establish.d. Cell Growth and HarvestingThis section should generally contain descriptions of:• each step in propagation, from retrieval of the working cell bank to culture harvest (stages of growth);• the media used at each step (including water quality), with details of their preparation and sterilization;• the inoculation and growth of initial and sub-cultures, including volumes, time and temperature of incubation(s);• how transfers are performed;Contains Nonbinding Recommendations11• precautions taken and in-process testing conducted to control contamination;• the nature of the main culture system, including operating conditions and control parameters, (e.g., temperature of incubation, static vs. agitated, aerobic vs. anaerobic, culture vessels vs. fermenter, volume of fermenter, or number and volume of culture vessels);• the use of antibiotics in the medium and rationale, if applicable; and• the methods and the criteria used for harvesting and determining yields, and the criteria for pooling more than one harvest, if applicable.e. Purification and Downstream ProcessingYou should provide a description of the methods and materials by which you separate and/or concentrate intermediate forms and the final bulk of whole cells. The description of each step in downstream processing should also include the accompanying analytical tests developed or adopted by the manufacturer to show identity, purity, and concentration, and the levels of product related and non-product related impurities.f. In-Process TestingFor all in-process testing indicated in the flow charts discussed above, you should provide a brief description of the sampling procedures and the test methods used. Acceptance limits for the in-process testing may be necessary to ensure that the product can be manufactured reproducibly. For testing performed at significant phases of production, you should specify the criteria for accepting or rejecting an in-process batch.5. Drug Substance SpecificationsYou should provide the preliminary specifications and tests for each drug substance. These should include, but not be limited to, assays for: identity; purity; microbial bioburden/contamination; potency; and/or biochemical or physicochemical measurements thought to predict potency, and where applicable, measures of stability. We recommend that you include upper and lower estimates of variability, as well as justification for the choice of such limits. Specifications are likely to be tighter once experience is gained in the manufacturing process and prior to use of the product in pivotal studies supporting licensure.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations12We recommend that the drug specifications section include the following:• The identity of each microbial strain present in the drug substance should be determined using a specific and reproducible assay. Testing may be based upon biochemical methods such as fermentation profile or genotypic methods, including such as ribotyping, restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), or both. In addition, if one or more genetic loci, either naturally occurring or engineered, have been identified as critical for biological activity, we recommend that you develop a specific identity assay.• Potency of live microbial products is generally a measure of viable cells per unit or dose, i.e., colony-forming units (CFUs). Additional measures of product potency may be applicable, depending on the specific product strain(s) and knowledge of the mechanism(s) of action.• Purity tests of a LBP may include assessment of endotoxin content, residual antibiotics, and/or the quantification of residual toxic components or contaminants introduced during manufacture.• Depending on the clinical setting and route of administration, LBPs may need to be devoid of any extraneous organisms, or alternatively should have a low level of extraneous organisms. Tests for microbial bioburden should be in accordance with the US Pharmacopeia (39 USP <61>) Microbiological Examination of Nonsterile Products: Microbial Enumeration Tests (Ref. 6). Depending on the nature of other products campaigned at the manufacturing facility and the proposed use of the product, the inclusion of tests specific for other organisms may be necessary.C. Drug ProductThe drug product contains the drug substance(s) formulated with other necessary ingredients in the finished dosage. Other necessary ingredients, active or inactive, may include adjuvants, stabilizers, and/or excipients. The other ingredients may also be held separately from the drug product, such as diluents for reconstitution.1. CompositionComposition includes a list of all components in the drug product, including drug substance(s) and other ingredients (see generally 21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(b)). You should specify quantitative composition of a unit dose and batch. This section should also contain a description of the tests and preliminary specifications for all of the drug product ingredients, including the acceptable upper and lower limits of CFUs for the product strain. You should submit certificates of analysis for all ingredients in the drug product, if not included inContains Nonbinding Recommendations13the drug substance section. If the drug product is encapsulated or is packaged within a delivery device11, you should also submit detailed information on the source, quality, and testing of such encapsulation or device.2. ManufactureYou must submit the name(s) and address(es) of the manufacturer(s) of the drug product (21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(b)). A list of all other products (research and development, clinical, or approved) manufactured in the same rooms also should be provided. In addition, you should indicate whether the production of other products will utilize the same product contact equipment and, if so, how that equipment will be cleaned between operations for the manufacturing of different products.You should submit a description of the manufacturing process flow of the formulated bulk and finished drug product, including the processing procedures, lyophilization, and packaging. You should provide records documenting production of the drug product, as well as manufacturing instructions for formulation, filling, labeling, and packaging. You must provide the drug product labeling (see 21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(d)).3. Drug Product SpecificationInformation within this section should include, but not be limited to, sampling procedures and a description of all test methods not already described in the Drug Substance section (section IV.B of this document).Most INDs for LBPs should contain preliminary specifications for the drug product release/acceptability testing, such as:• Identity (Drug Substance: section IV.B)• Potency (Drug Substance: section IV.B)• Potency Assay: During early clinical development, the potency assay may be an assessment of CFU. As development proceeds, an alternate or additional potency assay may be used. Whenever possible, evidence that the selected potency assay correlates with activity or efficacy observed in clinical trials should be provided.• Purity (Drug Substance: section IV.B);• Microbial bioburden/contamination (Drug Substance: section IV.B);• Appearance/visual inspection; and• Where applicable, additional tests or modifications thereof, such as11 Drug products packaged within delivery devices such as pre-filled syringes may meet the definition of a combination product (21 CFR 3.2(e)). See http://www.fda.gov/CombinationProducts/AboutCombinationProducts/ucm118332.htmContains Nonbinding Recommendations14percent viable cells, a determination of particulate matter (39 USP <788>) (Ref. 7), the rabbit pyrogenicity test (39 USP <151>) (Ref. 8), pH testing, and/or residual moisture (21 CFR 610.13(a)(1)).4. StabilityIn an IND submission, you must provide stability data to demonstrate that the new drug substance and drug product are within acceptable chemical and physical limits for the planned duration of the clinical investigation(21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(ii), 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(a)-(b)). For lyophilized products, you should develop and initiate an additional stability protocol that examines the shelf-life after reconstitution. If the product is frozen, you should develop data supporting product stability through a stated number of freeze-thaw cycles.The stability study protocol should include, but not be limited to: testing for potency; viable cell determination; microbial contamination; pH; and residual moisture, if applicable.5. PlaceboYou must include a brief general description of the composition, manufacture, and control of any placebo used in a controlled clinical trial in your IND submission (21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(c)).6. Environmental AssessmentYou must include a claim for a categorical exclusion with the basis for the exclusion or an environmental assessment (EA), as outlined in21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(e).12 An EA is likely to be needed for use of virulent organisms, organisms that are ecologically more fit than their wild-type counterparts, or organisms wherein eradication is problematic or difficult to document.D. IND Studies Utilizing Commercially Available Live Biotherapeutic Products (LBPs)For certain investigations of commercially marketed conventional foods and dietary supplements, we anticipate that the label on a commercially available LBP will be sufficient to satisfy the purpose of the CMC information under21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(a)-(b) and that noncompliance with21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(a)-(b) would not pose a significant and unreasonable risk to human subjects of the investigation (see 21 CFR 312.10(b)). Specifically, FDA generally12 For more information on EAs, see the FDA guidance entitled “Guidance for Industry: Environmental Assessment of Human Drug and Biologics Applications” dated July 1998, available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm070561.htm.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations15intends to grant a waiver provided that: 1) the LBP that is proposed for investigational use is lawfully marketed as a conventional food or dietary supplement; 2) the investigation does not involve a route of administration, dose, patient population, or other factor that significantly increases the risk (or decreases the acceptability of risk) associated with the use of the food or dietary supplement; 3) the investigation is not intended to support a marketing application of the LBP as a drug for human use or a biological product for human use; and 4) the investigation is otherwise conducted in compliance with the requirements for INDs (21 CFR Part 312). For FDA to grant a waiver from the requirements under 21 CFR 312.23(a)(7)(iv)(a)-(b), sponsors must request a waiver from FDA under 21 CFR 312.10(a). We recommend that sponsors submit the following information to the IND to meet the requirements for a waiver request under21 CFR 312.10(a): (1) information showing the above; (2) a copy of the label of the commercially available food or dietary supplement; and (3) a commitment to record the lot(s) number and date of expiry in the case report form.V. NON-CLINICAL INFORMATIONYou must submit adequate information about pharmacological and toxicological studies of the LBP in laboratory animals, or in vitro, to support a proposed clinical trial evaluating the investigational LBP (21 CFR 312.23(a)(8)). We recommend that you summarize available information and that you include studies you conduct as well as those reported in the relevant literature. Conclusions based on data obtained from animal studies and/or in vitro studies evaluating the clinical formulation or individual ingredients in the clinical formulation, as opposed to similar or unknown formulations, are generally most supportive of a proposed clinical trial. Depending on the product and as appropriate for the proposed clinical study, we recommend that you address: general toxicity; target organs or systems of toxicity; teratogenic, carcinogenic, or mutagenic potential of any ingredient in the product; and relationship of dosage and duration to toxic response and pharmacological activity. Additional FDA guidance documents, prepared under the auspices of the International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) are available at http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm122049.htm (Refs. 9 and 10).As discussed above, we encourage you to consult the applicable CBER review division, preferably in a pre-IND meeting, regarding the extent and type of non-clinical data necessary to support the proposed clinical investigation (Ref. 2).VI. CLINICAL INFORMATIONA. Previous Human ExperiencePrevious human experience varies from prospectively designed, randomized, controlled clinical trials to case reports. Similarly, varying degrees of product characterization may be reported for the products used in the respective study or studies. Drawing conclusionsContains Nonbinding Recommendations16or making assumptions as to the relevance of previous studies may be difficult or impossible without adequate available CMC information.In general, the relevance of previous human experience to support a proposed study is based upon the similarity of the product(s) under study, as well as study design, objectives and endpoints, the number of individuals exposed, the level and duration of exposure, the type and duration of active monitoring and passive surveillance, and the integrity of study conduct, data collection and subsequent analyses. If you wish to reference a study submitted to the Agency by a person other than you (the sponsor), you must obtain and include in your submission, a signed letter of cross-reference stating that FDA has permission to access this information (21 CFR 312.23(b)). Also, an accounting of the final disposition of all randomized or enrolled study subjects is important in order to provide a context for the study data, since a large number of dropouts, withdrawals, or protocol violations make data analysis and conclusions less convincing. Multiple statistical analyses without appropriate correction and post hoc analyses, including analyses of population subsets, can be useful to generate hypotheses in designing subsequent studies; however, conclusions based solely upon multiple statistical analyses without appropriate correction may be misleading. Finally, safety data based on active adverse event monitoring provides a more meaningful safety profile of a product than data based on passive monitoring and/or reporting of only those events that an individual investigator deems “related” based upon an individual investigator’s judgment.B. Proposed Initial StudiesSafety data obtained from the administration of an investigational product to healthy volunteers can be important in identifying common product-associated adverse events before proceeding to studies in more vulnerable populations, e.g., children or those with the disease of interest. Proposed studies evaluating treatment effects should include disease definitions and criteria for worsening, improvement, relapse, etc., applicable to the disease and population studied. For useful sources of information on clinical investigations generally, and clinical studies in pediatric or geriatric populations specifically, you should refer to the appropriate FDA guidance documents, including those prepared under the auspices of ICH at http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm122049.htm (Refs. 11 through 15).


Considerations for the Design of Early-Phase Clinical Trials of Cellular and Gene Therapy Products_______________________________________________________Guidance for IndustryThis guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s or Agency’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance using the contact information on the title page of this guidance.I. INTRODUCTIONThe Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)/Office of Cellular, Tissue, and Gene Therapies (OCTGT) is issuing this guidance to assist sponsors and investigators in designing early-phase clinical trials for cellular therapy (CT) and gene therapy (GT) products. CT and GT products will be referred to collectively as CGT products. This guidance provides OCTGT’s current recommendations regarding clinical trials in which the primary objectives are the initial assessments of safety, tolerability, or feasibility of administration of investigational products. Such trials include most Phase 1 trials, including the initial introduction of an investigational new drug into humans, and some Phase 2 trials of CGT products.The scope of this guidance is limited to products for which OCTGT has regulatory authority. CGT products within the scope of this guidance meet the definition of “biological product” in section 351(i) of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act (42 U.S.C. 262(i)) and include CT and GT products that are used as therapeutic vaccines.1 This guidance does not apply to those human cells, tissues, and cellular- and tissue-based products (HCT/Ps) regulated solely under section 361 of the PHS Act (42 U.S.C. 264), as described in Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 1271 (21 CFR Part 1271), or to products regulated as medical devices under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, or to therapeutic biological products for which the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) has regulatory responsibility.There is increasing interest and activity in the development of CGT products because of their potential to address unmet medical needs. This guidance is intended to facilitate such development by providing recommendations regarding selected aspects of the design of early-phase clinical trials of these products. This guidance does not provide detailed information about the preclinical and chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC) components of an1 Many of the principles in this guidance may apply to combination products involving a biological product under OCTGT’s regulatory authority.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations2investigational new drug application (IND), as we have previously provided recommendations in connection with these components (Refs. 1, 2, and 3). This guidance is intended to complement the information in those guidances.This guidance finalizes the draft guidance of the same title dated July 2013.FDA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the FDA’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in FDA’s guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. BACKGROUNDThe design of early-phase clinical trials of CGT products often differs from the design of clinical trials for other types of pharmaceutical products. Differences in trial design are necessitated by the distinctive features of these products, and also may reflect previous clinical experience.Early experiences with CGT products indicate that some CGT products may pose substantial risks to subjects. These experiences include multi-organ failure and death of a subject who received a GT product for ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (Ref. 4), late-onset T-cell leukemia in subjects who received a GT product for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID) (Ref. 5), and development of tumors in the brain and spinal cord of a patient who received intrathecal allogeneic stem cells for ataxia telangiectasia (Ref. 6). These events illustrate that the nature of the risks of CGT products can be different from those typically associated with other types of pharmaceuticals.Features of some CGT products that may contribute to their risks include the potential for prolonged biological activity after a single administration, a high potential for immunogenicity, or the need for relatively invasive procedures to administer the product. Unlike many small molecule pharmaceuticals, the logistics and feasibility of manufacturing a CGT product sometimes influence the design of the clinical trials. In addition, the preclinical data generated for CGT products may not always be as informative as for small molecule pharmaceuticals, particularly since it usually is not feasible to conduct traditional preclinical pharmacokinetic (PK) studies with CGT products.Thus, the design of early-phase clinical trials of CGT products often involves consideration of clinical safety issues, preclinical issues, and CMC issues that are encountered less commonly or not at all in the development of other pharmaceuticals. Section III of this guidance describes some distinctive features of CGT products and their development. Section IV discusses specific aspects of the design of early-phase trials of CGT products, based on consideration of the issuespresented in Section III. Therefore, Section IV focuses on elements of trial design that may be different for CGT products than for other types of pharmaceuticals. Finally, Sections V and VI offer brief recommendations regarding IND submissions and meetings with OCTGT.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations3III. FEATURES OF CGT PRODUCTS THAT INFLUENCE CLINICAL TRIAL DESIGNThe design of early-phase clinical trials of CGT products is influenced by their many distinctive features. These features include product characteristics and manufacturing considerations, some of which are unique to CGT products, and can dictate critical elements of the clinical trial design. In addition, the preclinical studies conducted in support of the clinical trial design are often different from those for other types of products. This section describes some of these special features. Section IV describes how these special features influence the design of clinical trials for CGT products.A. Product Characteristics1. Characteristics of Both CT and GT ProductsIn contrast with some well-studied classes of small molecules, there is a relative lack of clinical experience with some CGT products. In the absence of substantial experience across a broad population, there can be considerable uncertainty about the nature and frequency of safety problems that might be associated with specific types of CGT products.Also, some CGT products can persist in humans for an extended period after administration, or have an extended or permanent effect even after the product itself is no longer present. The effects of the product might evolve over time (e.g., stem cells that proliferate and differentiate). Therefore, evaluation of safety and pharmacologic activity might require observation of subjects for a substantial period of time to understand the safety profile. Additional information about duration of follow-up can be found in Section IV.F.3 of this guidance.CGT products may require surgery or other invasive procedures for delivery to the target site. The risks added by the use of an invasive procedure might be a substantial component of the overall risk of treatment, particularly when the product is administered into a relatively sensitive site, such as the heart or central nervous system. In some cases, product delivery may require use of an investigational device. The use of an existing, legally marketed device for administering a CGT product also may be investigational. As indicated in Section V of this guidance, it is appropriate to discuss clinical issues related to such usage in the pre-IND meeting. Furthermore, when surgery or other invasive procedures are required, the training of those responsible for administering the product might affect the safety and reliability of the administration procedure (see Section IV.E.3).Allogeneic CT products, GT vectors, and proteins that might be produced by CGT products have the potential to elicit immune responses (immunogenicity). The induction of an immune response may be the desired effect of some products, such as therapeutic vaccines. For other CGT products, immunogenicity may be a risk. ForContains Nonbinding Recommendations4example, pre-existing antibodies, or antibodies that develop after administration of the product, could reduce or extinguish a beneficial effect, cause an adverse reaction (e.g., an autoimmune syndrome), or influence safety or efficacy if there are any subsequent administrations. Also, in patients who have a condition that could be treated with a cellular, tissue, or organ transplant in the future, the development of antibodies to an allogeneic CGT product might jeopardize the success of the future transplant.2. Characteristics of CT ProductsCT products have unique complexities due to the dynamic nature of living cells. For example, cells may present a variety of molecules on their membranes and express a variety of factors. These molecules and factors may be affected by the microenvironment and change over time. Cells may differentiate in vivo into undesired cell types. Cells might also develop undesired autonomous functions, such as cells with the characteristics of cardiomyocytes forming a focus that generates electrical activity uncoordinated with the rest of the heart (Ref. 7). Stem cells, which have the potential to develop into a variety of mature tissue types, may undergo transformation and begin forming tumors (Ref. 6). In addition, a CGT product may include a variety of cell types, and it may be unclear which cell type or types are responsible for any specific toxic or therapeutic effect.Another distinctive feature of cells is the ability to migrate. Systemic delivery of CT products may result in cells being distributed to a variety of tissues in the body; even cells delivered to a specific tissue or organ may migrate to unintended locations (Ref. 8).The source (donor) of the cells or tissue may be the subject to be treated (autologous), or another individual (allogeneic). In some cases, the donor may receive a treatment prior to the harvest of source material. If the donor is also the trial subject, such pre-treatment may add to the overall risk to the subject.Similarly, some CT products require pre-treatment of the recipient, e.g., with immune modification or myeloablative conditioning to facilitate cell survival. In such cases, the risks associated with the pre-treatment should be considered in the overall benefit-risk assessment.3. Characteristics of GT ProductsSeveral characteristics of GT products can influence trial design. For example, expression of a delivered gene may be uncontrolled and interfere with normal function of a critical enzyme, hormone, or biological process in the recipient. Some GT products are designed to integrate into the DNA of the recipient’s cells to allow for long-term expression of the integrated genes. This genomic alteration could cause activation or inactivation of neighboring genes and give rise to benign or malignantContains Nonbinding Recommendations5tumors (Ref. 5). In addition, GT products with a viral or bacterial vector present the possibility of shedding, i.e., excretion/secretion of viral particles or bacteria that could be transmitted to other individuals.4. Characteristics of Gene-Modified Cellular ProductsGene-modified cells, or ex vivo GT products, are products in which a gene is introduced into cells ex vivo, and then the modified cells are administered to the subjects. Products of this type have features, and potential risks, of both GT and CT products. Therefore, clinical trial design considerations of both GT and CT products apply to gene-modified cells.B. Manufacturing ConsiderationsThe scientific or logistical complexities of manufacturing CGT products may impose practical limits on the dose of the product that can be produced, or may limit the concentration or volume of product that can be delivered. These factors might therefore restrict the range of doses that are feasible in an early-phase trial. The implications of these factors for trial design are discussed in Sections IV.A.1 and IV.D.For autologous products or patient-specific allogeneic donor products, unique product lots are manufactured for each subject, and potentially for each dose a subject receives. For such products, the inability to control factors such as subject-to-subject variability can contribute to product complexity. Some CGT products may take several weeks to months to produce. A failure or delay in manufacturing could prevent a subject from being treated as intended. For other patient-specific products, cell viability and potency may decline rapidly from the time of formulation. Therefore, “fresh” cells that are not cryopreserved may require administration within hours of manufacturing. Trial design considerations for patient-specific products are discussed in Section IV.E.4.C. Preclinical ConsiderationsPreclinical in vitro and in vivo proof-of-concept, pharmacology, and toxicology studies are conducted to establish feasibility and rationale for clinical use of the investigational CGT product, as well as characterize the product’s safety profile. These studies also provide the scientific basis to support the conclusion that it is reasonably safe to conduct the proposed clinical investigations (21 CFR 312.23(a)(8)). Due to the diverse biology and scientific issues associated with CGT products, it is important to conduct a careful benefit-risk analysis, performed in the context of the particular clinical condition under study. Preclinical data generated from studies conducted in appropriate animal species and animal models of disease contribute to defining reasonable risk for the investigational CGT product.Several issues can limit the ability of the preclinical data to guide various aspects of the design of the early-phase clinical trial. For example, the extrapolation of a potentially safe and possibly bioactive starting clinical dose from the animal data can depend onContains Nonbinding Recommendations6various factors, such as the animal models used, the clinical route of product administration, the biodistribution profile, and any immune response to the administered CGT product. However, traditional PK study designs are generally not feasible for CGT products; thus, such data are not available to guide clinical trial design. Due to various issues, such as species specificity and immunogenicity, extrapolation from a CGT product dose administered in animals to a clinical dose can be less reliable than the customary allometric scaling typically used for small-molecule pharmaceuticals.To provide additional information about preclinical program objectives, selection of suitable animal species and animal models of disease, and overall considerations for the design of preclinical studies to support early-phase clinical trials, FDA has published the guidance entitled “Guidance for Industry: Preclinical Assessment of Investigational Cellular and Gene Therapy Products” dated November 2013 (Ref. 3).IV. CLINICAL TRIAL DESIGNThis section describes specific elements of the design of an early-phase trial for a CGT product. For the most part, this guidance does not discuss elements of the trial design, such as efficacy endpoints and the analysis plan, that are generally the same for CGT products and other types of products. Instead, the discussion focuses on aspects of early-phase clinical trial design that are often different for CGT products than for other types of products. Due to the wide variety of CGT products and their potential applications, a case-by-case assessment is warranted for the design of each clinical trial. Therefore, OCTGT encourages prospective sponsors to meet with FDA review staff early in a development program (see Section V).A. Early-Phase Trial ObjectivesThe IND regulations in 21 CFR Part 312 emphasize the importance of the assessment of trial risks and the safeguards for trial subjects. For early-phase clinical trials, especially first-in-human trials, the primary objective should be an evaluation of safety(21 CFR 312.21). Safety evaluation includes an assessment of the nature and frequency of potential adverse reactions and an estimation of the relationship to dose. For CGT products, these early-phase trials often assess not only safety of specific dose regimens and routes of administration, but also other issues, such as feasibility of administration and pharmacologic activity.Sponsors should consider the design of early-phase studies in the context of the objectives of the overall development program. Therefore, sponsors might include design elements that could help foster further product development. For example, some Phase 1 studies include selected features of Phase 2 study design in order to gather preliminary evidence of effectiveness.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations71. Dose ExplorationFor some products and conditions, including many uses of CGT products for serious or life-threatening diseases, some toxicities may be expected and acceptable. In these situations, a major trial objective might be to identify the maximum tolerated dose (MTD), the highest dose that can be given with acceptable toxicity. To achieve this objective, some trials use a well-defined dose-escalation protocol.For some CGT products, toxicity is not expected to be substantial in the predicted therapeutic range. In this situation, one objective of dose exploration may be to determine the range of biologically active or optimal effective doses. In some cases, indicators of potential benefit may appear to plateau above a certain dose, so that further dose escalation to reach an MTD may seem unnecessary. Although identifying an MTD may seem unnecessary or impractical, it is important to recognize that the effective clinical dose is difficult to estimate early in development. Failure to identify an MTD during early development may lead to subsequent clinical trials using sub-therapeutic dose levels. Therefore, dose exploration that includes identification of the MTD is generally recommended.Alternatively, for many CGT products, there are significant practical limits on the dose of the product that can be produced or delivered. In such cases, the trial objectives may only be able to focus on achieving a specified target range of exposure or characterizing the safety profile of the feasible dose or doses, rather than finding the MTD.For further discussion of considerations relating to dose, see Section IV.D.2. Feasibility AssessmentsCGT products sometimes require specialized devices or novel procedures for administration, customized preparation of products, special handling of products (e.g., very short expiration time), or adjunctive therapy. In these cases, sponsors should consider designing early-phase trials to identify and characterize any technical or logistic issues with manufacturing and administering the product. Such issues may need to be addressed before proceeding with further product development.3. Activity AssessmentsA common secondary objective of early-phase trials is to obtain preliminary assessments of product activity, using either short-term responses or longer-term outcomes that could suggest potential for efficacy. Such proof-of-concept data can support subsequent clinical development. For CGT products, activity assessments might include specialized measures such as gene expression, cell engraftment, or morphologic alterations, as well as more common measures such as changes in immune function, tumor shrinkage, or physiologic responses of various types.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8B. Choosing a Study PopulationChoice of the subjects to include in the trial depends on the expected risks and potential benefits, recognizing that there will be considerable uncertainty about those expectations in an early-phase trial. Expected risks may be estimated from the nonclinical data, an understanding of the biological mechanisms, and any previous relevant human experience, but the clinical significance of those risks can depend on the population that receives the product. Similarly, the potential for benefit might depend on the choice of study population. In addition, the choice of study population may affect the ability to detect the product’s activity, either adverse or beneficial. For example, a biomarker that may be indicative of risk or benefit might be more sensitive, meaningful, or interpretable in one population versus another. Some populations may offer advantages (e.g., higher cell numbers or viability) as sources for autologous products. The objective is to select a trial population with an acceptable balance between the anticipated risks and potential benefits for the study subjects, while also achieving the study’s scientific objectives. As discussed below in Section IV.E.4 of this guidance, there are special considerations regarding selection of the study population for patient-specific products.1. Healthy Volunteers2Study of healthy adult volunteers may be reasonable for an early-phase trial for products with short duration of action or in a class with a well understood safety profile. However, the risks of most CGT products include the possibility of extended or permanent effects, along with the risks of any invasive procedures necessary for product administration. Therefore, for most CGT trials, the benefit-risk profile is not acceptable for healthy volunteers.2. Disease Stage or SeveritySelection of the most appropriate study population for an early-phase trial involves several considerations, including not only the potential risks, but also the potential benefits and the ability of the study population to provide interpretable data.Subjects with more severe or advanced disease may be more willing to accept the risks of an investigational CGT product, or they may be in situations where the risks can be more readily justified. Therefore, sponsors sometimes propose to limit enrollment into early-phase trials to subjects with more severe or advanced disease. However, in some cases, selection of subjects with less advanced or more moderate disease may be appropriate.Subjects with minimal reserve of physiological function due to severe or advanced disease may be less able than subjects with less severe disease to tolerate additional loss, which could leave them with no function. For example, the risk of a decrease in visual acuity might be more acceptable in a subject with some visual reserve than in a2 For the purposes of this guidance, the term healthy volunteers means individuals who do not have the disease or condition of interest.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations9subject for whom that same decrement might result in loss of all functional vision. Similarly, a risk of pulmonary or cardiovascular toxicity might be more acceptable in a subject with early lung disease than in a subject with more advanced disease and less pulmonary reserve. In addition, subjects with severe or advanced disease may not be able to tolerate invasive procedures needed for manufacture (e.g., cell harvest) or delivery of the product. Thus, the decision about the severity of disease to be studied in an early-phase trial should be made only after considering the estimated nature and magnitude of the risks to the subjects, and the implications of those risks, for various stages or severity of the disease.In addition to considerations regarding risks, assessment of the overall benefit-risk profile should take into account any potential for individual subject benefit. In some situations, such as trials in children or trials that involve high-risk procedures, the prospect for individual clinical benefit may be an important factor in the overall benefit-risk assessment for the selected study population. The estimated prospect for benefit may depend on the severity or stage of disease. Although subjects with more severe or advanced disease may have the greatest need for benefit, there can be situations in which a greater potential for benefit might be expected for subjects who are less severely affected. Further, the ability to detect evidence of any benefit could depend on the severity or stage of disease in the study population, and the anticipated effects of the product might be more clearly discernible in subjects with milder disease. This could be a significant consideration if detecting evidence of treatment activity is important to the objectives of the study.Also, the study population should be chosen with consideration of the potential interpretability of study outcomes. Subjects with severe or advanced disease might have confounding adverse events or be receiving concomitant treatment, related to underlying disease, that could make the safety or effectiveness data difficult to interpret. If the ultimate target population is patients with milder disease, a trial in severe or advanced disease could be essentially uninformative regarding relevant safety information and might also have a smaller prospect for benefit to offset risks.Thus, while severely affected subjects are often included in early-phase CGT trials, they should not be an automatic choice. Several factors should be taken into account when selecting the appropriate subjects to include in the study for a specific condition. The study population should be chosen in light of the above considerations, and the choice should be discussed and justified in the IND submission.3. Lack of Other Treatment OptionsEarly-phase studies of CGT products typically have significant risks and an uncertain potential for benefits. Therefore, early-phase CGT trials sometimes enroll only the subset of subjects who have not had an adequate response to available medical treatment or who have no acceptable treatment options. If a trial is designed to enroll only subjects for whom no other treatment options are available or acceptable, theContains Nonbinding Recommendations10trial should include procedures to ensure that each subject’s treatment options have been adequately evaluated, and it should be designed to capture the pertinent information regarding that evaluation.4. Other ConsiderationsThere are additional considerations for selecting the subject population for certain product types. For example, for cancer vaccines, it may be important to identify subjects whose tumors express a specific target antigen.3 For certain gene therapies, pre-existing antibodies to either the vector or the transgene product may influence the safety or effectiveness of the product; therefore, the study might exclude subjects with such antibodies.4 For products for indications (e.g., severe renal, hepatic, or cardiac disease) that might ultimately be amenable to organ transplantation, sponsors should consider whether exposure to the investigational agent would cause sensitization that could compromise the prospect for future transplant success. If so, early-phase trials might exclude subjects with the most imminent or predictable need for transplantation. The exclusion could be reconsidered for subsequent trials once the likelihood of sensitization is better understood.5. Pediatric SubjectsSome CGT products are developed specifically for pediatric conditions. For example, GT products might be intended to correct childhood genetic diseases by replacing a missing gene or complementing a defective one. CT products might be intended as regenerative medicine to correct congenital deformities or as treatments for genetic diseases, such as hematologic or immunologic disorders, which result in abnormal cellular function.Sponsors who are developing CGT products to treat pediatric diseases should consider how they will incorporate the additional safeguards for pediatric subjects in clinical investigations into the overall development program. Clinical development programs for pediatric indications usually obtain initial safety and tolerability data in adults before beginning studies in children (Ref. 9). Title 21 CFR Part 50 Subpart D (Subpart D) provides additional safeguards to children in clinical investigations. A detailed discussion of the individual provisions of Subpart D is beyond the scope of3 “Guidance for Industry: Clinical Considerations for Therapeutic Cancer Vaccines” dated October 2011, http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/Vaccines/UCM278673.pdf.4 In those cases where a special test, such as an antigen or antibody assay, could be critical to the safety or potential effectiveness of the product, the test might be regarded as a companion diagnostic product. If the specific use of the test is also investigational, then the Center for Devices and Radiological Health may need to evaluate the risk of that use. For additional information regarding companion diagnostics, please see the guidance document entitled “In Vitro Companion Diagnostic Devices – Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff” dated August 2014, http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/UCM262327.pdf.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations11this guidance, and the FDA has published other documents for that purpose (Refs. 9, 10). We highlight the following principles for sponsors and investigators who wish to conduct studies of CGT products in pediatric subjects.Before a clinical trial that meets all other applicable requirements may proceed in children, Subpart D requires the Institutional Review Board (IRB) to determine that the trial meets additional requirements applicable to studies in pediatric subjects. The IRB must assess the level of risk that the interventions and procedures included in a clinical trial would present to pediatric subjects to determine whether they present minimal risk (21 CFR 50.51), greater than minimal risk (21 CFR 50.52), or a minor increase over minimal risk (21 CFR 50.53). Because of the special features of CGT products described earlier in this guidance, trials of CGT products usually present more than a minor increase over minimal risk, and therefore would need to meet the requirements of 21 CFR 50.52.Clinical trials presenting greater than minimal risk may proceed only after the IRB finds either that the intervention or procedure presenting that risk holds out the prospect of direct benefit for the individual pediatric subjects, or that the monitoring procedure presenting that risk is likely to contribute to the subject’s well-being. In addition, the IRB must find that: the risk is justified by the anticipated benefit to the subjects; the relation of the anticipated benefits to the risk is at least as favorable to the subjects as that presented by available alternative approaches; and adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of the children and the permission of their parents or guardians (21 CFR 50.52 and 50.55).When an IRB determines that existing data are inadequate to support the findings required under these regulations, it may not permit the study to proceed.5IND submissions for pediatric trials must provide additional information related to plans for assessing pediatric safety and effectiveness (21 CFR 312.23(a)(10(iii)). The IND regulations also require the sponsor to submit to FDA an investigational plan, including the rationale for the drug or the research study(21 CFR 312.23(a)(3)(iv)(a)). Accordingly, the sponsor should provide a rationale for conducting the CGT study in children. To obtain the information necessary for a benefit-risk assessment under Subpart D, and because of considerations regarding informed consent, data to support the rationale are usually obtained in adults before5 If an IRB cannot conclude that a study meets the requirements of 21 CFR 50.51, 50.52, or 50.53, but finds that the clinical investigation presents a reasonable opportunity to further the understanding, prevention, or alleviation of a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of children, the IRB may refer the clinical protocol to FDA’s Office of Pediatric Therapeutics for review under 21 CFR 50.54. For additional information on this issue, please refer to the FDA guidance entitled “Guidance for Clinical Investigators, Institutional Review Boards and Sponsors - Process for Handling Referrals to FDA Under 21 CFR 50.54 - Additional Safeguards for Children in Clinical Investigations” dated December 2006, http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm127541.htm.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations12initiating pediatric studies. We recognize that in some situations, it may be appropriate to initiate clinical studies of CGT products in children based only on the results of preclinical studies. If the sponsor intends to conduct a pediatric trial when there has been no prior safety or efficacy study in adults, the rationale should explain why prior adult studies are unethical or infeasible. For example, the common childhood form of the disease may have severe manifestations or a rapidly deteriorating clinical course, whereas the adult-onset phenotype may be very mild and easily managed. In such a situation, if the intervention is highly invasive, the overall benefit-risk assessment for a study in adults might be so unfavorable that an adult trial to assess safety or efficacy is unethical. In other cases, the disease may occur so rarely in adults that a study in affected adults would not be feasible, and studies in healthy adults might have an unacceptable overall balance of benefits and risks (see Section IV.B.1).FDA has a responsibility to assess the risks presented and determine whether the clinical trial presents an unreasonable risk to subjects (21 CFR 312.42(b)(1)(i), 312.42(b)(1)(iv) and 312.42(b)(2)(i)). When reviewing studies of CGT products proposed to be conducted in pediatric subjects, we intend to assess the reasonableness of the risks after full consideration of the information, including information relevant to the determinations that the IRB must make to comply with the Subpart D safeguards. The IND submission must provide adequate information to permit FDA to make this assessment (21 CFR 312.23(a)(10)(iii) and 312.23(a)(11)). For example, if the sponsor proposes that a study in pediatric subjects meets the criteria in 21 CFR 50.52 because, among other things, it presents a prospect of direct benefit to the subjects, the sponsor should include the available adult human and animal data relevant to this determination in the IND submission, and an analysis of the balance of anticipated benefit(s) and risks. In addition to providing the relevant animal or adult human data, the IND submission should include a discussion of how those data are sufficient to support an assessment that the pediatric study, taking into account the proposed starting dose, dosing regimen, and design, offers a prospect of direct benefit. FDA may place on clinical hold an IND that does not provide the information FDA needs to assess the risks presented to pediatric subjects(21 CFR 312.42(b)(1)(iv) and (b)(2)(i)).Finally, in accordance with 21 CFR 312.23(a)(11), the sponsor also must provide the parent or guardian permission document and a child assent document required under 21 CFR 50.55.C. Control Group and BlindingThe objectives of early-phase trials usually focus on safety, for which rigorous inference regarding comparison to a control (e.g., placebo) may not be necessary. Assessments of activity or efficacy, if any are to be made, are usually exploratory. Therefore, in early-phase trials, a concurrent control group and blinding are generally not as critical as for aContains Nonbinding Recommendations13confirmatory efficacy trial. However, in early phases of clinical development, a control group can be useful to facilitate interpretation of the safety data and provide a comparator for any assessments of activity or efficacy.For example, a concurrent control group may be particularly valuable for trials in diseases for which the natural history is not well-characterized or for trials that enroll subjects with a wide range of disease severity. The importance of concurrent controls and blinding in any specific trial depends on multiple factors, including not only the study objectives, but also the extent to which the study procedures and outcome assessments are subject to bias.For some CGT products, use of an intra-subject control may be a useful and convenient way to control a trial. An example would be injection of the study agent into one limb and injection of the control agent into the contralateral limb. With intra-subject control, any systemic effects may confound the interpretation of the results, but comparisons of local effects can be facilitated by the elimination of inter-subject variation.Standard-of-care and no-treatment controls allow evaluation of the risk of the overall investigational treatment, including the risks of both the study agent and the administration procedure. With this type of control, blinding of the subject and investigator may not be feasible, although it may be possible to maintain the blind for subjects for some kinds of standard-of-care controls.For trials that do include a concurrent control group, blinding of subjects, investigators, and assessors can be useful to minimize the risk of bias in the study results. However, rigorous blinding in early-phase trials may not be desirable if it cannot be done simply and in a way that minimizes risk to control subjects. Some CGT products might require an invasive procedure for administration (e.g., cardiac catheterization) or for collection of tissue to use for starting materials. Use of the same invasive procedure in a control group could help to distinguish product-related from procedure-related adverse reactions. However, use of the invasive procedure in the control group solely to administer a placebo, or otherwise mimic the active treatment arm for purposes of blinding, could represent an unreasonable risk for an early-phase trial, even if it might be appropriate for a later confirmatory trial. For early-phase clinical trials involving children, the use of an invasive procedure in the control group should present no more than a minor increase over minimal risk, given the absence of a prospect of direct benefit from the control intervention.Thus, the advantages and disadvantages of specific controls and blinding should be carefully considered in the context of the objectives and circumstances of the specific early-phase clinical trial.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations14D. Dose and Regimen1. Role of Preclinical DataIf animal or in vitro data are available, there might be sufficient information to determine if a specific starting dose has an acceptable level of risk. However, conventional allometric scaling methods for CGT products may be less precise than for small-molecule drugs, and traditional PK and pharmacodynamic correlations might not be possible. Therefore, it may be difficult to establish an initial starting dose based on the considerations used for small-molecule drugs. If available, previous clinical experience with the CGT product or related products, even if by a different route of administration or for a different condition, might help to justify the clinical starting dose.2. Considerations Regarding How Dose is DescribedOne of the objectives of early-phase trials should be the identification of the product attribute (or attributes) that is most relevant to characterizing dose. To that end, it is important to collect data on characteristics of the administered product and clinical outcomes that will enable correlative analyses to help in dose definition.Selecting the study dose(s) of a CT product can be challenging. Dosing to target a therapeutic effect might be based on one cell type, but adverse reactions might depend more on a different cell type that is present in the same product. The active cell subset may not be known, so the dose is based on a specific subset that is thought to be the best representation of the desired activity. For example, for a CT product derived from cord blood or other hematopoietic tissues, the total number of nucleated cells might be used as the measure of dose, but the number of CD3+ cells could be an important aspect of the dose for consideration of certain safety outcomes, such as graft versus host disease (GVHD). In situations where there is uncertainty about the cell subset(s) responsible for the therapeutic or adverse effects, collecting data on various cell subsets in the final CT product, with a comparison of clinical outcomes associated with these different subsets, may help to identify the cell subsets most relevant to product safety and effectiveness.For many GT products, dose is based on vector titer. However, some vector types may have specific properties that necessitate dosing using alternative units. For example, viral particles that do not contain the therapeutic gene are unlikely to have therapeutic activity. However, these particles themselves might produce adverse reactions, such as an allergic response. Therefore, if there are such safety considerations, the study dose(s) should be based on the total particle number, as is the case with adenoviral vectors. Other considerations for describing dosing may be related to the strengths and weaknesses of the methods available to accurately quantify specific attributes of the GT products. For example, adeno-associated viralContains Nonbinding Recommendations15(AAV) vectors are typically dosed based on vector genomes, due to the strengths of the quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay and the difficulties in quantitating transducing units.For gene-modified cells, dosing should consider several factors, including transduction efficiency. For some products, transduction efficiency can vary from lot to lot. This variation might lead to substantial differences in the active dose administered to different subjects. Ideally, manufacturers should work to control variability in the transduction process. If variability in transduction is occurring, and if the transduced cell number can be identified prior to product administration, then transduced cell number might provide more consistent dosing among subjects. In addition to transduction efficiency, other factors that should be considered in determining the dose include the total number of cells administered to subjects, the mean number of copies of vector sequences integrated per cell, and cell viability.3. Dose Escalation and RegimenClinical development of CGT products has often included dose escalation in half-log (approximately three-fold) increments. However, the dosing increments used for dose escalation should consider preclinical and any available clinical data regarding the risks and activity associated with changes in dose.Many CGT products can persist in the subject or have an extended duration of activity, so that repeated dosing might not be an acceptable risk until there is a preliminary understanding of the product’s toxicity and duration of activity. Therefore, most first-in-human CGT trials use a single administration or one-time dosing regimen. However, for some CGT products, such as therapeutic vaccines, multiple administrations may be appropriate for early-phase trials.E. Treatment Plan1. Staggering AdministrationWhen there is no previous human experience with a specific CGT product or related product, treating several subjects simultaneously may represent an unreasonable risk. To address this issue, most first-in-human trials of CGT products include staggered treatment to limit the number of subjects who might be exposed to an unanticipated safety risk.With staggered treatment, there is a specified follow-up interval between administration of the product to a subject, or small group of subjects, and administration to the next subject or group of subjects. For example, in a dose-escalation study, the first several individual subjects within the first cohort might be staggered, followed by staggering between cohorts. Depending on the degree of safety concern, staggered treatment of individual subjects within each new cohortContains Nonbinding Recommendations16might be appropriate. When the dose of the CGT product is difficult to quantify precisely or is highly variable due to manufacturing issues, it may be necessary to stagger additional subjects.The staggering interval, either within a cohort or between cohorts, is intended to be long enough to monitor for acute and subacute adverse events prior to treating additional subjects at the same dose, or prior to increasing the dose in subsequent subjects. The choice of staggering interval should consider the time course of acute and subacute adverse events that was observed in the animal studies and in any previous human experience with related products. The staggering interval should also consider the expected duration of product activity. However, the staggering interval should be practical in the context of overall development timelines.2. Cohort SizeFor trials that enroll sequential cohorts with dose-escalation between cohorts, the choice of cohort size should consider the amount of risk that is acceptable in the study population. Larger cohorts might be necessary to provide reasonable assurance of safety before escalating the dose of a product intended to treat a disease that is less serious and for which the tolerance for accepting risk might be lower. Smaller cohorts might be adequate for a product that is intended to treat a serious or life-threatening disease where a greater potential benefit may justify a higher risk. Standardized protocol designs, such as the 3+3 design, are often used for dose escalation of oncology products. However, the cohort size in such a design might not be appropriate for other therapeutic areas where there is less tolerance of risk, and a larger cohort might be needed to provide a greater assurance of safety prior to dose escalation. In addition, other study objectives, such as assessments of tolerability, feasibility, and pharmacologic activity may influence choice of cohort size.For CGT products, manufacturing capacity is often limited, which might place a practical limit on cohort size, particularly early in clinical development. The prevalence of the proposed study population may also limit the cohort size. When considering the limitations due to manufacturing capacity and prevalence of the study population, sponsors should select a cohort size that is feasible, but still adequate to meet the study objectives.3. Operator Training and Documentation of ProceduresFor product delivery that involves a complex administration procedure or a device requiring special training, such as subretinal injection or use of specialized catheters for cardiac administration, the skill of the individual administering the product can impact the product’s safety and efficacy. When individual skill in administering a product may affect its safety or effectiveness, the trial should specify minimum requirements for the operator’s training, experience, or level of proficiency. In some cases (particularly, if there are multiple operators), training of operators on the specific administration procedures may reduce variability of administration andContains Nonbinding Recommendations17thereby improve interpretability of the study results. Detailed, written standard operating procedures (SOPs) can also help ensure safety and consistency in product administration. Careful recording of steps and observations during the administration process can help identify the operator’s compliance with the protocol. These records can also facilitate correlating procedure variations with clinical outcomes and identify modifications that may improve the administration process.4. Considerations for Patient-Specific ProductsAs discussed earlier, some CT products or gene-modified cells are manufactured using cells or tissue from the intended recipient or from an allogeneic donor selected because of immunological matching to the recipient. In these cases, the product needs to be manufactured separately for each subject in a trial.However, manufacturing of some CGT products may take many weeks or months. Although a subject might meet the study enrollment criteria when the tissue or cells are first collected, the subject might no longer meet those criteria at the time planned for product administration. For example, the subject’s condition may have deteriorated so that the subject is no longer expected to tolerate the study procedures or survive for the study duration. To adjust for the possibility of a change in the subject’s condition, the enrollment criteria may need to include selection for factors that would improve the likelihood that the recipient would still be suitable for product administration when the manufacturing process is complete. Alternatively, the trial might include separate criteria that need to be met at the time of product administration.If a problem occurs in product manufacturing, there may be no product available to administer to an intended recipient. It is helpful to try to gain an understanding from early-phase trials of the likelihood of manufacturing failure and any subject factors that may relate to such failures (e.g., subject characteristics that might predict a poor cell harvest). This information can facilitate design of subsequent trials by suggesting subject selection criteria to reduce the chance of failure, or by prompting the development of a treatment protocol with a formalized manufacturing failure contingency plan.In case of failure to administer the CGT product to a subject, the protocol should be designed so that the subject is not committed to any high-risk preparative procedures (e.g., myeloablation) until it is known that the product is available. The protocol should also clearly specify whether re-treatment will be attempted with another round of manufacturing and whether an untreated subject will be replaced by increasing enrollment. Failure-to-treat may be an important trial endpoint that is part of a feasibility evaluation, and there should be plans to analyze the proportion of failure-to-treat subjects to look for factors that may predict failure to administer the product and to evaluate the consequences to the subject if there is a failure to treat.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations18F. Monitoring and Follow-up1. General Monitoring ConsiderationsSince a major objective of early-phase trials is evaluation of safety, early-phase trials should employ general tests and monitoring to look for both expected and unexpected safety issues. General safety monitoring typically includes recording of symptoms and common clinical measurements, such as physical examinations, chemistry profiles, complete blood counts, and possibly other examinations that are appropriate for the condition being investigated. Examples include continuous electrocardiographic monitoring if arrhythmogenicity is a concern, and antinuclear antibody (ANA) or other immunology testing if autoimmunity is a concern. The specific monitoring program will depend on multiple factors, such as the nature and mechanism of action of the product, the study population, the results of animal studies, and any related human experience.Another objective of many early-phase trials is to provide preliminary evidence of efficacy or pharmacologic activity. Pharmacologic activity may develop slowly or be delayed relative to the traditional time course of activity of small molecules. Therefore, subjects should continue to be monitored for both safety and pharmacologic activity regardless of whether or not they receive the complete treatment regimen.Attribution of individual adverse events to the product, study procedures, or other causes can be unreliable. Therefore, for early-phase trials, sponsors should capture all adverse events, even if the investigational product is an add-on to known toxic therapies, such as chemotherapy, radiation, or another toxic drug. Many early-phase CGT trials include a Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) to help ensure subject safety. Although use of a medical monitor may be sufficient, a DMC might be considered to enhance subject protection if the trial presents substantial risks to subjects.6In addition to providing evidence of safety, many early-phase clinical trials have the secondary objective of obtaining preliminary efficacy or proof-of-concept data to support subsequent clinical development. Therefore, sponsors are encouraged to include a wide range of activity or efficacy outcome measures in early-phase clinical trials.2. Special Monitoring Considerations for CGT ProductsIn addition to general tests and monitoring to look for unanticipated safety issues, evaluations may include assessments targeting specific safety issues that could be anticipated with CGT products. Such product-specific safety issues might include6 For additional information on DMCs, please see the guidance document entitled “Guidance for Clinical Trial Sponsors: Establishment and Operation of Clinical Trial Data Monitoring Committees” dated March 2006, http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM127073.pdf.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations19acute or delayed infusion reactions, autoimmunity, graft failure, GVHD, new malignancies, transmission of infectious agents from a donor, and viral reactivation. Monitoring procedures relevant to specific CGT products or study populations include the following: If immunogenicity is a concern (e.g., with viral capsids or allogeneic cellular products), then each subject’s immune response to the product should be evaluated. This evaluation may include monitoring for evidence of both cellular and humoral immune responses. If adequate assays are not yet available, baseline and post-treatment blood and/or plasma, as appropriate, should be cryopreserved for later evaluation, once assays have been developed. Attempts should be made to determine the duration of persistence of the product and its activity. Product persistence is assessed by looking for evidence of the presence of cells, vector, or virus in biological fluids or tissues. Activity might be assessed by looking for physiologic effects, such as gene expression or changes in biomarkers. In some trials, these assessments of persistence or activity could be based on relevant tissue (e.g., from the site of administration or the site of intended activity) that becomes available in the course of subject management or is easily obtained by biopsy. In such trials, the protocol might include plans for tissue studies. If some deaths are expected to occur during the course of the trial, planning for possible postmortem studies to assess product persistence and activity may be useful. For CT products, if applicable, the potential for migration from the target site, ectopic tissue formation, or other abnormal cell activity should be addressed by performing evaluations appropriate to the nature of the concern (e.g., imaging studies for potential ectopic tissue, or cardiac rhythm monitoring for potential arrhythmogenic foci in cardiac disease). For GT products, the potential for viral shedding should be addressed early in product development.7, 8 For GT products that integrate into the genome, monitoring for clonal outgrowths should be performed when technically feasible. Typically, this type of monitoring is done when hematopoietic stem cells are transduced with an integrating vector. Vector integration sites in patient peripheral blood7 “Guidance for Industry: Supplemental Guidance on Testing for Replication Competent Retrovirus in Retroviral Vector Based Gene Therapy Products and During Follow-up of Patients in Clinical Trials Using Retroviral Vectors” dated October 2006, http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/CellularandGeneTherapy/ucm072961.htm.8 “Draft Guidance for Industry: Design and Analysis of Shedding Studies for Virus or Bacteria-Based Gene Therapy and Oncolytic Products” dated July 2014, http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceregulatoryInformation/Guidances/CellularandGeneTherapy/ucm404050.htm. When finalized, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations20mononuclear cells (PMBCs) can be monitored for outgrowth of a predominant clone. Additional information can be found in the “Guidance for Industry: Gene Therapy Clinical Trials – Observing Subjects for Delayed Adverse Events” dated November 2006 (Ref. 11). CGT products may affect linear growth and maturation of developing organ systems in children. The systems that are most likely to be affected may vary by product, but concerns include potential reproductive, immunologic, neurologic, skeletal, or psychological effects. Therefore, monitoring and assessment of effects on these systems may be critical elements in the design of pediatric clinical trials.3. Duration of Follow-upIn general, the duration of monitoring for adverse events should begin with any pretreatment and cover the time during which the product might reasonably be thought to present safety concerns. In addition, the expected time course of pharmacologic activity may influence the duration of monitoring. The appropriate duration of follow-up depends on the results of preclinical studies, experience with related products, knowledge of the disease process, and other scientific information. In case of failure to administer the CGT product to a subject, the protocol should stipulate any follow-up time needed to assess the risks of any harvesting procedure or other type of preparative treatments (e.g., immune modification) the subject received.For most CGT products, a year or more of follow-up is appropriate for each subject in early-phase trials. For some CGT products, such as those with an indefinite duration of activity, additional long-term follow-up might be appropriate. For example, long-term safety monitoring can be useful if the product contains cells for which there is concern, either from the animal studies or other scientific information, that the cells might transform, migrate, or otherwise have the potential to develop ectopic tissue. The monitoring program should account for the duration of risks due to any concomitant medications, such as immunosuppressants. In addition, sponsors should consider the duration of follow-up that will provide preliminary evidence of efficacy and information on durability of activity.With respect to extended follow-up, for certain GT products, we recommend following the recommendations in the FDA guidance document entitled “Guidance for Industry: Gene Therapy Clinical Trials – Observing Subjects for Delayed Adverse Events” dated November 2006 (Ref. 11). As stated in that guidance, if the product is a GT for which the vector is integrating, or if the vector has latency, such as herpes simplex virus, then sponsors should follow subjects for 15 years to identify any late safety issues. Long-term safety monitoring can also be useful if the product involves a gene that might predispose subjects to develop secondary malignancies.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations21Sponsors sometimes propose to have one protocol for a CGT study of safety or efficacy, and a separate protocol for long-term monitoring. However, long-term follow-up is sometimes necessary for the trial to have an acceptable balance of risks and benefits. In that case, long-term monitoring should be included as an integral part of the CGT trial, and not designed as a separate study. There may be logistical issues that influence the feasibility of including long-term monitoring in the initial protocol. When there is a separate protocol for long-term monitoring, subjects should be consented for all long-term monitoring prior to participation in the initial CGT trial.Long-term monitoring does not need to be as detailed as the safety monitoring in the initial part of a trial. In general, long-term monitoring for CGT products focuses on subject survival and on serious adverse events that are hematologic, immunologic, neurologic, or oncologic. For some purposes, a telephone call to the subject, rather than a clinic visit, may be sufficient to obtain the necessary follow-up information. In addition, completion of long-term monitoring usually is not necessary prior to initiating subsequent trials or submitting a marketing application.In the pediatric population, long-term monitoring following the administration of CGT products may need to characterize the effects of the intervention on growth and development as discussed in Section IV.F.2 of this guidance. Depending on the intervention, children also have the potential to be exposed for a longer time because of their younger age. Thus, clinical follow-up data over an extended period may be critical to assess safety and developmental outcomes, particularly when an intervention is tested in infants and young children. Therefore, monitoring the long-term safety and duration of effects may be more challenging in pediatric studies than in adult studies. Sponsors of all CGT early-phase trials, both adult and pediatric, should consider these issues in their proposals for long-term monitoring.4. Study Stopping RulesBecause there can be considerable uncertainty about the frequency or severity of adverse reactions in trials of CGT products, most early-phase trials of these products should include study stopping rules. The purpose of these rules is to control the number of subjects put at risk, in the event that early experience uncovers important safety problems.Study stopping rules typically specify a number or frequency of events, such as serious adverse events or deaths, that will result in temporary suspension of enrollment and dosing until the situation can be assessed. Based on the assessment, the clinical protocol might be revised to mitigate the risk to subjects. Such revisions could include changes in the enrollment criteria, for example, to exclude individuals who might be at relatively high risk for developing particular adverse reactions. Revisions might also include dose reduction, some other change in product preparation or administration, or changes in the monitoring plan. Following the implementation of such changes in the protocol, it may be safe for the trial to resume.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations22Therefore, study stopping rules do not necessarily terminate a trial. Well-designed stopping rules allow sponsors to assess and address risks identified as the trial proceeds, and to assure that risks to subjects remain reasonable.V. MEETINGS WITH OCTGTOCTGT encourages prospective sponsors to meet with FDA review staff. Meeting with OCTGT can be especially beneficial for sponsors who have little experience with the IND process, and for sponsors developing a product for the treatment of a rare disease. In such meetings, OCTGT can provide advice that may increase the likelihood that an IND submission will be sufficient to support a proposed trial, or that the overall development program will be sufficient to support a marketing application.The FDA guidance document entitled “Guidance for Industry: Formal Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or Applicants” dated May 2009 (Ref. 12), describes the process for requesting and preparing for a meeting. One type of formal meeting is the pre-IND meeting. A pre-IND meeting is intended to help ensure that appropriate work has or will be done to support a planned IND. The sponsor’s pre-IND briefing package should include a clinical protocol or synopsis. In addition to discussions of preclinical studies and manufacturing issues, appropriate clinical topics for such a meeting could include the following: the adequacy of the available or planned safety and proof-of-concept information to justify the risks of the proposed trial; the choice of study population; the doses to be administered; the dosing schedule; clinical issues related to any invasive administration procedures; the treatment plan for the control group, if one is proposed; staggering plans; the safety monitoring plan, including long-term follow-up; any special safety assessments; stopping rules; selection of trial endpoints; and the overall clinical development program.VI. GUIDANCE ON SUBMITTING AN INDThe requirements with respect to what needs to be submitted in support of an IND can be found in the FDA regulations, 21 CFR 312.23, and recommendations with respect to these submissions can be found in the FDA guidance document entitled, “Guidance for Industry: Content and Format of Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs) for Phase 1 Studies of Drugs, Including Well-Characterized, Therapeutic, Biotechnology-derived Products” dated November 1995 (Ref. 13). Information on the preparation of the CMC section of an IND for a CGT product can be found in the FDA guidances entitled “Guidance for FDA Reviewers and Sponsors:Contains Nonbinding Recommendations23Content and Review of Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Control (CMC) Information for Human Somatic Cell Therapy Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs)” dated April 2008 (Ref. 1) and “Guidance for FDA Reviewers and Sponsors: Content and Review of Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Control (CMC) Information for Human Gene Therapy Investigational New Drug Applications (INDs)” dated April 2008 (Ref. 2). As noted previously, information on the preparation of the preclinical section of an IND for a CGT product can be found in the FDA guidance entitled “Guidance for Industry: Preclinical Assessment of Investigational Cellular and Gene Therapy Products” dated November 2013 (Ref. 3).The IND submission for an early-phase trial must include a summary of previous human experience known to the applicant with the investigational product, along with detailed information about such experience that is relevant to the safety of the proposed investigation or to the investigator’s rationale (21 CFR 312.23(a)(9)). The submission also should include a summary of previous human experience with similar or closely related products. OCTGT recommends that the submission include discussion of any of the issues raised in Sections III and IV of this guidance that are applicable to the proposed trial.Sponsors also may find it prudent to develop an overall product development plan early in the course of development (prior to clinical trial initiation). Such a plan should be sufficiently flexible to accommodate adaptation based on data acquired through product development. One potential approach to planning development is known as a Target Product Profile (TPP). FDA has published a draft guidance for comment that discusses how this particular planning tool might be used (Ref. 14). When finalized, the TPP guidance will represent our current thinking on this topic.FDA has developed additional resources that sponsors may find useful when preparing an IND for CGT products, including guidances relevant to the development of CGT products for selected specified conditions.3,9,10,11 Likewise, information on manufacturing, preclinical, and clinical topics related to development of CGT products, including discussion of IND submissions and meeting requests, is available in the OCTGT Learn webinars on the OCTGT website:

Guidance for Industry1M3(R2) Nonclinical Safety Studies for the Conduct of HumanClinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for PharmaceuticalsQuestions and Answers(R2)This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the appropriate number listed on the title page of this guidance.I. INTRODUCTION2Although the ICH M3(R2) guidance is still in its early phases of the implementation, the complexity of the guidance, its broader scope, and numerous changes in recommendations from the M3(R1) guidance have generated questions that have an impact on its successful implementation. This question and answer (Q&A) document is intended to clarify the key issues. The Steering Committee has endorsed the establishment of an M3(R2) Implementation Working Group (IWG), which is currently working on the development of Q&As.This guidance is a revision of the ICH guidance of the same title dated February 2012 (M3(R2) Q&As). The February 2012 guidance addressed the first set of Q&As on Limit Dose for Toxicity Studies, Metabolites, and Reversibility of Toxicity that was finalized under Step 4 in June 2011.In December 2011, a second set of Q&As addressing Combination Drug Toxicity Testing was developed and approved under Step 4 for integration in the M3(R2) Q&As. In March 2012, an additional question on Limit Dose for Toxicity Studies and four additional sections addressing Safety Pharmacology, Exploratory Clinical Trials, Reproductive Toxicity, and Juvenile Animal1 This guidance was developed within the Expert Working Group (Multidisciplinary) of the International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) and has been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH process. This document has been endorsed by the ICH Steering Committee at Step 4 of the ICH process, December 2011 and March 2012. At Step 4 of the process, the final draft is recommended for adoption to the regulatory bodies of the European Union, Japan, and the United States.2 Arabic numbers reflect the organizational breakdown in the document endorsed by the ICH Steering Committee at Step 4 of the ICH process, June 2011.1Studies were approved under Step 4 for integration in the (M3(R2) Q&As. This revised guidance incorporates the changes approved in December 2011 and March 2012.FDA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERSA. Limit Dose for Toxicity Studies (1)Q1: Can you provide a definition of a 50-fold clinical exposure margin in terms of how it is calculated and whether it relates to the intended therapeutic clinical exposure or the maximum exposure achieved in phase 1 trials?A1: Generally, the exposure margins should be calculated using the group/cohort mean area under the curve (AUC) values for animals at the highest dose tested and for humans at the anticipated therapeutic exposure. In some special cases, based on prior knowledge of the compound class, exposure limits based on Cmax (maximum plasma concentration) might also be appropriate (e.g., if it is suspected that the drug could cause seizures).Using the 50-fold approach, the high dose in the toxicity studies should be selected to produce a 50-fold exposure margin over the anticipated clinical exposure at the highest dose proposed for phase 2 and 3 studies (see the exception for phase 3 trials in the United States (ICH M3(R2) guidance, section I.E High Dose Selection for General Toxicity Studies (1.5)), and the answers to Q2 and Q3 of this section). For phase 1 clinical trials, it is recognized that the therapeutic exposure generally will be exceeded and smaller margins are appropriate (for example, see answers to Q2 and Q3).Q2: When using the 50-fold exposure approach and there are no adverse findings in the rodent and nonrodent toxicity studies, if the clinical dose is escalated up to the agreed limit (1/50th of the exposure achieved at the top dose in animal studies) and there are no adverse findings in humans, is it possible to escalate the clinical dose further?A2: In this situation, if the clinical dose is escalated to 1/50th of the maximum exposure in the animal studies and no treatment-related adverse effects are noted in volunteers/patients, for short-term clinical studies (e.g., 14 days duration) the2clinical dose could be cautiously further escalated up to 1/10th of the maximum exposure in the animal studies, or to a dose that produces adverse effects in humans, whichever occurs first. This is reasonable because exploratory trials Approach 4 (not intended to evaluate a maximum tolerated dose (MTD) supports dosing for 14 days up to 1/10th the NOAEL (no observed adverse event level) exposure with the same First-In-Human enabling toxicity studies.Q3: When toxicity study doses are selected by using the 50-fold exposure approach and there are adverse findings in at least one of the toxicity studies, but the findings are not dose-limiting, what is the limitation for clinical exposure?A3: Doses might be escalated in the clinical studies based on the NOAEL for the adverse findings identified in the toxicity studies. The clinical doses should not be limited by the 50-fold margin in this case but should be based on standard risk assessment approaches (e.g., whether the findings are reversible and/or monitorable, the severity of the indication, adverse effects in clinical studies). Note the exception for phase 3 trials in the United States (section I.E (1.5) of ICH M3(R2)).Q4: Does the 50-fold exposure limit only apply to small molecules?A4: Yes, the 50-fold margin of exposure limit dose applies to small molecules only. As stated in section I.C (1.3) of ICH M3(R2), the guidance only applies to biologics with regard to timing of nonclinical studies relative to clinical development. High dose selection for nonclinical studies of biologics is different from that for small molecules (see ICH S6(R1)3).Q5: When making a maximum feasible dose (MFD) argument, to what lengths should the sponsor go to justify the MFD?A5: The MFD should be a dose that attempts to maximize exposure in toxicity studies, rather than maximize the administered dose. However, formulation volumes that can be administered should be based on anatomical and physiological attributes of the test species and properties of the formulation, and can have an impact on the MFD. In addition, the chemical and physical stability of the formulation are important criteria for suitability for use in toxicity studies and could limit the selection of vehicles for determining the MFD. Solubility limits can restrict the dose for some routes, such as intravenous. Solubility limits are not usually considered sufficient to justify the MFD for some other routes of administration, such as inhalation or oral. The characteristics of multiple formulations of the test3 The ICH guidances referenced in this document are available on the FDA Drugs guidance Web page at http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm. We update guidances periodically. To make sure you have the most recent version of a guidance, check the Drugs guidance Web page.3article, with a range of properties (e.g., aqueous and non-aqueous and various viscosities), should be investigated before dosing in animals. The most promising formulations (generally three) should be evaluated in animals to determine which formulation produces maximal exposure. The vehicles used should be well characterized in the scientific literature or selected based on experience (sponsor or regulatory agency information) to provide confidence that they will not cause significant toxicity under conditions of use.Q6: What if dose-limiting toxicity is not identified in any species and there is only one nonclinical toxicity study in each species before the phase 3 study (regarding phase 3 recommendation for the United States)?A6: The guidelines for high dose selection for general toxicity studies apply irrespective of the length or complexity of the drug development paradigm. In accord with the recommendation to support phase 3 studies in the United States (see section I.E (1.5) of ICH M3(R2)), an assessment of doses up to an MTD, MFD or limit dose should be conducted in an attempt to identify toxicity.Q7: Does the guidance on high dose selection and the 50-fold margin of clinical AUC apply to routes other than oral (e.g., dermal, inhalation)?A7: For any drug intended to provide systemic exposure (including transdermal), the 50-fold approach is considered appropriate. For topical drugs intended to produce local effects, the high dose in topical toxicity studies should generally be based on the MFD or MTD and might not achieve high local concentrations or high systemic exposures compared to those achieved clinically. In this case, a 50-fold systemic margin is not relevant.For inhaled drugs with intended systemic action, the high dose in an inhalation toxicity study could be one that produces an AUC value of greater than or equal to 50-fold the clinical systemic exposure and a 10-fold margin over the calculated deposited lung dose. For inhaled drugs that are designed to work locally in the lungs, the high dose could be one that achieved a calculated deposited lung dose of 50 times the calculated clinical deposited lung dose and produced a 10-fold margin over the AUC achieved in humans at the clinical dose.Q8: Does the 50-fold margin apply to juvenile animal studies? Can the 50-fold margin be used to select the top dose for reproductive toxicity studies?A8: Similar principles of reliance on exposure margins to limit the top dose should be applicable to some other types of toxicity testing, such as juvenile animal toxicity studies where toxicity is not anticipated. Use of a 50-fold margin for top doses in reproductive toxicity studies has not been addressed; however, current ICH4guidance states that minimal toxicity is expected to be induced in the high dosedams although other factors can also limit the dose (see ICH S5(R2)).Q9: What exposure limits should be applied for clinical development studies when the top dose for the nonclinical studies is the limit dose such as 1000 mg/kg or 2000 mg/kg described in section 1.5 or an MFD and no toxicity is observed at this dose?A9: The clinical dose could be conservatively escalated up to one that produced a plasma AUC exposure of 1/2 that seen in the animal species that gives the lowest exposure at the limit dose or MFD. If there are no adverse effects in humans at this clinical exposure, further careful escalation might be justified based on risk/benefit considerations.B. Metabolites (2)Q1: In the M3(R2) guidance, what does “significantly greater” mean in the following statement: “Nonclinical characterization of a human metabolite(s) is only warranted when that metabolite(s) is observed at exposures greater than 10 percent of total drug-related exposure and at significantly greater levels in humans than the maximum exposure seen in the toxicity studies”?A1: The term significantly greater is not meant to imply a statistically greater level. Differences of ≥ 2-fold in (mean) AUC are generally considered meaningful in toxicokinetic evaluations. Thus, characterization of metabolite toxicity would generally be considered adequate when animal exposure is at least 50 percent the exposure seen in humans. In some cases, for example when a metabolite composes the majority of the total human exposure, it is appropriate for exposure to the metabolite in animals to exceed that in humans (see also Q12 of this section). In this latter case it is important to achieve a higher exposure to the metabolite in animals because this metabolite constitutes the bulk of human exposure.Q2: What is the definition and calculation method of 10 percent?A2: The 10 percent threshold refers to when a human metabolite comprises greater than 10 percent of the measured total exposure to drug and metabolites, usually based on group mean AUC (e.g., AUC 0-inf).Q3: When characterization of metabolite toxicity is warranted, in what type(s) of in vivo nonclinical studies is it important that adequate systemic exposure to a metabolite be achieved?5A3: It is important to have adequate exposure to the metabolite in one species used in the general toxicity evaluation, one species used in a carcinogenicity study when carcinogenicity evaluation is warranted (or one species used in an in vivo micronucleus study when carcinogenicity evaluation is not warranted), and one species used in an embryo-fetal development study.Q4: Are in vitro genotoxicity studies recommended for metabolites? When genotoxicity assessment is warranted for a metabolite, is quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) assessment sufficient or should genotoxicity studies be conducted?A4: This topic is outside the scope of ICH M3(R2).Q5: Is the metabolite exposure data provided from the single-dose radiolabeled human ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion)) study sufficient for comparison to the exposures observed in animal toxicity studies without evaluation of steady state levels, which cannot be done with radiolabel clinically?A5: An evaluation of whether a metabolite is 10 percent of the total drug-related exposure can be based on single-dose data in humans. It is not generally feasible to measure AUC of all metabolites by non-radiolabeled methods, particularly for those drugs that have many metabolites. In these cases, a single-dose radiolabeled study provides a reasonable estimate of human total drug-related exposure and is an adequate basis for calculating whether a metabolite exceeds 10 percent. (A metabolite cannot be more than 10 percent of the total drug-related material if non-radiolabeled methods indicate that a metabolite is less than 10 percent of the parent or of any drug-related component(s). For example, P+M1+M2+…Mn = total; if M1 is less than 10 percent of P or M1 is less than 10 percent of any M, then M1 is less than 10 percent of the total. In this case, no further assessment of that metabolite is warranted.)If during development exposure data normally collected from multiple-dose human studies indicate that steady state levels of a metabolite exceed 10 percent, then additional nonclinical evaluation of the metabolite should be considered.Generally, exposure data from nonclinical studies and single-dose clinical studies can be compared to determine whether further metabolite toxicity characterization is warranted. For those metabolites that have been determined to exceed 10 percent of drug-related material in humans only after repeated dosing, steady state levels (clinical and nonclinical) should be used to assess the adequacy of the exposure margins.6Q6: The M3(R2) guidance says: “Nonclinical characterization of a human metabolite(s) is only warranted when that metabolite(s) is observed at exposures greater than 10 percent of total drug-related exposure and at significantly greater levels in humans than the maximum exposure seen in the toxicity studies.”When a human metabolite exposure is compared to the maximum exposure of that metabolite in toxicity studies, should it always be to the highest exposure achieved in the animal studies or is it more appropriate in some cases to use the exposure at the NOAEL, NOEL (no observed effect level), or MTD?A6: Because the parent drug and metabolites contribute to the target organ toxicity profile observed in animals at the MTD, the exposure comparisons across species should be conducted at the MTD in the animal compared to the maximum exposure in humans at the therapeutic dose, assuming the toxicity of concern can be adequately monitored in humans and does not pose an unacceptable risk. If the toxicity at the MTD is not monitorable in humans or poses an unacceptable risk, then the exposure comparison should be conducted at the NOAEL for the toxicity of concern.Q7: When in development, should data on nonclinical metabolites be available?A7: As described in ICH M3(R2), section III Toxicokinetic and Pharmacokinetic Studies (3), paragraph 1, in vitro metabolism data for animals and humans should be evaluated before initiating human clinical trials. Data on in vivo metabolism in test species and humans should be available before exposing large numbers of human subjects or treating for long duration (generally before phase 3).Q8: Clarification is sought on metabolites that may not be of toxicological concern. In ICH M3(R2), what is meant by “most” in the phrase “most glutathione conjugates”? Would acyl glucuronides that can undergo chemical rearrangement be an example of a concern? What should we do about chemically reactive metabolites?A8: Although there are relatively rare exceptions, most glutathione conjugates are formed by conjugation with reactive metabolites to form excretory metabolites that are not of toxicological concern. Most glucuronides are not of concern, except those that undergo chemical rearrangement (e.g., reactive acyl glucuronides). Highly chemically reactive metabolites, although of toxicological concern, do not generally accumulate in plasma due to their short half-life. Generally, it is not feasible to test highly reactive metabolites independently because of their instability, but they are assumed to contribute to the overall nonclinical toxicity of the drug.7Q9: Should safety pharmacology studies be conducted for metabolites that warrant nonclinical characterization?A9: Clinical studies assessing safety pharmacology endpoints are generally conducted during phase 1. These endpoints will have already been assessed in humans before a full characterization of the metabolites is conducted. Therefore, nonclinical safety pharmacology studies are generally not warranted for the characterization of metabolites. However, if a safety pharmacology signal is seen in humans that was not predicted by nonclinical studies with the parent, then additional safety pharmacology studies of these human metabolites can be considered to better understand the mechanism (see ICH S7A and ICH S7B).Q10: What does “in vitro biochemical information” mean in section III (3), paragraph 1, of ICH M3(R2)?A10: In vitro biochemical information includes standard in vitro metabolic evaluation (e.g., cytochrome P450 (CYP) inhibition, pregnane X receptor (PXR) activation assays). It can include studies with hepatic microsomes/hepatocytes or studies on potential interactions via drug transporters.Q11: What should be the design of nonclinical studies for metabolites (e.g., species, duration, study type)?A11: This level of detail is generally out of scope for ICH M3(R2); study design should be considered on a case-by-case basis using scientific judgment in consultation with regulatory agencies. Also see answers to other questions in this section (e.g., Q3 and Q9).Q12: Does the guidance on metabolites in ICH M3(R2) apply to a prodrug (i.e., when a metabolite provides most of the pharmacologic activity)?A12: The guidance does not specifically address prodrugs. If the animal species converts the prodrug to the active metabolite similarly to humans, then a standard testing approach as recommended in ICH M3(R2) can be used. If the active metabolite is not adequately produced in the animal species, then the target molecule for toxicological evaluation is the active metabolite and therefore additional testing beyond that recommended for metabolites can be appropriate. Timing of the nonclinical testing of the active metabolite in this case should follow the general timelines as outlined in ICH M3(R2) rather than the timing indicated for metabolite testing in section III (3) of M3(R2).C. Reversibility of Toxicity (3)8Q1: When is assessment of reversibility considered to be appropriate and is it important to demonstrate full reversibility or is it sufficient to demonstrate the potential for full reversibility?A1: ICH M3(R2) states the following in section I.D General Principles (1.4): “The goals of the nonclinical safety evaluation generally include a characterization of toxic effects with respect to target organs, dose dependence, relationship to exposure, and, when appropriate, potential reversibility.”Evaluation of the potential for reversibility of toxicity (i.e., return to the original or normal condition) should be provided when there is severe toxicity in a nonclinical study with potential adverse clinical impact. The evaluation can be based on a study of reversibility or on a scientific assessment.The scientific assessment of reversibility can include the extent and severity of the pathologic lesion, the regenerative capacity of the organ system showing the effect and knowledge of other drugs causing the effect. Thus, recovery arms or studies are not always critical to conclude whether an adverse effect is reversible. The demonstration of full reversibility is not considered essential. A trend towards reversibility (decrease in incidence or severity), and scientific assessment that this trend would eventually progress to full reversibility, are generally sufficient. If full reversibility is not anticipated, this should be considered in the clinical risk assessment.A toxicity study that includes a terminal non-dosing period is generally warranted if a scientific assessment cannot predict whether the toxicity will be reversible and if:1.there is severe toxicity at clinically relevant exposures (e.g., ≤ 10-fold the clinical exposure); or2.the toxicity is only detectable at an advanced stage of the pathophysiology in humans and where significant reduction in organ function is expected. (The assessment of reversibility in this case should be considered even at > 10-fold exposure multiples.)A toxicity study that includes a terminal non-dosing period is generally notwarranted when the toxicity:1.can be readily monitored in humans at an early stage before the toxicity becomes severe; or2.is known to be irrelevant to humans (e.g., rodent Harderian gland toxicity); or3.is only observed at high exposures not considered clinically relevant (see 2 above for exception); or4.is similar to that induced by related agents, and the toxicity based on prior clinical experience with these related agents is considered a manageable risk.9If a study of reversibility is called for, it should be available to support clinical studies of a duration similar to those at which the adverse effects were seen nonclinically. However, a reversibility study is generally not warranted to support clinical trials of a duration equivalent to that at which the adverse effect was not observed nonclinically.If a particular lesion is demonstrated to be reversible in a short duration (e.g., 2week or 1-month) study, and does not progress in severity in longer term studies, repeating the reversibility assessment in longer term toxicity studies is generally not warranted.If a reversibility study is warranted, it is efficient to conduct it as part of a chronic study so that all toxicities of concern can be assessed in a single study, provided that it is not critical to conduct it earlier to support a specific clinical trial.D. Combination Drug Toxicity Testing (4)Q1: If two (or more) late stage entities are combined but for one of them the human dosage/exposure will be higher than that already approved, is it important to conduct a combination toxicity study or are the existing nonclinical data and clinical experience with the lower dose considered adequate to address the nonclinical assessment?A1: If there has been previous clinical experience with the two entities used together, a combination toxicity study would generally not be recommended for an increase in dose/exposure of one of the entities unless this gave cause for significant toxicological concern. The level of concern would depend on the new exposure margins, the established safety profile of the individual agents, the degree of experience with the co-administration, and the ability to monitor any potential adverse effects in humans. If the increase in dose/exposure does cause concern and a study is conducted to address that concern, then it should generally be completed before carrying out clinical studies with the combination. If there is no clinical experience with the entities used together, see paragraph 4 of section XVII (17) of ICH M3(R2).Q2: Section XVII (17) of M3(R2) states, “[i]f nonclinical embryo-fetal studies have indicated that neither agent poses a potential human developmental risk, combination studies are not recommended unless concerns exist, based on the properties of individual components, that their combination could give rise to a hazard for humans.” Although this statement is in line with European Medicines Agency (EMA) guidance, it contradicts FDA guidance that states that embryo-fetal development studies of the combination should be conducted unless the marketed drug substance or the new molecular entity (NME) is already known to have significant risk for developmental toxicity (e.g., the10marketed drug has been assigned a pregnancy category “D” or “X”). Please provide clarity regarding the precedence of ICH guidance over regional guidances in those areas where such differences occur.A2: Statements made in ICH guidances represent an agreed position across the participating bodies and reflect each regulatory body’s current recommendations on a given topic.Q3: The current guidance states that for combinations of late stage products for which there is adequate clinical experience of co-administration, combination toxicity studies are generally not recommended unless there is a significant toxicological concern. In this context, what is considered “adequate clinical experience with co-administration”? Specifically, how do you get “adequate” clinical experience with the combination without having done combination toxicity testing? This guidance seems only to apply to marketed products that have been used together. Was that the intent?A3: This section of the guidance was not intended to only apply to marketed products. Adequate clinical experience is defined in ICH M3(R2) as data from phase 3 clinical studies and/or postmarketing use. Adequate clinical experience can be the result of common clinical practice with drug combinations.Co-administration of two or more late stage entities is a common practice in many therapeutic areas of clinical development where add-on therapy to the standard of care or combination therapy is common, such as with hypertension, diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis C, and cancer.Q4: For non-fixed-dose combinations, if one of the agents is a member of a class containing multiple approved products, should each member of the class be tested in a combination toxicity study?A4: Generally, combination toxicity studies are recommended when there is an intent to combine (co-package or administer in a single dosage form) specific drugs, or when the product information of one drug recommends co-use with another specified drug. There is no recommendation for combination toxicity testing in the guidance for the situation described in this question. When there is a specific cause for concern with an agent, combination toxicity testing should be done with the agent. When there is a class-related cause for concern, a combination toxicity study with a representative agent in the class could be informative (see also Q&A3 in this section). A rationale should be provided for the agent selected for testing.Q5: How are dosage, duration, and endpoint of a combination toxicity study selected?11A5: ICH M3(R2) is intended primarily to address the timing and duration of nonclinical studies relative to clinical development. Provided a nonclinical combination toxicity study is warranted to support the combination clinical trial, the duration of the study should be equivalent to that of the clinical trial it is intended to support, up to a maximum of 90 days (which would also support marketing). A combination study of shorter duration can be used to support marketing, depending on the duration of clinical use. A combination toxicity study intended to address a particular cause for toxicological concern, based on the experience with the individual agents, should be of a duration that is appropriate to address the concern.The combination toxicity study should incorporate endpoints to evaluate additive and synergistic effects for known toxicities that might be predicted from what is known of the pharmacological, toxicological, and pharmacokinetic (PK) profiles of the individual entities, as well as the available clinical data, and standard endpoints typically used in a general toxicity study. Detailed discussion of experimental design (e.g., choice of species, dose and dosing frequency justifications) is outside the scope of this guidance. However, dosages should be appropriate to address any identified cause for concern or to provide exposure margins that are clinically relevant (e.g., when conducting a study with two early stage agents).Q6: When there is a cause for concern for multiple entities being used together (e.g., more than two), how should the multiple entity combinations be assessed in the toxicity studies?A6: Because of the potential complexity of performing and interpreting a combination toxicity study with more than two entities, it is generally more practical for initial studies to evaluate combinations of no more than two entities. Additional testing would then depend on the outcome of these studies and should be considered on a case-by-case basis, and in consultation with appropriate regulatory authorities.Q7: If a compound is being developed that aims to reduce another compound’s side effect, such combination effects would be evaluated in clinical or nonclinical pharmacology studies. Do the pharmacology studies replace the combination toxicity study?A7: When combination toxicity studies are warranted, they generally cannot be replaced by combination pharmacology studies, except for anticancer pharmaceuticals (see ICH S9). The purpose of a combination toxicity study is to evaluate toxicity endpoints that could give rise to an unanticipated hazard for humans. These toxicity endpoints are not usually adequately evaluated in the pharmacology studies. Situations where combination toxicity studies are not warranted are described in section XVII (17) of the M3(R2) guidance.12Q8: Section XVII (17) of M3(R2) indicates that if there is a concern for a potential human developmental risk of a combination and a combination embryo-fetal development study is warranted, such a study should be available to support the marketing application. Please clarify whether such a study should be performed before the commencement of a clinical trial that includes women of childbearing potential (WOCBP).A8: As described in the M3(R2) guidance, the combination embryo-fetal toxicity study should be provided to support marketing. Any trial enrolling WOCBP before completing a combination embryo-fetal development study should include appropriate precautions, including informed consent, to minimize the risk of unintentional exposure of the embryo or fetus as outlined in section XI.C (11.3).Q9: In ICH M3(R2), section I.C Scope of the Guidance (1.3) states that “[p]harmaceuticals under development for indications in life-threatening or serious diseases (e.g., advanced cancer, resistant HIV infection, and congenital enzyme deficiency diseases) without current effective therapy also warrant a case-by-case approach to both the toxicological evaluation and clinical development in order to optimize and expedite drug development.” Although not specifically stated in the combination section of M3(R2) (see section XVII (17)), it is generally accepted that combination toxicity studies on advanced cancer and HIV products are not warranted unless there is a specific cause for concern. Can this be confirmed? Would this also extend to hepatitis C virus (HCV) products, as discussed in the recently issued FDA draft guidance for industry on Chronic Hepatitis C Virus Infection: Developing Direct-Acting Antifiral Agents for Treatment (September 2010),4 and to other therapeutic areas where “cocktails” of drugs are standard clinical practice?A9: It is accepted that combination toxicity studies on advanced cancer, tuberculosis, and HIV products are generally not warranted unless there is a specific cause for concern under clinically relevant conditions. Combination toxicity studies are also not generally warranted for antiviral agents for treatment of hepatitis C. There are other situations where combinations of drugs are standard clinical practice for serious or life-threatening conditions without current effective therapies, and a similar approach might also apply.Q10: In case of combinations with at least one biotechnology-derived product, does section XVII Combination Drug Toxicity Testing (17) apply as such, or only with regard to timing as suggested in section I.C (1.3) on the scope of the M3(R2) guidance? And in case of the latter, which guidance would (still) apply in deciding whether and which types of studies would be recommended?4 When final, this guidance will represent FDA’s current thinking on this topic.13A10: For biotechnology-derived products, appropriate nonclinical safety studies should be determined in accordance with ICH S6(R1). However, the topic of combination toxicity studies is not addressed by that guidance. When the combination consists of a biotechnology-derived component and a nonbiotechnology-derived component, the design and feasibility of any nonclinical combination study are complex and should be considered on a case-by-case basis. The rationale for such a study should be clearly scientifically justified, using the principles of ICH S6(R1) and ICH M3(R2).Q11: In the discussion of inclusion of WOCBP in combination drug development, M3(R2) states, “where . . . individual agent(s) have shown findings indicative of embryo-fetal risk, combination studies are not recommended as a potential human developmental hazard has already been identified.” What is meant by the phrase “have shown findings indicative of embryo-fetal risk”? FDA's guidance for industry on Nonclinical Safety Evaluation of Drug or Biologic Combinations references Pregnancy Category D and X only as yielding this exclusion. Is this the intent for the ICH as well?A11: A finding indicative of embryo-fetal risk includes any observations for reproductive hazard at relevant exposure multiples (within approximately an order of magnitude of the clinical exposure) or directly related to the pharmacodynamics of the drug. In these cases, recommendations about patient actions to minimize the identified hazard would likely be unchanged even if data from a combination study showed an enhanced effect, because a significant risk to patients has already been identified. Therefore, combination reproductive toxicity studies are not recommended when a finding with one of the individual agents indicates embryo-fetal risk; that information would be made available to patients and physicians as part of the risk communication, irrespective of pregnancy category. For example, if studies with one of the agents showed fetal death or terata at approximately 10-fold the clinical exposure, even if observed in only one species, a combination study would not be warranted, provided that this information was present in the single agent product labeling.Q12: There is no mention about pharmacology studies, and pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction studies in section XVII (17). Please indicate whether and when these studies should be conducted.A12: Presumably, the pharmacodynamic activities and pharmacokinetic profile, including the effects on the CYP450s of the individual drugs, are known before the drugs are combined. Because potential pharmacodynamic interactions are anticipated based on the nonclinical and clinical experiences with the individual entities or their combination, no nonclinical pharmacodynamic interaction studies are warranted. If the pharmacology information indicates potential interactions that could lead to toxicity, then combination nonclinical toxicity studies might be warranted.14Concerns regarding pharmacokinetic interactions can often be addressed by lowering the initial doses administered below those that might be appropriate for the individual drugs or by conducting a clinical pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction study.E. Safety Pharmacology (5)Q1: ICH M3(R2) states that including the in vivo safety pharmacology evaluations in toxicity studies to the extent feasible should be considered. Does this mean that the safety pharmacology assessment conducted as part of general toxicity studies can be less thorough than that obtained in stand-alone safety pharmacology studies?A1: No. Assessment of safety pharmacology as part of the general toxicity studies should provide rigor similar to that in stand-alone safety pharmacology studies. This can be achieved with current technology, provided the methods have been adequately assessed.F. Exploratory Clinical Trials (6)Q1: To support exploratory clinical trials, why should the extended single-dose studies be done in both sexes when the clinical exploratory studies are likely to be done in one sex?A1: Exploratory clinical studies do not represent a commitment to full development. Therefore, when intent is to conduct the exploratory clinical study in one sex only, the single-dose toxicity studies can be restricted to that sex. However, in such cases, animal group sizes for the Day 2 termination should be increased, as it is normal to combine effects from both sexes with respect to identifying and characterizing toxicities that are not sex-specific. For extended single-dose toxicity studies using a single sex, the usual animal numbers should be 15/group (rodents) or 5/group (nonrodents) for the Day 2 termination, and 7/group (rodents) or 3/group (nonrodents) for the Day 14 termination.Q2a: Please clarify the differences between Approaches 3, 4, and 5.A2a: Approach 3 involves just a single dose in humans supported by extended single-dose toxicity studies in rodents and nonrodents conducted up to the animal maximum tolerated dose (MTD), maximum feasible dose (MFD), or limit dose.Approach 4 involves multi-dose clinical trials (up to 14 days) supported by 14day toxicity studies (in rodents and nonrodents) in which dose selection for15animals is based on multiples of proposed human exposure in the exploratory clinical trial. If no toxicity is observed in either species, it is recommended that the maximum clinical dose not exceed 1/10th the lower exposure (AUC) in either species at the highest dose tested in the animals. If toxicity is observed, see answer A2b below.Approach 5 involves multi-dose clinical trials (up to 14 days) supported by a 14day study in rodents up to the MTD, MFD, or limit dose and a nonrodent confirmatory study (at least equivalent to the duration of the exploratory clinical trial) that indicates that the nonrodent is not more sensitive than the rodent. In this case, the highest exposure appropriate in the exploratory clinical trial should be determined by the findings in the toxicity studies.Thus, the differences between Approach 4 and Approach 5 include how the standard nonclinical toxicity study recommendations are modified, and how the clinical exposure limit is established. Approach 5 probably uses less drug than Approach 4, but relies heavily on the rodent for identifying safety risks. Approach 4 gives equal weight to the rodent and nonrodent, but might not identify target organ toxicity in either species. In this case, clinical progression is supported by the knowledge that a reasonable safety margin exists.The series of examples are intended to provide sponsors flexibility in exploratory clinical trial approaches so that they can do what best fits their purpose. The approaches given are only examples, and sponsors can propose alternatives that do not fit neatly into one of the described approaches.Q2b: Why does Approach 4 have a more stringent maximum clinical dose than Approaches 3 and 5?A2b: Approach 4 is the only one of these approaches that does not rely on the standard high-dose criteria described in section I.E (1.5) (MTD, MFD, 50X exposure multiple, or limit dose) in at least one species.In Approach 4, the high dose in both the rodent and nonrodent studies is based on multiples of the proposed human exposure, and thus the high-dose selection recommendations described in section I.E (1.5) are not applied to either species. This is in contrast to Approach 3, in which the standard high-dose criteria should be met in both species, and in contrast to Approach 5, in which the standard high-dose criteria should be met in rodents. In Approach 3 and Approach 5, the use of standard high-dose selection criteria reduces the uncertainty around potential unidentified toxicities that might be relevant to humans.Because Approach 4 uses exposure multiples for the high-dose selection in both species, it is possible that potential toxicity might not be identified in either species. In this case, more conservative limits on clinical exposure (e.g., 1/10th the exposure obtained using the lower exposure of the two species) are16recommended because the dose-limiting toxicities of potential concern for clinical monitoring have not been identified. If toxicity is identified in one species, then the limit on clinical exposure is based on the No Observed Adverse Effect Level (NOAEL) exposure in the species with toxicity or ½ the NOAEL exposure in the species without toxicity, whichever is lower. This can yield a higher limit in Approach 4 than in the case where toxicity in neither species has been observed. The limit on clinical exposure for Approach 4 when based on toxicity can be comparable to the limit on clinical exposure in Approach 5. If dose-limiting toxicity is identified in both species using Approach 4, then the high-dose recommendations of section I.E (1.5) have been met or exceeded in both species and a maximum clinical dose can be based on standard risk assessment used for phase 1 trials and a clinical MTD can be explored.Q2c: In cases where toxicity is demonstrated (e.g., Approaches 3 and 5) why is the maximum allowable human dose (equal to or 1/2 the NOAEL) different from usual practice ( i.e., (1) where toxicity is nonserious and/or monitorable, human doses above the NOAEL would normally be allowed, and (2) where toxicity is serious and non-monitorable the maximum human dose would usually be limited to 1/10th the NOAEL).A2c: The more stringent limits on maximum exposure in exploratory clinical trials compared to standard phase 1 trials are consistent with the more limited nonclinical recommendations compared with the standard toxicity study recommendations described in section I.E (1.5) and section V (5) in M3(R2). For example, in Approach 3, extended single-dose studies are recommended rather than the typical recommendation of a study of at least 2 weeks’ duration (see Table 1 and Approach 5); the nonrodent study is only confirmatory in nature and can be limited to 3 animals at a single-dose level targeted to be a NOAEL. The recommendation that the maximum human exposure allowed could be up to 1/2 the NOAEL exposure assumes that the toxicity defining the NOAEL is not severe and is monitorable. If this is not the case, it might be appropriate to adjust the exposure margin based on the nature of the dose-limiting toxicity.Q3: Why is an MFD treated like an MTD in Approaches 3 and 5 when considering the maximum clinical exposure in the exploratory clinical trial? If no toxicity is observed in either species when using an MFD, shouldn’t this be treated similarly to the case in Approach 4 when there is no toxicity in either species (i.e., limit the clinical exposure to 1/10th rather than 1/2 the exposure at the highest dose tested)?A3: In any situation in which the MFD is used as the top dose for a toxicity study, it is simply not possible to test a higher dose/exposure. If the top dose used is the MFD and no toxicity is observed, this situation is similar to that of the limit dose when toxicity has not been identified (i.e., the limit dose is the NOAEL) where clinical exposures up to 1/2 the AUC at the NOAEL can be used (see section I.E17(1.5) of the M3(R2) guidance, and section II.A (1) of this Q&A guidance, Limit Dose for Toxicity Studies, Q&A9). The 1/10th exposure limit is not applied when the high dose is limited by an MFD, because this could prevent adequate clinical testing of a drug under the exploratory clinical trial concept. When no toxicity is identified using Approach 4, a more stringent safety limit has been recommended because it would have been possible to test higher doses in animals to characterize the toxicity profile of the drug.Q4: The M3(R2) guidance provides advice on establishing the maximum dose (exposure) permitted in exploratory clinical trials but provides minimal guidance for establishing the maximum dose in standard phase 1 or clinical development trials. Can the maximum dose in standard phase 1 trials be based on the principles described for exploratory clinical trials (Table 3 of M3(R2))?A4: When the package of nonclinical studies meets the general recommendations of section V.A (5.1) of ICH M3(R2), then the maximum clinical dose for a clinical development phase 1 study can be based on standard risk assessments (e.g., whether the findings are reversible and/or monitorable, the severity of the indication, adverse effects in clinical studies; also see section VI (6) of ICH M3(R2) and regional guidances). This would normally support a higher clinical dose than that recommended for exploratory clinical trials. However, a sponsor has the option to set a lower maximum clinical dose for a phase 1 study (e.g., based on the principles described for exploratory approaches).Q5: What are reasonable strategies for exploratory clinical trials with biotechnology-derived products?A5: Exploratory clinical trial approaches can be applicable to biotechnology-derived products. Biotechnology-derived products include a wide variety of molecular structures and targets (e.g., peptides, polypeptides, therapeutic proteins, and monoclonal antibodies). The designs of the exploratory clinical trial and supporting toxicity studies for biotechnology-derived products should reflect their special features as described in ICH S6(R1). This includes the duration of exposure, the potential for immunogenicity in animals or humans, and the possibility that dose-limiting toxicity might be due to on-target, pharmacodynamic-related mechanisms. ICH S6(R1) recommends that exploratory clinical trial approaches be discussed with the appropriate regulatory authorities.Note that some biotechnology-derived products, for example monoclonal antibodies, are not active in rodents, and in such cases a nonhuman primate can be used as a single relevant species for toxicity testing. In such cases, an approach analogous to Approach 5 would not be applicable because it relies on a rodent toxicity study and confirmatory nonrodent study. Also, for standard toxicity studies of biotechnology-derived products, the high dose is routinely based on18exposure multiples (i.e., 10X the maximum clinical exposure) rather than on an MTD, an MFD (unless these are lower), or a limit dose. Thus, the high dose recommendation in Approach 4 is not substantially different from the standard recommendations for biotechnology-derived products.Q6: In exploratory Approaches 1 and 2 that use doses of < 100 micrograms (μg), why is the cross-species exposure conversion for intravenous administration based on milligram (mg)/kilogram (kg) and not mg/square meter (m2) as it is for oral administration?A6: The intravenous (i.v.) approach of using mg/kg and permitting dosing with 1/100th of the NOAEL reflects a conservative risk mitigation strategy, considering the low levels of drug being administered. The use of mg/kg for i.v. and mg/m2 for oral administration when determining dose multiples for microdose studies reflects the thinking that it is appropriate to use a more conservative scaling factor for oral versus i.v. administration. With oral administration, there is the additional complexity of potential differences in absorption between species and, therefore, the more conservative mg/m2 basis was used rather than the mg/kg basis used for i.v. administration.Q7: For Approach 1, the M3(R2) guidance says:(a)Total dose ≤ 100 μg (no inter-dose interval limitations) AND Total dose ≤ 1/100th NOAEL and ≤ 1/100th pharmacologically active dose (scaled on mg/kg for i.v. and mg/m2 for oral).But it also says:(b)Extended single-dose toxicity study (see footnotes c and d) in one species, usually rodent, by intended route of administration with toxicokinetic data, or via the i.v. route. A maximum dose of 1000-fold the clinical dose on a mg/kg basis for i.v. and mg/m2 for oral administration can be used.It is unclear whether the margin of exposure should be 100-fold the NOAEL or1000-fold.A7: The 1/100th the NOAEL in the animals is one of the criteria that could limit the clinical dose. Statement Q7(b) above refers to defining a limit dose for testing in animals for the microdose approaches rather than a clinical margin based on dose.Q8: For positron emission tomography (PET) tracers, please confirm that for Approaches 1 and 2, toxicokinetics (TK) is not needed for either oral or i.v. administration.A8: A nonclinical toxicity study conducted to support a clinical microdose trial should include TK assessment unless the study is conducted by the intravenous route. This is to demonstrate that systemic exposure has occurred. However, it is19recognized that for some PET tracers, the clinical microdose can be very low andin such cases it might not be possible to characterize a full TK profile.Q9: What chemistry, manufacturing, and control (CMC) information should be available for an exploratory clinical trial?A9: CMC information for exploratory clinical trials was not addressed in ICH M3(R2). Consult appropriate regulatory authorities and regional guidances.Q10: Does evaluation of potential mutagenic impurities (e.g., structure-activity relationship (SAR) or testing) apply to exploratory clinical trial support?A10: The drug substance should be considered appropriate from a CMC perspective. For approaches 1 and 2 (microdose studies), SAR or genotoxicity testing is not recommended for the parent drug or for the impurities. For other exploratory clinical trial approaches where higher doses and longer treatments are used, available guidance on mutagenic impurities should be followed.G. Reproductive Toxicity (7)Q1a: Endnote 4: In the preliminary embryo-fetal developmental study, what is the definition of “adequate dose levels”? Does this mean maternal toxicity at least one dose level? If only one or two dose levels have surviving fetuses, would that be adequate?A1a: The same dose selection criteria used for a definitive embryo-fetal development study should be used for the preliminary study (see ICH S5).Q1b: Endnote 4: The text specifies a minimum of six dams per group. Does this mean a minimum of six litters per group should be evaluated?A1b: No. Sometimes pregnant females have total loss of litters. Dosing should be initiated with a minimum of six presumed pregnant females per group, with all surviving litters evaluated.Q1a: Are embryo-fetal development studies or the demonstration that the drug and/or metabolites do not partition into semen important for male-only products?A1a: The ICH M3(R2) guidance does not address recommendations for embryo-fetal development studies in products intended for use only in males. Embryo-fetal development studies for a male-only drug should be considered on a case-by-case basis.20Q2b: Should contraception be used in male-only studies until reproductive risks have been evaluated?A2b: It is general practice to use contraception in males until the potential for reproductive and developmental risk has been addressed.H. Juvenile Animal Studies (8)Q1: What is the appropriate duration of treatment for a toxicity study using juvenile animals to address a specific issue of concern?A1: Specific aspects of the design of juvenile toxicity studies are outside the scope of ICH M3(R2). However, in general, the duration of such a study will depend on the toxicity to be addressed, the organ system involved, and the information available from previous studies. The design and duration of the study should address the concerns for the product’s potential to affect the developing organ systems of the intended clinical population.To reduce animal use, the specific issue of concern can sometimes be evaluated by incorporating developmental endpoints into a general repeated-dose toxicity study or into a pre/postnatal toxicity study in which the pups were adequately exposed to the drug.Q2: Clarify when a second species might be important.The guidance states that when a juvenile animal toxicity study is warranted, one relevant species (preferably rodents) is generally considered adequate. It may be difficult to prospectively describe the majority of instances in which a second study in another species is scientifically justified, but can parameters be described that are not reasonable justifications?A2: There are few circumstances for which juvenile animal studies in two species would be recommended besides (1) an absence of adult human data (i.e., a pediatric-only indication), or (2) there are multiple specific issues of developmental concern and no one species is able to address them adequately. Some situations for which a juvenile study in a second species is not warranted include the following: solely because a therapeutic is first-in-class, when verifying adverse findings in a juvenile study in one species, or when further examining behavioral effects of agents for which such effects are known or can be expected.Q3: Please clarify what is important for pediatric-only indications. Should a juvenile animal study be conducted to support a pharmacokinetic (PK) study in21pediatric populations if you don’t have any adult data? Should a second species be studied?A3: Generally, data from adult human volunteers and the supporting nonclinical data (in two species) should be available before pediatric clinical trials are initiated, even when the product is not intended for development in adults. Section XII(12) of ICH M3(R2), Clinical Trials in Pediatric Populations, generally provides recommendations for the situation in which adult clinical trials should precede pediatric trials and indicates that juvenile animal toxicity studies are not considered important to support short-term PK trials in pediatric populations. However, if data from adult humans are not available and the drug will be developed only for pediatric subjects, then this is a case where juvenile animal studies in two species would be appropriate to support pediatric PK trials.



Guidancefor Industry and FDA StaffGuidance for the Use ofBayesian Statistics inMedical Device Clinical TrialsDocument issued on: February 5, 2010The draft of this document was issued on 5/23/2006For questions regarding this document, contact Dr. Greg Campbell (CDRH) at 301-796-5750 or greg.campbell@fda.hhs.gov or the Office of Communication, Outreach and Development, (CBER) at 1-800-835-4709 or 301-827-1800.U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Devices and Radiological HealthDivision of BiostatisticsOffice of Surveillance and BiometricsCenter for Biologics Evaluation and ResearchContains Nonbinding RecommendationsPrefacePublic CommentWritten comments and suggestions may be submitted at any time for Agency consideration to the Division of Dockets Management, Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, Room 1061, (HFA-305), Rockville, MD, 20852.Alternatively, electronic comments may be submitted to http://www.regulations.gov. When submitting comments, please refer to Docket No.2006D-0191. Comments may not be acted upon by the Agency until the document is next revised or updated.Additional CopiesAdditional copies are available from the Internet at: http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm071072.htm You may also send an e-mail request to dsmica@fda.hhs.gov to receive an electronic copy of the guidance or send a fax request to 240-276-3151 to receive a hard copy. Please use the document number (Office GGP Rep will insert DOC number in parentheses) to identify the guidance you are requesting.Additional copies of this guidance document are also available from the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), Office of Communication, Outreach and Development (HFM-40), 1401 Rockville Pike, Suite 200N, Rockville, MD 20852-1448, or by calling 1-800-835-4709 or 301-827-1800, or email ocod@fda.hhs.gov, or from the Internet at http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htmContains Nonbinding RecommendationsTable of Contents1. Introduction............................................................................................................................................42. Foreword................................................................................................................................................42.1 What is Bayesian statistics?..................................................................................................................52.2 Why use Bayesian statistics for medical devices?................................................................................52.3 Why are Bayesian methods more commonly used now?.....................................................................62.4 When should FDA participate in the planning of a Bayesian trial?......................................................62.5 The Bayesian approach is not a substitute for sound science...............................................................62.6 What are potential benefits of using Bayesian methods?.....................................................................72.7 What are potential challenges using the Bayesian approach?...............................................................82.8 What software programs are available that can perform Bayesian analyses?.....................................102.9 What resources are available to learn more about Bayesian statistics?..............................................113. Bayesian Statistics................................................................................................................................113.1 Outcomes and Parameters..................................................................................................................123.3 What is a prior distribution?...............................................................................................................133.4 What is the likelihood of the observed data?......................................................................................153.5 What is the posterior distribution?......................................................................................................153.6 What is a predictive distribution?.......................................................................................................163.7 What is exchangeability?....................................................................................................................173.8 What is the Likelihood Principle?......................................................................................................194. Planning a Bayesian Clinical Trial.......................................................................................................194.1 Bayesian trials start with a sound clinical trial design........................................................................194.2 Selecting the relevant endpoints.........................................................................................................204.3 Collecting other important information: covariates............................................................................214.4 Choosing a comparison: controls........................................................................................................214.5 Initial information about the endpoints: prior distributions................................................................224.6 Borrowing strength from other studies: hierarchical models..............................................................254.7 Determining the sample size...............................................................................................................274.8 Assessing the operating characteristics of a Bayesian design.............................................................285. Analyzing a Bayesian Clinical Trial.........................................................................................................325.1 Summaries of the posterior distribution.............................................................................................325.2 Hypothesis testing..............................................................................................................................325.3 Interval estimation..............................................................................................................................325.4 Predictive probabilities.......................................................................................................................335.5 Interim analyses..................................................................................................................................345.6 Model Checking.................................................................................................................................355.7 Sensitivity Analysis............................................................................................................................365.8 Decision analysis................................................................................................................................366. Post-Market Surveillance.....................................................................................................................377. Technical Details..................................................................................................................................387.1 Suggested Information to Include in Your Protocol...........................................................................387.2 Simulations to Obtain Operating Characteristics................................................................................407.3 Model Selection..................................................................................................................................427.4 Checking Exchangeability using the Posterior Predictive Distribution..............................................437.5 Calculations........................................................................................................................................448. References............................................................................................................................................46Guidance for Industryand FDA StaffGuidance for the Use of Bayesian Statistics in Medical Device Clinical TrialsThis guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA's) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the appropriate number listed on the title page of this guidance.1. IntroductionThis document provides guidance on statistical aspects of the design and analysis of clinical trials for medical devices that use Bayesian statistical methods.The purpose of this guidance is to discuss important statistical issues in Bayesian clinical trials for medical devices. The purpose is not to describe the content of a medical device submission. Further, while this document provides guidance on many of the statistical issues that arise in Bayesian clinical trials, it is not intended to be all-inclusive. The statistical literature is rich with books and papers on Bayesian theory and methods; a selected bibliography has been included for further discussion of specific topics.FDA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.2. Foreword42.1 What is Bayesian statistics?Bayesian statistics is an approach for learning from evidence as it accumulates. In clinical trials, traditional (frequentist) statistical methods may use information from previous studies only at the design stage. Then, at the data analysis stage, the information from these studies is considered as a complement to, but not part of, the formal analysis. In contrast, the Bayesian approach uses Bayes’ Theorem to formally combine prior information with current information on a quantity of interest. The Bayesian idea is to consider the prior information and the trial results as part of a continual data stream, in which inferences are being updated each time new data become available.Throughout this document we will use the terms “prior distribution”, “prior probabilities”, or simply “prior” to refer to the mathematical entity (the probability distribution) that is used in these Bayesian calculations. The term “prior information” refers to the set of all information that may be used to construct the prior distribution.2.2 Why use Bayesian statistics for medical devices?With prior informationWhen good prior information on clinical use of a device exists, the Bayesian approach may enable this information to be incorporated into the statistical analysis of a trial. In some circumstances, the prior information for a device may be a justification for a smaller-sized or shorter-duration pivotal trial.Good prior information is often available for medical devices because of their mechanism of action and evolutionary development. The mechanism of action of medical devices is typically physical. As a result, device effects are typically local, not systemic. Local effects can sometimes be predictable from prior information on the previous generations of a device when modifications to the device are minor. Good prior information can also be available from studies of the device overseas. In a randomized controlled trial, prior information on the control can be available from historical control data.Our experience is that Bayesian methods are usually less controversial when the prior information is based on empirical evidence such as data from clinical trials. However, Bayesian methods can be controversial when the prior information is based mainly on personal opinion (often derived by elicitation from “experts”).Without prior informationThe Bayesian approach is also frequently useful in the absence of prior information. First, the approach can accommodate adaptive trials (e.g., interim analyses, change to sample size, or change to randomization scheme) and even some unplanned, but necessary trial modifications. Second, the Bayesian approach can be useful for analysis of a complex model when a5frequentist analysis is difficult to implement or does not exist. Other potential uses include adjustment for missing data, sensitivity analysis, multiple comparisons, and optimal decision making (Bayesian decision theory).Least burdensomeThe Bayesian approach, when correctly employed, may be less burdensome than a frequentist approach.1 Section 513(a)(3) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) mandates that FDA shall consider the least burdensome appropriate means of evaluating effectiveness of a device that would have a reasonable likelihood of resulting in approval (see 21 U.S.C. 360c(a)(3)).2.3 Why are Bayesian methods more commonly used now?Bayesian analyses are often computationally intense. However, recent breakthroughs in computational algorithms and computing speed have made it possible to carry out calculations for very complex and realistic Bayesian models. These advances have resulted in a huge increase in the popularity of Bayesian methods (cf. Malakoff, 1999). A basic computational tool is a method called Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling, a method for simulating from the distributions of random quantities.2.4 When should FDA participate in the planning of a Bayesian trial?With any clinical trial, we recommend you schedule meetings to discuss experimental design and models. For a Bayesian design we recommend you discuss your prior information with FDA before the study begins. If an investigational device exemption (IDE) is required, we recommend you meet with FDA before you submit the IDE.2.5 The Bayesian approach is not a substitute for sound science.Scientifically sound clinical trial planning and rigorous trial conduct are important regardless of whether you use a Bayesian or frequentist approach. We recommend you remain vigilant regarding randomization, concurrent controls, prospective planning, blinding, bias, precision, and all other factors1 Two examples of successful use of Bayesian methods in device trials are:TRANSCAN (http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfTopic/pma/pma.cfm?num=p970033). Prior information was used to incorporate results from previous studies, resulting in a reduced sample size for demonstration of effectiveness.INTERFIX (http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfTopic/pma/pma.cfm?num=p970015). An interim analysis was performed; based on Bayesian predictive modeling of the future success rate, the trial was stopped early. No prior information was used.6that go into a successful clinical trial. See Section 4.1: Bayesian trials start with a sound clinical trial design.2.6 What are potential benefits of using Bayesian methods?2.6.1 More Information for Decision MakingThe information from a current trial is augmented and the precision may be increased by the incorporation of prior information in a Bayesian analysis. The Bayesian analysis brings to bear the extra, relevant, prior information, which can help FDA make a decision.2.6.2 Sample size reduction via prior informationIn some instances, the use of prior information may alleviate the need for a larger sized trial.However, a decrease in the sample size for the current trial may not be warranted by a Bayesian analysis incorporating prior information. See section 4.7 for further discussion on sample size issues in a Bayesian clinical trial.Additionally, if the prior information does not agree sufficiently with trial results, then the Bayesian analysis may actually be conservative relative to a frequentist or Bayesian analysis that does not incorporate the prior information.2.6.3 Sample size reduction via Adaptive Trial DesignAdaptive designs use accumulating data to decide on how to modify certain aspects of a trial according to a pre-specified plan. They are often used to potentially reduce the size of a trial by stopping the trial early when conditions warrant. Adaptive trial designs can sometimes be easier to implement using Bayesian methods than frequentist methods. By adhering to the Likelihood Principle, a Bayesian approach can offer flexibility in the design and analysis of adaptive trials (see Sections 3.8 and 4.10).2.6.4. Midcourse changes to the trial designWith appropriate planning, the Bayesian approach can also offer the flexibility of midcourse changes to a trial. Some possibilities include dropping an unfavorable treatment arm or modifications to the randomization scheme. Modifications to the randomization scheme are particularly relevant for an ethically sensitive study or when enrollment becomes problematic for a treatment arm. Bayesian methods can be especially flexible in allowing for changes in the treatment to control randomization ratio during the course of the trial. See Kadane (1996) for a discussion.2.6.5 Other Potential BenefitsExact analysis7The Bayesian approach can sometimes be used to obtain an exact analysis when the corresponding frequentist analysis is only approximate or is too difficult to implement.Missing DataBayesian methods allow for great flexibility in dealing with missing data. See section 5.4 for a discussion of the use of these Bayesian methods.MultiplicityMultiplicity is pervasive in clinical trials. For example, inferences on multiple endpoints or testing of multiple subgroups (e.g., race or sex) are examples of multiplicity. Bayesian approaches to multiplicity problems are different from frequentist ones, and may be advantageous. See section 4.9 for a discussion of Bayesian multiplicity adjustments.2.7 What are potential challenges using the Bayesian approach?Extensive preplanningPlanning the design, conduct, and analysis of any trial is always important from a regulatory perspective, but is especially crucial for a Bayesian trial. In a Bayesian trial, decisions have to be made at the design stage regarding:•the prior information,•the information to be obtained from the trial, and•the mathematical model used to combine the two.Different choices of prior information or different choices of model can produce different decisions. As a result, in the regulatory setting, the design of a Bayesian clinical trial involves pre-specification of and agreement on both the prior information and the model. Since reaching this agreement is often an iterative process, we recommend you meet with FDA early to obtain agreement upon the basic aspects of the Bayesian trial design. 2A change in the prior information or the model at a later stage of the trial may imperil the scientific validity of the trial results. For this reason, formal agreement meetings may be appropriate when using a Bayesian approach.2 The FFDCA provides for two types of early collaboration meetings: agreement meetings and determination meetings. See §§ 513(a)(3)(D), 520(g)(7). For details, see the FDA Guidance on early collaboration meetings at http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm073604.htm.8Specifically, the identification of the prior information may be an appropriate topic of an agreement meeting.Extensive model-buildingThe Bayesian approach can involve extensive mathematical modeling of a clinical trial, including:•the probability distributions chosen to reflect the prior information,•the relationships between multiple sources of prior information,•the influence of covariates on patient outcomes or missing data, and•sensitivity analyses on the model choices.We recommend you make your modeling choices through close collaboration and agreement with FDA and your statistical and clinical experts.Specific statistical and computational expertiseThe Bayesian approach often involves specific statistical expertise in Bayesian analysis and computation. Special computational algorithms like MCMC are often used to•analyze trial data,•check model assumptions,•assess prior probabilities at the design stage,•perform simulations to assess probabilities of various outcomes, and•estimate sample size.The technical and statistical costs involved in successfully designing, conducting, and analyzing a Bayesian trial may be offset by the increased precision on device performance that can be obtained by incorporating prior information, or in the absence thereof, by the benefits of a flexible Bayesian trial design (e.g., smaller expected sample size resulting from interim analysis).Choices regarding prior informationAn FDA advisory panel may question prior information you and FDA agreed upon beforehand. We recommend you be prepared to clinically and statistically justify your choices of prior information. In addition, we recommend that you perform sensitivity analysis to check the robustness of your models to different choices of prior distributions.Device labelingResults from a Bayesian trial are expressed differently from the way trial results are usually described in device labels. Bayesian terminology is not yet9commonly seen in device labeling3. As always, we recommend you ensure trial results reported on the device label are easy to understand.Checking calculationsThe flexibility of Bayesian models and the complexity of the computational techniques for Bayesian analyses create greater possibility for errors and misunderstandings. As with any submission, FDA will carry out a detailed statistical review, including verifying results using the same or alternate software. FDA recommends you submit your data and any instruction set used by the statistical analysis program in electronic form.Bayesian and frequentist analyses approaches may differ in their conclusionsTwo investigators, each with the same data and a different preplanned analysis (one Bayesian and one frequentist), could conceivably reach different conclusions that are both scientifically valid. While the Bayesian approach can often be favorable to the investigator with good prior information, the approach can also be more conservative than a frequentist approach (e.g., see Section 4: Planning a Bayesian Clinical Trial).We recommend you do not switch from a frequentist to a Bayesian analysis (or vice versa) once a trial has been initiated. Such post hoc analyses are not scientifically sound and tend to weaken the validity of the submission.2.8 What software programs are available that can perform Bayesian analyses?A commonly available, non-commercial software package dedicated to making Bayesian calculations is called WinBUGS4. The acronym BUGS stands for Bayesian Inference Using Gibbs Sampling, a common type of MCMC sampling. WinBUGS has spawned two other software packages, BRUGS and OpenBUGS. BRUGS enables BUGS to be run in the popular non-commercial package R. OpenBUGS is an open source version of BUGS that allows users to modify the programming code in the package. Other Bayesian software packages are likely to become available in the future. We recommend that before you choose a particular software product you consult with FDA statisticians regarding the computations you will be undertaking in your submission.3 However, one example can be seen at INTERFIX labeling at (SSE: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfTopic/pma/pma.cfm?num=p970015).4 The WinBUGS program can be downloaded from the website of the Medical Research Center, Cambridge: www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk. OpenBUGS can be found at http://mathstat.helsinki.fi/openbugs/ 102.9 What resources are available to learn more about Bayesian statistics?Non-technical introductory references to Bayesian statistics and their application to medicine include Malakoff (1999), Hively (1996), Kadane (1995), Brophy & Joseph (1995), Lilford & Braunholtz (1996), Lewis & Wears (1993), Bland & Altman (1998), and Goodman (1999a, 1999b). O’Malley & Normand (2003) discuss the FDA process and Bayesian methods for medical device trials. Berry (1997) has written an introduction on Bayesian medical device trials specifically for FDA.Brophy & Joseph (1995) provide a well-known synthesis of three clinical trials using Bayesian methods. A comprehensive summary on the use of Bayesian methods to design and analyze clinical trials or perform healthcare evaluations appears in Spiegelhalter, Abrams, & Myles (2004).Introductions to Bayesian statistics that do not emphasize medical applications include Berry (1996), DeGroot (1986), Stern (1998), Lee (1997), Lindley (1985), Gelman, et al. (2004), and Carlin and Louis (2008).References with technical details and statistical terminology are Spiegelhalter, et al. (2000), Spiegelhalter, et al. (1994), Berry & Stangl (1996), Breslow (1990), Stangl & Berry (1998), and Box and Tiao (1992).Technical overviews of Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods for Bayesian computation include Gamerman and Lopes (2006) and Chapter 1 of Gilks, Richardson and Spiegelhalter (1996).Practical applications of Bayesian analyses appear in a number of excellent books, including Spiegelhalter et al (2004), , Congdon (2003), Broemeling (2007), Congdon (2007), Congdon (2005), Albert (2007), and Gilks et al. (1996).Excellent books on optimal Bayesian decision making (a.k.a., Bayesian decision theory) include Berger (1986), Robert (2007), Raiffa and Schlaifer (2000), and MH DeGroot (1970).A list of resources on the Web appears on the International Society for Bayesian Analysis website.53. Bayesian Statistics5 http://www.bayesian.org/ 113.1 Outcomes and ParametersStatistics is concerned with making inferences about unknown quantities of interest. A quantity of interest may be:•an outcome associated with a patient or some other experimental orstudy unit, or•a parameter, a quantity that describes a characteristic of the populationfrom which the study is considered to be a sample.For instance, outcomes in device trials include:•adverse events (e.g., death, renal failure, bleeding, myocardialinfarctions, recurrence),•measures of effectiveness (e.g., in cardiac function, visual acuity,patient satisfaction), and•diagnostic test results.Parameters might describe:•the rate of serious adverse events,•the probability of device effectiveness for a patient,•a patient’s survival probability, and•sensitivity and specificity of a diagnostic device.3.2 The Bayesian ParadigmThe Bayesian paradigm states that probability is the only measure of one’s uncertainty about an unknown quantity. In a Bayesian clinical trial, uncertainty about a quantity of interest is described according to probabilities, which are updated as information is gathered from the trial.Prior distributionBefore a Bayesian trial begins and data are obtained, probabilities are given to all the possible values (or ranges of values) of an unknown quantity of interest. These probabilities, taken together, constitute the prior distribution for that quantity. In trials undergoing regulatory review, the prior distribution is usually based on data from previous trials (although mathematically they need not actually be temporally ordered).Bayes’ theorem and posterior probabilitiesAfter data from the trial become available, the prior distribution is updated according to Bayes’ theorem. This updated distribution is called the posterior distribution, from which one obtains the probabilities for values of the unknown quantity after data are observed. This approach is a scientifically valid way of combining previous information (the prior probabilities) with12current data. The approach can be used in an iterative fashion as knowledge accumulates: today’s posterior probabilities become tomorrow’s prior probabilities.Bayesian inferences are based on the posterior distribution. For example, a Bayesian decision procedure might rule out a set of parameter values if the posterior probability of the parameter values (given the observed data) is small.Decision rulesThe pre-market evaluation of medical devices aims to demonstrate reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness of a new device, often through pre-specified decision rules. Traditional hypothesis testing is an example of a type of decision rule. For Bayesian trials, one common type of decision rule considers that a hypothesis has been demonstrated (with reasonable assurance) if its posterior probability is large enough (“large enough” will be discussed later).The Bayesian approach encompasses a number of key concepts, some of which are not part of the traditional statistical approach. Below, we briefly discuss these concepts and contrast the Bayesian and frequentist approaches.3.3 What is a prior distribution?Suppose that the Greek letter θ (“theta”) represents a parameter in a clinical trial. The initial knowledge about θ prior to data collection is represented by the prior distribution for θ, which we denote in symbols as P(θ).As an example, suppose θ is the rate of a serious adverse event. Its possible values lie between 0 and 1. The prior distribution might give preference to lower values of θ. Figure 1 shows an example of such a prior distribution. The probability that θ takes on any particular set of values is determined by the area under the curve for that set of values. So the prior probability that the adverse event rate θ is greater than 0.4 (the shaded area) is about 0.38.130.00.20.40.60.81.0θFigure 1. Example of a unimodal, right-skewed prior distribution for a serious adverse event rate, denoted by θ. The prior probability that θ is greater than 0.4 (the shaded area) is about 0.38.Alternatively, another prior distribution is the uniform distribution indicating no preference for any value of θ. (Figure 2) For a uniform distribution, the probability that θ lies between 0.2 and 0.3 is 0.10, the same as the probability that θ lies between 0.7 and 0.8, or between 0.55 and 0.65, or in any interval of length 0.10. For this prior, the prior probability that θ is greater than 0.4 (again represented by the shaded area) is 0.60.140.00.20.40.60.81.0θFigure 2. Example of a uniform prior distribution for a serious adverse event rate, denoted by θ. The prior probability that θ is greater than 0.4 (the shaded area) is 0.60.3.4 What is the likelihood of the observed data?Now suppose outcomes have been obtained from a clinical trial. The likelihood function is a mathematical representation of the relationships between observed outcomes and the parameter θ. The likelihood function can be expressed in symbols by P(data |θ), which is the conditional probability of observing the data given a specific value of the parameter θ, for each possible value of θ.3.5 What is the posterior distribution?The final objective is to obtain the posterior distribution, the probabilities of the possible values of the parameter θ conditional on the observed data, which can be denoted in symbols as P(θ| data). Bayes’ theorem is used to update the prior distribution for θ, P(θ), via the likelihood, P(data|θ), to obtain the posterior distribution for θ, P(θ|data). The information about θ is summarized by this posterior distribution, and Bayesian inferences are based on it.As an example, Figure 3 shows the posterior distribution that would be obtained if we started with the prior shown in Figure 1 and observed data with 1 adverse event in 10 patients. Since the adverse event rate observed in these patients is 0.10, the distribution has shifted further to the left (that is, it now favors even lower values for θ). The posterior probability that θ greater than 0.4 (the shaded area) is about 0.04. The probability that the adverse event rate is greater than 0.4 has been reduced from about 0.38 (the prior probability) to about 0.04 (the posterior probability) by the observed trial results.150.00.20.40.60.81.0θFigure 3. Example of a unimodal, right-skewed posterior distribution for a serious adverse event rate, denoted by θ, after observing one adverse event in 10 patients and updating the prior probability in Figure 1. The posterior probability that θ is greater than 0.4 (the shaded area) is about 0.04.The posterior distribution that has been obtained today may serve as a prior distribution when more data are gathered. The more information that is accrued, the less uncertainty there may be about the posterior distribution for θ. As more and more information is collected, the influence of the original prior distribution is usually less. If enough data are collected, the relative importance of the prior distribution will be negligible compared to the likelihood.3.6 What is a predictive distribution?The Bayesian approach allows for the derivation of a special type of posterior probability; namely, the probability of unobserved outcomes (future or missing) given what has already been observed. This probability is called the predictive probability. Collectively, the probabilities for all possible values of the unobserved outcome are called the predictive distribution. Predictive distributions have many uses, including:•determining when to stop a trial (based on predicting outcomes for patients not yet observed),•helping a physician and patient make decisions by predicting the patient’s clinical outcome, given the observed outcomes of patients in the clinical trial,16•predicting a clinical outcome from an earlier or more easily measured outcome for that patient,•augmenting trial results for missing data (imputation), and•model checking.These uses are discussed in more detail in Section 5. Analyzing a Bayesian Clinical Trial.3.7 What is exchangeability?Exchangeability is a fundamental concept underlying statistical inference. It can be of particular importance in Bayesian trials. Formally, we would say that units (patients or trials) are considered exchangeable if the probability of observing any particular set of outcomes on those units is invariant to any re-ordering of the units. This definition can be made clearer through examples.Exchangeability of patientsIn a clinical trial, patients within the trial are usually assumed to be exchangeable. Under exchangeability, patient outcomes are not expected to depend on the order in which the patients were enrolled, the order in which the outcomes are observed, or any other re-indexing or re-numbering of the patients. If patients in the trial are exchangeable with patients in the population from which they were sampled (e.g., the intended use population), then inferences can be made about the population on the basis of data observed on the trial patients. Thus, the concept of a representative sample can be expressed in terms of exchangeability.Exchangeability of trialsFor a Bayesian clinical trial, another level of exchangeability is often assumed. Namely, the trial can be assumed to be exchangeable with other previous trials when the previous trials are considered to be good prior information. The assumption of trial exchangeability enables the current trial to “borrow strength” from the previous trials, while acknowledging that the trials are not identical in all respects. Thus, exchangeability of trials is important in the development of realistic models for combining trial data with prior information.Suppose the rate of an adverse event for a device will be estimated in a future Bayesian trial, and several historical trials are proposed as prior information.All the trials could be considered exchangeable if the adverse event rate for any trial is no more likely to be larger or smaller than that of the other trials. That is, the trial outcomes are not expected to depend on any particular17ordering, re-indexing or re-numbering of the trials. In particular, the rate in the future trial is no more likely to be smaller or larger than the rates in the historical trials.For example, suppose there are two historical trials with adverse event rates of 0.05 and 0.07. Exchangeability of trials is supported if we have no information indicating that the adverse event rate in the future trial will be below, between, or above the two historical trial rates.Exchangeable trials can be thought of as a representative sample of some super-population of clinical trials. The historical trials then provide information on the super-population, and this information, in turn, provides information on the future trial. In this way, the future trial borrows strength from the historical trials.Determining exchangeability of trials in practiceFrom a practical point of view, the judgment regarding exchangeability should have input from the clinical, engineering, and statistical point of view.•The clinicians should be satisfied that the previous trials that are proposed as prior information are similar enough in design and execution to the current trial. A priori, they should not have any reason to believe that there are systematic differences among the trials in any given direction. In particular, they should not be able to predict the direction of a difference between the proposed trial and any of the other previous trials.•The engineers should be satisfied that any design or manufacturing differences among the devices in the trials should not alter significantly the expected performance of the devices, at least in terms of the outcome or parameter of interest.•The statisticians should be able to agree on the appropriate statistical model to be used. The statistical model should be developed in consultation with the clinicians and engineers. In some circumstances, a model can be developed that removes systematic, directional differences among the trials such that exchangeability can still be assumed after adjustment for these differences (see Section 4.6).Bayesian hierarchical models are used to implement exchangeability of trials and exchangeability of patients within trials (see Section 4: Planning a Bayesian Clinical Trial).18For an introductory discussion of exchangeability, see Gelman et. al. (2004), Spiegelhalter et. al. (2004), or Lad (1996). For technical definitions of exchangeability, see Bernardo & Smith (1995).3.8 What is the Likelihood Principle?The Likelihood Principle is an important concept in statistics, but is central to the Bayesian approach. The principle states that all information about the parameter of interest, θ, obtained from a clinical trial, is contained in the likelihood function. In the Bayesian approach, the prior distribution for θ is updated using the information provided by the trial through the likelihood function, and nothing else. Bayesian analysts base all inferences about θ solely on the posterior distribution produced in this manner.A trial can be altered in many ways without changing the likelihood function. Adherence to the likelihood principle allows for flexibility in conducting Bayesian clinical trials, in particular with respect to:•modifications to sample size,•adaptive designs,•interim looks for the purpose of possibly stopping the trial early, and•multiplicity.Note that due to regulatory considerations trial modifications may need to be pre-specified at the design stage.As outlined above, Bayesian analysts base all inferences on the posterior distribution, which (in adherence to the likelihood principle) is the product only of the prior and the likelihood function. Although the frequentist approach makes extensive use of the likelihood function, frequentist analysis does not always adhere to the likelihood principle. For example, the p-value is based on outcomes that might have occurred but were not actually observed in the trial, that is, on something external to the likelihood.For more on the Likelihood Principle, see Berger & Wolpert (1988), Berger & Berry (1988), Irony (1993), and Barlow, et al., (1989).4. Planning a Bayesian Clinical Trial4.1 Bayesian trials start with a sound clinical trial designThe basic tenets of good trial design are the same for both Bayesian and frequentist trials. Parts of a comprehensive trial protocol include:•objectives of the trial,19•endpoints to be evaluated,•conditions under which the trial will be conducted,•population that will be investigated, and•planned statistical analysis.We recommend you follow the principles of good clinical trial design and execution, including minimizing bias. Randomization minimizes bias that can be introduced in the selection of which patients get which treatment. Randomization allows concrete statements about the probability of imbalances in covariates due to chance alone. For reasonably large sample sizes, randomization ensures some degree of balance for all covariates, including those not measured in the study.Masking (also known as blinding) of physicians avoids bias that can be introduced by intended or unintended differences in patient care or in evaluation of patient outcomes based on the treatment received during the course of the trial. Masking of patients minimizes biases due to their expectation of benefit.We recommend you choose beforehand the type of analysis to be used (Bayesian or frequentist). Switching to an analysis method that produces a more favorable outcome after observing the data is problematic. It is difficult to justify such a switch at the analysis stage. In some cases, a Bayesian analysis of a new trial may salvage some information obtained in a previous non-Bayesian clinical trial that deviated from the original protocol. The information provided by such a trial may be represented by a prior distribution to be used in a prospective Bayesian clinical trial.For further information on planning a trial, see FDA’s Statistical Guidance for Non-Diagnostic Medical Devices.64.2 Selecting the relevant endpointsEndpoints (also called parameters in this document) are the measures of safety and effectiveness used to support a certain claim. Ideally, endpoints are:•clinically relevant,•directly observable,•related to the claims for the device, and6http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/Guidance Documents/ucm106757.htm 20•important to the patient.For example, an endpoint may be a measure of the average change in an important outcome (mortality, morbidity, quality of life) observed in the trial.The objective of a clinical trial is to gather information from the patients in the trial to make inferences about these unknown endpoints or parameters.4.3 Collecting other important information: covariatesCovariates, also known as confounding factors, are characteristics of the study patients that can affect their outcome. There are many statistical techniques (Bayesian and frequentist) to adjust for covariates. Covariate adjustment is especially important in any situation where some degree of covariate balance is not assured through randomization, such as a Bayesian trial in which other trials are used as prior information. If adjustments are not made for differences in the covariates between trials, the analysis can be biased. Covariate adjustment is also often used to reduce variation, which leads to a more powerful analysis.4.4 Choosing a comparison: controlsTo facilitate evaluation of clinical trial results, we recommend you use a comparator, or control group, as a reference. Types of control groups that may be considered are:•concurrent controls,•self controls, and•historical controls.We believe that self controls and historical controls have more potential for bias than concurrent controls because of:•potential problems with covariate adjustment,•placebo effect, and•regression to the mean.Another way to characterize the type of control is to distinguish between controls that are treated with an effective therapy (active controls) vs. controls that either receive no treatment (inactive controls) or are treated with a sham device (placebo controls). Bayesian methods are especially useful with active controlled trials seeking to demonstrate a new device is not only non-inferior to the active control but is also superior to no treatment or a sham control. A Bayesian trial can investigate this question by using previous studies comparing the active control to the inactive control. Bayesian methods for active control trials are discussed in Gould (1991) and Simon (1999).21Bayesian methods can be useful for combining historical controls with concurrent controls. The historical controls act as prior information for the concurrent control. Bayesian methods for utilizing historical controls as prior information are discussed in Pocock (1976) and in Spiegelhalter et al. (2004).), and O’Malley, Normand, and Kuntz (2003), who apply their methods to historical controls for coronary artery stent trials.4.5 Initial information about the endpoints: prior distributionsRecall that the state of our knowledge (or lack thereof) regarding a quantity of interest before we carry out a study is described by the prior distribution. Appropriate prior information should be carefully selected and incorporated into the analysis correctly. Discussions with FDA regarding study design will include an evaluation of the model to be used to incorporate the prior information into the analysis.Choosing sources of prior informationWe recommend you identify as many sources of good prior information as possible. The evaluation of “goodness” of the prior information is subjective. Because your trial will be conducted with the goal of FDA approval of a medical device, you should present and discuss your choice of prior information with FDA reviewers (clinical, engineering, and statistical) before your study begins.Possible sources of prior information include:•clinical trials conducted overseas,•patient registries,•clinical data on very similar products, and•pilot studies.When an Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) is required, you must submit a complete report of prior investigations.7 In addition to this report, we recommend that you also submit any additional information you propose to use in your analysis that constitutes prior information. In some cases, otherwise valid prior information may be unavailable (e.g., the data may belong to someone else who is unwilling to allow legal access). We recommend you hold a pre-IDE meeting with FDA to come to agreement on what prior information will be used and how it will be used in the analysis.Prior distributions based directly on data from other studies are the easiest to evaluate. While we recognize that two studies are never exactly alike, we7 See 21 CFR 812.20(b)(2) and 21 CFR 812.27.22nonetheless recommend the studies used to construct the prior be similar to the current study in the following aspects:•protocol (endpoints, target population, etc.), and•time frame of the data collection (e.g., to ensure that the practice ofmedicine and the study populations are comparable)In some circumstances, it may be helpful if the studies are also similar in investigators and sites.Include studies that are favorable and non-favorable. Including only favorable studies creates bias. Bias, based on study selection may be evaluated by:•the representativeness of the studies that are included, and•the reasons for including or excluding each study.Prior distributions based on expert opinion rather than data can be problematic. Approval of a device could be delayed or jeopardized if FDA advisory panel members or other clinical evaluators do not agree with the opinions used to generate the prior.Informative and non-informative prior distributionsAn informative prior distribution gives preferences to some values of the quantity of interest as being more likely than others (such as Figure 1). These preferences are usually based on previous studies. Lack of preference among the values or lack of information can be represented through a non-informative prior distribution (such as Figure 2).Incorporating informative prior distributionsA Bayesian analysis of a current study of a new device may include prior information from:•the new device,•the control device, or•both devices.When incorporating prior information from a previous study, the patients in the previous study are rarely considered exchangeable with the patients in the current study. Instead, a hierarchical model is often used to “borrow strength” from the previous studies. At the first level of the hierarchy, these models assume that patients are exchangeable within a study but not across studies. At a second level of the hierarchy, the previous studies are assumed to be exchangeable with the current study, which acknowledges variation between studies. For more detail on hierarchical models, see Section 4.6.If the prior information for a study is based on many more patients than are to be enrolled in the study, the prior distribution may be too informative. The23judgment of what constitutes too informative is a case-by-case decision. In this case, some modifications to the study design and analysis plan may be warranted. 24Non-informative prior distributionsNon-informative prior distributions are used frequently in Bayesian adaptive trials when no prior information is available. As another example, in a Bayesian hierarchical model for combining studies, a non-informative prior distribution may be placed on a parameter that captures the variability between studies because, ordinarily, no informative prior is available on this parameter.There is broad literature on the issues surrounding prior distributions, for example the definition of “non-informative”, the effect of changes in the measurement scale, et cetera. Discussion of these issues can be found in Lee (1997), Kass & Wasserman (1996), Box & Tiao (1973), Bernardo & Smith (1993), and Bernardo, Berger, and Sun (2008). Irony & Pennello (2001) discuss prior distributions for trials under regulatory review.4.6 Borrowing strength from other studies: hierarchical modelsBayesian hierarchical modeling is a specific methodology you may use to combine results from multiple studies to obtain estimates of safety and effectiveness parameters. The name hierarchical model derives from the hierarchical manner in which observations and parameters are structured. Some Bayesian analysts refer to this approach as “borrowing strength.” For device trials, the amount of strength borrowed can be translated into sample size, and the extent of borrowing depends on how closely results from the current study (the study of interest) reflect the results from the previous studies (from whence we are “borrowing strength”; note that mathematically these need not necessarily occur at an earlier point in time).If results are very similar, the current study can borrow considerable strength. As current results vary from the previous information, the current study borrows less and less. Very different results borrow no strength at all, or even potentially “borrow negatively”. In a regulatory setting, hierarchical models can be very appealing: They reward having good prior information on device performance by lessening the burden in demonstrating safety and effectiveness. At the same time, the approach can protect against over-reliance on previous studies that turn out to be overly optimistic for the pivotal study parameter.An example of a hierarchical modelSuppose you want to combine information on the success probabilities from two earlier studies of an approved device with results from a new study. You may decide to use two levels in a hierarchical model: the patient level and the study level.The first (patient) level of the hierarchy assumes that within each study (current or historical), patients are exchangeable. However, patients from 25previous studies are not exchangeable with patients in the current study, so patient data from the earlier studies and the current study may not be simply pooled.The second (study) level of the hierarchy applies a model that assumes the success probabilities from the previous studies and the current study are exchangeable, but the success probabilities may differ. This assumption is prudent since you are not sure if patients from the previous studies are directly exchangeable with the patients from the current study. However, the success probabilities from all three studies are related in that they are assumed exchangeable. As a result, the previous studies provide some information about the success probability in the current study, although not as much information as if the patients in the three groups were directly poolable.Similarity of previous studies to the current studyThe key clinical question in using hierarchical modeling to borrow strength from previous studies is whether the previous studies are sufficiently similar to the current study to be considered exchangeable, as discussed in Section 3.7.To achieve study exchangeability, statistical adjustments for certain differences in covariates such as demographic and prognostic variables using patient-level data may be necessary. This is called exchangeability conditioned on covariates. Generally, proper calibration of your study depends on having the same covariate information at the patient level as in previous studies, and on incorporating it appropriately. For example, if prior information from historical controls is to be used to augment the sample size in a concurrent control group, but covariates indicate that the concurrent control patients are healthier, then exchangeability of the historical and concurrent controls may be plausible only after adjustment for the covariates (Pennello and Thompson, 2008, Section 3; O’Malley, Normand, and Kuntz, 2003).Calibration based only on covariate summaries (such as from the literature) may be inadequate because the relationship of the covariate level to the outcome can be determined in the current study but not in the previous studies. This forces the untestable assumption that covariate effects in your study and in the previous studies are the same; that is, that study and covariate effects do not interact.Previous studies with large sample sizes in a hierarchical model can be very informative. As we will discuss in Section 7.1, if the prior probability of a successful trial is too high, it might be necessary to modify the study design and analysis plan.26Hierarchical models may also be used to combine data across centers in a multi-center trial. For an example, see the Summary of Safety and Effectiveness for PMA P980048, BAK/Cervical Interbody Fusion System by Sulzer Spine-Tech.8Outcomes for devices can vary substantially by site due to such differences as:•physician training,•technique,•experience with the device,•patient management, and•patient population.A hierarchical model on centers assumes that the parameter of interest varies from center to center but that center-specific parameters are related via exchangeability. This kind of model adjusts for center-to-center variability when estimating the parameter over all centers.Introductory discussion of hierarchical models and technical details on their implementation appear in Gelman et al. (2004). Other, more complex approaches are described in Ibrahim & Chen (2000) and Dey et al. (1998).4.7 Determining the sample sizeThe sample size in a clinical trial depends on:•variability of the sample,•prior information,•mathematical model used in analysis,•distributions of parameters in the analytic model, and•specific decision criteria.If the outcomes are highly variable, the required sample size can be large. If there is no variability (i.e., everyone in the population has the same value for the outcome of interest), a single observation may be sufficient. The purpose of sizing a trial is to gather enough information to make a decision while not wasting resources or putting patients at unnecessary risk.In traditional frequentist clinical trial design, the sample size is determined in advance. As an alternative to specifying a fixed sample size, the Bayesian8 http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfTopic/pma/pma.cfm?num=p980048. 27approach (and some modern frequentist methods) may specify a particular criterion to stop the trial. Appropriate stopping criteria may be based on a specific amount of information about the parameter (e.g., a sufficiently narrow credible interval, defined in Section 5: Analyzing a Bayesian Clinical Trial) or an appropriately high probability for a pre-specified hypothesis.At any point before or during a Bayesian clinical trial, you can obtain the predictive distribution for the sample size. Therefore, at any point in the trial, you can compute the expected additional number of observations needed to meet the stopping criterion. In other words, the predictive distribution for the sample size is continuously updated as the trial goes on. Because the sample size is not explicitly part of the stopping criterion, the trial can be ended at the precise point where enough information has been gathered to answer the important questions.Special considerations when sizing a Bayesian trialWhen sizing a Bayesian trial, FDA recommends you decide in advance the minimum sample size according to safety and effectiveness endpoints because safety endpoints may produce a larger sample size. FDA also recommends you include a minimum level of information from the current trial to enable verification of model assumptions and appropriateness of prior information used. This practice also enables the clinical community to gain experience with the device.When hierarchical models are used, we also recommend you provide a minimum sample size for determining the amount of information that will be “borrowed” from other studies.We recommend the maximum sample size be defined according to economical, ethical, and regulatory considerations.Various approaches to sizing a Bayesian trial are described in Inoue et al. (2005), Katsis & Toman (1999), Rubin & Stern (1998), Lindley (1997), and Joseph et al. (1995a,b).4.8 Assessing the operating characteristics of a Bayesian designBecause of the inherent flexibility in the design of a Bayesian clinical trial, a thorough evaluation of the operating characteristics should be part of the trial planning. This includes evaluation of:•probability of erroneously approving an ineffective or unsafe device (type I error rate),•probability of erroneously disapproving a safe and effective device (type II error rate),28•power (the converse of type II error rate: the probability of appropriately approving a safe and effective device),•sample size distribution (and expected sample size),•prior probability of claims for the device, and•if applicable, probability of stopping at each interim look.A more thorough discussion appears in Technical Details, Section 7.“Pure” Bayesian approaches to statistics do not necessarily place the same emphasis on the notion of control of type I error as traditional frequentist approaches. There have, however, been some proposals in the literature that Bayesian methods should be “calibrated” to have good frequentist properties (e.g. Rubin, 1984; Box, 1980). In this spirit, as well as in adherence to regulatory practice, FDA recommends you provide the type I and II error rates of your proposed Bayesian analysis plan (see Technical Details, Section 7).For Bayesian trials, here are some points to consider regarding type I error:1.FDA considers type I error, along with other operating characteristics of the trial design, in evaluating submissions. We strive for reasonable control of the type I error rate. An adequate characterization of the operating characteristics of any particular trial design may need extensive simulations. For more discussion, see Section 7.4, Technical Details.2.When using prior information, it may be appropriate to control type I error at a less stringent level than when no prior information is used. For example, if the prior information is favorable, the current trial may not need to provide as much information regarding safety and effectiveness. The degree to which we might relax the type I error control is a case-by-case decision that depends on many factors, primarily the confidence we have in the prior information.3.We may recommend discounting of historical/prior information if the prior distribution is too informative relative to the current study. What constitutes “too informative” is also a case-by-case decision.4.9 Bayesian Multiplicity AdjustmentsMultiplicity within a clinical trial can be an important regulatory concern because the Agency is concerned with making incorrect decisions; multiplicity can inflate the probability of an incorrect decision of approval.Multiplicity can greatly affect the statistical interpretation of a clinical trial. For example, if 20 independent subgroups of a frequentist trial are each tested for a significant device effect at Type I error level 5%, then the chance of at29least one falsely significant result can be as high as 64%. The typical frequentist approach is to lower the error levels of the individual tests such that the overall chance of a falsely significant result is controlled at a reasonable level, say 5%. However, this approach also lowers the chance of detecting real effects (i.e., power), often substantially. Equivalently, the chance of not detecting a real effect (i.e., a Type II error) increases.Instead, a possible Bayesian approach to the subgroup problem mentioned above is to consider the subgroups as exchangeable, a priori, through the use of a hierarchical model. This modeling makes the Bayesian estimate of the device effect for a subgroup “borrow strength” from the other subgroups. If the observed device effect for a subgroup is large, then the Bayesian estimate is adjusted according to how well the other subgroups either support or cast doubt on this observation. For more discussion see Dixon and Simon (1991) and Pennello and Thompson (2008).Bayesian adjustments to multiplicity can be acceptable to FDA, provided the the analysis plan has been pre-specified and the operating characteristics of the analysis are adequate (see Section 4.8). Please consult FDA early on with regard to a statistical analysis plan that includes Bayesian adjustment for multiplicity.Selected references on Bayesian adjustments for multiplicity are Scott and Berger (2006), Duncan and Dixon (1983), Berry (1988), Gonen et. al. (2003), Pennello (1997), and Lewis and Thayer (2004).4.10 Bayesian Adaptive DesignsIntroductionAdaptive designs use accumulating data to decide on how to modify certain aspects of a trial according to a pre-specified plan without undermining the validity and integrity of the trial. Adaptive trial designs have the potential to provide optimal statistical inference and to improve quality, speed and efficiency of decision making.The Likelihood Principle, inherent to the Bayesian approach, makes adaptive designs and interim analyses natural. An adaptive Bayesian clinical trial can involve:•Interim looks to adapt sample size (to stop or to continue patient accrual)•Interim looks for the purpose of possibly stopping the trial early either for success, futility, or harm•Switching the hypothesis of non-inferiority to superiority or vice-versa•Dropping arms or doses•Adaptive randomization, i.e., modification of the randomization rate during a trial to increase the probability that a patient be allocated to the best treatment30Efficient Decision MakingA trial design that is adaptive to information as it is accrued can allow for a decision to be made in an efficient way. According to the Bayesian approach, information from a trial should be gathered until it is deemed sufficient for a decision to be made. However, before the trial starts, there is a great deal of uncertainty on the sample size that will provide enough information for a decision to be made. If the variability of the sample is larger than expected, a larger sample size will be needed whereas if the variability is smaller than expected, a smaller sample size will suffice. When adaptive designs are used, the variability of the sample is learned as the trial takes place and less information will be lacking or wasted.As an example, consider active-controlled (non-inferiority) trials where the endpoint is the device success rate. Here, the sample size depends critically on the control and treatment success rates. For example, consider a situation with a non-inferiority margin of 0.10. Suppose the true control and treatment success rates are both 0.60 and the required sample size is 300 patients per group. If the success rate for the treatment group is 0.65 rather than 0.60 then the sample size will be reduced to approximately 130 patients per group. It is clear that it would be desirable to adapt between these two scenarios since the savings in sample size could be considerable.Regulatory ConsiderationsThe Agency recognizes that a purely Bayesian approach would allow for continuous design adaptation as the trial take place. However, for regulatory purposes and in order to maintain the integrity of the trial while minimizing operational biases, we strongly recommend that an adaptive trial be planned in advance and that the operating characteristics of the design be assessed in a variety of scenarios at the IDE stage (see 4.8). In other words, the Bayesian adaptive trial should be adaptive by design.Practical ImplementationImplementation of adaptive designs may be challenging because the confidentiality of the data needs to be maintained to avoid operational biases, that is, investigator bias, selection bias, and patient bias. For instance, if the investigator knows that one treatment is doing better at an interim analysis, he or she may assign it with a higher probability to future patients. In order to minimize operational biases, the design should be well planned in advance and the adaptive algorithm should be pre-specified. Third party analyses and firewalls are recommended. When blinding is essential to assure unbiasedness, the details of the adaptive design that may reveal evolving treatment differences may be best referred to Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) to avoid unblinding issues.31Enrollment rates greatly impact adaptive trials. When enrollment rates are too high vis-à-vis the length of follow-up, adaptations may not be possible because by the time interim results are available, all patients may be already enrolled. As a consequence, the sponsor should be able to control enrollment rates in order to benefit from adaptive designs. In addition, the benefits of fast enrollment should be weighed against benefits of slower controlled enrollment before decisions on adaptive designs are made.5. Analyzing a Bayesian Clinical Trial5.1 Summaries of the posterior distributionRecall that the posterior distribution contains all information from the prior distribution, combined with the results from the trial via the likelihood function. Conclusions from a Bayesian trial are based only on the posterior distribution. FDA recommends you summarize the posterior distribution with a few numbers (e.g., posterior mean, standard deviation, credible interval), especially when there are numerous endpoints to consider. FDA also recommends you include graphic representations of the appropriate distributions.5.2 Hypothesis testingStatistical inference may include hypothesis testing, interval estimation, or both. For Bayesian hypothesis testing, you may use the posterior distribution to calculate the probability that a particular hypothesis is true, given the observed data.5.3 Interval estimationBayesian interval estimates are based on the posterior distribution and are called credible intervals. If the posterior probability that an endpoint lies in an interval is 0.95, then this interval is called a 95 percent credible interval. FDA strongly encourages reporting of credible intervals for Bayesian trials in the labeling. For an example on how credible intervals are reported, see the Summary of Safety and Effectiveness for InFuse Bone Graft / LT-CAGE ™ 9.Two types of credible intervals are highest posterior density (HPD) intervals (Lee, 1997) and central posterior intervals. For construction of credible intervals, see Chen & Shao (1999) and Irony (1992).9 http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfTopic/pma/pma.cfm?num=P000058.325.4 Predictive probabilitiesUses of predictive probabilities (Section 3.6) include the following:Deciding when to stop a trialIf it is part of the clinical trial plan, you may use a predictive probability at an interim point as the rule for stopping your trial. If the predictive probability that the trial will be successful is sufficiently high (based on results at the interim point), you may be able to stop the trial and declare success. If the predictive probability that the trial will be successful is small, you may stop the trial for futility and cut losses.Exchangeability is a key issue here; these predictions are reasonable only if you can assume the patients who have not been observed are exchangeable with the patients who have. This assumption is difficult to formally evaluate but may be more plausible in some instances (e.g., administrative censoring) than others (e.g., high patient drop-out).Predicting outcomes for future patientsYou may also calculate the predictive probability of the outcome of a future patient, given the observed outcomes of the patients in a clinical trial, provided the current patient is exchangeable with the patients in the trial. In fact, that probability answers the following questions:•Given the results of the clinical trial, what is the probability that a new patient receiving the experimental treatment will be successful?•What would that probability be if the patient were treated in the control group?We recommend that you consider the usefulness of this information in helping physicians and patients make decisions regarding treatment options and whether it should be included in the device labeling.Predicting (imputing) missing dataYou may use predictive probabilities to predict (or impute) missing data, and trial results can be adjusted accordingly. There are also frequentist methods for missing data imputation.Regardless of the method, the adjustment depends on the assumption that patients with missing outcomes follow the same statistical model as patients with observed outcomes. This means the missing patients are exchangeable with the non-missing patients, or that data are missing at random. If this assumption is questionable, FDA recommends you conduct a sensitivity analysis using the prediction model. For examples of missing data adjustments and sensitivity analysis, see the Summary and Safety33Effectiveness for PMA P980048, BAK/Cervical Interbody Fusion System, by Sulzer Spine-Tech.10When the missing data are suspected not to be missing at random, a sensitivity analysis can be built into the computational code to determine what degree of departure from the missing at random assumption is needed for conclusions to change (reference cf. Sulzer-Spine PMA SSED), which can help in alleviating the concern that the missing data may lead to invalid conclusions.Predicting a clinical outcome from earlier measurementsIf patients have measurements of the same outcome at earlier and later follow-up visits, you may make predictions for the later follow-up visit (even before the follow-up time has elapsed). Basing predictions on measures at the earlier visit requires that:•some patients have results from both follow-up visits•there is sufficiently high correlation between the early and the later measurement.In this example, the outcome at the first time point is being used to predict the outcome at the second. This type of prediction was used to justify early stopping for the clinical trial of the INTERFIX Intervertebral Body Fusion Device.11The earlier measurement may also be on a different outcome; for example, for breast implants, rupture may be predictive of an adverse health outcome later.5.5 Interim analysesFDA recommends you specify your method for analyzing interim results in the trial design and ensure FDA agrees in advance of the trial. The following describes two specific Bayesian interim analysis methods:Applying posterior probabilityOne method stops the trial early if the posterior probability of a hypothesis at the interim look is large enough. In other words, the same Bayesian hypothesis test is repeated during the course of the trial.Applying predictive distributionAs mentioned in Section 5.4, another method calculates at interim stages the probability that the hypothesis test will be successful. This method uses the10 http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfTopic/pma/pma.cfm?num=p980048.11 See Summary of Safety and Effectiveness for PMA P970015 at http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfTopic/pma/pma.cfm?num=p970015.34Bayesian predictive distribution for patients yet to be measured. If the predictive probability of success is sufficiently high, the trial may stop early. If the predictive probability is very low, the trial may stop early for futility. This method was used in the submission of the INTERFIX Intervertebral Body Fusion Device.125.6 Model CheckingModel checkingFDA recommends you investigate all assumptions important to your analysis. For example, an analysis of a contraceptive device might assume the monthly pregnancy rate is constant across the first year of use. To assess this assumption, the observed month-specific rates may be compared to their predictive distribution. You may summarize this comparison using a Bayesian p-value (Gelman et al., 1996, 2004), the predictive probability that a statistic is equal to or more extreme than that observed under the assumptions of the model. You may also assess model checking and fit by Bayesian deviance measures, such as the Deviance Information Criterion as described in Spiegelhalter et al. (2002). Alternatively, two models may be compared using Bayes factors. More discussion of these assessments is given in Technical Details (Section 7.2).For example, patients enrolled later in a trial may have a different success rate with the device than those enrolled earlier if:•physicians have to overcome a learning curve in using the device,•physicians form an opinion on whom the device treats best, and then enroll more or less favorable patients in the trial,•an effective adjunctive therapy becomes available to the patients in the trial, or•an alternative treatment becomes available during the course of the trial, potentially altering the characteristics of the patients who choose to enroll in the trial.In principle, the assumption that the patients earlier in the trial are exchangeable with patients later in the trial can be checked using any of the methods suggested above.12 See the Summary of Safety and Effectiveness for PMA P970015 at http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfTopic/pma/pma.cfm?num=p970015).355.7 Sensitivity AnalysisSensitivity analysis is used to investigate the effects of deviations from your statistical model and its assumptions. FDA may recommend that you submit a sensitivity analysis. This might include investigations of:•deviations from the distributional assumptions (i.e. deviations from the assumptions regarding the stochastic elements of your model),•alternative functional forms for the relationships in your model,•alternative prior distributions,•alternative “hyperprior” parameters in hierarchical models, or•deviations from any “missing at random” assumptions for missing data.5.8 Decision analysisDecision analysis is a prescriptive approach that enables a decision maker to logically analyze a problem in order to choose the best course of experimentation and action in the presence of uncertainty.A decision analysis method considers the consequences of decisions and experimentation to obtain optimum courses of action. Courses of action might include decisions to stop or continue a study or to approve or not approve a medical device.In any regulatory review of trial results, the consequences of possible decisions should be evaluated and reflected in the values of the posterior probabilities that will be used in order to make the claims. The more critical the endpoint, the more information about that endpoint will be necessary, and the sharper should be its posterior distribution. For example, if there is a possibility of death or serious disability with the use of the device, the Agency will want to be sure that the chance of occurrence of such event is small. A reasonable degree of certainty could be 90%, 95% or even 99%. These values will be reflected in the pre-specified posterior probabilities that the endpoints are below a certain target, or that the difference between the chances of death when using the new device and the control is smaller than a pre-specified value.A decision analysis method might in principle be used to develop an interim analysis plan. Carlin, Kadane, & Gelfand (1998) propose a method to approximate a decision analysis approach in interim analyses.36For an excellent insight on the decision analysis approach to inference and hypothesis testing see Lee (1997), Chapter 7. More advanced texts on the topic are, in order of complexity, Raiffa (1968), Lindley (1984), Bernardo and Smith (1993), Raiffa and Schlaiffer (1961), Berger (1985), DeGroot (1970), Ferguson (1967).6. Post-Market SurveillanceFDA believes the Bayesian approach is well suited for surveillance purposes. The key concept: “Today’s posterior is tomorrow’s prior” allows you to use the posterior distribution from a pre-market study as a prior distribution for surveillance purposes, to the extent that data from the clinical study reflect how the device is used after approval. In other words, you may readily update information provided by a pre-market clinical trial with post-market data via Bayes’ theorem if you can justify exchangeability between pre- and post-market data. You may continue to update post-market information via Bayes’ theorem as more data are gathered.You may also use Bayesian models to mine large databases of post-market medical reports. DuMouchel (1999) discusses Bayesian models for analyzing a very large frequency table that cross-classifies adverse events by type of drug used. DuMouchel uses a hierarchical model to smooth estimates of relative frequencies of adverse events associated with drugs to reduce the number of falsely significant associations that are expected due to multiplicity. It is unclear at this time if this approach is as useful for medical device reports as it is with drug reports.377. Technical Details7.1 Suggested Information to Include in Your ProtocolIn addition to the standard clinical trial protocol, FDA believes there are statistical issues unique to Bayesian trial designs that should be addressed in your submission. The following suggestions (not an exhaustive listing) will facilitate a smoother review process and serve as a starting point when writing your protocol. Not all points apply to all studies.Prior informationFDA recommends you indicate all prior information you will use and the assumptions you are making.Criterion for successFDA recommends you provide a criterion for success of your study (related to safety and effectiveness).Justification for the proposed sample sizeFDA also recommends you justify your proposed sample size. The method of justification may differ, depending on the trial design.For example, in a fixed-sample-sized trial, you might choose to simulate data assuming a range of different true parameter values and different sample sizes. For each simulated data set, we recommend you determine the posterior distribution of the parameter. The posterior distribution can be used to compute a credible interval or the posterior probability of the study claim, for example. For each simulation, the credible interval or posterior probability is compared with the “true” parameter value known in the simulation. Repeated simulations are used to assess the proposed sample size. This approach to sample size calculation, can involve intensive simulation. For some situations, simpler methods can be appropriate to obtain an approximation to the sample size. Pennello and Thompson (2008, Section 2) review some of these methods.For an adaptive trial design, the sample size is a function of the study design parameters and the results of the trial (for example the maximal sample size, the spacing and timing of interim looks, the criteria for stopping the trial). Before the trial begins we recommend you provide the minimum and maximum sample sizes, the number of interim analyses, and the number of patients at each interim analysis.Operating characteristics (power and type I error rate)FDA recommends you provide tables of the probability of satisfying the study claim, given various “true” parameter values (e.g., event rates) and various sample sizes for the new trial. This table will also provide an estimate of the38probability of a type I error in the case where the true parameter values are consistent with the null hypothesis, or power in the case where the true parameter values are consistent with the alternative (see section 4.8 for definitions).In some simple cases (e.g. a single arm trial with a binomial outcome) these probabilities can be calculated directly. If the study design is complex it is usually necessary to use simulation to compute these probabilities. In general, the simulation should reflect the study design. Some suggestions on simulation are outlined in Technical Details 7.2: Simulations to Obtain Operating Characteristics.Prior probability of the study claimFDA recommends you evaluate the prior probability of your study claim if you are using an informative prior distribution. This is the probability of the study claim before seeing any new data, and it should not be too high. What constitutes “too high” is a case-by-case decision. In particular, we recommend the prior probability not be as high as the success criterion for the posterior probability.FDA makes this recommendation to ensure the prior information does not overwhelm the current data, potentially creating a situation where unfavorable results from the proposed study get masked by a favorable prior distribution. In an evaluation of the prior probability of the claim, FDA will balance the informativeness of the prior against the gain in efficiency from using prior information as opposed to using noninformative priors.To calculate this prior probability, you can simulate data using only the prior distribution. For example, if you are using a computer program that performs Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation, you provide no current data and have the program simulate these values instead. Simulations done in this manner provide the prior probability of the study claim.If necessary, the prior probability of the study claim can be lowered by modifying the prior distribution on the variance among studies to have a larger prior mean than initially. Alternatively, the prior distribution of the variance can be restricted to be greater than a constant, and the constant can be varied until the prior probability of the claim is lowered to the desired value. These approaches can work for three or more studies. However, for only two studies, i.e., a proposed and a previous study, the prior distribution may also have to be fairly precise because data from two studies may not by themselves provide much information about this variance.Effective Sample Size 39A useful summary that can be computed for any simulations using posterior variance information is the effective sample size in the new trial. That is,Effective sample size (ESS) is given by:ESS = n * V1/V2,Where n = the sample size in the new trialV1 = the variance of the parameter of interest without borrowing (computed using a non-informative prior distribution)V2 = the variance of the parameter of interest with borrowing (computed using the proposed informative prior)Then, the quantity (ESS – n) can be interpreted as the number of patients “borrowed” from the previous trial. This summary is useful in quantifying the efficiency you are gaining from using the prior information. It is also useful for gauging if the prior is too informative. For example, if the number of patients “borrowed” is larger than the sample size for the trial, then the prior may be too informative and may need to be modified by using, for example, the techniques mentioned above (see last paragraph of previous subsection).Program codeFDA recommends you submit the program code and any data that you use to conduct simulations as part of the IDE submission. We also recommend you include an electronic copy of the data from the study and the computer code used in the analysis with the PMA submission13. (Note we do NOT want the actual software products; instead we are requesting the instruction set that directs how the software performs your analyses.)7.2 Simulations to Obtain Operating CharacteristicsFDA usually recommends you provide simulations of your trial at the planning (or IDE) stage. This will facilitate FDA’s assessment of the operating characteristics of the Bayesian trial; specifically, the type I and type II error rates. We recommend your simulated trials mimic the proposed trial by considering the same:•prior information,•sample size,•interim analyses, and•possible modifications of the trial in midcourse.13 See http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/HowtoMarketYourDevice/PremarketSubmissions/ucm136377.htm for information on submitting clinical data in electronic form. 40You can assess the type I error rate from simulated trials where the parameters are fixed at the borderline values for which the device should not be approved. The proportions of successful trials in these simulations provide an estimate of the maximum type I error rate. FDA recommends that several likely scenarios be simulated and that the expected sample size and estimated type I error be provided in each case.You can assess power (and the type II error rate) from simulated trials where the parameters are fixed at plausible values for which the device should be approved. The proportions of unsuccessful trials in these simulations provide estimates of the type II error rate. The complement estimates the power provided by the experimental design. FDA recommends several likely scenarios be simulated and that the expected sample size and estimated type II error rate and power be provided in each case.If FDA considers the type I error rate of a Bayesian experimental design to be too large, we recommend you modify the design or the model to reduce that rate. Determination of “too large” is specific to a submission because some sources of type I error inflation (e.g., large amounts of valid prior information) may be more acceptable than others (e.g., inappropriate choice of studies for construction of the prior, inappropriate statistical model, or inappropriate criteria for study success). The seriousness (cost) of a Type I error is also a consideration.There are many options for decreasing the type I error rate. These options include:•increasing the posterior (or predictive) probability that defines a successful trial (e.g., 97 percent, 98 percent, 99 percent),•increasing the number of patients before the first interim analysis,•reducing the number of interim analyses,•discounting the prior information,a)Choice of hyperprior parameter valuesb)Discounting historical datac)Limiting the effective number of patients “borrowed” from the historical controld)Including an inflation factor on the variance between studies in hierarchical modelse)Putting restrictions on the amount of borrowing that is allowed from previous studies1414 In a regulatory setting, it is of paramount concern if the result of current study is substantially different from that of previous studies. Therefore, a restriction on the amount of borrowing might be determined at the design stage according to relevant experts’ input. For example, to guide against using the previous control data when the serious adverse event rate of the current control arm is substantially smaller than that of the previous study, an empirical rule may be set such that if the serious adverse event rate of the current control arm is smaller than that of the previous study by a fixed number, no data from the previous study will be used. Such empirical rules should be reflected in simulations of the operating characteristics.41•increasing the maximum sample size (again, to reduce the influence of the prior),•changing the criteria for terminating enrollment in an adaptive trial,•Altering the calculation of type I error rate, ora)Inclusion (or not) of prior information in the calculation of type I errorb)Inclusion (or not) of covariate adjustments in the calculation of type I errorc)Calculation of type I error at appropriate point(s) away from the null boundary. Clinical judgment will help define “appropriate.”d)Calculation of “average” type I error integrating over the prior distribution, conditional on the null.•any combination of the above optionsIn case the experimental design is modified, we recommend you carry out a new set of simulations to evaluate the new design.We may also ask you to characterize the sensitivity of the operating characteristics to assumptions made about the trial (e.g., various model and distributional assumptions and, with Bayesian trials, the choice of prior, and, for adaptive trials, rate of accrual, etc.).7.3 Model SelectionSome statistical analysis plans allow for comparison of several possible models of the data and parameters before a final model is chosen for analysis. For example, in a Bayesian analysis of a study outcome that borrows strength from other studies, the effects of a factor on the outcome might vary from study to study. Two possible models that you may want to consider might be (1) a model in which the factor effects do not vary by study and (2) a more expansive model in which they do.One method of comparing two models tests the null hypothesis that one model is true against the alternative that the other model is true. The result of such a test depends on the posterior probability of the alternative model, or the posterior odds for the alternative model. Posterior odds refer to the ratio of the posterior probability of the alternative model to the posterior probability of the null model. According to Bernardo and Smith (1994), an optimal decision for choosing the true model among a finite set of possible models for a given data set is to choose the model with highest posterior probability. Thus, posterior odds is often a preferred method of model comparison.Prior odds, on the other hand, refer to the ratio of the prior probability of the alternative model to the prior probability of the null model. For a given alternative42model, the ratio of posterior odds to prior odds is referred to as the Bayes Factor. Thus, a Bayes Factor is said to represent the change in odds of an alternative model over a null model, say, as we move from prior to posterior. Thus the Bayes Factor could potentially be used for model selection. By comparing the posterior odds to the prior odds, the Bayes factor may be robust to the choice of prior distribution. We should note, however, that Bayes Factors are not well-defined for some non-informative priors, specifically when the prior distribution is improper (does not integrate to one). Carlin and Louis (2008) offer more details on Bayes Factors and their computation.In addition, Bayesian deviance measures such as Deviance InformationCriterion (DIC, Spiegelhalter et al., 2002) can be used for model choice bycomparing the fit of one model over another. DIC appears as an option in theWinBUGS program. It is calculated as the posterior mean of the model devianceminus the effective number of parameters in the model (pD) where the effectivenumber of parameters is the decrease in deviance expected from estimating theparameters of the model. pD can be estimated as the posterior mean of the devianceminus the deviance evaluated at the posterior mean of the parameters (Gelmanet al., 2003, p. 182, give a good discussion of effective number of parameters). The model with the minimum DIC provides the best fit to the data.7.4 Checking Exchangeability using the Posterior Predictive DistributionIn Section 5.5, we discuss using the predictive distribution to check certain assumptions of the model used to fit to the data. In this section we describe how one might use predictive distribution to assess exchangeability of the current study and several historical studies. Exchangeability is determined from a clinical and engineering standpoint at the planning stage. However, sometimes we can also check this assumption statistically.Suppose an adverse event rate was observed to be much higher in a new study than in historical studies, despite a clinical judgment of exchangeability of studies prior to collecting data on the new study. To simplify discussion, suppose no covariates are available that could account for the difference. Then, we might use posterior predictive analysis to check whether the difference is unlikely under the exchangeable model being considered in the prior distribution. One possible test statistic is the smallest absolute difference between the observed rate for the new study and another study rate, a type of gap statistic. If this observed gap is large compared with similarly defined gaps between the historical studies, then the new and historical study rates may not be exchangeable. This observed gap statistic can be compared with its posterior predictive distribution, calculated under the exchangeable model. The exchangeable model is not supported if the observed gap is located far into the right-hand tail of its posterior predictive distribution. A summary is to compute the posterior predictive probability of observing a gap at least as large as that observed, which is called the Bayesian p-value for the gap. If the Bayesian p value is small, then43the exchangeable model may not hold. A more technical discussion is given in Pennello and Thompson (2008).7.5 CalculationsAlmost all quantities of interest in a Bayesian analysis involve the calculation of a mathematical integral. All the following are expressed as an integral involving the posterior distribution:•the posterior mean,•the posterior standard deviation,•the credible interval, and•the posterior probability of a hypothesis.The following are some numerical integration techniques used to compute these integrals:•Gaussian quadrature,•posterior distribution sampling,•Laplace approximation,•importance sampling, and•Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques (Gamerman and Lopes 2006).MCMC techniques are probably the most commonly used; the most used MCMC technique is the Gibbs sampler. The Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is a generalization that can be used in cases where the Gibbs sampler fails.MCMC techniques are popular because in many analyses, the posterior distribution is too complex to write down, and therefore traditional numerical integration techniques like quadrature and Laplace approximation cannot be carried out. The Gibbs sampler draws samples from other, known distributions to create a (Markov) chain of values. A Markov chain is a set of samples where the value at each point depends only on the immediately preceding sample. Eventually, as the chain converges, the values sampled begin to resemble draws from the posterior distribution. The draws from the Markov chain can then be used to approximate the posterior distribution and compute the integrals.Tanner (1996) provides a survey of computational techniques used in statistics, including numerical integration and MCMC techniques. Gilks et al. (1996) explains MCMC techniques and their application to a variety of scientific problems. Discussion of MCMC and other techniques also appear in Gamerman and Lopes (2006), Gelman et al. (2004), and many other textbooks.44When MCMC techniques are used, FDA recommends you check that the chain of values generated has indeed converged at some point so that subsequent draws are from the posterior distribution. Various techniques have been developed to diagnose nonconvergence. You may refer to diagnostic techniques discussed in Gelman et al. (2004), Gilks et al. (1996), Tanner (1996), Gamerman and Lopes (2006), and the manual for CODA (Convergence Diagnosis and Output Analysis), a set of SPlus functions that process the output from the program BUGS (Bayesian inference using Gibbs sampling).15Convergence difficultiesDepending on how the Bayesian model is parameterized, the Markov chain might converge very slowly. Alternative parameterizations or alternative MCMC samplers may help to speed up convergence. One possible explanation for a chain that does not seem to converge is that an improper prior distribution was used (see Section 5: Analyzing a Bayesian Clinical Trial). In that case, the chain may not converge because a proper posterior distribution does not exist. When improper prior distributions are used, you should check that the posterior distribution is proper. Convergence difficulties can also occur when the prior distribution is nearly improper.Data augmentationThe technique of data augmentation introduces auxiliary variables into a model to facilitate computation. The use of auxiliary variables can also aid in the interpretation of your analysis. For example, latent variables are now commonly introduced in analyses of ordinal outcomes (i.e., outcomes with only a few possible values that are ordered). Examples of such outcomes include answers to multiple-choice questions for a quality of life questionnaire. Johnson & Albert (1999) discuss Bayesian analysis of ordinal outcomes using latent variables. Tanner (1996) discusses data augmentation as a general technique.Electronic submission of calculationsFor Bayesian or other analyses that entail intensive computation, FDA will routinely check the calculations (e.g. for convergence of the Markov chain when using MCMC techniques). We recommend you submit data and any programs used for calculations to FDA electronically.15 Both programs may be downloaded from the Medical Research Center, Cambridge, athttp://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.ukGuidance for Sponsors, Clinical Investigators, and IRBsData Retention When Subjects Withdraw from FDA-Regulated Clinical TrialsAdditional copies are available from:Good Clinical Practice Program, HF-34Office of Science & Health Coordination, Office of the CommissionerFood and Drug Administration5600 Fishers LaneRockville, MD 20857(Tel) (301)-827-3340http://www.fda.gov/oc/gcp/draft.htmlU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationOffice of the Commissioner (OC)Good Clinical Practice Program (GCPP)October 2008Contains Nonbinding Recommendations35TABLE OF CONTENTSI. INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................................1II. BACKGROUND.....................................................................................................................1III. DISCUSSION........................................................................................................................IV. FDA POLICY........................................................................................................................Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsGuidance for Sponsors, Clinical Investigators, and IRBs1Data Retention When Subjects Withdraw from FDA-Regulated Clinical TrialsThis guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA's) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative approach, contact the appropriate FDA staff. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the appropriate telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance.I. INTRODUCTIONThis guidance is intended for sponsors, clinical investigators and institutional review boards (IRBs). It describes the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) longstanding policy that already-accrued data, relating to individuals who cease participating in a study, are to be maintained as part of the study data. This pertains to data from individuals who decide to discontinue participation in a study, who are withdrawn by their legally authorized representative, as applicable, or who are discontinued from participation by the clinical investigator. This policy is supported by the statutes and regulations administered by FDA as well as ethical and quality standards applicable to clinical research. Maintenance of these records includes, as with all study records, safeguarding the privacy and confidentiality of the subject’s information.FDA's guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency's current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.II. BACKGROUNDThe Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) authorizes the study of an investigational product to develop safety and effectiveness data about the product. The act also requires the maintenance of records documenting these data and the submission of certain reports regarding this use to FDA.2, 3 FDA (by delegation from the Secretary)1 This guidance document was developed by the Good Clinical Practice Program and the Office of the Chief Counsel (OCC), both in the Office of the Commissioner (OC), FDA.2 The investigational new drug provisions of the act condition use of such drugs upon, for example, "the establishment and maintenance of such records, and the making of such1Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsimplemented these provisions by issuing regulations relating to investigational drugs, the Investigational New Drug (IND) regulations at 21 CFR Part 312, and investigational devices, the Investigational Device Exemptions (IDE) regulations at 21 CFR Part 812. These regulations specify that data collection and maintenance are indispensable requirements when conducting a clinical investigation of an unapproved product.For example, the IND regulations require investigators “… to prepare and maintain adequate and accurate case histories that record all observations and other data pertinent to the investigation on each individual administered the investigational drug or employed as a control in the investigation" (21 CFR 312.62(b)). Similarly, the IDE regulations require an investigator to maintain "Records of each subject's case history and exposure to the device" (21 CFR 812.140(a)(3)).Additionally, the regulations relating to the submission of marketing applications require the submission of all relevant data in order for FDA to determine whether a product meets the standard for approval. A new drug application (NDA) must include a description and analysis of each clinical pharmacology study and controlled clinical study, a description of each uncontrolled trial, and an integrated summary of all available information about the safety of the drug product (21 CFR 314.50(d)(5)) and “copies of individual case report forms for each patient who died during a clinical study or who did not complete the study because of an adverse event, whether believed to be drug related or not, including patients receiving reference drugs or placebo” (21 CFR 314.50(f)(2)). Similarly, an application for premarket approval (PMA) for a device must include “safety and effectiveness data, adverse reactions and complications, patient discontinuation, patient complaints, device failures and replacements, tabulations of data from all individual subject report forms and copies of such forms for each subject who died during a clinical investigation or who did not complete the investigation” (21 CFR 814.20(b)(6)(ii)). Likewise , an application for a biologics license application (BLA) must include data derived from nonclinical laboratory and clinical studies which demonstrate that the manufactured product is safe, pure, and potent (21 CFR 601.2(a)).reports to the Secretary, by the manufacturer or the sponsor of the investigation of such drug, of data (including but not limited to analytical reports by investigators) obtained as the result of such investigational use of such drug, as the Secretary finds will enable him to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of such drug in the event of the filing of an application pursuant to subsection (b)." 21 USC 355(i)(1)(C).3 The investigational device provisions similarly require "that the person applying for an exemption for a device assure the establishment and maintenance of such records, and the making of such reports to the Secretary of data obtained as a result of the investigational use of the device during the exemption, as the Secretary determines will enable him to assure compliance with such conditions, review the progress of the investigation, and evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the device." 21 USC 360j(g)(2)(B)(ii).2Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsFDA law and regulations require the collection and maintenance of complete clinical study data. This includes information on subjects who withdraw from a clinical investigation, whether the subject decides to discontinue participation in the clinical trial (21 CFR 50.25(a)(8)) or is discontinued by the investigator because the subject no longer qualifies under the protocol (for example, due to a significant adverse event or due to failure to cooperate with study requirements). FDA recognizes that a subject may withdraw from a study; however, the withdrawal does not extend to the data already obtained during the time the subject was enrolled. FDA’s longstanding policy has been that all data collected up to the point of withdrawal must be maintained in the database and included in subsequent analyses, as appropriate.4III. DISCUSSIONFDA law and regulations recognize that a complete and accurate risk/benefit profile of an investigational product depends upon the data from every subject’s experience in the clinical trial. For example, if a subject’s data could be withdrawn from a study, a sponsor would not have access to data on adverse events experienced by the subject and would be unable to evaluate whether changes to the protocol or the informed consent documents are needed to ensure the rights, safety, and welfare of other trial subjects.54 FDA previously addressed the topic of data withdrawal in the preamble to the 1996 final rule providing an exception from informed consent requirements for emergency research, 21 CFR 50.24. In response to a comment that a subject’s legally authorized representative should be allowed to prevent the review of the subject’s data, FDA stated: “FDA regulations (see, for example, Sec. 312.62 and Sec. 812.140(a)(3)) require investigators to prepare and maintain adequate case histories recording all observations and other data pertinent to the investigation on each individual treated with the drug or exposed to the device. The agency needs all such data in order to be able to determine the safety and effectiveness of the drug or device. The fact of having been in an investigation cannot be taken back. Also, if a subject were able to control the use (inclusion and exclusion) of his or her data, and particularly if the clinical investigation were not blinded, the bias potential would be immense. Thus, the agency rejects this comment because it could prevent FDA from learning of an important effect of the product and significantly bias the results of the investigation” (”see comment 95, 61 Federal Register 51498, 51519, October 2, 1996). It should be appreciated that FDA’s response applies to the most potentially difficult situation, that is, studies involving an exception from the informed consent requirements in which subjects, due to a life threatening medical condition, are unable to provide informed consent to participate in the study. Subjects may subsequently withdraw from such studies, but the data collected up to withdrawal may not be removed.5 Such review of safety data by sponsors is required by 21 CFR 312.56 and 21 CFR 812.46.3Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsThe validity of a clinical study would also be compromised by the exclusion of data collected during the study. There is long-standing concern with the removal of data, particularly when removal is non-random, a situation called “informative censoring.” FDA has long advised “intent-to-treat” analyses (analyzing data related to all subjects the investigator intended to treat), and a variety of approaches for interpretation and imputation of missing data have been developed to maintain study validity.6 Complete removal of data, possibly in a non-random or informative way, raises great concerns about the validity of the study.There is particular concern with a study’s reliability when subjects withdraw their data in a non-random way because they are unhappy with their experience, either because they failed to obtain a desired effect or suffered an adverse event. Loss of these subjects’ data could greatly distort effectiveness results and could hide important safety information (for example, toxicity) of a poorly tolerated treatment. Allowing subjects to withdraw data could even provide an opportunity for unscrupulous parties to “improve” study results by selectively encouraging certain subjects to withdraw from a study.The importance of ensuring the scientific validity of clinical research is reflected not only in FDA’s regulations but in international documents and published literature as well. The International Conference on Harmonization of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), in which FDA participates, identifies as a principle of good clinical practice that “clinical trials should be scientifically sound."7 Other international guidance documents include similar statements, such as the International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects, Guideline 1, which states “scientifically invalid research is unethical in that it exposes research subjects to risks without possible benefit …”8Published literature on medical research ethics, dating back to the Nuremburg Code of 1947,9 also emphasizes the importance of scientific validity. As maintained by6 For a discussion of problems presented by missing data in the analysis of clinical trials, please see “Points to Consider on Missing Data” from the Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA), http://www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/human/ewp/177699EN.pdf.7 http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/959fnl.pdf. ICH E6 Guidance for Industry, “Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guidance,” adopted as official guidance by FDA, Section 2.5.8 http://www.cioms.ch/frame_guidelines_nov_2002.htm. These guidelines are published by the Counsel of International Organizations for Medical Sciences (CIOMS). Guideline 11 reiterates this principle.9 The Nuremberg Code: http://ohsr.od.nih.gov/guidelines/nuremberg.html4Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsEmanuel, et. al., “For a clinical research protocol to be ethical, the methods must be valid and practically feasible: the research must have a clear scientific objective; be designed using accepted principles, methods, and reliable practices; have sufficient power to definitively test the objective; and offer a plausible data analysis plan.”10 The importance of scientific validity to ethical research is also underscored in modern ethical documents, such as the Declaration of Helsinki11 and the Belmont Report, issued in 1979 by the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research.12In summary, data collected on study subjects up to the time of withdrawal must remain in the trial database in order for the study to be scientifically valid. If a subject withdraws from a study, removal of already collected data would undermine the scientific, and therefore the ethical, integrity of the research. Such removal of data could also put enrolled subjects, future subjects, and eventual users of marketed products at an unreasonable risk. Finally, removal of data would fundamentally compromise FDA’s ability to perform its mission, to protect public health and safety by ensuring the safety and effectiveness of regulated products.IV. FDA POLICYFollowing are key points regarding FDA’s policy on the withdrawal of subjects from a clinical investigation, whether the subject elects to discontinue further interventions or the clinical investigator terminates the subject’s participation in further interventions:10 Emanuel, EJ, Wendler, D, and Grady, C., “What Makes Clinical Research Ethical?” JAMA 283:20 (May 24/31, 2000 2701-11).11 "Medical research involving human subjects must conform to generally accepted scientific principles, be based on a thorough knowledge of the scientific literature, other relevant sources of information, and on adequate laboratory and, where appropriate, animal experimentation." The Declaration of Helsinki (2000) (as amended 2002, 2004) http://www.wma.net/e/policy/b3.htm.12 The Belmont Report addresses the connection between scientific validity and ethics through the Principle of Beneficence. Beneficence has two complementary aspects: maximizing possible benefits and minimizing possible harms. The Report recognizes as one of the components of maximizing benefits, "In the case of scientific research in general, members of the larger society are obliged to recognize the longer term benefits and risks that may result from the improvement of knowledge and from the development of novel medical, psychotherapeutic, and social procedures." http://ohsr.od.nih.gov/guidelines/belmont.html5Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6•According to FDA regulations, when a subject withdraws from a study, the data collected on the subject to the point of withdrawal remains part of the study database and may not be removed.•An investigator may ask a subject who is withdrawing whether the subject wishes to provide continued follow-up and further data collection subsequent to their withdrawal from the interventional portion of the study. Under this circumstance, the discussion with the subject would distinguish between study-related interventions and continued follow-up of associated clinical outcome information, such as medical course or laboratory results obtained through non-invasive chart review, and address the maintenance of privacy and confidentiality of the subject’s information.•If a subject withdraws from the interventional portion of the study, but agrees to continued follow-up of associated clinical outcome information as described in the previous bullet, the investigator must obtain the subject’s informed consent for this limited participation in the study (assuming such a situation was not described in the original informed consent form). In accordance with FDA regulations, IRB approval of informed consent documents would be required (21 CFR 50.25, 56.109(b), 312.60, 312.66, 812.100).•If a subject withdraws from the interventional portion of a study and does not consent to continued follow-up of associated clinical outcome information, the investigator must not access for purposes related to the study the subject’s medical record or other confidential records requiring the subject’s consent. However, an investigator may review study data related to the subject collected prior to the subject’s withdrawal from the study, and may consult public records, such as those establishing survival status.

Guidance for IndustryToxicity Grading Scale for Healthy Adult and Adolescent Volunteers Enrolled in Preventive Vaccine Clinical TrialsAdditional copies of this guidance are available from the Office of Communication, Training and Manufacturers Assistance (HFM-40), 1401 Rockville Pike, Suite 200N, Rockville, MD 20852-1448, or by calling 1-800-835-4709 or 301-827-1800, or from the Internet at http://www.fda.gov/cber/guidelines.htm.For questions on the content of this guidance, contact the Division of Vaccines and Related Products Applications, Office of Vaccines Research and Review at 301-827-3070.U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Biologics Evaluation and ResearchSeptember 2007Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsTable of ContentsI. INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................1II. BACKGROUND...............................................................................................................2III. TOXICITY GRADING SCALE TABLES.....................................................................2A. Tables for Clinical Abnormalities.......................................................................3B. Tables for Laboratory Abnormalities.................................................................6IV. REFERENCES..................................................................................................................8 iContains Nonbinding RecommendationsGuidance for IndustryToxicity Grading Scale for Healthy Adult and Adolescent Volunteers Enrolled in Preventive Vaccine Clinical TrialsThis guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative approach, contact the appropriate FDA staff. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the appropriate number listed on the title page of this guidance.I. INTRODUCTIONPreventive vaccines are usually developed to prevent disease in a healthy population. The Office of Vaccines Research and Review, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, regulates preventive vaccines under authority of section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262), as well as specific sections of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and reviews investigational new drug applications (INDs) and biologics license applications (BLAs). (See, for example, Title 21 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Parts 312, 600, and 601). Most of the clinical trials of preventive vaccines conducted to support INDs and BLAs enroll healthy volunteers in all phases of vaccine testing. The enrollment of healthy volunteers warrants a very low tolerance for risk in those clinical trials.This guidance provides you, sponsors, monitors, and investigators of vaccine trials, with recommendations on assessing the severity of clinical and laboratory abnormalities in healthy adult and adolescent volunteers enrolled in clinical trials. The grading system described in the table can also be useful in defining a particular study’s stopping rules (e.g., a certain number of adverse events, as defined in the table, may call for stopping the study). Less extreme observations (e.g., mild) may not require discontinuing the study vaccine but can still contribute to evaluating safety by identifying parameters to focus upon in subsequent product development. Uniform criteria for categorizing toxicities in healthy volunteers can improve comparisons of safety data among groups within the same study and also between different studies. We, FDA, recommend using toxicity grading scale tables, provided below, as a guideline for selecting the assessment criteria to be used in a clinical trial of a preventive vaccine. We recommend incorporation of such appropriate, uniform, criteria into the investigational plan, case report forms, and study reports and correspondence with FDA, sponsors, monitors, investigators, and IRBs.This guidance finalizes the draft guidance of the same title dated April 2005 (70 FR 22664, May 2, 2005).1Contains Nonbinding Recommendations FDA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe FDA’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in FDA’s guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required. II. BACKGROUNDStandardized toxicity assessment scales have been widely used to evaluate products treating specific diseases. For example, the National Cancer Institute’s Common Toxicity Criteria Scale and the Division of AIDS’ Toxicity Grading Scale standardize the evaluation of adverse events among patients with cancer and HIV/AIDS, respectively (Refs. 1, 2). The defined toxicity parameters in those scales are designed for patients who may already experience mild, moderate, or severe adverse clinical or laboratory events due to the disease process, and may not be appropriate for healthy volunteers. In the development of the toxicity grading scales for healthy volunteers, we chose parameter limit values based on published information, when such values were available (Refs. 1-6). For example, the Brighton Collaboration has developed case definitions and guidelines to evaluate some adverse events associated with administering vaccines (Ref. 3). In some cases, parameter limit values were based on clinical experience and experience reviewing vaccine clinical trials that enroll normal healthy subjects. Toxicity grading scales for laboratory abnormalities should consider the local laboratory reference values when the parameter limit values are defined. The characterization of laboratory parameters among some populations of healthy adults and adolescents may require the exercise of clinical judgment, for example, consideration of the potential for ethnic differences in white blood cell (WBC) counts or sex differences in creatine phosphokinase (CPK) values. III. TOXICITY GRADING SCALE TABLESAdverse events in a clinical trial of an investigational vaccine must be recorded and monitored and, when appropriate, reported to FDA and others involved in an investigation (sponsors, IRBs, and investigators). (See, for example, 21 CFR 312.32, 312.33, 312.50, 312.55, 312.56, 312.60, 312.62, 312.64, 312.66). Although the use of a toxicity grading scale for adverse events would not replace these regulatory requirements, using a scale to categorize adverse events observed during a clinical trial may assist you in monitoring safety and making required reports. Nonetheless, we believe that categorization or grading of data as outlined in this document is supplementary to and should not replace full and complete data analysis. These guidelines for toxicity grading scales are primarily intended for healthy adult and adolescent volunteers. The parameters in the tables below are not necessarily applicable to every clinical trial of healthy volunteers. The parameters monitored should be appropriate for the specific study vaccine. For some preventive vaccines under development, it may be appropriate2Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsto include additional parameters to be monitored during a clinical trial or to alter the choice of values in the toxicity table. For example, additional parameters might be added based on one or more of the following: safety signals observed in pre-clinical toxicology studies, the biological plausibility of the occurrence of certain adverse events, or previous experience with a similar licensed product.As discussed above, the tables do not represent a recommendation to monitor all the listed parameters in all clinical trials of healthy volunteers, nor do the tables represent all possible parameters to be monitored. In addition, these tables do not represent study inclusion or exclusion criteria. We recommend that the parameters monitored be appropriate for the study vaccine administered to healthy volunteers participating in the clinical trial.A. Tables for Clinical AbnormalitiesLocal Reaction toInjectable ProductMild (Grade 1)Moderate(Grade 2)Severe (Grade 3)Potentially LifeThreatening(Grade 4)PainDoes not interferewith activityRepeated use of non-narcotic pain reliever > 24 hours or interferes with activityAny use of narcotic pain reliever or prevents dailyactivityEmergency room(ER) visit orhospitalizationTendernessMild discomfort to touchDiscomfort with movementSignificantdiscomfort at restER visit orhospitalizationErythema/Redness *2.5 – 5 cm5.1 – 10 cm> 10 cmNecrosis orexfoliative dermatitisInduration/Swelling **2.5 – 5 cm and does not interferewith activity5.1 – 10 cm orinterferes withactivity> 10 cm orprevents dailyactivityNecrosis* In addition to grading the measured local reaction at the greatest single diameter, the measurement should berecorded as a continuous variable.** Induration/Swelling should be evaluated and graded using the functional scale as well as the actual measurement.3Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsVital Signs *Mild (Grade 1)Moderate(Grade 2)Severe (Grade 3)Potentially LifeThreatening(Grade 4)Fever (°C) **(°F) **38.0 – 38.4100.4 – 101.138.5 – 38.9101.2 – 102.039.0 – 40102.1 – 104> 40> 104Tachycardia - beats perminute101 – 115116 – 130> 130ER visit orhospitalization forarrhythmiaBradycardia - beats perminute***50 – 5445 – 49< 45ER visit orhospitalization forarrhythmiaHypertension (systolic) -mm Hg141 – 150151 – 155> 155ER visit orhospitalization formalignanthypertensionHypertension (diastolic) -mm Hg91 – 9596 – 100> 100ER visit orhospitalization formalignanthypertensionHypotension (systolic) –mm Hg85 – 8980 – 84< 80ER visit orhospitalization forhypotensive shockRespiratory Rate – breathsper minute17 – 2021 – 25> 25Intubation* Subject should be at rest for all vital sign measurements.** Oral temperature; no recent hot or cold beverages or smoking.*** When resting heart rate is between 60 – 100 beats per minute. Use clinical judgement when characterizingbradycardia among some healthy subject populations, for example, conditioned athletes.Systemic (General)Mild (Grade 1)Moderate(Grade 2)Severe (Grade 3)Potentially LifeThreatening(Grade 4)Nausea/vomitingNo interferencewith activity or 1 – 2episodes/24 hoursSome interferencewith activity or > 2episodes/24 hoursPrevents dailyactivity, requiresoutpatient IVhydrationER visit orhospitalization forhypotensive shockDiarrhea2 – 3 loose stools or< 400 gms/24 hours4 – 5 stools or400 – 800 gms/24hours6 or more waterystools or> 800gms/24 hoursor requiresoutpatient IVhydrationER visit orhospitalizationHeadacheNo interference withactivityRepeated use of non-narcotic painreliever > 24 hours orsome interferencewith activitySignificant; anyuse of narcoticpain reliever orprevents dailyactivityER visit orhospitalizationFatigueNo interference withactivitySome interferencewith activitySignificant;prevents dailyactivityER visit orhospitalizationMyalgiaNo interference withactivitySome interferencewith activitySignificant;prevents dailyactivityER visit orhospitalization4Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsSystemic IllnesMild (Grade 1)(Moderate(Grade 2)Severe (Grade 3)Potentially LifeThreatening(Grade 4)Illness or clinical adverseevent (as definedaccording to applicableregulations)No interference withactivitySome interferencewith activity notrequiring medicalinterventionPrevents dailyactivity andrequires medicalinterventionER visit orhospitalization5Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsB. Tables for Laboratory AbnormalitiesThe laboratory values provided in the tables below serve as guidelines and are dependent upon institutional normal parameters. Institutional normal reference ranges should be provided to demonstrate that they are appropriate.Serum *Mild (Grade 1)Moderate (Grade 2)Severe(Grade 3)Potentially LifeThreatening(Grade 4)**Sodium – Hyponatremia mEq/L132 – 134130 – 131125 – 129< 125Sodium – Hypernatremia mEq/L144 – 145146 – 147148 – 150> 150Potassium – Hyperkalemia mEq/L5.1 – 5.25.3 – 5.45.5 – 5.6> 5.6Potassium – Hypokalemia mEq/L3.5 – 3.63.3 – 3.43.1 – 3.2< 3.1Glucose – Hypoglycemia mg/dL65 – 6955 – 6445 – 54< 45Glucose – HyperglycemiaFasting – mg/dLRandom – mg/dL100 – 110110 – 125111 – 125126 – 200>125>200Insulin requirements or hyperosmolar comaBlood Urea NitrogenBUN mg/dL23 – 2627 – 31> 31Requires dialysisCreatinine – mg/dL1.5 – 1.71.8 – 2.02.1 – 2.5> 2.5 or requires dialysisCalcium – hypocalcemia mg/dL8.0 – 8.47.5 – 7.97.0 – 7.4< 7.0Calcium – hypercalcemia mg/dL10.5 – 11.011.1 – 11.511.6 – 12.0> 12.0Magnesium – hypomagnesemia mg/dL1.3 – 1.51.1 – 1.20.9 – 1.0< 0.9Phosphorous – hypophosphatemia mg/dL2.3 – 2.52.0 – 2.21.6 – 1.9< 1.6CPK – mg/dL1.25 – 1.5 x ULN***1.6 – 3.0 x ULN3.1 –10 x ULN> 10 x ULNAlbumin – Hypoalbuminemia g/dL2.8 – 3.12.5 – 2.7< 2.5--Total Protein – Hypoproteinemia g/dL5.5 – 6.05.0 – 5.4< 5.0--Alkaline phosphate –increase by factor1.1 – 2.0 x ULN2.1 – 3.0 x ULN3.1 – 10 x ULN> 10 x ULNLiver Function Tests –ALT, ASTincrease by factor1.1 – 2.5 x ULN2.6 – 5.0 x ULN5.1 – 10 x ULN> 10 x ULNBilirubin – when accompaniedby any increase in Liver Function Testincrease by factor1.1 – 1.25 x ULN1.26 – 1.5 x ULN1.51 – 1.75 x ULN> 1.75 x ULNBilirubin – when Liver Function Test is normal; increase by factor1.1 – 1.5 x ULN1.6 – 2.0 x ULN2.0 – 3.0 x ULN> 3.0 x ULNCholesterol201 – 210211 – 225> 226---Pancreatic enzymes – amylase, lipase1.1 – 1.5 x ULN1.6 – 2.0 x ULN2.1 – 5.0 x ULN> 5.0 x ULN* The laboratory values provided in the tables serve as guidelines and are dependent upon institutional normal parameters. Institutional normal reference ranges should be provided to demonstrate that they are appropriate.** The clinical signs or symptoms associated with laboratory abnormalities might result in characterization of the laboratory abnormalities as Potentially Life Threatening (Grade 4). For example. a low sodium value that falls within a grade 3 parameter (125-129 mE/L) should be recorded as a grade 4 hyponatremia event if the subject had a new seizure associated with the low sodium value.***ULN” is the upper limit of the normal range.6Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsHematology *Mild (Grade 1)Moderate(Grade 2)Severe (Grade 3)Potentially LifeThreatening (Grade 4)Hemoglobin (Female) - gm/dL11.0 – 12.09.5 – 10.98.0 – 9.4< 8.0Hemoglobin (Female)change from baseline value - gm/dLAny decrease – 1.51.6 – 2.02.1 – 5.0> 5.0Hemoglobin (Male) - gm/dL12.5 – 13.510.5 – 12.48.5 – 10.4< 8.5Hemoglobin (Male)change from baseline value – gm/dLAny decrease – 1.51.6 – 2.02.1 – 5.0> 5.0WBC Increase - cell/mm310,800 – 15,00015,001 – 20,00020,001 – 25, 000> 25,000WBC Decrease - cell/mm32,500 – 3,5001,500 – 2,4991,000 – 1,499< 1,000Lymphocytes Decrease - cell/mm3750 – 1,000500 – 749250 – 499< 250Neutrophils Decrease - cell/mm31,500 – 2,0001,000 – 1,499500 – 999< 500Eosinophils - cell/mm3650 – 15001501 - 5000> 5000HypereosinophilicPlatelets Decreased - cell/mm3125,000 – 140,000100,000 – 124,00025,000 – 99,000< 25,000PT – increase by factor(prothrombin time)1.0 – 1.10 x ULN**1.11 – 1.20 x ULN1.21 – 1.25 x ULN> 1.25 ULNPTT – increase by factor(partial thromboplastin time)1.0 – 1.2 x ULN1.21 – 1.4 x ULN1.41 – 1.5 x ULN> 1.5 x ULNFibrinogen increase - mg/dL400 – 500501 – 600> 600--Fibrinogen decrease - mg/dL150 – 200125 – 149100 – 124< 100 or associatedwith gross bleedingor disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)* The laboratory values provided in the tables serve as guidelines and are dependent upon institutional normal parameters. Institutional normal reference ranges should be provided to demonstrate that they are appropriate.** “ULN” is the upper limit of the normal range.Urine *Mild (Grade 1)Moderate(Grade 2)Severe (Grade 3)Potentially LifeThreatening(Grade 4)ProteinTrace1+2+Hospitalization ordialysisGlucoseTrace1+2+Hospitalization forhyperglycemiaBlood (microscopic) –red blood cells perhigh power field (rbc/hpf)1 - 1011 – 50> 50 and/or grossbloodHospitalization orpacked red bloodcells (PRBC)transfusion* The laboratory values provided in the tables serve as guidelines and are dependent upon institutional normal parameters. Institutional normal reference ranges should be provided to demonstrate that they are appropriate.7Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsIV. REFERENCES1. National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria, April 30, 1999. (http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/CTC-3.html)2. Division of AIDS Table for Grading Severity of Adult Adverse Experiences; August 1992. (http://rcc.tech-res-intl.com/tox_tables.htm)3. The Brighton Collaboration. Finalized Case Definitions and Guidelines. (http://brightoncollaboration.org/internet/en/index/definition___guidelines.html)4. HIV Vaccine Trials Network Table for Grading Severity of Adverse Experiences; September 18, 2002. (http://rcc.tech-res-intl.com/tox_tables.htm)5. Division of AIDS Table for Grading the Severity of Adult and Pediatric Adverse Events, December 2004. (http://www3.niaid.nih.gov/research/resources/DAIDSClinRsrch/PDF/Safety/DAIDSAEGradingTable.pdf)6. Kratz A, Ferraro M, Sluss PM, Lewandrowski KB. Laboratory Reference Values. New England Journal of Medicine. 2004;351:1548-1563.8


J:\!GUIDANC\5541fnlcln1.doc07/06/05Guidance for IndustryEstimating the Maximum Safe Starting Dose in Initial Clinical Trials for Therapeutics in Adult Healthy VolunteersU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)July 2005Pharmacology and ToxicologyGuidance for IndustryEstimating the Maximum Safe Starting Dose in Initial Clinical Trials for Therapeutics in Adult Healthy VolunteersAdditional copies are available from:Office of Training and CommunicationsDivision of Drug Information, HFD-240Center for Drug Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration5600 Fishers LaneRockville, MD 20857(Tel) 301-827-4573http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htmU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)July 2005Pharmacology and ToxicologyTABLE OF CONTENTSI. INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................1II. BACKGROUND...............................................................................................................2III. OVERVIEW OF THE ALGORITHM...........................................................................3IV. STEP 1: NO OBSERVED ADVERSE EFFECT LEVEL DETERMINATION........5V. STEP 2: HUMAN EQUIVALENT DOSE CALCULATION......................................6A. Conversion Based on Body Surface Area....................................................................................6B. Basis for Using mg/kg Conversions..............................................................................................7C. Other Exceptions to mg/m2 Scaling Between Species.................................................................8VI. STEP 3: MOST APPROPRIATE SPECIES SELECTION.........................................9VII. STEP 4: APPLICATION OF SAFETY FACTOR.......................................................9A. Increasing the Safety Factor.......................................................................................................10B. Decreasing the Safety Factor......................................................................................................11VIII. STEP 5: CONSIDERATION OF THE PHARMACOLOGICALLY ACTIVE DOSE................................................................................................................................12IX. SUMMARY.....................................................................................................................12REFERENCES............................................................................................................................13GLOSSARY.................................................................................................................................15APPENDIX A:.............................................................................................................................16Analysis of Allometric Exponent on HED Calculations....................................................................16APPENDIX B:.............................................................................................................................18Analysis of Body Weight Effects on HED Calculations....................................................................18APPENDIX C:.............................................................................................................................24Derivation of the Interspecies Scaling Factor (Wa/Wh)(1-b)................................................................24APPENDIX D:.............................................................................................................................25Examples of Calculations for Converting Animal Doses to Human Equivalent Doses..................25APPENDIX E:.............................................................................................................................27Selection of Maximum Recommended Starting Dose for Drugs Administered Systemically to Normal Volunteers...............................................................................................................................27Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsGuidance for Industry1Estimating the Maximum Safe Starting Dose in Initial Clinical Trials for Therapeutics in Adult Healthy VolunteersThis guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the appropriate number listed on the title page of this guidance.I. INTRODUCTIONThis guidance outlines a process (algorithm) and vocabulary for deriving the maximum recommended starting dose (MRSD) for first-in-human clinical trials of new molecular entities in adult healthy volunteers, and recommends a standardized process by which the MRSD can be selected. The purpose of this process is to ensure the safety of the human volunteers.The goals of this guidance are to: (1) establish a consistent terminology for discussing the starting dose; (2) provide common conversion factors for deriving a human equivalent dose (HED); and (3) delineate a strategy for selecting the MRSD for adult healthy volunteers, regardless of the projected clinical use. This process is depicted in a flow chart that presents the decisions and calculations used to generate the MRSD from animal data (see Appendix E).FDA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but not required.1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of New Drugs in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) at the Food and Drug Administration.1Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsII. BACKGROUNDThe process identified in this guidance pertains to determining the MRSD for adult healthy subjects when beginning a clinical investigation of any new drug or biological therapeutic that has been studied in animals. This guidance is not pertinent to endogenous hormones and proteins (e.g., recombinant clotting factors) used at physiologic concentrations or prophylactic vaccines. The process outlined in this guidance pertains primarily to drug products for which systemic exposure is intended; it does not address dose escalation or maximum allowable doses in clinical trials.Although the process outlined in this guidance uses administered doses, observed toxicities, and an algorithmic approach to calculate the MRSD, an alternative approach could be proposed that places primary emphasis on animal pharmacokinetics and modeling rather than dose (Mahmood et al. 2003; Reigner and Blesch 2002). In a limited number of cases, animal pharmacokinetic data can be useful in determining initial clinical doses.2 However, in the majority of investigational new drug applications (INDs), animal data are not available in sufficient detail to construct a scientifically valid, pharmacokinetic model whose aim is to accurately project an MRSD.Toxicity should be avoided at the initial clinical dose. However, doses should be chosen that allow reasonably rapid attainment of the phase 1 trial objectives (e.g., assessment of the therapeutic’s tolerability, pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic profile). All of the relevant preclinical data, including information on the pharmacologically active dose, the full toxicologic profile of the compound, and the pharmacokinetics (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion) of the therapeutic, should be considered when determining the MRSD. Starting with doses lower than the MRSD is always an option and can be particularly appropriate to meet some clinical trial objectives.2 If the parent drug is measured in the plasma at multiple times and is within the range of toxic exposures for two or more animal species, it may be possible to develop a pharmacokinetic model predicting human doses and concentrations and to draw inferences about safe human plasma levels in the absence of prior human data. Although quantitative modeling for this purpose may be straightforward, the following points suggest this approach can present a number of difficulties when estimating a safe starting dose. Generally, at the time of IND initiation, there are a number of unknowns regarding animal toxicity and comparability of human and animal pharmacokinetics and metabolism: (1) human bioavailability and metabolism may differ significantly from that of animals; (2) mechanisms of toxicity may not be known (e.g., toxic accumulation in a peripheral compartment); and/or (3) toxicity may be due to an unidentified metabolite, not the parent drug. Therefore, relying on pharmacokinetic models (based on the parent drug in plasma) to gauge starting doses would require multiple untested assumptions. Modeling can be used with greatest validity to estimate human starting doses in special cases where few underlying assumptions would be necessary. Such cases are exemplified by large molecular weight proteins (e.g., humanized monoclonal antibodies) that are intravenously administered, are removed from circulation by endocytosis rather than metabolism, have immediate and detectable effects on blood cells, and have a volume of distribution limited to the plasma volume. In these cases, allometric, pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic models have been useful in identifying the human mg/kg dose that would be predicted to correlate with safe drug plasma levels in nonhuman primates. Even in these cases, uncertainties (such as differences between human and animal receptor sensitivity or density) have been shown to affect human pharmacologic or toxicologic outcomes, and the use of safety factors as described in this guidance is still warranted.2Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsThe remainder of this guidance focuses on the recommended algorithmic process for starting dose extrapolation from animals to humans based on administered doses, since this method will likely be useful for the majority of INDs seeking to investigate new drugs in healthy volunteers. Some classes of drugs (e.g., many cytotoxic or biological agents) are commonly introduced into initial clinical trials in patient volunteers rather than healthy volunteers. Typically, patients are used instead of healthy volunteers when a drug is suspected or known to be unavoidably toxic. This guidance does not address starting doses in patients. However, many principles and some approaches recommended here may be applicable to designing such trials.III. OVERVIEW OF THE ALGORITHMThe recommended process for selecting the MRSD is presented in Appendix E and described in this section. The major elements (i.e., the determination of the no observed adverse effect levels (NOAELs) in the tested animal species, conversion of NOAELs to HED, selection of the most appropriate animal species, and application of a safety factor) are all discussed in greater detail in subsequent sections. Situations are also discussed in which the algorithm should be modified. The algorithm is intended to be used for systemically administered therapeutics. Topical, intranasal, intratissue, and compartmental administration routes and depot formulations can have additional considerations, but similar principles should apply.The process of calculating the MRSD should begin after the toxicity data have been analyzed. Although only the NOAEL should be used directly in the algorithm for calculating an MRSD, other data (exposure/toxicity relationships, pharmacologic data, or prior clinical experience with related drugs) can affect the choice of most appropriate species, scaling, and safety factors.The NOAEL for each species tested should be identified, and then converted to the HED using appropriate scaling factors. For most systemically administered therapeutics, this conversion should be based on the normalization of doses to body surface area. Although body surface area conversion is the standard way to approximate equivalent exposure if no further information is available, in some cases extrapolating doses based on other parameters may be more appropriate. This decision should be based on the data available for the individual case. The body surface area normalization and the extrapolation of the animal dose to human dose should be done in one step by dividing the NOAEL in each of the animal species studied by the appropriate body surface area conversion factor (BSA-CF). This conversion factor is a unitless number that converts mg/kg dose for each animal species to the mg/kg dose in humans, which is equivalent to the animal’s NOAEL on a mg/m2 basis. The resulting figure is called a human equivalent dose (HED). The species that generates the lowest HED is called the most sensitive species.When information indicates that a particular species is more relevant for assessing human risk (and deemed the most appropriate species), the HED for that species may be used in subsequent calculations, regardless of whether this species is the most sensitive. This situation is more applicable to biologic therapies, many of which have high selectivity for binding to human target3Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsproteins and limited reactivity in species commonly used for toxicity testing. In such cases, in vitro binding and functional studies should be conducted to select an appropriate, relevant species before toxicity studies are designed (refer to ICH guidance for industry S6 Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals for more details3). (However, if serious toxicities are observed in an animal species considered less relevant, those toxicities should be taken into consideration in determining the species to be used to calculate an HED. For example, in one particular case, dog was selected as the animal species used for calculation of an HED because of unmonitorable cardiac lesions, even though the rat was considered the most relevant species based on pharmacological activity data.) Additionally, a species might be considered an inappropriate toxicity model for a given drug if the dose-limiting toxicity in that species was concluded to be of limited value for human risk assessment, based on historical comparisons of toxicities in the animal species to those in humans across a therapeutic class (i.e., the dose-limiting toxicity is species-specific). In this case, data from that species should not be used to derive the HED. Without any additional information to guide the choice of the most appropriate species for assessing human risk, the most sensitive species is designated the most appropriate, because using the lowest HED would generate the most conservative starting dose.A safety factor should then be applied to the HED to increase assurance that the first dose in humans will not cause adverse effects. The use of the safety factor should be based on the possibility that humans may be more sensitive to the toxic effects of a therapeutic agent than predicted by the animal models, that bioavailability may vary across species, and that the models tested do not evaluate all possible human toxicities. For example, ocular disturbances or pain (e.g., severe headaches) in humans can be significant dose-limiting toxicities that may go undetected in animal studies.In general, one should consider using a safety factor of at least 10. The MRSD should be obtained by dividing the HED by the safety factor. Safety concerns or design shortcomings noted in animal studies may increase the safety factor, and thus reduce the MRSD further. Alternatively, information about the pharmacologic class (well-characterized classes of therapeutics with extensive human clinical and preclinical experience) may allay concerns and form the basis for reducing the magnitude of the default safety factor and increasing the MRSD. Although a dose lower than the MRSD can be used as the actual starting dose, the process described in this guidance will derive the maximum recommended starting dose. This algorithm generates an MRSD in units of mg/kg, a common method of dosing used in phase 1 trials, but the equations and conversion factors provided in this guidance (Table 1, second column) can be used to generate final dosing units in the mg/m2 form if desired.As previously stated, for purposes of initial clinical trials in adult healthy volunteers, the HED should ordinarily be calculated from the animal NOAEL. If the HED is based on an alternative index of effect, such as the pharmacologically active dose (PAD), this exception should be prominently stipulated in descriptions of starting dose calculations.3 We update guidances periodically. To make sure you have the most recent version of a guidance, check the CDER guidance Web page at http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm. 4Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsThe remainder of this guidance provides a description of the individual steps in the recommended process and the reasoning behind each step.IV. STEP 1: NO OBSERVED ADVERSE EFFECT LEVEL DETERMINATIONThe first step in determining the MRSD is to review and evaluate the available animal data so that a NOAEL can be determined for each study. Several definitions of NOAEL exist, but for selecting a starting dose, the following is used: the highest dose level that does not produce a significant increase in adverse effects in comparison to the control group. In this context, adverse effects that are biologically significant (even if they are not statistically significant) should be considered in the determination of the NOAEL. The NOAEL is a generally accepted benchmark for safety when derived from appropriate animal studies and can serve as the starting point for determining a reasonably safe starting dose of a new therapeutic in healthy (or asymptomatic) human volunteers.The NOAEL is not the same as the no observed effect level (NOEL), which refers to any effect, not just an adverse one, although in some cases the two might be identical. The definition of the NOAEL, in contrast to that of the NOEL, reflects the view that some effects observed in the animal may be acceptable pharmacodynamic actions of the therapeutic and may not raise a safety concern. The NOAEL should also not be confused with lowest observed adverse effect level (LOAEL) or maximum tolerated dose (MTD). Both of the latter concepts are based on findings of adverse effects and are not generally used as benchmarks for establishing safe starting doses in adult healthy volunteers. (The term level refers to dose or dosage, generally expressed as mg/kg or mg/kg/day.)Initial IND submissions for first-in-human studies by definition lack in vivo human data or formal allometric comparison of pharmacokinetics. Measurements of systemic levels or exposure (i.e., AUC or Cmax) cannot be employed for setting a safe starting dose in humans, and it is critical to rely on dose and observed toxic response data from adequate and well-conducted toxicology studies. However, there are cases where nonclinical data on bioavailability, metabolite profile, and plasma drug levels associated with toxicity may influence the choice of the NOAEL. One such case is when saturation of drug absorption occurs at a dose that produces no toxicity. In this instance, the lowest saturating dose, not the highest (nontoxic) dose, should be used for calculating the HED.There are essentially three types of findings in nonclinical toxicology studies that can be used to determine the NOAEL: (1) overt toxicity (e.g., clinical signs, macro- and microscopic lesions); (2) surrogate markers of toxicity (e.g., serum liver enzyme levels); and (3) exaggerated pharmacodynamic effects. Although the nature and extent of adverse effects can vary greatly with different types of therapeutics, and it is anticipated that in many instances, experts will disagree on the characterization of effects as being adverse or not, the use of NOAEL as a benchmark for dose-setting in healthy volunteers should be acceptable to all responsible investigators. As a general rule, an adverse effect observed in nonclinical toxicology studies5Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsused to define a NOAEL for the purpose of dose-setting should be based on an effect that would be unacceptable if produced by the initial dose of a therapeutic in a phase 1 clinical trial conducted in adult healthy volunteers.V. STEP 2: HUMAN EQUIVALENT DOSE CALCULATIONA. Conversion Based on Body Surface AreaAfter the NOAELs in the relevant animal studies have been determined, they are converted to HEDs. A decision should be made regarding the most appropriate method for extrapolating the animal dose to the equivalent human dose. Toxic endpoints for therapeutics administered systemically to animals, such as the MTD, are usually assumed to scale well between species when doses are normalized to body surface area (i.e., mg/m2) (EPA 1992; Lowe and Davis 1998). The basis for this assumption lies primarily with the work of Freireich et al. (1966) and Schein et al. (1970). These investigators reported that, for antineoplastic drugs, doses lethal to 10 percent of rodents (LD10s) and MTDs in nonrodents both correlated with the human MTD when the doses were normalized to the same administration schedule and expressed as mg/m2. Despite the subsequent analyses showing that the MTDs for this set of drugs scale best between species when doses are normalized to W0.75 rather than W0.67 (inherent in body surface area normalization) (Travis and White 1988; Watanabe et al. 1992), normalization to body surface area has remained a widespread practice for estimating an HED based on an animal dose.An analysis of the affect of the allometric exponent on the conversion of an animal dose to the HED was conducted (see Appendix A). Based on this analysis and on the fact that correcting for body surface area increases clinical trial safety by resulting in a more conservative starting dose estimate, it was concluded that the approach of converting NOAEL doses to an HED based on body surface area correction factors (i.e., W0.67) should be maintained for selecting starting doses for initial studies in adult healthy volunteers. Nonetheless, use of a different dose normalization approach, such as directly equating the human dose to the NOAEL in mg/kg, may be appropriate in some circumstances. Deviations from the body surface area approach, when describing the conversion of animal dose to HED, should be justified. The basis for justifying direct mg/kg conversion and examples in which other normalization methods are appropriate are described in the following subsection.Although normalization to body surface area is an appropriate method for extrapolating doses between species, consistent factors for converting doses from mg/kg to mg/m2 have not always been used. Given that body surface area normalization provides a reasonable approach for estimating an HED, the factors used for converting doses for each species should be standardized. Since body surface area varies with W0.67, the conversion factors are dependent on the weight of the animals in the studies. However, analyses conducted to address the effect of body weight on the actual BSA-CF demonstrated that a standard factor provides a reasonable estimate of the HED over a broad range of human and animal weights (see Appendix B). The conversion factors and divisors shown in Table 1 are therefore recommended as the standard6Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsvalues to be used for interspecies dose conversions for NOAELs. (These factors may also be applied when comparing safety margins for other toxicity endpoints (e.g., reproductive toxicity and carcinogenicity) when other data for comparison (i.e., AUCs) are unavailable or are otherwise inappropriate for comparison.)Table 1: Conversion of Animal Doses to Human Equivalent Doses Based on Body Surface AreaTo Convert Animal Dose in mg/kg to HEDa in mg/kg, Either:SpeciesTo Convert Animal Dose in mg/kg to Dose in mg/m², Multiply by kmDivideAnimal Dose ByMultiplyAnimal Dose ByHuman37------Child (20 kg)b25------Mouse312.30.08Hamster57.40.13Rat66.20.16Ferret75.30.19Guinea pig84.60.22Rabbit123.10.32Dog201.80.54Primates:Monkeysc123.10.32Marmoset66.20.16Squirrel monkey75.30.19Baboon201.80.54Micro-pig271.40.73Mini-pig351.10.95a Assumes 60 kg human. For species not listed or for weights outside the standard ranges, HED can be calculated from the following formula:HED = animal dose in mg/kg x (animal weight in kg/human weight in kg)0.33.b This km value is provided for reference only since healthy children will rarely be volunteers for phase 1 trials.c For example, cynomolgus, rhesus, and stumptail.B. Basis for Using mg/kg ConversionsThe factors in Table 1 for scaling animal NOAEL to HEDs are based on the assumption that doses scale 1:1 between species when normalized to body surface area. However, there are occasions for which scaling based on body weight (i.e., setting the HED (mg/kg) = NOAEL (mg/kg)) may be more appropriate. To consider mg/kg scaling for a therapeutic, the available data should show that the NOAEL occurs at a similar mg/kg dose across species. The following circumstances should exist before extrapolating to the HED on a mg/kg basis rather than using7Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsthe mg/m2 approach. Note that mg/kg scaling will give a twelve-, six-, and twofold higher HED than the default mg/m2 approach for mice, rats, and dogs, respectively. If these circumstances do not exist, the mg/m2 scaling approach for determining the HED should be followed as it will lead to a safer MRSD.1. NOAELs occur at a similar mg/kg dose across test species (for the studies with a given dosing regimen relevant to the proposed initial clinical trial). (However, it should be noted that similar NOAELs on a mg/kg basis can be obtained across species because of differences in bioavailability alone.)2. If only two NOAELs from toxicology studies in separate species are available, one of the following should also be true:• The therapeutic is administered orally and the dose is limited by local toxicities. Gastrointestinal (GI) compartment weight scales by W0.94 (Mordenti 1986). GI volume determines the concentration of the therapeutic in the GI tract. It is then reasonable that the toxicity of the therapeutic would scale by mg/kg (W1.0).• The toxicity in humans (for a particular class) is dependent on an exposure parameter that is highly correlated across species with dose on a mg/kg basis. For example, complement activation by systemically administered antisense oligonucleotides in humans is believed to be dependent upon Cmax (Geary et al. 1997). For some antisense drugs, the Cmax correlates across nonclinical species with mg/kg dose and in such instances mg/kg scaling would be justified.• Other pharmacologic and toxicologic endpoints also scale between species by mg/kg for the therapeutic. Examples of such endpoints include the MTD, lowest lethal dose, and the pharmacologically active dose.• There is a robust correlation between plasma drug levels (Cmax and AUC) and dose in mg/kg.C. Other Exceptions to mg/m2 Scaling Between SpeciesScaling between species based on mg/m2 is not recommended for the following categories of therapeutics:1. Therapeutics administered by alternative routes (e.g., topical, intranasal, subcutaneous, intramuscular) for which the dose is limited by local toxicities. Such therapeutics should be normalized to concentration (e.g., mg/area of application) or amount of drug (mg) at the application site.2. Therapeutics administered into anatomical compartments that have little subsequent distribution outside of the compartment. Examples are intrathecal, intravesical,8Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsintraocular, or intrapleural administration. Such therapeutics should be normalized between species according to the compartmental volumes and concentrations of the therapeutic.3. Proteins administered intravascularly with Mr > 100,000 daltons. Such therapeutics should be normalized to mg/kg.VI. STEP 3: MOST APPROPRIATE SPECIES SELECTIONAfter the HEDs have been determined from the NOAELs from all toxicology studies relevant to the proposed human trial, the next step is to pick one HED for subsequent derivation of the MRSD. This HED should be chosen from the most appropriate species. In the absence of data on species relevance, a default position is that the most appropriate species for deriving the MRSD for a trial in adult healthy volunteers is the most sensitive species (i.e., the species in which the lowest HED can be identified).Factors that could influence the choice of the most appropriate species rather than the default to the most sensitive species include: (1) differences in the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) of the therapeutic between the species, and (2) class experience that may indicate a particular animal model is more predictive of human toxicity. Selection of the most appropriate species for certain biological products (e.g., human proteins) involves consideration of various factors unique to these products. Factors such as whether an animal species expresses relevant receptors or epitopes may affect species selection (refer to ICH guidance for industry S6 Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals for more details).When determining the MRSD for the first dose of a new therapeutic in humans, absorption, distribution, and elimination parameters will not be known for humans. Comparative metabolism data, however, might be available based on in vitro studies. These data are particularly relevant when there are marked differences in both the in vivo metabolite profiles and HEDs in animals. Class experience implies that previous studies have demonstrated that a particular animal model is more appropriate for the assessment of safety for a particular class of therapeutics. For example, in the nonclinical safety assessment of the phosphorothioate antisense drugs, the monkey is considered the most appropriate species because monkeys experience the same dose limiting toxicity as humans (e.g., complement activation) whereas rodents do not. For this class of therapeutics, the MRSD would usually be based on the HED for the NOAEL in monkeys regardless of whether it was lower than that in rodents, unless unique dose limiting toxicities were observed with the new antisense compound in the rodent species.VII. STEP 4: APPLICATION OF SAFETY FACTOROnce the HED of the NOAEL in the most appropriate species has been determined, a safety factor should then be applied to provide a margin of safety for protection of human subjects receiving the initial clinical dose. This safety factor allows for variability in extrapolating from 9Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsanimal toxicity studies to studies in humans resulting from: (1) uncertainties due to enhanced sensitivity to pharmacologic activity in humans versus animals; (2) difficulties in detecting certain toxicities in animals (e.g., headache, myalgias, mental disturbances); (3) differences in receptor densities or affinities; (4) unexpected toxicities; and (5) interspecies differences in ADME of the therapeutic. These differences can be accommodated by lowering the human starting dose from the HED of the selected species NOAEL.In practice, the MRSD for the clinical trial should be determined by dividing the HED derived from the animal NOAEL by the safety factor. The default safety factor that should normally be used is 10. This is a historically accepted value, but, as described below, should be evaluated based on available information.A safety factor of 10 may not be appropriate for all cases. The safety factor should be raised when there is reason for increased concern, and lowered when concern is reduced because of available data that provide added assurance of safety. This can be visualized as a sliding scale, balancing findings that mitigate the concern for harm to healthy volunteers with those that suggest greater concern is warranted. The extent of the increase or decrease is largely a matter of judgment, using the available information. It is incumbent on the evaluator to clearly explain the reasoning behind the applied safety factor when it differs from the default value of 10, particularly if it is less than 10.A. Increasing the Safety FactorThe following considerations indicate a safety concern that might warrant increasing the safety factor. In these circumstances, the MRSD would be calculated by dividing the HED by a safety factor that is greater than 10. If any of the following concerns are defined in review of the nonclinical safety database, an increase in the safety factor may be called for. If multiple concerns are identified, the safety factor should be increased accordingly.• Steep dose response curve. A steep dose response curve for significant toxicities in the most appropriate species or in multiple species may indicate a greater risk to humans.• Severe toxicities. Qualitatively severe toxicities or damage to an organ system (e.g., central nervous system (CNS)) indicate increased risk to humans.• Nonmonitorable toxicity. Nonmonitorable toxicities may include histopathologic changes in animals that are not readily monitored by clinical pathology markers.• Toxicities without premonitory signs. If the onset of significant toxicities is not reliably associated with premonitory signs in animals, it may be difficult to know when toxic doses are approached in human trials.10Contains Nonbinding Recommendations• Variable bioavailability. Widely divergent or poor bioavailability in the several animal species, or poor bioavailability in the test species used to derive the HED, suggest a greater possibility for underestimating the toxicity in humans.• Irreversible toxicity. Irreversible toxicities in animals suggest the possibility of permanent injury in human trial participants.• Unexplained mortality. Mortality that is not predicted by other parameters raises the level of concern.• Large variability in doses or plasma drug levels eliciting effect. When doses or exposure levels that produce a toxic effect differ greatly across species or among individual animals of a species, the ability to predict a toxic dose in humans is reduced and a greater safety factor may be needed.• Nonlinear pharmacokinetics. When plasma drug levels do not increase in a dose-related manner, the ability to predict toxicity in humans in relation to dose is reduced and a greater safety factor may be needed.• Inadequate dose-response data. Poor study design (e.g., few dose levels, wide dosing intervals) or large differences in responses among animals within dosing groups may make it difficult to characterize the dose-response curve.• Novel therapeutic targets. Therapeutic targets that have not been previously clinically evaluated may increase the uncertainty of relying on the nonclinical data to support a safe starting dose in humans.• Animal models with limited utility. Some classes of therapeutic biologics may have very limited interspecies cross-reactivity or pronounced immunogenicity, or may work by mechanisms that are not known to be conserved between (nonhuman) animals and humans; in these cases, safety data from any animal studies may be very limited in scope and interpretability.B. Decreasing the Safety FactorSafety factors of less than 10 may be appropriate under some conditions. The toxicologic testing in these cases should be of the highest caliber in both conduct and design. Most of the time, candidate therapeutics for this approach would be members of a well-characterized class. Within the class, the therapeutics should be administered by the same route, schedule, and duration of administration; should have a similar metabolic profile and bioavailability; and should have similar toxicity profiles across all the species tested including humans. A smaller safety factor might also be used when toxicities produced by the therapeutic are easily monitored, reversible, predictable, and exhibit a moderate-to-shallow dose-response relationship with toxicities that are11Contains Nonbinding Recommendationsconsistent across the tested species (both qualitatively and with respect to appropriately scaled dose and exposure).A safety factor smaller than 10 could be justified when the NOAEL was determined based on toxicity studies of longer duration compared to the proposed clinical schedule in healthy volunteers. In this case, a greater margin of safety should be built into the NOAEL, as it was associated with a longer duration of exposure than that proposed in the clinical setting. This assumes that toxicities are cumulative, are not associated with acute peaks in therapeutic concentration (e.g., hypotension), and did not occur early in the repeat dose study.VIII. STEP 5: CONSIDERATION OF THE PHARMACOLOGICALLY ACTIVE DOSESelection of a PAD depends upon many factors and differs markedly among pharmacological drug classes and clinical indications; therefore, selection of a PAD is beyond the scope of this guidance. However, once the MRSD has been determined, it may be of value to compare it to the PAD derived from appropriate pharmacodynamic models. If the PAD is from an in vivo study, an HED can be derived from a PAD estimate by using a BSA-CF. This HED value should be compared directly to the MRSD. If this pharmacologic HED is lower than the MRSD, it may be appropriate to decrease the clinical starting dose for pragmatic or scientific reasons. Additionally, for certain classes of drugs or biologics (e.g., vasodilators, anticoagulants, monoclonal antibodies, or growth factors), toxicity may arise from exaggerated pharmacologic effects. The PAD in these cases may be a more sensitive indicator of potential toxicity than the NOAEL and might therefore warrant lowering the MRSD.IX. SUMMARYA strategy has been proposed to determine the maximum recommended starting dose for clinical trials of new therapeutics in adult healthy volunteers. In summary, usually NOAELs from the relevant animal studies should be converted to the HEDs using the standard factors presented in Table 1. Using sound scientific judgment, a safety factor should be applied to the HED from the most appropriate species to arrive at the MRSD. This process is meant to define the upper limit of recommended starting doses and, in general, lower starting doses can be appropriate. The process described in this guidance should foster consistency among sponsors and Agency reviewers.12Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsREFERENCESBoxenbaum, H and C DiLea, 1995, First-Time-in-Human Dose Selection: Allometric Thoughts and Perspectives, Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 35:957-966.Burtles, SS, DR Newell, REC Henrar, and TA Connors, 1995, Revisions of General Guidelines for the Preclinical Toxicology of New Cytotoxic Anticancer Agents in Europe, European Journal of Cancer, 31A:408-410.Contrera, JF, AC Jacobs, RP Hullahalli, M Mehta, WJ Schmidt, and JA DeGeorge, 1995, Systemic Exposure — Based Alternative to the Maximum Tolerated Dose for Carcinogenicity Studies of Human Therapeutics, Journal of American College of Toxicology, 14:1-10.EPA, 1992, A Cross-Species Scaling Factor for Carcinogen Risk Assessment Based on Equivalence of Mg/Kg0.75/Day, Federal Register, 57:24152-24173.Freireich, EJ, EA Gehan, DP Rall, LH Schmidt, and HE Skipper, 1966, Quantitative Comparison of Toxicity of Anticancer Agents in Mouse, Rat, Hamster, Dog, Monkey, and Man, Cancer Chemotherapy Reports, 50:219-244.Geary, RS, JM Leeds, SP Henry, DK Monteith, and AA Levin, 1997, Antisense Oligonucleotide Inhibitors for the Treatment of Cancer: 1. QUESTION Pharmacokinetic Properties of Phosphorothioate Oligodeoxynucleotides, Anti-Cancer Drug Design, 12:383-393.Lowe, MC and RD Davis, 1998, The Current Toxicology Protocol of the National Cancer Institute, in K Hellman and SK Carter (eds.), Fundamentals of Cancer Chemotherapy, pp. 228-235, New York: McGraw Hill.Mahmood, I, MD Green, and JE Fisher, 2003, Selection of the First-Time Dose in Humans: Comparison of Different Approaches Based on Interspecies Scaling of Clearance, 43(7):692-697.Mordenti, J, 1986, Man Vs. Beast: Pharmacokinetic Scaling in Mammals, Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 75:1028-1040.Reigner, BG and KS Blesch, 2002, Estimating the Starting Dose for Entry into Humans: Principles and Practice, European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 57:835-845.Schein, PS, RD Davis, S Carter, J Newman, DR Schein, and DP Rall, 1970, The Evaluation of Anticancer Drugs in Dogs and Monkeys for the Prediction of Qualitative Toxicities in Man, Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 11:3-40.Spector, WS (ed.), 1956, Handbook of Biological Data, pp. 175, Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.13Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsStahl, WR, 1967, Scaling of Respiratory Variables in Mammals, Journal of Applied Physiology, 22:453-460.Travis, CC and RK White, 1988, Interspecies Scaling of Toxicity Data, Risk Analysis, 8:119-125.Watanabe, K, FY Bois, and L Zeise, 1992, Interspecies Extrapolation: A Reexamination of Acute Toxicity Data, Risk Analysis, 12:301-310.International Conference on Harmonisation GuidancesICH guidance for industry S6 Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived PharmaceuticalsICH guidance for industry S3A Toxicokinetics: The Assessment of Systemic Exposure in Toxicity StudiesICH guidance for industry M3 Nonclinical Safety Studies for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials for Pharmaceuticals14Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsGLOSSARYb: Allometric exponentBody surface area conversion factor (BSA-CF): A factor that converts a dose (mg/kg) in an animal species to the equivalent dose in humans (also known as the human equivalent dose), based on differences in body surface area. A BSA-CF is the ratio of the body surface areas in the tested species to that of an average human.Human equivalent dose (HED): A dose in humans anticipated to provide the same degree of effect as that observed in animals at a given dose. In this guidance, as in many communications from sponsors, the term HED is usually used to refer to the human equivalent dose of the NOAEL. When reference is made to the human equivalent of a dose other than the NOAEL (e.g., the PAD), sponsors should explicitly and prominently note this usage.K: A dimensionless factor that adjusts for differences in the surface area to weight ratio of species because of their different body shapes.km: Factor for converting mg/kg dose to mg/m2 doseLowest observed adverse effect level (LOAEL): The lowest dose tested in an animal species with adverse effects.Maximum recommended starting dose (MRSD): The highest dose recommended as the initial dose in a clinical trial. In clinical trials of adult healthy volunteers, the MRSD is predicted to cause no adverse reactions. The units of the dose (e.g., mg/kg or mg/m2) may vary depending on practices employed in the area being investigated.Maximum tolerated dose (MTD): In a toxicity study, the highest dose that does not produce unacceptable toxicity.No observed adverse effect level (NOAEL): The highest dose tested in an animal species that does not produce a significant increase in adverse effects in comparison to the control group. Adverse effects that are biologically significant, even if not statistically significant, should be considered in determining an NOAEL.No observed effect level (NOEL): The highest dose tested in an animal species with no detected effects.Pharmacologically active dose (PAD): The lowest dose tested in an animal species with the intended pharmacologic activity.Safety factor (SF): A number by which the HED is divided to introduce a margin of safety between the HED and the maximum recommended starting dose.W: Body weight in kg15Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsAPPENDIX A:Analysis of Allometric Exponent on HED CalculationsAn analysis was conducted to determine the effect of the allometric exponent on the conversion of an animal dose to the HED. One can derive the following equation (see Appendix C) for converting animal doses to the HED based on body weights and the allometric exponent (b):HED = animal NOAEL x (Wanimal/Whuman)(1-b)Conventionally, for a mg/m2 normalization b would be 0.67, but a number of studies (including the original Freireich data) have shown that MTDs scale best across species when b = 0.75. The Interagency Pharmacokinetics Group has recommended that W0.75 be used for interspecies extrapolation of doses in carcinogenicity studies (EPA 1992). There are no data, however, to indicate the optimal method for converting NOAELs to HEDs. Conversion factors were calculated over a range of animal and human weights using (Wanimal/Whuman)0.33 or (Wanimal/Whuman)0.25 to assess the effect on starting dose selection of using b = 0.75 instead of b = 0.67. The results are shown in Table 2. Using an allometric exponent of 0.75 had a big effect on the conversion factor for the smaller species mice and rats. Nonetheless, mice are not commonly used for toxicology studies to support the first-in-human clinical trials. In addition, there is evidence that the area under the plasma concentration versus time curves in rats and humans correlates reasonably well when doses are normalized to mg/m2 (Contrera et al. 1995). We conclude that the approach of converting NOAEL doses to an HED based on body surface area correction factors (i.e., b = 0.67) should be maintained for selecting starting doses for initial studies in healthy volunteers since: (1) mg/m2 normalization is widely used throughout the toxicology and pharmacokinetic research communities; (2) mg/m2 normalization provides a more conservative conversion; (3) there are no data to suggest a superior method for converting NOAELs; and (4) CDER has significant experience in establishing safe starting doses based on mg/m2, and it is readily calculated.Table 2: Effect of Allometric Exponent on Conversion FactoraConversion FactorscRatio of 0.75 to 0.67SpeciesWeight Rangeb (kg)Standardb = 0.67b = 0.75Mouse0.018-0.0330.0810.0750.1411.88Rat0.09-0.400.1620.1560.2451.57Rabbit1.5-30.3240.330.431.30Monkey1.5-40.3240.370.471.27Dog6.5-13.00.5410.530.621.17a conversion factor = (Wanimal/Whuman)(1-b)b human weight range used was 50-80 kg (110-176 lb)c mean conversion factor calculated across entire animal weight range and human weight range16Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsThe following summarizes the analysis of the effects of the allometric exponent on HED calculations:• Changing the allometric exponent from 0.67 to 0.75 had a big effect on the conversion factor for the smaller rodent species; for mice the conversion factors differed by a factor of almost 2.• Converting doses based on an exponent of 0.75 would lead to higher, more aggressive and potentially more toxic starting doses.• The limited data available suggest that the most accurate allometric exponent for normalizing MTDs of antineoplastic agents for interspecies extrapolation is b = 0.75, but there are no data to indicate the optimal normalization method for interspecies extrapolation of NOAELs in a broad range of therapeutic classes. Using mg/m2 is widely adopted throughout the drug development community.• Unless evidence is provided to the contrary, HED calculations should be based on b = 0.67 (i.e., the standard conversions based on mg/m2 relationships).• There was no notable effect of body weight on calculation of the HED within the weight ranges examined.17Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsAPPENDIX B:Analysis of Body Weight Effects on HED CalculationsAccurate conversion of a mg/kg dose to a mg/m2 dose depends on the actual weight (and surface area) of the test species. A popular formula for converting doses is:(i) mg/m2 = km × mg/kgwhere km = 100/K × W0.33 where K is a value unique to each species (Freireich etal. 1966)or km = 9.09 × W0.35 where a K value unique to each species is not needed (Boxenbaum and DiLea 1995; Burtles et al. 1995; Stahl 1956).The km value is not truly constant for any species, but increases within a species as body weight increases. The increase is not linear, but increases approximately proportional to W2/3. For example, the km value in rats varies from 5.2 for a 100 g rat to 7.0 for a 250 g rat. Strictly speaking, the km value of 6 applies only to rats at the reference weight of 150 g. For standardization and practical purposes, a fixed km factor for each species is preferred. An analysis was undertaken to determine the effect of different body weights within a species on the conversion of an animal dose to the HED using km factors. The km factor was calculated for a range of body weights using km = 100/K × W0.33. In Table 3, a working weight range is shown next to the reference body weight. This is the range within which the HED calculated by using the standard km value will not vary more than ±20 percent from that which would be calculated using a km value based on exact animal weight. This is a relativity small variance considering dose separation generally used in deriving the NOAEL, in toxicology studies, which are often twofold separations. For example, suppose a NOAEL in rats is 75 mg/kg and the average rat weight is 250 g. The km value for a 250 g rat is 7.0.HED = 75 × (7/37) = 14 mg/kg in humans.Using the standard km value of 6 for rats,HED = 75 × (6/37) = 12 mg/kg in humans.The HED calculated with the standard km value of 6 is within 15 percent of the value calculated using the actual km value of 7. As shown in Table 3, the body weights producing km factors for which the nominal, integer conversion factor was within 20 percent of the calculated factor covered a broad range. This working weight range encompassed the animal weights expected for the majority of studies used to support starting doses in humans.18Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsTable 3: Conversion of Animal Doses to Human Equivalent Doses Based on Body Surface AreaTo Convert Animal Dose in mg/kg to HEDb in mg/kg, EitherSpeciesReference Body Weight(kg)Working Weight Rangea (kg)Body Surface Area (m²)To Convert Dose inmg/kg to Dose in mg/m² Multiply by kmDivideAnimal Dose ByMultiplyAnimal Dose ByHuman60---1.6237------Childc20---0.8025------Mouse0.0200.011-0.0340.007312.30.081Hamster0.0800.047-0.1570.01657.40.135Rat0.1500.080-0.2700.02566.20.162Ferret0.3000.160-0.5400.04375.30.189Guinea pig0.4000.208-0.7000.0584.60.216Rabbit1.80.9-3.00.15123.10.324Dog105-170.50201.80.541Primates:Monkeysd31.4-4.90.25123.10.324Marmoset0.3500.140-0.7200.0666.20.162Squirrel monkey0.6000.290-0.9700.0975.30.189Baboon127-230.60201.80.541Micro-pig2010-330.74271.40.730Mini-pig4025-641.14351.10.946a For animal weights within the specified ranges, the HED for a 60 kg human calculated using the standard km value will not vary more than ±20 percent from the HED calculated using a km value based on the exact animal weight.b Assumes 60 kg human. For species not listed or for weights outside the standard ranges, human equivalent dose can be calculated from the formula: HED = animal dose in mg/kg x (animal weight in kg/human weight in kg)0.33.c The km value is provided for reference only since healthy children will rarely be volunteers for phase 1 trials.d For example, cynomolgus, rhesus, and stumptail.19Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsFor the typical species used in nonclinical safety studies, Table 3 also shows the body surface area in m2 for an animal at a particular reference weight. For example, a 400 g guinea pig has a body surface area of approximately 0.05 m2. These values come from published sources with surface area determined experimentally by various methods. Compilations of this type of data can be found in published references (Spector 1956).For animal weights outside the working weight range in Table 3, or for species not included in the table, an alternative method is available for calculating the HED. In these cases the following formula can be used:HED = Animal dose (mg/kg) × [animal weight (kg) ÷ human weight (kg)]0.33For example, assume that a NOAEL of 25 mg/kg was determined in a study using rabbits weighing 4.0 kg. The 4.0 kg animals are outside the working range for rabbits of 0.9 to 3.0 kg indicated in Table 3.HED = 25 mg/kg × (4.0 ÷ 60)0.33 = 25 × (0.41) = 10 mg/kgAlternatively, if the standard conversion factor was used to calculate the HEDHED = 25 mg/kg ÷ 3.1 = 8.1 mg/kgThe value of 10 mg/kg for the HED is 25 percent greater than the value of 8.1 mg/kg that would be calculated using the standard conversion factor. For example, assume that a NOAEL of 25 mg/kg was determined in a study using rabbits weighing 4.0 kg. The 4.0 kg animals are outside the working range for rabbits of 0.9 to 3.0 kg indicated in Table 3.HED = 25 mg/kg × (4.0 ÷ 60)0.33 = 25 × (0.41) = 10 mg/kgAlternatively, if the standard conversion factor was used to calculate the HEDHED = 25 mg/kg ÷ 3.1 = 8.1 mg/kgThe value of 10 mg/kg for the HED is 25 percent greater than the value of 8.1 mg/kg that would be calculated using the standard conversion factor.The km analysis addresses only half of the HED conversion process. The range of human sizes should also be considered to convert the mg/m2 dose back to an HED dose in mg/kg. To examine the effect of both animal and human weights on the conversion factor, the principle of allometry was used. Interspecies biologic parameters are often related by the power function Y = aWb where W is body weight and b (allometric exponent) is the slope of the log-log plot, logy = b × logW + C. Using algebraic manipulation (see Appendix C), one can derive an equation for converting an animal dose to the HED based on the body weights of the human and the animals for a given allometric exponent. For converting an animal NOAEL in mg/kg to the HED in mg/kg, the equation is:20Contains Nonbinding Recommendations(ii) HED = animal NOAEL x (Wanimal/Whuman)(1-b)Since body surface area is believed to scale with an allometric exponent (b) of 0.67, one can explore how the animal and human body weights affect the conversion factor (Wanimal/Whuman)0.33.The conversion factor was calculated over a range of animal weights and a range of human weights from 50-80 kg. The results are summarized in Table 4. Column B is the weight range of the animals used to calculate, in conjunction with the 50-80 kg range in humans, the conversion factor. The extremes of the conversion factors for the permutations chosen are shown in columns C and D. The proposed standard conversion factors are shown in column E. The percentage difference of these extremes from the standard is shown in column F. Finally, the range of animal weights that produced a conversion factor for a 60 kg human within 20 percent of the standard factor is shown in column G. The ±10 percent and ±20 percent intervals across the entire range of weights are graphically illustrated for rats in Table 5.Table 4: Effect of Body Weight on Human Equivalent Dose ConversionsaABCDEFGConversion FactorcSpeciesAnimal Weight Rangeb (kg)sm animallg humanlg animalsm humanStandardd% Difference of Extremee from Standard±20% Rangef for 60 kg Human(kg)Mouse0.018-0.0330.0600.0890.081-22%0.015-0.051Rat0.090-0.4000.1060.2130.162-35%0.123-0.420Rabbit1.5-3.00.2690.3950.324+22%1.0-3.4Monkey1.5-4.00.3190.4350.324+34%1.0-3.4Dog6.5-13.00.4370.6410.541-19%4.7-16.2a conversion factor = (Wanimal/Whuman)0.33b human weight range used was 50-80 kg (110-176 lb)c HED in mg/kg equals animal dose in mg/kg multiplied by this valued See Table 1e extreme from column C or Df range of animal weights that produced a calculated conversion factor within 20 percent of the standard factor (column E) when human weight was set at 60 kg21Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsTable 5: Human and Rat Body Weights Producing Body Surface Area Dose Conversion Factors Within 10 Percent and 20 Percent of the Standard Factor (0.162)EFFECT OF BODY WEIGHT ON BSA-CFHED = animal NOAEL· (Wanimal/Whuman)exp(1-b), b = 0.67 for mg/m2 conversion± 10%0.146-0.178Standard conversion to mg/kg = 0.162± 20%0.130-0.194Human Body Weight (kg)Rat Body Weight (kg)505560657075800.0900.1240.1200.1170.1140.1110.1090.1060.1000.1290.1250.1210.1180.1150.1130.1100.1100.1330.1290.1250.1220.1190.1160.1140.1200.1370.1320.1290.1250.1220.1190.1170.1300.1400.1360.1320.1290.1260.1230.1200.1400.1440.1390.1350.1320.1290.1260.1230.1500.1470.1420.1380.1350.1320.1290.1260.1600.1500.1460.1410.1380.1340.1310.1290.1700.1530.1490.1440.1410.1370.1340.1310.1800.1560.1510.1470.1430.1400.1370.1340.1900.1590.1540.1500.1460.1420.1390.1360.2000.1620.1570.1520.1480.1450.1410.1380.2100.1640.1590.1550.1510.1470.1440.1410.2200.1670.1620.1570.1530.1490.1460.1430.2300.1690.1640.1590.1550.1520.1480.1450.2400.1720.1660.1620.1570.1540.1500.1470.2500.1740.1690.1640.1600.1560.1520.1490.2600.1760.1710.1660.1620.1580.1540.1510.2700.1790.1730.1680.1640.1600.1560.1530.2800.1810.1750.1700.1660.1620.1580.1550.2900.1830.1770.1720.1680.1640.1600.1570.3000.1850.1790.1740.1790.1650.1620.1580.3100.1870.1810.1760.1710.1670.1630.1600.3200.1890.1830.1780.1730.1690.1650.1620.3300.1910.1850.1800.1750.1710.1670.1630.3400.1930.1870.1810.1770.1720.1690.1650.3500.1940.1880.1830.1780.1740.1700.1670.3600.1960.1900.1850.1800.1760.1720.1680.3700.1980.1920.1870.1820.1770.1730.1700.3800.2000.1940.1880.1830.1790.1750.1710.3900.2020.1950.1900.1850.1800.1760.1730.4000.2030.1970.1910.1860.1820.1780.1740.4100.2050.1990.1930.1880.1830.1790.1750.4200.2070.2000.1940.1890.1850.1810.1770.4300.2080.2020.1960.1910.1860.1820.1780.4400.2100.2030.1970.1920.1880.1830.1800.4500.2110.2050.1990.1940.1890.1850.1810.4600.2130.2060.2000.1950.1900.1860.18222Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsThe following are conclusions from these analyses:• The ±20 percent interval around the standard conversion factor includes a broad range of animal and human weights.• Given that the human weights will vary broadly, it is not usually necessary to be concerned about the affect of the variation of animal weights within a species on the HED calculation.• If an extreme animal weight is encountered in a toxicology study, one can calculate an accurate conversion factor using (Wanimal/Whuman)0.33.23Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsAPPENDIX C:Derivation of the Interspecies Scaling Factor (Wa/Wh)(1-b)Power equation (mg) = aWblog(mg) = log(a) + bClog(W) = bClog(W) + cGiven the weights of animal and human, and animal dose in mg/kg, solve for HED in mg/kg:Let H = mg/kg dose in humansA = mg/kg dose in animalsWh = weight of humanWa = weight of animalfor animal log(mg) = log(a) + bClog(Wa) = bClog(Wa) + creplace mg log(ACWa) = bClog(Wa) + csolve for c c = log(ACWa) - bClog(Wa)= log(A) + log(Wa) - bClog(Wa)= log(A) + (1-b)log(Wa)likewise for human c = log(H) + (1-b)log(Wh)equate two equations log(A) + (1-b)log(Wa) = log(H) + (1-b)log(Wh)solve for log(H) log(H) = log(A) + (1-b)log(Wa) - (1-b)log(Wh)= log(A) + (1-b)[log(Wa) - log(Wh)]= log(A) + log[(Wa/Wh)(1-b)]log(H) = log[AC(Wa/Wh)(1-b)]solve for H H = AC(Wa/Wh)(1-b)For example, using mg/m2 normalization (b = 0.67) the predicted human MTD in mg/kg based on a rat LD10 in mg/kg is MTD = LD10 C(Wa/Wh)0.33.Likewise the HED in mg/kg based on a surface area conversion given an animal NOAEL is HED = NOAEL C(Wa/Wh)0.33.24Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsAPPENDIX D:Examples of Calculations for Converting Animal Dosesto Human Equivalent DosesThis appendix provides examples of specific calculations to be taken in deriving an HED based on standardized factors.Tables 1 and 3 provide standardized conversion factors for changing animal or human doses expressed as mg/kg to doses expressed as mg/m2. Tables 1 and 3 also have factors (and divisors) for converting animal doses in mg/kg to the human dose in mg/kg that is equivalent to the animal dose if both were expressed on a mg/m2 basis. This human dose in mg/kg is referred to as the HED.Example 1: Converting to mg/m2 HEDTo convert an animal or human dose from mg/kg to mg/m2, the dose in mg/kg is multiplied by the conversion factor indicated as km (for mass constant). The km factor has units of kg/m2; it is equal to the body weight in kg divided by the surface area in m2.formula: mg/kg × km = mg/m2to convert a dose of 30 mg/kg in a dog: 30 × 20 = 600 mg/m2to convert a dose of 2.5 mg/kg in a human: 2.5 × 37 = 92.5 mg/m2Example 2: Converting to mg/kg HED in two stepsTo calculate the HED for a particular dose in animals, one can calculate the animal dose in mg/m2 by multiplying the dose in mg/kg by the km factor for that species as described in Example 1. The dose can then be converted back to mg/kg in humans by dividing the dose in mg/m2 by the km factor for humans.formula: (animal mg/kg dose × animal km) ÷ human km = human mg/kg doseto calculate the HED for a 15 mg/kg dose in dogs:(15 × 20) ÷ 37 = 300 mg/m² ÷ 37 = 8 mg/kgExample 3: Converting to mg/kg HED in one stepThe calculation in Example 2 can be simplified by combining the two steps. The HED can be calculated directly from the animal dose by dividing the animal dose by the ratio of the human/animal km factor (third column in Table 1) or by multiplying by the ratio of the animal/human km factor (fourth column in Table 1).25Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsDivision methodNOAEL calculation HEDmg/kg ÷ [kmhuman/kmanimal]15 mg/kg in dogs 15 mg/kg ÷ 1.8 = 8 mg/kg50 mg/kg in rats 50 mg/kg ÷ 6.2 = 8 mg/kg50 mg/kg in monkeys 50 mg/kg ÷ 3.1 = 16 mg/kgMultiplication methodNOAEL calculation HEDmg/kg × [kmanimal/kmhuman]15 mg/kg in dogs 15 mg/kg × 0.541 = 8 mg/kg50 mg/kg in rats 50 mg/kg × 0.162 = 8 mg/kg50 mg/kg in monkeys 50 mg/kg × 0.324 = 16 mg/kg26Contains Nonbinding Recommendations27APPENDIX E:Selection of Maximum Recommended Starting Dosefor Drugs Administered Systemically to Normal Volunteers


56Guidance for IndustryProtocol Development Guideline for Clinical Effectiveness and Target Animal Safety TrialsThis guidance supercedes the guidance of November 1994. (This document was revised to include the disclaimer in the paragraph below and to add the address to submit comments.)Guidance #85 entitled "Good Clinical Practices" became final on May 15, 2001. Until the Center revises guidance #56, sponsors should follow the recommendations in guidance #85 when differences among the guidances occur. If you have any questions, please contact Herman Schoenemann (HFV120), Center for Veterinary Medicine, Food and Drug Administration, 7500 Standish Place, Rockville, MD 20855, (240) 276-8302, e-mail: herman.schoenemann@fda.hhs.gov.The purpose of this document is to suggest a uniform system for writing study protocols and to provide a list of essential items that should be included in a study protocol. This guidance represents the agency’s current thinking on the preferred system for writing study protocols. It does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. An alternative approach may be used as long as it satisfies the requirements of applicable statutes and regulations.Comments and suggestions regarding this document should be submitted to Division of Dockets Management (HFA-305), Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, Rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. Submit electronic comments to http://www.regulation.gov. For questions regarding this guidance document, contact the Office of New Animal Drug Evaluation, Center for Veterinary Medicine (HFV-100), Food and Drug Administration, 7500 Standish Place, Rockville, MD 20855, (240) 276-8300.U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Veterinary Medicine (CVM)July 10, 2001The goals of the Protocol Development Guideline are:1.To suggest a uniform system for writing study protocols.2.To provide a reference of essential items that should be considered for inclusion in a study protocol.3.To facilitate the development of complete study protocol(s) by the author(s).4.To design more user friendly protocols for investigator(s).5.To enable FDA reviewers to evaluate study protocols more quickly and convey their comments in terms more easily understood by the sponsor.6.To reduce the number of essential revisions in study protocols.On perusal of the contents of the "Protocol Development Guideline," it will become obvious that the contents are neither all inclusive nor will all items listed be applicable to all study protocols. It is the responsibility of the sponsor to ensure the essential components of a study are included in the study protocol(s). It is requested that effectiveness and target animal safety study protocols follow this suggested format.In addition to facilitating the development of study protocols, the Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM) suggests that this format be followed when submitting the final reports of the trials conducted for review by CVM. This format may also be used to prepare the final reports by clinical investigators, study monitors, and the sponsor. More uniform reports should facilitate a systematic, orderly review of the data. This will enhance the efficiency of each CVM reviewer resulting in quicker more complete review of the data.Regulatory Background:Guidelines state procedures or practices that may be useful to the persons to whom they are directed, but are not legal requirements. Guidelines represent the agency's position on a procedure or practice at the time of their issuance. A person may follow the guideline or may choose to follow alternative procedures. If a person chooses to use alternate procedures, that person may wish to discuss the matter further with the agency to prevent an expenditure of money and effort on activities that may later be determined to be unacceptable to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The guideline does not bind the agency, and it does not create or confer any rights, privileges, immunities, or benefits for or on any person. Where the guideline states a requirement is imposed by statute or regulation, however, the requirement is law and its force and effect are not changed in any way by virtue of its inclusion in the guideline.This guideline was written in response to a need perceived by the Center for Veterinary Medicine in its work with the animal health industry.Protocol Format1 TITLE:2 PROTOCOL NUMBER:2.1 Define the type of protocol (i.e. general or site specific)3 SPONSOR:3.1 Address3.2 Telephone number4 PROTOCOL OBJECTIVE(S):4.1 Define objective of the protocol (e.g. dose determination, dose confirmation etc.)5 STUDY OBJECTIVE(S):5.1 Are the studies to be pivotal or non pivotal5.2 Define the standards applied to the conduct of the studies (GLP, investigator, or other)6 STUDY SCHEDULE:6.1 Proposed date(s) of initiation6.2 Schedule of events6.3 Proposed date(s) of completion7 STUDY DESIGN:7.1 Treatment Groups7.2 Experimental Design (i.e., cross-over, Latin Square, CRD, RCBD, Split-plots, etc.)7.3 Blocking factor(s)7.4 Randomization Procedures:7.4.1 Allocation of animals to treatment groups7.4.2 Allocation of treatment groups to experimental units8 STUDY PROCEDURES:8.1 Test Animal(s):8.1.1 Description:8.1.1.1 Age (parity if applicable)8.1.1.2 Sex8.1.1.3 Breed/Class8.1.1.4 Initial body weight8.1.1.5 Physiological State (e.g., Lactating, Pregnant, Estrus)8.1.2 Number of animals8.1.3 Source of animals8.1.4 Identification method (tattoo, neck band, wing band, brand, etc.), if not client-owned companion animals8.2 Inclusion criteria8.3 Exclusion criteria8.4 Acclimation of Test Animals:8.4.1 Duration8.4.2 Medication and/or vaccination during acclimation period8.4.3 Baseline data collected prior to initiating study8.5 Blinding of study:8.5.1 Extent of blinding, e.g., monitor, investigator, etc.8.5.2 Blinding method(s) and procedure(s)8.5.3 List personnel with access to treatment codes and rationale8.6 Analytical Methods:8.6.1 Describe the analytical measurement(s) to be made and the relevance to the protocol objectives.8.6.2 Specify the analytical plan to be used for the protocol measurement(s). This should include the following:8.6.2.1 An abstract of the method(s)8.6.2.2 Description of procedures for sample selection, preparation, and storage.8.6.2.3 Evidence of methods validation8.6.2.4 Description of validation plan when method is being developed for the study8.6.2.5 Quality control procedures for the method8.6.2.6 The criteria and procedures used to assess analytical results8.6.3 Relevant scientific literature supporting the use of the analytical method for the intended measurements.8.6.4 Certification that all needed validations will be done before the initiation of the study8.7 Study Facilities:8.7.1 Containment equipment (cages, pens, runs, stalls, etc.)8.7.2 Lighting equipment (if controlled define photo period)8.7.3 Heating equipment8.7.4 Cooling equipment8.7.5 Feeding equipment8.7.6 Watering equipment8.7.7 Ventilation equipment8.7.8 Space allocation per animal (compare to normal management practices)8.7.9 Pasture description (area, forage, rotation, etc.)8.7.10 Facility diagram:8.7.10.1 Location of feeding and watering equipment8.7.10.2 Orientation of building8.7.10.3 Ventilation8.7.10.4 Location of lighting8.7.10.5 Pen/cage dimensions8.7.10.6 Orientation of blocks8.7.10.7 Treatment code8.7.10.8 Environmental/weather recording devices8.8 Experimental Diet(s) (if applicable):8.8.1 Diet formulation(s):8.8.1.1 Ingredient list:8.8.1.1.1 Feedstuffs8.8.1.1.2 Vitamin premixes8.8.1.1.3 Mineral premixes8.8.1.1.4 Feed additives (drugs, antioxidants, pellet binders, copper sulfate, etc.)8.8.2 Nutrient and drug concentration of experimental diet(s): (Define feed sampling procedure)8.8.2.1 Calculated nutrient concentration8.8.2.2 Assayed nutrient concentration8.8.2.2.1 Assay procedure8.8.2.2.2 Analytical laboratory:8.8.2.2.2.1 Address8.8.2.2.2.2 Telephone number8.8.2.3 Assayed drug concentration:8.8.2.3.1 Specify drug(s) that will be assayed in each treatment group for each type of diet8.8.2.3.2 Anticipated analytical variation and assay limits8.8.2.3.3 Analytical method8.8.2.3.4 Analytical laboratory:8.8.2.3.4.1 Address8.8.2.3.4.2 Telephone number8.8.2.3.5 Number of assay replicates8.8.3 Feed form, (i.e. mash, crumbled, pellets)8.8.4 Manufacture of experimental diet(s):8.8.4.1 Procedures8.8.4.2 Facilities and equipment8.8.5 Feeding program, (i.e. schedule for feeding experimental diets)8.8.6 Watering program8.9 Drug Administration:8.9.1 Dosing regime (dose(s), frequency, and duration)8.9.2 Route of administration8.9.3 Investigational withdrawal period (reference the appropriate CVM authorization letter)8.9.4 Proposed withdrawal period (anticipated labeled withdrawal period)8.10 Removal of Subject(s) from the study:8.10.1 Criteria for removal of subjects from the study8.10.2 Procedures for removal of subjects from the study8.10.3 Fate of removed study animals8.11 Concurrent/Concomitant Medications/Therapies8.12 General management practices, e.g. frequency of visits to facility site, frequency of checking feeders and waterers, frequency of adding feed to feeders,frequency of checking for temperature and humidity, distribution of used litter across treatment groups, used or new litter, etc.8.13 Provisions for necropsy and disposal of expired test subjects8.14 Owner Consent (if applicable)9 SPECIFICATION OF VARIABLES:9.1 Variable(s) to be measured for evaluating labeled claim:9.1.1 When variable(s) will be assessed9.1.2 Procedures for assessing variable9.1.3 Equipment used to assess variable9.1.4 Calculation of derived data9.1.5 Forms for retention of source data9.1.6 Name(s) and address(es) of outside labs used for analysis9.2 Other variables to be recorded during the study:9.2.1 When variable(s) will be assessed9.2.2 Procedures for assessing variable9.2.3 Equipment used to assess variable9.2.4 Calculation of derived data10 DATA ANALYSIS (Depends upon protocol design chosen and the variables measured. Details of the analysis procedure should be provided)10.1 Define the experimental unit10.2 Define the number of replicates per treatment10.3 Define statistical methodology, including hypothesis to be tested or parameters to be estimated, assumptions that are being made, and model specification if a model is to be used.10.4 Define how the statistical results will be used to draw conclusions about the study's objectives11 STUDY LOCATION(S):12 PERSONNEL: (Provide debarment statements)12.1 Investigator(s):12.1.1 Address12.1.2 Telephone number12.1.3 Training and experience of investigator (prefer CVs)12.2. Study Monitor:12.2.1 Address12.2.2 Telephone number12.2.3 Training and experience of monitor (prefer CVs)12.3 Consultants (pathologist, statistician, etc.):12.3.1 Address12.3.2 Telephone number12.3.3 Training and experience of each consultant (prefer CVs)12.4 Quality Assurance Unit:12.4.1 Address12.4.2 Telephone number12.5 Other personnel involved in study:12.5.1 Address12.5.2 Telephone number12.5.3 Involvement in study12.5.4 Training and experience of other personnel (prefer CVs)13 COLLECTION AND RETENTION OF SOURCE DATA:14 ADDENDUM/DEVIATIONS TO THE PROTOCOL:15 INVESTIGATIONAL DRUG AND CONTROL:15.1 Test Substance(s):15.1.1 Chemical name15.1.2 Trade name15.1.3 Active/inactive ingredients (is this the final formula?)15.1.4 Dosage form (solution, powder, granules, etc.)15.1.5 Dose(s) to be tested (mg/gram, mg/mL, etc.)15.1.6 Manufacturing site (name and address)15.1.7 Lot No.15.1.8 Packaging15.1.9 Drug storage during study (define storage environment and drug's stability characteristics in the proposed storage environment)15.1.10 Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS)15.2 Control (placebo, vehicle, positive control, etc.) Identification of applicable items from 11.116 DRUG DISPOSITION/ANIMAL ACCOUNTABILITY/FEED DISPOSITION/FEED ACCOUNTABILITY: The accountability and disposition of all unused drug supplies, unused feed, and animals should be documented.17 PROTOCOL APPROVAL SIGNATURES: Include the appropriate individuals.17.1 Sponsor Monitor17.2 Investigator17.3 Study Monitor17.4 Quality Assurance17.5 Consultant17.6 Others18 APPENDICES: (such as:)18.1 Owner Consent Form (if applicable):18.2 Unexpected or Adverse Reaction Form:18.3 Description of treatment site preparation:18.4 Description of sample collections:18.5 Description of sample preparation for evaluation:18.6 Description of special equipment: (Validation techniques employed)18.7 Test organism(s)/include reference strains:18.8 Assay medium and its preparation:18.9 Preparation of cultural plates:18.10 Adjustment of zones of inhibition18.11 Preparation of standard curve and samples:18.12 Plating of standards and samples:18.13 Construction of standard curve:18.14 Investigator obligations:18.15 SOPs18.16 Other:



Guidance for IndustryE 10 Choice of Control Group andRelated Issues in Clinical TrialsU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)May 2001ICHGuidance for IndustryE 10 Choice of Control Group andRelated Issues in Clinical TrialsAdditional copies are available from:Office of Training and CommunicationDivision of Drug Information, HFD-240Center for Drug Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration5600 Fishers LaneRockville, MD 20857(Tel) 301-827-4573http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htmorOffice of Communication, Training andManufacturers Assistance, HFM-40Center for Biologics Evaluation and ResearchFood and Drug Administration1401 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852-1448http://www.fda.gov/cber/guidelines.htmFax: 1-888-CBERFAX or 301-827-3844Phone: the Voice Information System at 800-835-4709 or 301-827-1800U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)May 2001ICHiTABLE OF CONTENTSI. INTRODUCTION (1.0)............................................................................................................................................1A. GENERAL SCHEME AND PURPOSE OF GUIDANCE (1.1) .........................................................................................2B. PURPOSE OF CONTROL GROUP (1.2) ......................................................................................................................31. Randomization (1.2.1).......................................................................................................................................32. Blinding (1.2.2)..................................................................................................................................................4C. TYPES OF CONTROLS (1.3) .....................................................................................................................................41. Placebo Concurrent Control (1.3.1)................................................................................................................52. No-treatment Concurrent Control (1.3.2) .......................................................................................................53. Dose-response Concurrent Control (1.3.3).....................................................................................................54. Active (Positive) Concurrent Control (1.3.4)..................................................................................................65. External Control (Including Historical Control) (1.3.5)................................................................................66. Multiple Control Groups (1.3.6)......................................................................................................................6D. PURPOSES OF CLINICAL TRIALS AND RELATED ISSUES (1.4) ...............................................................................61. Evidence of Efficacy (1.4.1)..............................................................................................................................72. Comparative Efficacy and Safety (1.4.2).........................................................................................................73. Fairness of Comparisons (1.4.3)......................................................................................................................7a. Dose (1.4.3.1) ....................................................................................................................................................... 8b. Patient Population (1.4.3.2) ................................................................................................................................... 8c. Selection and Timing of Endpoints (1.4.3.3) .......................................................................................................... 8E. ASSAY SENSITIVITY (1.5).......................................................................................................................................91. Assay Sensitivity in Non-inferiority or Equivalence Trials (1.5.1)...............................................................9a. Historical Evidence of Sensitivity to Drugs Effects and Choosing the Non-inferiority Margin (1.5.1.1) ................. 10b. Appropriate Trial Conduct (1.5.1.2)..................................................................................................................... 122. Assay Sensitivity in Trials Intended to Demonstrate Superiority (1.5.2) ................................................... 13II. DETAILED CONSIDERATION OF TYPES OF CONTROL (2.0)............................................................. 14A. PLACEBO CONTROL (2.1) .................................................................................................................................... 141. Description (See Section 1.3.1) (2.1.1)......................................................................................................... 142. Ability to Minimize Bias (2.1.2) .................................................................................................................... 143. Ethical Issues (2.1.3)...................................................................................................................................... 144. Usefulness of Placebo-controlled Trials and Validity of Inference in Particular Situations (2.1.4) ....... 155. Modifications of Design and Combinations with Other Controls That Can Resolve Ethical, Practical, orInferential Issues (2.1.5).......................................................................................................................................... 16a. Additional Control Groups (2.1.5.1) .................................................................................................................... 16b. Other Modifications of Study Design (2.1.5.2) ..................................................................................................... 176. Advantages of Placebo-controlled Trials (2.1.6)......................................................................................... 19a. Ability to Demonstrate Efficacy (2.1.6.1) ........................................................................................................... 19b. Measures Absolute Efficacy and Safety (2.1.6.2).................................................................................................. 19c. Efficiency (2.1.6.3) ............................................................................................................................................. 19d. Minimizing the Effect of Subject and Investigator Expectations (2.1.6.4).............................................................. 207. Disadvantages of Placebo-controlled Trials (2.1.7).................................................................................... 20a. Ethical Concerns (See Sections 2.1.3 and 2.1.4) (2.1.7.1) ..................................................................................... 20b. Patient and Physician Practical Concerns (2.1.7.2) ............................................................................................... 20c. Generalizability (2.1.7.3) .................................................................................................................................... 20d. No Comparative Information (2.1.7.4) ................................................................................................................. 21B. NO-TREATMENT CONCURRENT CONTROL (SEE SECTION 1.3.2) (2.2) ............................................................ 21C. DOSE-RESPONSE CONCURRENT CONTROL (SEE SECTION 1.3.3) (2.3) ............................................................ 211. Description (2.3.1)......................................................................................................................................... 212. Ability to Minimize Bias (2.3.2) .................................................................................................................... 223. Ethical Issues (2.3.3)...................................................................................................................................... 224. Usefulness of Dose-response Studies and Validity of Inference in Particular Situations (2.3.4)............. 225. Modifications of Design and Combinations with Other Controls That Can Resolve Ethical, Practical, orInferential Problems (2.3.5) .................................................................................................................................... 22ii6. Advantages of Dose-response Trials (2.3.6) ................................................................................................ 22a. Efficiency (2.3.6.1) ............................................................................................................................................. 22b. Possible Ethical Advantage (2.3.6.2) ................................................................................................................... 237. Disadvantages of Dose-response Study (2.3.7)............................................................................................ 23D. ACTIVE CONTROL (SEE SECTION 1.3.4) (2.4) .................................................................................................... 231. Description (2.4.1)......................................................................................................................................... 232. Ability to Minimize Bias (2.4.2) .................................................................................................................... 243. Ethical Issues (2.4.3)...................................................................................................................................... 244. Usefulness of Active Control Trials; Validity of Inference in Particular Situations (2.4.4)..................... 245. Modifications of Design and Combinations with Other Controls That Can Resolve Ethical, Practical, orInferential Issues (2.4.5).......................................................................................................................................... 256. Advantages of Active Control Trials (2.4.6)................................................................................................. 25a. Ethical and Practical Advantages (2.4.6.1) ........................................................................................................... 25b. Information Content (2.4.6.2) .............................................................................................................................. 257. Disadvantages of Active Control Trials (2.4.7) ........................................................................................... 25a. Information Content (2.4.7.1) .............................................................................................................................. 25b. Large Sample Size (2.4.7.2) ................................................................................................................................ 25E. EXTERNAL CONTROL (INCLUDING HISTORICAL CONTROL, SEE SECTION 1.3.5) (2.5).................................... 261. Description (2.5.1)......................................................................................................................................... 262. Ability to Minimize Bias (2.5.2) .................................................................................................................... 263. Ethical Issues (2.5.3)...................................................................................................................................... 274. Usefulness of Externally Controlled Trials; Validity of Inference in Particular Situations (2.5.4)......... 285. Modifications of Design and Combinations with Other Controls That Can Resolve Ethical, Practical orInferential Problems (2.5.5) .................................................................................................................................... 286. Advantages of Externally Controlled Trials (2.5.6)..................................................................................... 297. Disadvantages of Externally Controlled Trials (2.5.7) ............................................................................... 29III. CHOOSING THE CONCURRENT CONTROL GROUP (3.0) .................................................................... 291Guidance for Industry1E10 Choice of Control Groupand Related Issues in Clinical TrialsThis guidance is intended to assist applicants in choosing a control group for clinical trialsintended to demonstrate the efficacy of a treatment. The guidance also discusses related trialdesign and conduct issues and describes what trials using each design can demonstrate. Thisguidance does not address the regulatory requirements of any region.I. INTRODUCTION (1.0)2The choice of control group is always a critical decision in designing a clinical trial. That choiceaffects the inferences that can be drawn from the trial, the ethical acceptability of the trial, thedegree to which bias in conducting and analyzing the study can be minimized, the types ofsubjects that can be recruited and the pace of recruitment, the kind of endpoints that can bestudied, the public and scientific credibility of the results, the acceptability of the results byregulatory authorities, and many other features of the study, its conduct, and its interpretation.1 This guidance was developed within the Expert Working Group (Efficacy) of the InternationalConference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH)and has been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH process. This documenthas been endorsed by the ICH Steering Committee at Step 4 of the ICH process, July 2000. At Step 4 of the process,the final draft is recommended for adoption to the regulatory bodies of the European Union, Japan, and the UnitedStates.2 Arabic numbers reflect the organizational breakdown in the document endorsed by the ICH SteeringCommittee at Step 4 of the ICH process, July 2000.This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA's) current thinkingon this topic. It does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does notoperate to bind FDA or the public. An alternative approach may be used if suchapproach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.2A. General Scheme and Purpose of Guidance (1.1)The purpose of this guideance is to describe the general principles involved in choosing a controlgroup for clinical trials intended to demonstrate the efficacy of a treatment and to discuss relatedtrial design and conduct issues. This guidance does not address the regulatory requirements inany region, but describes what trials using each design can demonstrate. The general principlesdescribed in this guidance are relevant to any controlled trial but the choice of control group is ofparticularly critical importance to clinical trials carried out during drug development todemonstrate efficacy. The choice of the control group should be considered in the context ofavailable standard therapies, the adequacy of the evidence to support the chosen design, andethical considerations.This guidance first describes the purpose of the control group and the types of control groupscommonly employed to demonstrate efficacy. It then discusses the critical design andinterpretation issues associated with the use of an active control trial to demonstrate efficacy byshowing non-inferiority or equivalence to the control (Section 1.5). There are circumstances inwhich a finding of non-inferiority cannot be interpreted as evidence of efficacy. Specifically, fora finding of non-inferiority to be interpreted as showing efficacy, the trial needs to have had theability to distinguish effective from less effective or ineffective treatments.The guidance then describes trials using each kind of control group in more detail (see sections2.0-2.5.7) and considers, for each:· Its ability to minimize bias· Ethical and practical issues associated with its use· Its usefulness and the quality of inference in particular situations· Modifications of study design or combinations with other controls that can resolveethical, practical, or inferential concerns· Its overall advantages and disadvantagesSeveral other ICH guidances are particularly relevant to this guidance:· E3: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports· E4: Dose-Response Information to Support Drug Registration· E5: Ethnic Factors· E6: Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guideline· E8: General Considerations for Clinical Trials· E9: Statistical Principles for Clinical TrialsAlthough trials using any of the control groups described and discussed in this guidance may beuseful and acceptable in clinical trials that serve as the basis for marketing approval in at leastsome circumstances, they are not equally appropriate or useful in every case. The generalapproach to selecting the type of control is outlined in Section 3.0, Figure 1, and Table 1.3Although this guidance is focused primarily on clinical trials intended to assess the efficacy of atreatment, many of the considerations discussed also apply to the assessment of specific safetyhypotheses and to safety or efficacy comparisons of two treatments.B. Purpose of Control Group (1.2)Control groups have one major purpose: to allow discrimination of patient outcomes (forexample, changes in symptoms, signs, or other morbidity) caused by the test treatment fromoutcomes caused by other factors, such as the natural progression of the disease, observer orpatient expectations, or other treatment. The control group experience tells us what would havehappened to patients if they had not received the test treatment or if they had received a differenttreatment known to be effective.If the course of a disease were uniform in a given patient population, or predictable from patientcharacteristics such that outcome could be predicted reliably for any given subject or group ofsubjects, results of treatment could simply be compared with the known outcome withouttreatment. For example, one could assume that pain would have persisted for a defined time,blood pressure would not have changed, depression would have lasted for a defined time, tumorswould have progressed, or the mortality after an acute infarction would have been the same aspreviously seen. In unusual cases, the course of illness is in fact predictable in a definedpopulation and it may be possible to use a similar group of patients previously studied as ahistorical control (see section 1.3.5). In most situations, however, a concurrent control group isneeded because it is not possible to predict outcome with adequate accuracy or certainty.A concurrent control group is one chosen from the same population as the test group and treatedin a defined way as part of the same trial that studies the test treatment, and over the same periodof time. The test and control groups should be similar with regard to all baseline and ontreatmentvariables that could influence outcome, except for the study treatment. Failure toachieve this similarity can introduce a bias into the study. Bias here (and as used in ICH E9)means the systematic tendency of any aspects of the design, conduct, analysis, and interpretationof the results of clinical trials to make the estimate of a treatment effect deviate from its truevalue. Randomization and blinding are the two techniques usually used to minimize the chanceof such bias and to ensure that the test treatment and control groups are similar at the start of thestudy and are treated similarly in the course of the study (see ICH E9). Whether a trial designincludes these features is a critical determinant of its quality and persuasiveness.1. Randomization (1.2.1)Assurance that subject populations are similar in test and control groups is best attained byrandomly dividing a single sample population into groups that receive the test or controltreatments. Randomization avoids systematic differences between groups with respect to knownor unknown baseline variables that could affect outcome. Inability to eliminate systematicdifferences between treatment groups is a major problem of studies without a concurrentrandomized control (see external control trials, section 1.3.5). Randomization also provides asound basis for statistical inference.42. Blinding (1.2.2)The groups should not only be similar at baseline, but should be treated and observed similarlyduring the trial, except for receiving the test and control drug. Clinical trials are oftendouble-blind (or double-masked), meaning that both subjects and investigators, as well as sponsoror investigator staff involved in the treatment or clinical evaluation of subjects, are unaware ofeach subject's assigned treatment. Blinding is intended to minimize the potential biases resultingfrom differences in management, treatment, or assessment of patients, or interpretation of resultsthat could arise as a result of subject or investigator knowledge of the assigned treatment. Forexample:· Subjects on active drug might report more favorable outcomes because they expect a benefitor might be more likely to stay in a study if they knew they were on active drug.· Observers might be less likely to identify and report treatment responses in a no-treatmentgroup or might be more sensitive to a favorable outcome or adverse event in patientsreceiving active drug.· Knowledge of treatment assignment could affect vigor of attempts to obtain on-study orfollow-up data.· Knowledge of treatment assignment could affect decisions about whether a subject shouldremain on treatment or receive concomitant medications or other ancillary therapy.· Knowledge of treatment assignment could affect decisions as to whether a given subject'sresults should be included in an analysis.· Knowledge of treatment assignment could affect choice of statistical analysis.Blinding is intended to ensure that subjective assessments and decisions are not affected byknowledge of treatment assignment.C. Types of Controls (1.3)Control groups in clinical trials can be classified on the basis of two critical attributes: (1) thetype of treatment used and (2) the method of determining who will be in the control group. Thetype of control treatment may be any of the following four: (1) placebo, (2) no treatment, (3)different dose or regimen of the study treatment, or (4) a different active treatment. The principalmethods of determining who will be in the control group are by randomization or by selection ofa control population separate from the population treated in the trial (external or historicalcontrol). This document categorizes control groups into five types. The first four areconcurrently controlled (the control group and test groups are chosen from the same populationand treated concurrently), usually with random assignment to treatment; they are distinguished bythe type of control treatment (listed above) used. External (historical) control groups, regardlessof the comparator treatment, are considered together as the fifth type because of serious concernsabout the ability of such trials to ensure comparability of test and control groups and their abilityto minimize important biases, making this design usable only in unusual circumstances.5It is increasingly common to carry out studies that have more than one type of control group.Each type of control group is appropriate in some circumstances, but none is usable or adequatein every situation. The five types of control group are:1. Placebo Concurrent Control (1.3.1)In a placebo-controlled trial, subjects are randomly assigned to a test treatment or to anidentical-appearing treatment that does not contain the test drug. The treatments may be titratedto effect or tolerance, or may be given at one or more fixed doses. Such trials are almost alwaysdouble-blind. The name of the control suggests that its purpose is to control for placebo effect(improvement in a subject resulting from thinking that he or she is taking a drug), but that is notits only or major benefit. Rather, the placebo control design, by allowing blinding andrandomization and including a group that receives an inert treatment, controls for all potentialinfluences on the actual or apparent course of the disease other than those arising from thepharmacologic action of the test drug. These influences include spontaneous change (naturalhistory of the disease and regression to the mean), subject or investigator expectations, the effectof being in a trial, use of other therapy, and subjective elements of diagnosis or assessment.Placebo-controlled trials seek to show a difference between treatments when they are studyingeffectiveness, but may also seek to show lack of difference (of specified size) in evaluating asafety measurement. In that case, the question of whether the trial could have shown such adifference if there had been one is critical (see section 1.5).The use of a placebo control group does not imply that the control group is untreated. In manyplacebo-controlled trials, the new treatment and placebo are each added to a common standardtherapy (so-called add-on studies, see section 2.1.5.2.1).2. No-treatment Concurrent Control (1.3.2)In a no treatment-controlled trial, subjects are randomly assigned to test treatment or to no (i.e.,absence of) study treatment. The principal difference between this design and aplacebo-controlled trial is that subjects and investigators are not blind to treatment assignment.Because of the advantages of double-blind designs, this design is likely to be needed and suitableonly when it is difficult or impossible to double-blind (e.g., treatments with easily recognizedtoxicity) and only when there is reasonable confidence that study endpoints are objective and thatthe results of the trial are unlikely to be influenced by the factors listed in section 1.2.2. Note thatit is often possible to have a blinded evaluator carry out endpoint assessment, even if the overalltrial is not double-blind. This is a valuable approach and should always be considered in trialsthat cannot be blinded, but it does not solve the other problems associated with knowing thetreatment assignment (see section 1.2.2).3. Dose-response Concurrent Control (1.3.3)In a randomized, fixed-dose, dose-response trial, subjects are randomized to one of several fixeddosegroups. Subjects may either be placed on their fixed dose initially or be raised to that dosegradually, but the intended comparison is between the groups on their final dose. Dose-response6trials are usually double-blind. They may include a placebo (zero dose) and/or active control. Ina concentration-controlled trial, treatment groups are titrated to several fixed-concentrationwindows; this type of trial is conceptually similar to a fixed-dose, dose-response trial. In aregimen-controlled trial subjects are randomized to two or more regimens of the study drug (e.g.,once vs. twice daily, 3 days vs. 7 days).4. Active (Positive) Concurrent Control (1.3.4)In an active control (or positive control) trial, subjects are randomly assigned to the test treatmentor to an active control treatment. Such trials are usually double-blind, but this is not alwayspossible; many oncology trials, for example, are considered difficult or impossible to blind (seesection 1.3.2) because of different regimens, different routes of administration, and differenttoxicities. Active control trials can have two distinct objectives with respect to showing efficacy:(1) to show efficacy of the test treatment by showing it is as good as a known effective treatmentor (2) to show efficacy by showing superiority of the test treatment to the active control. Theymay also be used with the primary objective of comparing the efficacy and/or safety of the twotreatments (see section 1.4). Whether the purpose of the trial is to show efficacy of the newtreatment or to compare two treatments, the question of whether the trial would be capable ofdistinguishing effective from less effective or ineffective treatments is critical (see section 1.5).5. External Control (Including Historical Control) (1.3.5)An externally controlled trial compares a group of subjects receiving the test treatment with agroup of patients external to the study, rather than to an internal control group consisting ofpatients from the same population assigned to a different treatment. The external control can be agroup of patients treated at an earlier time (historical control) or a group treated during the sametime period but in another setting. The external control may be defined (a specific group ofpatients) or non-defined (a comparator group based on general medical knowledge of outcome).Use of this latter comparator is particularly treacherous (such trials are usually considereduncontrolled) because general impressions are so often inaccurate. So-called baseline-controlledstudies, in which subjects' status on therapy is compared with status before therapy (e.g., bloodpressure, tumor size), have no internal control and are thus uncontrolled or externally controlled(see section 2.5).6. Multiple Control Groups (1.3.6)As will be described further below (see section 1.5.1), it is often possible and advantageous touse more than one kind of control in a single study, e.g., use of both an active control andplacebo. Similarly, trials can use several doses of test drug and several doses of an active control,with or without placebo. This design may be useful for active drug comparisons where therelative potency of the two drugs is not well established, or where the purpose of the trial is toestablish relative potency.D. Purposes of Clinical Trials and Related Issues (1.4)7Two purposes of clinical trials should be distinguished: (1) assessment of the efficacy and/orsafety of a treatment and (2) assessment of the relative (comparative) efficacy, safety, risk/benefitrelationship or utility of two treatments.1. Evidence of Efficacy (1.4.1)A trial using any of the control types may demonstrate efficacy of the test treatment by showingthat it is superior to the control (placebo, no treatment, and low dose of test drug, active drug).An active control trial may, in addition, demonstrate efficacy in some cases by showing the newtreatment to be similar in efficacy to a known effective treatment. This similarity establishes theefficacy of the test treatment, however, only if it can be assumed that the active control waseffective under the conditions of the trial, as two treatments would also look similar if neitherwere effective in the trial (see section 1.5).Clinical trials designed to demonstrate efficacy of a new drug by showing that it is similar inefficacy to a standard agent have been called equivalence trials. Most of these are actually noninferioritytrials, attempting to show that the new drug is not less effective than the control bymore than a defined amount, generally called the margin.2. Comparative Efficacy and Safety (1.4.2)In some cases, the focus of the trial is on the comparison of one treatment with another treatment,not the efficacy of the test drug per se. Depending on the therapeutic area, these trials may beseen as providing information that is important for relative risk/benefit assessment. The activecomparator(s) should be acceptable to the region for which the data are intended. It is notnecessary to demonstrate superiority to the active comparator, and, depending on the situation, itmay not be necessary to show non-inferiority. For example, a less effective treatment could havesafety advantages and thus be considered useful.Even though the primary focus of such a trial is the comparison of treatments, rather thandemonstration of efficacy, the cautions described for conducting and interpreting non-inferioritytrials need to be taken into account (see section 1.5). Specifically, the ability of the comparativetrial to detect a difference between treatments when one exists needs to be established because atrial incapable of distinguishing between treatments that are in fact different cannot provideuseful comparative information.3. Fairness of Comparisons (1.4.3)For the comparative trial to be informative concerning relative safety and/or efficacy, the trialneeds to be fair; i.e., the conditions of the trial should not inappropriately favor one treatmentover the other. In practice, an active control equivalence or non-inferiority trial offered asevidence of efficacy also almost always needs to provide a fair effectiveness comparison with thecontrol, because any doubt as to whether the control in the study had its usual effect wouldundermine assurance that the trial had assay sensitivity (see section 1.5). Among aspects of trial8design that could unfairly favor one treatment are choice of dose or patient population andselection and timing of endpoints.a. Dose (1.4.3.1)In comparing the test drug with an active control, it is important to choose an appropriate doseand dose regimen of the control and test drugs. In examining the results of a comparison of twotreatments, it is important to consider whether an apparently less effective treatment has beenused at too low a dose or whether the apparently less well-tolerated treatment has been used attoo high a dose. In some cases, to show superior efficacy or safety convincingly it will benecessary to study several doses of the control and perhaps several doses of the test treatment.b. Patient Population (1.4.3.2)Selection of subjects for an active control trial can affect outcome; the population studied shouldbe carefully considered in evaluating what the trial has shown. For example, if many subjects ina trial have previously failed to respond to the control treatment, there would be a bias in favor ofthe new treatment. The results of such a trial could not be generalized to the entire population ofpreviously untreated patients. A finding of superiority of the new treatment, however, still wouldbe evidence of the efficacy of the new treatment in the population studied. In fact, a trial of anew treatment in apparent nonresponders to another treatment, in which the nonresponders arerandomized to either the new or failed treatment (so long as this does not place the patients atrisk), can provide a demonstration of the value of the new treatment in such nonresponders, aclinically valuable observation.Similarly, it is sometimes possible to identify patient subsets more or less likely to have afavorable response or to have an adverse response to a particular drug. For example, blacksusually respond poorly to the blood pressure effects of beta blockers and angiotensin- convertingenzyme inhibitors, so that a comparison of a new antihypertensive with these drugs in thesepatients would tend to show superiority of the new drug. It would not be appropriate to concludethat the new drug is generally superior. Again, however, a planned trial in a subgroup, withrecognition of its limitations and of what conclusion can properly be drawn, could beinformative.c. Selection and Timing of Endpoints (1.4.3.3)When two treatments are used for the same disease or condition, they may differentially affectvarious outcomes of interest in that disease, particularly if they represent different classes ormodalities of treatment. Therefore, when comparing them in a clinical trial, the choice andtiming of endpoints may favor one treatment or the other. For example, thrombolytics in patientswith acute myocardial infarction can reduce mortality but increase hemorrhagic stroke risk. If anew, more pharmacologically active, thrombolytic were compared with an older thrombolytic,the more active treatment might look better if the endpoint were mortality, but worse if theendpoint were a composite of mortality and disabling stroke. Similarly, in comparing twoanalgesics in the management of dental pain, assigning a particularly heavy weight to pain at9early time points would favor the drug with more rapid onset of effect, while assigning moreweight to later time points would favor a drug with a longer duration of effect.E. Assay Sensitivity (1.5)Assay sensitivity is a property of a clinical trial defined as the ability to distinguish an effectivetreatment from a less effective or ineffective treatment. Assay sensitivity is important in any trialbut has different implications for trials intended to show differences between treatments(superiority trials) and trials intended to show non-inferiority. If a trial intended to demonstrateefficacy by showing superiority of a test treatment to control lacks assay sensitivity, it will fail toshow that the test treatment is superior and will fail to lead to a conclusion of efficacy. Incontrast, if a trial is intended to demonstrate efficacy by showing a test treatment to be noninferiorto an active control, but lacks assay sensitivity, the trial may find an ineffective treatmentto be non-inferior and could lead to an erroneous conclusion of efficacy.When two treatments within a trial are shown to have different efficacy (i.e., when one treatmentis superior), that finding itself demonstrates that the trial had assay sensitivity. In contrast, asuccessful non-inferiority trial (i.e., one that has shown non-inferiority), or an unsuccessfulsuperiority trial, generally does not contain such direct evidence of assay sensitivity.1. Assay Sensitivity in Non-inferiority or Equivalence Trials (1.5.1)The presence of assay sensitivity in a non-inferiority or equivalence trial may be deduced fromtwo determinations:Historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects, i.e., that similarly designed trials in the pastregularly distinguished effective treatments from less effective or ineffective treatments andAppropriate trial conduct, i.e., that the conduct of the trial did not undermine its ability todistinguish effective treatments from less effective or ineffective treatments.Historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects can, and should, be evaluated before beginning anon-inferiority trial. Specifically, it should be determined that, in the specific therapeutic areaunder study, appropriately designed and conducted trials that used a specific active treatment, orother treatments with similar effects, reliably showed an effect. Optimally, this is demonstratedby finding that the active treatment intended for use as the active control was reliably foundsuperior to placebo. If this is the case, there is historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effectsfor similarly designed active control trials (see section 1.5.1.1).Appropriateness of trial conduct can only be fully evaluated after the active control noninferioritytrial is completed. Not only should the design of the non-inferiority trial be similar tothat of previous trials used to determine historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects (e.g.,entry criteria, allowable concomitant therapy); but, in addition, the actual study populationentered, the concomitant therapies actually used, etc., should be assessed to ensure that conductof the study was, in fact, similar to the previous trials. The trial should also be conducted with10high quality (e.g. good compliance, few losses to follow-up). Together with historical evidence ofsensitivity to drug effects, appropriate trial conduct (section 1.5.1.2) provides assurance of assaysensitivity in the new active control trial.The design and conduct of a non-inferiority trial thus involve four critical steps:Determining that historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects exists. Without thisdetermination, demonstration of efficacy from a showing of non-inferiority is not possible andshould not be attempted.Designing a trial. Important details of the trial design, e.g., study population, concomitanttherapy, endpoints, run-in periods, should adhere closely to the design of the trials used todetermine that historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects existsSetting a margin. An acceptable non-inferiority margin should be defined, taking into accountthe historical data and relevant clinical and statistical considerations.Conducting the trial. The trial conduct should also adhere closely to that of the historical trialsand should be of high quality.a. Historical Evidence of Sensitivity to Drug Effects and Choosing the Non-inferiorityMargin (1.5.1.1)As noted earlier, most active control equivalence trials are really non-inferiority trials intended toestablish the efficacy of a new treatment. Analysis of the results of non-inferiority trials isdiscussed in ICH guidances E9 and E3. Briefly, in such a trial, test and known effectivetreatments are compared. Prior to the trial, an equivalence or non-inferiority margin, sometimescalled delta, is selected. This margin is the degree of inferiority of the test treatments to thecontrol that the trial will attempt to exclude statistically. If the confidence interval for thedifference between the test and control treatments excludes a degree of inferiority of the testtreatment as large as, or larger than, the margin, the test treatment can be declared non-inferior; ifthe confidence interval includes a difference as large as the margin, the test treatment cannot bedeclared non-inferior.The margin chosen for a non-inferiority trial cannot be greater than the smallest effect size thatthe active drug would be reliably expected to have compared with placebo in the setting of theplanned trial. If a difference between active control and the new drug favors the control by asmuch as or more than this margin, the new drug might have no effect at all. Identification of thesmallest effect size that the active drug would be reliably expected to have is only possible whenthere is historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects and, indeed, identification of the marginis based upon that evidence. The margin generally is identified based on past experience inplacebo-controlled trials of adequate design under conditions similar to those planned for the newtrial, but could also be supported by dose response or active control superiority studies.Regardless of the control groups used in those earlier studies, the value of interest in determiningthe margin is the measure of superiority of the active treatment to its control, not uncontrolled11measures such as change from baseline. Note that exactly how to calculate the margin is notdescribed in this document, and there is little published experience on how to do this.The determination of the margin in a non-inferiority trial is based on both statistical reasoningand clinical judgment, should reflect uncertainties in the evidence on which the choice is based,and should be suitably conservative. If this is done properly, a finding that the confidenceinterval for the difference between new drug and the active control excludes a suitably chosenmargin provides assurance that the test drug has an effect greater than zero. In practice, the noninferioritymargin chosen usually will be smaller than that suggested by the smallest expectedeffect size of the active control because of interest in ensuring that some clinically acceptableeffect size (or fraction of the control drug effect) was maintained. For example, it would notgenerally be considered sufficient in a mortality non-inferiority study to ensure that the testtreatment had an effect greater than zero; retention of some substantial fraction of the mortalityeffect of the control would usually be sought. This would also be true in a trial whose primaryfocus is the relative effectiveness of a test drug and active control (see section 1.4.2), where itwould be usual to seek assurance that the test and control drug were quite similar, not simply thatthe new drug had any effect at all.The fact that the choice of the margin to be excluded is based on historical evidence gives thenon-inferiority trial an element in common with a historically controlled (externally controlled)trial. The non-inferiority trial design is appropriate and reliable only when the historical estimateof drug effect size can be well supported by reference to the results of previous studies of thecontrol drug. These studies should lead to the conclusion that the active control can consistentlybe distinguished from placebo in appropriately sized trials of design similar to the proposed trialand should identify an effect size that represents the smallest effect that the control can reliablybe expected to have. If placebo-controlled trials of a design similar to the one proposed morethan occasionally show no difference between the proposed active control and placebo, and thiscannot be explained by some characteristic of the study, only superiority of the test drug wouldbe interpretable.Whether there is historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects in any given case is to somedegree a matter of judgment. In some cases sensitivity to drug effects is clear from theconsistency of results of prior placebo-controlled trials or is obvious because the outcome oftreated and untreated disease is very different. For example, in many infectious diseases curerates on effective treatment far exceed the spontaneous cure rates over the course of a short-termstudy. There are many conditions, however, in which drugs considered effective cannot regularlybe shown superior to placebo in well-controlled trials; and one therefore cannot reliablydetermine a minimum effect the drug will have in the setting of a specific trial. Such conditionstend to include those in which there is substantial improvement and variability in placebo groups,and/or in which the effects of therapy are small or variable, such as depression, anxiety,dementia, angina, symptomatic congestive heart failure, seasonal allergies, and symptomaticgastroesophageal reflux disease.In all these cases, there is no doubt that the standard treatments are effective because there aremany well-controlled trials of each of these drugs that have shown an effect. Based on available12experience, however, it would be difficult to describe trial conditions in which the drug wouldreliably have at least a minimum effect (i.e., conditions in which there is historical evidence ofsensitivity to drug effects) and that, therefore, could be used to identify an appropriate margin. Insome cases, the experience on which the historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects is basedmay be of questionable relevance, e.g., if standards of treatment and diagnosis have changedsubstantially over time (for an example, see section 2.1.7.1). If someone proposing to use anactive-control or non-inferiority design cannot provide sufficient support for historical evidenceof the sensitivity to drug effects of the study with the chosen non-inferiority margin, a finding ofnon-inferiority cannot be considered informative with respect to efficacy.As noted, a determination regarding historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects applies onlyto trials of a specific design. For a planned non-inferiority trial to be similarly sensitive to drugeffects, it is essential that the trial have critical design characteristics similar to those of thehistorical trials. These design characteristics include, for example, the entry criteria (severity ofmedical condition, concomitant illness, method of diagnosis), dose and regimen of control drug,concomitant treatments used, the endpoint measured and timing of assessments, and the use of awashout period to exclude selected patients. When differences in study design characteristics areunavoidable or desirable (e.g. because of technological or therapeutic advances), the implicationsof any differences for the determination of the presence of historical evidence of sensitivity todrug effects and for choice of margin should be carefully considered.b. Appropriate Trial Conduct (1.5.1.2)Even where there is historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects and the new study is similarin design to the past studies, assay sensitivity can be undermined by the actual conduct of thetrial. To ensure assay sensitivity of a trial, its conduct should be of high quality and the patientsactually enrolled, the treatments (other than the test treatment) actually given, and theassessments actually made should be similar to those of the trials on which the determination ofhistorical sensitivity to drug effects was based.There are many factors in the conduct of a trial that can reduce the observed difference betweenan effective treatment and a less effective or ineffective treatment and therefore may reduce atrial’s assay sensitivity, such as:1. Poor compliance with therapy2. Poor responsiveness of the enrolled study population to drug effects3. Use of concomitant non-protocol medication or other treatment that interferes with thetest drug or that reduces the extent of the potential response4. An enrolled population that tends to improve spontaneously, leaving no room for furtherdrug-induced improvement5. Poorly applied diagnostic criteria (patients lacking the disease to be studied)6. Biased assessment of endpoint because of knowledge that all patients are receiving apotentially active drug, e.g., a tendency to read blood pressure responses as normalized,potentially reducing the difference between test drug and control13Clinical researchers and trial sponsors intend to perform high-quality trials, and the availability ofthe Good Clinical Practices guidance (ICH E6) will continue to enhance trial quality.Nonetheless, it should be appreciated that in trials intended to show a difference betweentreatments there is a strong imperative to use a good trial design and minimize trial errors becausemany trial imperfections increase the likelihood of failing to show a difference betweentreatments when one exists. In placebo-controlled trials many efforts are made to improvecompliance and increase the likelihood that the patient population will be responsive to drugeffects to ensure that an effective treatment will be distinguished from placebo. Nonetheless, inmany clinical settings, despite the strong stimulus and extensive efforts to ensure trial excellenceand assay sensitivity, clinical trials are often unable to reliably distinguish effective drugs fromplacebo.In contrast, in trials intended to show that there is not a difference of a particular size (noninferiority)between two treatments, there may be a much weaker stimulus to engage in many ofthese efforts to ensure study quality that will help ensure that differences will be detected, i.e.,that ensure assay sensitivity. The kinds of trial error that diminish observed differences betweentreatments (e.g., poor compliance, high placebo response, certain concomitant treatment,misclassification of outcomes) are of particular concern with respect to preservation of assaysensitivity. However, when it is believed that the new drug is actually superior to the control,there will be a strong stimulus to conduct a high quality trial so that the non-inferiority margin ismore likely to be excluded. It should also be noted that some kinds of trial errors can increasevariance, which would decrease the likelihood of showing non-inferiority by widening theconfidence interval, so that a difference between treatment and control greater than the margincould not be excluded. There would therefore be a strong stimulus in non-inferiority trials toreduce such sources of variance as poor measurement technique.As noted, to determine that a non-inferiority trial had appropriate trial conduct, its conduct shouldbe reviewed not only for the presence of factors that might obscure differences betweentreatments but also for factors that might make the trial different from the trials that provided thebasis for determining the non-inferiority margin. In particular, it should be determined whetherany observed differences in the populations enrolled, the use of concomitant therapies,compliance with therapy, and the extent of, and reasons for, dropping out could adversely affectassay sensitivity. Even when the design and conduct of a trial appear to have been quite similarto those of the trials providing the basis for determining the non-inferiority margin, outcomeswith the active control treatment that are visibly atypical (e.g., cure rate in an antibiotic trial thatis unusually high or low) can indicate that important differences existed.2. Assay Sensitivity in Trials Intended to Demonstrate Superiority(1.5.2)The question of assay sensitivity, although particularly critical in non-inferiority trials, actuallyarises in any trial that fails to detect a difference between treatments, including aplacebo-controlled trial and a dose-response trial. If a treatment fails to show superiority toplacebo, for example, it means either that the treatment was ineffective or that the study asdesigned and conducted was not capable of distinguishing an effective treatment from placebo.14A useful approach to the assessment of assay sensitivity in active control trials and in placebocontrolledtrials is the three-arm trial, including both placebo and a known active treatment, atrial design with several advantages. Such a trial measures effect size (test drug versus placebo)and allows comparison of test drug and active control in a setting where assay sensitivity isestablished by the active control versus placebo comparison. (See Section 2.1.5.1.1).II. DETAILED CONSIDERATION OF TYPES OF CONTROL (2.0)A. Placebo Control (2.1)1. Description (See Section 1.3.1) (2.1.1)In a placebo-controlled trial, subjects are assigned, almost always by randomization, to either atest treatment or to a placebo. A placebo is a dummy treatment that appears as identical aspossible to the test treatment with respect to physical characteristics such as color, weight, tasteand smell, but that does not contain the test drug. Some trials may study more than one dose ofthe test treatment or include both an active control and placebo. In these cases, it may be easierfor the investigator to use more than one placebo (double-dummy) than to try to make alltreatments look the same. The use of placebo facilitates, and is almost always accompanied by,double-blinding (or double-masking). The difference in outcome between the active treatmentand placebo groups is the measure of treatment effect under the conditions of the trial. Withinthis general description there are a wide variety of designs that can be used successfully: Parallelor crossover designs (see ICH E9), single fixed dose or titration in the active drug group, severalfixed doses. Several designs meriting special attention will be described below. Note that notevery study that includes a placebo is a placebo-controlled study. For example, an active controlstudy could use a placebo for each drug (double-dummy) to facilitate blinding; this is still anactive control trial, not a placebo-controlled trial. A placebo-controlled trial is one in whichtreatment with a placebo is compared with treatment with a test drug.It should also be noted that not all placebos are completely inactive. For example, some vehiclecontrols used in studies of topical skin preparations may have beneficial activity. This does notimpair the ability of the design to measure the specific effect of the test agent. Special problemsarise when the chosen vehicle control may have harmful effects. In this case a no treatment armwould allow the measurement of the total effect of the test agent plus its vehicle.2. Ability to Minimize Bias (2.1.2)The placebo-controlled trial, using randomization and blinding, generally minimizes subject andinvestigator bias. Such trials, however, are not impervious to blind-breaking through recognitionof pharmacologic effects of one treatment; blinded outcome assessment can enhance biasreduction in such cases. This concern may be particularly relevant in crossover studies.3. Ethical Issues (2.1.3)15When a new treatment is tested for a condition for which no effective treatment is known, there isusually no ethical problem with a study comparing the new treatment to placebo. Use of aplacebo control may raise problems of ethics, acceptability, and feasibility, however, when aneffective treatment is available for the condition under study in a proposed trial. In cases wherean available treatment is known to prevent serious harm, such as death or irreversible morbidityin the study population, it is generally inappropriate to use a placebo control. There areoccasional exceptions, however, such as cases in which standard therapy has toxicity so severethat many patients have refused to receive it.In other situations, when there is no serious harm, it is generally considered ethical to ask patientsto participate in a placebo-controlled trial, even if they may experience discomfort as a result,provided the setting is noncoercive and patients are fully informed about available therapies andthe consequences of delaying treatment. Such trials, however, even if ethical, may poseimportant practical problems. For example, deferred treatment of pain or other symptoms may beunacceptable to patients or physicians and they may not want to participate in a trial that requiresthis. Whether a particular placebo controlled trial of a new agent will be acceptable to subjectsand investigators when there is known effective therapy is a matter of investigator, patient, andinstitutional review board (IRB)/ independent ethics committee (IEC) judgment, and acceptabilitymay differ among ICH regions. Acceptability could depend on the specific design of the trial andthe patient population chosen, as will be discussed below (see section 2.1.5).Whether a particular placebo-controlled trial is ethical may in some cases depend on what isbelieved to have been clinically demonstrated under the particular circumstances of the trial. Forexample, a short term placebo-controlled trial of a new antihypertensive agent in patients withmild essential hypertension and no end-organ disease might be considered generally acceptable,while a longer trial, or one that included sicker patients, probably would not be.It should be emphasized that use of a placebo or no-treatment control does not imply that thepatient does not get any treatment at all. For example, in an oncology trial, when no active drugis approved, patients in both the placebo or no-treatment group and the test drug group willreceive needed palliative treatment, such as analgesics, and best supportive care. Many placebocontrolledtrials are conducted as add-on trials, where all patients receive a specified standardtherapy or therapy left to the choice of the treating physician or institution (see section 2.1.5.2.1).4. Usefulness of Placebo-controlled Trials and Validity of Inference inParticular Situations (2.1.4)When used to show effectiveness of a treatment, the placebo-controlled trial is as free ofassumptions and reliance on external (extra-study) information as it is possible to be. Mostproblems in the design or conduct of a trial increase the likelihood of failure to demonstrate atreatment difference (and thereby establish efficacy), so that the trial contains built-in incentivesfor trial excellence. Even when the primary purpose of a trial is comparison of two active agentsor assessment of dose-response, the addition of a placebo provides an internal standard thatenhances the inferences that can be drawn from the other comparisons.16Placebo-controlled trials also provide the maximum ability to distinguish adverse effects causedby a drug from those resulting from underlying disease or intercurrent illness. Note, however,that when used to show similarity of two treatments, for example, to show that a drug does nothave a particular adverse effect by showing similar rates of the event in drug-treated and placebotreatedpatients, placebo-controlled trials have the same assay sensitivity problem as anyequivalence or non-inferiority trial (see section 1.5.1). To interpret the result, one must know thatif the study drug had caused an adverse event, the event would have been observed. Ordinarily,such a study should include an active control treatment that does cause the adverse event inquestion, but in some cases it may be possible to conclude that a study has assay sensitivity tosuch an effect by documenting historical sensitivity to adverse drug effects for a particular studydesign.5. Modifications of Design and Combinations with Other Controls ThatCan Resolve Ethical, Practical, or Inferential Issues (2.1.5)It is often possible to address the ethical or practical limitations of placebo-controlled trials byusing modified study designs that still retain the inferential advantages of these trials. Inaddition, placebo-controlled trials can be made more informative by including additionaltreatment groups, such as multiple doses of the test agent or a known active control treatment.a. Additional Control Groups (2.1.5.1)i. Three-arm Trial; Placebo and Active Control (2.1.5.1.1)As noted in section 1.5.1, three-arm trials including an active control as well as a placebo-controlgroup can readily assess whether a failure to distinguish test treatment from placebo impliesineffectiveness of the test treatment or is simply the result of a trial that lacked the ability toidentify an active drug. The comparison of placebo to standard drug in such a trial providesinternal evidence of assay sensitivity. It is possible to make the active groups larger than theplacebo group to improve the precision of the active drug comparison, if this is consideredimportant. This may also make the trial more acceptable to patients and investigators, as there isless chance of being randomized to placebo.ii. Additional Doses (2.1.5.1.2)Randomization to several fixed doses of the test drug in addition to placebo allows assessment ofdose-response and may be particularly useful in a comparative trial to ensure a fair comparison oftreatments (see ICH E4: Dose-Response Information to Support Drug Registration).iii. Factorial Designs (2.1.5.1.3)Factorial designs may be used to explore several doses of the investigational drug asmonotherapy and in combination with several doses of another agent proposed for use incombination with it. A single study of this type can define the properties of a wide array ofcombinations. Such studies are common in the evaluation of new antihypertensive therapies, but17can be considered in a variety of settings where more than one treatment is used simultaneously.For example, the independent additive effects of aspirin and streptokinase in preventing mortalityafter a heart attack were shown in such a trial.b. Other Modifications of Study Design (2.1.5.2)i. Add on Study, Placebo-Controlled; Replacement Study. (2.1.5.2.1)An add-on study is a placebo-controlled trial of a new agent conducted in people also receivingstandard treatment. Such studies are particularly important when available treatment is known todecrease mortality or irreversible morbidity, and when a non-inferiority trial with standardtreatment as the active control cannot be carried out or would be difficult to interpret (see section1.5). It is common to study anticancer, antiepileptic, and heart failure drugs this way. This designis useful only when standard treatment is not fully effective (which, however, is almost alwaysthe case), and it has the advantage of providing evidence of improved clinical outcomes (ratherthan mere non-inferiority). Efficacy is, of course, established by such studies only for thecombination treatment, and the dose in a monotherapy situation might be different from the dosefound to be effective in combination. In general, this approach is likely to succeed only when thenew and standard treatments possess different pharmacologic mechanisms, although there areexceptions. For example, combination treatments for people with AIDS may show a beneficialeffect of pharmacologically related drugs because of delays in development of resistance.A variation of this design that can sometimes give information on monotherapy, and that isparticularly applicable in the setting of chronic disease, is the replacement study, in which thenew drug or placebo is added by random assignment to conventional treatment given at aneffective dose and the conventional treatment is then withdrawn, usually by tapering. The abilityto maintain the subjects' baseline status is then observed in the drug and placebo groups usingpredefined success criteria. This approach has been used to study steroid-sparing substitutions insteroid-dependent patients, avoiding initial steroid withdrawal and the recrudescence ofsymptoms in a washout period. The approach has also been used to study antiepileptic drugmonotherapy.ii. Early Escape; Rescue Treatment (2.1.5.2.2)It is possible to design a study to plan for early escape from ineffective therapy. Early escaperefers to prompt removal of subjects whose clinical status worsens or fails to improve to adefined level (blood pressure not controlled by a prespecified time, seizure rate greater than someprescribed value, blood pressure rising to a certain level, angina frequency above a defined level,liver enzymes failing to normalize by a preset time in patients with hepatitis), who have a singleevent that treatment was intended to prevent (first recurrence of unstable angina, grand malseizure, paroxysmal supraventricular arrhythmia), or who otherwise require rescue treatment. Insuch cases, the need to change treatment becomes a study endpoint. The criteria for decidingwhether these endpoints have occurred should be well specified, and the timing of measurementsshould ensure that patients would not remain untreated with an active drug while their disease ispoorly controlled. The primary difficulty with this trial design is that it may give information18only on short-term effectiveness. The randomized withdrawal trial (see section 2.1.5.2.4),however, which can also incorporate early-escape features, can give information on long-termeffectiveness.iii. Limited Placebo Period (2.1.5.2.3)In a situation where long-term placebo treatment would not be acceptable, the use of a placebogroup for a short period at the beginning of an active control trial could establish assay sensitivity(at least for short-term effects). The trial would then continue without the placebo group.iv. Randomized Withdrawal (2.1.5.2.4)In a randomized withdrawal trial, subjects receiving a test treatment for a specified time arerandomly assigned to continued treatment with the test treatment or to placebo (i.e., withdrawalof active therapy). Subjects for such a trial could be derived from an organized open single-armstudy, from an existing clinical cohort (but usually with a protocol-specified wash-in phase toestablish the initial on-therapy baseline), from the active arm of a controlled trial, or from one orboth arms of an active control trial. Any difference that emerges between the group receivingcontinued treatment and the group randomized to placebo would demonstrate the effect of theactive treatment. The pre-randomization observation period on treatment can be of any length;this approach can therefore be used to study long-term persistence of effectiveness when longtermplacebo treatment would not be acceptable. The post-withdrawal observation period couldbe of fixed duration or could use early escape or time to event (e.g., relapse of depression)approaches. As with the early-escape design, careful attention should be paid to procedures formonitoring patients and assessing study endpoints to ensure that patients failing on an assignedtreatment are identified rapidly.The randomized withdrawal approach is useful in several situations. First, it may be suitable fordrugs that appear to resolve an episode of recurring illness (e.g., antidepressants), in which casethe withdrawal study is, in effect, a relapse-prevention study. Second, it may be used for drugsthat suppress a symptom or sign (chronic pain, hypertension, and angina), but where a long-termplacebo-controlled trial would be difficult; in this case, the study can establish long-term efficacy.Third, the design is particularly useful in determining how long a therapy should be continued(e.g., post-infarction treatments with a beta-blocker).The general advantage of randomized withdrawal designs, when used with an early-escapeendpoint, such as return of symptoms, is that the period of placebo exposure with poor responsethat a patient would have to undergo is short.This type of design can address dosing issues. After all patients have received an initial fixeddose, they could be randomly assigned in the withdrawal phase to several different doses (as wellas placebo), a particularly useful approach when there is reason to think the initial andmaintenance doses might be different, either on pharmacodynamic grounds or because there issubstantial accumulation of active drug resulting from a long half life of parent drug or activemetabolite. Note that the randomized withdrawal design could be used to assess dose-response19after an initial placebo-controlled titration study (See ICH E4). The titration study is an efficientdesign for establishing effectiveness, but does not give good dose-response information in manycases. The randomized withdrawal phase, with responders randomly assigned to several fixeddoses and placebo, will permit dose-response to be studied rigorously while allowing theefficiency of the titration design to be used in the initial phase of the trial.In using randomized withdrawal designs, it is important to appreciate the possibility ofwithdrawal phenomena, suggesting the wisdom of relatively slow tapering. A patient maydevelop tolerance to a drug such that no benefit is being accrued, but the drug’s withdrawal maylead to disease exacerbation, resulting in an erroneous conclusion of persisting efficacy. It is alsoimportant to realize that treatment effects observed in these trials may be larger than those seen inan unselected population because randomized withdrawal studies are enriched with respondersand exclude people who cannot tolerate the drug. This phenomenon results when the trialexplicitly includes only subjects who appear to have responded to the drug or includes onlypeople who have completed a previous phase of study (which is often an indicator of a goodresponse and always indicates ability to tolerate the drug). In the case of studies intended todetermine how long a therapy should be continued, such entry criteria provide the studypopulation and comparison of interest.v. Other Design Considerations (2.1.5.2.5)In any placebo-controlled study, unbalanced randomization (e.g., 2:1, study drug to placebo) mayenhance the safety database and may also make the study more attractive to patients and/orinvestigators.6. Advantages of Placebo-controlled Trials (2.1.6)a. Ability to Demonstrate Efficacy (2.1.6.1)Like other superiority trials, a placebo-controlled trial contains internal evidence of assaysensitivity. When a difference is demonstrated it is interpretable without reference to externalfindings.b. Measures Absolute Efficacy and Safety (2.1.6.2)The placebo-controlled trial measures the total pharmacologically mediated effect of treatment.In contrast, an active control trial or a dose-comparison trial measures the effect relative toanother treatment. The placebo-controlled trial also allows a distinction between adverse eventsdue to the drug and those due to the underlying disease or background noise. The absolute effectsize information is valuable in a three-group trial (test, placebo, active), even if the primarypurpose of the trial is the test versus active control comparison.c. Efficiency (2.1.6.3)20Placebo-controlled trials are efficient in that they can detect treatment effects with a smallersample size than any other type of concurrently controlled study.d. Minimizing the Effect of Subject and Investigator Expectations (2.1.6.4)Use of a blinded placebo control may decrease the amount of improvement resulting from subjector investigator expectations because both are aware that some subjects will receive no activedrug. This may increase the ability of the study to detect true drug effects.7. Disadvantages of Placebo-controlled Trials (2.1.7)a. Ethical Concerns (See Sections 2.1.3 and 2.1.4) (2.1.7.1)When effective therapy that is known to prevent death or irreversible morbidity exists for aparticular population, that population cannot usually be ethically studied in placebo-controlledtrials; the particular conditions and populations for which this is true may be controversial.Ethical concerns may also direct studies toward less ill subjects or toward examination ofshort-term endpoints when long-term outcomes are of greater interest. Where a placebocontrolledtrial is unethical and an active control trial would not be credible, it may be verydifficult to study new drugs at all. For example, it would not be considered ethical to carry out aplacebo-controlled trial of a thrombolytic agent in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Yetit would be difficult in the current environment to establish a valid non-inferiority margin basedon historical data because of the emergence of acute revascularization procedures that might alterthe size of the benefits of the thrombolytics. The designs described in section 2.1.5 may beuseful in some of these cases.b. Patient and Physician Practical Concerns (2.1.7.2)Physicians and/or patients may be reluctant to accept the possibility that the patient will beassigned to the placebo treatment, even if there is general agreement that withholding or delayingtreatment will not result in harm. Subjects who sense they are not improving may withdraw fromtreatment because they attribute lack of effect to having been treated with placebo, complicatingthe analysis of the study. With care, however, withdrawal for lack of effectiveness cansometimes be used as a study endpoint. Although this may provide some information on drugeffectiveness, such information is less precise than actual information on clinical status insubjects receiving their assigned treatment.c. Generalizability (2.1.7.3)It is sometimes argued that any controlled trial, but especially a placebo-controlled trial,represents an artificial environment that gives results different from true real world effectiveness.If study populations are unrepresentative in placebo-controlled trials because of ethical orpractical concerns, questions about the generalizability of study results can arise. For example,protocol, investigator, or patient choice from placebo-controlled trials may exclude patients withmore serious disease. In some cases, only a limited number of patients or centers may be willing21to participate in studies. Whether these concerns actually (as opposed to theoretically) limitgeneralizability has not been established.d. No Comparative Information (2.1.7.4)Placebo-controlled trials lacking an active control give little useful information aboutcomparative effectiveness, information that is of interest and importance in many circumstances.Such information cannot reliably be obtained from cross-study comparisons, as the conditions ofthe studies may have been quite different.B. No-treatment Concurrent Control (See Section 1.3.2) (2.2)The randomized no-treatment control is similar in its general properties and its advantages anddisadvantages to the placebo-controlled trial. Unlike the placebo-controlled trial, however, itcannot be fully blinded, and this can affect all aspects of the trial, including subject retention,patient management, and all aspects of observation (see section 1.2.2). This design is appropriatein circumstances where a placebo-controlled trial would be performed, except that blinding is notfeasible or practical. When this design is used, it is desirable to have critical decisions, such aseligibility and endpoint determination or changes in management, made by an observer blinded totreatment assignment. Decisions related to data analysis, such as inclusion of patients in analysissets, should also be made by individuals without access to treatment assignment. See ICH E9 forfurther discussion.C. Dose-response Concurrent Control (See Section 1.3.3) (2.3)1. Description (2.3.1)A dose-response study is one in which subjects are randomly assigned to two or more dosagegroups, with or without a placebo group. Dose-response studies are carried out to establish therelation between dose and efficacy and adverse effects and/or to demonstrate efficacy. The firstuse is considered in ICH E4; the use to demonstrate efficacy is the subject of this guidance.Evidence of efficacy could be based on significant differences in pair-wise comparisons betweendosage groups or between dosage groups and placebo, or on evidence of a significant positivetrend with increasing dose, even if no two groups are significantly different. In the latter case,however, further study may be needed to assess the effectiveness of the low doses. As noted inICH E9, the particular approach for the primary efficacy analysis should be prespecified.Studies in which the treatment groups vary in regimen raise many of the same considerations asdose-response trials. Since the use of regimen-controlled trials to establish efficacy isuncommon, the current discussion is focussed on dose-response trials.There are several advantages to inclusion of a placebo (zero-dose) group in a dose-responsestudy. First, it avoids studies that are uninterpretable because all doses produce similar effects sothat one cannot assess whether all doses are equally effective or equally ineffective. Second, theplacebo group permits an estimate of the total pharmacologically mediated effect of treatment,22although the estimate may not be very precise if the dosing groups are relatively small. Third, asthe drug-placebo difference is generally larger than inter-dose differences, use of placebo maypermit smaller sample sizes. The size of various dose groups need not be identical; e.g., largersamples could be used to give more precise information about the effect of smaller doses or beused to increase the power of the study to show a clear effect of what is expected to be theoptimal dose. Dose-response studies can include one or more doses of an active controltreatment. Randomized withdrawal designs can also assign subjects to multiple dosage levels.2. Ability to Minimize Bias (2.3.2)If the dose-response study is blinded, it shares with other randomized and blinded designs anability to minimize subject and investigator bias. When a drug has pharmacologic effects thatcould break the blind for some patients or investigators, it may be easier to preserve blinding in adose-response study than in a placebo-controlled trial. Masking treatments may necessitatemultiple dummies or preparation of several different doses that look alike.3. Ethical Issues (2.3.3)The ethical and practical concerns related to a dose-response study are similar to those affectingplacebo-controlled trials. Where there is therapy known to be effective in preventing death orirreversible morbidity, it is no more ethically acceptable to randomize deliberately to subeffectivecontrol therapy than it is to randomize to placebo. Where therapy is directed at less seriousconditions or where the toxicity of the therapy is substantial relative to its benefits, dose-responsestudies that use lower, potentially less effective and less toxic doses or placebo may be acceptableto patients and investigators.4. Usefulness of Dose-response Studies and Validity of Inference in ParticularSituations (2.3.4)In general, a blinded dose-response study is useful for the determination of efficacy and safety insituations where a placebo-controlled trial would be useful and has similar credibility (see section2.1.4).5. Modifications of Design and Combinations with Other Controls ThatCan Resolve Ethical, Practical, or Inferential Problems (2.3.5)In general, the sorts of modification made to placebo-controlled studies to mitigate ethical,practical, or inferential problems are also applicable to dose-response studies (see section 2.1.5).6. Advantages of Dose-response Trials (2.3.6)a. Efficiency (2.3.6.1)Although a comparison of a large, fully effective dose to placebo may be maximally efficient forshowing efficacy, this design may produce unacceptable toxicity and gives no dose-response23information. When the dose-response is monotonic, the dose-response trial is reasonablyefficient in showing efficacy and also yields dose-response information. If the optimallyeffective dose is not known, it may be more prudent to study a range of doses than to choose asingle dose that may prove to be suboptimal or to have unacceptable adverse effects.b. Possible Ethical Advantage (2.3.6.2)In some cases, notably those in which there is likely to be dose-related efficacy and dose-relatedimportant toxicity, the dose-response study may represent a difference-showing trial that can beethically or practically conducted, even where a placebo-controlled trial could not be, becausethere is reason for patients and investigators to accept lesser effectiveness in return for greatersafety.7. Disadvantages of Dose-response Study (2.3.7)A potential problem that should be recognized is that a positive dose-response trend (i.e., asignificant correlation between the dose and the efficacy outcome), without significant pair-wisedifferences, can establish efficacy (see 2.3.1), but may leave uncertainty as to which doses (otherthan the largest) are actually effective. Of course, a single-dose study poses a similar problemwith respect to doses below the one studied, giving no information at all about such doses.It should also be appreciated that it is not uncommon to show no difference between doses in adose-response study; if there is no placebo group this is usually an uninformative outcome.If the therapeutic range is not known at all, the design may be inefficient, as many patients maybe assigned to sub-therapeutic or supratherapeutic doses.Dose-response designs may be less efficient than placebo-controlled titration designs for showingthe presence of a drug effect; they do, however, in most cases provide better dose-responseinformation (see ICH E4).D. Active Control (See Section 1.3.4) (2.4)1. Description (2.4.1)An active control (positive control) trial is one in which an investigational drug is compared witha known active drug. Such trials are randomized and usually double blind. The most crucialdesign question is whether the trial is intended to show a difference between the two treatmentsor to show non-inferiority or equivalence. A sponsor intending to demonstrate effectiveness bymeans of a trial showing non-inferiority of the test drug to a standard agent needs to address theissue of the assay sensitivity of the trial, as discussed in section 1.5. In a non-inferiority orequivalence trial, the active control treatment needs to be of established efficacy at the dose usedand under the conditions of the study (see ICH E9: Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials). Ingeneral, this means it should be a drug acceptable in the region to which the studies will besubmitted for the same indication at the dose being studied. A superiority study favoring the test24drug, on the other hand, is readily interpretable as evidence of efficacy, even if the dose of activecontrol is too low or the active control is of uncertain benefit (but not if it could be harmful).Such a result, however--superiority in the trial of the test agent to the control--is interpretable astrue superiority of the test treatment to the control treatment only when the active control is usedin appropriate patients at an appropriate dose and schedule (see section 1.4.3). Lack ofappropriate use of the control treatment would also make the study unusable as a non-inferioritystudy, if superiority of the test drug is not shown, because assay sensitivity of the study would notbe ensured (see section 1.5.2).2. Ability to Minimize Bias (2.4.2)A randomized and blinded active control trial generally minimizes subject and investigator bias,but a note of caution is warranted. In a non-inferiority trial, investigators and subjects know thatall subjects are getting active drug, although they do not know which one. This could lead to atendency toward categorizing borderline cases as successes in partially subjective evaluations,e.g., in an antidepressant study, which could decrease observed treatment differences andincrease the likelihood that a finding of non-inferiority would not represent evidence ofeffectiveness.3. Ethical Issues (2.4.3)Active control trials are generally considered to pose fewer ethical and practical problems thanplacebo-controlled trials because all subjects receive active treatment. It should be appreciated,however, that subjects receiving a new treatment are not receiving standard therapy (just as aplacebo control group is not) and may be receiving an ineffective or harmful drug. This is animportant matter if the active control therapy is known to improve survival or decrease theoccurrence of irreversible morbidity, i.e. conditions in which a placebo or no treatment controlwould be unacceptable. There should therefore be a sound rationale for the test treatment. Ifthere is no strong reason to expect the new drug to be at least as good as the standard, an add-onstudy (see section 2.1.5.2.1) may be more appropriate, if the conditions allow such a design.4. Usefulness of Active Control Trials; Validity of Inference in ParticularSituations (2.4.4)When a new treatment shows an advantage over an active control, the study is readily interpretedas showing efficacy, just as any other superiority trial is, assuming that the active control is notactually harmful. When an active control trial is used to show efficacy by demonstrating noninferiority,there is the special consideration of assay sensitivity, which is considered above insection 1.5. The active control trial can also be used to assess comparative efficacy if assaysensitivity is established.255. Modifications of Design and Combinations with Other Controls That Can ResolveEthical, Practical, or Inferential Issues (2.4.5)As discussed earlier (section 2.1.5), active control trials can include a placebo group, multipledosegroups of the test drug, and/or other dose groups of the active control. Comparative doseresponsestudies, in which there are several doses of both test and active control, are typical inanalgesic trials. The doses in active control trials can be fixed or titrated, and both cross-over andparallel designs can be used. The assay sensitivity of a non-inferiority trial can sometimes besupported by a randomized placebo-controlled withdrawal phase at the end (see section 2.1.5.2.4)or by an initial short period of comparison to placebo (see section 2.1.5.2.3). Active controlsuperiority studies in selected populations (nonresponders to other therapy or to the activecontrol) can be very useful and are generally easy to interpret, although the results may not begeneralizable.6. Advantages of Active Control Trials (2.4.6)a. Ethical and Practical Advantages (2.4.6.1)The active control design, whether intended to show non-inferiority or equivalence or superiority,reduces ethical concerns that arise from failure to use drugs with documented important healthbenefits. It also addresses patient and physician concerns about failure to use documentedeffective therapy. Recruitment and IRB/IEC approval may be facilitated, and it may be possibleto study larger samples. There may be fewer withdrawals due to lack of effectiveness.b. Information Content (2.4.6.2)Where superiority to an active treatment is shown, active control studies are readily interpretableregarding evidence of efficacy. The larger sample sizes needed are sometimes more achievableand acceptable in active control trials and can provide more safety information. Active controltrials also can, if properly designed, provide information about relative efficacy.7. Disadvantages of Active Control Trials (2.4.7)a. Information Content (2.4.7.1)See section 1.5 for discussion of the problem of assay sensitivity and the ability of the trial tosupport an efficacy conclusion in non-inferiority or equivalence trials. Even when assaysensitivity is supported and the study is suitable for detecting efficacy, there is no directassessment of effect size, and there is also greater difficulty in quantitating safety outcomes.b. Large Sample Size (2.4.7.2)Generally, the non-inferiority margin to be excluded is chosen conservatively in order to bereasonably sure that the margin is not greater than the smallest effect size that the active controlwould reliably be expected to have. In addition, because there will usually be an intent to rule26out loss of more than some reasonable fraction (see section 1.5.1) of the control drug effect, a stillsmaller non-inferiority margin is often used. Because the choice of the margin will therefore beconservative, sample sizes may be very large. In an active control superiority trial, the expecteddifference between two drugs is always smaller than the expected difference between test drugand placebo, again leading to large sample sizes.E. External Control (Including Historical Control, See Section 1.3.5) (2.5)1. Description (2.5.1)An externally controlled trial is one in which the control group consists of patients who are notpart of the same randomized study as the group receiving the investigational agent; i.e., there isno concurrently randomized control group. The control group is thus not derived from exactly thesame population as the treated population. Usually, the control group is a well-documentedpopulation of patients observed at an earlier time (historical control), but it could be a group atanother institution observed contemporaneously, or even a group at the same institution butoutside the study. An external control study could be a superiority study (e.g. comparison withan untreated group) or a non-inferiority study. Sometimes certain patients from a larger externalexperience are selected as a control group on the basis of particular characteristics that makethem similar to the treatment group; there may even be an attempt to match particular control andtreated patients.In so-called baseline-controlled studies, the patient's state over time is compared with theirbaseline state. Although these studies are sometimes thought to use the patient as his owncontrol, they do not in fact have an internal control. Rather, changes from baseline are comparedwith an estimate of what would have happened to the patients in the absence of treatment with thetest drug. Both baseline-controlled trials and trials that use a more complicated sequential on-offon(drug, placebo, drug) design, but that do not include a concurrently randomized control group,are of this type. As noted, in these trials the observed changes from baseline or between studyperiods are always compared, at least implicitly, to some estimate of what would have happenedwithout the intervention. Such estimates are generally made on the basis of general knowledge,without reference to a specific control population. Although in some cases this is plainlyreasonable, e.g., when the effect is dramatic, occurs rapidly following treatment, and is unlikelyto have occurred spontaneously (e.g., general anesthesia, cardioversion, measurable tumorshrinkage), in most cases it is not so obvious and a specific historical experience should besought. Designers and analysts of such trials need to be aware of the limitations of this type ofstudy and should be prepared to justify its use.2. Ability to Minimize Bias (2.5.2)Inability to control bias is the major and well-recognized limitation of externally controlled trialsand is sufficient in many cases to make the design unsuitable. It is always difficult, and in manycases impossible, to establish comparability of the treatment and control groups and thus to fulfillthe major purpose of a control group (see section 1.2). The groups can be dissimilar with respectto a wide range of factors, other than use of the study treatment, that could affect outcome,27including demographic characteristics, diagnostic criteria, stage or severity of disease,concomitant treatments, and observational conditions (such as methods of assessing outcome,investigator expectations). Such dissimilarities can include important but unrecognizedprognostic factors that have not been measured. Blinding and randomization are not available tominimize bias when external controls are used. It is well documented that untreated historicalcontrolgroups tend to have worse outcomes than an apparently similarly chosen control group ina randomized study, possibly reflecting a selection bias. Control groups in a randomized studyneed to meet certain criteria to be entered into the study, criteria that are generally more stringentand identify a less sick population than is typical of external control groups. An external controlgroup is often identified retrospectively, leading to potential bias in its selection. A consequenceof the recognized inability to control bias is that the potential persuasiveness of findings fromexternally controlled trials depends on obtaining much more extreme levels of statisticalsignificance and much larger estimated differences between treatments than would be considerednecessary in concurrently controlled trials.The inability to control bias restricts use of the external control design to situations in which theeffect of treatment is dramatic and the usual course of the disease highly predictable. In addition,use of external controls should be limited to cases in which the endpoints are objective and theimpact of baseline and treatment variables on the endpoint is well characterized.As noted, the lack of randomization and blinding, and the resultant problems with lack ofassurance of comparability of test group and control group, make the possibility of substantialbias inherent in this design and impossible to quantitate. Nonetheless, some approaches to designand conduct of externally controlled trials could lead them to be more persuasive and potentiallyless biased. A control group should be chosen for which there is detailed information, including,where pertinent, individual patient data regarding demographics, baseline status, concomitanttherapy, and course on study. The control patients should be as similar as possible to thepopulation expected to receive the test drug in the study and should have been treated in a similarsetting and in a similar manner, except with respect to the study therapy. Study observationsshould use timing and methodology similar to those used in the control patients. To reduceselection bias, selection of the control group should be made before performing comparativeanalyses; this may not always be feasible, as outcomes from these control groups may have beenpublished. Any matching on selection criteria or adjustments made to account for populationdifferences should be specified prior to selection of the control and performance of the study.Where no obvious single optimal external control exists, it may be advisable to study multipleexternal controls, providing that the analytic plan specifies conservatively how each will be usedin drawing inferences (e.g., study group should be substantially superior to the most favorablecontrol to conclude efficacy). In some cases, it may be useful to have an independent set ofreviewers reassess endpoints in the control group and in the test group in a blinded manneraccording to common criteria.3. Ethical Issues (2.5.3)When a drug is intended to treat a serious illness for which there is no satisfactory treatment,especially if the new drug is seen as promising on the basis of theoretical considerations, animal28data, or early human experience, there may be understandable reluctance to perform acomparative study with a concurrent control group of patients who would not receive the newtreatment. At the same time, it is not responsible or ethical to carry out studies that have norealistic chance of credibly showing the efficacy of the treatment. It should be appreciated thatmany promising therapies have had less dramatic effects than expected or have shown noefficacy at all when tested in controlled trials. Investigators may, in these situations, be facedwith very difficult judgments. It may be tempting in exceptional cases to initiate an externallycontrolled trial, hoping for a convincingly dramatic effect, with a prompt switch to randomizedtrials if this does not materialize.Alternatively, and generally preferably, in dealing with serious illnesses for which there is nosatisfactory treatment, but where the course of the disease cannot be reliably predicted, even theearliest studies should be randomized. This is usually possible when studies are carried outbefore there is an impression that the therapy is effective. Studies can be monitored byindependent data monitoring committees so that dramatic benefit can be detected early. Theconcurrently controlled trial can detect extreme effects very rapidly and, in addition, can detectmodest, but still valuable, effects that would not be credibly demonstrated by an externallycontrolled trial.4. Usefulness of Externally Controlled Trials; Validity of Inference in ParticularSituations (2.5.4)An externally controlled trial should generally be considered only when prior belief in thesuperiority of the test therapy to all available alternatives is so strong that alternative designsappear unacceptable and the disease or condition to be treated has a well-documented, highlypredictable course. It is often possible, even in these cases, to use alternative, randomized,concurrently controlled designs (see section 2.1.5).Externally controlled trials are most likely to be persuasive when the study endpoint is objective,when the outcome on treatment is markedly different from that of the external control and a highlevel of statistical significance for the treatment-control comparison is attained, when thecovariates influencing outcome of the disease are well characterized, and when the controlclosely resembles the study group in all known relevant baseline, treatment (other than studydrug), and observational variables. Even in such cases, however, there are documented examplesof erroneous conclusions arising from such trials.When an external control trial is considered, appropriate attention to design and conduct mayhelp reduce bias (see section 2.5.2).5. Modifications of Design and Combinations with Other Controls That Can ResolveEthical, Practical or Inferential Problems (2.5.5)The external control design can incorporate elements of randomization and blinding through useof a randomized, placebo controlled withdrawal phase, often with early escape provisions, asdescribed earlier (see section 2.1.5.2.4). The results of the initial period of treatment, in which29subjects who appear to respond are identified and maintained on therapy, are thus validated by arigorous, largely assumption- and bias-free study.6. Advantages of Externally Controlled Trials (2.5.6)The main advantage of an externally controlled trial is that all patients can receive a promisingdrug, making the study more attractive to patients and physicians.The design has some potential efficiencies because all patients are exposed to test drug, ofparticular importance in rare diseases. However, despite the use of a single treatment group in anexternally controlled trial, the estimate of the external control group outcome always should bemade conservatively, possibly leading to a larger sample size than would be needed in a placebocontrolledtrial. Great caution (e.g., applying a more stringent significance level) is called forbecause there are likely to be both identified and unidentified or unmeasurable differencesbetween the treatment and control groups, often favoring treatment.7. Disadvantages of Externally Controlled Trials (2.5.7)The externally controlled study cannot be blinded and is subject to patient, observer, and analystbias; these are major disadvantages. It is possible to mitigate these problems to a degree, buteven the steps suggested in section 2.5.2 cannot resolve such problems fully, as treatmentassignment is not randomized and comparability of control and treatment groups at the start oftreatment, and comparability of treatment of patients during the trial, cannot be ensured or wellassessed. It is well documented that externally controlled trials tend to overestimate efficacy oftest therapies. It should be recognized that tests of statistical significance carried out in suchstudies are less reliable than in randomized trials.III. CHOOSING THE CONCURRENT CONTROL GROUP (3.0)Table 1 describes the usefulness of specific types of control groups, and Figure 1 provides adecision tree for choosing among different types of control groups. Although the table and figurefocus on the choice of control to demonstrate efficacy, some designs also allow comparisons oftest and control agents. The choice of control can be affected by the availability of therapies andby medical practices in specific regions.The potential usefulness of the principal types of control (placebo, active, and dose-response) inspecific situations and for specific purposes is shown in Table 1. The table should be used withthe text describing the details of specific circumstances in which potential usefulness can berealized. In all cases, it is presumed that studies are appropriately designed. External controls area case so distinct that they are not included in the table.In most cases, evidence of efficacy is most convincingly demonstrated by showing superiority toa concurrent control treatment. If a superiority trial is not feasible or is inappropriate for ethicalor practical reasons, and if a defined treatment effect of the active control is regularly seen (e.g.,30as it is for antibiotics in most situations), a non-inferiority or equivalence trial can be used andcan be persuasive.31Table 1. Usefulness of Specific Concurrent Control Types in Various SituationsType of ControlTrial Objective Placebo Active noninferiorityActiveSuperiorityDoseResponse(D/R)Placebo+ActivePlacebo+D/RActive+D/RPlacebo +Active +D/RMeasureAbsolute effectsizeY N N N Y Y N YShow existenceof effectY P Y Y Y Y Y YShow Dose-ResponserelationshipN N N Y N Y Y YComparetherapiesN P Y N Y N P YY=Yes, N=No, P=Possible, depending on whether there is historical evidence of sensitivity to drug effects32Figure 1: Choosing the Concurrent Control for Demonstrating EfficacyThis figure shows the basic logic for choosing the control group; the decision may depend on the available drugs or medical practices in the specificregion.Is there proven effective treatment?YES¯---- NO ----®Options· Placebo control (see 2.1), with designmodifications,1 if appropriate· Dose-response control (see 2.3)· Active control seeking to show superiority oftest drug to active control (see 2.4)· No-treatment control (see 2.2), with designmodifications,1 if appropriate· Any combination of above controls (see 1.3.6)Is the proven effective treatment lifesaving or known to prevent irreversiblemorbidity?----- YES ----®Options· Active control; superiority, or non-inferiority ifthere is historical evidence of sensitivity to drugeffect (see 1.5)· Placebo control with appropriate designmodifications1 (e.g., add-on study)· Dose-response control (limited cases)NO¯Is there historical evidence ofsensitivity to drug effects for anappropriately designed and conductedtrial (see section 1.5)---- NO ----® Options· Placebo control (see 2.1), with designmodifications1, if appropriate· Dose-response control (see 2.3)· Active control showing superiority to control· No treatment control (see 2.2), with designmodifications, if appropriate· Active and placebo controls (3-arm study; see2.1.5.1.1)33¯YES-----------------------------® Options· Placebo control (see 2.1), with designmodifications, if appropriate· Dose-response control· Active control showing superiority tocontrol· Active and placebo controls (3-arm study;see 2.1.5.1.1)· Active control non-inferiority (see 1.5)1 Add-on, replacement, early escape, brief placebo period, and randomized withdrawal (see section 2.1.5.2).




Guidance for IndustryE9 Statistical Principles for ClinicalTrialsU.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)September 1998ICHGuidance for IndustryE9 Statistical Principles for ClinicalTrialsAdditional copies are available from:Office of Training and CommunicationsDivision of Drug Information (HFD-240)Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER),5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857 (Tel) 301-827-4573http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htmorOffice of Communication, Training, and Manufacturers Assistance (HFM-40)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)1401 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852-1448http://www.fda.gov/cber/guidelines.htm; (Fax) 888-CBERFAX or 301-827-3844(Voice Information) 800-835-4709 or 301-827-1800U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)September 1998ICHiTABLE OF CONTENTSI. INTRODUCTION.......................................................................................................................................................1A. BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE (1.1) ...........................................................................................................................1B. SCOPE AND DIRECTION (1.2).....................................................................................................................................2II. CONSIDERATIONS FOR OVERALL CLINICAL DEVELOPMENT.................................................................4A. TRIAL CONTEXT (2.1)................................................................................................................................................4B. SCOPE OF TRIALS (2.2) .............................................................................................................................................6C. DESIGN TECHNIQUES TO AVOID BIAS (2.3).............................................................................................................10III. TRIAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS...................................................................................................................14A. DESIGN CONFIGURATION (3.1)................................................................................................................................14B. MULTICENTER TRIALS (3.2) ....................................................................................................................................16C. TYPE OF COMPARISON (3.3)....................................................................................................................................18D. GROUP SEQUENTIAL DESIGNS (3.4).........................................................................................................................21E. SAMPLE SIZE (3.5) ...................................................................................................................................................21F. DATA CAPTURE AND PROCESSING (3.6)...................................................................................................................23IV. TRIAL CONDUCT CONSIDERATIONS..............................................................................................................23A. TRIAL MONITORING AND INTERIM ANALYSIS (4.1) .................................................................................................23B. CHANGES IN INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA (4.2)........................................................................................24C. ACCRUAL RATES (4.3) ............................................................................................................................................24D. SAMPLE SIZE ADJUSTMENT (4.4) .............................................................................................................................24E. INTERIM ANALYSIS AND EARLY STOPPING (4.5) ......................................................................................................24F. ROLE OF INDEPENDENT DATA MONITORING COMMITTEE (IDMC) (4.6) ...............................................................26V. DATA ANALYSIS CONSIDERATIONS................................................................................................................27A. PRESPECIFICATION OF THE ANALYSIS (5.1) .............................................................................................................27B. ANALYSIS SETS (5.2) ..............................................................................................................................................27C. MISSING VALUES AND OUTLIERS (5.3)....................................................................................................................31D. DATA TRANSFORMATION (5.4)................................................................................................................................31E. ESTIMATION, CONFIDENCE INTERVALS, AND HYPOTHESIS TESTING (5.5) ..............................................................32F. ADJUSTMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE AND CONFIDENCE LEVELS (5.6).............................................................................33G. SUBGROUPS, INTERACTIONS, AND COVARIATES (5.7) .............................................................................................33H. INTEGRITY OF DATA AND COMPUTER SOFTWARE VALIDITY (5.8).............................................................................34VI. EVALUATION OF SAFETY AND TOLERABILITY.......................................................................................34A. SCOPE OF EVALUATION (6.1)...................................................................................................................................34B. CHOICE OF VARIABLES AND DATA COLLECTION (6.2) .............................................................................................34C. SET OF SUBJECTS TO BE EVALUATED AND PRESENTATION OF DATA (6.3) ...............................................................35D. STATISTICAL EVALUATION (6.4)..............................................................................................................................36E. INTEGRATED SUMMARY (6.5)...................................................................................................................................37VII. REPORTING.......................................................................................................................................................37A. EVALUATION AND REPORTING (7.1) ........................................................................................................................37B. SUMMARIZING THE CLINICAL DATABASE (7.2) .........................................................................................................39GLOSSARY (ANNEX 1) ...................................................................................................................................................411GUIDANCE FOR INDUSTRY1E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical TrialsI. INTRODUCTIONA. Background and Purpose (1.1) 2The efficacy and safety of medicinal products should be demonstrated by clinical trials thatfollow the guidance in E6 Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guidance adopted by theICH, May 1, 1996. The role of statistics in clinical trial design and analysis isacknowledged as essential in that ICH guidance. The proliferation of statistical research inthe area of clinical trials coupled with the critical role of clinical research in the drugapproval process and health care in general necessitate a succinct document on statisticalissues related to clinical trials. This guidance is written primarily to attempt to harmonizethe principles of statistical methodology applied to clinical trials for marketingapplications submitted in Europe, Japan and the United States.As a starting point, this guidance utilized the CPMP (Committee for Proprietary MedicinalProducts) Note for Guidance entitled Biostatistical Methodology in Clinical Trials inApplications for Marketing Authorizations for Medicinal Products (December 1994). Itwas also influenced by Guidelines on the Statistical Analysis of Clinical Studies (March1992) from the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare and the U.S. Food and DrugAdministration document entitled Guideline for the Format and Content of the Clinical1 This guidance was developed within the Expert Working Group (Efficacy) of the International Conference onHarmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) and has been subject toconsultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH process. This document has been endorsed by the ICHSteering Committee at Step 4 of the ICH process, February 1998. At Step 4 of the process, the final draft is recommended foradoption to the regulatory bodies of the European Union, Japan, and the United States. This guidance was published in theFederal Register on September 16, 1998 (63 FR 49583), and is applicable to drug and biological products.2 Arabic numbers reflect the organizational breakdown in the document endorsed by the ICH Steering Committee atStep 4 of the ICH process, February 1998.This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA's) current thinking on this topic. Itdoes not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.An alternative approach may be used if such approach satisfies the requirements of the applicablestatutes and regulations.2and Statistical Sections of a New Drug Application (July 1988). Some topics related tostatistical principles and methodology are also embedded within other ICH guidances,particularly those listed below. The specific guidance that contains related text will beidentified in various sections of this document.E1A The Extent of Population Exposure to Assess Clinical Safety (March 1995)E2A Clinical Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for ExpeditedReporting (March 1995)E2B Clinical Safety Data Management: Data Elements for Transmission of IndividualCase Safety Reports (January 1998)E2C Clinical Safety Data Management: Periodic Safety Update Reports for MarketedDrugs (November 1996)E3 Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (July 1996)E4 Dose-Response Information to Support Drug Registration (November 1994)E5 Ethnic Factors in the Acceptability of Foreign Clinical Data (June 1998)E6 Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guideline (April 1996)E7 Studies in Support of Special Populations: Geriatrics (August 1994)E8 General Considerations for Clinical Trials (December 1997E10 Choice of Control Group in Clinical Trials (September 1999)M1 Standardization of Medical Terminology for Regulatory Purposes (November1999)M3 Nonclinical Safety Studies for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials forPharmaceuticals (July 1997)This guidance is intended to give direction to sponsors in the design, conduct, analysis, andevaluation of clinical trials of an investigational product in the context of its overallclinical development. The document will also assist scientific experts charged withpreparing application summaries or assessing evidence of efficacy and safety, principallyfrom clinical trials in later phases of development.B. Scope and Direction (1.2)The focus of this guidance is on statistical principles. It does not address the use ofspecific statistical procedures or methods. Specific procedural steps to ensure thatprinciples are implemented properly are the responsibility of the sponsor. Integration ofdata across clinical trials is discussed, but is not a primary focus of this guidance.Selected principles and procedures related to data management or clinical trial monitoringactivities are covered in other ICH guidances and are not addressed here.This guidance should be of interest to individuals from a broad range of scientificdisciplines. However, it is assumed that the actual responsibility for all statistical workassociated with clinical trials will lie with an appropriately qualified and experiencedstatistician, as indicated in ICH E6. The role and responsibility of the trial statistician (seeGlossary), in collaboration with other clinical trial professionals, is to ensure thatstatistical principles are applied appropriately in clinical trials supporting drug3development. Thus, the trial statistician should have a combination of education/trainingand experience sufficient to implement the principles articulated in this guidance.For each clinical trial contributing to a marketing application, all important details of itsdesign and conduct and the principal features of its proposed statistical analysis should beclearly specified in a protocol written before the trial begins. The extent to which theprocedures in the protocol are followed and the primary analysis is planned a priori willcontribute to the degree of confidence in the final results and conclusions of the trial. Theprotocol and subsequent amendments should be approved by the responsible personnel,including the trial statistician. The trial statistician should ensure that the protocol and anyamendments cover all relevant statistical issues clearly and accurately, using technicalterminology as appropriate.The principles outlined in this guidance are primarily relevant to clinical trials conductedin the later phases of development, many of which are confirmatory trials of efficacy. Inaddition to efficacy, confirmatory trials may have as their primary variable a safetyvariable (e.g., an adverse event, a clinical laboratory variable, or an electrocardiographicmeasure) or a pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic variable (as in a confirmatorybioequivalence trial). Furthermore, some confirmatory findings may be derived from dataintegrated across trials, and selected principles in this guidance are applicable in thissituation. Finally, although the early phases of drug development consist mainly of clinicaltrials that are exploratory in nature, statistical principles are also relevant to these clinicaltrials. Hence, the substance of this document should be applied as far as possible to allphases of clinical development.Many of the principles delineated in this guidance deal with minimizing bias (seeGlossary) and maximizing precision. As used in this guidance, the term bias describes thesystematic tendency of any factors associated with the design, conduct, analysis, andinterpretation of the results of clinical trials to make the estimate of a treatment effect (seeGlossary) deviate from its true value. It is important to identify potential sources of bias ascompletely as possible so that attempts to limit such bias may be made. The presence ofbias may seriously compromise the ability to draw valid conclusions from clinical trials.Some sources of bias arise from the design of the trial, for example an assignment oftreatments such that subjects at lower risk are systematically assigned to one treatment.Other sources of bias arise during the conduct and analysis of a clinical trial. For example,protocol violations and exclusion of subjects from analysis based upon knowledge ofsubject outcomes are possible sources of bias that may affect the accurate assessment of thetreatment effect. Because bias can occur in subtle or unknown ways and its effect is notmeasurable directly, it is important to evaluate the robustness of the results and primaryconclusions of the trial. Robustness is a concept that refers to the sensitivity of the overallconclusions to various limitations of the data, assumptions, and analytic approaches to dataanalysis. Robustness implies that the treatment effect and primary conclusions of the trialare not substantially affected when analyses are carried out based on alternativeassumptions or analytic approaches. The interpretation of statistical measures of4uncertainty of the treatment effect and treatment comparisons should involve considerationof the potential contribution of bias to the p-value, confidence interval, or inference.Because the predominant approaches to the design and analysis of clinical trials have beenbased on frequentist statistical methods, the guidance largely refers to the use of frequentistmethods (see Glossary) when discussing hypothesis testing and/or confidence intervals.This should not be taken to imply that other approaches are not appropriate; the use ofBayesian (see Glossary) and other approaches may be considered when the reasons fortheir use are clear and when the resulting conclusions are sufficiently robust.II. CONSIDERATIONS FOR OVERALL CLINICAL DEVELOPMENTA. Trial Context (2.1)1. Development Plan (2.1.1)The broad aim of the process of clinical development of a new drug is to find outwhether there is a dose range and schedule at which the drug can be shown to besimultaneously safe and effective, to the extent that the risk-benefit relationship isacceptable. The particular subjects who may benefit from the drug, and the specificindications for its use, also need to be defined.Satisfying these broad aims usually requires an ordered program of clinical trials,each with its own specific objectives (see ICH E8). This should be specified in aclinical plan, or a series of plans, with appropriate decision points and flexibilityto allow modification as knowledge accumulates. A marketing application shouldclearly describe the main content of such plans, and the contribution made by eachtrial. Interpretation and assessment of the evidence from the total program of trialsinvolves synthesis of the evidence from the individual trials (see section VII.B).This is facilitated by ensuring that common standards are adopted for a number offeatures of the trials, such as dictionaries of medical terms, definition and timing ofthe main measurements, handling of protocol deviations, and so on. A statisticalsummary, overview, or meta-analysis (see Glossary) may be informative whenmedical questions are addressed in more than one trial. Where possible, thisshould be envisaged in the plan so that the relevant trials are clearly identified andany necessary common features of their designs are specified in advance. Othermajor statistical issues (if any) that are expected to affect a number of trials in acommon plan should be addressed in that plan.2. Confirmatory Trial (2.1.2)A confirmatory trial is an adequately controlled trial in which the hypotheses arestated in advance and evaluated. As a rule, confirmatory trials are necessary toprovide firm evidence of efficacy or safety. In such trials the key hypothesis ofinterest follows directly from the trial's primary objective, is always predefined,5and is the hypothesis that is subsequently tested when the trial is complete. In aconfirmatory trial, it is equally important to estimate with due precision the size ofthe effects attributable to the treatment of interest and to relate these effects to theirclinical significance.Confirmatory trials are intended to provide firm evidence in support of claims;hence adherence to protocols and standard operating procedures is particularlyimportant. Unavoidable changes should be explained and documented, and theireffect examined. A justification of the design of each such trial and of otherimportant statistical aspects, such as the principal features of the planned analysis,should be set out in the protocol. Each trial should address only a limited numberof questions.Firm evidence in support of claims requires that the results of the confirmatorytrials demonstrate that the investigational product under test has clinical benefits.The confirmatory trials should therefore be sufficient to answer each key clinicalquestion relevant to the efficacy or safety claim clearly and definitively. Inaddition, it is important that the basis for generalization (see Glossary) to theintended patient population is understood and explained; this may also influence thenumber and type (e.g., specialist or general practitioner) of centers and/or trialsneeded. The results of the confirmatory trial(s) should be robust. In somecircumstances, the weight of evidence from a single confirmatory trial may besufficient.3. Exploratory Trial (2.1.3)The rationale and design of confirmatory trials nearly always rests on earlierclinical work carried out in a series of exploratory studies. Like all clinical trials,these exploratory studies should have clear and precise objectives. However, incontrast to confirmatory trials, their objectives may not always lead to simple testsof predefined hypotheses. In addition, exploratory trials may sometimes require amore flexible approach to design so that changes can be made in response toaccumulating results. Their analysis may entail data exploration. Tests ofhypothesis may be carried out, but the choice of hypothesis may be data dependent.Such trials cannot be the basis of the formal proof of efficacy, although they maycontribute to the total body of relevant evidence.Any individual trial may have both confirmatory and exploratory aspects. Forexample, in most confirmatory trials the data are also subjected to exploratoryanalyses which serve as a basis for explaining or supporting their findings and forsuggesting further hypotheses for later research. The protocol should make a cleardistinction between the aspects of a trial which will be used for confirmatory proofand the aspects which will provide data for exploratory analysis.6B. Scope of Trials (2.2)1. Population (2.2.1)In the earlier phases of drug development, the choice of subjects for a clinical trialmay be heavily influenced by the wish to maximize the chance of observing specificclinical effects of interest. Hence they may come from a very narrow subgroup ofthe total patient population for which the drug may eventually be indicated.However, by the time the confirmatory trials are undertaken, the subjects in thetrials should more closely mirror the target population. In these trials, it isgenerally helpful to relax the inclusion and exclusion criteria as much as possiblewithin the target population while maintaining sufficient homogeneity to permitprecise estimation of treatment effects. No individual clinical trial can be expectedto be totally representative of future users because of the possible influences ofgeographical location, the time when it is conducted, the medical practices of theparticular investigator(s) and clinics, and so on. However, the influence of suchfactors should be reduced wherever possible and subsequently discussed during theinterpretation of the trial results.2. Primary and Secondary Variables (2.2.2)The primary variable (target variable, primary endpoint) should be the variablecapable of providing the most clinically relevant and convincing evidence directlyrelated to the primary objective of the trial. There should generally be only oneprimary variable. This will usually be an efficacy variable, because the primaryobjective of most confirmatory trials is to provide strong scientific evidenceregarding efficacy. Safety/tolerability may sometimes be the primary variable, andwill always be an important consideration. Measurements relating to quality of lifeand health economics are further potential primary variables. The selection of theprimary variable should reflect the accepted norms and standards in the relevantfield of research. The use of a reliable and validated variable with whichexperience has been gained either in earlier studies or in published literature isrecommended. There should be sufficient evidence that the primary variable canprovide a valid and reliable measure of some clinically relevant and importanttreatment benefit in the patient population described by the inclusion and exclusioncriteria. The primary variable should generally be the one used when estimatingthe sample size (see section III.E).In many cases, the approach to assessing subject outcome may not bestraightforward and should be carefully defined. For example, it is inadequate tospecify mortality as a primary variable without further clarification; mortality maybe assessed by comparing proportions alive at fixed points in time or by comparingoverall distributions of survival times over a specified interval. Another commonexample is a recurring event; the measure of treatment effect may again be a simpledichotomous variable (any occurrence during a specified interval), time to first7occurrence, rate of occurrence (events per time units of observation), and so on.The assessment of functional status over time in studying treatment for chronicdisease presents other challenges in selection of the primary variable. There aremany possible approaches, such as comparisons of the assessments done at thebeginning and end of the interval of observation, comparisons of slopes calculatedfrom all assessments throughout the interval, comparisons of the proportions ofsubjects exceeding or declining beyond a specified threshold, or comparisonsbased on methods for repeated measures data. To avoid multiplicity concernsarising from post hoc definitions, it is critical to specify in the protocol the precisedefinition of the primary variable as it will be used in the statistical analysis. Inaddition, the clinical relevance of the specific primary variable selected and thevalidity of the associated measurement procedures will generally need to beaddressed and justified in the protocol.The primary variable should be specified in the protocol, along with the rationalefor its selection. Redefinition of the primary variable after unblinding will almostalways be unacceptable, since the biases this introduces are difficult to assess.When the clinical effect defined by the primary objective is to be measured in morethan one way, the protocol should identify one of the measurements as the primaryvariable on the basis of clinical relevance, importance, objectivity, and/or otherrelevant characteristics, whenever such selection is feasible.Secondary variables are either supportive measurements related to the primaryobjective or measurements of effects related to the secondary objectives. Theirpredefinition in the protocol is also important, as well as an explanation of theirrelative importance and roles in interpretation of trial results. The number ofsecondary variables should be limited and should be related to the limited numberof questions to be answered in the trial.3. Composite Variables (2.2.3)If a single primary variable cannot be selected from multiple measurementsassociated with the primary objective, another useful strategy is to integrate orcombine the multiple measurements into a single or composite variable, using apredefined algorithm. Indeed, the primary variable sometimes arises as acombination of multiple clinical measurements (e.g., the rating scales used inarthritis, psychiatric disorders, and elsewhere). This approach addresses themultiplicity problem without requiring adjustment to the Type I error. The methodof combining the multiple measurements should be specified in the protocol, and aninterpretation of the resulting scale should be provided in terms of the size of aclinically relevant benefit. When a composite variable is used as a primaryvariable, the components of this variable may sometimes be analyzed separately,where clinically meaningful and validated. When a rating scale is used as aprimary variable, it is especially important to address factors such as content8validity (see Glossary), inter- and intrarater reliability (see Glossary), andresponsiveness for detecting changes in the severity of disease.4. Global Assessment Variables (2.2.4)In some cases, global assessment variables (see Glossary) are developed tomeasure the overall safety, overall efficacy, and/or overall usefulness of atreatment. This type of variable integrates objective variables and theinvestigator's overall impression about the state or change in the state of thesubject, and is usually a scale of ordered categorical ratings. Global assessmentsof overall efficacy are well established in some therapeutic areas, such asneurology and psychiatry.Global assessment variables generally have a subjective component. When aglobal assessment variable is used as a primary or secondary variable, fullerdetails of the scale should be included in the protocol with respect to:· The relevance of the scale to the primary objective of the trial;· The basis for the validity and reliability of the scale;· How to utilize the data collected on an individual subject to assign him/herto a unique category of the scale;· How to assign subjects with missing data to a unique category of the scale,or otherwise evaluate them.If objective variables are considered by the investigator when making a globalassessment, then those objective variables should be considered as additionalprimary or, at least, important secondary variables.Global assessment of usefulness integrates components of both benefit and risk andreflects the decisionmaking process of the treating physician, who must weighbenefit and risk in making product use decisions. A problem with global usefulnessvariables is that their use could in some cases lead to the result of two productsbeing declared equivalent despite having very different profiles of beneficial andadverse effects. For example, judging the global usefulness of a treatment asequivalent or superior to an alternative may mask the fact that it has little or noefficacy but fewer adverse effects. Therefore, it is not advisable to use a globalusefulness variable as a primary variable. If global usefulness is specified asprimary, it is important to consider specific efficacy and safety outcomes separatelyas additional primary variables.95. Multiple Primary Variables (2.2.5)It may sometimes be desirable to use more than one primary variable, each ofwhich (or a subset of which) could be sufficient to cover the range of effects of thetherapies. The planned manner of interpretation of this type of evidence should becarefully spelled out. It should be clear whether an impact on any of the variables,some minimum number of them, or all of them, would be considered necessary toachieve the trial objectives. The primary hypothesis or hypotheses and parametersof interest (e.g., mean, percentage, distribution) should be clearly stated withrespect to the primary variables identified, and the approach to statistical inferencedescribed. The effect on the Type I error should be explained because of thepotential for multiplicity problems (see section V.F); the method of controllingType I error should be given in the protocol. The extent of intercorrelation amongthe proposed primary variables may be considered in evaluating the impact onType I error. If the purpose of the trial is to demonstrate effects on all of thedesignated primary variables, then there is no need for adjustment of the Type Ierror, but the impact on Type II error and sample size should be carefullyconsidered.6. Surrogate Variables (2.2.6)When direct assessment of the clinical benefit to the subject through observingactual clinical efficacy is not practical, indirect criteria (surrogate variables — seeGlossary) may be considered. Commonly accepted surrogate variables are used ina number of indications where they are believed to be reliable predictors ofclinical benefit. There are two principal concerns with the introduction of anyproposed surrogate variable. First, it may not be a true predictor of the clinicaloutcome of interest. For example, it may measure treatment activity associatedwith one specific pharmacological mechanism, but may not provide full informationon the range of actions and ultimate effects of the treatment, whether positive ornegative. There have been many instances where treatments showing a highlypositive effect on a proposed surrogate have ultimately been shown to bedetrimental to the subjects' clinical outcome; conversely, there are cases oftreatments conferring clinical benefit without measurable impact on proposedsurrogates. Second, proposed surrogate variables may not yield a quantitativemeasure of clinical benefit that can be weighed directly against adverse effects.Statistical criteria for validating surrogate variables have been proposed but theexperience with their use is relatively limited. In practice, the strength of theevidence for surrogacy depends upon (i) the biological plausibility of therelationship, (ii) the demonstration in epidemiological studies of the prognosticvalue of the surrogate for the clinical outcome, and (iii) evidence from clinicaltrials that treatment effects on the surrogate correspond to effects on the clinicaloutcome. Relationships between clinical and surrogate variables for one productdo not necessarily apply to a product with a different mode of action for treating thesame disease.107. Categorized Variables (2.2.7)Dichotomization or other categorization of continuous or ordinal variables maysometimes be desirable. Criteria of success and response are common examplesof dichotomies that should be specified precisely in terms of, for example, aminimum percentage improvement (relative to baseline) in a continuous variable ora ranking categorized as at or above some threshold level (e.g., good) on an ordinalrating scale. The reduction of diastolic blood pressure below 90 mmHg is acommon dichotomization. Categorizations are most useful when they have clearclinical relevance. The criteria for categorization should be predefined andspecified in the protocol, as knowledge of trial results could easily bias the choiceof such criteria. Because categorization normally implies a loss of information, aconsequence will be a loss of power in the analysis; this should be accounted for inthe sample size calculation.C. Design Techniques to Avoid Bias (2.3)The most important design techniques for avoiding bias in clinical trials are blinding andrandomization, and these should be normal features of most controlled clinical trialsintended to be included in a marketing application. Most such trials follow a double-blindapproach in which treatments are prepacked in accordance with a suitable randomizationschedule, and supplied to the trial center(s) labeled only with the subject number and thetreatment period, so that no one involved in the conduct of the trial is aware of the specifictreatment allocated to any particular subject, not even as a code letter. This approach willbe assumed in section II.C.1 and most of section II.C.2, exceptions being considered at theend.Bias can also be reduced at the design stage by specifying procedures in the protocolaimed at minimizing any anticipated irregularities in trial conduct that might impair asatisfactory analysis, including various types of protocol violations, withdrawals andmissing values. The protocol should consider ways both to reduce the frequency of suchproblems and to handle the problems that do occur in the analysis of data.1. Blinding (2.3.1)Blinding or masking is intended to limit the occurrence of conscious andunconscious bias in the conduct and interpretation of a clinical trial arising from theinfluence that the knowledge of treatment may have on the recruitment andallocation of subjects, their subsequent care, the attitudes of subjects to thetreatments, the assessment of end-points, the handling of withdrawals, the exclusionof data from analysis, and so on. The essential aim is to prevent identification ofthe treatments until all such opportunities for bias have passed.11A double-blind trial is one in which neither the subject nor any of the investigatoror sponsor staff involved in the treatment or clinical evaluation of the subjects areaware of the treatment received. This includes anyone determining subjecteligibility, evaluating endpoints, or assessing compliance with the protocol. Thislevel of blinding is maintained throughout the conduct of the trial, and only whenthe data are cleaned to an acceptable level of quality will appropriate personnel beunblinded. If any of the sponsor staff who are not involved in the treatment orclinical evaluation of the subjects are required to be unblinded to the treatmentcode (e.g., bioanalytical scientists, auditors, those involved in serious adverseevent reporting), the sponsor should have adequate standard operating proceduresto guard against inappropriate dissemination of treatment codes. In a single-blindtrial the investigator and/or his staff are aware of the treatment but the subject isnot, or vice versa. In an open-label trial the identity of treatment is known to all.The double-blind trial is the optimal approach. This requires that the treatments tobe applied during the trial cannot be distinguished (by appearance, taste, etc.)either before or during administration, and that the blind is maintainedappropriately during the whole trial.Difficulties in achieving the double-blind ideal can arise: The treatments may be ofa completely different nature, for example, surgery and drug therapy; two drugs mayhave different formulations and, although they could be made indistinguishable bythe use of capsules, changing the formulation might also change the pharmacokineticand/or pharmacodynamic properties and hence necessitate that bioequivalence ofthe formulations be established; the daily pattern of administration of twotreatments may differ. One way of achieving double-blind conditions under thesecircumstances is to use a double-dummy (see Glossary) technique. This techniquemay sometimes force an administration scheme that is sufficiently unusual toinfluence adversely the motivation and compliance of the subjects. Ethicaldifficulties may also interfere with its use when, for example, it entails dummyoperative procedures. Nevertheless, extensive efforts should be made to overcomethese difficulties.The double-blind nature of some clinical trials may be partially compromised byapparent treatment induced effects. In such cases, blinding may be improved byblinding investigators and relevant sponsor staff to certain test results (e.g.,selected clinical laboratory measures). Similar approaches (see below) tominimizing bias in open-label trials should be considered in trials where unique orspecific treatment effects may lead to unblinding individual patients.If a double-blind trial is not feasible, then the single-blind option should beconsidered. In some cases only an open-label trial is practically or ethicallypossible. Single-blind and open-label trials provide additional flexibility, but it isparticularly important that the investigator's knowledge of the next treatment shouldnot influence the decision to enter the subject; this decision should precedeknowledge of the randomized treatment. For these trials, consideration should begiven to the use of a centralized randomization method, such as telephone12randomization, to administer the assignment of randomized treatment. In addition,clinical assessments should be made by medical staff who are not involved intreating the subjects and who remain blind to treatment. In single-blind or openlabeltrials every effort should be made to minimize the various known sources ofbias and primary variables should be as objective as possible. The reasons for thedegree of blinding adopted, as well as steps taken to minimize bias by other means,should be explained in the protocol. For example, the sponsor should haveadequate standard operating procedures to ensure that access to the treatment codeis appropriately restricted during the process of cleaning the database prior to itsrelease for analysis.Breaking the blind (for a single subject) should be considered only whenknowledge of the treatment assignment is deemed essential by the subject'sphysician for the subject's care. Any intentional or unintentional breaking of theblind should be reported and explained at the end of the trial, irrespective of thereason for its occurrence. The procedure and timing for revealing the treatmentassignments should be documented.In this document, the blind review (see Glossary) of data refers to the checking ofdata during the period of time between trial completion (the last observation on thelast subject) and the breaking of the blind.2. Randomization (2.3.2)Randomization introduces a deliberate element of chance into the assignment oftreatments to subjects in a clinical trial. During subsequent analysis of the trial data,it provides a sound statistical basis for the quantitative evaluation of the evidencerelating to treatment effects. It also tends to produce treatment groups in which thedistributions of prognostic factors, known and unknown, are similar. In combinationwith blinding, randomization helps to avoid possible bias in the selection andallocation of subjects arising from the predictability of treatment assignments.The randomization schedule of a clinical trial documents the random allocation oftreatments to subjects. In the simplest situation it is a sequential list of treatments(or treatment sequences in a crossover trial) or corresponding codes by subjectnumber. The logistics of some trials, such as those with a screening phase, maymake matters more complicated, but the unique preplanned assignment of treatment,or treatment sequence, to subject should be clear. Different trial designs willnecessitate different procedures for generating randomization schedules. Therandomization schedule should be reproducible (if the need arises).Although unrestricted randomization is an acceptable approach, some advantagescan generally be gained by randomizing subjects in blocks. This helps to increasethe comparability of the treatment groups, particularly when subject characteristicsmay change over time, as a result, for example, of changes in recruitment policy. Italso provides a better guarantee that the treatment groups will be of nearly equal13size. In crossover trials, it provides the means of obtaining balanced designs withtheir greater efficiency and easier interpretation. Care should be taken to chooseblock lengths that are sufficiently short to limit possible imbalance, but that are longenough to avoid predictability towards the end of the sequence in a block.Investigators and other relevant staff should generally be blind to the block length;the use of two or more block lengths, randomly selected for each block, canachieve the same purpose. (Theoretically, in a double-blind trial predictabilitydoes not matter, but the pharmacological effects of drugs may provide theopportunity for intelligent guesswork.)In multicenter trials (see Glossary), the randomization procedures should beorganized centrally. It is advisable to have a separate random scheme for eachcenter, i.e., to stratify by center or to allocate several whole blocks to each center.More generally, stratification by important prognostic factors measured at baseline(e.g., severity of disease, age, sex) may sometimes be valuable in order to promotebalanced allocation within strata; this has greater potential benefit in small trials.The use of more than two or three stratification factors is rarely necessary, is lesssuccessful at achieving balance, and is logistically troublesome. The use of adynamic allocation procedure (see below) may help to achieve balance across anumber of stratification factors simultaneously, provided the rest of the trialprocedures can be adjusted to accommodate an approach of this type. Factors onwhich randomization has been stratified should be accounted for later in theanalysis.The next subject to be randomized into a trial should always receive the treatmentcorresponding to the next free number in the appropriate randomization schedule (inthe respective stratum, if randomization is stratified). The appropriate number andassociated treatment for the next subject should only be allocated when entry of thatsubject to the randomized part of the trial has been confirmed. Details of therandomization that facilitate predictability (e.g., block length) should not becontained in the trial protocol. The randomization schedule itself should be filedsecurely by the sponsor or an independent party in a manner that ensures thatblindness is properly maintained throughout the trial. Access to the randomizationschedule during the trial should take into account the possibility that, in anemergency, the blind may have to be broken for any subject. The procedure to befollowed, the necessary documentation, and the subsequent treatment andassessment of the subject should all be described in the protocol.Dynamic allocation is an alternative procedure in which the allocation of treatmentto a subject is influenced by the current balance of allocated treatments and, in astratified trial, by the stratum to which the subject belongs and the balance withinthat stratum. Deterministic dynamic allocation procedures should be avoided andan appropriate element of randomization should be incorporated for each treatmentallocation. Every effort should be made to retain the double-blind status of the trial.For example, knowledge of the treatment code may be restricted to a central trialoffice from where the dynamic allocation is controlled, generally through telephone14contact. This in turn permits additional checks of eligibility criteria and establishesentry into the trial, features that can be valuable in certain types of multicentertrials. The usual system of prepacking and labeling drug supplies for double-blindtrials can then be followed, but the order of their use is no longer sequential. It isdesirable to use appropriate computer algorithms to keep personnel at the centraltrial office blind to the treatment code. The complexity of the logistics andpotential impact on the analysis should be carefully evaluated when consideringdynamic allocation.III. TRIAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONSA. Design Configuration (3.1)1. Parallel Group Design (3.1.1)The most common clinical trial design for confirmatory trials is the parallel groupdesign in which subjects are randomized to one of two or more arms, each armbeing allocated a different treatment. These treatments will include theinvestigational product at one or more doses, and one or more control treatments,such as placebo and/or an active comparator. The assumptions underlying thisdesign are less complex than for most other designs. However, as with otherdesigns, there may be additional features of the trial that complicate the analysisand interpretation (e.g., covariates, repeated measurements over time, interactionsbetween design factors, protocol violations, dropouts (see Glossary), andwithdrawals).2. Crossover Design (3.1.2)In the crossover design, each subject is randomized to a sequence of two or moretreatments and hence acts as his own control for treatment comparisons. Thissimple maneuver is attractive primarily because it reduces the number of subjectsand usually the number of assessments needed to achieve a specific power,sometimes to a marked extent. In the simplest 2x2 crossover design, each subjectreceives each of two treatments in randomized order in two successive treatmentperiods, often separated by a washout period. The most common extension of thisentails comparing n(>2) treatments in n periods, each subject receiving all ntreatments. Numerous variations exist, such as designs in which each subjectreceives a subset of n(>2) treatments, or designs in which treatments are repeatedwithin a subject.Crossover designs have a number of problems that can invalidate their results. Thechief difficulty concerns carryover, that is, the residual influence of treatments insubsequent treatment periods. In an additive model, the effect of unequal carryoverwill be to bias direct treatment comparisons. In the 2x2 design, the carryover effectcannot be statistically distinguished from the interaction between treatment and15period and the test for either of these effects lacks power because thecorresponding contrast is between subject. This problem is less acute in higherorder designs, but cannot be entirely dismissed.When the crossover design is used, it is therefore important to avoid carryover.This is best done by selective and careful use of the design on the basis of adequateknowledge of both the disease area and the new medication. The disease understudy should be chronic and stable. The relevant effects of the medication shoulddevelop fully within the treatment period. The washout periods should besufficiently long for complete reversibility of drug effect. The fact that theseconditions are likely to be met should be established in advance of the trial bymeans of prior information and data.There are additional problems that need careful attention in crossover trials. Themost notable of these are the complications of analysis and interpretation arisingfrom the loss of subjects. Also, the potential for carryover leads to difficulties inassigning adverse events that occur in later treatment periods to the appropriatetreatment. These and other issues are described in ICH E4. The crossover designshould generally be restricted to situations where losses of subjects from the trialare expected to be small.A common, and generally satisfactory, use of the 2x2 crossover design is todemonstrate the bioequivalence of two formulations of the same medication. In thisparticular application in healthy volunteers, carryover effects on the relevantpharmacokinetic variable are most unlikely to occur if the wash-out time betweenthe two periods is sufficiently long. However, it is still important to check thisassumption during analysis on the basis of the data obtained, for example, bydemonstrating that no drug is detectable at the start of each period.3. Factorial Designs (3.1.3)In a factorial design, two or more treatments are evaluated simultaneously throughthe use of varying combinations of the treatments. The simplest example is the 2x2factorial design in which subjects are randomly allocated to one of the fourpossible combinations of two treatments, A and B. These are: A alone; B alone;both A and B; neither A nor B. In many cases, this design is used for the specificpurpose of examining the interaction of A and B. The statistical test of interactionmay lack power to detect an interaction if the sample size was calculated based onthe test for main effects. This consideration is important when this design is usedfor examining the joint effects of A and B, in particular, if the treatments are likelyto be used together.Another important use of the factorial design is to establish the dose-responsecharacteristics of the simultaneous use of treatments C and D, especially when theefficacy of each monotherapy has been established at some dose in prior trials. Anumber, m, of doses of C is selected, usually including a zero dose (placebo), and a16similar number, n, of doses of D. The full design then consists of mxn treatmentgroups, each receiving a different combination of doses of C and D. The resultingestimate of the response surface may then be used to help identify an appropriatecombination of doses of C and D for clinical use (see ICH E4).In some cases, the 2x2 design may be used to make efficient use of clinical trialsubjects by evaluating the efficacy of the two treatments with the same number ofsubjects as would be required to evaluate the efficacy of either one alone. Thisstrategy has proved to be particularly valuable for very large mortality trials. Theefficiency and validity of this approach depends upon the absence of interactionbetween treatments A and B so that the effects of A and B on the primary efficacyvariables follow an additive model. Hence the effect of A is virtually identicalwhether or not it is additional to the effect of B. As for the crossover trial,evidence that this condition is likely to be met should be established in advance ofthe trial by means of prior information and data.B. Multicenter Trials (3.2)Multicenter trials are carried out for two main reasons. First, a multicenter trial is anaccepted way of evaluating a new medication more efficiently. Under some circumstances,it may present the only practical means of accruing sufficient subjects to satisfy the trialobjective within a reasonable timeframe. Multicenter trials of this nature may, inprinciple, be carried out at any stage of clinical development. They may have severalcenters with a large number of subjects per center or, in the case of a rare disease, theymay have a large number of centers with very few subjects per center.Second, a trial may be designed as a multicenter (and multi-investigator) trial primarily toprovide a better basis for the subsequent generalization of its findings. This arises from thepossibility of recruiting the subjects from a wider population and of administering themedication in a broader range of clinical settings, thus presenting an experimental situationthat is more typical of future use. In this case, the involvement of a number of investigatorsalso gives the potential for a wider range of clinical judgement concerning the value of themedication. Such a trial would be a confirmatory trial in the later phases of drugdevelopment and would be likely to involve a large number of investigators and centers. Itmight sometimes be conducted in a number of different countries to facilitategeneralizability (see Glossary) even further.If a multicenter trial is to be meaningfully interpreted and extrapolated, then the manner inwhich the protocol is implemented should be clear and similar at all centers. Furthermore,the usual sample size and power calculations depend upon the assumption that thedifferences between the compared treatments in the centers are unbiased estimates of thesame quantity. It is important to design the common protocol and to conduct the trial withthis background in mind. Procedures should be standardized as completely as possible.Variation of evaluation criteria and schemes can be reduced by investigator meetings, bythe training of personnel in advance of the trial, and by careful monitoring during the trial.17Good design should generally aim to achieve the same distribution of subjects to treatmentswithin each center and good management should maintain this design objective. Trials thatavoid excessive variation in the numbers of subjects per center and trials that avoid a fewvery small centers have advantages if it is later found necessary to take into account theheterogeneity of the treatment effect from center to center, because they reduce thedifferences between different weighted estimates of the treatment effect. (This point doesnot apply to trials in which all centers are very small and in which center does not featurein the analysis.) Failure to take these precautions, combined with doubts about thehomogeneity of the results, may, in severe cases, reduce the value of a multicenter trial tosuch a degree that it cannot be regarded as giving convincing evidence for the sponsor'sclaims.In the simplest multicenter trial, each investigator will be responsible for the subjectsrecruited at one hospital, so that center is identified uniquely by either investigator orhospital. In many trials, however, the situation is more complex. One investigator mayrecruit subjects from several hospitals; one investigator may represent a team of clinicians(subinvestigators) who all recruit subjects from their own clinics at one hospital or atseveral associated hospitals. Whenever there is room for doubt about the definition ofcenter in a statistical model, the statistical section of the protocol (see section V.A) shouldclearly define the term (e.g., by investigator, location or region) in the context of theparticular trial. In most instances, centers can be satisfactorily defined through theinvestigators. (ICH E6 provides relevant guidance in this respect.) In cases of doubt, theaim should be to define centers to achieve homogeneity in the important factors affectingthe measurements of the primary variables and the influence of the treatments. Any rulesfor combining centers in the analysis should be justified and specified prospectively in theprotocol where possible, but in any case decisions concerning this approach should alwaysbe taken blind to treatment, for example, at the time of the blind review.The statistical model to be adopted for the estimation and testing of treatment effects shouldbe described in the protocol. The main treatment effect may be investigated first using amodel that allows for center differences, but does not include a term for treatment-bycenterinteraction. If the treatment effect is homogeneous across centers, the routineinclusion of interaction terms in the model reduces the efficiency of the test for the maineffects. In the presence of true heterogeneity of treatment effects, the interpretation of themain treatment effect is controversial.In some trials, for example, some large mortality trials with very few subjects per center,there may be no reason to expect the centers to have any influence on the primary orsecondary variables because they are unlikely to represent influences of clinicalimportance. In other trials, it may be recognized from the start that the limited numbers ofsubjects per center will make it impracticable to include the center effects in the statisticalmodel. In these cases, it is not considered appropriate to include a term for center in themodel, and it is not necessary to stratify the randomization by center in this situation.If positive treatment effects are found in a trial with appreciable numbers of subjects percenter, there should generally be an exploration of the heterogeneity of treatment effects18across centers, as this may affect the generalizability of the conclusions. Markedheterogeneity may be identified by graphical display of the results of individual centers orby analytical methods, such as a significance test of the treatment-by-center interaction.When using such a statistical significance test, it is important to recognize that thisgenerally has low power in a trial designed to detect the main effect of treatment.If heterogeneity of treatment effects is found, this should be interpreted with care, andvigorous attempts should be made to find an explanation in terms of other features of trialmanagement or subject characteristics. Such an explanation will usually suggestappropriate further analysis and interpretation. In the absence of an explanation,heterogeneity of treatment effect, as evidenced, for example, by marked quantitativeinteractions (see Glossary) implies that alternative estimates of the treatment effect, givingdifferent weights to the centers, may be needed to substantiate the robustness of theestimates of treatment effect. It is even more important to understand the basis of anyheterogeneity characterized by marked qualitative interactions (see Glossary), and failureto find an explanation may necessitate further clinical trials before the treatment effect canbe reliably predicted.Up to this point, the discussion of multicenter trials has been based on the use of fixedeffect models. Mixed models may also be used to explore the heterogeneity of the treatmenteffect. These models consider center and treatment-by-center effects to be random and areespecially relevant when the number of sites is large.C. Type of Comparison (3.3)1. Trials to Show Superiority (3.3.1)Scientifically, efficacy is most convincingly established by demonstratingsuperiority to placebo in a placebo-controlled trial, by showing superiority to anactive control treatment, or by demonstrating a dose-response relationship. Thistype of trial is referred to as a superiority trial (see Glossary). In this guidancesuperiority trials are generally assumed, unless explicitly stated otherwise.For serious illnesses, when a therapeutic treatment that has been shown to beefficacious by superiority trial(s) exists, a placebo-controlled trial may beconsidered unethical. In that case the scientifically sound use of an active treatmentas a control should be considered. The appropriateness of placebo control versusactive control should be considered on a trial-by-trial basis.2. Trials to Show Equivalence or Noninferiority (3.3.2)In some cases, an investigational product is compared to a reference treatmentwithout the objective of showing superiority. This type of trial is divided into twomajor categories according to its objective; one is an equivalence trial (seeGlossary) and the other is a noninferiority trial (see Glossary).19Bioequivalence trials fall into the former category. In some situations, clinicalequivalence trials are also undertaken for other regulatory reasons such asdemonstrating the clinical equivalence of a generic product to the marketed productwhen the compound is not absorbed and therefore not present in the blood stream.Many active control trials are designed to show that the efficacy of aninvestigational product is no worse than that of the active comparator and, hence,fall into the latter category. Another possibility is a trial in which multiple doses ofthe investigational drug are compared with the recommended dose or multipledoses of the standard drug. The purpose of this design is simultaneously to show adose-response relationship for the investigational product and to compare theinvestigational product with the active control.Active control equivalence or noninferiority trials may also incorporate a placebo,thus pursuing multiple goals in one trial. For example, they may establishsuperiority to placebo and hence validate the trial design and simultaneouslyevaluate the degree of similarity of efficacy and safety to the active comparator.There are well-known difficulties associated with the use of the active controlequivalence (or noninferiority) trials that do not incorporate a placebo or do notuse multiple doses of the new drug. These relate to the implicit lack of anymeasure of internal validity (in contrast to superiority trials), thus making externalvalidation necessary. The equivalence (or noninferiority) trial is not conservativein nature, so that many flaws in the design or conduct of the trial will tend to biasthe results towards a conclusion of equivalence. For these reasons, the designfeatures of such trials should receive special attention and their conduct needsspecial care. For example, it is especially important to minimize the incidence ofviolations of the entry criteria, noncompliance, withdrawals, losses to follow-up,missing data, and other deviations from the protocol, and also to minimize theirimpact on the subsequent analyses.Active comparators should be chosen with care. An example of a suitable activecomparator would be a widely used therapy whose efficacy in the relevantindication has been clearly established and quantified in well-designed and welldocumentedsuperiority trial(s) and that can be reliably expected to exhibit similarefficacy in the contemplated active control trial. To this end, the new trial shouldhave the same important design features (primary variables, the dose of the activecomparator, eligibility criteria, and so on) as the previously conducted superioritytrials in which the active comparator clearly demonstrated clinically relevantefficacy, taking into account advances in medical or statistical practice relevant tothe new trial.It is vital that the protocol of a trial designed to demonstrate equivalence ornoninferiority contain a clear statement that this is its explicit intention. Anequivalence margin should be specified in the protocol; this margin is the largestdifference that can be judged as being clinically acceptable and should be smaller20than differences observed in superiority trials of the active comparator. For theactive control equivalence trial, both the upper and the lower equivalence marginsare needed, while only the lower margin is needed for the active controlnoninferiority trial. The choice of equivalence margins should be justifiedclinically.Statistical analysis is generally based on the use of confidence intervals (seesection V.E). For equivalence trials, two-sided confidence intervals should beused. Equivalence is inferred when the entire confidence interval falls within theequivalence margins. Operationally, this is equivalent to the method of using twosimultaneous one-sided tests to test the (composite) null hypothesis that thetreatment difference is outside the equivalence margins versus the (composite)alternative hypothesis that the treatment difference is within the margins. Becausethe two null hypotheses are disjoint, the Type I error is appropriately controlled.For noninferiority trials, a one-sided interval should be used. The confidenceinterval approach has a one-sided hypothesis test counterpart for testing the nullhypothesis that the treatment difference (investigational product minus control) isequal to the lower equivalence margin versus the alternative that the treatmentdifference is greater than the lower equivalence margin. The choice of Type I errorshould be a consideration separate from the use of a one-sided or two-sidedprocedure. Sample size calculations should be based on these methods (see sectionIII.E).Concluding equivalence or noninferiority based on observing a nonsignificant testresult of the null hypothesis that there is no difference between the investigationalproduct and the active comparator is considered inappropriate.There are also special issues in the choice of analysis sets. Subjects whowithdraw or drop out of the treatment group or the comparator group will tend tohave a lack of response; hence the results of using the full analysis set (seeGlossary) may be biased toward demonstrating equivalence (see section V.B.3).3. Trials to Show Dose-Response Relationship (3.3.3)How response is related to the dose of a new investigational product is a questionto which answers may be obtained in all phases of development and by a variety ofapproaches (see ICH E4). Dose-response trials may serve a number of objectives,among which the following are of particular importance: the confirmation ofefficacy; the investigation of the shape and location of the dose-response curve; theestimation of an appropriate starting dose; the identification of optimal strategiesfor individual dose adjustments; the determination of a maximal dose beyond whichadditional benefit would be unlikely to occur. These objectives should beaddressed using the data collected at a number of doses under investigation,including a placebo (zero dose) wherever appropriate. For this purpose, theapplication of procedures to estimate the relationship between dose and response,21including the construction of confidence intervals and the use of graphical methods,is as important as the use of statistical tests. The hypothesis tests that are used mayneed to be tailored to the natural ordering of doses or to particular questionsregarding the shape of the dose-response curve (e.g., monotonicity). The details ofthe planned statistical procedures should be given in the protocol.D. Group Sequential Designs (3.4)Group sequential designs are used to facilitate the conduct of interim analysis (see sectionIV.E and Glossary). While group sequential designs are not the only acceptable types ofdesigns permitting interim analysis, they are the most commonly applied because it is morepracticable to assess grouped subject outcomes at periodic intervals during the trial than ona continuous basis as data from each subject become available. The statistical methodsshould be fully specified in advance of the availability of information on treatmentoutcomes and subject treatment assignments (i.e., blind breaking, see section IV.E). Anindependent data monitoring committee (IDMC) (see Glossary) may be used to review orto conduct the interim analysis of data arising from a group sequential design (see sectionIV.F). While the design has been most widely and successfully used in large, long-termtrials of mortality or major nonfatal endpoints, its use is growing in other circumstances. Inparticular, it is recognized that safety must be monitored in all trials; therefore, the need forformal procedures to cover early stopping for safety reasons should always be considered.E. Sample Size (3.5)The number of subjects in a clinical trial should always be large enough to provide areliable answer to the questions addressed. This number is usually determined by theprimary objective of the trial. If the sample size is determined on some other basis, thenthis should be made clear and justified. For example, a trial sized on the basis of safetyquestions or requirements or important secondary objectives may need larger numbers ofsubjects than a trial sized on the basis of the primary efficacy question (see ICH E1A).Using the usual method for determining the appropriate sample size, the following itemsshould be specified: A primary variable; the test statistic; the null hypothesis; thealternative (working) hypothesis at the chosen dose(s) (embodying consideration of thetreatment difference to be detected or rejected at the dose and in the subject populationselected); the probability of erroneously rejecting the null hypothesis (the Type I error) andthe probability of erroneously failing to reject the null hypothesis (the Type II error); aswell as the approach to dealing with treatment withdrawals and protocol violations. Insome instances, the event rate is of primary interest for evaluating power, and assumptionsshould be made to extrapolate from the required number of events to the eventual samplesize for the trial.The method by which the sample size is calculated should be given in the protocol,together with the estimates of any quantities used in the calculations (such as variances,mean values, response rates, event rates, difference to be detected). The basis of these22estimates should also be given. It is important to investigate the sensitivity of the samplesize estimate to a variety of deviations from these assumptions and this may be facilitatedby providing a range of sample sizes appropriate for a reasonable range of deviations fromassumptions. In confirmatory trials, assumptions should normally be based on publisheddata or on the results of earlier trials. The treatment difference to be detected may bebased on a judgement concerning the minimal effect which has clinical relevance in themanagement of patients or on a judgement concerning the anticipated effect of the newtreatment, where this is larger. Conventionally, the probability of Type I error is set at 5percent or less or as dictated by any adjustments made necessary for multiplicityconsiderations; the precise choice may be influenced by the prior plausibility of thehypothesis under test and the desired impact of the results. The probability of Type II erroris conventionally set at 10 percent to 20 percent. It is in the sponsor's interest to keep thisfigure as low as feasible, especially in the case of trials that are difficult or impossible torepeat. Alternative values to the conventional levels of Type I and Type II error may beacceptable or even preferable in some cases.Sample size calculations should refer to the number of subjects required for the primaryanalysis. If this is the full analysis set, estimates of the effect size may need to be reducedcompared to the per protocol set (see Glossary). This is to allow for the dilution of thetreatment effect arising from the inclusion of data from patients who have withdrawn fromtreatment or whose compliance is poor. The assumptions about variability may also needto be revised.The sample size of an equivalence trial or a noninferiority trial (see section III.C.2) shouldnormally be based on the objective of obtaining a confidence interval for the treatmentdifference that shows that the treatments differ at most by a clinically acceptabledifference. When the power of an equivalence trial is assessed at a true difference of zero,then the sample size necessary to achieve this power is underestimated if the truedifference is not zero. When the power of a noninferiority trial is assessed at a zerodifference, then the sample size needed to achieve that power will be underestimated if theeffect of the investigational product is less than that of the active control. The choice of aclinically acceptable difference needs justification with respect to its meaning for futurepatients, and may be smaller than the "clinically relevant" difference referred to above inthe context of superiority trials designed to establish that a difference exists.The exact sample size in a group sequential trial cannot be fixed in advance because itdepends upon the play of chance in combination with the chosen stopping guideline and thetrue treatment difference. The design of the stopping guideline should take into account theconsequent distribution of the sample size, usually embodied in the expected and maximumsample sizes.When event rates are lower than anticipated or variability is larger than expected, methodsfor sample size reestimation are available without unblinding data or making treatmentcomparisons (see section IV.D).23F. Data Capture and Processing (3.6)The collection of data and transfer of data from the investigator to the sponsor can takeplace through a variety of media, including paper case record forms, remote sitemonitoring systems, medical computer systems, and electronic transfer. Whatever datacapture instrument is used, the form and content of the information collected should be infull accordance with the protocol and should be established in advance of the conduct ofthe clinical trial. It should focus on the data necessary to implement the planned analysis,including the context information (such as timing assessments relative to dosing) necessaryto confirm protocol compliance or identify important protocol deviations. Missing valuesshould be distinguishable from the value zero or characteristic absent.The process of data capture, through to database finalization, should be carried out inaccordance with good clinical practice (GCP) (see ICH E6, section 5). Specifically,timely and reliable processes for recording data and rectifying errors and omissions arenecessary to ensure delivery of a quality database and the achievement of the trialobjectives through the implementation of the planned analysis.IV. TRIAL CONDUCT CONSIDERATIONSA. Trial Monitoring and Interim Analysis (4.1)Careful conduct of a clinical trial according to the protocol has a major impact on thecredibility of the results (see ICH E6). Careful monitoring can ensure that difficulties arenoticed early and their occurrence or recurrence minimized.There are two distinct types of monitoring that generally characterize confirmatory clinicaltrials sponsored by the pharmaceutical industry. One type of monitoring concerns theoversight of the quality of the trial, while the other type involves breaking the blind to maketreatment comparisons (i.e., interim analysis). Both types of trial monitoring, in addition toentailing different staff responsibilities, involve access to different types of trial data andinformation, and thus different principles apply for the control of potential statistical andoperational bias.For the purpose of overseeing the quality of the trial, the checks involved in trialmonitoring may include whether the protocol is being followed, the acceptability of databeing accrued, the success of planned accrual targets, the appropriateness of the designassumptions, success in keeping patients in the trials, and so on (see sections IV.B toIV.D). This type of monitoring does not require access to information on comparativetreatment effects nor unblinding of data and, therefore, has no impact on Type I error. Themonitoring of a trial for this purpose is the responsibility of the sponsor (see ICH E6) andcan be carried out by the sponsor or an independent group selected by the sponsor. Theperiod for this type of monitoring usually starts with the selection of the trial sites and endswith the collection and cleaning of the last subject's data.24The other type of trial monitoring (interim analysis) involves the accruing of comparativetreatment results. Interim analysis requires unblinded (i.e., key breaking) access totreatment group assignment (actual treatment assignment or identification of groupassignment) and comparative treatment group summary information. Therefore, theprotocol (or appropriate amendments prior to a first analysis) should contain statisticalplans for the interim analysis to prevent certain types of bias. This is discussed in sectionsIV.E and IV.F.B. Changes in Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria (4.2)Inclusion and exclusion criteria should remain constant, as specified in the protocol,throughout the period of subject recruitment. Changes may occasionally be appropriate, forexample, in long-term trials, where growing medical knowledge either from outside thetrial or from interim analyses may suggest a change of entry criteria. Changes may alsoresult from the discovery by monitoring staff that regular violations of the entry criteria areoccurring or that seriously low recruitment rates are due to over-restrictive criteria.Changes should be made without breaking the blind and should always be described by aprotocol amendment. This amendment should cover any statistical consequences, such assample size adjustments arising from different event rates, or modifications to the plannedanalysis, such as stratifying the analysis according to modified inclusion/exclusion criteria.C. Accrual Rates (4.3)In trials with a long time-scale for the accrual of subjects, the rate of accrual should bemonitored. If it falls appreciably below the projected level, the reasons should beidentified and remedial actions taken to protect the power of the trial and alleviateconcerns about selective entry and other aspects of quality. In a multicenter trial, theseconsiderations apply to the individual centers.D. Sample Size Adjustment (4.4)In long-term trials there will usually be an opportunity to check the assumptions whichunderlie the original design and sample size calculations. This may be particularlyimportant if the trial specifications have been made on preliminary and/or uncertaininformation. An interim check conducted on the blinded data may reveal that overallresponse variances, event rates or survival experience are not as anticipated. A revisedsample size may then be calculated using suitably modified assumptions, and should bejustified and documented in a protocol amendment and in the clinical study report. Thesteps taken to preserve blindness and the consequences, if any, for the Type I error and thewidth of confidence intervals should be explained. The potential need for re-estimation ofthe sample size should be envisaged in the protocol whenever possible (see section III.E).E. Interim Analysis and Early Stopping (4.5)25An interim analysis is any analysis intended to compare treatment arms with respect toefficacy or safety at any time prior to formal completion of a trial. Because the number,methods, and consequences of these comparisons affect the interpretation of the trial, allinterim analyses should be carefully planned in advance and described in the protocol.Special circumstances may dictate the need for an interim analysis that was not defined atthe start of a trial. In these cases, a protocol amendment describing the interim analysisshould be completed prior to unblinded access to treatment comparison data. When aninterim analysis is planned with the intention of deciding whether or not to terminate a trial,this is usually accomplished by the use of a group sequential design that employs statisticalmonitoring schemes as guidelines (see section III.D). The goal of such an interim analysisis to stop the trial early if the superiority of the treatment under study is clearly established,if the demonstration of a relevant treatment difference has become unlikely, or ifunacceptable adverse effects are apparent. Generally, boundaries for monitoring efficacyrequire more evidence to terminate a trial early (i.e., they are more conservative) thanboundaries for monitoring safety. When the trial design and monitoring objective involvemultiple endpoints, then this aspect of multiplicity may also need to be taken into account.The protocol should describe the schedule of interim analyses or, at least, theconsiderations that will govern its generation, for example, if flexible alpha spendingfunction approaches are to be employed. Further details may be given in a protocolamendment before the time of the first interim analysis. The stopping guidelines and theirproperties should be clearly described in the protocol or amendments. The potentialeffects of early stopping on the analysis of other important variables should also beconsidered. This material should be written or approved by the data monitoring committee(see section IV.F), when the trial has one. Deviations from the planned procedure alwaysbear the potential of invalidating the trial results. If it becomes necessary to make changesto the trial, any consequent changes to the statistical procedures should be specified in anamendment to the protocol at the earliest opportunity, especially discussing the impact onany analysis and inferences that such changes may cause. The procedures selected shouldalways ensure that the overall probability of Type I error is controlled.The execution of an interim analysis should be a completely confidential process becauseunblinded data and results are potentially involved. All staff involved in the conduct of thetrial should remain blind to the results of such analyses, because of the possibility that theirattitudes to the trial will be modified and cause changes in the characteristics of patients tobe recruited or biases in treatment comparisons. This principle may be applied to allinvestigator staff and to staff employed by the sponsor except for those who are directlyinvolved in the execution of the interim analysis. Investigators should be informed onlyabout the decision to continue or to discontinue the trial, or to implement modifications totrial procedures.Most clinical trials intended to support the efficacy and safety of an investigational productshould proceed to full completion of planned sample size accrual; trials should be stoppedearly only for ethical reasons or if the power is no longer acceptable. However, it isrecognized that drug development plans involve the need for sponsor access tocomparative treatment data for a variety of reasons, such as planning other trials. It is also26recognized that only a subset of trials will involve the study of serious life-threateningoutcomes or mortality which may need sequential monitoring of accruing comparativetreatment effects for ethical reasons. In either of these situations, plans for interimstatistical analysis should be in place in the protocol or in protocol amendments prior tothe unblinded access to comparative treatment data in order to deal with the potentialstatistical and operational bias that may be introduced.For many clinical trials of investigational products, especially those that have major publichealth significance, the responsibility for monitoring comparisons of efficacy and/or safetyoutcomes should be assigned to an external independent group, often called an independentdata monitoring committee (IDMC), a data and safety monitoring board, or a datamonitoring committee, whose responsibilities should be clearly described.When a sponsor assumes the role of monitoring efficacy or safety comparisons andtherefore has access to unblinded comparative information, particular care should be takento protect the integrity of the trial and to manage and limit appropriately the sharing ofinformation. The sponsor should ensure and document that the internal monitoringcommittee has complied with written standard operating procedures and that minutes ofdecisionmaking meetings, including records of interim results, are maintained.Any interim analysis that is not planned appropriately (with or without the consequences ofstopping the trial early) may flaw the results of a trial and possibly weaken confidence inthe conclusions drawn. Therefore, such analyses should be avoided. If unplanned interimanalysis is conducted, the clinical study report should explain why it was necessary and thedegree to which blindness had to be broken, and provide an assessment of the potentialmagnitude of bias introduced and the impact on the interpretation of the results.F. Role of Independent Data Monitoring Committee (IDMC) (4.6)(see sections 1.25 and 5.5.2 of ICH E6)An IDMC may be established by the sponsor to assess at intervals the progress of aclinical trial, safety data, and critical efficacy variables and recommend to the sponsorwhether to continue, modify or terminate a trial. The IDMC should have written operatingprocedures and maintain records of all its meetings, including interim results; these shouldbe available for review when the trial is complete. The independence of the IDMC isintended to control the sharing of important comparative information and to protect theintegrity of the clinical trial from adverse impact resulting from access to trial information.The IDMC is a separate entity from an institutional review board (IRB) or an independentethics committee (IEC), and its composition should include clinical trial scientistsknowledgeable in the appropriate disciplines, including statistics.When there are sponsor representatives on the IDMC, their role should be clearly definedin the operating procedures of the committee (e.g., covering whether or not they can vote onkey issues). Since these sponsor staff would have access to unblinded information, the27procedures should also address the control of dissemination of interim trial results withinthe sponsor organization.V. DATA ANALYSIS CONSIDERATIONSA. Prespecification of the Analysis (5.1)When designing a clinical trial, the principal features of the eventual statistical analysis ofthe data should be described in the statistical section of the protocol. This section shouldinclude all the principal features of the proposed confirmatory analysis of the primaryvariable(s) and the way in which anticipated analysis problems will be handled. In thecase of exploratory trials, this section could describe more general principles anddirections.The statistical analysis plan (see Glossary) may be written as a separate document to becompleted after finalizing the protocol. In this document, a more technical and detailedelaboration of the principal features stated in the protocol may be included (see sectionVII.A). The plan may include detailed procedures for executing the statistical analysis ofthe primary and secondary variables and other data. The plan should be reviewed andpossibly updated as a result of the blind review of the data (see section VII.A fordefinition) and should be finalized before breaking the blind. Formal records should bekept of when the statistical analysis plan was finalized as well as when the blind wassubsequently broken.If the blind review suggests changes to the principal features stated in the protocol, theseshould be documented in a protocol amendment. Otherwise, it should suffice to update thestatistical analysis plan with the considerations suggested from the blind review. Onlyresults from analyses envisaged in the protocol (including amendments) can be regarded asconfirmatory.In the statistical section of the clinical study report, the statistical methodology should beclearly described including when in the clinical trial process methodology decisions weremade (see ICH E3).B. Analysis Sets (5.2)The set of subjects whose data are to be included in the main analyses should be defined inthe statistical section of the protocol. In addition, documentation for all subjects for whomtrial procedures (e.g., run-in period) were initiated may be useful. The content of thissubject documentation depends on detailed features of the particular trial, but at leastdemographic and baseline data on disease status should be collected whenever possible.If all subjects randomized into a clinical trial satisfied all entry criteria, followed all trialprocedures perfectly with no losses to follow-up, and provided complete data records,then the set of subjects to be included in the analysis would be self-evident. The design28and conduct of a trial should aim to approach this ideal as closely as possible, but, inpractice, it is doubtful if it can ever be fully achieved. Hence, the statistical section of theprotocol should address anticipated problems prospectively in terms of how these affectthe subjects and data to be analyzed. The protocol should also specify procedures aimed atminimizing any anticipated irregularities in study conduct that might impair a satisfactoryanalysis, including various types of protocol violations, withdrawals and missing values.The protocol should consider ways both to reduce the frequency of such problems and tohandle the problems that do occur in the analysis of data. Possible amendments to the wayin which the analysis will deal with protocol violations should be identified during theblind review. It is desirable to identify any important protocol violation with respect tothe time when it occurred, its cause, and its influence on the trial result. The frequency andtype of protocol violations, missing values, and other problems should be documented inthe clinical study report and their potential influence on the trial results should bedescribed (see ICH E3).Decisions concerning the analysis set should be guided by the following principles: (1) Tominimize bias and (2) to avoid inflation of Type I error.1. Full Analysis Set (5.2.1)The intention-to-treat (see Glossary) principle implies that the primary analysisshould include all randomized subjects. Compliance with this principle wouldnecessitate complete follow-up of all randomized subjects for study outcomes. Inpractice, this ideal may be difficult to achieve, for reasons to be described. In thisdocument, the term full analysis set is used to describe the analysis set which is ascomplete as possible and as close as possible to the intention-to-treat ideal ofincluding all randomized subjects. Preservation of the initial randomization inanalysis is important in preventing bias and in providing a secure foundation forstatistical tests. In many clinical trials, the use of the full analysis set provides aconservative strategy. Under many circumstances, it may also provide estimates oftreatment effects that are more likely to mirror those observed in subsequentpractice.There are a limited number of circumstances that might lead to excludingrandomized subjects from the full analysis set, including the failure to satisfy majorentry criteria (eligibility violations), the failure to take at least one dose of trialmedication, and the lack of any data post randomization. Such exclusions shouldalways be justified. Subjects who fail to satisfy an entry criterion may be excludedfrom the analysis without the possibility of introducing bias only under thefollowing circumstances:a. The entry criterion was measured prior to randomization. (i)b. The detection of the relevant eligibility violations can be madecompletely objectively. (ii)29c. All subjects receive equal scrutiny for eligibility violations. (Thismay be difficult to ensure in an open-label study, or even in adouble-blind study if the data are unblinded prior to this scrutiny,emphasizing the importance of the blind review.) (iii)d. All detected violations of the particular entry criterion are excluded.(iv)In some situations, it may be reasonable to eliminate from the set of all randomizedsubjects any subject who took no trial medication. The intention-to-treat principlewould be preserved despite the exclusion of these patients provided, for example,that the decision of whether or not to begin treatment could not be influenced byknowledge of the assigned treatment. In other situations it may be necessary toeliminate from the set of all randomized subjects any subject without data postrandomization. No analysis should be considered complete unless the potentialbiases arising from these specific exclusions, or any others, are addressed.When the full analysis set of subjects is used, violations of the protocol that occurafter randomization may have an impact on the data and conclusions, particularly iftheir occurrence is related to treatment assignment. In most respects, it isappropriate to include the data from such subjects in the analysis, consistent withthe intention-to-treat principle. Special problems arise in connection with subjectswithdrawn from treatment after receiving one or more doses who provide no dataafter this point, and subjects otherwise lost to follow-up, because failure to includethese subjects in the full analysis set may seriously undermine the approach.Measurements of primary variables made at the time of the loss to follow-up of asubject for any reason, or subsequently collected in accordance with the intendedschedule of assessments in the protocol, are valuable in this context; subsequentcollection is especially important in studies where the primary variable is mortalityor serious morbidity. The intention to collect data in this way should be describedin the protocol. Imputation techniques, ranging from the carrying forward of the lastobservation to the use of complex mathematical models, may also be used in anattempt to compensate for missing data. Other methods employed to ensure theavailability of measurements of primary variables for every subject in the fullanalysis set may require some assumptions about the subjects' outcomes or asimpler choice of outcome (e.g., success/failure). The use of any of these strategiesshould be described and justified in the statistical section of the protocol, and theassumptions underlying any mathematical models employed should be clearlyexplained. It is also important to demonstrate the robustness of the correspondingresults of analysis, especially when the strategy in question could itself lead tobiased estimates of treatment effects.Because of the unpredictability of some problems, it may sometimes be preferableto defer detailed consideration of the manner of dealing with irregularities until theblind review of the data at the end of the trial, and, if so, this should be stated in theprotocol.302. Per Protocol Set (5.2.2)The per protocol set of subjects, sometimes described as the valid cases, theefficacy sample, or the evaluable subjects sample, defines a subset of the subjectsin the full analysis set who are more compliant with the protocol and ischaracterized by criteria such as the following:a. The completion of a certain prespecified minimal exposure to thetreatment regimen (i)b. The availability of measurements of the primary variable(s) (ii)c. The absence of any major protocol violations, including theviolation of entry criteria (iii)The precise reasons for excluding subjects from the per protocol set should be fullydefined and documented before breaking the blind in a manner appropriate to thecircumstances of the specific trial.The use of the per protocol set may maximize the opportunity for a new treatment toshow additional efficacy in the analysis, and most closely reflects the scientificmodel underlying the protocol. However, the corresponding test of the hypothesisand estimate of the treatment effect may or may not be conservative, depending onthe trial. The bias, which may be severe, arises from the fact that adherence to thestudy protocol may be related to treatment and outcome.The problems that lead to the exclusion of subjects to create the per protocol set,and other protocol violations, should be fully identified and summarized. Relevantprotocol violations may include errors in treatment assignment, the use of excludedmedication, poor compliance, loss to followup, and missing data. It is goodpractice to assess the pattern of such problems among the treatment groups withrespect to frequency and time to occurrence.3. Roles of the Different Analysis Sets (5.2.3)In general, it is advantageous to demonstrate a lack of sensitivity of the principaltrial results to alternative choices of the set of subjects analyzed. In confirmatorytrials, it is usually appropriate to plan to conduct both an analysis of the fullanalysis set and a per protocol analysis, so that any differences between them canbe the subject of explicit discussion and interpretation. In some cases, it may bedesirable to plan further exploration of the sensitivity of conclusions to the choiceof the set of subjects analyzed. When the full analysis set and the per protocol setlead to essentially the same conclusions, confidence in the trial results is increased,bearing in mind, however, that the need to exclude a substantial proportion ofsubjects from the per protocol analysis throws some doubt on the overall validityof the trial.31The full analysis set and the per protocol set play different roles in superioritytrials (which seek to show the investigational product to be superior) and inequivalence or noninferiority trials (which seek to show the investigational productto be comparable, see section III.C.2). In superiority trials, the full analysis set isused in the primary analysis (apart from exceptional circumstances) because ittends to avoid over-optimistic estimates of efficacy resulting from a per protocolanalysis. This is because the noncompliers included in the full analysis set willgenerally diminish the estimated treatment effect. However, in an equivalence ornoninferiority trial, use of the full analysis set is generally not conservative and itsrole should be considered very carefully.C. Missing Values and Outliers (5.3)Missing values represent a potential source of bias in a clinical trial. Hence, every effortshould be undertaken to fulfill all the requirements of the protocol concerning thecollection and management of data. In reality, however, there will almost always be somemissing data. A trial may be regarded as valid, nonetheless, provided the methods ofdealing with missing values are sensible, particularly if those methods are predefined inthe protocol. Definition of methods may be refined by updating this aspect in the statisticalanalysis plan during the blind review. Unfortunately, no universally applicable methods ofhandling missing values can be recommended. An investigation should be madeconcerning the sensitivity of the results of analysis to the method of handling missingvalues, especially if the number of missing values is substantial.A similar approach should be adopted to exploring the influence of outliers, the statisticaldefinition of which is, to some extent, arbitrary. Clear identification of a particular valueas an outlier is most convincing when justified medically as well as statistically, and themedical context will then often define the appropriate action. Any outlier procedure set outin the protocol or the statistical analysis plan should be such as not to favor any treatmentgroup a priori. Once again, this aspect of the analysis can be usefully updated during blindreview. If no procedure for dealing with outliers was foreseen in the trial protocol, oneanalysis with the actual values and at least one other analysis eliminating or reducing theoutlier effect should be performed and differences between their results discussed.D. Data Transformation (5.4)The decision to transform key variables prior to analysis is best made during the design ofthe trial on the basis of similar data from earlier clinical trials. Transformations (e.g.,square root, logarithm) should be specified in the protocol and a rationale provided,especially for the primary variable(s). The general principles guiding the use oftransformations to ensure that the assumptions underlying the statistical methods are met areto be found in standard texts; conventions for particular variables have been developed in anumber of specific clinical areas. The decision on whether and how to transform avariable should be influenced by the preference for a scale that facilitates clinicalinterpretation.32Similar considerations apply to other derived variables, such as the use of change frombaseline, percentage change from baseline, the area under the curve of repeated measures,or the ratio of two different variables. Subsequent clinical interpretation should becarefully considered, and the derivation should be justified in the protocol. Closelyrelated points are made in section II.B.2.E. Estimation, Confidence Intervals, and Hypothesis Testing (5.5)The statistical section of the protocol should specify the hypotheses that are to be testedand/or the treatment effects that are to be estimated in order to satisfy the primaryobjectives of the trial. The statistical methods to be used to accomplish these tasks shouldbe described for the primary (and preferably the secondary) variables, and the underlyingstatistical model should be made clear. Estimates of treatment effects should beaccompanied by confidence intervals, whenever possible, and the way in which these willbe calculated should be identified. A description should be given of any intentions to usebaseline data to improve precision or to adjust estimates for potential baseline differences,for example, by means of analysis of covariance.It is important to clarify whether one- or two-sided tests of statistical significance will beused and, in particular, to justify prospectively the use of one-sided tests. If hypothesistests are not considered appropriate, then the alternative process for arriving at statisticalconclusions should be given. The issue of one-sided or two-sided approaches to inferenceis controversial, and a diversity of views can be found in the statistical literature. Theapproach of setting Type I errors for one-sided tests at half the conventional Type I errorused in two-sided tests is preferable in regulatory settings. This promotes consistency withthe two-sided confidence intervals that are generally appropriate for estimating thepossible size of the difference between two treatments.The particular statistical model chosen should reflect the current state of medical andstatistical knowledge about the variables to be analyzed as well as the statistical design ofthe trial. All effects to be fitted in the analysis (for example, in analysis of variancemodels) should be fully specified, and the manner, if any, in which this set of effects mightbe modified in response to preliminary results should be explained. The sameconsiderations apply to the set of covariates fitted in an analysis of covariance. (See alsosection V.G.) In the choice of statistical methods, due attention should be paid to thestatistical distribution of both primary and secondary variables. When making this choice(for example between parametric and nonparametric methods), it is important to bear inmind the need to provide statistical estimates of the size of treatment effects together withconfidence intervals (in addition to significance tests).The primary analysis of the primary variable should be clearly distinguished fromsupporting analyses of the primary or secondary variables. Within the statistical section ofthe protocol or the statistical analysis plan there should also be an outline of the way inwhich data other than the primary and secondary variables will be summarized and33reported. This should include a reference to any approaches adopted for the purpose ofachieving consistency of analysis across a range of trials, for example, for safety data.Modeling approaches that incorporate information on known pharmacological parameters,the extent of protocol compliance for individual subjects, or other biologically based datamay provide valuable insights into actual or potential efficacy, especially with regard toestimation of treatment effects. The assumptions underlying such models should always beclearly identified, and the limitations of any conclusions should be carefully described.F. Adjustment of Significance and Confidence Levels (5.6)When multiplicity is present, the usual frequentist approach to the analysis of clinical trialdata may necessitate an adjustment to the Type I error. Multiplicity may arise, forexample, from multiple primary variables (see section II.B.2), multiple comparisons oftreatments, repeated evaluation over time, and/or interim analyses (see section IV.E).Methods to avoid or reduce multiplicity are sometimes preferable when available, such asthe identification of the key primary variable (multiple variables), the choice of a criticaltreatment contrast (multiple comparisons), and the use of a summary measure such as areaunder the curve (repeated measures). In confirmatory analyses, any aspects of multiplicitythat remain after steps of this kind have been taken should be identified in the protocol;adjustment should always be considered and the details of any adjustment procedure or anexplanation of why adjustment is not thought to be necessary should be set out in theanalysis plan.G. Subgroups, Interactions, and Covariates (5.7)The primary variable(s) is often systematically related to other influences apart fromtreatment. For example, there may be relationships to covariates such as age and sex, orthere may be differences between specific subgroups of subjects, such as those treated atthe different centers of a multicenter trial. In some instances, an adjustment for theinfluence of covariates or for subgroup effects is an integral part of the planned analysisand hence should be set out in the protocol. Pretrial deliberations should identify thosecovariates and factors expected to have an important influence on the primary variable(s),and should consider how to account for these in the analysis to improve precision and tocompensate for any lack of balance between treatment groups. If one or more factors areused to stratify the design, it is appropriate to account for those factors in the analysis.When the potential value of an adjustment is in doubt, it is often advisable to nominate theunadjusted analysis as the one for primary attention, the adjusted analysis being supportive.Special attention should be paid to center effects and to the role of baseline measurementsof the primary variable. It is not advisable to adjust the main analyses for covariatesmeasured after randomization because they may be affected by the treatments.The treatment effect itself may also vary with subgroup or covariate. For example, theeffect may decrease with age or may be larger in a particular diagnostic category of34subjects. In some cases such interactions are anticipated or are of particular prior interest(e.g., geriatrics); hence a subgroup analysis or a statistical model including interactions ispart of the planned confirmatory analysis. In most cases, however, subgroup or interactionanalyses are exploratory and should be clearly identified as such; they should explore theuniformity of any treatment effects found overall. In general, such analyses should proceedfirst through the addition of interaction terms to the statistical model in question,complemented by additional exploratory analysis within relevant subgroups of subjects, orwithin strata defined by the covariates. When exploratory, these analyses should beinterpreted cautiously. Any conclusion of treatment efficacy (or lack thereof) or safetybased solely on exploratory subgroup analyses is unlikely to be accepted.H. Integrity of Data and Computer Software Validity (5.8)The credibility of the numerical results of the analysis depends on the quality and validityof the methods and software (both internally and externally written) used both for datamanagement (data entry, storage, verification, correction, and retrieval) and for processingthe data statistically. Data management activities should therefore be based on thoroughand effective standard operating procedures. The computer software used for datamanagement and statistical analysis should be reliable, and documentation of appropriatesoftware testing procedures should be available.VI. EVALUATION OF SAFETY AND TOLERABILITYA. Scope of Evaluation (6.1)In all clinical trials, evaluation of safety and tolerability (see Glossary) constitutes animportant element. In early phases this evaluation is mostly of an exploratory nature and isonly sensitive to frank expressions of toxicity, whereas in later phases the establishment ofthe safety and tolerability profile of a drug can be characterized more fully in largersamples of subjects. Later phase controlled trials represent an important means ofexploring, in an unbiased manner, any new potential adverse effects, even if such trialsgenerally lack power in this respect.Certain trials may be designed with the purpose of making specific claims aboutsuperiority or equivalence with regard to safety and tolerability compared to another drugor to another dose of the investigational drug. Such specific claims should be supported byrelevant evidence from confirmatory trials, similar to that necessary for correspondingefficacy claims.B. Choice of Variables and Data Collection (6.2)In any clinical trial, the methods and measurements chosen to evaluate the safety andtolerability of a drug will depend on a number of factors, including knowledge of theadverse effects of closely related drugs, information from nonclinical and earlier clinicaltrials and possible consequences of the pharmacodynamic/ pharmacokinetic properties of35the particular drug, the mode of administration, the type of subjects to be studied, and theduration of the trial. Laboratory tests concerning clinical chemistry and hematology, vitalsigns, and clinical adverse events (diseases, signs, and symptoms) usually form the mainbody of the safety and tolerability data. The occurrence of serious adverse events andtreatment discontinuations due to adverse events are particularly important to register (seeICH E2A and ICH E3).Furthermore, it is recommended that a consistent methodology be used for the datacollection and evaluation throughout a clinical trial program to facilitate the combining ofdata from different trials. The use of a common adverse event dictionary is particularlyimportant. This dictionary has a structure that makes it possible to summarize the adverseevent data on three different levels: System-organ class, preferred term, or included term(see Glossary). The preferred term is the level on which adverse events usually aresummarized, and preferred terms belonging to the same system-organ class could then bebrought together in the descriptive presentation of data (see ICH M1).C. Set of Subjects to Be Evaluated and Presentation of Data (6.3)For the overall safety and tolerability assessment, the set of subjects to be summarized isusually defined as those subjects who received at least one dose of the investigationaldrug. Safety and tolerability variables should be collected as comprehensively as possiblefrom these subjects, including type of adverse event, severity, onset, and duration (see ICHE2B). Additional safety and tolerability evaluations may be needed in specificsubpopulations, such as females, the elderly (see ICH E7), the severely ill, or those whohave a common concomitant treatment. These evaluations may need to address morespecific issues (see ICH E3).All safety and tolerability variables will need attention during evaluation, and the broadapproach should be indicated in the protocol. All adverse events should be reported,whether or not they are considered to be related to treatment. All available data in thestudy population should be accounted for in the evaluation. Definitions of measurementunits and reference ranges of laboratory variables should be made with care; if differentunits or different reference ranges appear in the same trial (e.g., if more than one laboratoryis involved), then measurements should be appropriately standardized to allow a unifiedevaluation. Use of a toxicity grading scale should be prespecified and justified.The incidence of a certain adverse event is usually expressed in the form of a proportionrelating number of subjects experiencing events to number of subjects at risk. However, itis not always self-evident how to assess incidence. For example, depending on thesituation, the number of exposed subjects or the extent of exposure (in person-years) couldbe considered for the denominator. Whether the purpose of the calculation is to estimate arisk or to make a comparison between treatment groups, it is important that the definition isgiven in the protocol. This is especially important if long-term treatment is planned and asubstantial proportion of treatment withdrawals or deaths are expected. For such36situations, survival analysis methods should be considered and cumulative adverse eventrates calculated in order to avoid the risk of underestimation.In situations when there is a substantial background noise of signs and symptoms (e.g., inpsychiatric trials), one should consider ways for accounting for this in the estimation ofrisk for different adverse events. One such method is to make use of the treatmentemergent (see Glossary) concept in which adverse events are recorded only if they emergeor worsen relative to pretreatment baseline.Other methods to reduce the effect of the background noise may also be appropriate, suchas ignoring adverse events of mild severity or requiring that an event should have beenobserved at repeated visits to qualify for inclusion in the numerator. Such methods shouldbe explained and justified in the protocol.D. Statistical Evaluation (6.4)The investigation of safety and tolerability is a multidimensional problem. Although somespecific adverse effects can usually be anticipated and specifically monitored for any drug,the range of possible adverse effects is very large, and new and unforeseeable effects arealways possible. Further, an adverse event experienced after a protocol violation, such asuse of an excluded medication, may introduce a bias. This background underlies thestatistical difficulties associated with the analytical evaluation of safety and tolerability ofdrugs, and means that conclusive information from confirmatory clinical trials is theexception rather than the rule.In most trials, the safety and tolerability implications are best addressed by applyingdescriptive statistical methods to the data, supplemented by calculation of confidenceintervals wherever this aids interpretation. It is also valuable to make use of graphicalpresentations in which patterns of adverse events are displayed both within treatmentgroups and within subjects.The calculation of p-values is sometimes useful, either as an aid to evaluating a specificdifference of interest or as a flagging device applied to a large number of safety andtolerability variables to highlight differences worthy of further attention. This isparticularly useful for laboratory data, which otherwise can be difficult to summarizeappropriately. It is recommended that laboratory data be subjected to both a quantitativeanalysis (e.g., evaluation of treatment means) and a qualitative analysis where counting ofnumbers above or below certain thresholds are calculated.If hypothesis tests are used, statistical adjustments for multiplicity to quantify the Type Ierror are appropriate, but the Type II error is usually of more concern. Care should betaken when interpreting putative statistically significant findings when there is nomultiplicity adjustment.37In the majority of trials, investigators are seeking to establish that there are no clinicallyunacceptable differences in safety and tolerability compared with either a comparator drugor a placebo. As is the case for noninferiority or equivalence evaluation of efficacy, theuse of confidence intervals is preferred to hypothesis testing in this situation. In this way,the considerable imprecision often arising from low frequencies of occurrence is clearlydemonstrated.E. Integrated Summary (6.5)The safety and tolerability properties of a drug are commonly summarized across trialscontinuously during an investigational product's development and, in particular, at the timeof a marketing application. The usefulness of this summary, however, is dependent onadequate and well-controlled individual trials with high data quality.The overall usefulness of a drug is always a question of balance between risk and benefit.In a single trial, such a perspective could also be considered even if the assessment ofrisk/benefit usually is performed in the summary of the entire clinical trial program (seesection VII.B.2).For more details on the reporting of safety and tolerability, see section 12 of ICH E3.VII. REPORTINGA. Evaluation and Reporting (7.1)As stated in the introduction, the structure and content of clinical study reports is thesubject of ICH E3. That ICH guidance fully covers the reporting of statistical work,appropriately integrated with clinical and other material. The current section is thereforerelatively brief.During the planning phase of a trial, the principal features of the analysis should have beenspecified in the protocol as described in section V. When the conduct of the trial is overand the data are assembled and available for preliminary inspection, it is valuable to carryout the blind review of the planned analysis also described in section V. This pre-analysisreview, blinded to treatment, should cover, for example, decisions concerning theexclusion of subjects or data from the analysis sets, the checking of possibletransformations and definitions of outliers, the addition to the model of importantcovariates identified in other recent research, and the reconsideration of the use ofparametric or nonparametric methods. Decisions made at this time should be described inthe report and should be distinguished from those made after the statistician has had accessto the treatment codes, as blind decisions will generally introduce less potential for bias.Statisticians or other staff involved in unblinded interim analysis should not participate inthe blind review or in making modifications to the statistical analysis plan. When theblinding is compromised by the possibility that treatment-induced effects may be apparentin the data, special care will be needed for the blind review.38Many of the more detailed aspects of presentation and tabulation should be finalized at orabout the time of the blind review so that, by the time of the actual analysis, full plans existfor all its aspects including subject selection, data selection and modification, datasummary and tabulation, estimation, and hypothesis testing. Once data validation iscomplete, the analysis should proceed according to the predefined plans; the more theseplans are adhered to, the greater the credibility of the results. Particular attention shouldbe paid to any differences between the planned analysis and the actual analysis asdescribed in the protocol, the protocol amendments, or the updated statistical analysis planbased on a blind review of data. A careful explanation should be provided for deviationsfrom the planned analysis.All subjects who entered the trial should be accounted for in the report, whether or not theyare included in the analysis. All reasons for exclusion from analysis should bedocumented; for any subject included in the full analysis set but not in the per protocol set,the reasons for exclusion from the latter should also be documented. Similarly, for allsubjects included in an analysis set, the measurements of all important variables should beaccounted for at all relevant time-points.The effect of all losses of subjects or data, withdrawals from treatment, and major protocolviolations on the main analyses of the primary variable(s) should be considered carefully.Subjects lost to followup, withdrawn from treatment, or with a severe protocol violationshould be identified and a descriptive analysis of them provided, including the reasons fortheir loss and its relationship to treatment and outcome.Descriptive statistics form an indispensable part of reports. Suitable tables and/orgraphical presentations should illustrate clearly the important features of the primary andsecondary variables and of key prognostic and demographic variables. The results of themain analyses relating to the objectives of the trial should be the subject of particularlycareful descriptive presentation. When reporting the results of significance tests, precisep-values (e.g., p=0.034) should be reported rather than making exclusive reference tocritical values.Although the primary goal of the analysis of a clinical trial should be to answer thequestions posed by its main objectives, new questions based on the observed data maywell emerge during the unblinded analysis. Additional and perhaps complex statisticalanalysis may be the consequence. This additional work should be strictly distinguished inthe report from work which was planned in the protocol.The play of chance may lead to unforeseen imbalances between the treatment groups interms of baseline measurements not predefined as covariates in the planned analysis buthaving some prognostic importance nevertheless. This is best dealt with by showing that anadditional analysis which accounts for these imbalances reaches essentially the sameconclusions as the planned analysis. If this is not the case, the effect of the imbalances onthe conclusions should be discussed.39In general, sparing use should be made of unplanned analyses. Such analyses are oftencarried out when it is thought that the treatment effect may vary according to some otherfactor or factors. An attempt may then be made to identify subgroups of subjects for whomthe effect is particularly beneficial. The potential dangers of over-interpretation ofunplanned subgroup analyses are well known (see also section V.G) and should becarefully avoided. Although similar problems of interpretation arise if a treatment appearsto have no benefit or an adverse effect in a subgroup of subjects, such possibilities shouldbe properly assessed and should therefore be reported.Finally, statistical judgement should be brought to bear on the analysis, interpretation andpresentation of the results of a clinical trial. To this end, the trial statistician should be amember of the team responsible for the clinical study report and should approve theclinical report.B. Summarizing the Clinical Database (7.2)An overall summary and synthesis of the evidence on safety and efficacy from all thereported clinical trials is required for a marketing application (expert report in EU,integrated summary reports in the United States, gaiyou in Japan). This may beaccompanied, when appropriate, by a statistical combination of results.Within the summary a number of areas of specific statistical interest arise: Describing thedemography and clinical features of the population treated during the course of the clinicaltrial program; addressing the key questions of efficacy by considering the results of therelevant (usually controlled) trials and highlighting the degree to which they reinforce orcontradict each other; summarizing the safety information available from the combineddatabase of all the trials whose results contribute to the marketing application; andidentifying potential safety issues. During the design of a clinical program, carefulattention should be paid to the uniform definition and collection of measurements whichwill facilitate subsequent interpretation of the series of trials, particularly if they are likelyto be combined across trials. A common dictionary for recording the details ofmedication, medical history and adverse events should be selected and used. A commondefinition of the primary and secondary variables is nearly always worthwhile and isessential for meta-analysis. The manner of measuring key efficacy variables, the timing ofassessments relative to randomization/entry, the handling of protocol violators anddeviators, and perhaps the definition of prognostic factors should all be kept compatibleunless there are valid reasons not to do so.Any statistical procedures used to combine data across trials should be described in detail.Attention should be paid to the possibility of bias associated with the selection of trials, tothe homogeneity of their results, and to the proper modelling of the various sources ofvariation. The sensitivity of conclusions to the assumptions and selections made should beexplored.401. Efficacy Data (7.2.1)Individual clinical trials should always be large enough to satisfy their objectives.Additional valuable information may also be gained by summarizing a series ofclinical trials that address essentially identical key efficacy questions. The mainresults of such a set of trials should be presented in an identical form to permitcomparison, usually in tables or graphs that focus on estimates plus confidencelimits. The use of meta-analytic techniques to combine these estimates is often auseful addition because it allows a more precise overall estimate of the size of thetreatment effects to be generated and provides a complete and concise summary ofthe results of the trials. Under exceptional circumstances, a meta-analytic approachmay also be the most appropriate way, or the only way, of providing sufficientoverall evidence of efficacy via an overall hypothesis test. When used for thispurpose, the meta-analysis should have its own prospectively written protocol.2. Safety Data (7.2.2)In summarizing safety data, it is important to examine the safety database thoroughlyfor any indications of potential toxicity and to follow up any indications by lookingfor an associated supportive pattern of observations. The combination of the safetydata from all human exposure to the drug provides an important source ofinformation because its larger sample size provides the best chance of detecting therarer adverse events and, perhaps, of estimating their approximate incidence.However, incidence data from this database are difficult to evaluate because of thelack of a comparator group, and data from comparative trials are especiallyvaluable in overcoming this difficulty. The results from trials which use a commoncomparator (placebo or specific active comparator) should be combined andpresented separately for each comparator providing sufficient data.All indications of potential toxicity arising from exploration of the data should bereported. The evaluation of the reality of these potential adverse effects shouldtake into account the issue of multiplicity arising from the numerous comparisonsmade. The evaluation should also make appropriate use of survival analysismethods to exploit the potential relationship of the incidence of adverse events toduration of exposure and/or followup. The risks associated with identified adverseeffects should be appropriately quantified to allow a proper assessment of therisk/benefit relationship.41GLOSSARY (Annex 1)Bayesian approaches: Approaches to data analysis that provide a posterior probabilitydistribution for some parameter (e.g., treatment effect), derived from the observed data and a priorprobability distribution for the parameter. The posterior distribution is then used as the basis forstatistical inference.Bias (statistical and operational): The systematic tendency of any factors associated with thedesign, conduct, analysis and evaluation of the results of a clinical trial to make the estimate of atreatment effect deviate from its true value. Bias introduced through deviations in conduct isreferred to as operational bias. The other sources of bias listed above are referred to asstatistical bias.Blind review: The checking and assessment of data during the period of time between trialcompletion (the last observation on the last subject) and the breaking of the blind, for the purposeof finalizing the planned analysis.Content validity: The extent to which a variable (e.g., a rating scale) measures what it issupposed to measure.Double dummy: A technique for retaining the blind when administering supplies in a clinicaltrial, when the two treatments cannot be made identical. Supplies are prepared for Treatment A(active and indistinguishable placebo) and for Treatment B (active and indistinguishable placebo).Subjects then take two sets of treatment; either A (active) and B (placebo), or A (placebo) and B(active).Dropout: A subject in a clinical trial who for any reason fails to continue in the trial until the lastvisit required of him/her by the study protocol.Equivalence trial: A trial with the primary objective of showing that the response to two or moretreatments differs by an amount which is clinically unimportant. This is usually demonstrated byshowing that the true treatment difference is likely to lie between a lower and an upperequivalence margin of clinically acceptable differences.Frequentist methods: Statistical methods, such as significance tests and confidence intervals,which can be interpreted in terms of the frequency of certain outcomes occurring in hypotheticalrepeated realizations of the same experimental situation.Full analysis set: The set of subjects that is as close as possible to the ideal implied by theintention-to-treat principle. It is derived from the set of all randomized subjects by minimal andjustified elimination of subjects.42Generalizability, generalization: The extent to which the findings of a clinical trial can bereliably extrapolated from the subjects who participated in the trial to a broader patient populationand a broader range of clinical settings.Global assessment variable: A single variable, usually a scale of ordered categorical ratings,that integrates objective variables and the investigator's overall impression about the state orchange in state of a subject.Independent data monitoring committee (IDMC) (data and safety monitoring board,monitoring committee, data monitoring committee): An independent data monitoring committeethat may be established by the sponsor to assess at intervals the progress of a clinical trial, thesafety data, and the critical efficacy endpoints, and to recommend to the sponsor whether tocontinue, modify, or stop a trial.Intention-to-treat principle: The principle that asserts that the effect of a treatment policy can bebest assessed by evaluating on the basis of the intention to treat a subject (i.e., the plannedtreatment regimen) rather than the actual treatment given. It has the consequence that subjectsallocated to a treatment group should be followed up, assessed, and analyzed as members of thatgroup irrespective of their compliance with the planned course of treatment.Interaction (qualitative and quantitative): The situation in which a treatment contrast (e.g.,difference between investigational product and control) is dependent on another factor (e.g.,center). A quantitative interaction refers to the case where the magnitude of the contrast differs atthe different levels of the factor, whereas for a qualitative interaction the direction of the contrastdiffers for at least one level of the factor.Interrater reliability: The property of yielding equivalent results when used by different raterson different occasions.Intrarater reliability: The property of yielding equivalent results when used by the same rater ondifferent occasions.Interim analysis: Any analysis intended to compare treatment arms with respect to efficacy orsafety at any time prior to the formal completion of a trial.Meta-analysis: The formal evaluation of the quantitative evidence from two or more trialsbearing on the same question. This most commonly involves the statistical combination ofsummary statistics from the various trials, but the term is sometimes also used to refer to thecombination of the raw data.Multicenter trial: A clinical trial conducted according to a single protocol but at more than onesite and, therefore, carried out by more than one investigator.Noninferiority trial: A trial with the primary objective of showing that the response to theinvestigational product is not clinically inferior to a comparative agent (active or placebo control).43Preferred and included terms: In a hierarchical medical dictionary, for example, the WorldHealth Organization's Adverse Reaction Terminology (WHO-Art), the included term is the lowestlevel of dictionary term to which the investigator description is coded. The preferred term is thelevel of grouping of included terms typically used in reporting frequency of occurrence. Forexample, the investigator text “Pain in the left arm” might be coded to the included term “Jointpain,” which is reported at the preferred term level as “Arthralgia.”Per protocol set (valid cases, efficacy sample, evaluable subjects sample): The set of datagenerated by the subset of subjects who complied with the protocol sufficiently to ensure that thesedata would be likely to exhibit the effects of treatment according to the underlying scientific model.Compliance covers such considerations as exposure to treatment, availability of measurements,and absence of major protocol violations.Safety and tolerability: The safety of a medical product concerns the medical risk to the subject,usually assessed in a clinical trial by laboratory tests (including clinical chemistry andhematology), vital signs, clinical adverse events (diseases, signs and symptoms), and other specialsafety tests (e.g., electrocardiograms, ophthalmology). The tolerability of the medical productrepresents the degree to which overt adverse effects can be tolerated by the subject.Statistical analysis plan: A statistical analysis plan is a document that contains a more technicaland detailed elaboration of the principal features of the analysis described in the protocol, andincludes detailed procedures for executing the statistical analysis of the primary and secondaryvariables and other data.Superiority trial: A trial with the primary objective of showing that the response to theinvestigational product is superior to a comparative agent (active or placebo control).Surrogate variable: A variable that provides an indirect measurement of effect in situationswhere direct measurement of clinical effect is not feasible or practical.Treatment effect: An effect attributed to a treatment in a clinical trial. In most clinical trials, thetreatment effect of interest is a comparison (or contrast) of two or more treatments.Treatment emergent: An event that emerges during treatment, having been absent pretreatment,or worsens relative to the pretreatment state.Trial statistician: A statistician who has a combination of education/training and experiencesufficient to implement the principles in this guidance and who is responsible for the statisticalaspects of the trial.


