 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 1 of 11 INFORME D CONSEN T TO TAKE PAR T IN A RESEARC H 
STUDY  
 
TITLE:  A 24- Week Open -Label Study Evaluating the Efficacy and Safety of 
OPN -375 186 µg Twice a Day (BID) in Adults with Bilateral Nasal 
Polyps using Nasoendoscopic Video  
 
PROTOCOL NO.:  OPN -FLU-NP-3104  
 WIRB® Protocol #20180279  
 
SPONSOR:  OptiNose US, Inc  
 
INVESTIGATOR:  Name 
 Address  
 City, State Zip  
 Country  
 
STUDY -RELATED  
PHONE NUMBER(S):  Name 
 Number(s) (24 -hour phone number required)  
 
What is the purpos e of this form? 
 
You are being aske d to participate in a resear ch study. It is important that you read the following 
explanation of the proposed  procedu res. This form desc ribes the purpose , procedur es, benefit s, 
risks, discomforts and precau tions of the study. It also desc ribes the alternative procedur es that 
are available to you and your right to withdraw from the study at any time. A member of the 
study staff will read through  the consen t with you and discuss all the information. When you 
think you under stand the study, you will then be aske d if you agree to take part. If you agree, 
you will be aske d to sign this consen t form. Once you sign it, we will give you a signed and 
dated copy to keep.  
 
You may show this consent  form to family, other doctors, and friends before you sign it. You 
may want to discus s it with them to help you decide if you want to be part of the study. If you do 
not know another doctor, but want a secon d opinion abou t this study, please ask. The study 
doctor will give you the name of another doctor that you can talk to. 
 
You are being asked to participate in this study becaus e you have been diagnose d with nasa l 
polyps in both sides of your nasa l caviti es. 
 
Why is this study being done ? 
 
This study  is being  conducted to see if OPN -375 (fluticasone propionate nasal  spray  with an 
exhalation delivery  system  that delivers  drug into the nose)  is safe and effective  in reducing  your 
nasal  symptoms  and the size of your nasal  polyps , and to provide video  evidence of the changes  
that occur  over time with OPN -375 treatment .  The sponsor  will pay the study doctor  for conducting 
this study  and for your participation.  
 
A desc ription of this clinical trial will be available on http://www .ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by 
U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identif y you. At most, the Web site 
will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time. 
 
 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 2 of 11 What is being studied? 
 
Currentl y, the most commonly used medications for the treatment of nasal  polyps and their 
symptoms are part of a class of medications called corticosteroids.  Corticosteroids are natural 
subs tance s found  in the body that help fight inflamma tion.  Fluticason e propionate is a man-
made corticosteroid. 
 
Fluticasone propionate  given  at a dose  of 186 mcg twice  a day using the exhalation delivery  
system  is being used  in this study.  This study seeks to document the response of your polyps by 
documenting the change in the size of your nasal polyps, and to provide video evidence of the 
changes that occur over time.  The documentation of polyp change over time is not done routinely 
and is therefore considered investigational.  
 
OPN -375 (fluticasone  propionate)  is approved by the FDA as XHANCE ™ for the treatment  of 
nasal  polyps  in adults.   The  approved doses  are one or two spray s per nostril  twice  daily  (total 
daily  dose  of 372-744 micrograms ). 
 
The delivery  system  has a nose piece and mouthpiece and a glass bottle that contains the study 
medication. The user administers the medication by inserting the nosep iece into one nostril and 
the mouthpiece into the mouth.  The user then blows forcefully into the mouthpiece while pushing  
up on the botto m of the glass bottle. The medication then flows  into the nasal  cavity. The 
procedur e is repeat ed in the other nostril. You will use the study medication twice a day, in the 
morning and at night. You will receive detailed instructions on the number of sprays and how to 
properl y use the device. 
 
What do you need to know abou t this study? 
 
Approximately 10 patients are expec ted to take part in this study at 2 US sites.  The entire study 
is expec ted to last for abou t 24 weeks . Your participation in the study will last up to 24 weeks . 
 
What will happe n during this study?  
 
PROCEDURE S TO BE FOLLOWED DUR ING THE 
STUDY 
 
Visit  1 (Day 1/Baseline ) 
 
If you decide you want to be in the study, you will have the following procedur es, called 
“screening procedur es,” performed to find out if you qualify to be in this study.  This visit will 
last about  2 hours . 
 
• The study  staff will review  with you your medical  history  including  a review  of your 
current  medications.   You  will not be permitted  to take or use certain  medications  
while  you are in the study.  It is important  that you inform  your study  doctor  or 
research  staff of all prescription and nonprescription medications,  dietary  
supplements  and vitamins  which  you are presently  taking  or have taken  within  the 
past 1 month.   If you have asthma  or chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease 
(COPD)  you will be asked  about  medications,  you have  taken within  the past 3 
months . 
 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 3 of 11 • The study  staff will review  inclusion/exclusion criteria  (study  rules)  with you. 
• You will receive  instruction  on the use of OPN -375. You will be given  a training  
device that contains  no active  medication  and the study  staff will evaluate  your 
ability  to correctly  use the device . You will return  the training  device to the study  
staff. 
• If you are a woman  who can have children,  a urine  pregnancy  test will be 
performed.   If you are pregnant  (test positive)  you will not be allowed  to participate 
in the study . 
• Your  vital signs  (blood pressure  and heart  rate)  will be measured.  
• You will complete a questionnaire  that consists  of 22 questions  related to the 
symptoms  of and how you feel about  your nasal  polyps.   This  questionnaire  takes  
less than 5 minutes  to complete  
• A test for your sense  of smell will also be conducted.   You  will smell,  either  
blindfolded  or with open eyes,  pens  with different  odors .  The  substances  used  are 
all non-toxic  and not harmful  in the concentrations  given.   If you are unable  to smell  
and cannot  decide  on an answer,  please use your best guess.   There are three 
parts  to the test which  will take about  a total of 30-40 minutes  to complete.  
• A nasal  examination  will be performed and a nasoendoscopy  will be performed  
using  a nasoendoscope.   The nasoendoscope  is a long thin tube with a bright  light 
at the end. It allows  your doctor  to look at the nasal  passages  and other  
surrounding  structures.   This procedure is done  with you sitting  in a chair  with a 
head support.  Your  doctor  will decide  if you will require the use of a local  anesthetic  
(applied  directly  to the area)  and / or a decongestant  before the nasoendoscopy  is 
performed.   Your  doctor  will insert  the endoscope  into your nostril(s)  and through 
the nasal  passages . Your  doctor  will observe,  record,  and grade the nasal  polyp s 
that are presen t, and will record the nasal  examination . An independent  doctor  will 
also grade  the polyps  based on the video  recording  of the nasal  examination .  The  
video  recording viewed  by the independent  doctor  will not have  your name  on it. 
 
If you qualif y for the study after screening procedures  during the Day 1/Baseline  visit, you will 
be given a 3-month supply  of the study  medication  and your study staff will review the proper 
use of the device with you.  You will give yourself  morning and evening dose s of the study 
medication as directed by the study team and the instructions provided. 
 
At each visit you must bring back your study medication. 
 
Study  Staff will contact  you approximately  every  4 weeks  between  site visits  to confirm  if you are 
taking your medication  as instructed,  to inquire if you have had any changes  in your health and 
to record  changes  in your medications  since  your last visit. 
 
Visit 2 (Week 12) 
 
At this visit the study staff will ensure that you are still eligible to continue participating in 
the study.  This visit will last abou t 2 hours. 
• Your  study  team  will review  any changes  in your health  and changes  in your 
medications  since  your last visit. 
• If you are a woman  who can have children,  a urine  pregnancy  test will be 
performed;  you will be told if you are pregnant  and will not be able to continue  your 
participation in the study.  
• Your  vital signs  (blood pressure and heart  rate)  will be measured . 
• You will complete a questionnaire  that consists  of 22 questions  related to the 
symptom s of and how you feel about  your nasal  polyps.   The questionnaire  takes  
approximately  5 minutes  to complete 
 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 4 of 11 • You will complete a questionnaire about  your overall  impression of the changes  in 
your symptoms  that takes  less than 5 minutes  to complete  
• A nasal  examination  will be performed and a nasoendoscopy  will be performed  
using  a nasoendoscope.   The nasoendoscope  is a long thin tube with a bright  light 
at the end. It allows  your doctor  to look at the nasal  passages  and other  
surrounding  structures.    This procedure is done with you sitting  in a chair  with a 
head support.  Your  doctor  will decide  if you will require the use of a local  anesthetic  
(applied  directly  to the area)  and / or a decongestant  before the nasoendoscopy  is 
performed.   Your  doctor  will inser t the endoscope  into your nostril(s)  and through 
the nasal  passages.  Your  doctor  will observe and record the nasal  polyps  that are 
present,  including  a video  recording  of the nasal  examination.  An independent  
doctor  will also grade the polyps  based on the video  recording  of the nasal  
examination.   The  video  recording  viewed  by the independent  doctor  will not have  
your name  on it. 
• Your  study  staff will review  the proper  use of the device  with you. 
• You must  bring  back  your study  medication  and you will receiv e new medication . 
 
Study  Staff will contact  you approximately  every  4 weeks  between  site visits  to confirm  if you are 
taking your medication  as instructed,  to inquire if you have had any changes  in your health and 
to record  changes  in your medications  since your last visit. 
 
Visit  3 (Week  24) 
 
During this visit the following procedures  will be performed.   This  visit will last about  2 hours . 
 
• Your  study  team  will review  any changes  in your health  and changes  in your 
medications  since  your last visit. 
• If you are a woman  who can have children,  a urine  pregnancy  test will be 
performed;  you will be told if you are pregnant.  
• Your  vital signs  (blood pressure and heart  rate)  will be measured.  
• You will complete a questionnaire  that consists  of 22 questions  related to the 
symptoms  of and how you feel about  your nasal  polyps.   The questionnaire  takes  
approximately  5 minutes  to complete.  
• You will complete a questionnaire about  your overall  impression of the changes  in 
your symptoms  that takes  less than 5 minutes  to compl ete 
• A test for your sense  of smell  will also be conducted.   You  will smell,  either  
blindfolded  or with open eyes,  pens  with different  odors .  The  substances  used  are 
all non-toxic  and not harmful  in the concentrations  given.   If you are unable  to smell  
and cannot  decide  on an answer,  please  use your best guess.   There are three 
parts  to the test which  will take about  a total of 30-40 minutes  to complete.  
• A nasal  examination  will be performed and a nasoendoscopy  will be performed  
using  a nasoendoscope.   The nasoendoscop e is a long thin tube with a bright  light 
at the end. It allows  your doctor  to look at the nasal  passages  and other  
surrounding  structures.  This procedure is done with you sitting  in a chair  with a 
head support.  Your  doctor  will decide  if you will require the use of a local  anesthetic  
(applied  directly  to the area)  and / or a decongestant  before the nasoendoscopy  is 
performed.   Your  doctor  will insert  the endoscope  into your nostril(s)  and through 
the nasal  passages.  Your  doctor  will observe and record the nasal  polyps  that are 
present,  including  a video  recording  of the nasal  examination.    An  independent  
doctor  will also grade the polyps  based on the video  recording  of the nasal  
examination.   The  video  recording  viewed  by the independent  doctor  will not have  
your name  on it. 
• You will return  your study  medication.  
 
 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 5 of 11 What is being  performed  specifically  for the study ? 
 
The following are being performed for the purpose s of this study and are not cons idered standar d 
care: 
 
Urine  Pregnanc y tests (for women  who can become pregnan t), additi onal office visits, completion  
of questionnaires  and the smell  tests . 
 
Other Important Information/ Participant Respons ibilities 
 
If you decide to take part in this resear ch study, you will be expec ted to complete the study visits 
and other procedur es and to follow the instructions of the study doctor and study staff.  It is 
important that you follow the study doctor’s instructions for taking the study medication and that 
you do not give the study medication to anyone  else. 
 
If you requir e a reading aid to read/write (e.g. glasses ), kindly ensu re that you bring such aids 
with you to all study visits, to assist with the completion of the ques tionnair es. 
 
During your participation  in the study  you will receive  your assigned  study  medication for the time 
that you are actively  participating  in this research  study; however,  the study  medication will not be 
made available to you after your participation  in this research study  ends.  
 
If you decide to stop participating in the study, it is important that you notify the study doctor or 
study staff.  You will be aske d to return to the study center for a final study visit. 
 
What are the potential risks of being in the study? 
 
UNKNOWN RISKS TO PREGNANT  WOMEN,  EMBRYO,  FETUS  OR NURSING  INFANT  
 
Use of the study medication may involve unkno wn risks to a pregnant  woman, an embryo, fetus 
(unbor n baby ), or nursing infant.  Ther efore, if you are pregnant , planning to beco me pregnant  
or are lactating (including breastfeeding a child), you canno t participate in this study. 
 
If you are a woman who could becom e pregnan t, you must either be abstinent (not have sexua l 
intercourse) or you must use birth control during your study participation.  The following methods 
of birth control are accept able during participation in the study: 
 
• prescri ption oral contracepti ves (the Pill), 
• contracepti ve injections, 
• contracepti ve patch, 
• intrauterine device, 
•  doubl e-barrier method defined as condom s, diaphragm, or cervical cap with spermicidal 
foam, cream, or gel (the cervical cap, even with spermicidal foam, cream or gel is not as 
effective as other options), 
• or female study participants whose male partner is sterile. 
 
If you are postmenopausa l, but for less than 1 year, meaning that you have had menstrual 
bleeding within the 1 year before entry into this study, you will be required to have pregnancy 
tests and must use birth control if sexua lly active. 
 
Your study doctor will discuss with you whether the methods of birth control you plan to use are 
accept able for this study. 
 
 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 6 of 11 Before entering the study, a urine pregnanc y test will be done  for all women who are able to 
becom e pregnant .   This test might not detect an early pregnancy .  Urine  pregnanc y tests will 
be repeat ed at each office  visit.   If you think you are pregnant , tell the study doctor 
immediately. 
 
Pregnanc y will be a reason  to stop study treatment.  If you beco me pregnan t during the study, 
you will be discon tinued from study participation for safety reasons .  If you becom e pregnan t, 
please make your obstetrician aware of your study participation. 
 
POSSIBLE  SIDE  EFFECTS  OF OPN -375 
 
Nose Problems  
 
Nose  problems  may include:  nose  bleeds,  sores  (ulcers) in your nose,  a certain fungal  infection  in 
your nose,  mouth,  and/or  throat  (thrush),  and hole in the cartilag e of your nose  (nasal  septal  
perforation).   Symptoms  of nasal  septal  perforation may include:  crusting  in the nose,  nose  bleeds,  
runny nose,  and whistling sound when  you breathe . 
 
Slow  Wound Healing  
 
The use of fluticasone may slow wound  healing in your nose.  You should let the study  doctor  
know  if you have  a sore in your nose,  have had surgery  on your nose,  or if your nose has been  
injured.  
 
Eye Problems  
 
Glaucoma  and cataracts  have been reported  with long term use of corticosteroids.   You  should let 
the study  doctor  know  if you have any eye problems  and if you experience  any change  in your 
eyesight.  
 
Serious  Allergic  Reactions  
 
You should  let your study  doctor  know  or get emergency  medical  care (call 911 or go to the 
nearest  emergency  room)  if you get any of the following  signs  of a serious  allergic  reaction:   rash,  
hives,  swelling  of your face,  mouth,  and tongue,  and breathing  problems.   These  reactions  might  
become very serious  and even life-threatening.    If you have a history  of hypersensitivity  to any 
medications  you should  let your doctor  know  so s/he can decide  if it is safe for you to participate in 
this study . 
 
Weakened  Immune  System  and Increased  Chance of Getting  Infections  
(Immunosuppression)  
 
Taking  corticosteroids  such  as fluticasone  propionat e may make  you more  likely  to get infections  
and can make  certain  infections  worse.  These  infections  may include  tuberculosis  (TB),  ocular  
herpes  simplex  infections,  and infections  caused  by fungi,  bacteria,  viruses,  and parasites.  Avoid  
contact  with peopl e who have a contagious  disease  such  as chickenpox  or measles  while  using  
OPN -375. If you meet  someone  who has chickenpox  or measles  call your study  doctor  right away.  
Symptoms  of an infection  may include:  fever,  pain,  aches,  chills,  feeling  tired,  nausea,  vomiting . 
 
Reduced Steroid  Hormone Levels (adrenal  insufficiency).  
 
Adrenal  insufficiency  happens  when  your adrenal  glands  do not make  enough steroid  hormones.  
This can happen  when  you stop taking  oral corticosteroid medicines  (such  as prednisone)  and 
start taking  medicine  containing  a topical  steroid (such  as OPN -375). Symptoms  of adrenal  
insufficiency  may include:  feeling  tired,  lack of energy,  weakness,  nausea  and vomiting,  and low 
blood pressure . 
 
 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 7 of 11 Bone  Thinning or Weakness (Osteopenia or osteoporosis)  
 
Most  Common  Side  Effects  
 
The most  common  side effects  of OPN -375 include:  nose bleeds,  redness  or sores  (ulcers)  in the 
nose,  nasal  congestion,  headache,  sinus  infection,  sore nose  and throat, and sore throat.  
 
Drug interacti ons with Fluticasone 
 
Certain  medications  may interact  with OPN -375.  It is important  that you inform  your study  doctor  
or research staff of all medications  you are currently  taking.  
 
Other possible  discomforts from  participating  in this study  
 
The nasal  endoscopy  may activate  the gag reflex  (i.e. make  you feel like you are choking or going 
to vomit).   Nosebleed,  nasal  discomfort,  spasms,  and cough may also occur . Let your doctor  know  
if you are experiencing  any unpleasant  symptoms during  the procedure.  
 
Will you be informed of new information relating to the study? 
 
All new findings  discovered during the course of this research  study  that may reasonably  influence 
your decision to continue to participate in this study  will be provided to youby  your study  doctor  as 
such  information  becom e available . 
 
Does being in this study provide any benefit? 
 
Participating in this study may or may not provide a direct bene fit to you. It is hoped that the 
information learned in this research may benefit future patients with nasal polyps.  
 
Who do you contact in the even t of an emergency?  
 
If you suffer any medical event s that are not typical for you during this study, the event s would 
be cons idered an “adver se event” . Adverse event s are not necessa rily side effects of the study 
medication. For example, a person might have an upset  stomach due to receiving a study 
medication, or the upse t stomach might occu r without the study medication.  We will watch 
everyone in the study for any adver se even ts. 
 
You will be monitored very closely by the study  doctor  and medical  staff while  you are in the study.  
This monitoring will include vital signs,  nasal  examinations,  and other  tests  if the study  doctor  feels  
that they are needed.  
 
It is important  that you tell the study  staff if you feel abnormal  or unusual  in any way. If you are not 
completely  truthful  about  any side effects, you may increase  the risk of harming yourself  by taking 
part in this study.  You will be given  any new information  that may affect  your willingness  to start or 
continue  in the study.  
 
If you experience an adve rse reaction or a resea rch-related injury during the course of the 
study, you shoul d immedi ately contact Dr. [Name] at [Number] or [Number]  (if during non-
business hours). 
 
If you seek emergenc y care, or if you are hosp italized , please alert the doctor who is treating 
you that you are enrolled in a resear ch study being conduc ted by Dr. [Name]. 
 
 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 8 of 11 What happen s if you have  a researc h related injury?  
 
If you suffer a phys ical injury as a result of your participation in this study, you will be reimbursed 
for medical expenses to treat the injury, to the extent not paid by your insurance or if you do not 
have insurance .  You may receive medical care in the same way as you would normally. No 
funds have been set aside for payments or other forms of compensa tion (such  as for lost 
wages , lost time, or discomfort).  However, you do not give up any of your legal rights by signing 
this consen t form. 
 
What other treatments are available? 
 
Alternative Treatments 
 
Your alternative to taking part in this study is to receive standar d medical care as prescribed by 
your doctor.  The following treatments are available for nasal polyps: 
 
• nasal  corticosteroid spray 
• oral corticosteroids such as prednisone  
• Sometimes, nasal  polyps are so large and obstructive that corticosteroid nasal  sprays 
are ineffective. In such  cases , surgery can be an effective option. 
 
Your  study  doctor  will be able to discuss  alternative  procedure(s)  or treatment(s)  that may be 
available,  and their potential  benefits  and risks.  
 
Will it cost  you anything to be in this study? 
 
The study medication will be made available to you at no charge and you will not pay for any 
protocol-related tests and procedur es during your participation in the study. You and/or your 
insurance provider may be billed for any standar d medical care that is not part of this resea rch 
study. 
 
Will you be paid for being in this study? 
 
To help defray  any costs  associated with your participation (for example,  travel  costs),  you will be 
paid $50.00 per each completed  visit up to a total of $150.00 for completing  the entire study.  If you 
should not complete the study,  you will be paid for each  of the visits  you have completed.  
 
The Inves tigator/Study doctor will receive compensati on from the Sponso r to conduc t this resear ch 
study. 
 
Do you have to be in this study? 
 
Your participation in this study is voluntary.  Your refusal to participate or your withdrawal from 
the study will involve no penalt y or loss of benefit s to which you are entitl ed.  You may stop your 
participation at any time without affecting your ongoing medical care.  If you decide to stop 
participating in the study, it is important that you notify the study doctor or study staff.  You will 
be aske d to return to the study center for a final study visit. 
 
 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 9 of 11 Can you be removed from the study without  your permission? 
 
Your study doctor may end your participation in this study for any of the following reasons : 
 
1. If you deve lop a side effect or medical cond ition that may place you at risk of 
further complications by continuing your participation or if you need  a medicine not 
allowed on this study; 
2. If you beco me pregnan t; 
3. If you are unab le to take the study medication 
4. If you are unab le to keep your schedu led appoi ntments; 
5. If the study is cance lled by the sponso r, the Institutional Review Board/ Ethics 
Committees , FDA or any other Regulatory Authority. 
6. For administrative reasons . 
 
Who will have acces s to your study and/or medical information? 
 
Records of your participation in this study will be held confidential excep t as disclosure is requir ed 
by law or as desc ribed in this informed consen t docu ment. Disclosures requir ed by law may 
include: suspec ted child abuse;  infectious disease ; expression of suicidal ideas ; those  situations 
in which resea rch docu ments are ordered to be produce d by a court of law; and those  situations 
in which resea rchers are requir ed to report to the appropriate authoriti es.  The study doctor, the 
sponsor  or persons working on behal f of the sponso r and unde r certain circumstances , 
represen tatives of the FDA, Institutional Review Board (IRB), and other Regulatory Authoriti es 
will be able to inspec t and copy confidential study-related records which identif y you by name.  
Therefore, abso lute confidentiality cannot  be guaranteed.  If the results of this study are 
published or present ed at meetings, you will not be identified. 
 
Who do you contact if you have ques tions abou t the study? 
 
Your study doctor will answer any ques tions regarding OPN -375, fluticasone propionate, its 
risks, side effects, potential benefits , and other treatment options available to you now or at 
any time you are taking part in this study. 
 
PRIVACY : COLLEC TION, USE AND DISCLOSUR E OF IDEN TIFIABLE PRIVATE HEA LTH 
INFORMAT ION 
 
During your participation in this resear ch study, the study doctor and study staff will collect or 
create persona l health information, such  as docu mentation of medical histories, physi cal 
examination, etc., about  you. The study doctor will keep this personal  healt h information in your 
study-related records.  In addition, the study doctor may obtain, and include in your study- 
related records, information abou t your past, presen t and/or future phys ical or mental health  
and/or cond ition. (Your study doctor may ask you or your legally  acceptable representative to 
sign a sepa rate consent/release to obtain some or all of your medical records from your 
doctor(s) or other healt hcare provider(s ).)  Your study-related records may include other 
personal  information, medical record number(s), or any other identifying healt h information 
number, initials, date of birth, etc., that could be used to identif y you.  (Health information that 
contains information that can be used  to identif y you will be called “Identifi able Private Health 
Information” or “IPHI.”). 
 
The IPHI to be collected, used and disclosed during this study includes : phys ical examinations, 
medical history and other data collected during this study. 
 
 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 10 of 11 If you do not agree to share your IPHI you will not be able to participate in this study. B y signing 
this consen t docu ment, you are giving the study doctor permission to disclose your IPHI to: 
 
• The sponsor  of this study and anyone  working on behal f of the sponso r to conduc t this 
study (“sponsor’) .  The sponso r will analyze and evaluate the data that may contain your 
IPHI and may use it to devel op new tests, procedur es and commercial produc ts.  The 
study staff will assign a code number and/or letters to your study-related records which 
mean that you will not ordinarily be identified in the records sent to the sponsor .  The 
sponsor  may, however, look at your complete study records that identify you.  In additi on, 
the sponsor  may visit the study site to oversee the way the study is being conduc ted and 
may review your IPHI during these visits to make sure the information is correct. 
• The Institutional Review Board (“IRB”) may have acces s to your IPHI in relation to its 
respons ibilities as an Institutional Review Board. 
• Clinical monitors and auditors, who work for the study sponsor , will have access to all 
information abou t you at the study site, so that they can verify the information.  Also, the 
study sponso r might review or copy all your records, including the abov e information, to 
assu re the qualit y of the study or for other uses allowed by law. 
 
The study doctor or sponsor  may disclose your IPHI to the FDA and/or similar gover nment 
agenc ies in other coun tries. 
 
Excep t for the disclosures desc ribed above,  your IPHI will not be shared with others unless 
disclosure is otherwise required by law, for example, if a court of law orders the disclosure.   If 
you have ques tions abou t this, please ask the study doctor. 
 
Your consent  to collect, use and disclose IPHI will expire fifty (50) years from the date you sign 
it unless you cance l it sooner . You can cance l your consent  to collect, use and disclose your 
IPHI at any time.  To do so, you must write a letter to the study doctor stating that you are 
revok ing your consen t to collect, use and disclose your identifiable private healt h information.  If 
you cance l your consent  allowing the study doctor to collect, use and disclose your IPHI, you 
will not be allowed to continue in the study.  The study doctor will no longe r use or share your 
IPHI unless it is necessa ry to protect the integrity of the study. 
 
There are national and provincial/territorial laws that requir e the study doctor to protect the 
privacy of your IPHI; however, there is no guarantee of absol ute privacy becaus e of the need  to 
share information.  After disclosure of your IPHI, the laws may no longe r protect the privacy of 
your information. The sponsor  or others may share your information with other peopl e who are 
not requir ed to protect the privacy of your information. 
 
If you would like to know  how the sponso r will protect the privacy of your records, ask the study 
doctor how to get this information. 
 
You have a right to see and make  copies  of your study -related  information.   By  signing  this 
consent  document,  however,  you agree  not to see or copy some  or all your records  until the 
sponsor  has completed  all work  related  to this study.    At  that time,  you may ask to see your 
records.  
 
 Approved Template  
 MUST  BE APPROVED   
 FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE   
 Feb 20, 2018  
 WIRB 
  
Page 11 of 11 VOLUNTEER 'S STATEMENT: 
 
I have been given a chance  to ask questions  about  this research study.   These questions  have  
been answered to my satisfaction.   I may contact  Dr. [Name]  at the phone number listed above on 
the first page if  I have any more  questions , concerns, or complaints  about  taking  part in this study.   I 
understand that Dr. [Name ] or the company  he/she  is employed by is being paid by the sponsor  for 
my participation in this study.  
 
I under stand that my participation in this resear ch project is voluntary.  I know that I may quit the 
study at any time without harming my future medical care or losing any benefit s to which I might 
be entitled.  I also unde rstand that the inves tigator in charge of this study may decide at any 
time that I shoul d no longe r participate in this study. 
 
This study  has been reviewed and approved by the Western Institutional Review Board®  (WIRB®). 
If you have any questions , concerns or complaints about this study, or questions  about  your rights  
as a research  participant -, or the Investigator’s  responsibilities,  you may contact  WIRB  24 hours  per 
day and 7 days  per week  at 360-252-2500 or toll-free at 1-800-562-4789.  An IRB is a group of 
scientific and non- scientific  individuals  who perform the initial and ongoing  ethical  review  of the 
research study  with the subject’s rights  and welfare  in mind.   If you have any study -related 
comments,  complaints  or concerns,  we ask that you first contact  the study  investigator.  Please  call 
the IRB if you need to speak  to a person independent  from the Investigator  and the research staff,  
and/or  if the Investigator  and the research staff could not be reached.  
 
By signing this form, I have not waived any of my legal rights. 
 
I have read and under stand the abov e information.  I agree to participate in this study.  I 
under stand that I will be given a copy of this signed and dated form for my own 
records. 
 
 
      
Printed Name of Study Participant  Signature of Participant Date  
  
 
 
      
Printed name of the person explaining Signature of person explaining Date  
the consen t the consen t 
 
 
      
Printed name of Inves tigator Signature of Inves tigator Date  