 
 Title: Phase I Drug Interaction and Self Administration Studies of Compounds for Cocaine Use Disorder  
 
NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Document version date: August 2, 2017  
 
Document  approval date: October 2, 2017 
 Document Type: Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 1 of 48 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1 BACKGROUND  4 
1.1 Overview of Non -Clinical Studies  10 
1.2 Overview of Clinical Studies  11 
2 STUDY RATIONALE  11 
2.1 Risk / Benefit Assessment  11 
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES  16 
3.1 Primary Objective  16 
3.2 Secondary Objectives  16 
4 STUDY DESIGN  16 
4.1 Study Overview  16 
5 Criteria for evaluation  17 
5.1 Primary Efficacy Endpoint 17 5.2 Secondary Efficacy Endpoints 17 6 SUBJECT SELECTION  17 
6.1 Study Population 17 6.2 Inclusion Criteria  17 
6.3 Exclusion Criteria  18 
7 Concurrent Medications 19 7.1 Allowed  19 
7.2 Prohibited 19 8 STUDY TREATMENTS  19 
8.1 Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups 19 8.2 Blinding 19 8.3 Test and Control Formulation   22 
8.4 Supply of Study Medication at the Site 21 8.5 Study Medication Accountability  21 
9 STUDY PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES  21 
9.1 Clinical Assessments  22 
9.2 Clinical Laboratory Measurements (include sections as appropriate) 24 9.3 Pharmacokinetic Measurements  24 
10 EVALUATIONS BY VISIT  24 
10.1 Visit 1 (Day/Week/Month #) 24 10.2 Visit 2 (Day/Week/Month # include visit window) 25 10.3 Visit 3 (Day/Week/Month # include visit window) 25 10.4 Visit 4 (Day/Week/Month # include visit window) 26 
10.5 Visit 5 (Follow -up or Day/Week/Month # include visit window) 26 
11 ADVERSE Experience REPORTING AND DOCUMENTATION  34 
11.1 Adverse Events  34 
11.2 Serious Adverse Experiences (SAE)  35 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 2 of 48 
 11.4 Medical Monitoring 36 
11.5 Safety Management Plan  4 
12 DISCONTINUATION And Replacement of subjects  36 
12.1 Withdrawal of Subjects 36 12.3 Replacement of Subjects  36 
13 PRotocol Violations 37 14 DATA SAFETY MONITORING (optional Section – Include when appropriate)  37 
15 STATISTICAL METHODS AND CONSIDERATIONS  38 
15.1 Data Sets Analyzed  38 
15.2 Demographic and Baseline Characteristics  38 
15.3 Analysis of Primary Endpoint 39 15.4 Analysis of Secondary Endpoints 39 15.5 Interim Analysis  39 
15.6 Sample Size and Randomization 39 
16 DATA COLLECTION, RETENTION AND MONITORING  40 
16.1 Data Collection Instruments  40 
16.2 Data Management Procedures  40 
16.3 Data Quality Control and Reporting 41 16.4 Archival of Data  41 
16.5 Availability and Retention of Investigational Records 41 
16.7 Subject Confidentiality  41 
17 ADMINISTRATIVE, ETHICAL, REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  41 
17.1 Protocol Amendments 41 17.2 Institutional Review Boards and Independent Ethics Committees 41 17.3 Informed Consent Form 42 17.4 Publications 42    
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 3 of 48 
  
List of Abbreviations  
AE adverse ev ent 
ALT  alanine aminotransferase  
ASI-lite Addiction Severity Index 
AST  aspartate aminotransferase 
BUN  blood urea nitrogen 
CFR  
 Code of Federal Regulations  
 
C-SSRS  Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale  
CGI-I Clinical Global Impression Improvement  
CGI-S Clinical Global Impression Severity  
CNS  Central Nervous System  
COCUD Cocaine Use Disorder  
COWS  Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale  
CRF  case report form  
CRP  C-reactive protein  
CRSU  Clinical Research Services Unit  
DMC  Data Monitoring Committee  
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  
ESR erythrocyte sedimentation rate  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration 
  
FTND  Fagerstr om Test for Nicotine Dependence  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GGT  gamma -glutamyl transferase  
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
ICF informed consent form 
ICH 
IDAS  International Conference on Harmonization  
Institute for Drug and Alcohol Studies 
IEC Independent Ethics Committee 
IL-8 Interleukin-8 
IRB Institutional Review Board  
IV intravenous 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 4 of 48 
 KID-SCID  Childhood Disorders Version of the SCID ADHD Module 
KMSK Kreek -McHugh -Schluger -Kellogg Scale  
LDH  lactate dehydrogenase  
NART  National Adult Reading Test 
PI Principal Investigator  
PK pharmacokinetic 
POMS  Profile of Mood Sates 
SAE  serious adverse experience  
SCID  The Structured  Clinical Interview for DSM -IV 
SCID -II The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Personality 
Disorders Module 
VAS  Visual Analog Scale  
WURS  Wender Utah Rating Scale 
 
  
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 5 of 48 
 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
TITLE  Phase I drug interaction and self-administration studies of compounds 
for C ocaine Use Disorder (COCUD)  
  SPONSOR  F. Gerard Moeller, M.D. 
  FUNDING 
ORGANIZATION  National Institute on Drug Abuse 
NUMBER OF SITES  1 
  RATIONALE  The overall goal of this project is to develop initial human data on effects of novel compounds on safety (interactions with cocaine) and efficacy (subjective response to cocaine and self administration data) in non- treatment seeking cocaine use disorder s ubjects. The 
compound to be studied will be the 5-HT2CR agonist lorcaserin. Lorcaserin and other 5-HT2CR agonists have been shown to reduce cocaine self -administration and cue reactivity in rodents ( Cunningham 
et al., 2011; Manvich et al., 2012). In addition there is human safety 
data in non- cocaine using subjects for lorcaserin as it is currently FDA 
approved for obesity, and safety data from a cocaine interaction study in rodents (included below), but there is no human cocaine interaction/PK data and no PD data to support potential dosages for phase II clinical trials.  
  STUDY DESIGN  This is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 1b/2a study.  
  PRIMARY OBJECTIVE  1. Assess interaction between lorcaserin and cocaine in healthy 
cocaine using subjects.  2. Assess effects of lorcaserin on cocaine self -
administration  in healthy cocaine using subjects. 3. Assess effect of 
lorcaserin on subjective response to cocaine in healthy cocaine using subjects.  4. Assess effect of lorcaserin on cocaine PK  in healthy 
cocaine using subjects.  
  SECONDARY OBJECTIVES  Assess effect of lorcaserin on response inhibition in healthy cocaine using subjects. 
  NUMBER OF SUBJECTS  18 
  SUBJECT SELECTION  
CRITERIA  Inclusion Criteria: 
In order to participate in this study, subjects must: 1. Males and females between 18 and 5 9 years -of-age. 
2. Understand the study procedures and provide written informed 
consent. 
3. Meet current DSM -5 criteria for cocaine use disorder, at least 
moderate severity, and current DSM -IV diagnosis of cocaine 
dependence, but are not seeking treatment.  
4. Currently using cocaine by smoking or intravenous route of 
administration as determined by self -report and have a positive urine 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 6 of 48 
 drug screen for cocaine during screening.  
5. Have vital signs as follows: resting pulse below 95 bpm, blood 
pressures  below 140 mm Hg systolic and  90 mm Hg diastolic.  
6. Have no clinically significant abnormalities in the judgment of the 
study physician in hematolog y and chemistry laboratory tests 
including liver function tests.  
7. Have sinus rhythm with normal conduction (including QTcF less than 440 ms) by ECG.  
8. Have no contraindications for study participation as determined by 
medical history and physical exami nation. 
9. Be able to demonstrate an understanding of study procedures and follow instructions including behavioral laboratory testing.  
10. No pregnant or nursing women will be permitted in the study, and 
women must either be unable to conceive (i.e., sur gically sterilized, 
sterile, or postmenopausal) or be using a reliable form of contraception (e.g., abstinence, birth control pills, intrauterine device with spermicide, or condoms). Men will be advised to use condoms. All females must provide negative pre gnancy urine tests before study 
entry, at each visit during the study, and at the end of study participation.  
11. Have hemoglobin/hematocrit values within normal limits based on age and gender. 
 Exclusion Criteria:  
In order to participate in the study, subjects must not: 1. Meet current DSM -5 diagnosis of any psychoactive substance use 
disorder other than cocaine, opioids, marijuana, or nicotine. Diagnosis 
of mild to moderate use disorder for alcohol will not be considered exclusionary.  
2. Have a DSM -5 axis  I psychiatric disorder other than substance use 
disorder including but not limited to Bipolar Disorder, Major Depressive Disorder, ADHD, or Schizophrenia or a neurological disorder requiring ongoing treatment and/or making study participation unsafe. 
3. Have any previous medically adverse reaction to cocaine, including 
loss of consciousness, chest pain, or epileptic seizure. 4. Have any clinically significant medical disorder including 
cardiovascular (including hypertension), pulmonary, CNS, hepatic, or renal disorder.  
5. Have a history of seizures (excluding childhood febrile seizures), or clinically significant head injury . 
6. Have significant current suicidal or homicidal ideation or a history of suicide attempt within the past 6 months.  
7. Have conditions of probation or parole requiring reports of drug use to officers of the court.  
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 7 of 48 
 8. Have impending incarceration.  
9. Have a positive HIV test by self -report or history.  
10. Be pregnant or nursing or not using a reliable form of 
contraception if able to conceive. All females must provide negative pregnancy urine tests at screening, and at each study visit. 
11. Have any other illness, or condition, which in the opinion of the PI would preclude safe and/or successful completion of the study. 
12. Have a positive breath alcohol test or urine drug screening 
positive for drugs of abuse with the exception of cocaine, cocaine metabolites, opioids, and  marijuana.  
13. Subjects who are allergic to lorcaserin.  
14. Subjects who have taken any investigational drug within 90 days prior to baseline. 
15. Subjects who have symptoms of opioid withdrawal during 
screening.  
 
 
  TEST PRODUCT, 
DOSE, AND ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION  Lorcaserin 10mg  
Product will be administered orally once daily  for 6 days then 
increasing to twice daily for 3 days.   
  CONTROL PRODUCT, DOSE AND ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION  Placebo  
Subjects who are randomized to placebo will receive identical capsules to the test product at the same time administered orally.  
  DURATION OF SUBJECT PARTICIPATION AND DURATION OF STUDY Screening:  up to 7 days 
Treatment  in CRSU  and IDAS :  12 days  
Follow-up:  7 days   
The total duration of the study is expected to be 4 years .  
  CONCOMMITANT 
MEDICATIONS  Allowed:  Non -CNS Active medications  
 
Prohibited: CNS active medications  
Medications which could potentially interact with lorcaserin or 
cocaine  
  Efficacy Evaluations Primary outcome measures:  
1. Safety: Heart rate (HR) and blood pressure (BP) measures during saline infusions will be com pared to HR and BP after each cocaine 
infusion (20 mg and 40 mg doses).  Changes in HR and BP induced by cocaine infusion along with lorcaserin will be compared to those without lorcaserin, by cocaine dose level (20 mg and 40 mg doses), using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). Changes in ECG readings during saline infusion as compared to those taken during cocaine infusions will be reported as summary statistics. 
Adverse event data will be compiled for lorcaserin and placebo 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 8 of 48 
 cohorts and present ed as summary statistics.  
2. Cocaine Self -administration: Repeated measures ANOVA with 
cocaine dose (0mg, 25mg) and lorcaserin dose (0mg, 10mg, 20mg) as 
within subject factors will be used to examine differences in mean cocaine choice selection. In additi on, a Bayesian analysis will be 
carried out as described below.  
3. Subjective response to cocaine: Subjective response measures (VAS) obtained during saline infusions will be compared between lorcaserin and placebo subjects to those during cocaine infusions by cocaine dose level to determine the extent to which these measures are modified by the administration of lorcaserin using repeated measures ANOVA.  
4. Cocaine PK: Plasma concentration -time profiles of cocaine after 
cocaine infusion during place bo administration (Day 2) will be 
analyzed to obtain pharmacokinetic parameter estimates of cocaine (Tmax, AUC, apparent t½, CL) by individual. These parameters will be compared within subjects on sessions with lorcaserin (Days 6 and 10). 
Secondary Outcome Measure: Response inhibition: Commission errors on the IMT will be compared between lorcaserin and placebo subjects to determine the extent to which this measure is modified by the administration of lorcaserin using repeated measures ANOVA.  
 
Planned Interim Analyses  When approximately 50% of patients have completed the study, an 
interim analysis for safety will be conducted by the DSMB . Serious 
adverse events will be monitored by the committee on an ongoing basis throughout the study. 
  STATISTICS  
Primary Analysis Plan  Initial analyses will evaluate group differences on demographic and baseline variables, will use contingency tables with chi-square testing, ANOVA’s, and examination of correlations between baseline variables subjective responses and clinical results. General data analysis procedures: Urn randomization will be used for gender to reduce any potential between -group differences (lorcaserin vs. 
placebo) on baseline variables. Prior to data analysis procedures, groups will be examined for differences in other baseline characteristics that could potentially influence treatment outcome. Any variables that differ between groups and are related to outcome measures will be examined as potential covariates in subsequent data analyses.  
 
Primary outcome measures:  
1. Safety: Heart rate (HR) and blood pressure (BP) measures during 
saline infusions will be compared to HR and BP after each cocaine infusion (20 mg and 40 mg doses).  Changes in HR and BP induced by cocaine infusion along with lorcaserin will be compared to those 
without lorcaserin, by cocaine dose level (20 mg and 40 mg doses), 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 9 of 48 
 using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). Changes in 
ECG readings during saline infusion as compared to those taken 
during cocaine infusions will be reported as summary statistics. Adverse event data will be compiled for lorcaserin and placebo cohorts and presented as summary statistics.  
2. Cocaine Self -administration: Repeated measures ANOVA with 
cocaine dose (0mg, 25mg) and lorcaserin dose (0mg, 10mg, 20mg) as within subject factors will be used to examine differences in mean cocaine choice selection. In addition, a Bayesian analysis will be carried out as described below.  
3. Subjective response to cocaine: Subjective response measures (VAS)  obtained during saline infusions will be compared between 
lorcaserin and placebo subjects to those during cocaine infusions by cocaine dose level to determine the extent to which these measures are modified by the administration of lorcaserin using repeat ed measures 
ANOVA.  
4. Cocaine PK: Plasma concentration -time profiles of cocaine after 
cocaine infusion during placebo administration (Day 2) will be analyzed to obtain pharmacokinetic parameter estimates of cocaine (Tmax, AUC, apparent t½, CL) by individua l. These parameters will 
be compared within subjects on sessions with lorcaserin (Day 6 and Day 10 ). 
Secondary Outcome Measure: Response inhibition: Commission errors on the IMT will be compared between lorcaserin and placebo subjects to determine the extent to which this measure is modified by the administration of lorcaserin using repeated measures ANOVA.  
.   
Rationale for Number of Subjects  Power Calculation and Sample Size:  
Rationale for sample size: Sample size for effect of lorcaserin on cocaine self -administration was based on previous research showing 
effects of medication on human cocaine self -administration (Hart et 
al., 2008). In an effort to increase the power of the study, a Bayesian approach will also be utilized that incorporates information from previous studies.  This approach will use a Bayesian hierarchic al 
model with subject at the lowest level of the hierarchy and treatment group at the second level.  This model is analogous to the repeated measures ANOVA except that prior information will be introduced.  Since many similar studies have been conducted with cocaine users and the same outcome measures we will assign an informative prior distribution on the control group where the mean and standard deviation are educated guesses from the information provided in previous study of Hart et al. (2008).  For the treatment group we will assume a priori no change in the mean from the control group and the standard deviation are similar to those as the experimental group of the study by Hart et al. (Hart et al., 2008
).  The model will be 
calculated using standard Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) 
packages such as WinBUGS, OpenBUGS, JAGS or MCMCpack in R.  
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 10 of 48 
 Because MCMC sampling techniques are being employed the qu ality 
of the samples from the posterior distribution will be checked using 
trace plots, effective sample size, potential scale reduction factor and Hellinger distances (for more on Bayesian analyses and MCMC sampling see (
Gelman et al., 2013) .  As necessary techniques such as 
discarding burn-in samples, thinning and over- disperse starting points 
will be employed in order to obtain a set of samples from the posterior distribution that have an effective sample size of 10,000 on all parameters.  All inferences will be made from this set of samples from the posterior distribution. 
 To calculate the power for the acute effects of the study three 
analyses are considered using the paired differences of subjects at 
baseline and acute time points.  A two -sample test on the means is 
performed using: Wilcoxon test (non- parametric), T -test (parametric) 
and a Bayesian (parametric) approach.  While from a Bayesian paradigm the notion of power does not exist in the traditional sense, one can create a decision rule and loss function in such a way that the associated risk is analogous to the notion of power.  To understand the power of each of the methods a Monte Carlo study was performed 
utilizing 1,000 separate datasets for likely ef fect sizes and sample 
sizes.  The power was calculated as the proportion of datasets in 
which the test “rejected” the null hypothesis.  The table below gives the power for each test across percent change in effect size and control group sample sizes, here the treatment group sample size was n2 = 12. Based on the table at left, an n of 6 was chosen as the sample size for the placebo group. 
  
 
BACKGROUND  
Lorcaserin is a 5 -HT2CR agonist (Trade Name Belviq) approved for treatment of obesity.  
Overview of Non-Clinical Studies  
Lorcaserin and other 5-HT2CR agonists have been shown to reduce cocaine self-administration and cue 
reactivity in rodents ( Cunningham et al., 2011; Manvich et al., 2012). We have collected preliminary data to 

Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 11 of 48 
 indicate that lorcaserin dose-dependently suppresses cue reactivity. Male Sprague- Dawley rats (n=11) were 
trained to self -administer cocaine on  an FR5 schedule of reinforcement (0.75 mg/kg/inf; 3 hrs/d) for 14 days 
(Anastasio et  al, 2014b). Rats were returned to their home cage for 1 day of forced abstinence (no exti nction 
training) and were then reintroduced to the chambers. To assess cue reactivity, presses on the previously  active 
lever were reinforced contingently by the discrete cue complex on an FR1 for one hour (active lever responses); 
inactive lever presses w ere recorded but produced no scheduled consequences. As predicted by studies with 
other selective 5 -HT2cR agonists in extinction/reinstatement models, lorcaserin effectively suppressed cue 
reactivity . In addition there is human safety data in non- cocaine using subjects for lorcaserin as it is currently 
FDA approved for obesity, and safety data from a cocaine interaction study in rodents (See included full study 
report). , 
Overview of Clinical Studies  
BEL VIQ (lorcaserin hydrochloride) tablets, for oral use. BELVIQ is a serotonin 2C receptor agonist indicated 
as an adjunct to a reduced- calorie diet and increased physical activity for chronic weight  management in adults 
with an initial body mass index (BMI) of: 30 kg/m2 or greater (obese)  or 27 kg/m2 or greater (overweight) in 
the presence of at least one weight -related  comorbid condition, (e.g., hypertension, dyslipidemia, type 2 
diabetes) . 
In a preliminary report of a smoking cessation study, Eisai Inc. and Arena Pharmaceuticals Inc. announced 
results from a  Phase 2 trial investigating lorcaserin HCl for smoking cessation. The trial demonstrated 
statistically significant improvement over placebo in reducing the number of patients who smoke after 12 weeks of treatment.  
Based on Arena media report dated November 3, 2014, the 12-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the efficacy and safety of lorcaserin as a potential aid to smoking cessation. In the trial, 603 active smokers were randomized to receive lorcaserin 10 mg once daily, 10 mg twice daily or placebo in a 1:1:1 ratio. A t baseline subjects were dependent on nicotine averaging 18 cigarettes per day. Patients received 
medication for two weeks prior to attempting to quit around Day 15 of the trial . Subjects also received  smoking 
cessation counseling during the trial. Results showed that the carbon monoxide confirmed continuous abstinence rate (CAR), was achieved by 5.6%, 8.7%, and 15.3% of patients in the placebo, once daily and t wice 
daily  groups, respectively (p -value = 0.003 and odds ratio = 3.02 for twice daily  vs. placebo; the result for once 
daily  vs. placebo was not statistically significant).  
Safety and tolerability  data showed that there was a statistically significant difference in weight between 
lorcaserin twice daily  and placebo ( -0.98 kg and -0.01 kg, respectively, p-value = 0.0004). The most common 
adverse events during the study were headache, nausea, constipation, dizziness and dry mouth, similar to previous trials of lorcaserin . 
For more detail refer to Belviq  prescribing information.  
STUDY RATIONALE  
The overall goal of this project is to develop initial human data on effects of novel compounds on safety (interactions with cocaine) and efficacy (subjective response to cocaine and self - administration data) in non-
treatment seeking cocaine use disorder subjects. The compound to be studied will be the 5- HT2CR agonist 
lorcaserin. Lorcaserin and other 5 -HT2CR agonists have been shown to reduce cocaine self -administration and 
cue reactivity in rodents ( Cunningham et al., 2011; Manvich et al., 2012). In addition there is human safety data 
in non-cocaine using subjects for lorcaserin as it is currently FDA approved for obesity, and safety data from a cocaine interact ion study in rodents (included below), but there is no human cocaine interaction/PK data and no 
PD data to support potential dosages for phase II clinical trials. 
Risk / Benefit Assessment  
Potential risks are listed below. The primary risks to participate in this study are those involved from potential 
unexpected serious adverse events due to receiving cocaine or lorcaserin . The risks of the medications are 
provided below. 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 12 of 48 
 Risks of Lorcaserin Administration  
Lorcaserin is FDA approved for the treatment of obesity. According to the FDA briefing document on 
lorcaserin based on the clinical trials in patients with obesity, “the most common adverse events with an incidence in the lorcaserin group that clearly exceeded placebo were headache (16.8 vs. 10.1%), dizziness (8.5 vs. 3.8%), nausea (8.3 vs. 5.3%), fatigue (7.2 vs. 3.6%), and dry mouth (5.3 vs. 2.3%). These events were typically  dose-related, mild or moderate in severity and transient. Furthermore, the excess over placebo 
occurred primarily within the fir st several days of treatment for headache and dizziness. Rates of 
discontinuation for adverse events were similar for lorcaserin 10 mg BID (8.6%), 10 mg QD (7.5%), and placebo (6.8%). Serious adverse events were as expected for the population, and similar in both character and frequency in the lorcaserin and placebo populations.” Because lorcaserin has the potential to impair cognitive function, patients should be cautioned about operating hazardous machinery, including automobiles, until they are reasonably certain that lorcaserin therapy does not affect them adversely. In preclinical studies abnormalities in thyroid function and liver tests have been seen in animals, but no changes in thyroid function or liver function have been noted in humans. In patients with diabetes, a drop in blood sugar has been seen. Weight loss may increase the risk of hypoglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus treated with insulin and/or insulin secretagogues ( e.g., sulfonylureas); hypoglycemia was observed in clinical  trials with lorcaserin. Lorcaserin has 
not been studied in combination with insulin. In other populations, lorcaserin has been associated with a modest increase in blood pressure.  
Other Potential Risks of Lorcaserin but not seen in Clinical Trials  
Risk of serotonin syndrome: As lorcaserin is a serotonergic medication, it carries the risk of serotonin syndrome 
associated with all serotonergic compounds. This risk could be increased by combining lorcaserin with other serotonergic compounds. Our own research experience using another serotonergic drug, citalopram with cocaine dependent subjects (Moeller et al., 2007) and another ongoing clinical trial has not seen any episodes of 
serotonin syndrome. Risk of valvular heart disease: Valvular heart disease has been seen in compounds that are 5-HT2B agonists ( Hutcheson et al., 2011) . Lorcaserin is a 5 -HT2C agonist, with minimal affinity for the 5 -
HT2B receptor (see table 1 below). In addition, occurrence of valvular heart disease was examined in clinical  
trials with lorcaserin. In 3451 subjects who took lorcaserin 10mg twice daily for 1 year, 2.4% of patients who received lorcaserin and 2.0% of patients who received placebo developed valvular regurgitation on echocardiography (Belviq prescribing informati on). 
 
Table 1. Lorcaserin 5-HT Receptor Affinity (Belviq Prescribing Information) 
 Risk of Priapism: Other medications that have 5 -HT2C receptor affinities have been shown to produce 
priapism. Due to this risk subjects will be warned regarding the need for prompt treatment of prolonged 
erections lasting more than four hours. 
 Abuse Potential: Lorcaserin is a Schedule IV medication due to studies in humans showing that 
supratherapeutic doses of lorcaserin produced a rating of “high”. In a published study ( Shram et al., 2011) 
subjective measures of drug response were obtained in recreational polydrug users after 20mg, 40mg, and 60mg of lorcaserin and compared with zolpidem (15mg and 30mg) and ketamine (100mg). Results of that study showed that on the visual analog scale (VAS) rating of “drug liking”, overall, the mean scores for zolpidem and ketamine were in the “liking” range of greater than 50 on a 100 point scale, whereas, ratings for lorcaserin were in the “disliking” range (less than 50). The effects were primarily due to higher doses of lorcaserin. On other 

Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 13 of 48 
 VAS ratings, lorcaserin 40mg and 60mg produced a significant increase in the “high” rating but also produced a 
significant increase in the “feeling sick” rating. In contrast, zolpidem and ketamine were liked by the subj ects. 
The authors’ conclusions regarding this study were that “This study demonstrated that lorcaserin has a very low potential for abuse by recreational polydrug users with a history of using perception- altering and central 
nervous system depressant drugs. Supratherapeutic doses of lorcaserin were significantly disliked, as demonstrated by the bipolar Drug Liking VAS (primary measure), and was associated with prominent negative effects.” (Shram et al, 2011). 
Based on the safety and abuse potential data fro m human studies described above, as well as the preclinical data 
on interaction with cocaine described below, a dosage regimen of 10mg daily escalating to a maximum dose of 10mg twice daily was chosen for this study. 
Risks of Cocaine Administration 
Cocaine exposure: Medical complications that have been reported with cocaine use include heart attack, rupture 
of major blood vessels, stroke, difficulty breathing, swelling, cessation of bowel function, and death. However, none of these complications have been observed during our previous experience using I.V. cocaine administration for a similar protocol with GBR12909 at the University of Texas Medical Branch, or another study at UTMB using another study medication, SYN117. Cocaine is a potent sympathomimetic and has been associated with adverse cardiovascular events, including myocardial infarction and stroke, when taken illicitly.  While these consequences have never been observed following controlled experimental administration, we will limit these potential risks in several ways: (1) We will enroll only physically healthy cocaine using subjects with no evidence of cardiovascular disease based on history, physical examination, ECG, and laboratory tests – all prospective subjects will be seen a Cardiologist on s taff prior to the initiation of the study. (2) We will 
administer a dose shown to be safe in our hands that was selected to produces scientifically valid results. (3) We will monitor subjects closely in a hospital setting throughout the duration of action of the drug, under the 
supervision of medical personnel trained in basic and advanced cardiac life support. We will also employ continuous non-invasive hemodynamic monitoring using the Nexfin finger cuff (Edwards Scientific) that 
provides real- time assessm ent of blood pressure, heart rate, stroke volume, stroke volume variability, systemic 
vascular resistance, and cardiac output. Hemodynamic data will be continuously visible at bedside and stored for off -line analysis  via the finger cuff.  We have an interv ention plan in place to deal with any adverse events 
that may occur, as described in the following paragraph. In the event of an adverse event, the research team and the hospital is fully prepared to respond to any situation that may arise. The general and psychiatric emergency rooms are located minutes away.  There is a 24- hour medical emergency code team in the hospital. Physicians 
and their designated medical staff are fully trained to respond to all types of medical and psychiatric emergencies. A fully equipped crash cart is located on the unit. Study days 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, and 11 of this study 
will be conducted at the CRS unit, a specialized research unit at VCU Medical Center. This unit has previously conducted phase I studies, including cocaine studies in humans ( Baker et al., 2007). In the highly unlikely event 
of a suspected of medical emer gency (i.e. chest pain, uncontrolled hypertension, cardiac arrhythmia, respiratory 
distress) the subject will be promptly evaluated by one of the research physician s and either transferred to Step 
Down Unit, ICU or Emergency Department or prescribed the ap propriate treatment and monitoring level. Low 
risk subjects such as those with resolution of symptoms, normalization of vital signs, non-diagnostic ECG, and lack of potentially lethal arrhythmias may be monitored in the CRSU (see Immediate Evaluation of Ad verse 
Event form).  
 Effects on addiction: An additional concern is possible exposure to intravenous route of cocaine administration. 
In recruiting our subjects, the inclusion criteria include intravenous and/or smoked cocaine use. It is possible that some  subjects might be exposed to intravenous cocaine for the first time. One concern will be whether this 
experience will lead to a change in route of drug administration, i.e. cocaine smoking subject becoming intravenous drug users. Previous research has shown that this event is not likely to occur. In the case of cocaine, users of smoked cocaine rarely switch to intravenous cocaine use even after exposure to intravenous cocaine. 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 14 of 48 
 Thus, we do not think that administering intravenous cocaine to crack users will encourage intravenous drug 
use. In fact, human laboratory studies comparing the smoked and intravenous administered cocaine have shown that pharmacokinetics are very similar with these routes of administration. That is, time to reach peak plasma levels as  well as onset and duration of effect are comparable between intravenous and smoked cocaine 
administration in humans.  
 In addition, some of subjective effects of cocaine such as feelings of "stimulated" and "high" were greater for 
smoked than those for intravenous cocaine at comparable plasma levels. In addition, smoked cocaine seems to be associated with more craving than the comparable intravenous dose. Therefore, there is little evidence to support the view that intravenous cocaine is more addicting than smoked cocaine; in fact, the current evidence supports the opposite view. The risk of cocaine administration on craving in general will be minimized through: 1) To enroll in this study, cocaine use disorder subjects must not be seeking treatment. 2) Subj ects will remain 
in the controlled environment after the last dose of cocaine. 3) At the time study completion , risks of ongoing 
cocaine use and opportunities for treatment are discussed with all subjects. 
Risks of Lorcaserin Combined with Cocaine  
In a rec ent NIDA funded preclinical study (NIDA Study Report 1812-12132, Sep. 20, 2013), lorcaserin was 
administered to rodents in combination with cocaine without any significant toxicity. Final results of this study 
are summarized here and provided in detail in an attached document. In short, at human equivalent doses in rats (i.e., 5 mg/kg, equivalent to 20 mg/day in humans, based on systemic exposures), there were no additive/synergistic effects of PO lorcaserin on IV cocaine -induced mortality or convulsions.  However, at 5-
fold higher doses (i.e., 25 mg/kg in rats, equivalent to 100 mg/day in humans – substantially beyond what is proposed in this study), there are indications of increased sensitivity to cocaine-induced convulsions due to lorcaserin. The combination of lorcaserin and cocaine has not been studied in humans. We will guard against potential toxicity of cocaine combined with lorcaserin by dosing cocaine using an ascending dose approach, and we have specific stopping criteria in place to stop the cocaine dose escalation if warranted by excessive cardiovascular responses.  If in spite of these precautions cocaine toxicity is observed (significant hypertension, tachycardia, symptoms of ischemia or evidence of arrhythmias) we have established treatment pr otocols in 
place and a code team will respond if needed.  We have never required such assistance in the past. Moreover, additional blood samples will be drawn 4-6 hours on the days of escalating cocaine infusions to measure high-
sensitivity troponin I (hsT nI) and N- terminal pro -brain natriuretic peptide (NT -pro-BNP). Although not 
routinely utilized in clinical practice, these markers will be stored for batch analysis upon completion of the study to detect the presence cardiac strain and/or stress to the myocardium related to cocaine in the absence of overt clinical disease (Gaggin and Januzzi, 2014; Gualandro et al., 2014). This data will be used as a potential 
biomarker of subclinical effects of cocaine on heart for future clinical trials. The total amount of blood for the entire study will not exceed 550ml in an 8 week period. 
Potential Risks Not Due to Study Medic ation 
Potential risks to participating in this study not involving medication include: unauthorized disclosure of 
confidential information; discomfort or embarrassment related to urine collection or questionnaires dealing with personal habits, lifestyle, drug or alcohol use; possible unwanted encounters with friends or associates in the treatment setting.  
Phlebotomy: There is the potential risk of bruising at the site of the blood draw  for the blood chemistries and complete blood count. This risk will be minimized by having blood drawn by a trained phlebotomist. 
Adequacy of Protection Against Risks 
Informed Consent Procedures. The informed consent process involves a detailed verbal description of the study, 
the behavioral intervention, and the study medication provided by a study staff member.  Staff will emphasize that participation is voluntary. Next, the Project Director or study coordinator will conduct an item- by-item 
reading of the consent form while the participant reads along. The participant then me ets with a physician 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 15 of 48 
 investigator to ask questions about the risks of the medical procedures in the study. In this initial interview, 
participants will be informed of the following: 
They have an opportunity for research participation involving a program to evaluate effects of the study 
medication on effects produced by administration of cocaine in the hospital.   
Subjects in the studies will be randomly assigned to receive study medication or placebo. All assignments are 
based on chance.  
As with all medications, there are risks to treatment with the study medication. These are enumerated in the 
section above describing potential risks to the medication. 
All participants will be asked to complete questionnaires and answer questions related to drug and alcohol use, 
personal habits, lifestyle and feelings.  The initial information collection will take approximately 2 hours; shorter data collection sessions will occur weekly. 
All participants will be asked to provide a urine specimen for drug screening at each clinic visit.  
Participants may drop out at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to which they are otherwise entitled.  
Participants will be informed of procedures for ensuring their confidentiality, including: the issuance of a 
“Certificate of  Confidentiality” by the federal government; the use of numbers, codes and/or pseudonyms rather 
than participants’ names; and the placement of all data in locked files.  
Participants will be informed that, despite participant confidentiality protections, r esearch staff, under current 
state law, are required to report certain communicable diseases, and any incidents of sexual or physical abuse of 
a child or elder.   
Participants will be given the contact numbers of both the Principal Investigator and IRB to answer questions 
about the study or one’s rights as a human subject. 
 A copy of the signed form is made and given to the subject, another copy is held in the Principal Investigator’s 
records, and the original signed consent is kept in a separate, locked fi le accessible to the Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) upon request. Individuals who decide that they are interested in treatment for cocaine dependence will be assisted in selecting treatment services and self -help meetings from the community resource listings. 
Assessment of Adverse Events. Participants will be asked daily how they are doing and if they are having any problems. Any spontaneously reported symptoms or complaints will be recorded and reported to the IRB and NIDA and the FDA if events are class ified as serious.  
 
Data monitoring to ensure subject safety and confidentiality.  A potential risk in studies involving drug-
dependent volunteers is breach of confidentiality. This will be limited by maintaining data files on the medical histories of subjects to be kept in a locked file cabinet in the P.I.’s offices, accessible only to the study P.I. and designated study personnel as needed. Electronic media (i.e., computer-stored data, and data stored on CDs) will be password protected via encrypted code key known only to the designated study personnel.  
Furthermore, all subject information is coded with a unique numerical identifier. Protections of privacy of subjects’ medical information will be described to the prospective subjects as part of the enroll ment interview 
and the informed consent procedures.  
 As part of the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan, a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will monitor 
study processes and findings; part of the role of the DSMB will be to intercede to recommend halting enrollment of subjects if results definitively indicate that the study medication or protocol is harmful or in any way would negatively impact those individuals.   
 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 16 of 48 
 Approval by other interested agencies, including the FDA, is required prior to initiating studies investigating 
new indications of approved medications. This will provide further safeguard against unanticipated risks. An IND for drug and cocaine administration will be obtained well in advance of project start -up. 
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others  
Subjects in the study will receive close psychiatric attention. The potential benefits to society include decreased cocaine use if the study medications prove beneficial, with a resultant decrease in cocaine morbidi ty and 
mortality, as well as a reduction in the overall social costs for cocaine dependence. 
Risk -Benefit Ratio  
The primary risks to participation to this research are those that result from exposure to the study medications. 
These risks are seen as reason able since there are in place numerous procedures, ongoing and periodic, designed 
to detect adverse experiences that occur both at the level of the individual and at the level of the medication condition. Once detected, there are adequate procedures in place to determine the most appropriate method for addressing adverse events that occur to the individual or to a group of individuals in a specific medication condition. There are few anticipated physical, psychological, social, or legal risks. However, some possible risks to participating in these studies include: unauthorized disclosure of confidential information; discomfort or embarrassment related to urine collection or questionnaires dealing with personal habits, lifestyle, drug or alcohol use; and possible unwanted encounters with friends or associates in the study setting. If participants were to find any aspects of their involvement in the study psychologically or otherwise uncomfortable, they will first meet with the study physician to discuss the situation and determine if modifications can be made to accommodate them. If there is no apparent resolution available, the decision will be made whether or not to discontinue the participant from the study.  
Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
The risks to participants are reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits because:  
Staff will be trained and supervised to identify participants who are of danger to themselves or others.  Those 
participants found to be seeking treatment will be referred for appropriate care.  
The identification of effective treatments for cocaine dependence would be a great benefit to society.  
 
If any Psychiatric or non -Psychiatric medical illness (other than substance abuse) is discovered during the study, 
subjects will be referred for additional treatment in the community.  
STUDY OBJECTIVES  
Primary Objective  
The primary objectives are to provide safety and PK information on drug interactions between lorcaserin and 
cocaine in subjects with cocaine use disorder, to provide information on effects of lorcaserin on subjective response to cocaine and cocaine self -administration in subjects with cocaine use disorder, and to provide safety, 
PK information, and cocaine self-administration and subjective response to cocaine information for compounds chosen based on results of current project and discussions with NIDA pro gram staff.  
Secondary Objectives  
The secondary objective is to examine effects of lorcaserin on behavioral laboratory measures of impulsivity in cocaine dependent subjects.  
STUDY DESIGN 
Study Overview  
The overall goal of this project is to develop initial human data on effects of novel compounds on safety 
(interactions with cocaine) and efficacy (subjective response to cocaine and self -administration data) in non-
treatment seeking cocaine use disorder subjects. This project will provide innovative data on effects of novel 
compounds on cocaine self-administration in addition to needed safety data on drug interactions with cocaine. This is a Phase I human drug interaction study examining the safety of concurrent administration of cocaine 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 17 of 48 
 with novel compounds, and the effects of the novel compounds on subjective response to cocaine and cocaine 
self-administration in non-treatment seeking cocaine use disorder subjects. This data will provide important 
information for go/no- go decisions on phase II clinical trials  using medications as a tool to enhance abstinence. 
The initial compound to be studied will be the 5-HT2CR agonist lorcaserin, which has been shown to reduce cocaine self -administration and cue reactivity in rodents. In addition there is human safety data in non- cocaine 
using subjects for lorcaserin as it is currently FDA approved for obesity, but there is no human cocaine interaction/PK data and no PD data to support potential dosages for phase II clinical trials.  
This is a single center, double-blind, pl acebo -controlled, randomized, 1b/2a study. 18 subjects are planned.   
Screening data will be reviewed to determine subject eligibility.  Subjects who meet all inclusion criteria and 
none of the exclusion criteria will be entered into the study.  
The follow ing treatment regimens will be used:  
Lorcaserin  will be 10mg once daily increasing to 10mg twice daily.  
Placebo or Comparator – identical placebo capsules administered at the same time as lorcaserin.  
Subject participation will consist of 12 active study da ys and 2 follow-up visits, divided into multiple scheduled  
study visits .  Total duration of the study is expected to be 4 years . 
Criteria for evaluation Primary Efficacy Endpoint 
1. Safety: Heart rate (HR) and blood pressure (BP) measures during saline infusions will be compared to HR 
and BP after each cocaine infusion (20 mg and 40 mg doses).  Changes in HR and BP induced by cocaine infusion along with lorcaserin will be compared to those without lorcaserin, by cocaine dose level (20 mg and 40 mg doses), using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). Changes in ECG readings during saline infusion as compared to those taken during cocaine infusions will be reported as summary statistics. Adverse event data will be compiled for lorcaserin and placebo cohorts and presented as summary statistics.  
2. Cocaine Self -administration: Repeated measures ANOVA with cocaine dose (0mg, 25mg) and lorcaserin 
dose (0mg, 10mg, 20mg) as within subject factors will be used to examine differences in mean cocaine choice 
selection. In addition, a Bayesian analysis will be carried out as described below. 
3. Subjective response to cocaine: Subjective response measures (VAS) obtained during saline infusions will be compared between lorcaserin and placebo subjects to those during cocaine infusions by cocaine dose level to determine the extent to which these measures are modified by the administration of lorcaserin using repeated measures ANOVA.  
4. Cocaine PK: Plasma concentration -time profiles of cocaine after cocaine infusion du ring placebo 
administration (Day 2) will be analyzed to obtain pharmacokinetic parameter estimates of cocaine (Tmax, AUC, apparent t½, CL) by individual. These parameters will be compared within subjects on sessions with lorcaserin (Days 6 and 10 ). 
Secondary Efficacy Endpoints 
Response inhibition: Commission errors on the IMT will be compared between lorcaserin and placebo subjects 
to determine the extent to which this measure is modified by the administration of lorcaserin using repeated measures AN OVA.  
SUBJECT SELECTION  
Study Population  
Subjects with a diagnosis of cocaine use disorder  who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be eligible 
for participation in this study.   
Inclusion Criteria  
Males and females between 18 and 5 9 years -of-age. 
Understand the study procedures and provide written informed consent. 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 18 of 48 
 Meet current DSM -5 criteria for cocaine use disorder, at least moderate severity, and current DSM -IV diagnosis 
of cocaine dependence, but are not seeking treatment.  
Currently using cocaine by smoking or intravenous route of administration as determined by self-report and 
have a positive urine drug screen for cocaine during screening.  
Have vital signs as follows:  resting pulse below 95 bpm, blood pressures  below 140 mm Hg systolic and  90 
mm Hg diastolic.  
 
Have no clinically significant abnormalities in the judgment of the study physician in hematology and chemistry 
laboratory tests including liver function tests.  
Have sinus rhythm with normal conduction (including QTcF less than 440 ms) by ECG.   
Have no contraindications for study participation as determined by medical history and physical examination. 
Be able to demonstrate an understanding of study procedures and follow instructions including behavioral 
laboratory testing.  
No pregnant or nursing women will be permitted in the study, and women must either be unable to conceive (i.e., surgically sterilized, sterile, or postmenopausal) or be using a reliable form of contraception (e.g., abstinence, birth control pills, intrauterine device with spermicide, or condoms). Men will be advised to use condoms. All females must provide negative pregnancy urine tests before study entry, at each visit during the study, and at the end of study participation. 
Have hemoglobin/hematocrit values within normal limits based on age and gender.  
Exclusion Criteria  
Meet current DSM -5 diagnosis of any psychoactive substance use disorder other than cocaine, opioids, 
marijuana, or nicotine.  Diagnosis of mild to moderate use disorder for alcohol will not be exclusionary.  
Have a DSM -5 diagnosis of any psychoactive substance use disorder including but not limited to Bipolar 
Disorder, Major Depressive Disorder, ADHD, or Schizophrenia or a neurological disorder requiring ongoing 
treatment and/or making study participation unsafe.  
Have any previous medically adverse reaction to cocaine, including loss of consciousness, chest pain, or epileptic seizure.  
Have any clinically significant medical disorder including cardiovascular (including hypertension), pulmonary, CNS , hepatic, or renal disorder.  
Have a history of seizures (excluding childhood febrile seizures), or clinically significant head injury . 
Have significant current suicidal or homicidal ideation or a history of suicide attempt within the past 6 months. 
Have conditions of probation or parole requiring reports of drug use to officers of the court. 
Have impending incarceration.  Have a positive HIV test by self -report or history.  
Be pregnant or nursing or not using a reliable form of contraception if able to conceive. All females must 
provide negative pregnancy urine tests at screening, and at each study visit. 
Have any other illness, or condition, which in the opinion of the PI would preclude safe and/or successful completion of the study. 
Have a positive breat h alcohol test or urine drug screening positive for drugs of abuse with the exception of 
cocaine, cocaine metabolites, opiates and marijuana.  
Have a score > 5 on the Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale on any screening, monitoring, or study visit.  
Subjects who are allergic to lorcaserin.  
Subjects who have taken any investigational drug within 90 days prior to baseline. 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 19 of 48 
 Concurrent Medications  
All subjects should be maintained on the same medications throughout the entire study period, as medically 
feasible, with no introduction of new chronic therapies. 
Allowed Medications and Treatments  
Non-CNS active medications which are not known to have a potential interaction with cocaine or lorcaserin 
would be allowed in this study. 
Prohibited Medications and Treatments The following medications are prohibited during the study and administration will be considered a protocol 
violation. 
Any CNS active medications  
Any medications with a known interaction with cocaine or lorcaserin 
STUDY TREATMENTS  
Method of Assigning Subj ects to Treatment Groups  
Up to 18 eligible patients will be randomly assigned to lorcaserin  or placebo treatment groups in a 1:2 ratio 
using a SAS- based computer -generated randomization scheme developed by the study data management 
provider.   Blinding  
Due to the objectives of the study, the identity of test and control treatments will not be known to investigators, 
research staff, or patients.  The following study procedures will be in place to ensure double-blind 
administration of study treatments.  
Acces s to the randomization code will be strictly controlled.   
Packaging and labeling of lorcaserin  and placebo  will be identical to maintain the blind.  
Lorcaserin concentrations will not be analyzed till the end of the study. 
The study blind will be broken on completion of the clinical study and after the study database has been locked.  During the study, the blind may be broken only in emergencies when knowledge of the patient’s treatment 
group is necessary for further patient management. Unblinding will occur by the PI contacting the research pharmacy to break the blind in case of emergency.  
Formulation of Test Product 
Lorcaserin HCL 10mg tablets (Belviq, Arena Pharmaceuticals) will be used for this study. To ensure blinding, 
tablets will be placed in gelati n capsules by the research pharmacist prior to administration.   
Commercially available sterile normal saline for human use will be used as a matched  
placebo for cocaine. Cocaine is packaged in 2 mL vials containing 20 mg per mL. 
Cocaine for IV human use will be obtained from a NIDA contractor under a letter of authorization to allow cross reference to NIDA’s DMF for cocaine obtained and submitted to the IND.  
The pharmacist will prepare the cocaine according to instructions supplied by the NIDA contractor and dispense according to the randomization. The labels on the cassettes of 
cocaine and matching placebo will conform to internal Pharmacy and CRSU SOPs and  
instructions. The doses of cocaine will be prepared by diluting cocaine with 20 mL normal saline. Cocaine administration: Cocaine will be administered by a study  nurse  under the direct supervision of a 
physician . The drug is given intravenously (IV) over a 2 minute period in a cassette via a pump delivery system. 
Formulation of Control Product 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 20 of 48 
 Gelatin placebo capsules identical to capsules that enclose the study drug will be used for placebo. Dextrose 
powder will be used as a filling in the capsules. 
Packaging and Labeling  
Each pill bottle  of study drug will be labeled with the required FDA warning statement, the protocol number, a 
treatment number, the name of the study physician , and directions for patient use and storage.   
Administration  of Study Drug  
Dosage/Dosage Regimen 
 If subjects meet inclusion criteria, they will be seen both in the hospital and at  IDAS clinic  for a total of 12 
active study days and monitoring procedures will be in place to detect drug and alcohol use and assess for 
adverse events  at each visit . In addition, the hospital cocaine administration procedures will reduce the 
likelihood of increased cocaine craving after cocaine administration. Subjects will undergo procedures as 
described below. Subjects will not be allowed to smoke cigarettes, as smoking is not allowed in the hospital or anywhere on the VCU campus. Subjects will have the option to use a nicotine patch dosed based on the amount of daily cigarettes smoked. Subjects will not be allowed to leave the CRS Unit nor receive visitors  during their 
study visits . Subjects who are unable to comply with these restrictions will be dropped from the study. After a 
screening cocaine infusion to determine safety, eligible subjects will be randomized to Group A –placebo only or Group B –placebo followed by an ascending dose of lorcaserin. Six subjects will be assigned to Group A (placebo) and 12 subjects will be assigned to Group B (active lorcaserin).  
Study Drug Dosage: Lorcaserin will be 10mg once daily increasing to 10mg twice daily.  Outcome Measures: The primary outcome measures are adverse events, cardiovascular responses (Heart rate 
(HR), blood pressure (BP), ECG measurements, subjective response to cocaine, cocaine self-administration, and cocaine blood PK. Secondary outcome measures will be impulsivity as measured by the i mmediate memory 
task (IMT).  
1) Days 1 -2: All subjects will be seen on  the CRSU. All subjects will receive placebo on days 1 -2 in a single 
blind fashion. Vital signs including heart rate, blood pressure and respiration rate will be obtained after placebo 
administration. Days 1 -2 will be single -blind placebo, whereas all remaining study days will be double-blind. 
All subjects will leave the CRSU at the end of each study day. 
2) Days 3 -6: All subjects will be seen on  the CRSU  on days 3 and 6, and at the IDAS clinic on days 4 and 5. On 
days 3 -6, subject group A will receive one placebo pill twice daily, and group B will receive one placebo pill in 
the morning and one matching lorcaserin 10 mg pill in the evening, for a total dose of 10 mg daily . ECG with 
QTc wi ll be performed daily. If the QTc is prolonged greater than 30ms over baseline lorcaserin dosage will be 
held.  
3) Day 7: All subjects will receive one placebo pill in the morning in single blind fashion. Following Cocaine 
Self-administration sessions and impulsivity testing the subjects will leave  the unit. 
4) Days 8-10: All subjects will be seen at the   IDAS clinic  on Days 8 and 9 and subjects in group B will have a 
blinded dosage increase to 10 mg of lorcaserin twice daily for Days 8 -11 (Days 10 and 11 will take place at the 
CRSU) . Vital signs including heart rate, blood pressure and respiration rate will be obtained before 
placebo/lorcaserin administration. ECG with QTc will be performed daily  under the supervision of a study 
physician . If the QTc is prolonged greater than 30ms over baseline lorcaserin dosage will be held. 
5) Day 11: All subjects will be seen on the CRSU and receive placebo/lorcaserin in the morning followed by the 
last cocaine self -administration session.  
6) Day  12: Subjects will be seen at IDAS  for study procedures.   
5) Cocaine Infusion Sessions (Days 1, 2, 6, and 10): All subjects will undergo an ascending dose intravenous cocaine administration after admission on day 1 to ensure safety of later cocaine studies.  
To assess the safety and subjective effects of cocaine in the presence of lorcaserin, subjects will receive 
ascending doses of intravenous cocaine (10 mg, 20 mg, 40 mg), with each cocaine administration separated by 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 21 of 48 
 one hour. In addition, 0 mg cocaine (saline)  infusion will be randomly given after the first dose of cocaine in 
order to aid in blinding investigators and subjects to the order of drug administration. Infusions will be carried 
out hourly starting from 1 hour after placebo/lorcaserin for 4 times (on Day 1, 2, 6, and 10 ). An example dose 
by session diagram is shown below. Note that the 0 mg dose is randomly given after the first dose of cocaine. Monitoring will be continued for 1 hour after the last dose of cocaine. 
 
Dose  Dose Session 1  Dose Session 2  Dose Session 3  Dose Session 4  
1 10 mg Cocaine  10 mg Cocaine  10 mg Cocaine  10 mg Cocaine  
2 20 mg Cocaine  0 mg Cocaine  20 mg Cocaine  0 mg Cocaine  
3 0 mg Cocaine  20 mg Cocaine  40 mg Cocaine  20 mg Cocaine  
4 40 mg Cocaine  40 mg Cocaine  0 mg Cocaine  40 mg Cocaine  
 
Dispensing  
Study drug s will be dispensed by the research pharmacist and administered by the research nurse on the CRS 
unit (cocaine) or trained research personnel (lorcaserin)  at IDAS . 
Supply of Study Drug at the Site  
Study drug will be provided to the CRS research unit after an order from the study physician . 
Storage  
At the testing facility, all lorcaserin, placebo, and cocaine must be kept in a secure, locked storage place with 
access limited to authorized study personnel only. Lorcaserin bottles must be 
kept at room temperature (15°C–25°C) until ready for administration. Cocaine must be stored in accordance with regulations for controlled substances and per pharmacy policy. 
Study Drug Accountability  
An accurate and current accounting of the disp ensing and return of study drug for each subject will be 
maintained on an ongoing basis by a member of the study site staff.  The number of study drug dispensed and 
returned by the subject will be recorded on the Investigational Drug Accountability Record. The study staff must record an accurate accounting of each lorcaserin, and Cocaine/placebo dispensation and assignment number, as well as the date dispensed. 
Both used and cocaine/placebo cassettes and IV cocaine vials must be accounted for on a drug disposition and 
accountability form, including the amount of cocaine that was not dispensed and was wasted from the 2mg/mL 
vial. 
 
STUDY PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES  
A Schedule of Events representing the required testing procedures to be performed for the duration of the study 
is diagrammed in Appendix 1. While it will be preferable to schedule all of the study days consecutively, the 
modular design allows Day 1 and Day 2 to be scheduled independently in advance of the Day 3 -7 and Day 8-12 
study visits . The Day 3 -7 and Day 8-12 hospital visits will be for 5 days each. In addition these 2 study visits 
may be scheduled separately to accommodate the availability of participants. However, all study days must be 
completed with a 90- day period. In the event that all study  days are not scheduled consecutively, participants 
will be required to come into the research clinic for weekly monitoring  (including UDS, vitals, and questionnaires). 
 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 22 of 48 
 Prior to conducting any study- related activities, written informed consent and the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) authorization must be signed and dated by the subject.  If appropriate, assent 
must also be obtained prior to conducting any study- related activities.  
Clinical Assessments  
Concomitant Medications  
All concomitant medication and concurrent therapies will be documented at screening  and study days (Days 1 -
11) and Follow- Up days (Days 12, 15 and 19 ).  Dose, route, unit frequency of administration, and indication for 
administration and dates of medication will be captured.  
Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale  (COWS)  
This scale will be administered each study day during screening, monitoring and at each of the study visits  for 
subjects who meet criteria for opioid dependence to determine  the presence of symptoms indicative of opiate 
withdrawal. A score  > 5 on the scale would prohibit study participation. In the event of a positive urine drug 
screen for opia tes the study physician will review the COWS and the subject’s drug use history to determine the 
likelihood of opiate withdrawal which would also prohibit study participation. 
Demographics  
Demographic information (date of birth, gender, race) will be recorded at screening . 
Medical History  
Relevant medical history, including history of current disease, other pertinent respiratory history, and 
information regarding underlying diseases will be recorded at screening . 
Physical Examination 
A complete physical examination will be performed by qualified staff (MD, NP,).  New abnormal physical 
exam findings must be documented and will be followed by a physician or other qualified staff at the next scheduled visit. 
Vital Signs  
Body temperature, blood pressure, pulse and respirations will be performed after resting for 5 minutes at 
screening and at study visits (Days 1 -12) and Follow- Up visits (Days  15 and 19). 
The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM- IV (SCID)  
The SCID (First et al, 2002) will be used to collect diagnostic information used to make eligibility 
determinations. This interview  will be conducted by staff  who will be trained by experienced SCID interviewers 
using standardized training videotapes from Biometrics Research, NY. This interview  will be conducted at 
screening.  
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV Personality Disorders Module (SCID- II) 
This instrument provides a DSM-IV axis II diagnosis, and will be used to determine a diagnosis of Antisocial Personality Disorder and Borderline Personality Disorder (First et al, 1997). This interview  will be conducted at 
screening by trained staff . 
Childhood Disorders Version of the SCID (KID -SCID) ADHD Module  
A version of the KID-SCID modified for adults will be used to aid in the determination of a diagnosis of adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This interview  will be conducted at screening by trained staff . 
Wender Utah Rating  Scale (WURS)  
This 61- item scale for adults  (Almaric and Koo b, 1993)  describes their own childhood behavior to aid in the 
deter mination of ADHD in adults. This will be conducted at screening by trained staff . 
Kreek -McHugh -Schluger -Kellogg Scale (KMSK)  
This scale (Kellogg et al, 2003) will be used to quantify use of opioids, cocaine, marijuana, alcohol, and other substances of abuse by assessing the frequency, amount, and duration of use of the particular substance during 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 23 of 48 
 the individual’s period of greatest consumption. The scale also assesses the mode of use, whethe r the substance 
use is current or past, and whether each substance is the substance of choice. This will be conducted at 
screening by trained staff.  
Addiction Severity Index (ASI -lite) 
This scale (Cacciola et al, 2007) will be used in conjunction with the KMSK as measures of baseline severity of substance use. This will be conducted at screening by trained staff.  
Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND)  
This is a short self -report questionnaire (Heatherton et al, 1991) designed to measure the construct of nicotine 
dependence, will be included to explore the potential moderating effects of tobacco dependence in relation to cocaine use and response to treat ment. This will be conducted at screening by trained staff.  
National Adult Reading Test (NART)  
The NART -R is a 61 -item vocabulary test (Nelson and O’Connell, 1978) will be used to estimate general 
intellectual ability and to control for individual differences in subject’s premorbid level of intelligence. This test has been shown to have high inter- rater (.96 -.98) and test-retest reliability (.98) and predictive validity (.74) 
with the WAIS -R IQ.  This will be conducted at screening. 
Attentional Bias  (modified Stroop  task) 
This is a widely -used implicit task in which the subject is presented with words printed in color, and asked to 
discriminate the color of each stimulus and to ignore the meaning of the words. There are ten cocaine- related 
words (e.g ., "cocaine", "crack"), and ten neutral words consisting of household features (eg., "table", "kitchen"). 
The word sets are matched in length or frequency of use using typical procedures. Subjects are instructed that words written in different colors (blue, green, or red) will be presented on the screen, one after the other, and that their task is to indicate the color in which the word is written as quickly and as accurately as possible, ignoring the meaning of the word itself. A new word is presented 500m s after a response (or 500ms after the 
timeout of 3 sec). In this block design protocol a block (60s) of neutral words alternates with a block (60s) of cocaine words and each run is approximately 10 min. Subjects first respond to a practice sequence (50 tr ials) of 
letter strings (e.g, HHHH). Within each Stroop task, the program randomly determines the presentation order of 
words and colors for each participant under the constraint that the same color does not appear on two consecutive trials.  
Conditioned Di stracter XY Go -No Go task 
This task is based on the XY-GoNo Task of Hugh Garavan and colleagues: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12944513
 
In this task, the subject sees the letters X and Y alternating once per second (white letter on black background) 
in a large font, e.g. 400 ms of letter presentation, alternating with 600 ms blank screen.  The subject is to emit a 
press each time the letter is different from the one before (an alte rnation).  Since most of the time X alternates 
with Y, this builds up a prepotent tendency of the subject to press every second.  However, the subject is to NOT press if the same letter is presented twice in a row, e.g.   ..X.…Y…..X….X.....  or   X….Y…..X….Y….X….Y….Y…   The presentation of the same letter twice in 
a row in the series is a called a LURE, and these represent 10% of the stimuli, and lures never occur in rapid succession. The task will be divided into 15 blocks, each 30 seconds long. Each block  will thus have 30 letters 
shown, three of which will be identical to the letter before it (i.e. three lures per block. Five blocks will be "non-distractor" control blocks, where the background will be black as in the original Garavan task. Five blocks wil l 
be "unconditioned distractor) control blocks, where the subject will see a continuous thick yellow border at the periphery of the screen. Five blocks will be the "conditioned distractor" blocks, where the subject will see a continuous teal-colored thick border that was previously seen in the cocaine self -administration task.   
 
 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 24 of 48 
 Adverse Events  
Information regarding occurrence of adverse events will be captured throughout the study. Duration (start and 
stop dates and times), severity, outcome, treatment and relation to study drug will be recorded on the case report form (CRF).  
Clinical Laboratory Measurements  
Hematology  
Blood will be obtained and sent to each site’s clinical hematology lab a complete blood count (hemoglobin, 
hematocrit, red blood cell count, white blood cell count, white blood cell differential, and platelet count). 
Blood Chemistry Profile  
Blood will be obtained and sent to each site’s clinical chemistry lab for determination of serum sodium, 
potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, random glucose, BUN, creatinine, aspartate aminotransferase (AST/SGOT), alanine aminotransferase (ALT/SGPT), alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, albumin and LDH. 
Pregnancy Test  
A urine pregnancy test will be obtained from female subjects who are of childbearing age prior to their 
participation in the study.  
Urinalysis  
Urine will be obtained and sent to each site’s clinical laboratory for determination of color, specific gravity, pH, protein, glucose, ketones, and blood. 
Urine Drug Screen  
Urine will be  obtained from all subjects to be tested for cocaine (benzoylecgonine), opiates and opioids, 
benzodiazepines, amphetamine, methamphetamine, and THC. Breathalyzer  
Breath alcohol level will be obtained from all subjects.  Subjects who have a positive breath alcohol will be told 
that they must return at a later date with a negative breath alcohol in order to take part in study procedures. 
Pharmacokinetic Measurements  
Pharmacokinetic samples for analysis of cocaine (PK): Blood samples for analysis of the pharmacokinetics of 
10 mg IV cocaine will be collected during treatment with 0 mg Lorcaserin (on study day 2) and during treatmen t with lorcaserin at 10 mg once daily (study day 6 ) and lorcaserin 10mg twice daily (study day 10). 
Plasma cocaine levels at th ese time points for each of those days: -15, 5, 10, 20, 30, 45 60, 90, 120, 180, 240 
minutes. Plasma levels of cocaine and metabolites will be assayed by liquid chromatography -tandem mass 
spectrometry. Benzoylecgonine and ecgonine methyl ester both peak at approximately 120 minutes, with 
expected concentrations of 170 and 15 ng/mL at 480 minutes, respectively. Determinations of cocaine, benzoylecgonine, ecgonine methyl ester, and norcocaine (if detectible) will be measured. Blood will be collected into Vacu tainer tubes that contain fluoride to inhibit hydrolysis of cocaine by plasma cholinesterases. 
After separation of plasma by routine methods, samples will be frozen at -70°C until ready for analysis.  
 
EVALUATIONS BY VISIT  (see table 2. below for overview  of time course) 
 
Screening  (Days -7 to 0) Conducted at IDAS  
Review the study with the subject and obtain written informed consent. Assign the subject a unique screening number. Record demographics data.  
Record medical history.  Record concomitant medications.  
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 25 of 48 
 Administe r COWS  if opioid user 
Perform a complete physical examination.  
Perform a complete neurological exam.  
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG.  
Collect urine for clinical laboratory tests (urine drug screen, pregnancy test, urinalysis). 
Perform and recor d vital signs.  
Perform and record Breathalyzer.  
Collect blood for clinical laboratory tests (serum chemistry  and hematology ). 
Perform psychiatric interviews (SCID, SCID -II, KID -SCID).  
Conduct clinical assessments (KMSK, FTND, NART, ASI- lite, POMS, CGI -S, C- SSRS) . 
Record brief substance craving scale, timeline follow back cocaine use, and drug use history. Verify inclusion and exclusion. Schedule subject for Day 1 visit  as soon as possible.    Study Day 1  
Arrive at  CRS unit. 
Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen.  
Perform and record  Breathalyzer.  
Administer COWS  if opioid user.  
Perform and record vital signs. Perform a 12 -Lead ECG.  
Perform a brief physical exam and continuous cardiovascular monitoring. Administer placebo in morning. Administer  cocaine for Dosing session 1. 
Record brief substance craving scale.  
Update concomitant medications.  
Record Visual Analog Scale (VAS).  
Record adverse events.  
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I, C-SSRS).  
Administer Immediate Memory Task (IM T). 
 Leave  CRS unit. 
 Study Day 2  
Arrive  on CRS unit. 
Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen. Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs.  
Administer C OWS  if opioid user. 
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG.  
Perform a brief physical exam and continu ous cardiovascular monitoring. 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 26 of 48 
 Administer placebo in morning. 
Administer cocaine  for P K. 
Record brief substance craving scale.  
Update concomitant medications.  
Record VAS  and adverse events . 
Administer cocaine for Dosing session  2. 
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I). 
Leave  CRS unit. 
 Study Day 3  
Arrive on  CRS unit. 
Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen. Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs.  
Administer C OWS  if opioid user. 
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG, brief physical exam , and continuous cardiovascular monitoring. 
Administer placebo in morning Self -Administer ed cocaine session 1  in morning. 
Self-Administered cocaine session 2 in afternoon. 
Record brief substance craving scale.  
Update concomitant medications . 
Record VAS  and AE.  
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I). 
Administer placebo/lorcaserin in evening Leave CRS unit.  Study Day 4  
Arrive at IDAS  
Administer placebo in morning Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen  
Perform and record Breathalyzer and  vital signs.  
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG . 
Record  brief substance craving scale and AE.  
Administer C OWS  if opioid user. 
Update concomitant medications.  
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS , CGI- I). 
Administer IMT task  
Administer placebo/lorcaserin in evening Leave  IDAS . 
 Study Day 5  
Arrive at IDAS   
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 27 of 48 
 Administer placebo in morning 
Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen. Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs.  
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG.  
Record brief substance craving scale and AE.  
Administer C OWS  if opioid user. 
Update concomitant medications.  
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I, and C- SSRS).  
Administer placebo/lorcaserin in evening Leave IDAS . 
 Study Day 6  
Arrive on CRS unit  Administer placebo in morning Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen. Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs.  
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG  and continuous cardiovascular monitoring. 
Record brief substance craving scale, VAS, and AE. 
Administer C OWS  if opioid user. 
Update concomitant medications.  
Administer cocaine for PK.  
Measure lorcaserin PK 
Administer cocaine  for D osing session  3. 
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I). 
Administer placebo/lorcaserin in evening Leave CRS unit.  Study Day 7  
Arrive on CRS unit  Administer placebo in morning Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen. Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs.  
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG  and brief physical exam . 
Record brief substance craving scale, VAS  and AE. 
Administer C OWS  if opioid user. 
Update concomitant medication.  
Self -Administered cocaine session 3 in morning. 
Self -Administered cocaine session 4 in afternoon. 
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I). 
Administer IMT task.  
Leave CRS unit 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 28 of 48 
  
Study Day 8  
Arrive at IDAS   
Administer placebo/lorcaserin in morning 
Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen. Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs.  
Administer C OWS  if opioid user. 
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG and brief physical exam.  
Record brief substance craving scale, VAS  and AE. 
Update concomi tant medications.  
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I, and C- SSRS).  
Administer placebo/lorcaserin in evening. Leave IDAS . 
 Study Day 9  
Arrive at IDAS  
Administer placebo/lorcaserin in morning Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen. Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs. 
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG.  
Record brief substance craving scale and AE.  
Administer COWS  if opioid user. 
Update concomitant medications.  
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I, and C- SSRS).  
Administer placebo/lo rcaserin in evening. 
Leave IDAS . 
 Study Day 10   
Arrive on CRS unit  Administer placebo/lorcaserin in morning Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen. Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs.  
Perform a 12 -Lead ECGand continuous cardiovascular monitoring. 
Record brief substance craving scale, VAS, and AE. Administer COWS  if opioid user. 
Update concomitant medications.  
Administer cocaine for PK.  
Measure lorcaserin PK.  
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I). 
Administer cocaine  for Dosing session  4. 
Administer IMT task  
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 29 of 48 
 Administer placebo/lorcaserin in evening 
Leave CRS unit.  Study Day 11  
Arrive on CRS unit  Administer placebo/lorcaserin in morning Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen. Collect blood for clinical laboratory test s (serum chemistry  and hematology).  
Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs.  
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG and continuous cardiovascular monitoring. 
Record brief substance craving scale, VAS  and AE. 
Administer COWS  if opioid user. 
Update concomitant medication.  
Self -Administered cocaine session 5 in morning. 
Self -Administered cocaine session 6 in afternoon. 
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I). 
Leave CRS unit.   Study Day 12   
Arrive at IDAS  
Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen.  
Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs.  
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG.  
Record brief substance craving scale and AE.   
Administer COWS  if opioid user. 
Update concomitant medication.  
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS ,CGI -I, Stroop, and XY Go -No Go ). 
PI (or designee) conduct assessment for lorcaserin side effects . 
Leave IDAS  
 Follow- Up Days (Day 1 5, 19) Conducted at IDAS  
Collect urine for pregnancy test and urine drug screen. Perform and record Breathalyzer and vital signs.  
Perform a 12 -Lead ECG and brief physical exam  (Day 19 only). 
Record brief substance craving scale and  timeline follow back cocaine use.  
Update concomitant medication.  
Conduct clinical assessments (POMS, CGI -I, and C- SSRS).  
 
   
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 30 of 48 
  
   Table 2.   Overview of Study Procedures  
Study Day Day 1  Day 2  
Study Visit One Two 
Procedure Morning 
Session  Arrive   at CRS , Three Screening 
Doses of Cocaine (NexFin 
monitoring) Arrive at CRS  
10mg Cocaine for PK  
Procedure Afternoon 
Session  Impulsivity Testing  
Depart from CRS  Three Doses of Cocaine, Cardiovascular 
(NexFin monitoring) 
Cardiac Biomarkers (4 -6 hrs from last dose)  
Subjective Ratings  
Depart from  CRS  
Study Drug Placebo 8:00 a.m. Placebo 8:00 a.m 
 
Study Day Day 3  Day 4  Day 5  Day 6  Day 7  
Study Visit Three  Four Five Six 
 Seven  
Arrive at CRS  
ECG  
Procedure 
Morning Session Arrive at CRS Cocaine Self 
Administration  Arrive at IDAS  
ECG  
Impulsivity 
Testing  Arrive at 
IDAS  
 
ECG  Arrive at CRS  
ECG  
10mg Cocaine for PK, 
Lorcaserin blood levels  Cocaine Self 
Administration  
Procedure 
Afternoon Session Cocaine Self Administration  
Depart from CRS      Three Doses of Cocaine  (NexFin monitoring) 
Cardiovascular& 
Subjective Ratings  
Cardiac Biomarkers (4 -
6 hrs from last dose) 
Depart from CRS  Cocaine Self 
Administration  
Impulsivity Testing  
Depart from CRS  
Study Drug Placebo 8:00 a.m., Lorcaserin 
10mg p.m. prior 
to departure  or 
Placebo 8:00 
a.m., Placebo 
p.m. prior to Placebo 8:00 a.m., 
Lorcaserin 
10mg p.m. 
prior to 
departure  or 
Placebo 8:00 Placebo 8:00 a.m., 
Lorcaserin 
10mg p.m. 
prior to 
departure  
or Placebo Placebo 8:00 a.m., 
Lorcaserin 10mg p.m. 
prior to departure, or Placebo 8:00 a.m., 
placebo   p.m. prior to 
departure Placebo 8:00 a.m. 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 31 of 48 
 departure  a.m., 
placebo p.m. 
prior to 
departure 8:00 a.m., 
placebo 
p.m. prior 
to departure 
  
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 32 of 48 
  
 
Study Day 
Day 8  Day 9  Day 10  Day 11  Day 12  
Study Visit 
Eight  Nine  Ten Eleven  Twelve  
Procedure 
Morning Session Arrive at 
IDAS  
ECG  
  Arrive at IDAS  
ECG  
 Arrive at CRS  
ECG  
10mg Cocaine for PK, Lorcaserin blood levels  Arrive at CRS  
ECG  
Cocaine Self 
Administration  Arrive at IDAS  
ECG  
Impulsivity Testing  
 
Procedure 
Afternoon 
Session  
  
 Three Doses of 
Cocaine (NexFin 
monitoring) 
Cardiovascular & 
Subjective Ratings  
Cardiac Biomarkers (4-6 hrs from last 
dose) 
Impulsivity Testing  
Depart from CRS  Cocaine Self 
Administration  
 Depart from CRS  Physical exam  
Study Drug Lorcaserin 
10mg 8:00 
a.m., Lorcaserin 
10mg p.m. 
prior to 
departure . or 
Placebo 8:00 
a.m., placebo 
p.m. prior to 
departure Lorcaserin 
10mg 8:00 
a.m., Lorcaserin 
10mg p.m. 
prior to 
departure or 
Placebo 8:00 a.m., placebo 
p.m. prior to 
departure Lorcaserin 10mg 8:00 a.m., Lorcaserin 
10mg p.m. prior to 
departure or Placebo 
8:00 a.m., placebo 
p.m. prior to departure Lorcaserin 10mg 8:00 a.m. or Placebo 
8:00 a.m.,    
 
Self-Administration Session (Days 3, 7, and 1 1)  
On days 3, 7, and 11 , subjects participate in two self -administrative sessions and will make six choices for 
cocaine or $5. The first session will begin at 10 am and the second at 1 pm (see Table 3 below), with each 
session being 2.5 hours long.  
 
Table 3. Schedule of Cocaine Self Administration Procedure  
Time  Choices  8 patients  8 patients  
10:00 am  Baseline: VAS, BP/HR, EKG  
10:20 am  Choice 1 0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
10:35 am  Choice 2 0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 33 of 48 
 10:50 am  Choice 3 0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
11:05 am  Choice 4 0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
11:20 am  Choice 5 0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
11:35 am  Choice 6 0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
    
1:00 pm  Baseline: VAS, BP/HR, EKG  
1:20 pm  Choice 1 25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
1:35 pm  Choice 2 25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
1:50 pm  Choice 3 25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
2:05 pm  Choice 4 25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
2:20 pm  Choice 5 25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
2:35 pm  Choice 6 25 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  0 mg cocaine IV or $ 5  
 
In one session subjects will make six choices between 0 mg i.v. cocaine or money. During the other self -
administration session, subjects will make six choices between 25 mg i.v. cocaine or money. The dose of 
cocaine was chosen based on previous studies showing a signific ant medication effect on cocaine self -
administration (Hart et al, 2008 ). Sessions begin with a baseline period in which participants complete 
computerized subjective- effects questionnaires, and vital signs are monitored.  
The session begins with one “sample” choice, where participant respond on a keyboard under a fixed ratio 
schedule (FR200; participants are required to press the spacebar 200 times to receive the option). The subsequent five trials are spaced 15 -min apart, in which participants had the opportunity to self -administer the 
same dose of cocaine as the sample dose,  or to receive money. A modified progressive ratio of responding is 
used, in which the first response requirement is a FR200. Following each choice, the response requirement for 
the chosen option increases by 400, while the response requirement for the non- chosen option does not 
change. Thus, if a participant only chose cocaine or only chose money, the response requirements would 
escalate progressively through 600, 1,000, 1,400,1,800, and 2,200 bar presses (Haney  et al, 2011) .  
The subject would make a series of choices using the PR schedule between ascending value money 
options ($5) or cocaine (0 mg or 25 mg/i.v. infusion) using a patient controlled (PCA pump). Choices for money 
will be verbally indicated to the investigator. Infusions will be made over a 2 min period followed by a 13 min 
time-out period. Subjects will receive the cash or cocaine doses (0 or 25 mg) immediately after they meet the 
progressive ratio criteria for each choice, providing vital signs remain within the preset intervals. If the subject 
chooses all cocaine options in the cocaine choice session and no money, they will receive a maximum of 120 
mg cocaine, i.v. Money choices will be given directly to the patient after choice session, but this can only be 
spent after departing from the CRS. All infusions on this day will be double- blinded and counterbalanced in 
their presentation among subjects.  
 
Cardiovascular Monitoring During Cocaine Infusions and Cocaine Self -Administration Procedure 
Cardiovascular monitoring by continuous measuring heart rate /ECG  and blood pressure starting 15 minutes 
prior to each of the 4 cocaine infusions and continued for at least 60 minutes following each dose . PI/Co -I or 
their medically qualified designees will be present during all cocaine infusions to monitor and intervene if 
necessary.  For the sessions of cocaine infusions on Day 1, 2, 6, and 10, non -invasive monitoring of cardiac 
hemodynamics will be performed with the NexFin finger cuff system (Edwards Life Sciences). 
 Criteria f or withholding Cocaine Administration 
Cocaine administration will not be initiated if:  
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 34 of 48 
 • Clinically significant arrhythmias  
• Resting pulse > 130 bpm  
• QTc increase of greater than 30ms over baseline  
• Blood pressure above 165mm Hg systolic and 100mm Hg diastolic . 
• Behavioral manifestations of cocaine toxicity (agitation, psychosis, inability to  
cooperate with study procedures).  
 
If cardiovascular measures have not returned to acceptable levels (heart rate  
<130 bpm, diastolic pressure <100mmHg, and systolic pressur e <165 mmHg , QTc <3 0ms over baseline), the 
next session will be delayed by 15 min, after which these measures will be repeated. 
 
Stopping Criteria for Subject Participation  
Subject participation will be terminated if any of the following events occur:  
The following values do not return to acceptable limits within appropriate time frames  
(approximately 30 minutes);  
• Systolic BP > 180 mm Hg 
• Diastolic BP > 120 mm Hg 
• Heart rate > (220 – age x 0.85) bpm  
• QTc > 470ms  
• Participants must continue to meet other inclusion criteria in order to remain in the  
protocol   
 
ADVERSE EXPERIENCE  REPORTING AND DOCUMENTATION 
Adverse Events  
Adverse Events (AEs) will be identified through daily interviews with participants and noted at any visit. The 
data will be entered on the standard VCU IRB AE and SAE forms. Continuous logs of all SAEs and AEs will 
be maintained. SAEs will be reported to the VCU IRB, the NIDA PO, the DSMB and the US FDA (when appropriate) as described above. In addition to immediate reports where appropriate, there will be annual reports and descriptions in the results section of publications. 
 Table 4.  AE Severity Grading 
Severity (Toxicity Grade)  Description  
Mild (1) Transient or mild discomfort; no limitation in activity; no 
medical intervention or therapy required. The subject may be aware of the sign or symptom but tolerates it reasonably well. 
Moderate (2)  Mild to moderate limitation in activity, no or minimal medical intervention/therapy required. 
Severe (3)  Marked limitation in activity, medical intervention/therapy required, hospitalizations possible. 
Life-threatening (4) The subject is at risk of death due to the adverse experience as it occurred. This does not refer to an experience that hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe.  
 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 35 of 48 
 AE Relationship to Study Drug  
The relationship of an AE to the study drug will be assessed using the following the guidelines in 5. 
Table 5.  AE Relationship to Study Drug 
Relationship  
to Drug Comment 
Definitely  Previously known toxicity of agent; or an event that follows a reasonable 
temporal sequence from administration of the drug; that follows a known or expected response pattern to the suspected drug; that is confirmed by stopping or reducing the dosage of the drug; and that is not explained by any other reasonable hypothesis. 
Probably An event that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of the drug; that follows a known or expected response pattern to the suspected drug; that is confirmed by stopping or reducing the dosage of the drug; and that is unlikely to be explained by the known characteristics of the subject’s clinical state or by other interventions.  
Possibly An event that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of the drug; that follows a known or expected response pattern to that suspected drug; but that could readily have been produced by a number of other factors. 
Unrelated  An event that can be determined with certainty to have no relationship to the study drug. 
Serious Adverse Experiences (SAE)  
An SAE is defined as any AE occurring at any dose that results in any of the following outcomes: 
• death  
• a life -threatening adverse experience  
• inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• a persistent or significant disab ility/incapacity  
• a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
Other important medical events may also be considered an SAE when, based on appropriate medical judgment, they jeopardize the subject or require intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed.  
  
Serious Adverse Experience Reporting  
All adverse events (AEs) occurring during the course of the study will be collected, documented, and reported 
to the PI. The occurrence of AEs will be assessed at baseline and each clinic visit during the treatment phase of the study.  
 AE’s deemed to be serious (SAEs), as defined by the FDA, will be systematically evaluated at each clinic visit. 
Any SAE, whether or not related to study, will be reported to the VCU IRB, the NIDA Program Officer (Aidan Hampson, and the FDA (when appropriate) within 24- 48 hours. A full written report to all institutions will 
follow as soon as possible but in no more than three days.  The written report will be in the format required by the local IRB and will contain information regarding th e date of the SAE, description of the SAE, severity 
rating (Grade 1 to 4), assessment of cause, whether the SAE indicates an increased risk for current or future subjects, and whether changes to the informed consent form will be necessary.   
 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 36 of 48 
 In cases of early termination from the study due to SAE, the participant will have appropriate follow- up medical 
monitoring. Monitoring will continue until the problem has resolved or stabilized with no further change 
expected, is clearly unrelated to study medication , or results in death.  Outcome of SAEs will be periodically 
reported to NIDA. A summary of the SAEs that occurred during the previous year will be included in the annual progress report to NIDA. 
 
Medical Monitoring  
Dr. F. Gerard Moeller should be contacted directly at these numbers to report medical concerns or questions 
regarding safety.  
Phone: (804) 828-4134 
Pager: ( 804) 828-4999, pager 3479 
   
DISCONTINUATION AND REPLACEMENT OF SUBJECTS  
Early Discontinuation of Study Drug  
A subject may be discontinued from study treatment at any time if the subject, the investigator, or the Sponsor 
feels that it is not in the subject’s best interest to continue.  The following is a list of possible reasons for study treatment discontinuation:  
Subject withdrawal of cons ent (or assent)  
Subject is not compliant with study procedures 
Adverse event that in the opinion of the investigator would be in the best interest of the subject to discontinue 
study treatment 
Protocol violation requiring discontinuation of study treatment Lost to follow-up Sponsor request for early termination of study Positive pregnancy test (females)  
Chest discomfort or shortness of breath consistent with ischemia Systolic BP > 180 mmHg 
Diastolic BP > 110 mmHg  
Heart rate > Maximum predicted heart rate (> 220 – age x 0.85) bpm. 
If a subject is withdrawn from treatment due to an adverse event, the subject will be followed and treated by the 
Investigator until the abnormal parameter or symptom has resolved or stabilized.   
All subjects who discontinue study treatment should come in for an early discontinuation visit as soon as 
possible and then should be encouraged to complete all remaining scheduled visits and procedures. 
All subjects are free to withdraw from participation at any time, for any reason, specified or unspecified, and 
without prejudice. 
Reasonable attempts will be made by the investigator to provide a reason for subject withdrawals.  The reason 
for the subject’s withdrawal from the study will be specified in the subject’s source documents Refer to Section 10 for early termination procedures. 
Withdrawal of Subjects from the Study  
A subject may be withdrawn from the study at any time if the subject, the investigator, or the Sponsor feels that 
it is not in the subject’s best interest to continue.    
All subjects are free to withdraw from participation at any time, for any reason, specified or unspecified, and without prejudice. 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 37 of 48 
 Reasonable attempts will be made by the investigator to provide a reason for subject withdrawals.  The reason 
for the subject’s withdrawal from the study will be specified in the subject’s source documents.   
Replacement of Subjects  
Subjects who withdraw from the study treatment will be replaced.   
Subjects who withdraw from the study will be replaced.   
 
Protocol  Violations 
A protocol violation occurs when the subject, investigator, fails to adhere to significant protocol requirements 
affecting the inclusion, exclusion, subject safety and primary endpoint criteria.  Protocol violations for this 
study include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Failure to meet inclusion/exclusion criteria  
Use of a prohibited concomitant medication Failure to follow study procedures as described in the study protocol. Failure to comply with Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines will also res ult in a protocol violation. The 
investigator  will determine if a protocol violation will result in withdrawal of a subject.  
When a protocol violation occurs, it will be discussed with the investigator and a Protocol Violation Form 
detailing the violation will be generated. A copy of the form will be filed in the site’s regulatory binder.  
 
DATA SAFETY MONITORING  
a. The Data Safety and Monitoring Board includes, Michael J. Lennon (M.D., Richmond VA Hospital), and 
Ananda Pandurangi (M.D., VCU school of Medicine), and John M. Hettema (M.D., Ph.D., VCU school of Medicine), Roshanak Markley, (M.D. Cardiology VCU school of Medicine), Brandon Willis (DO, Emergency medicine and toxicology VCU school of medicine), Spencer Hays , (statistician, VCU department of statistics). 
Members are individuals who are completely independent of the investigators and who have no financial, scientific, or other conflict of interest with the trial.  Each member will provide written documentation attesting to absence of conflict of int erest.  
 
b.  Frequency of meetings The first meeting will take place face -to-face to discuss the protocol, any modifications of the trial, and to 
establish guidelines to monitor the study. The DSMB Chairperson and the PI will prepare the agenda to address 
the review of manual of operating procedures, modification of the study design, initiation of the trial, reporting of adverse events, stopping rules, interim analysis plan, etc.  
 Meetings of the DSMB will be held at time points corresponding with annual p rogress reports.  Open DSMB 
meetings will be attended by the PI, co -investigators, and research staff member (as appropriate).  A closed 
DSMB session will be held at study completion and attendance will be limited to DSMB members and the PI.  
Meetings may be convened as conference calls as well as in person, although the initial meeting and meetings to 
discuss interim analysis will be face -to-face. An emergency meeting of the DSMB (open, closed, or executive 
session) may be called at any time by the Chairperson should questions of patient safety arise.  
 Issues discussed at DSMB sessions will include conduct and progress of the study, patient accrual, compliance 
with protocol, and problems encountered. As patient- specific data and treatment group data may be presented at 
DSMB sessions, the discussion will be regarded as completely confidential.   
 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 38 of 48 
 c.  Conflict of interest 
All participating investigators and DSMB members will declare any conflicts of interest before the study is 
initiated, annually, and in the event of changing circumstances. Beyond this, the investigators are blind to the conditions and the PI does not make active decisions about assignment or subject care or participation. This separation of activities diminishes the risk of harm to either science or subjects due to conflicts of interest.  
 d.  Protection of confidentiality All materials, discussions and proceedings of the DSMB are completely confidential. Members and other 
participants in DSMB meetings will be expected to maintain confidentiality.  
 
e.  Monitoring activities  
After initial r eview and approval of the project, the monitoring activities of the DSMB will be to evaluate the 
progress of the trial, including periodic assessments of data quality and timeliness, participant recruitment, 
accrual and retention, participant risk versus benefit, performance of the trial site, and other factors that can affect study outcome.  
 
f.  Communication plans to IRB, NIDA, and FDA The DSMB will make recommendations to the PI, who will then communicate the recommendations to the 
NIDA PO, and if necess ary, to the FDA.  Recommendations of the DSMB will be sent to the IRB as well.   
 
 
STATISTICAL METHODS AND CONSIDERATIONS  
Prior to the analysis of the final study data, a detailed Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) will be written describing 
all analyses that  will be performed.  The SAP will contain any modifications to the analysis plan described 
below.   
Data Sets Analyzed  
Initial analyses will evaluate group differences on demographic and baseline variables, will use contingency 
tables with chi- square testi ng, ANOVA’s, and examination of correlations between baseline variables subjective 
responses and clinical results. General data analysis procedures: Urn randomization will be used for gender to reduce any potential between -group differences (lorcaserin vs. placebo) on baseline variables. Prior to data 
analysis procedures, groups will be examined for differences in other baseline characteristics that could potentially influence treatment outcome. Any variables that differ between groups and are related to outcome measures will be examined as potential covariates in subsequent data analyses.  
Demographic and Baseline Characteristics  
Women, minorities, and children (18-21 years of age) will be included to the extent they are reflected in this non-treatment seeki ng population.  In our previous cocaine clinical trials, the percentage of females and males is 
approximately 30% and 70% respectively. We will continue recruitment efforts to achieve a 50- 50 balance and 
thus permit meaningful analyses by sex across groups.  
 The ethnic representation has been 55% Black, 44% White, 15% Hispanic, and <1% Asian in previous research 
by our group. Nevertheless, we are prepared to implement recruitment procedures to ensure a more diverse patient population.  These procedures include: 1) Targeted advertising in newspapers which serve minority communities (e.g., Hispanic or Latino communities). 2) Distribution of flyers and notices in neighborhoods known to have a high minority population. 3) Engaging in outreach activities on an ongoing basis, e.g., 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 39 of 48 
 contacting church and community leaders in the Hispanic communities to provide educational material about 
cocaine dependence and its consequences; providing contact information to aid in referrals to our clinic.  
 Children as defined by NIH (age 18- 21years) will be included in this research.  The incidence of severe cocaine 
abuse/dependence is relatively small in the population of youth less than 18 years old.  From a safety 
perspective, risks of exposure to the proposed study medication and cocaine administration in substance-dependent children under 18 have not been established.   
Analysis of Primary Endpoint 1. Safety: Heart rate (HR) and blood pressure (BP) measures during saline infusions will be compared to HR 
and BP after each cocaine infusion (20 mg and 40 mg doses).  Changes in HR and BP induced by cocaine infusion along with lorcaserin will be compared to those without lorcaserin, by cocaine dose level (20 mg and 40 mg doses), using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). Changes in ECG readings during saline infusion as compared to those taken during cocaine infusions will be reported as summary statistics. Adverse event data will be compiled for lorcaserin and placebo cohorts and presented as summary statistics.  
2. Coca ine Self -administration: Repeated measures ANOVA with cocaine dose (0mg, 25mg) and lorcaserin 
dose (0mg, 10mg, 20mg) as within subject factors will be used to examine differences in mean cocaine choice 
selection. In addition, a Bayesian analysis will be carried out as described below. 
3. Subjective response to cocaine: Subjective response measures (VAS) obtained during saline infusions will be 
compared between lorcaserin and placebo subjects to those during cocaine infusions by cocaine dose level to determine the extent to which these measures are modified by the administration of lorcaserin using repeated measures ANOVA.  
4. Cocaine PK: Plasma concentration -time profiles of cocaine after cocaine infusion during placebo 
administration (Day 2) will be a nalyzed to obtain pharmacokinetic parameter estimates of cocaine (Tmax, AUC, 
apparent t½, CL) by individual. These parameters will be compared within subjects on sessions with lorcaserin (Day 6 and 10 ). 
Analysis of Secondary Endpoints 
Response inhibition: Commission errors on the IMT will be compared between lorcaserin and placebo subjects 
to determine the extent to which this measure is modified by the administration of lorcaserin using repeated measures ANOVA.  
Safety and tolerability data will be summariz ed by treatment group.   
Adverse event rates will be coded by body system and MedDra classification term.  Adverse events will be 
tabulated by treatment group and will include the number of patients for whom the event occurred, the rate of occurrence, and the severity and relationship to study drug.   
Interim Analysis  
When approximately 50% of patients have completed the study, an interim analysis for safety will be conducted 
by the DSMB. Serious adverse events will be monitored by the committee on an ongoing basis throughout the study.  
Sample Size and Randomization 
This project requires a final sample size of 18 subjects (Six subjects assigned to Group A (placebo) and 12 
subjects assigned to Group B (active lorcaserin). This sample size for effect of l orcaserin on cocaine self -
administration was based on previous research showing effects of medication on human cocaine self-administration (Hart et al, 2008). In an effort to increase the power of the study, a Bayesian approach will also be utilized that incorporates information from previous studies.  This approach will use a Bayesian hierarchical model with subject at the lowest level of the hierarchy and treatment group at the second level.  This model is analogous to the repeated measures ANOVA except t hat prior information will be introduced.  Since many 
similar studies have been conducted with cocaine users and the same outcome measures we will assign an 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 40 of 48 
 informative prior distribution on the control group where the mean and standard deviation are educa ted guesses 
from the information provided in previous study of Hart et al. (2008).  For the treatment group we will assume a 
priori no change in the mean from the control group and the standard deviation are similar to those as the experimental group of the study by Hart et al. (Hart et al, 2008).  The model will be calculated using standard Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) packages such as WinBUGS, OpenBUGS, JAGS or MCMCpack in R.  Because MCMC sampling techniques are being employed the quality of the sampl es from the posterior 
distribution will be checked using trace plots, effective sample size, potential scale reduction factor and Hellinger distances (for more on Bayesian analyses and MCMC sampling see (Gelman et al, 2013). As 
necessary techniques such as  discarding burn-in samples, thinning and over- disperse starting points will be 
employed in order to obtain a set of samples from the posterior distribution that have an effective sample size of 10,000 on all parameters.  All inferences will be made from t his set of samples from the posterior distribution.  
 To calculate the power for the acute effects of the study three analyses are considered using the paired 
differences of subjects at baseline and acute time points.  A two -sample test on the means is perf ormed using: 
Wilcoxon test (non- parametric), T -test (parametric) and a Bayesian (parametric) approach.  While from a 
Bayesian paradigm the notion of power does not exist in the traditional sense, one can create a decision rule and loss function in such a way that the associated risk is analogous to the notion of power.  To understand the power of each of the methods a Monte Carlo study was performed utilizing 1,000 separate datasets for likely effect sizes and sample sizes.  The power was calculated as the proportion of datasets in which the test 
“rejected” the null hypothesis.  The table below gives the power for each test across percent change in effect size and control group sample sizes, here the treatment group sample size was n2 = 12. Based on the table at left, an n of 6 was chosen as the sample size for the placebo group. 
 
DATA COLLECTION, RETENTION AND MONITORING  
Data Collection Instruments  
The Investigator will prepare and maintain adequate and accurate source documents designed to record all 
observations and other pertinent data for each subject treated with the study drug.   
Study personnel at each site will enter data from source documents corresponding to a subject’s visit into the 
protocol- specific paper CRF when the information corresponding t o that visit is available.  Subjects will not be 
identified by name in the study database or on any study documents to be collected by the Sponsor (or designee), but will be identified by a subject number. 
The Investigator is responsible for all information collected on subjects enrolled in this study.  All data collected 
during the course of this study must be reviewed and verified for completeness and accuracy by the Investigator.  
Data Management Procedures  

Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 41 of 48 
 The data will be entered into a REDCap database.  The Data Management group will be responsible for data 
processing, in accordance with procedural documentation.  Database lock will occur once quality assurance 
procedures have been completed.  
All procedures for the handling and analysis of data will be conducted using good computing practices meeting FDA guidelines for the handling and analysis of data for clinical trials.  
Data Quality Control and Reporting 
After data have been entered into the study database, a system of computerized data validation checks will be 
implemented and applied to the database on a regular basis.  The study database will be updated in accordance 
with the resolved queries.  All changes to the study database will be documented. 
Archival of Data 
The database is safeguarded against  unauthorized access by established security procedures; appropriate backup 
copies of the database and related software files will be maintained.   Databases  are backed up by the database 
administrator in conjunction with any updates or changes to the datab ase.   
At critical junctures of the protocol (e.g., production of interim reports and final reports), data for analysis is 
locked and cleaned per established procedures. 
Availability and Retention of Investigational Records 
The Investigator will make study data accessible to IRB, and Regulatory Agency (e.g., FDA) inspectors upon 
request.  A file for each subject must be maintained that includes the signed Informed Consent, HIPAA 
Authorization and Assent Form and copies of all source documentation related to that subject.  The Investigator will ensure the reliability and availability of source documents from which the information on the CRF was derived. 
All study documents (patient files, signed informed consent forms, copies of CRFs, Study File Notebook, etc .) 
will be kept secured for a period of six years after study completion and the IND has been discontinued.   
Subject Confidentiality  
In order to maintain subject confidentiality, only a subject number will identify all study subjects on CRFs and 
other documentation submitted to the Sponsor.  In addition, a Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained 
from NIDA to protect subject confidentiality.  
 
ADMINISTRATIVE, ETHICAL, REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  
The study will be conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki, Protection of Human Volunteers (21 CFR 
50), Institutional Review Boards (21 CFR 56), and Obligations of Clinical Investigators (21 CFR 312). 
To maintain confidentiality, all laboratory spe cimens, evaluation forms, reports and other records will be 
identified by a coded number and initials only.  All study records will be kept in a locked file cabinet and code 
sheets linking a patient’s name to a patient identification number will be stored separately in another locked file 
cabinet.  Clinical information will not be released without written permission of the subject, except as necessary for monitoring by the FDA.  The Investigator must also comply with all applicable privacy regulations (e.g., Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, EU Data Protection Directive 95/46/EC). 
Protocol Amendments  
Any amendment to the protocol will be written by the investigator   Protocol amendments cannot be 
implemented without prior written IR B approval except as necessary to eliminate immediate safety hazards to 
patients.  A protocol amendment intended to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to patients may be 
implemented immediately, provided the IRBs are notified within five working days.  
Institutional Review Boards and Independent Ethics Committees  
The protocol and consent form will be reviewed and approved by the VCU IRB prior to study initiation.  
Serious adverse experiences regardless of causality will be reported to the IRB in accordan ce with the standard 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 42 of 48 
 operating procedures and policies of the IRB, and the Investigator will keep the IRB informed as to the progress 
of the study.  The Investigator will obtain assurance of IRB compliance with regulations. 
Any documents that the IRB may n eed to fulfill its responsibilities (such as protocol, protocol amendments, 
Investigator’s Brochure, consent forms, information concerning patient recruitment, payment or compensation 
procedures, or other pertinent information) will be submitted to the IRB.  The IRBs written unconditional approval of the study protocol and the informed consent form will be in the possession of the Investigator before the study is initiated.   
Protocol and/or informed consent modifications or changes may not be initiated without prior written IRB approval except when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to the patients or when the change(s) involves only logistical or administrative aspects of the study.  Such modifications will be submitted to the IRB and written verific ation that the modification was submitted and subsequently approved should be obtained.   
The IRB must be informed of revisions to other documents originally submitted for review; serious and/or unexpected adverse experiences occurring during the study in accordance with the standard operating procedures and policies of the IRB; new information that may affect adversely the safety of the patients of the conduct of the study; an annual update and/or request for re-approval; and when the study has been comple ted. 
Informed Consent Form  
Informed consent will be obtained in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, ICH GCP, US Code of 
Federal Regulations for Protection of Human Subjects (21 CFR 50.25[a,b], CFR 50.27, and CFR Part 56, Subpart A), the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA, if applicable), and local regulations. 
The Investigator will prepare the informed consent form and HIPAA authorization. The written consent 
document will embody the elements of informed consent as described in the International Conference on Harmonization  and will also comply with local regulations.  
A properly executed, written, informed consent will be obtained from each subject prior to entering the subject into the trial.  Information should be given in both oral and written form and subjects must be given ample 
opportunity to inquire about details of the study. A copy of the signed consent form will be given to the subject  
and the original will be maintained with the subject’s records.  
Publications  
The publication or presentation of any study results shall comply with all applicable privacy laws, including, but 
not limited to, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996.    References:  
Baker, J.R., Jatlow, P., McCance-Katz, E.F., 2007. Disulfiram effects on responses to intravenous cocaine 
administration. Drug Alcohol Depend 87, 202-209. Cunningham, K.A., Fox, R.G., Anastasio, N.C., Bubar, M.J., Stutz, S.J., Moeller, F.G., Gilbertson, S.R., 
Rosenzweig -Lipson, S., 2011. Selective serotonin 5- HT(2C) receptor activation suppresses the reinforcing 
efficacy of cocaine and sucrose but differentially affects the incentive- salience value of cocaine- vs. sucrose -
associated cues. Neuropharmacology.  
Gaggin, H.K., Januzzi, J.L., Jr., 2014. Natriuretic peptides in heart failure and acute coronary syndrome. Clinics in laboratory medicine 34, 43-58, vi. 
Gelman, A., Carlin, J., Stern, H., Dunson, D.B., Vehtari, A., Rubin, D.B., 2013. Bayesian Data Analysis, Third 
Edition. Chapman and Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, Florida. 
Gualandro, D.M., Puelacher, C., Mueller, C., 2014. High-sensitivity cardiac troponin in acute conditions. 
Current opinion in critical care 20, 472-477. 
Version # 7: Version Date: 08/02/17  Page 43 of 48 
 Hart, C.L., Haney, M., Vosburg, S.K., Rubin, E., Foltin, R.W., 2008. Smoked cocaine self -administration is 
decreased by modafinil. Neuropsychopharmacology 33, 761-768. 
Hutcheson, J.D., Setola, V., Roth, B.L., Merryman, W.D., 2011. Serotonin receptors and heart valve disease --it 
was meant 2B. Pharmacol Ther 132, 146-157. Manvich, D.F., Kimmel, H.L., Howell, L.L., 2012. Effects of serotonin 2C receptor agonists on the behavioral 
and neurochemical effects of cocaine in squirrel monkeys. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 341, 424-434. Moeller, F.G., Schmitz, J.M., Steinberg, J.L., Green, C.M., Reist, C., Lai, L.Y., Swann, A.C., Grabowski, J., 
2007. Citalopram combined with behavioral therapy reduces cocaine use: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 33, 367-378. 
Shram, M.J., Schoedel, K.A., Bartlett, C., Shazer, R.L., Anderson, C.M., Sellers, E.M., 2011. Evaluation of the 
abuse potential of lorcaserin, a serotonin 2C (5-HT2C) receptor agonist, in recreational polydrug users. Clin Pharmacol Ther 89, 683-692. 
 
Protocol Number  Confidential  
 
Version #:  7 Version  Date  08/02/17  Page 44 of 48 
 APPENDIX 1.  DETAILED TIMELINE OF MEASURES  
 Screening  
Day Study Day  Follow-
up 
Procedure -90 to 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 15, 19 
Informed Consent X              
Serum Chemistry  X           X   
Hematology  X           X   
History, Physical Exam, and Neurological Exam  X X 
X         X   
Urine Pregnancy test (females)  X X 
X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Psychiatric Interview (SCID)  X              
Kreek -
McHugh -
Schluger -
Kellogg scale (KMSK)  X              
Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND)  X              
National Adult 
Reading Test 
(NART)  X              
Addiction Severity Index (ASI -
lite) X              
Protocol Number  Confidential  
 
Version #:  7 Version  Date  08/02/17  Page 45 of 48 
 Brief 
Substance Craving Scale  X X 
X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Timeline Follow Back Cocaine Use  X             X 
Drug Use History  X              
Concomitant Medications  X X 
X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale (COWS) X X 
X X X X X X X X X X X  
Urine drug screen  X X 
X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Breathalyzer  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Verify Inclusion & Exclusion X X 
X            
Vital Signs  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
12-Lead 
ECG (baseline triplicate) and singlet thereafter)  X X 
X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Continuous Cardiovascular Monitoring  X 
X X   X   X   X  
Brief Physical Exam   X 
X X     X    X X (Day 19 only) 
Cocaine Administration for 3 Doses   X 
X    X    X    
Protocol Number  Confidential  
 
Version #:  7 Version  Date  08/02/17  Page 46 of 48 
 Adverse 
Events Inventory  X 
X X X X X X X X X X X  
Visual Analog Scale (VAS)   X 
X X   X X   X X   
Profile of Mood States (POMS)  X X 
X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Clinical Global Impression Severity & Improvement (CGI -S&I) 
( baseline CGI-S, and 
CGI-I 
thereafter)  X X 
X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS) 
(Lifetime version at screening and since last visit version thereafter)  X X    X   X     X 
Cocaine for PK   
X    X    X    
Lorcaserin PK measurement        X    X    
Cardiac biomarkers (baseline and 4-6 hours after last dose)   
X    X    X    
Protocol Number  Confidential  
 
Version #:  7 Version  Date  08/02/17  Page 47 of 48 
 Lorcaserin 
or Placebo   X X X X X X X X X X    
Cocaine Self-
administration    X    X    X   
Immediate Memory Task (IMT)   X   
X   X   X    
Stroop             X  
XY Go -
NoGo              X  
 
  
Protocol Number  Confidential  
 
Version #:  7 Version  Date  08/02/17  Page 48 of 48 
  
 