1 
 
Improving post -discharge antimicrobial use: a multicenter stepped wedge trial  
 
Protocol date March 24, 2023  
Version 1. 5 
 
Principal investigator: Daniel Livorsi, MD, MSc  
Data analyst/statistician: Amy O’Shea, PhD  
  
2 
 
BACKGROUND  
 
Antimicrobial stewardship programs (ASPs) often restrict their activities to inpatient 
antimicrobial -prescribing. However, at least 40% of all antimicrobial exposure associated with 
an acute -care hospital stay is prescribed at the time of hospital discharge (i.e., post -discharge).1-
3 Post-discharge antimicrobials mediate clinical outcomes after discharge and may facilitate the 
spread of antimicrobial resistance.  
 
Several studies have shown that post -discharge antimicrobial use is often inappropriate. We 
used national data to show that 61% of fluoroquinolone treatment days were prescribed at 
hospital discharge; manual chart reviews at 9 hospitals found that 40% of these post -discharge 
fluoroquinolone prescriptions were either unnecessary or sub- optimal.4 Other studies have 
found that 53- 79% of all post -discharge antimicrobials are either unnecessary or sub -optimal.5-7 
 
Post-discharge antimicrobials are an important target for antimicrobial stewardship. However, 
inpatient stewardship metrics do not capture post -discharge antimicrobials and ASPs frequently 
do not evaluate these prescriptions. A 2016 Veterans Health Administration (VHA) survey found 
that less than 50% of hospitals  routinely reviewed targeted antimicrobials at discharge.8 
According to a 2016 survey in Michigan, only 17% of 48 hospitals had a process for reviewing 
outpatient antimicrobial orders at discharge.9 Nearly all hospitals responding to these two 
surveys reported that they had an inpatient ASP.  
 
We currently do not know how inpatient ASP resources can be effectively leveraged to improve post-discharge antimicrobial use. Several randomized- controlled trials have demonstrated that 
post-prescription audit -and-review (PPR) can reduce and improve inpatient antimicrobial use, 
but these studies did not measure the effect of PPR on post -discharge antimicrobial use.
10-12 
Two single- center non -randomized studies, including a study by our team of investigators,  
showed that inpatient PPR can decrease and improve post -discharge antimicrobial use.1, 13 
However, these findings may not be generalizable to other settings.  
 If the goal is to improve post -discharge antimicrobial use, a potentially effective strategy may be 
a PPR process focused solely on prescriptions for patients who will soon be discharged. However, such a PPR intervention would require an innovative approach, as ASPs typically do not know when patients will be discharged. 
 
METHODS  
 
Trial design:   
 
We will perform  a stepped- wedge cluster -randomized trial to assess the effectiveness of 
discharge- post-prescription audit -and-review (i.e. discharge -PPR) in safely reducing post -
discharge antimicrobial use.   
 There are ten sites taking part in this study. Based on the stepped wedge study design, 
randomization will be performed at the site- level with all eligible patients having access to the 
intervention once a site has entered the intervention phase. Each facility will begin in control status with one facility crossing into the intervention every two weeks following a 24- week 
baseline period. A simple randomization scheme using a random number generator will be used a priori to determine the order of implementation. Once cli nical rollout is complete, all sites will 
continue to perform the intervention for another 2.5- 3 months. No site will perform the 
intervention for longer than 6 months.  
3 
 
 
Participants: We will enroll up to 9 antimicrobial stewardship teams and their respective 
hospital sites  (n=10) . Note that one stewardship team covers two hospitals.  
 
Inclusion criteria: An acute- care hospital with an anti microbial  stewardship team  
 
Exclusion criteria: A discharge- focused PPR process is already in place or will be implemented 
soon  
Method of recruitment: We will recruit sites through the EpiCenter’s national conference calls 
and known professional contacts of the study PI.  
 
Interventions:  
 
Pre-intervention activities:  All sites must identify a site principal investigator (PI), i.e. a physician 
who preferably has experience with antimicrobial stewardship. Each site must also identify a 
study pharmacist. Ideally, the study pharmacist will already be part of stewardship activities.  
• Baseline survey of ASP activities : All participating hospitals will complete an electronic 
survey about their baseline ASP activities.  
• Process development : Before the intervention, the pharmacist and site PI will develop a 
process for identifying eligible patients for discharge- PPR audits; this process may 
include using information technology tools and collaborating with case managers or 
discharge coordinators.  
• Collaborative learning calls : Nine months before the intervention begins, the study 
coordinator will start organizing collaborative learning calls for the study PI (D. Livorsi) 
and the study personnel (site PI and pharmacist) at all participating sites. During these monthly calls, sites will share their experience developing a process to identify patients 
who will be discharged within 48 hours. In addition, participants will review the audit -and-
feedback literature and their own personal experience with stewardship to facilitate 
discussion about the optimal approach to discharge- PPR .
13-15  
Intervention activities:  
During the intervention, a study team member (either a physician or pharmacist) will perform 
discharge- PPR every weekday for patients on select medical services who are receiving an 
antimicrobial and whose discharge is anticipated within the next 48 hours. The number of 
services selected for PPR will be aimed at providing approximately 200 discharges per month 
per facility. 
  
The site PI will provide physician -support for these PPR activities. Discharge- PPR audits will 
focus on optimizing antimicrobial selection, dose , and duration before discharge. The 
pharmacist will communicate all recommendations resulting from the audit to the primary  
prescribers. Site PIs and pharmacists will also participate in the collaborative learning calls 
every month during their sites’ intervention periods. 
  
All hospitals may continue their usual stewardship activities during the trial. However, hospitals 
will be strongly encouraged to not start any other new stewardship interventions targeting 
antimicrobial -prescribing at discharge.  
 
Further description of discharge- PPR process:  
• Content: Real -time f eedback on the selection, dose, and duration of antimicrobials 
prescribed at hospital discharge  
4 
 
 
• Delivery method:  Feedback will be preferably delivered in- person or by telephone. 
Electronic, asynchronous communication may also be used.  
 
• Unit of delivery: The feedback will be given to an inpatient provider directly caring for the 
patient who is receiving antimicrobials.  
 
• Deliverer: Feedback will be delivered by the participating stewardship teams or involved 
extenders.  
 
• Setting: The intervention w ill be delivered on the acute- care hospital units before 
patients receiving antimicrobial s are discharged.  
 
• Exposure quantity and duration: Feedback w ill be given during weekday working hours. 
 
• Time span:  2-6 months , depending on when a site is randomized to the intervention 
 
• Activities to increase compliance or adherence: Baseline education about duration of 
antimicrobial therapy for common infections treated in hospitalized patients.  
 
Objectives:  
 
AIM 1: Evaluate whether discharge post -prescription audit -and-review (PPR) can safely reduce 
post-discharge antimicrobial use across participating hospitals.  
Hypothesis 1: The discharge audit -and-feedback intervention will reduce post -discharge 
antimicrobial use without adversely affecting patient safety. 
 
AIM 2: Through monthly collaborative learning calls with participating sites, determine barriers 
and facilitators encountered by antimicrobial  stewardship teams in their implementation of the 
discharge- PPR process.  
 
Outcomes:   
 
We will use the RE -AIM framework (page 6) to assess our pilot trial. Clinical ou tcomes are listed 
below . Data for all clinical outcomes will be extracted from the respective data systems of each 
participating site. All data will be submitted to the project PI for final data analysis. 
 Primary outcome  
The primary outcome will be post -discharge antimicrobial length of therapy ( LOT) per 100 
admissions . This outcome will be collected every two weeks during the study period for all 
services or wards participating in the project . 
 
Secondary outcomes  
 Additional outcomes will include inpatient  antimicrobial use (inpatient L OT per 100 admissions), 
length of stay, and 30 -day hospital re- admission rates. These secondary outcomes will only be 
measured for patients who were discharged fro m a participating service or ward.  
 
5 
 
Process measures: Each day, the study pharmacist will record the number of patients  audited 
during discharge -PPR, the number of PPR recommendations communicated to providers, and 
the number of recommendations that were accepted.  
 
Implementation outcomes : We will use the RE -AIM framework to assess our intervention. 
Feasibility will be evaluated on 2 domains: 1) the development of a local process to identify 
patients who are on antimicrobials within 48 hours of hospital discharge, and 2) the initiation of 
the discharge- PPR intervention. To further understand the implementation process, the study 
coordinator will take notes during the collaborative learning calls. We will also record these calls. We will perform a rapid template analysis to describe each site’s implementation process, 
including barriers and facilitators to successful implementation.
16 Through a weekly survey , we 
will also assess each site’s fidelity to the discharge- PPR process and the  cost (i.e. time) of the 
intervention. Through a post -intervention electronic survey, we will assess the acceptability  of 
discharge- PPR to frontline prescribers .  
 
Sample Size:    
We will calculate the average post -discharge LOT per 100 admissions every two weeks and will 
include 10 sites. For these power calculations, we assume: 1) an intra- cluster correlation of 
0.75; 2) an effect size of 10% from the baseline average post -discharge LOT per 100 admission 
of 135 ; 3) 100 discharges per site every two weeks; ; 4) a cluster -level standard deviation of 3.4; 
5) a Type I error rate of 5% , and 6) a constant treatment effect regardless of exposure time.  
Given these assumptions, under a stepped wedge study design with 1) each step lasting 2 
weeks (24 measurements/site over 48 weeks total); 2)  all 10 facilities starting in control status 
and 1 facility crossing into intervention status every 2 weeks following a baseline period of 24 weeks and ending with all facilities in intervention status in the final two- week block, we have 
more than 90% power to determine a statistical difference when discharge -PPR is used.  
 
Blinding:  None  
 
Unit of Analysis : Each medical center  
 
Statistical Methods:  We will evaluate the effectiveness of implementing a discharge -focused 
process for post -prescription audit -and-review (PPR) via a generalized linear mixed model with 
identity link. The primary outcome will be post -discharge length of therapy  (LOT) per 100 
admissions. This model will include step and intervention indicators as fixed effects and a 
random intercept for cluster to account for facility -level factors. This model structure can provide 
proper weighting when cluster sizes vary and account for repeated measurements over time. 
Confounding variables (select covariates that may be associated with optimal antimicrobial  
prescribing) will be adjusted for statistically by inclusion in the model framework. 
  
6 
 
Applying the RE -AIM implementation framework to our evaluation of this pilot study’s 
findings  
Dimension  Definition1 Measurement  
Reach  The absolute number, proportion and 
representativeness of individuals who are 
willing to participate in a given initiative or 
program, and reasons why they do or do not 
participate  
Who actually participates or is exposed to the 
initiative?  Monitor the number of 
prescribers  at each site 
who receive feedback . 
Effectiveness  The effect of an intervention on important 
individual outcomes, such as clinical events, 
quality of life,  and economic outcomes  
 See primary and 
secondary outcomes, as 
listed above  
Adoption  The absolute number, proportion and 
representativeness of settings and agents 
who are willing to start a program and why 
they are willin g to start it  
Where is the program applied and who 
applied it? Describe the location and 
complexity of the  
intervention sites. During 
the introductory call, ask 
the teams at the 
intervention sites why 
they want to participate.  
Implementation  Fidelity to  the key elements of an evidence -
base practice, including consistency of 
delivery as intended and the time and cost of 
the program  
 
How consistently was the program delivered? 
How was it adapted to each setting? How 
much did it cost? Why did it achieve the  
observed result?  Measure fidelity by 
tracking the number of  
audits performed and 
recommendations made.  
 
Measure acceptability 
with a post -intervention 
survey  of frontline 
prescribers.  
 
Measure implementation 
cost by having the project 
team track the time committed to project 
activities on a weekly  
basis.  
Maintenance  The extent to which a program or policy 
becomes institutionalized or part of the routine 
organizational practices and policies.  
How long are the results of the program or policy sustained?  Assess whether sites are 
still performing discharge 
audit -and-feedback 6 
months after the project 
ends  
1. All definitions are taken from https://www.re -aim.org  
 
 
 
7 
 
References:  
1. Tamma PD, Avdic E, Keenan JF, et al. What is the More Effective Antibiotic Stewardship 
Intervention: Pre -Prescription Authorization or Post -Prescription Review with Feedback? Clin 
Infect Dis . Dec 0 7 2016;doi:10.1093/cid/ciw780 
2. Dyer AP, Dodds Ashley E, Anderson DJ, et al. Total duration of antimicrobial therapy 
resulting from inpatient hospitalization. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. May 28 2019:1- 8. 
doi:10.1017/ice.2019.118 
3. Feller J, Lund BC, Perencevich EN, et al. Post -discharge oral antimicrobial use among 
hospitalized patients across an integrated national healthcare network. Clin Microbiol Infect . Oct 
7 2019;doi:10.1016/j.cmi.2019.09.016  
4. Suzuki H, Perencevich EN, Alexander B, et al. Inpatient Fluoroquinolone Stewardship 
Improves the Quantity and Quality of Fluoroquinolone- prescribing at Hospital Discharge: A 
Retrospective Analysis among 122 Veterans Health Administration Hospitals. Clin Infect Dis . 
Sep 28 2019;doi:10.1093/cid/ciz967  
5. Chavada R, Davey J, O'Connor L, Tong D. 'Careful goodbye at the door': is there role for 
antimicrobial stewardship interventions for antimicrobial therapy prescribed on hospital discharge? BMC Infect Dis . May 16 2018;18(1):225. doi:10.1186/s12879- 018-3147-0 
6. Yogo N, Shihadeh K, Young H, et al. Intervention to Reduce Broad- Spectrum Antibiotics 
and Treatment Durations Prescribed at the Time of Hospital Discharge: A Novel Stewardship Approach. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. May 2017;38(5):534 -541. doi:10.1017/ice.2017.10  
7. Scarpato SJ, Timko DR, Cluzet VC, et al. An Evaluation of Antibiotic Prescribing 
Practices Upon Hospital Discharge. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. Mar 2017;38(3):353 -355. 
doi:10.1017/ice.2016.276 
8. 2015 Survey of Antimicrobial Stewardship in VHA (2016). 
9. Vaughn VM PL, Flanders, SA, Malani AN, Patel T, et al. A Deeper Dive into Antibiotic 
Stewardship Needs: A Multi -Hospital Survey. Open Forum Infect Dis . 2020;  
10. Camins BC, King MD, Wells JB, et al. Impact of an antimicrobial utilization program on 
antimicrobial use at a large teaching hospital: a randomized controlled trial. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol . Oct 2009;30(10):931 -8. doi:10.1086/605924 
11. Lesprit P, Landelle C, Brun- Buisson C. Clinical impact of unsolicited post -prescription 
antibiotic review in surgical and medical wards: a randomized controlled trial. Clin Microbiol 
Infect . Feb 2013;19(2):E91- 7. doi:10.1111/1469- 0691.12062  
12. Stenehjem E, Hersh AL, Buckel WR, et al. Impact of Implementing Antibiotic 
Stewardship Programs in 15 Small Hospitals: A Cluster -Randomized Intervention. Clin Infect 
Dis. Aug 1 2018;67(4):525- 532. doi:10.1093/cid/ciy155 
13. Griebel ME, Heintz B, Alexander B, Egge J, Goto M, Livorsi DJ. Understanding changes 
in the standardized antimicrobial administration ratio for total antimicrobial use after 
implementation of prospective audit and feedback. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. Dec 
2018;39(12):1476 -1479. doi:10.1017/ice.2018.248 
14. B rehaut JC, Colquhoun HL, Eva KW, et al. Practice Feedback Interventions: 15 
Suggestions for Optimizing Effectiveness. Ann Intern Med. Mar 15 2016;164(6):435- 41. 
doi:10.7326/M15- 2248  
15. Ivers N, Jamtvedt G, Flottorp S, et al. Audit and feedback: effects on professional 
practice and healthcare outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . Jun 13 2012;(6):CD000259. 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000259.pub3 16. N K. Using templates in the thematic analysis of text. In: Symon CCaG, ed. Essential 
Guide to Qualitative Methods in Organizational Research. Sage Publications; 2004:256- 70. 
17. Proctor E, Silmere H, Raghavan R, et al. Outcomes for implementation research: 
conceptual distinctions, measurement challenges, and research agenda. Adm Policy Ment 
Health . Mar 2011;38(2):65- 76. doi:10.1007/s10488- 010-0319 -7 
 