If applicable, agency approval letters must be submitted to the IRB upon receipt prior to any data 
collection at that agency.  A copy of the approved consent form with the IRB approval stamp is 
enclosed. Please use the consent form with the most recent approval date stamp when obtaining 
consent from your participants. A copy of the signed consent forms must be submitted with the 
request to close the study file at the completion of the study. 
Any modifications to this study must be submitted for review to the IRB using the Modification 
Request Form. Additionally, the IRB must be notified immediately of any adverse events or 
unanticipated problems. All forms are located on the IRB website. If you have any questions, please 
contact the TWU IRB.The above referenced study has been reviewed and approved by the Dallas IRB (operating under 
FWA00000178)  on 10/18/2016 using an expedited review procedure. This approval is valid for one 
year and expires on 10/18/2017. The IRB will send an email notification 45 days prior to the 
expiration date with instructions to extend or close the study. It is your responsibility to request an 
extension for the study if it is not yet complete, to close the protocol file when the study is complete, 
and to make certain that the study is not conducted beyond the expiration date.Approval for Efficacy of Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation on Dual-Task Walking After Stroke: A 
rTMS Study (Protocol #: 19219)Re:
Institutional Review Board
Office of Research and Sponsored Programs
P.O. Box 425619, Denton, TX 76204-5619
940-898-3378
email: IRB@twu.edu
http://www.twu.edu/irb.html
October 19, 2016
Physical Therapy - DallasDr. Hui-Ting Goh
Institutional Review Board (IRB) - DallasDATE:
TO:
FROM:
Dr. Mary Thompson, Physical Therapy - Dallas cc.
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   1 Texas Woman's University Institutional Review Board 
 
Application for Expedited and Full Review  
 
 
Name of Principal Investigator (PI):  Hui-Ting Goh, PhD  Phone : 214-689-7723 
Status:    faculty    student    staff   other :        E-mail: hgoh1 @twu.edu  
Department : School of Physical Therapy   
Colleague ID#  (this is the 7 -digit # on your ID) :  0598520   
Title of Study:  Efficacy of non -invasive brain stimulation on dual -task walking after stroke: a rTMS study  
 
If the PI is a student, provide the following  information  for the faculty advisor : 
Name  of advisor:        E-mail:        
TWU Department:         
  
Estimated beginning date of study:  10/1/2016  Estimated duration of study  2 years  
Campus (Denton, Dallas, or Houston)  Dallas  Level of review:   expe dited   full 
Type of Project :   thesis   professional paper   dissertation   class project  
(check all that apply)   faculty research   pilot  other          
Has project has been submitted for funding (internal or external)?   yes  no    
          If yes, funding source:        
 
Signatures:  
 
Principal Investigator (PI): Signature certifies that the investigator has primary responsibility for all aspects of the 
research project.  
____________________________________________________________   ________________  
Principal Investigator        Date  
 
Faculty Research Advisor (for student research only):  Signature certifies that the faculty member has read, 
reviewed, and approved the content of the application and is responsible for the supervision of this research study.   
____________________________________________________________   ________________  
Faculty Research Advisor        Date  
 
Academic Administrator:  Signature certifies that the administrator has read, reviewed, and approved the content of the 
application.  
____________________________________________________________   ________________  
Academic Administrator (Department Chair, Program Director, or Associate Dean)        Date  For office use only:  
 
Protocol #:  __________ 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   2 METHODOLOGY 
 
Please refer to instructions when completing this form.  The application must be typed using a font 
no smaller than 11 -point.  
 
1. Describe the purpose of study , including research questions and/or hypotheses.  
 
 Purpose: The purpose of this pilot study is to examine the feasibility and efficacy of a non-
invasive brain stimulation technique, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) in 
dual-task walking in individuals post- stroke. Our long- term objective is to use the technique as 
an adjunct rehabilitative tool to enhance gait recovery after stroke.  
 
 Background : Control of human movements requires sophisticated coordination between 
motor system and cognitive system. In able- bodied, the interaction between the two systems 
is often faultless and allows automatic execution of well -learned motor skills, such as walking. 
However, such coordinated interac tion is often disrupted after brain insults  (e.g. stroke). 
Numerous studies have shown that pati ents with stroke have difficulty in dual-task 
performance , for instance talking while walking1-4. Therefore, dual -tasking has been deemed 
as an important outcome to determine the effectiveness of gait rehabilitation5. To date, there  is 
very limited research on how to enhance dual -task gait in stroke6-9.  
 
  Non-invasive brain stimulation, such as rTMS, has been found to be an effective adjunct 
tool to traditional behavioral training to improve recovery of arm -hand function after stroke10. 
rTMS can be used to up -regulate or down- regulate the excitabil ity of the targeted neural 
network and subsequently affect the behaviors supported by that neural network . For 
example, in a previous research we applied 5Hz rTMS on the primary motor cortex (M1) in 
young healthy adults and found that it significantly increased M1 excitability11. Similarly, we 
demonstrated that application of 1Hz rTMS on the dorsal premotor cortex (dPM) significantly 
decreased corticospinal excitability and interfered with participant’s ability to learn the motor 
task under dual -task conditions12. Although the efficacy of rTMS has been well -demonstrated 
in recovery of upper extremity motor function after stroke, its usefulness for gait recovery is 
understudie d13,14.  
   There have been attempts to use non- invasiv e brain stimulation to improve dual -task 
walking in humans
15-17, including neurological involved population17,18. To date, there is no 
study  that examines  the efficacy of non- invasive brain stimulation in dual -task walking in 
individuals post- stroke. In addition, previous research has primarily focused  on stimulating left 
dorsal l ateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). M ost studies found that up- regulating excitability of 
the left DLPFC improved dual -task cost but had little effect on gait performance18. One 
possible explanation i s that the DLPFC does not play an important role in governing gait 
performance during dual -tasking even though it has significant impact on task switching19. 
Therefore, other neural network s, such as the supplementary motor area (SMA) that has been 
found to be associated with gait recovery15,20- 22 may also play an important role in modulating 
dual-task gait. The purpose of this pilot project is to examine the efficacy of rTMS applied to 
different neural loci in improving dual -task gait in individuals post- stroke .  
 Research question: Would rTMS applied to different neural loci result in different dual -task 
gait performance in patients with stroke?  
  
 
 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   3 2. Participant Information:  
 
 a. Description of participants in study:     
 
Ten men and women  with a diagnosis of left hemisphere stroke and age >18 years will be 
recruited to participate in this pilot project.  
 
 b. Approximate number of participants:    10 
 
 c. Vulnerable populations  as participants (check all that apply ): 
 
  Prisoners  ................................ .................   
  Pregnant women................................ .....  
  Fetuses / neonates  ................................ .  
  Minors  ................................ .....................   
 
  NOTE : Researchers  must comply with the federal mandate to report child abuse. See instructions for 
details.   
 
 d. Age (or age range) of participants:  > 18 years  
 
  Provide the rationale for inclusion/exclusion on the basis of age:   
1. This study will not include individuals  age below 18 years for a few reasons. Stroke is relatively 
uncommon in persons younger than 18 years. Further, rTMS safety data in children and 
adolescents are less well -established. We exclude individuals younger than 18 years for both 
scientific merit and safety concern.   
 
 e. Sex of participants  ................................ ................................ ..................   Male  Female   Both  
  
  Provide the rationale for inclusion/exclusion on the basis of sex:   
 
      
 
 f. Participants will be excluded based on ethnicity:  ................................ ..............................  Yes  No 
 
  If yes, p rovide a description of the exclusion criteria and the rationale for using these criteria:  
 
      
 
 
 g. List and provide rationale for any other inclusion/exclusion criteria:   
 
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Age above 18 years  
2.Stroke  is very unlikely in individuals age below 18 years. Further, there are limited 
data to support the safety of rTMS in individuals younger than 18 years.  
 
2. Diagnosis of Left hemispheric  stroke at least 6  months ago  
2.Left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has been shown to play an important role in human dual-task performance. We therefore specifically target those with left hemispheric 
lesion since they demonstrate greater deficits in dual -tasking. We exclude acute and 
subacute (< 6 months) stroke because spon taneous recovery is very likely to occur 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   4 during acute and subacute phases. This will lead to difficulty in result interpretation with 
the current single group design.   
 
3. First time stroke OR complete gait recovery from prior stroke  
2. Individuals  with more  than one stroke often have more than one lesion location or 
involve more than one hemisphere. This would potentially complicate the rTMS 
application. We therefore exclude those with multiple strokes such  that our sample can 
be more homogenous.  
 
4. Able to w alk independently for at least 10 meters with or without walking aids  
2.Participants are required to walk independently for the behavioral testing.  
 
5. Have at least minimal movements (> 5 degree of motion) at the affected ankle  
2.Stroke  survivors with big lesions at the motor areas often have difficulty to actively 
control distal segments (hands or ankle) and show very little responses to TMS 
stimulation. In our past experience, we found that resting motor threshold cannot be 
reliably measured in those with very little active movements.  
 
6. Score > 26 on Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE)  
2.Participants are required to score > 26 to rule out any cognitive impairments that would interfere with their comprehension of instructions.  
 
7. Ability to participate in the informed consent process  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Diagnosis of other neurological conditions, such as Parkinson Disease, Alzheimer, 
Spinal Cord Injury, Multiple Sclerosis  
2.This is to ensure that our sample is representative of stroke.   
 
2. Other comorbidities which could interfere with gait (i.e. amputation, severe 
osteoarthritis)  
2.This is to ensure that any potential gait deviations observed can only be attributed to 
stroke.  
  
3. Unstable clinical conditions  
2.This  is to ensure safety during testing. Individuals with unstable clinical conditions, 
eg. uncontrolled hypertension, will not be included.  
 
4. Non-ambulatory prior to onset of stroke 
2.This is to ensure that any potential gait deviations observed can only be attributed to stroke.  
 
5. History of significant head trauma  
2.This is a contraindication of high frequency rTMS.  
 
6. Electrical, magnetic, or mechanical implantation: cardiac pacemakers or intracerebral 
vascular clip  
2.This is a contraindication of TMS.  
 
7. Metal  implantation in the oral cavity, head/neck area and lower extremity  
2.This is a contraindication of TMS.  
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   5  
8. Pregnancy  
2.This is a contraindication of TMS.  
 
9. History of seizures or unexplained loss of consciousness  
2.This is a contraindication of TMS.  
 
10. Immediate family member with epilepsy  
2.This is a contraindication of TMS.  
 
11. Use of seizure threshold lowering medicine  
2.This is a contraindication of TMS.  
 
12. Current abuse of alcohol or drugs  
2.This is a contraindication of TMS.  
 
13. Anticipated inability to complete the study  
2.This is to ensure that participants can complete the study (all 3 visits).  
 
14. History of psychiatric illness requiring medication control  
 
2.This is a contraindication of TMS.  
 
  
 
3. Describe the participant  recruitment process in detail . Make sure that you a ttach any 
recruitment materials or scripts  in the attachment section . 
 
  Research participants will be recruited through local advertising and wor d-of-mouth by PI 
and research assistants  (advertising flyer attached) . The potential participants will contact 
the PI or research assistants via email, phone or face-to-face for a short meeting within 
which the research project will be explained by the PI or the research assistants  using the 
Consent Form as a guide. This meeting will take approximately 10-15 minutes. It should be 
noted that if the participant indicates he/she does not wish to participate after the meeting, 
he/she would not be enrolled. The signed consent will be obtained upon the agreement to 
participate. The original consent will be kept in the research file, one copy will be placed with 
the PI and the participant will receive a copy. 
  
4. Research Procedures:  
 
a. In the space below, describe in detail the research procedures  (do not use an attac hment) : 
   
1. Screening and Baseline assessment : Upon the consent, participants will be 
screened for their eligibilty in addition to the cri teria. We will use  Mini Mental State 
Exam (MMSE ; 3.Appendix 1) and TMS safety -screening questionnaire ( 3.Appendix 2) 
to ensure that participants do not have any cognitive impairments or contraindications  
for TMS.  In addition, they will be asked to perform a 10 meter walk test to ensure they 
are able to walk 10m independently.  
 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   6 Once the eligibility is determined, each participant will be assessed with the Fugl-
Meyer Motor Assessement (FMA ; 3.Appendix 3)23 scale to quantify their motor 
impairment and a Trail -Making Test (TMT ; 3.Appendix 4)24 to assess their executive 
function.  
  
2. Assessements: Each participant will be tested with a gait assessment, followed by a 
counting task performance and a neurophysiological assessement.  
 
 2a. Gait A ssessment : The gait assessment consists of walking at self- selected speed  
on the GaitRite carpet walkway. Gait performance (time taken, gait speed, stride 
cycle, step length) will be recorded by the GaitRite. The assessment will be repeated 3 
times with about a 1 minute break between trials.   
 The walking test will then be repeated for another 3 trials under a dual -task condition 
in which the participants will perform the walking task in conjunction with a counting 
task. Before the ‘Go’ command, the tester will verbal ly provide a random number 
ranged from  30 to 100.  They are then asked to perform the TUG test and count 
backward by 3 from the given number (e.g. 87, 84, 81, …). During the dual -task TUG 
test, the participants will be asked to priortize the counting task.  
         In addition to the GaitRite measurement, the gait assessment will be video-
recorded such that participants’ performance on the counting task can be quantified 
offline (number of correct responses).  
 
  2b.Counting Task assessment: After the participants finish the gait assessment, the 
counting task will be repeated 3 times while they are seated.  
 
  2c. Corticospinal excitability assessment: After th e 
counting task assessment, participants will go through a 
series of corticospinal excitability assessement using 
single pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS, Magstim
R  Company, UK ) . Surface electromyography 
(EMG) electrodes will be placed on the right Tibilias 
Anterior muscle with the participants seated on a reclining 
chair  and wearing a pair of ear plugs . EMG  data will be 
sampled at 2000Hz  and band -pass-filtered at 15 -500Hz  
(Mega 600, Mega Electronics Ltd, Finland). The EMG data 
will be recorded and stored  using MegaWin software 
(Mega Electronics Ltd, Finland)  and analyzed offline using 
Matlab program (The Mathowroks, Inc, Natick MA). A 
Magstim 200 stimulator (Magstim Company, UK) will be used to deliver the TMS pulse via a double cone coil (Figure 1).  
Figure 1. Double cone coil.  
 
Neuro navigation system Brainsight TM (Rogu e Research, Canada)  will be used to 
reliably place the TMS coil over the scalp to precisely target the selected area. 
Stimulation will begin at 40% of maximum stimulator output and will be systematically 
increased to yield a motor evoked potential (MEP) fr om the tibialis anterior. A ‘hot 
spot’of the right tibialis anterior will first to be determined. Hot spot is defined as the 
site at which the largest MEP is obtained at the lowest TMS stimulation intensity. Once 
the hot spot is determined, the resting motor thershold (RMT) will be defined. Resting 
motor threshold is the stimulation intenisty that yield a MEP peak -to-peak amplitud e > 
50 μV in 5 out of 10 consecutive trials. Once RMT is decided, the stimulation intensity 

June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   7 will be set at 120% RMT  and 10 stimulations will be delivered to t he hot- spot such 
that suprathres hold MEP can be recorded. These MEPs measures will be stored and 
analyzed offline to quantify corticospinal excitability.  
  
3. rTMS protocols:  After the corticospinal excitability assess ment, p articipants will 
receive a high frequency  rTMS applied to different areas 
at different visits.  
During each visit, they will receive 5Hz rTMS delivered to 
the target area (hot spot of the right tibialis anterior  at the 
M1, left SMA , or left DLPFC). The 5Hz  rTMS will be 
deliver ed in the form of 24 10 -second trains with a 30-
second intertrain interval (a total of 1200 pulses) via a air -
filled figure of 8 coil (Figure 2). The stimulation intensity 
will be set at 90% of individual RMT. We have previously 
shown that this protocol was effective to upregulate 
corticospinal excitability11.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Air -filled coil for rTMS   
 
  After the rTMS protocol, corticospinal excitability will be reassessed using single pulse 
TMS again ( procedure 2c). Participants will then perform the gait assessment 
(procedure 2a) and the counting task ( procedure 2b).  
Each participant will be tested for  3 visits ( each visit will be 7±2days apart between two 
successive visits).  Each visit will start with the assessment and be followed by a rTMS 
protocol. The target area for the rTMS protocols varies across visits (e.g. visit 1: Left 
SMA, visit 2: Left M1, and visit 3: Left DLPFC). The order will be pseudo- randomized 
and counterbalanced within  each group.  
 
 
 
4. Outcomes and data analysis : The primary outcome of this project is participant 
performance on the TUG test under single and dual -task conditions. The time taken to 
complete the TUG test under the two conditions  will be used to derive dual -task cost 
(TUG
dual – TUG single/TUG single). The dual -task cost will be compared ac ross three rTMS 
protocols using repeated measure ANOVA.  
The secondary outcomes of the projects  include gait parameters obtained from the 
GaitRite, MEPs measured under procedure 2c. These measures will be analyzed 
using repeated measure ANOVA as well.  
 
 
b. Is video recording a part of th e study?   Yes  No 
                With sound   Without sound    
 
c. Is audio  recording a part of th e study? ..............   ................................ ...............................  Yes  No 
 

June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   8   If you answered “yes” to question #4 b or 4c, describe the  
  purpose of the recording and who will have access to these  recordings . 
 
  The video recording will be used to quantify the number of corrected responses 
participants made on the counting task. 
 
d. Is internet / email a part of the study?  ...............   ................................ ...............................  Yes  No 
  If you answered “yes” to question #4d , describe how the internet and/or email 
will be used.  
 
        
 
 
5. What is the time commitment for the participants? Include the number of sessions, 
maximum time commitment per session, and the maximum cumulative time 
commitment.  
  Each participant will be tested o ver 3 sessions (7 ± 2 days between two successive sessions ). 
Thus, the whole experiment will take place over ~  3 weeks. E ach session is estimated to take 
about 2.5 hour. Thus, the maximum cumulative time commitment for each participant is 
approximately 7.5 hours.  
  
6.  Site / location of the study.  
 
 a. Will participants be affiliated with a specific non -TWU agency, institution, or organization?  ........    Yes  No  
 
  If yes: 
 
  Name of the site(s) ?  
 
        
 
  Affiliation of the principal investigator  to this site(s) ?  
 
        
 
  Affiliation of the participants to this site(s) ?  
        
 
  
  Agency approval letters are required by the IRB before data can be collected at a site. If you answered 
“yes” to 6a, attach the signed agency approval letter on letterhead from each agency. If agency 
approval cannot be obtained prior to submitting the IRB application, explain here.  
 
        
 
 b. Describe the setting of the study  (i.e. physical location, surroundings, privacy aspects, etc.)  
 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   9   The study will take place at the TWU – Dallas Campus.  Participants will undergo TMS 
procedure on the 1st floor in the Human Neurophysiology Lab. The gait assessment will 
take place on the 1st floor in the Motor Skill Lab.  
   
 
POTENTIAL RISKS AND PROTECTION OF PARTICIPANT S 
 
7. Explain the potential risks to the human participants involved in this research. All risks 
must be identified and listed on the consent form (if applicable).  
 
 
RISK  STEPS TO MINIMIZE RISK  
Loss of confidentiality  The investigators will attempt to maintain 
confidentiality to the extent that is allowed by 
law. The study will take place at Texas 
Woman’s University, School of Physical 
Therapy – Dallas Campus. Codes, rather than 
names, will be used in the data analysis and 
in the final report. The data will be stored in a 
locked file cabinet. The data recorded on 
papers will be stored for approximately 5 
years and then will be shredded.  The data recorded on disks will be stored for 5 years 
and then will be deleted.  It is anticipated that 
data will be published in books and/or 
journals. However, names or other identifying 
information will not be included in any 
publication.  
4.Loss of time 
The study requires 3 sessions and each 
session lasts 2 to 2.5 hours. The loss of time could potentially impact participants’  life.  
 To minimize the impact of loss of time, all visits 
will be scheduled based on participant’s 
convenience. For example, on the same day 
that they come to Dallas Stroke Center for 
speech therapy appointments  or during 
weekends .  
Loss of bala nce 
The gait assessment involves walking and turning in which participants may experience 
loss of balance.  To minimize this potential ris k, the tester will 
walk alongside the participants during testing.  
All testers are trained to detect and assist loss 
of balance during gait.  
5.Fatigue  
The study requires 3 sessions and each 
session lasts 2 to 2.5 hours. The length of the 
testing is necessary to obtain data needed. 
However, this might potentially result in fatigue due to the lengthy testing.   
 To minimize this potential risk, we will schedule 
sufficient resting time between tests. In 
addition, participan ts may withdraw anytime if 
they are too fatigued to continue.  
RISK  STEPS TO MINIMIZE RISK  
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   10 Headaches  
It has been shown that with repetitive 
stimulation on the scalp (in rTMS protocols), a 
small number of participants (< 28% cases) 
would develop transient headaches. The 
developed headaches usually resolved within 
3-4 hours and respond well to over -the-
counter pain medicine, such as  6.Tylenol . To minimize this potential risk, we will exclude 
participants who are prone to develop headaches (e.g. history of m igraine ). We will 
use subthres hold intensity for rTMS protocols 
that will reduce the likelihood of developing 
headaches.  
In addition, the tester will stop the testing 
when  they develop headaches during the test.  
6.If participants do develop headaches and require pain medication, we will ask them to 
take the pain medication that has been 
approved by their primary care physicians.  
  
RISK  STEPS TO MINIMIZE RISK  
Changes in auditory threshold  
There is a risk of alteration in auditory 
threshold after TMS protocols as TMS 
produces loud click when it is charged. The 
changes in auditory threshold are transient 
(lasts about 1 day) and not different from 
going to a music concert.   
 To minimize the ri sk, we will provide earplugs  
during TMS testing.  
RISK  STEPS TO MINIMIZE RISK  
Seizure  
Risk of seizure is associated with high 
frequency rTMS and is higher in those who 
have history of seizure, on medication that are 
known to reduce seizure threshold. Risk  of 
seizure is also higher when the rTMS 
parameters are set outside of the safety limits .  We will use a safety -screening questionnaire 
adapted from the recommendation of the 
international committee25,26. This 
questionnaire will help us to identify those at high risk of developing seizur e and they will 
be excluded from participation.  
The rTMS protocols adopted in this project are 
within recommended safety limits
25,26 and we 
have previously conducted rTMS experiments 
using the same protocols without any adverse 
events11,12.  
(Use continuation pa ges if necessary)  
 
 
8. Will participants be told about the intent of the study prior to participating?  ..  Yes  No 
 If “no ,” provide an explanation of why deception is necessary and the debriefing method to be used to 
fully inform the participants of the study's intent . 
 
      
 
 
9. Explain when and how the participants will be given the opportunity to ask questions.  
 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   11  
Participants will have the opportunity to ask questions anytime during the initial meeting with 
researchers or throughout the duration of the study.  
 
 
 
10. Identifiable Data  
 
  Outline the steps to ensure the confidentiality of identifiable data. Identifiable data 
includes documents, audio and video recordings, electronic data, and blood or other 
human specimens.  
 
 a. Explain what identifiable data, if any, will be collected.  
 
Name, date of birth, gender , self and family medical history  
 
 
 b. Where will identifiable data be stored? (Specify precise location, preferably in a locked file cabinet 
with limited access.)  
 
 
Identifiable data will be stored in a locked file cabinet in the School of Physical Therapy, 
Dallas Campus research lab room 8811. Access will be limited to the researchers.   
 
 
 
 c. Give the date that identifiable data will be destroyed (mm/dd/yy). If identifiable data will be stored for 
an indefinite period of time, please explain.  
 
The identifiable data will be destroyed by 12/31/2020 by shredding all paper documents.  
Electronic data will be destroyed by 12/31/2020 by deleting all files containing identifiable 
data from any and all electronic devices including computers and portable storage 
devices.  
 
  
 d. Identify specific ways that identifiable data will be destroyed at the end of this period of time.  
 
The identifiable data will be destroyed by 12/31/2020 by shredding all paper documents.  Electronic data will be destroyed by 12/31/2020 by deleting all files containing identifiable 
data from any and all electronic devices including computers and portable storage 
devices.  
 
 
 e. Because the academic component of TWU is classified as a non- covered HIPAA entity , identifiable 
health or health- related data cannot be transmitted electronically.  You must be able to answer “no” to 
at least one of the following questions in order for your  study to be approved.  
 
  Does this research involve health or health- related data?  ................................ ...........   Yes  No 
  If yes, are the data identifiable?  ................................ ................................ .....................   Yes  No 
  If yes, will data be transmitted electronically?  ................................ ...............................   Yes  No 
 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   12  
BENEFITS /REMUNERATION  
 
11. What will the participant receive for taking part in the study ( i.e., financial remuneration, free 
services, access to information, and access to an intervention) ? If there are none, state below that there 
are no direct benefits to the participant.  
 
Each participant will receive a gift- card worth USD 150 upon the completion of the experiment (3 
visits). In additi on, they will have access to their own information (gait, neurophysiological data).  
 
12. What are the generalizable benefits of this study? (e.g., contribution to knowledge in 
field).  
 
This study will expand the knowledge in the field of neuroscience. In particular, it will identify 
important neural circuitry that supports  human dual -task motor performance.  
 
 
13. Explain when and how the participants will be provided with the results of the study.  
 
Upon the completion of the study, the participants will receive a summary of the results (ab stract 
format) upon their request.  
 
INFORMED CONSENT PROCEDURES  
 
 
14. Written Informed Consent  
 
 a. Explain the PROCESS you will use to obtain informed consent.  
 
  Prospective  participant s will have the opportunity to read a  written informed consent form describing 
this study and ask questions regarding this study with research study personnel.  Each participant will 
sign the informed consent form in order to participate in thi s study after Institutional Review Board 
approval.  
 
 b. Unless there are unusual circumstances, investigators are required to document informed consent by 
obtaining the participant’s signature (or the signature of their parent or guardian) on a written consent 
form. Explain when and how that signature will be obtained. Explain where the signed consent forms will be stored (specify precise location, preferably in a locked file cabinet with limit ed access), how 
long the signed consent forms will be kept, and identify specific ways that the signed consent forms 
will be destroyed at the end of this period of time.  Note that a copy of the signed consent forms will 
need to be placed on file with the I RB when the study file is closed.  
 
  The signature will be obtained after the prospective participant has read the written informed consent 
and agreed to participate. The signed consent forms will be stored in a locked file cabinet in the School 
of Physical Therapy, Dallas Campus research lab room 881 l where only the researchers have access 
to it. The signed consent forms will be kept until 12/31/2020 and then be destroyed using a paper shredder. A copy of the signed consent form will be placed on  file with the IRB when the study file is 
closed (estimated closing date  May 2018). 
 
 
 c.  If you will not use a written consent form, provide a detailed rationale and explain how informed 
consent will be obtained  
 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   13   N/A 
 
 
RESEARCH TEAM MEMBERS 
 
15. Provide a list of all research team members other than the investigator and faculty advisor.  
 
 A current human subjects training certificate (less than 3 years old) must be on file for the 
investigator, advisor, and all research team members before an approval letter will be sent. These 
training certificates may be sent directly to the IRB separately or attached to this application in 
the attachment section.  If a current training certificate is already on file with the IRB, there is no 
need to attach another copy.  
Name  Delaina WalkerBatson  
TWU 7 -digit Colleague ID # (if applicable)  0066102  
Email Address:  DWalkerBatson@mail.twu.edu  
TWU Department or Name of Other Institution  Communication Sciences& Disorders, Stroke Center -
Dallas  
Role on Project  Co-Investigator  
  
Name  Alex Newton  
TWU 7-digit Colleague ID #  (if applicable)  1071827  
Email Address:  mnewton4@twu.edu  
TWU Department or Name of Other Institution  School of Physical Therapy  
Role on Project  Research Assistant  
 
Name  Isheanesu Nyangani  
TWU 7 -digit Colleague ID # (if applicable)  0996599  
Email Address:  inyangani@twu.edu>  
TWU Department or Name of Other Institution  School of Physical Therapy  
Role on Project  Research Assistant  
 
Name  Renee Vanasse  
TWU 7 -digit Colleague ID # (if applicable)  1107511  
Email Address:  rvanasse@twu.edu  
TWU Department or Name of Other Institution  School of Physical Therapy  
Role on Project  Research Assistant  
 
Name  Kevin Palm  
TWU 7 -digit Colleague ID # (if applicable)  1106859  
Email Address:  kpalm@twu.edu  
TWU Department or Name of Other Institution  School of Physical Therapy  
Role on Project  Research Assistant  
 
 (Attach additional sheets if necessary)  
 
 
   ATTACHMENTS 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   14  
16. List and describe all attachments   (Include forms, scripts, flyers, consent forms, agency approval 
letters, human subjects training certificates , signed confidentiality agreement forms, referral lists, 
surveys, questionnaires, or any other instrument used in the study. ) Attachment s should be listed  
below  in the same order in which they are attached.  
 
Advertising flyer 
TMS safety questionnaire  
         3.Mini Mental State Exam, Fugl- Meyer, Trail -Making Test  
IRB training certificates for ea ch research personnel (6 copies)  
 
 
 
SUBMISSION INSTRUCTIONS 
 
The application should be submitted to the appropriate campus IRB. 
 
Denton and Dallas  
 Mail the signed original to the address below. If electronic submission is preferred, combine all 
parts of application into single .pdf document and email to irb@twu.edu
. If the application is 
submitted electronically as a fully signed .pdf, the original copy is not required. 
  TWU’s Office of Research & Sponsored Programs  
 Institutional Review Board 
 PO Box 425619 
 Denton, TX 76204-5619 
 
Applications may also be hand delivered to the Denton campus ACT 7
th floor or the Dallas campus 
Office of Research IHSD 8th floor.  
 
Houston 
 
All parts of the application (including the signed cover page and appendices in order) should be 
combined into one single .pdf or Word document and emailed to irb-houston@twu.edu . The 
original copy is not required. If you have any difficulty with preparing a .pdf file, please contact the 
Houston Office of Research via email for assistance. 
 
 RESPONSE TIMES 
Upon receipt of the application, the investigator will receive an email notifying them that the 
application has been received, the level of review that the application has been assigned, and the 
protocol number that has been assigned. A pplicants  can expect to receive a r esponse from the 
IRB regarding the review within three weeks  for an expedited application and within two weeks  
from the date of the meeting for a full review application. Note that these times are estimates and 
additional time may be required during certain times of the academic calendar such as summer, 
semester breaks, and Holidays.  
References:   
 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   15 1. Bowen A, Wenman R, Mickelborough J, Foster J, Hill E, Tallis R. Dual -task effects of 
talking while walking on velocity and balance foll owing a stroke. Age Ageing. 
2001;30(4):319-323. 
2. Choi JH, Kim BR, Han EY, Kim SM. The effect of dual -task training on balance and 
cognition in patients with subacute post-stroke. Ann Rehabil Med. 2015;39(1):81-90. 
3. Plummer -D'Amato P, Altmann LJ. Relati onships between motor function and gait-related 
dual-task interference after stroke: a pilot study. Gait Posture. 2012;35(1):170-172. 
4. Yang YR, Chen YC, Lee CS, Cheng SJ, Wang RY. Dual -task -related gait changes in 
individuals with stroke. Gait Posture. 2 007;25(2):185-190. 
5. Plummer -D'Amato P, Altmann LJ, Saracino D, Fox E, Behrman AL, Marsiske M. 
Interactions between cognitive tasks and gait after stroke: a dual task study. Gait 
Posture. 2008;27(4):683-688. 
6. Kim GY, Han MR, Lee HG. Effect of Dual -task Rehabilitative Training on Cognitive and 
Motor Function of Stroke Patients. J Phys Ther Sci. 2014;26(1):1-6. 
7. Plummer P, Villalobos RM, Vayda MS, Moser M, Johnson E. Feasibility of dual -task gait 
training for community -dwelling adults after stroke: a cas e series. Stroke Res Treat. 
2014;2014:538602. 
8. Plummer -D'Amato P, Kyvelidou A, Sternad D, Najafi B, Villalobos RM, Zurakowski D. 
Training dual -task walking in community -dwelling adults within 1 year of stroke: a 
protocol for a single-blind randomized controlled trial. BMC Neurol. 2012;12:129. 
9. Yang YR, Wang RY, Chen YC, Kao MJ. Dual -task exercise improves walking ability in 
chronic stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2007;88(10):1236-
1240. 
10. Ludemann-Podubecka J, Bosl K, Nowak DA. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation for motor recovery of the upper limb after stroke. Prog Brain Res. 
2015;218:281-311. 
11. Goh HT, Chan HY, Abdul -Latif L. Aftereffects of 2 noninvasive brain stimulation 
techniques on corticospinal excitabi lity in persons with chronic stroke: a pilot study. J 
Neurol Phys Ther. 2015;39(1):15-22. 
12. Goh HT, Lee YY, Fisher BE. Neural correlates of dual -task practice benefit on motor 
learning: a repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation study. Eur J Neurosci. 
2013;37(11):1823-1829. 
13. Kakuda W, Abo M, Watanabe S, et al. High-frequency rTMS applied over bilateral leg 
motor areas combined with mobility training for gait disturbance after stroke: a 
preliminary study. Brain Inj. 2013;27(9):1080-1086. 
14. Wang RY, Tseng HY, Liao KK, Wang CJ, Lai KL, Yang YR. rTMS combined with task -
oriented training to improve symmetry of interhemispheric corticomotor excitability and gait performance after stroke: a randomized trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2012;26(3):222-230. 
15. Al-Yahya E, Johansen-Berg H, Kischka U, Zarei M, Cockburn J, Dawes H. Prefrontal 
Cortex Activation While Walking Under Dual -Task Conditions in Stroke: A Multimodal 
Imaging Study. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2016;30(6) :591-599. 
16. Manor B, Zhou J, Jor'dan A, Zhang J, Fang J, Pascual -Leone A. Reduction of Dual -task 
Costs by Noninvasive Modulation of Prefrontal Activity in Healthy Elders. J Cogn 
Neurosci. 2016;28(2):275-281. 
17. Schabrun SM, Lamont RM, Brauer SG. Transcr anial Direct Current Stimulation to 
Enhance Dual -Task Gait Training in Parkinson's Disease: A Pilot RCT. PLoS One. 
2016;11(6):e0158497. 
18. Swank C, Mehta J, Criminger C. Transcranial direct current stimulation lessens dual task 
cost in people with Parkins on's disease. Neurosci Lett. 2016;626:1-5. 
June 2015 (revised Nov 2015)   16 19. Wrightson JG, Twomey R, Ross EZ, Smeeton NJ. The effect of transcranial direct 
current stimulation on task processing and prioritisation during dual -task gait. Exp Brain 
Res. 2015;233(5):1575-1583. 
20. Miyai I , Yagura H, Hatakenaka M, Oda I, Konishi I, Kubota K. Longitudinal optical 
imaging study for locomotor recovery after stroke. Stroke. 2003;34(12):2866-2870. 
21. Miyairi T, Takamoto S, Kotsuka Y, Takeuchi A, Yamanaka K, Sato H. Neurocognitive outcome after retrograde cerebral perfusion. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77(5):1630-1633; 
discussion 1635. 
22. Beurskens R, Steinberg F, Antoniewicz F, Wolff W, Granacher U. Neural Correlates of 
Dual-Task Walking: Effects of Cognitive versus Motor Interference in Young Adults . 
Neural Plast. 2016;2016:8032180. 
23. Duncan PW, Propst M, Nelson SG. Reliability of the Fugl -Meyer assessment of 
sensorimotor recovery following cerebrovascular accident. Phys Ther. 
1983;63(10):1606-1610. 
24. Reitan RM. The relation of the trail making test to organic brain damage. J Consult 
Psychol. 1955;19(5):393-394. 
25. Rossi S, Hallett M, Rossini PM, Pascual -Leone A, Safety of TMSCG. Safety, ethical 
considerations, and application guidelines for the use of transcranial magnetic 
stimulation in clinical practice and research. Clin Neurophysiol. 2009;120(12):2008-2039. 
26. Rossini PM, Burke D, Chen R, et al. Non-invasive electrical and magnetic stimulation of 
the brain, spinal cord, roots and peripheral nerves: Basic principles and procedures for routine clinical and research application. An updated report from an I.F.C.N. Committee. 
Clin Neurophysiol. 2015;126(6):1071-1107. 
 