1 
  
 
Association of early m yocardial injury with major adverse outcomes in patients with 
COVID -19 
AHA Rapid Response Grant COVID -19 and Its Cardiovascular Impact  
Principal investigator: Dr. Annapoorna Kini , MD  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date:  3/8/2021  
  
2 
 Association of early m yocardial injury with major adverse outcomes in patients with 
COVID -19 
AHA Rapid Response Grant COVID -19 and Its Cardiovascular Impact  
Principal investigator: Dr. Annapoorna Kini , MD  
Co-Investigator: Dr. Roxana Mehran , MD  
Co-Investigator: Parasuram Krishnamoorthy, MD 
Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY  
Revised 3/8/2021  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Our understanding of diagnosis, treatment and outcomes of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -
19) is rapidly evolving . First  reports from China clearly indicate that older patients with 
underlying cardiovascular disease  and/or cardiac risk factors demonstrate higher mortality rates 
(1,2).  Most r ecent  reports provided novel  insights into the incidence of myocardial injury in 
COVID -19 patients  and its association with adverse outcomes  (3,4). In both studies , patients 
with myocardial injury manifested by elevated high -sensitivity troponin I (TnI) levels had 
significantly higher in -hospital mortality rates  compared with those without myocardial injury, 
(59.6 and 8.9% (3) and 51 vs 4.5 % (4)).  Among patients with myocardial injury, higher levels of 
TnI were associated with higher mortality rates. While the highest mortality rates were observed 
in patients with elevated TnI and underlying cardiovascular disease  (CVD) , mortality rates were 
also considerable in patients with elevated TnI and without prior CVD. In contrast, patients with 
known cardiova scular disease without TnI elevation had more favorable outcomes. Cardiac 
injury was independently associated with an increased risk of mortality in patients with COVID -
19 (4).  The arming reports  clearly indicate  that the data from larger  populations from multiple 
centers are needed  to further characterize and better understand the association between 
myocardial  injury and adverse  outcomes  in COVID -19 patients .   
 
II. STUDY  AIM (What specific question is being addressed?)    
The aim of the proposed study is to analyze the incidence , clinical outcomes  and predictors of 
myocardial injury in a large patient population with COVID -19 treated in Mount Sinai Hospital 
3 
 (MSH ) system . In addition , we will explore the association between TnI  levels and clinical 
characteristics, biomarkers, cardiac tests data and treatment approaches to uncover the 
potential mechanisms responsible for COVID -19 induced myocardial in jury. 
 
III. STUDY POPULATION (What population(s) is being studied? ) 
By October  2020, there had been 4,695 COVID -19 positive patients treated in the  Mount Sinai 
Hospital (MSH) . All consecutive patients admitted to the MSH system from February 2020  to 
October 2020  with laboratory -confirmed COVID -19 will  be included  in the retrospectiv e study.  
 
IV. STUDY DESIGN AND PROCEDURES  
Medical history, demographic characteristics, clinical data (symptoms, treatment, complications 
and outcomes), laboratory findings  and cardiac biomarkers on admission and during 
hospitalization  will be collected retrospectively using electronic medical records by trained  
research personnel  and reviewed by physicians .  In addition, we will collect available 
electrocardiog raphy , echocardiography and radiography ( chest radiography or computed 
tomography ) data.  Patients will be categorized according to the presence or absence of cardiac 
injury defined as blood levels of high sensitivity troponin (hsTn) above the 99th -percentile upper 
reference limit. The primary end point will be death ; secondary end points will  include the rate of 
pulmonary embolism, acute kidney injury and admission to the intensive care . The study 
population will be stratified into categories according to the presence and type of myocardial 
injury according to  the Fourth Universal Definition o f Myocardial infarction. The cumulative 
incidence of all -cause mortality will be assessed using the Kaplan -Meier method and compared 
across the study groups with the log -rank test. Multivariate regression models will be used to 
determine the independent ri sk factors for death.  Statistical analyses will be performed by an 
independent statistical center not involved in the data collection  
VI. OUTCOMES  (What is the anticipated actionable outcome? )  
The study will provide novel  insights into the incidence  and consequences of COVID -19 
associated myocardial  injury in US population  and its impact in early and late outcomes after the 
infection . We plan to  develop a statistical model to predict the risks for myocardial injury induced 
death in COVID -19 patients and identify responses to different treatment strategies.   This 
information will be pivotal for other centers who have yet had the surge of COVID cases.  We 
4 
 plan on fast track publication.    Furthermore,  electrocardiography, echocardiography and 
radiology data analyses will be used to uncover the potential  mechanisms responsible for the 
link between myocardial injury and mortality.  The findings will pro vide invaluable insights into 
the clinical  outcomes  and mechanisms underlying the collision between the acute COVID -19 
epidemic and ongoing epidemic of c ardiovascular  disease .  
 
References  
1. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel 
coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet 2020;395:497 -506. 
2. Wang D, Hu B, Hu C et al. Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 
2019 Novel Coronavirus -Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. Jama 2020.  
3. Guo T, Fan Y, Chen M et al. Cardiovascular Implications of Fatal Outcomes of Patients 
With Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19). JAMA cardiology 2020.  
4. Shi S, Qin M, Shen B et al. Association of Cardiac Injury With Mortality in Hospitalized 
Patients With COVID -19 in Wuhan, China. JAMA cardiology 2020.  
 
 