Official Title: ACcomplisH: A Phase 2, multicenter, double-blind, 
randomized, placebo-controlled, dose escalation trial 
evaluating safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of 
subcutaneous doses of TransCon CNP administered once 
weekly for 52 weeks in prepubertal children with 
achondroplasia followed by an Open-Label Extension Period 
Study ID: [REMOVED] 
Document Date:   Protocol Version 5: 28 December 2022 
Clinical Trial Protocol  Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022  Page 1 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0 CONFIDENTIAL  CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL  
PRODUCT NAME: TransCon CNP 
PROTOCOL NUMBER: TCC-201 
IND NUMBER: 142685  
EUDRACT NUMBER: 2019-002754-22 
PHASE: 2 
PROTOCOL TITLE: ACcomplisH: A Phase 2, multicen ter, double-blind, randomized, 
placebo -controlled, dose escalation trial evaluating safety, efficacy, and 
pharmacokinetics of subcutaneous dos es of TransCon CNP administered 
once weekly  for 52 weeks in prepubertal children with achondrop lasia 
followed by an Open-Label Extension Period 
PROTOCOL DATE: Version 1, 5 July 2019 
Version 2 , 1 September 2020 
Version 3 , 8 January 2021 
Version 4, 12 August 2021 
Version 5, 28 December 2022 
PROTOCOL VERSION: 5 
SPONSORED BY: Ascendis Pharma Growth Disorders A/S  
Tuborg Boulevard 12, DK -2900, Hellerup, Denmark  
GLOBAL MEDICAL 
MONITOR: , MD 
Ascendis Pharma, Inc.  
1000 Page Mill Rd , Palo Alto, California 94304, USA 
BACK-UP MEDICAL 
MONITOR, EUROPE: , MD  PhD  
Ascendis Pharma A/S  
Tuborg Boulevard 12, DK -2900, Hellerup, Denmark 
BACK-UP MEDICAL 
MONITOR: , MD  
Ascendis Pharma , Inc.  
1000 Page Mill Rd , Palo Alto, California 94304, USA  
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document contains proprietary and confidential information of Ascendis Phar ma Growth Disorders A/S 
or its affiliates.  Acceptance of this document cons titutes agreement by the recipient that no previousl y 
unpublished information contained  herein will be published or disclose d without the prior written approval 
of Ascendis Pharma Grow th Disorders A/S or its affiliates with the excepti on that this document may be 
disclosed to study personnel under your supervision who need to know the contents for conducting the study 
and appropriate Institutional Review Boards (IRBs)/Ethics Committees (EC) under the condition that the 
personnel have agreed to keep this informat ion confidential.  The foregoing shall not appl y to disclosure 
required by governmental regulations or laws, however , Ascendis Pharma Growth Disorders A/S or its 
affiliates shall be promptly no tified of any such disclosure. 1&7
PPD
PPD
PPDPPD
PPD
PPD
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 2 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  STATEMENT OF COMPLIA NCE   
This trial will be conducted in accordance with the following:  
• Protocol -related and trial -related documents  
• Declaration of Helsinki  
• Good Clinical Practice (GCP) as outlined by the International Conference on Harmonization  
(ICH ) E6 (R2) and regional regulations  
• Regional participant  data protection laws and regulations  
• Other applicable regional and local regulations  
• US Federal Regulation s, as applicable  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 3 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  1. APPROVAL SIGNATURES   
1.1. SPONSOR   
I agree to conduct this trial in accordance with the re quirements of this Clinical Trial Protocol 
and also in accordance with the following:  
x Protocol -related and trial -related documents  
x Declaration of Helsinki  
x Good Clinical Practice (GCP) as outlined by the Interna tional Conference on Harmoniz ation 
(ICH ) E6 (R2) and regional regulations  
x Regional participant  data protection laws and regulations  
x Other applicable regional and local regulations  
x Clinical trial contractual obligations  
x US Federal Regulations , as applicable  
 
CLINICAL TRIAL TITLE:  
ACcomplisH: A Phase 2, multicenter, double -blind, randomized, placebo -controlled, dose 
escalation trial evaluating safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of subcutaneous doses of 
TransCon CNP administered once weekly  for 52 weeks  in prepubertal children with 
achondrop lasia followed by a n Open -Label Extension Period . 
See Appended Electronic Signature  
 , MD  
 
Ascendis Pharma, Inc   Date PPD
PPD
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 4 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  SUMMARY OF CHANGES – VERSION 5, 28 December 2022  
Rationale  
The following substantial changes are made from protocol v 4.0 to protocol v 5.0: 
Section (s)  Change  Rationale  
Front page  Updated contact information for medical 
monitors   Change in Sponsor staff  
10.1.3.20 ; Synopsis  Adding information of a new separate 
long-term open -label extension study for 
participants completing treatment in the 
TCC -201 protocol.  Introducing the potential option to 
continue treatment in a separate long -
term open -label extension study 
(ASND0039) for the participants who 
are eligible and if no safety concerns for 
continued treatment with TransCon CNP 
have been identified.  
10.1.3.21 ; Synopsis; 
Appendix 1 
(Schedule of Events 
– OLE)  Follow -Up Visit not required for 
participants who will  continue in the 
separate long -term open -label study 
(ASND0039).  The assessments scheduled to be 
performed at the Follow -Up Visit will be 
performed in the long -term open -label 
extension study for the participants who 
continue in that study.  
11.8.1   Change of “Bone Age X -ray” to “Hand 
and Wrist X -ray”.  Clarification of the scope of assessments 
made from the x -ray of the hand and 
wrist, a s the images will not only be 
assessed for bone age but also for bone 
growth.  
11.8.2   Adding “bone growth” to the assessments 
made from the anterior -posterior standing 
lower extremity x -rays.  Clarification of the scope of assessments 
made from the x -ray of the lower 
extremity, as the images will also be 
assessed for bone growth.  
12.4.2   Updated SAE reporting  Reporting of Serious Adverse Events 
and pregnancies may contain personal 
identifiable information covered by data 
privacy regulation. As emails/fax are not 
considered to be adequately secure for 
sharing this type of information the 
current reporting method may therefore 
impose a risk of data breach.   
In order to mitigate this risk, Ascendis 
Pharma is changing the reporting 
method to secure online reporting 
through the Ascendis Safety Re porting 
Portal (safety.ascendispharma.com).  
This change has previously been 
implemented in a non -substantial 
protocol addendum version 1.0 and is 
now incorporated in the full protocol.  
 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 5 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  2. SYNOPSIS   
PRODUCT 
NUMBER/NAME TransCon  CNP  
PROTOCOL NUMBER TCC-201 
IND NUMBER 142685 
EUDRACT NUMBER 2019-002754-22 
DEVELOPMENT 
PHASE 2 
PROTOCOL TITLE ACcomplisH: A Phase 2, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, 
placebo -controlled, dose escalation trial evaluating safety, efficacy, 
and pharmacokinetics of subcutan eous doses of TransCon CNP 
administered once weekly for 52 weeks in prepubertal children with 
achondroplasia followed by an Open-Label Extension Period 
INDICATION Achondroplasia 
OBJECTIVES Primary:  
In prepubertal children with achondroplasia (ACH) at 52 weeks 
x To determine the safety of once weekly subcutaneous (SC) doses  
of TransCon CNP  
x To evaluate the effect of once weekly SC doses of TransCon CNP 
on annualized height velocity (AHV) 
Secondary:  
x To evaluate the effect of once weekly SC doses of TransCon CNP 
on body proportionality (upper to lower body segment ratio) in 
prepubertal children with ACH at 52 weeks  
x To evaluate the pharmacokinetic (PK) properties of once weekly 
SC doses of TransCon CNP 
x To assess the potential immunogenic response to once weekly  SC 
doses of TransCon CNP 
Exploratory:  
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 6 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  PLANNED TRIAL 
SITES Approximately 3 5 
PLANNED NUMBER 
OF PARTICIPANTS Minimum of 60  
TRIAL POPULATION Minimum of 60 male and female prepube rtal children with ACH aged 
2 to 10 years old 
ELIGIBILITY 
CRITERIA  Inclusion Criteria 
1. Clinical diagnosis of ACH with genetic confirmation (See 
Section 11.11 ) 
2. Age between 2 to 10 years old (i nclusive) at Screening Visit 
3. Prepubertal (Stage 1 breasts for girls or testicular volume < 4ml 
for boys) at Screening Visit (See Section 11.3) 
4. Able to stand without assistance 
5. Caregiver willing and able to administer subcutaneous injections 
of study drug  
6. Written, signed informed consent of the parent(s) or legal 
guardian(s) of the participant and written assent of the participant 
as required by the institutional review board/human research 
ethics committee/independent eth ics committee (IRB/HREC/IEC) 
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Clinically significant findings at Screening that: 
x are expected to require surgical intervention during 
participation in the trial or  
x are musculoskeletal in nature, such as Salter- Harris fractures 
and severe hip pain or 
x otherwise are considered by investigator or Medical M onitor 
to make a participant unfit to receive study drug or undergo 
trial related procedures 
2. Have received treatment (>3 months) of human growth hormone 
(hGH) or other medications known to affect stature or body 
proportionality at any time 
3. Have received any dose of medicati ons intended to affect stature 
or body proportionality within the previous 6 months of S creening 
Visit CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 7 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  4. Have received any study drug  or device intended to affect stature 
or body proportionality at any time  
5. History or presence of injury or disease of the gr owth plate(s), 
other than ACH, that affects growth potential of long bones  
6. History of any bone -related surgery that affects growth potential 
of long bones, such as orthopedic reconstructive surgery and 
osteotomy (Limb -lengthening with full recovery is all owed with a 
minimum of 12 months of bone healing. Foramen magnum 
decompression and laminectomy with full recovery are allowed 
with minimum of 6 months of bone healing . History of 8 plate 
epiphysiodesis is allowed, but the plates must have been removed 
prior to Screening with minimum 4 weeks of healing. )  
7. Have a form of skeletal dysplasia other than ACH or known 
medical conditions that result in short stature or abnormal  growth 
[such as severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and 
acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN), hypochondroplasia, growth 
hormone deficiency, Turner syndrome, pseudoachondroplasia, 
inflammatory bowel disease,  chronic renal insufficiency, active 
celiac disease1, Vitamin D deficiency2, untreated hypothyroidism3, 
poorly controlled diabetes mellitus (HbA1c ≥8.0%) or diabetic 
complications4] 
1Celiac disease responsive to a gluten -free diet is allowed  
2Vitamin D deficiency  or insufficiency treated with 
supple mentation is allowed. Vitamin D deficiency is defined as 
25(OH)D level <20ng/mL (<49.9 nmol/L), insufficiency is 
defined as 25(OH)D level 20 -30ng/mL (49.92  - 74.86 nmol/L).  
Participants with Vitamin D deficiency or insufficiency must be 
on Vitamin D regim en before randomization.   
3Participants with hypothyroidism mu st be clinically euthyroid 
for 3 months prior to Screening Visit  and, in the opinion of the 
investigator, have achieved any catch -up growth expected from 
thyroxine replacement  
4Participants with  diabetes mellitus must have been on stable 
medication regimen for 3 months prior to randomization (dose 
adjustments are allowed but addition or discontinuation of 
medications in this time period is disallowed)  
8. History or presence of malignant disease, other than basal cell 
epithelioma/carcinoma or completely resected squamous skin 
cancer with no recurrence for 12 months per medical records  
9. History or presence of the following:  
• Chronic anemia  (resolved iron deficiency anemia is allowed)  
• Significant cardi ovascular disease per the judgement of the 
investigator, such as congenital heart disease (uncomplicated 
patent ductus arteriosus and atrial or ventricular septal defect 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 8 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  with repair are allowed), aortic insufficiency, clinically 
significant arrhythmias, congestive heart failure with NYHA 
class II and above,  or other conditions that impair regulation of 
blood pressure or heart rate  
• Condition that impacts hemodynamic stability (such as 
autonomic dysfunction, orthostatic intolerance)  
• History of chronic renal insufficiency  
• Chronic  or recurrent illness that can affect hydration or volume 
status. This may include conditions associated with decreased 
nutritional intake or increased volume loss  
• Bone fracture within 6 months prior to Screen ing Visit  (within 
2 months for fracture of digits)  
• Any disease or condition that, in the opinion of the 
investigator, may make the participant  unlikely to fully 
complete the trial, may confound interpretation of trial results, 
or presents undue risk from r eceiving study drug  
10. Child has significant electrocardiogram abnormalities , including 
evidence of a previous myocardial infarction, left ventricular 
hypertrophy, flat T waves (particularly in the inferior leads) or 
more than minor non -specific ST -T wave cha nges or:  
• QRS >90 milliseconds (msec)  
• QT interval corrected using Fridericia ’s formula (QTcF) 
>440  msec  
• PR interval >170 msec  
• Complete right or left bundle branch block  
11. Requires, or anticipated to require , chronic  (> 4 weeks)  or 
repeated  (more than twice p er year ) treatment with oral 
corticosteroids during participation in the trial (low and mid -dose 
inhaled corticosteroids  are allowed. High -dose inhaled 
corticosteroids are not allowed. ). See Appendix  5 for definition of 
high doses of inhaled corticosteroids.  
12. Use of medication known to prolong the QT/QTc interval within 
7 days or 5 half -lives (whichever is longer) prior to  the Screening 
Visit (see https://crediblemeds.org/  for the list of medications that 
are known to prolong the QT/QTc interval. Note: Only 
medications on the Known Risk list are excluded, not those on the 
Possible or Conditional Risk lists)  
13. Ongoing t reatment with any medicatio n that affect s blood pressure 
or heart rate 
14. Known hypersensitivity to the components of the study drug  
[trehalose, tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, succinate and 
PEG ] 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 9 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  15. Any other reason that in the opinion of the investigator would 
prevent the child from complying with the trial requirements or 
completing the trial 
ROLLOVER 
CRITERIA  Participants are eligible for the Open-Label Extension Period if they 
fulfil l the following rollover criteria: 
1. Have completed the 52 weeks randomized treatment period 
2. Written, signed informed consent of the parent(s) or legal 
guardian(s) of the participant and written assent of the participant 
as required by the institutional review board/human research 
ethics committee/independent eth ics committee (IRB/HREC/IEC) 
to continue into the Open-Label Extension (OLE) Period   
3. Do not fulfill any of the Holding/stopping study drug conditions 
or symptoms (see Section 9.6)  
TRIAL DESIGN This trial is a multicenter trial consisting of two treatment periods . A 
52 week double -blind, randomized, placebo  controlled, dose 
escalation trial ev aluating up to 5 different dose levels of weekly 
TransCon CNP administered  subcutaneously in prepu bertal children 
2 to 10 years old, inclusive, with ACH.  After completing 52 weeks of 
their assigned cohort dose , participant s who fulfill  the rollover criteria 
can continue into the 104 weeks Open -Label Extension Period . In this 
extension period , participa nts may receive the highest dose level of 
TransCon CNP that has been reviewed and recommended  by the Data 
Monitoring Committee (DMC) for  safety.  
 
Trial Design Scheme : 
 
Trial design scheme in the Randomized and Open -Label Extension 
period. In the Randomized  Treatment Period, p articipants in each 
cohort will receive  their randomi zed treatment for 52 weeks , after 
which they are rolled over into the Open -Label Extension . The 
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 10 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  initiation of a new , subsequent  cohort in the Randomized Period  is 
gated by a DMC that reviews 3 mo nths of safety data of the current 
cohort to determine if the dose is safe, after which the DMC  can 
recommend to proceed with the next cohort . In the Open -Label 
Extension Period,  participants may receive the highest dose level of 
TransCon CNP that has been reviewed and recommended by the Data 
Monitoring Committee (DMC) for  safety and has passed DMC safety 
review.    
Cohort  Planned Dose Level  Appro ximate Number  
Of Participants ** 
1 6 µg CNP/kg/week  9 on TransCon CNP, 3 on placebo  
2 20 µg CNP/kg/week  ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on 
placebo  
3 50 µg CNP/kg/week  ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on 
placebo  
4 100 µg CNP/kg/week  ≥9 on T ransCon CNP, ≥3 on 
placebo  
5 > 100 µg CNP/kg/week*  ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on 
placebo  
*At a dose to be determined, if needed, based on emerging data  
**Minimum of 12 participants per cohort will be enrolled.  Plan to 
enroll approximately 14 participants per cohort to account for 
potential  dropouts due to COVID -19. 
Visit Schedule Diagram in the Randomiz ed and Open -Label 
Extension Period s 
 
Screening  Visit (up to approximately 1 to 4 weeks prior to 
randomization) : 
Following informed consent, participant s will complete the Screening 
Visit to determine eligibility.  
Screening evaluations will include:  
1. PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Verification of eligibility  

Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 11 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  3. Demographics  (date of birth, age at screening , biological sex, 
ethnicity, race) 
4. Medical history including family  history  of ACH , age of 
diagnosis,  date of diagnosis (if available),  type of mutation , and  
historical anthropometric measurement s, as available  
5. Prior and concomitant  medications  
6. Vital sign measurements (Temperature, HR, BP ) 
7. Full p hysical examination  (general appearance, HEENT, Ne ck 
(including thyroid), Lung/pulm onary, Chest, CV, Abdomen, Back, 
GU, Neurological, Extremities, and Skin ), including assessment of 
pubertal status and thorough skeletal exam  
8. Baseline qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring  pattern 
(clinical assessment  for monitoring)  
9. Weight  
10. Standing height  
11. Sitting height  
12. 12-lead ECG  
13. Genetic confirmation of ACH  (if not done previously) . See 
Section  11.11  
14. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. TSH  
c. Hemoglobin A1c  
d. Hematology  
e. Lipid panel  
f. 25(OH) Vitamin D  
g. Anti-drug antibodies  
h. Biomarkers  
15. Urine collection  
16.  
Screening Visit may be conducted remotely ( e.g. at the participant ’s 
home ), at the discretion of the investigator, to minimize the risk of 
exposure to an infection during a pandemic or due to other restrictions 
that prevent  the participant from being able to travel to the site.  In 
such an event, consent m ay be obtained remotely as allowed by the 
applicable IRB/EC requirements, and the Investigator will conduct the 
scheduled assessments remotely with assistance from the home health 
nurse (HHN) who will be with the participant.  If the PRO/ObsRO 
validation battery cannot be comp leted during the Screening Visit  due 
to the visit being conducted remotely , the battery  should be completed  
separately at approximately 14 days  prior to Visit 1, up to 7 days prior 
to Visit 1.  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 12 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  All anthropometric  measurements per medical records for up to one 
year prior to Screening Visit  should be collected. If measurement (s) 
are not available within one year, the last available measurement (s) 
prior to Screening Visit  should be collected.  
Thorough skeletal physical exam will be performed by palpating the 
bone structure and joints for tenderness and mobility and other 
abnormal changes not normally found in children with ACH. Special 
attention will be paid  to the hip exam, which will include a supine 
assessment of ab duction  and adduction of hips to assess for pain and 
any limitation of range of motion. If changes are noted further 
evaluation will be required as clinically indicated, including imaging 
and/or  orthopedic consultation. DMC will be apprised of any safety 
findings . 
Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern should include 
questions about neck hyperextension during sleep, loud and irregular 
snoring, glottal stops, observed sleep apnea, dee p compensatory sighs, 
self-arousals, secondary enuresis, night -time emesis, morning 
headaches, daytime somnolence, or changes in school performance or 
behavior (Pauli  2019 ). 
For the assessment of pubertal status, boys will be assessed for te stis 
volumes, and g irls for breast development according to Tanner stages 
(Tanner  1976 ).  Pubic hair rating will also be recorded according to 
Tanner sta ges but will not be used to assess eligibilit y.  All 
participant s must be Tanner Stage 1 for breast development 
(girls)  - no glandular developm ent/breast buds, and Tanner Stage 1 for 
gonadal development (boy s) - testicular volume < 4 mL 
(Emmanuel  2019 ). Tanner s tage progression during the course of the 
trial will not impact study treatment.  See Appendix  3 for details.  
In case the Screening Visit is conducted remotely, full physical exam 
including pubertal assessment and thorough skeletal exam, may be 
conducted at Visit 1 before administration o f study drug, with the 
understanding that an exam consistent with Ta nner stage ≥ 2 is 
exclusionary.  If the full physical exam and thorough skeleta l exam are 
done pre -dose at Visit 1 , an additional thorough skeletal exam and 
limited symptom directed physica l exam at Visit 1 are not required.  
Visit  1 (Randomization/ Week 0): 
Participant s meeting all entry criteria will return to the clinic for 
Visit  1.   
The following will be performed  prior to randomization and study 
drug administration : 
1. Subse t of PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review of changes in medical history  
3. Review of concomitant medications  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 13 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  4. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities 
based on age, including risk of sleep apnea and cervical medullary 
compression  (CMC )) 
5. Vital sign measurem ents (Temperature, HR, BP) , including 
orthostatic HR and BP  
6. Limited symptom -directed physical examination  (at investigator ’s 
discretion ), injection site inspection , and t horough skeletal 
physical exam  
7. Qualitative assessment of c hanges  of sleep and snoring  pattern  
8. Weight  
9. All anthropometric measurements  
10. Radiographic assessment  of bone  
a. Left hand and wrist b one age  X-ray  
b. Dual -energy X -ray absorptiometry (DXA)  
c. Anterior -posterior (AP) standing lower extremity X -ray 
d. AP and lateral spine X -ray 
11. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Pharmacokinetics  
d. Biomarkers  
e. Anti-drug antibodies  
12.  
13. After completion of these assessment , participants can proceed to 
randomization and study drug ad ministration:  
14. Randomization  
15. Study drug administration at site and diary dispensing  
If for any reason the PRO/ObsRO va lidation battery for the Screening 
Visit  was not completed prior to Visit 1 , the same battery should be 
completed during  Visit 1 prior to s tudy drug administration in lieu of 
the subset scheduled for Visit 1.  
Orthostatic vital signs (HR , BP) will be taken at rest (preferably 
supine) and upon standing. Orthostatic  hypotension  is defined as 
decrease in SBP of ≥ 20 mmHg (Stewart  2018 ). Accompanying 
tachycardia is defin ed as change of heart rate increment of ≥40 bpm 
and absolute orthostatic HR ≥130 bpm (for ages 13 years and 
younger) (Singer  2012 ). 
Thorough skeletal physical exam will be performed and additional 
imaging assessments may be conducted  as clinically indicated based 
on the physical exam findings.   CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 14 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Limited symptom -directed physical examination of other systems 
should be performed at the discretion of the investigator to verify no 
clinically relevant change s have occurred since the Screening Visit.  
Injection site must be visually inspected prior to do sing.   
If the Screening Visit was conducted remot ely, full physical 
examination must be performed at Visit 1 before administration of 
study drug.  Additional thorough skeletal exam and limited symptom 
directed physical exam are not required.  
Anthropometric measurements should be taken following the 
Anthro pometric Parameter Manual. For any anthropometric 
parameters that could not be measured during the visit, the reason 
must be documented.  
Radiographic assessments may not be required at Visit 1, with 
Medical Monitor approval, if the same assessments were c onducted 
within approximately 3 months prior to Visit 1. If radiographic 
assessments cannot  be completed prior to study drug administration 
due to scheduling conflicts, t he assessments may be comple ted at up 
to 24 hours after study drug administration.  
Bone age using X-ray imaging will be assessed in the left hand and 
wrist for all participants unless a med ical reason prohibits.  
DXA will be performed only for participants aged 5 years and older.  
The first dose of study drug will be administered on -site to provide 
training to the caregiver on study drug administration. Participant will 
be monitored for at least 2 hours in the clinic after injection for any 
acute reactions. Visual inspection of the injection site and vital signs 
measurements ( Temperature, HR, and BP) will be performed at 1 
hour and 2 hours after injection.  Participants should be monitored 
longer as clinically indicated based on any clinically significant 
changes that emerge during th e 2 hours.  
For participants who weigh ≥11 kg, the following will also be 
performed after injection of study drug:  
• Blood collection for pharmacokinetic analyses at approximately 8, 
24, and 48 hours after injection  
• Orthostatic vital signs (HR , BP) at rest (p referably supine) and 
upon standing prior to blood collection at approximately 8, 24, 
and 48 hours after injection  
• Inspection of injection site at approximately 8, 24, and 48 hours 
after injection  
• ECG collection at approximately 48 hours after injection pr ior to 
PK blood collection  
Allowances will be made for accommodation. Exceptions to the 
extended PK blood collection will be considered on an individual 
basis ( e.g. if travel creates an undue hardship for a family). 
Assessments at 24 hours and 48 hours aft er injection, including 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 15 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  orthostatic vital signs, ECG collection, blood collection, and injection 
site assessment may be conducted remotely by HHN.  
Phone Visit (Week 2 ±3 days ): 
All participants will be contacted by phone during Week  2 (±3 days)  
for follow  up. During the call, the study staff will ask the caregiver 
about the general well -being of the child, inquire regarding correct 
administration of study drug, record any AEs, record any concomitant 
medication changes and answer any questions.  
Visit 2 (Wee k 4 ±3 days), Visit 3, 4, 5, 6, (Week 8, 12, 26, 
39 ±7 days)  Visit : 
The following will be performed:  
1. Subset of PRO/ObsRO validation battery (Visit 3, 4, 5, 6 only)  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review of adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities 
based on age, including risk of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, BP, HR) 
5. Limited , symptom -directed  physical examination , injection site 
inspection , and thorough skeletal physical exam  (Visit 2, 3, 4, 
6 only)  
6. Full physical examination , including assessment of pubertal status , 
injection site inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
(Visit 5 only) 
7. Qualitative assessment of changes of sleep and snoring pattern  
8. Weight  
9. Standing height and sitting height only (Vis it 2, 3, 4, 6 only ) 
10. All anthropometric measurements (Visit 5 only)  
11. Radiographic assessment  of bone  
a. AP standing lower extremity  X-ray (Visit 4 only)  
b. AP and lateral spine X -ray (Visit 4 only)  
12. 12-lead ECG (Visit 2, 3, and 5 only)  
13. Study drug and diary dispensing  
14. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Lipid panel (Visit 3  and 6 only)  
d. 25(OH) Vitamin D (Visit 5 only)  
e. Pharmacokinetics  
f. Biomarkers ( except Visit 3 ) 
g. Anti-drug antibodies ( except Visit 3 ) 
15. Urine collection  (Visit 4, 5, and 6 only)  
16.  (Visit s 3, 4, 5, and 
6 only)  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 16 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Visit windows for all visits after Visit 1 may be increased due to 
extenuating circumstances such as Covid -19 travel restrictions, with 
the approval of th e Medical Monitor .  
At Visit 2 ( Week 4) and Visit 5 ( Week 26) , blood collection for 
pharmacokinetics must be at  trough  level. Therefore,  study drug 
cannot be administered within 6 days prior to these visits .  
Visit 2, 3, 4, and 6 may be conducted remotely with assistance from 
the home health nurse (HHN) , at the discretion of the Investigator . A 
portable stadiometer will be used to measure standing and sitting 
height and a portable scale to measure weight . Radiographic 
assessments  at Visit 4 may be conducted  remotely ( e.g. at a 
community imaging center).  
Visit 5 may only be conducted remotel y when regional/institutional 
restrictions  prohibit  site visits  (e.g. facility closed due to pandemic ). If 
Visit 5 must be conducted remotely, a portable stadiometer will be 
used to measure  standing and sitting  height and a portable scale to 
measure weight. A physical assessment will be performed by the 
HHN under the remote supervision of the Investigator.  
Visit 7 (Week 52 ±7 days) or ET Visit:  
This visit will serve as the last visit in the Randomized Period  and the 
first visit in the Open -Label Extension Period .  
At Visit 7, b lood collection for pharmacokinetics must be at trough 
level. Therefore, study drug cannot be administered within 6 days 
prior to the visit. For participant s who do not roll  over to the Open-
Label Extension , no further dose of study drug will be administered. 
Visit 7 may only be conducted remotely when regional/institutional 
restrictions prohibit site visits ( e.g. facility c losed due to pandemic).  If 
Visit 7 is conducted remotely, a portable stadiometer will be used to 
measure standing and sitting height and a portable scale to measure 
weight. A physical assessment will be performed by the HHN under 
the remote supervision of the Investigator.   
The following will be performed:  
1. PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review adverse events (including review of ACH comorbidities 
based on age, including risk of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital signs measur ement ( Temperature , HR, BP)  
5. Full physical examination  including assessment of pubertal status, 
injection site inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
6. Qualitative assessment of changes of sleep and snoring pattern  
7. Weight  
8. All anthropometric measurements  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 17 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  9. Radiographic assessment of bone  
a. Left hand and wrist Bone age X -ray 
b. DXA  
c. AP Standing lower extremity X -ray 
d. AP and lateral spine X -ray 
10. 12-lead ECG  
11. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. 25(OH) Vitamin D  
d. Lipid panel  
e. Pharmacokinetics  
f. Biomarkers  
g. Anti-drug antibodies  
12. Urine collection  
13.  
Radiographic assessments at Visit 7 may be conducted remotely ( e.g. 
at a community imaging center). Alternatively, radiologic assessments 
may be deferre d until the participant is able to travel to the site.  
Radiographic assessments may not be required at Visit 7, with 
Medical Monitor approval, if the same assessments were conducted 
within approximately 3 months prior to Visit 7.  
Immediately following com pletion of 52 weeks in the Randomized 
Period , all participants, including those randomized to placebo, may 
continue into the Open -Label Extension Period  to receive TransCon 
CNP  if they fulfill the rollover criteria (see Section  8.1.3  ). If the 
Investigator or Medical Monitor has concerns about continuing the 
participant in the Open -Label Extension Period  (e.g. potential safety 
concerns or emergent fulfillment of holding/ stopping criteria) 
participant may end treatment at the end of the Randomized Period .  
For those participants not rolling over to the Open -Label Extension 
Period , a follow -up visit should be sch eduled after 5 weeks (please  
see section below on follow -up visit).  
Follow -Up Visit (Week 57 ±7 days ): 
Participants who are not continuing in the Open -Label Extension 
Period will attend a follow -up visit 5 weeks after Visit 7 to review any 
adverse events, to collect blood samples for assessment of anti -drug 
antibodies  and answer any questions . The Follow -up visit may be 
conducted remotely (e.g. at the participant ’s home) by the HHN at the 
discretion of the investigator to minimize the risk of exposure to an  
infection during a pandemic, or due to other restrictions that prevent 
the participant from being able to travel to the site for the blood 
collection.  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 18 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  OPEN -LABEL EXTENSION PERIOD  VISITS:  
Visit 7  (Week 52 ±7 days)  
For participants continuing in the Open -Label Extension Period , all 
Visit 7 assessments for the Open -Label Extension Period  must be 
done immediately following completion of the Visit 7 assessments for 
the Randomized Period . 
Prior to any protocol related activities for the Open -Label Extensi on 
Period , signed informed consent will be obtained for each potential 
participant in accordance with GCP and regional regulatory 
requirements. The format and content of the ICF must be approved by 
the appropriate institutional review board/ethics committe e (IRB/EC) 
prior to implementation.   
During the Open -Label Extension Period , the Investigator should 
ascertain an individual ’s risk for becoming pregnant or fathering a 
child , and take appropriate steps for participants that attain 
reproduct ive potential during participation in the trial  (see 
Appendix  6). 
After completion of all scheduled assessments for the Randomized 
Period , the followi ng will be  performed:  
1. Informed consent  
2. Assessment of childbearing potential according to  Appendix  6  
3. Urinary hCG test for females of childbearing potential  (according 
to Appendix  6) 
4. Study  drug and diary dispensing  
For participants who received placebo during the Randomized Period , 
this will be the  first dose of  TransCon CNP , and in order to maintain 
the blind, all participants must undergo the same safety monitoring. 
Study drug  must  be administered on -site and p articipant s will be 
monitored for at least 2 hours in the clinic after injection for any acute 
reactions. Visual inspection of the injection site and vital signs 
measurements ( Temperature, HR, and BP) will be performed at 1 
hour and 2 hours after injection.  Participants should be monitored 
longer as clinically indicated based on any clinically significant 
changes that emerge during the 2 hours.  
For parti cipants who weigh ≥11 kg, the following will also be 
performed after injec tion of study drug:  
• Blood collection for pharmacokinetic analyses at approximately 8, 
24, and 48 hours after injection  
• Orthostatic vital signs (HR and BP) at rest (preferably supine) and 
upon standing prior to blood collection at approximately 8, 24, 
and 48 hours after injection  
• Inspection of injection site at approximately 8, 24, and 48  hours 
after injection  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 19 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  • ECG collection at approximately 48 hours after injection prior to 
PK blood collection  
Allowances will be made for accommodation.  Exceptions to the 
extended PK blood collection will be considered on an individual 
basis ( e.g. if travel creates an undue hardship for a family).  
Assessments at 24 hours and 48 hours after injection, including 
orthostatic vital signs, ECG collection, blood collection, and i njection 
site assessment may be conducted remotely by HHN.  
Phone Visit (Week 54  ±3 days ): 
All participants will be contacted by phone during Week  54 (±3 days)  
for follow up. During the call, the study staff will ask the caregiver 
about the general well-being of the child, inquire regarding correct 
administration of study drug procedures, record any AEs, record any 
concomitant medication changes , and answer any questions.  
Visit 8 (± 3 days) , 9, 10, 11, 12 , 13, 14, 15, 16 /ET (Week 56, 65, 78, 
91, 104 , 117, 130, 143, 156   (±7 days ): 
The following will be performed:  
1. PRO/ObsRO validation battery  (Visit 12, 16/ET) 
2. Subset of PRO/ObsRO validation batter y (Visit 10 and 14)  
3. Review changes in concomitant medications  
4. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities 
based on age, including risk of sleep apnea and CMC)  
5. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP ) 
6. Weight  
7. Standing height and sitting height (Visit 8, 9, 11, 13, and 15)  
8. All anthropometric measurements (Visit 10 , 12, 14, and 16/ET) 
9. Full physical examination , injection site inspection , and thorough 
skeletal exam (Visit 10 , 12, 14, and 16/ET) 
10. Limited physical examination , injection site inspection , and 
thorough skeletal exam (Visit 8, 9, 11, 13, and 15) 
11. Assessment of pubertal status and childbearing potential  according 
to Appendix  6 
12. Qualitative assessment of changes of sleep and snoring pattern  
13. Radiographic assessments  
a. X-ray of left hand and wrist for bone age (Visit  12 and  16/ET) 
b. Anterior -posterior (AP) standing lower extremity X -ray (Visit 
9, 12, 13, and 16/ET) 
c. Dual -energy X -ray absorptiometry (DXA) for bone mineral 
density (participants 5 yea rs and older only) (Visit  12 and  
16/ET) 
d. Anterior -posterior and lateral spine X -ray (Visit 9 , 12, 13, and 
16/ET) 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 20 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  14. 12-lead ECG (Visit 8, 10, 12 , 14 and 1 6/ET  and Visit 9 and 11 if 
dose is escalated at the visit ) 
15. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. 25(OH) Vitamin D (Visit, 10, 12, 14, and 16/ET)  
d. Lipid panel (Visit 10 , 12, 14, and 16/ET) 
e. Pharmacokinetics (Visit  8, 10, 12, 14, and 16/ET and Visit 9 
and 11 if dose is escalated at the visit ) 
f. Anti-drug antibodies  
g. Biomarkers  
16. Urine collection   
17. Urine collection  for Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG) for 
females of childbearing potential only (see Appendix  6) 
18. Study  drug and diary dispensing (Visit 8, 9, 10, 11 , 12, 13, 14, and 
15) 
19.  (Visit  9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16/ET) 
Visit 8, 9, 11, 13 and 15 may be conducted remotely with assistance 
from the home health nurse (HHN), at the discretion of the 
Investigator.  Pubertal assessment s will be deferred until the next on -
site visit.  A portable stadiometer will be used to measure standing and 
sitting height and a portable scale to measure weight. Scheduled 
radiographic assessments at Visit 9 and 13  may be  performed within 1 
week prior to or after the visit if  all scheduled assessments cannot be 
completed within the same day. Radiographic assessments  may also 
be conducted remotely ( e.g. at a community imaging center) .  
Visit 10, 12, 14  and 16/ET may only be  conducted remotely when 
regional/institutional restrictions prohibit site visits ( e.g. facility 
closed due to pandemic). A portable stadiometer will be used to 
measure standing and sitting height and a portable scale to measure 
weight. A physical assessme nt will be performed by the HHN under 
the remote supervision of the Investigator , but the pubertal  assessment 
will be deferred until the next on -site visit.  Radiographic assessments  
at Visit 9, 12, 1 3 and 16/ET may be conducted remotely ( e.g. at a 
community imaging center) . Alternatively, radiologic assessments 
may be deferred until the participant is able to  travel to the site . 
Radiographic assessments may not be required at Visit 1 6/ET, with 
Medical Monitor approval, if the same assessments were conducted 
within approximately 3 months prior to Visit 1 6/ET.  
During the Open -Label Extension Period , the Investigator should 
ascertain an individual ’s risk for becoming pregnant or fathering a 
child and take appropriate steps for participants that a ttain 
reproductive potential during participation in the trial. This should be 
captured in the eCRF. Pregnancy prevention counseling and CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 21 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  pregnancy testing should be provided as appropriate and can be 
tailored per the Investigator ’s judgement based on matur ity and 
cultural norms.  (see Appendix  6).  
Evaluation  of childbearing potential and inclusion of related safety 
measures like p regnancy testing will be included throughout the 
Open -Label Extension Period  (see Appendix  6). It is not deemed 
necessary to include these measures in the Randomized Period  
because if a child progressed from Tanner 1 at baseline to 
reproductive potential  in less than one year it would be considered 
pathologic pubertal tempo and would lead to study drug 
discontinuation under Stopping Rule s (see Section  9.6).  
Immediately following the completion of treatment in the Open -Label 
Extension period (Visit 16), participants may be offered  participation 
in a separate Long-Term Open-Label Extension Study (ASND0039) . 
Follow -Up Visit Open -Label Extension  (Week 161 ±7 days ): 
Participants will attend a follow -up visit 5 weeks after Visit 16 to 
review any adverse events, to coll ect blood samples for assessment of 
anti-drug antibodies  and answer any questions . The Follow -up visit 
may be conducted remotely (e.g. at the p articipant ’s home) by the 
HHN at the discretion of the investigator to minimize the risk of 
exposure to an infection during a pandemic, or due to other 
restrictions that prevent the participant from being able to travel to the 
site for the blood collection.  The follow -up visit is not appli cable for 
participants who will continue in the separate Long-Term Open-Label 
Extension Study (ASND0039) . 
Study Drug Dosing:  
TransCon CNP (or placebo) will be dosed at 6 to 100 μg 
CNP/kg/week, and if adequate safety is demonstrated at 100 μg 
CNP/kg/week, dosing may advance to a higher dose cohort based on 
emerging data. 
  The initial volume of study drug  (TransCon CNP or placebo) 
administered will be calculated using the weight measurement 
obtained at Visit 1.   The dose volume will be adjusted at each visit  
based on the participant ’s weight  at the corresponding visits.  Study 
drug will be dispensed  for weekly administration  by the caregiver, 
except for the first dose administered at the trial site.   
Data Monitoring Committee Meetings for Cohort Initiation and 
Dose Escalation  in the Open -Label Extension Period  
Data monitoring committee meeting s will be held by the Sponsor 
upon review of the following data to  assess whether the next cohort 
should be initiated as planned:  
1. Initiation of Cohort 2: Cohort 1 data with a minimum of  12 weeks  
of follow up for all participant s CCI
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 22 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  2. Initiation  of Cohort 3: Cohort 2 data with a minimum of 12 weeks  
of follow up for all participant s and available data from all other 
cohorts  
3. Initiation  of Cohort 4: Cohort 3 data with a minimum of 12 weeks  
of follow up fo r all participant s and available data from all other 
cohorts  
An independent  Data Monitoring Committee  (DMC) will attend each  
DMC meeting to provide recommendations on the action to be taken 
(i.e. proceed to  the next dose cohort  as planned , modify the dose of 
the next cohort, or stop dose escalation).  
The D MC will be provided with the following unblinded data at each 
DMC  meeting:  
1. Summary of safety data including but not limited to AEs, vital  
signs, and laboratory  findings  
2. Details  of SAEs and AEs leading to discontinuation of  study drug  
3. Summary of anthropometric measurements of cohorts that 
completed  at least 26 weeks  
4. Other relevant available data  at the request of the DMC , including 
available PK data  
Following the Data Monitoring Committee  meeting, the Sponsor will 
take into consideration the recommendation of the DMC to decide to  
either  proceed to the next dose level as planned, modify the dose of 
the next cohort, or stop dose escalation  for the Randomiz ed Period .  If 
available data  are inadequate to decide on the action to be taken, the 
decision may be deferred until after data through Visit 5 (Week 26) of 
the highest dosed cohort are available, at which time the Data 
Monitoring Committee  meeting will be reconvened.   
Another DMC mee ting will be held u pon completion of 26 weeks  of 
treatment  (Visit 5)  for the all participants in Cohort 4  to assess 
whether additional higher dose levels (up to 200  µg CNP/kg /week ) 
should be investigated based on emerging data. After review of the 
data and consultation with the DMC, the Sponsor will decide whether 
a higher dose level should be investigated .  
The DMC  will also make a recommendation  regarding dose 
escalatio n for the Open -Label Extension Period , which could be up to  
the highest dose level of TransCon CNP that has been reviewed by the 
DMC for  safety  and has passed DMC safety review. Dose escalation 
for the individual participant should be implemented at the next 
scheduled visit (except Visit 8) in the Open -Label Exten sion Period . 
After discussion with the Medical Monitor, an Investigator may 
choose to not increase the dose for an individual participant  or may 
decrease to a prior dose.  
If one serious adverse dr ug reaction o r two severe adverse drug 
reactions occur  at any time  during  a particular cohort, dose escalation 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 23 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  will be halted. Additionally, an urge nt DMC meeting will be called to 
determine whether dosing should be ha lted in that cohort or across the 
entire trial. If deemed appropriate af ter review of all available safety 
data, the DMC may recommend that dose escalation be re -started. If 
the DMC does not feel that enough d ata is available to make a 
recommendation, they may defer a decision and recommend a time at 
which the data should be re -evaluated. 
Additio nally, the DMC will be notified, and a meeting may be called 
for each inciden t of study drug discontinuation for reasons related to 
safety . 
If dose escalation is discontinued prior to initiating the Cohort 4, 
participant s to be enrolled in the cohorts not yet filled may receive the 
highest tolerated dose level investigated (or placebo), instead of the 
planned higher do ses. The decision to complete all four planned 
cohorts will be made by the Sponsor after review of available data  and 
consultation with the DMC.    
In addition, ad hoc DMC meetings may be called by the Sponsor at 
any time for review of newly identified safety concerns. 
INVESTIGATIONAL 
PRODUCT  Tran sCon  CNP Drug Product  
TransCon CNP is a long-acting  essentially inactive prodrug  
  TransCon CNP releases active CNP via auto -cleavage of the 
TransCon Linker in a controlled manner based on physiologic pH and 
temperature.  As such, the TransCon technology is designed to 
provide sustaine d exposure of active  CNP over 7 days, allowing an 
optimal pharmacokinetic profile for use in ACH .  
The drug product formulation containing TransCon CNP is a 
lyophilized powder in a single -use vial, i.e. TransCon CNP 3.9 mg 
  Prior to use, the l yophilized powder must be 
reconstituted with sterile water for injection from a prefilled syringe.  
  This 
solution will be administered by SC injection via syringe and needle.  
REFERENCE 
PRODUCT(S ) Reference product will be supplied as one of two placebos: 
x Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product 
x sWfI (sterile water for injection) Placebo for TransCon CNP drug 
product 
Placebo for TransCon CNP drug pr oduct contains the same excipients 
as TransCon CNP drug product but does not contain TransCon CNP.  
Prior to use, the lyophilized powder must be reconstituted with sterile 
water for injection from a prefilled syringe.  This solution will be 
administered by SC inject ion via syringe and needle. CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 24 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  sWfI Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product consists of sWfI. The 
sWfI is supplied in the same prefilled syringe as the one used for 
reconstitution of the lyophilized powder of the Placebo for TransCon 
CNP drug product.  The procedure for preparation and administration 
of sWfI Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product is the same as for 
Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product, only the vial with excipients 
will be replaced with an empty sterile vial. The diluent (sWfI) is 
injec ted into the empty vial and the dosing volume of sWfI will be 
drawn from the vial into the injection syringe and administered SC.  
If Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product is not available, sWfI 
Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product will be used until Placebo 
for TransCon CNP drug product becomes available.  
Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product will be available prior to the 
start of  Cohort 2, so this procedure will only be utilized in Cohort 1.  
When Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product is available for Cohort 
1, study drug will be prepared and administered by a caregiver (after 
proper training). Total dose volume for participants i n Cohort 1 is 
expected to be ≤ 0.05ml (based on 95 th percentile weight of 32.5 kg 
for children with ACH at 10.5 years of age). At such low volumes, 
risk of possible discomfort associated with hypotonicity is minimal 
and does not pose a significant safety c oncern.  
The dose of Cohort 1 is 6 µg CNP/kg/week (0.006 mg/kg/week) and 
the concentration of reconstituted study drug is 3.6 mg CNP/mL. 
Therefore, study drug will be administered at 
0.006/3.6  = 0.0017mL/kg.  
TREATMENT 
REGIMEN  Until Placebo containing the excipien ts become available , every dose 
of TransCon CNP or placebo will be prepared and administered by a n 
unblinded site staff or home healthcare service . In order to maintain 
the blind , study drug will be prepared out of sight of the investigator, 
caregiver, and the participant. Once Placebo for TransCon CNP  
become s available , study drug  should be administered by the 
caregiver . The injections will be given  SC once weekly 
(approximately eve ry 7 days ).  The dose (volume) of study drug  will 
be adjusted according to the participant ’s weight at each visit . 
For the first four weeks of study drug administration by the caregiver, 
once weekly home healthcare service will be offered to accommodate 
home administration of study drug. Extended support might be 
offered until participants/parents/caregivers are comfortable to take 
over administration of the study drug.  
Each participant will receive their assigned cohort  dose for 52  weeks  
in the Randomized Period , after which they may roll over to the 
Open -Label Extension Period  where all participants will receive 
TransCon CNP.   
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 25 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  BLINDING  This trial consists of a 52 -week randomized, double -blind, 
randomized, placebo -controlled treatment p eriod. Participants will be 
randomized to either TransCon CNP or placebo in 3:1 ratio within 
each cohort .  Once all participants  enrolled  in a dose cohort have 
completed (or withdrawn  from ) their Randomized Period  and the 
database has been locked , the treatment allocation for that dose cohort 
will be unblinded.  
The Randomized Period  will be followed by a 104-week Open -Label 
Extension  treatment period where all participant s will receive 
TransCon CNP.   
TRIAL AND  
TREATMENT 
DURATION  The total duration of the tr ial for an individual participant  is up to 
approximately 165 weeks . Duration includes up to approximately 
4 weeks of screening , plus 156 weeks of treatment  (52 weeks of 
treatment in the Randomized Period and  additional 104 weeks of 
treatm ent in the Open -Label Extension Period ) and a 5-week  
follow -up period .   
STOPPING RULES  The investigator or Medical Monitor  (and, if needed, with DMC  
review) may temporarily hold or stop the dosing of study drug to a 
participant  at any time during the trial . For participants that 
discontinue study drug for reasons related to safety, u nblinding of the 
treatment assignment for the participant may occur if  deemed 
necessary by the Sponsor to assess a potential safety signal  or by the 
investigator to provide adequate medical care to the participant . In 
case of medical emergency, the investigator will have direct access to 
unblinding of the treatment through the Interactive web response 
system. Examples of conditions or sympto ms that may warrant 
holding or stopping study drug  at the investigator ’s or Medical 
Monitor ’s discretion include:  
1. Severe fracture of long bones or growth plates regardless of 
causality  
2. Evidence of symptomatic persistent orthostatic intolerance, lasting 
over 24 hours not explained by other probable causes . Orthostatic  
hypotension  is defined as decrease in SBP of ≥20  mmHg 
(Stewart  2018 ). Accompanying tachycardia is defined as change 
of heart rate increment of ≥40 bpm and absolute orthostatic HR 
≥130 bpm (f or ages 13 years and younger) (Singer  2012 ) 
3. Skeletal abnormalities typically not associated with ACH, growth 
or other concurrent medical conditions, such as  
a. Scoliosis  
b. Severe hip pain 
c. Findings from thorough skeletal exam requiring imaging or 
consultation with orthopedics specialist  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 26 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  d. Clinically relevant findings on radiologic assessments (new 
onset or worsening of tibial bowing, joint abnormalities at the 
elbows, evidence of slipped capital femoral epiphysis)  
4. A severe or serious adverse reaction  
5. QTc value > 500 msec, or an extension > 60 msec from baseline 
in absence of possible causes other than the study drug  
6. Diagnosis of heart disease requiring pharmaceutical or surgical 
intervention to maintain heart function  
7. Any other sign that warrant s holding or discon tinuing study drug  
at the discretion of the investigator or Medical Monitor   
The investigator, with Sponsor Medical Monitor notification, must 
stop study drug for an individual participant in the presence of the 
following symptoms at any time during the tr ial: 
1. Closed epiphysis (bone age >14.0 years for females or >16.0  years 
for males)  
2. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis  
3. Pregnancy, intention of becoming pregnant, and females who 
become of childbearing potential and who do not use highly 
effective contraceptiv e measures. Highly effective contraceptive 
measures are methods that can achieve a failure rate of less than 
1% per year when used consistently and correctly (see 
Appendix  6).  
If study drug  is held or discontinued due to safety concerns, 
approval by the Medical Monitor  is required prior to resumption 
of study drug . Consideration of dose changes due to safety 
concerns may occur on an individual basis.  
Any participant  who discontinues study drug  should be encouraged to 
remain in the trial and attend all subsequent trial visits  and complete 
all assessments .  If, however, trial participation is fully discontinued  
for withdrawal of consent , an E T Visit shou ld be performed.   
CRITERIA FOR 
EVALUATION  Safety  Endpoints  
The following safety  endpoints will be assess ed for both blinded 
Randomized Period  and Open -Label Extension Period : 
• Incidence  of AEs 
• All blood chemistry, hematology, lipid panel, and urinalysis 
parameters  
• Vital  sign measurements and physical examination assessments  
• 12-lead ECG  
• Radiographic  findings from : 
− Bone age X -ray 
− DXA  
− AP standing lower extremity  X-ray  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 27 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL   AP and later al spine X-ray 
x Incidence of a nti-drug antibodies  
Efficacy  Endpoints  
Primary endpoint  
x AHV  as measured at 52 weeks  of weekly TransCon CNP 
treatment or placebo  
Secondary endpoints  
Change  in upper to lower body segment ratio as measured at 
52 weeks  of weekly TransCon CNP treatment or placebo  
Exploratory Endpoints  
Pharmacokinetic Endpoints  
x Plasma  concentration of Total CNP  
x Plasma  concentration of Free CNP  
x Plasma  concentration of mPEG  and mPEG -linker  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 28 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  STATISTICAL 
METHODS  Details of applicable statistical methods will be provided in a 
Statistical Analysis Plan.  
The Full Analysis Set will include all randomized participant s who 
have received at least one dose of investigational product and h ave a 
non-missing baseline height  as well as at least one post -baseline 
height measurement. Participant s will be analyzed according to study 
treatment as randomized. The Safety Analysis Set will include all 
randomized participant s who have received at least one dose of 
investigational product. Participant s will be analyzed according to 
study treatment as treated. The efficacy analyses will be based on the 
Full Analysis Set and safety analyses will be based on the Safety 
Analysis S et. 
In general, analysis will be done by dose levels, and placebo 
participants will be pooled.  Data from clinical assessments will be 
summarized using descriptive statistics. Categorical data will be 
presented using counts and percentages of participants. Continuous 
variables will be presented using number of participants, mean, 
standard deviation (SD), standard error (SE), median, minimum and 
maximum. Statistical significance is defined as P  <0.05  (2-sided).  
For the primary efficacy endpoint, AHV  at Week 5 2, the primary 
analysis is ANCOVA model with the AHV  at Week 52 as the 
response variable, treatment (dose groups and placebo) as factors, 
baseline age, sex, and baseline height SDS as covariates.  The similar 
ANCOVA model, with the baseline of the correspon ding parameter as 
a covariate, will be applied to secondary and exploratory efficacy 
endpoints.  As a sensitivity analysis  for the primary efficacy endpoint, 
AHV  at Week 52, the change from baseline to Week 52 in AHV  will 
be analyzed using ANCOVA model with  treatment and sex as factors, 
baseline age, baseline height SDS, and baseline AHV  as covariates.  
Once the highest tolerated dose is established, the following 
sequential testing procedure  will be used for the comparison between 
the highest tolerated dose group and pooled placebo group.  
The primary analysis for AHV  at Week 52 will be performed first. If 
the p -value for comparing the highest tolerated dose group and pooled 
placebo is <0.05, then the formal hypothesis test for upper to lower 
body segment ratio will be performed.  
Descriptive analysis for safety will mainly include the incidence and 
type of TEAEs, safety laboratory values, vital signs, radiographic 
findings, ECG parameters and antibody parameters.   
SAMPLE SIZE 
DETERMINATION  A sample size o f 9 in active group s (per cohort) and 12 in the placebo 
group (combined across cohorts) will provide 97% power to detect a 
treatment difference of 2 cm/year in 12 month AHV  at a 2 -sided 
significance level of 5%, assuming the SD is 1.1  cm/yr.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 29 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  3. TABLE  OF CONTENTS  
STATEMENT OF COMPLIA NCE  ................................ ................................ ................................ .2 
1. APPROVAL SIGNATURES  ................................ ................................ ....................... 3 
1.1. Sponsor  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 3 
SUMMARY OF CHANGES – VERSION 5, 28 DECEM BER 2022  ................................ ............. 4 
2. SYNOPSIS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 5 
3. TABLE OF CONTENTS  ................................ ................................ ........................... 29 
4. LIST OF ABBREVIATION S................................ ................................ ..................... 35 
5. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......38 
5.1. Background and Rationale  ................................ ................................ .......................... 38 
5.1.1.  Achondroplasia  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 38 
5.1.2.  Current Standard Therapy for ACH  ................................ ................................ ........... 38 
5.1.3.  Fibroblast Growth Factor Rece ptor Type 3  ................................ ................................ 38 
5.1.4.  C-type Natriuretic Peptide  ................................ ................................ .......................... 39 
5.1.5.  Impact of ACH on Well -Being and Functioning in Children with the 
Condition and Their Caregivers  ................................ ................................ .................. 40 
5.2. Relevant Findings from Nonclinical Studies  ................................ .............................. 40 
5.3. Clinical Experience  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....41 
5.4. Trial Rationale  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 42 
5.5. Summary of Important Risks and Potential Benefits  ................................ ................. 42 
5.5.1.  Important Risks  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 42 
5.5.2.  Potential Risks  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 43 
5.5.2.1.  Cardiovascular Changes  ................................ ................................ ............................. 43 
5.5.2.2.  Adverse Bone Overgrowth  ................................ ................................ ......................... 43 
5.5.3.  Potential Benefits  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 43 
6. OBJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 44 
6.1. Primary Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....44 
6.2. Secondary Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ .44 
6.3. Exploratory Objectives  ................................ ................................ ............................... 44 
7. TRIAL DESIGN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 45 
7.1. Overall Trial Design and Plan  ................................ ................................ .................... 45 
7.1.1.  Measures Taken to Maximize Study Integrity and Minimize Bias  ............................ 47 
7.2. Trial Sites  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 48 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 30 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  8. PARTICIPANT POPULATI ON ................................ ................................ ................ 48 
8.1. Eligibility Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......48 
8.1.1.  Inclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 48 
8.1.2.  Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......48 
8.1.3. Rollover Criteria for Open -Label Extension Period  ................................ ................... 50 
8.2. Premature Participant Withdrawal  ................................ ................................ .............. 51 
8.2.1.  Study Drug Discontinuation and Participant Withdrawal  ................................ .......... 51 
8.2.1.1.  Study Drug Discontinuation  ................................ ................................ ....................... 51 
8.3. Participant Replacement Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................ 51 
9. TREATMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 51 
9.1. Investigational Product  ................................ ................................ ............................... 51 
9.1.1.  Labeling  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 52 
9.1.2.  Accountability, Storage, and Dispensing  ................................ ................................ ....52 
9.2. Reference Product  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......53 
9.3. Treatment Administered  ................................ ................................ ............................. 53 
9.4. Selection of Trial Doses  ................................ ................................ .............................. 54 
9.5. Treatment Assignment  ................................ ................................ ................................ 55 
9.5.1.  Treatment Assignment During Randomized Period  ................................ ................... 55 
9.5.2.  Dose Escalation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 56 
9.6. Holding/Stopping Study Drug  ................................ ................................ .................... 57 
9.7. Prior and Concomitant Medications  ................................ ................................ ........... 58 
9.7.1.  Prohibited Therapies  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...59 
10. TRIAL PROCEDURES ................................ ................................ .............................. 59 
10.1.  Trial Duration  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 59 
10.1.1.  Trial Periods and Visits  ................................ ................................ .............................. 59 
10.1.2.  Screening Visit (approximately Week -4 to -1) ................................ .......................... 60 
10.1.3.  Randomized Treatment Period (Week 0 to Week 52) and Open -Label 
Extension Period (Week 52 – Week 156) ................................ ................................ ...63 
10.1.3.1.  Visit 1 (Randomization/Week 0)  ................................ ................................ ................ 64 
10.1.3.2.  Phone Visit (Week 2 ±3 days ) ................................ ................................ .................... 66 
10.1.3.3.  Visit 2 (Week 4 ±3 days)  ................................ ................................ ............................ 66 
10.1.3.4.  Visit 3 (Week 8 ±7 days)  ................................ ................................ ............................ 66 
10.1.3.5.  Visit 4 (Week 12 ±7 days):  ................................ ................................ ......................... 67 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 31 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  10.1.3.6.  Visit 5 (Week 26 ±7 days):  ................................ ................................ ......................... 68 
10.1.3.7.  Visit 6 (Week 39 ±7 days):  ................................ ................................ ......................... 69 
10.1.3.8.  Visit 7 (Week 52 ±7 days) or ET Visit:  ................................ ................................ ......70 
10.1.3.9.  Follow -up Visit (Week 57 ±7 days):  For Participants Not Continuing in the 
Open -Label Extension  ................................ ................................ ................................ 71 
10.1.3.10.  Visit 7 (Week 52 ±7 days):  ................................ ................................ ......................... 71 
10.1.3.11.  Phone Visit (Week 54 ±3 days):  ................................ ................................ ................. 72 
10.1.3.12.  Visit 8 (Week 56 ±3 days):  ................................ ................................ ......................... 72 
10.1.3.13.  Visit 9 (Week 65) ±7 Days  ................................ ................................ ......................... 73 
10.1.3.14.  Visit 10 (Week 78) ±7 Days  ................................ ................................ ....................... 74 
10.1.3.15.  Visit 11 (Week 91) ±7 Days  ................................ ................................ ....................... 75 
10.1.3.16.  Visit 12 (Week 104) ±7 Days  ................................ ................................ ..................... 76 
10.1.3.17.  Visit 13 (Week 117) ±7 Days  ................................ ................................ ..................... 77 
10.1.3.18.  Visit 14 (Week 130) ±7 Days  ................................ ................................ ..................... 78 
10.1.3.19.  Visit 15 (Week 143) ±7 Days  ................................ ................................ ..................... 78 
10.1.3.20.  Visit 16 (Week 156) ±7 Days/Early Termination Visit  ................................ .............. 79 
10.1.3.21.  Follow -Up Visit (Week 161 ±7 days):  ................................ ................................ .......80 
10.1.4.  Unscheduled Visits (UV)  ................................ ................................ ............................ 81 
10.1.5.  Early Termination (ET) Visits  ................................ ................................ .................... 81 
11. ASSESSMENTS ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 81 
11.1.  Vital Sign Measurements  ................................ ................................ ............................ 81 
11.2.  Electrocardiogram (ECG)  ................................ ................................ ........................... 82 
11.3.  Physical Examinations  ................................ ................................ ................................ 82 
11.4.  Qualitative Assessment of Sleep and Snoring Pattern  ................................ ................ 83 
11.5.  Anthropometric Measurements  ................................ ................................ .................. 83 
11.6.  PRO/ObsRO Validation Battery  ................................ ................................ ................. 83 
11.7.   ................................ ........................ 84 
11.8.  Radiographic Assessment of Bone  ................................ ................................ ............. 85 
11.8.1.  Hand and Wrist X -ray ................................ ................................ ................................ .85 
11.8.2.  Anterior -posterior (AP) Standing Lower Extremity X -ray ................................ ........ 86 
11.8.3.  Dual -energy X -ray Absorptiometry (DXA)  ................................ ............................... 86 
11.8.4.  Anterior -posterior and Lateral Spine X -ray ................................ ................................ 86 
11.9.  Weekly Diary  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 86 CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 32 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  11.10.  Adverse Event Review  ................................ ................................ ............................... 86 
11.11.  Laboratory Assessments  ................................ ................................ ............................. 87 
11.12.  Treatment Period Administration  ................................ ................................ ............... 89 
12. ADVERSE EVENTS, SERI OUS ADVERSE EVENTS, AND REPORTING  ......... 89 
12.1.  Adverse Events  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 89 
12.1.1. Definition  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 89 
12.2.  Methods and Timing for Assessing and Recording Safety Variables  ........................ 90 
12.2.1.  Adverse Event Reporting Period  ................................ ................................ ................ 91 
12.2.2.  Severity, Causality, and Outcome Assessment  ................................ ........................... 91 
12.2.2.1.  Severity Rating  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 91 
12.2.2.2.  Causality Rating  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 91 
12.2.2.3.  Outcome Assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..92 
12.3.  Procedures for Eliciting, Recording and Reporting Adverse Events  ......................... 92 
12.3.1.  Eliciting Adverse Events  ................................ ................................ ............................ 92 
12.3.2.  Recording Procedures for All Adverse Events  ................................ ........................... 93 
12.3.3.  Specific Instructions for Recording Adverse Events  ................................ .................. 94 
12.4.  Serious adverse events (SAE) and suspected unexpected serious adverse 
reactions (SUSAR)  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....96 
12.4.1.  Non-Serious Adverse Events Leading to Discontinuation  ................................ ......... 96 
12.4.2.  Reporting  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 96 
13. SAFETY  MONITORING  ................................ ................................ .......................... 97 
14. STATISTICS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 98 
14.1.  General  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 98 
14.2.  Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 98 
14.2.1.  Safety Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 98 
14.2.2.  Efficacy Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......98 
14.2.3.  Pharmacokinetic Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ........................ 99 
14.3.  Statistical Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......99 
14.4.  Planned Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......100 
14.5.  Sample Size Calculation  ................................ ................................ ........................... 101 
14.6.  Significance  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 101 
15. TRIAL CONDUCT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..101 
15.1.  Site Initiation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 101 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 33 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  15.2.  Data Handling and Record Keeping  ................................ ................................ ......... 101 
15.2.1.  Collection of Data  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....101 
15.2.2.  Coding Dictionaries  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..102 
15.2.3.  Data H andling  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 102 
15.2.4.  Direct Access  to Source Data/Documents  ................................ ................................ 102 
15.2.5.  Record Keeping  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 102 
15.3.  Data Quality Control  ................................ ................................ ................................ .103 
15.3.1.  Monitoring  Procedures  ................................ ................................ ............................. 103 
15.3.2.  Data  Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....103 
15.4.  Auditing Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .104 
15.5.  Laboratory Quality Standards  ................................ ................................ ................... 104 
15.6.  Trial Termination or Completion ................................ ................................ .............. 104 
15.7.  Changes to the Protocol  ................................ ................................ ............................ 105 
15.8.  Other Changes in Trial Conduct  ................................ ................................ ............... 105 
15.9.  Use of Information and Publication  ................................ ................................ .......... 105 
16. ETHICAL AND LEGAL CO NSIDERATIONS  ................................ ...................... 105 
16.1.  Data Monitoring Committee  ................................ ................................ ..................... 105 
16.2.  Informed Consent  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....106 
16.2.1.  Subject Identification Card  ................................ ................................ ....................... 106 
16.3.  IRB/EC Approvals  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....106 
17. REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 108 
SIGNATURE OF AGREEME NT ................................ ................................ ............................... 113 
18. APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 114 
APPENDIX  1. SCHEDULE OF EVENTS I N THE RANDOMIZED PER IOD ..................... 115 
APPENDIX  2. SCHEDULE OF EVENTS I N THE OPEN -LABEL PER IOD ........................ 118 
APPENDIX  3. TANNER STAGING CRITE RIA ................................ ................................ ....121 
APPENDIX  4. BLOOD VOLUME DRAWN A T EACH VISIT  ................................ ............. 122 
APPENDIX  5. DEFINITION OF HIGH D OSES OF INHALED 
CORTICOSTEROIDS  ................................ ................................ .............................. 123 
APPENDIX  6. DEFINITION OF CHILDB EARING POTENTIAL AND  
CONTRACEPTIVE REQUIR EMENTS  ................................ ................................ ..124 
 
LIST OF TABLES   
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 34 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Table  1: Adverse Event Severity Grading  Scale for Events Not Specifically Listed in 
WHO Toxicity Grading Scale  ................................ ................................ .................... 91 
 
LIST OF FIGURES   
Figure  1: Schematic Overview of the Interactions Between the Intracellular Pathways 
of the Fibroblast -Growth -Factor -Receptor 3 (FGFR3) and the C -Type 
Natriuretic Peptide (CNP) Receptors [Natriuretic peptide receptor -B 
(NPR -B) and -C (NPR -C)] in Bone Growth  ................................ ............................... 39 
Figure  2: Trial Design Scheme  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...46 
 
 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 35 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  4. LIST OF ABBREVIATION S  
μg Microgram 
  
ACH  achondroplasia  
AE adverse event 
AEM Achondroplasia Experience Measure 
AHV Annualized height velocity 
ALT Alanine aminotransferase 
ANCOVA Analysis of covariance 
AP Anterior-posterior 
  
AST  Aspartate aminotransferase  
BMD bone mineral density 
BMI body mass index 
BP Blood pressure 
BUN Blood urea nitrogen 
Cº Celsius 
CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
  
cGMP  Cyclic guanosine monophosphate  
cm Centimeter 
Cmax Maximum plasma drug concentration 
CMC Cervical medullary compression 
CNP C-type natriuretic peptide 
COVID Corona Virus Disease  
CRF Case report form 
CRO contract research organization 
CTX-I C‑terminal cross -linked telopeptide of type I collagen 
CV cardiovascular 
DMC Data Monitoring Committee 
DXA dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry 
EC Ethics Committee 
ECG electrocardiogram 
eCRF Electronic case report form 
EDC electronic data capture 
ER Emergency room CCI
CCI
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 36 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  ET Early termination  
Fº Fahrenheit  
FDA  United States Food and Drug Administration  
FGFR3  fibroblast growth factor receptor type 3  
G380R  glycine -to-arginine substitution at codon 380  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GI gastrointestinal  
GMP  Good Manufacturing Practice  
GU Genitourinary  
HbA1c  Hemoglobin A1c  
hCG  Human Chorionic Gonadotropin  
HDL  High -density lipoprotein  
HEENT  Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Throat  
hGH  Human growth hormone  
HHN  Home health nurse  
HR Heart rate  
ICF Informed consent form  
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
ICMJE  International Committee of Medical Journal Editors  
IFU Instructions for Use  
IM Investigator meeting  
IND Investigational new drug  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
IWRS  Interactive web response system  
Kg Kilogram  
LDL  Low-density lipoprotein  
MAPK  mitogen -activated protein kinase  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for  Regulatory Activities  
NHS  Natural History Study  
NPR -B Natriuretic peptide receptor -B 
NPR -C Natriuretic peptide receptor -C 
mPEG  methoxypolyethylene glycol  
NOAEL  No observed  adverse  effect level  
NOEL  No observed effect level  
NTproCNP  amino -terminal propeptide of C -type natriur etic peptide  
NYHA  New York Heart Association Functional Classification  
ObsRO  observer -reported outcome  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 37 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  OLE  Open -Label Extension  
PINP propeptide of type I procollagen, N‑terminal  
PEG  polyethylene glycol  
PK pharmacokinetics  
PR PR interval of ECG  
PRO  patient -reported outcome  
QoL quality of life  
QRS  duration of ventricular muscle depolarization of ECG  
QT duration of ventricular depolarization and repolarization of ECG  
QTc corrected QT interval  
QTcF  corrected QT interval by Fridericia ’s formula  
RBC  Red blood cell  
SAD  singl e ascending dose  
SADDAN  Severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans  
SAE  serious adverse event  
SAP statistical analysis plan  
SC subcutaneous  
SD standard deviation  
SDS Standard Deviation Score  
SE standard error  
SF-36 36-Item Short Form Survey  
SIV Site initiation visit  
SOP standard operating procedure  
SUSAR  suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction  
sWFI  Sterile water for injection  
t1/2 terminal elimination half -life 
TEAE  Treatment -emergent adverse event  
TENS  Toxic epidermal necrolysis  
Tmax time of maximum observed concentration  
URI upper respiratory infection  
UV Unscheduled visit  
WBC  White blood cell  
WHO  World Health Organization  
WOCBP  Women of Childbearing Potentia l 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 38 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  5. INTRODUCTION   
5.1. BACKGROUND AND RATIO NALE   
5.1.1.  Achondroplasia   
Achondroplasia (ACH) is the most common skeletal dysplasia and the most frequent form of 
short -limbed dwarfism (Horton  2007 ).  The condition occurs with a frequency of 1 in 10,000 to 
30,000 live births, affecting 250,000 men and women equally worldwide (Horton  2007 , 
Laederich  2010 ).  Although a heritable condition, more than 80% of cases of ACH are due to a 
sporadic mutation (Horton  2007 ).   
ACH results in severe skeletal complications that lead to nume rous comorbidities at various 
developmental stages.  Cervico -medullary compression resulting from foramen magnum stenosis 
is thought to be the major contributing factor to fatal cardiorespiratory arrest in infants with ACH 
(Horton  2007 ).  Additionally, a newborn with ACH may suffer from a small cranial -cervical 
junction leading to hydrocephalus requiring shunting (Horton  2007 ).  Mid -facial hyp oplasia with 
relative hypertrophy of the adenoids and tonsils, short Eustachian tubes, and hypoglossal canal 
stenosis in infants and young children may lead to chronic otitis media and subsequent hearing 
loss, speech delays, and obstructive sleep apnea.  O lder children and adults suffer from 
premature synchondroses closure of the vertebrae and ossification center fusion leading to spinal 
stenosis with subsequent neurogenic claudication (Horton  2007 ).  Due to short arms and limited 
range of motion of the joints, individuals with ACH have difficulty with personal care, such as 
dressing and personal hygiene, and require therapy to cope with the limitations (Unger  2017 ).  
Bowing of the legs can lead to difficulty walking and chronic knee pain.   
5.1.2.  Current Standard Therapy for ACH   
No effective medicinal product is available for treatment of ACH.  All existing interventions are 
intended to alleviate specific comorbidities of the condition, and do not address the underlying 
pathophysiology (Trotter  2005 , Horton  2007 , Wright  2012 , Ireland  2014 ).  Cervico -medullary 
decompression is performed i n infants and young children to treat central sleep apnea and 
alleviate neurological complications from spinal cord compression (Ho 2004 ).  Newborns with 
ACH may also suffer from hydrocephalus requi ring ventricular shunting.  Adolescents and adults 
with lumbar stenosis may undergo laminectomy (Carlisle  2011 ).  Challenges associated with 
height and reach may be alleviated by l imb lengthening su rgery, but the procedure comes with 
significant pain and morbidity over many months (Ornitz  2017 , Unger  2017 ). 
As none of the available therapies address the underlying pathophysiology of ACH, individuals 
with the condition undergo multiple surgeries and other interventions throughout their lives.  A 
clear unmet medical need  exists  for an effective therapy to treat ACH.  
5.1.3.  Fibro blast Growth Factor Receptor Type 3   
ACH is caused by a gain -of-function autosomal dominant mutation in the fibroblast growth 
factor receptor type 3 (FGFR3) gene with 100% penetra nce.  In cartilage, FGFR3 activation 
negatively regulates growth by inhibiting proliferation and terminal differentiation of growth 
plate chondrocytes, thereby reducing the rate of cartilage formation and turnover necessary for 
bone elongation.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 39 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Figure  1: Schematic Overview of t he Interactions  Between the Intracellular Pathways 
of the Fibroblast -Growth -Factor -Receptor 3 (FGFR3) and the C -Type 
Natriuretic Peptide (CNP) Receptors [Natriuretic peptide receptor -B 
(NPR -B) and -C (NPR -C)] in Bone Growth   
 
Adapted from (Peake  2014 , Ornitz  2015 ); FGF; Fibroblast Growth Factor  
FGFR3 is a tyrosine -kinase receptor activating signal transducer and activator of tran scription 
1 (STAT1) and the mitogen -activated protein kinase (MAPK) -pathway [RAS -RAF -MEK -ERK], 
which both have inhibiting effe cts on endochondral ossification (chondrocyte proliferation and 
differentiation , respectively ) (Figure  1).  
5.1.4.  C-type Natriuretic Peptide   
CNP influences growth by some of the same intracellular signaling pathways as FGFR3 , 
mediated through its receptors NPR -B and NPR -C (Figure  1).  NPR -B mediates an increa se in 
cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), substantiated to evok e an inhibition of RAF, thus 
blocking the MAPK -activit y (Miyazawa  2002 , Krejci  2005 ) resulting in increased growth, 
evident in animal models and humans overexpressing CNP (Yasoda  2004 , Bocciardi  2007 , 
Hannema  2013 ).  On the other hand, absence of CNP or a non -functional NPR -B receptor result 
in dwarfism (Chusho  2001 , Nakao  2015 ).  The diminished growth in CNP -deficient rats can be 
rescued by continuous SC CNP administration (Hirota  2018 ), providing evidenc e that exogenous 
CNP can reach chondrocyt e NPR-B receptors.  

Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 40 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  The NPR -C receptor is an important receptor for CNP with a lower affinity for CNP relative to 
NPR -B (Koller  1991 , Potter  2006).  NPR -C deficiency leads to increased growth (Colvin  1996 , 
Matsukawa  1999 ).  On the other hand, NPR -C mediates an intracellular signal that counteract s 
the NPR -B mediated signal (Figure  1). This is especially believed to be the case at 
supra -physiological CNP plasma concentration (Peake  2014 ). 
Thus, the mechanism of act ion of CNP is believed to be via inhibition of the downstream 
signaling pathway of the FGFR3, thereby counteracting the overactivation of the 
FGFR3  pathway, charact eristic for ACH, and thus restoring normal chondrogenesis 
(Laederich  2010 ). 
In clinical trials in ACH children employing daily administration of vosoritide  (a synthetic 
analogue of CNP) , the impact on bone growth, measured as annualized height velocity ( AHV ), 
amounts to an additional 1 -2 cm per year (BioMarin  2018 ) , from a baseline average growth 
velocity of approximately 5 cm/year (Hoover -Fong  2008 , BioMarin  2018 ). 
5.1.5.  Impact of ACH  on Well -Being and Functioning in Children with the Condition 
and Their Caregiver s  
Little is known about the impact of ACH on the fun ctioning and well -being of children or the 
impact of caring for these children on their caregivers  because much of the research conducted 
has focused on adults.  There is evidence that children with ACH have lower functioning and 
impaired quality of life ( QoL), possibly associated with lower self -esteem and social 
stigmatization; and 36 -Item Short Form Survey (SF -36) scores, for both the Physical and Mental 
components, have been shown to be below national means (Ireland  2011 , Dogba  2014 , 
Wigg  2016 , Dhiman  2017 , Matsushita  2019 ).  Further, this impairment in QoL is greater 
compared to children with short stature due to growth hormone deficiency or idiopathic short 
stature (Sommer  2017 ).  Unfortun ately, to date there are no measures that specifically assess 
these impacts on the daily functi oning and well -being of the child with ACH.  
Evidence for the impact on functioning and well -being for caregiver s’ of children with ACH is 
even more scarce, with a literature search on the topic identifying only 1 publication suggesting 
that caregiver s’ future outlook for their children with ACH focused on over -coming 
econo mic-occupational fears, and doubts concerning th eir ability to settle down and rear a family 
(Cacciaguerra  1981 ).  Additionally, anecdotal evidence, including caregiver  testimonials at the 
2018  FDA public advisory committee meeting on ACH, sugges ts a substantial impact on 
caregivers and highlights the need to further understand the experience of these caregiver s 
(FDA  2018 ). 
Additionally, there is no curren t information about the pa rticipant /caregiver  treatment experience 
of participation in an ACH  clinical trial.  As new treatments for this condition  are developed it 
will be critical to better understand this experience.  
5.2. RELEVANT FINDINGS FR OM NONCLINICAL STUDI ES  
Please refer to the current version of the TransCon CNP  Investigator ’s Brochure for a full 
discussion of nonclinical data.   
In animal studies, TransCon CNP has shown the expected pharmacological effects on cartilage 
homeostasis and bone growth.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 41 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Cardiovascular (CV) changes (decreased blood pressure, increased heart rate (HR) and the heart 
rate corrected QT [QTc] interval) were observed in cynomolgus monkeys at doses of ≥300 µg 
CNP/kg but did not result in any  clinical signs; the QTc increases were not biologically 
significant.   The CV no observed adverse effect level in cynomolgus monkeys was 100 µg 
CNP/kg.  In the pivotal repeat -dose toxicity studies in juvenile animals with a normal 
FGFR3  pathway , the no obs erved adverse effect level (NOAEL) for off -target effects after 
weekly SC administrations was the highest dose tested (up to 4000 µg CNP/kg/wk in rats).  The 
repeat -dose toxicity studies were conducted in juvenile animals with an intact FGFR3 -pathway 
and a  normal balance between FGFR3 activation and CNP mediated suppression of the 
FGFR3 -pathway.  When administering CNP to intact animals, this balance is disturbed and 
skeletal overgrowth, eventually leading to adverse exaggerated pharmacology can be observed .  
The only adverse findings observed were related to CNP ’s pharmacological effect on the physeal 
chondrocytes.  
5.3. CLINICAL EXPERIENCE   
In the  Phase 1, randomized, first -in-human, do uble-blind, placebo -controlled SAD trial , 
TransCon CNP was given by SC injection to healthy adult male participant s.  The primary 
objective was to determine the safety and tolerability of single -ascending SC doses of TransCon 
CNP . Other objectives were  to evaluate the PK properties and exploratory biomarkers after 
administration  of TransCon CNP.  The trial was conducted under GCP, EC, and Declaration of 
Helsinki guidelines.  
TransCon CNP was generally well tolerated as single ascending doses in healthy male adults.  
No serious AEs were reported,  and no participant  was withdrawn due to an AE.  Dose levels up 
to 150 μg CNP/kg were investigated with no dose limiting toxicities.  
No clinically significant trends were observed in clinical laboratory assessments, vital sign 
measurements, ECG parameters, or physical examination findings.  Continuous ECG monitoring 
via Holter monitor revealed no clinically relevant effects on any of th e studied ECG parameters, 
including heart rate or PR, QRS, and QT intervals at all investigated dose levels.  
Potential adverse immune response upon exposure to TransCon CNP was evaluated.  By using 
population derived assay cut points, all samples were conf irmed negative for anti -CNP 
antibodies.  In addition, individual changes in anti -PEG antibody levels were <3 fold compared 
to individual predose levels and were not considered clinically relevant.  
Pharmacokinetic parameters were generally consistent with t he target profile.  Exposure, as 
assessed by C max and AUC, o f Total CNP, Free CNP -38, mP EG. and mPEG -linker increased 
proportionally with dose administered.  A slow rise to peak concentrations were observed for all 
analytes  (median T max ranging from 45 to 66 hours post dose for Free CNP) , with long and dose -
independent elimination half -lives (t½ was 112 − 128 hours for Free CNP and 137 − 163 hours 
for Total CNP).   
The effect of TransCon CNP on cGMP levels was dose dependent , and the data supports 
administr ation of TransCon CNP as a way to deliver active CNP in a sustained manner.  
Endogenous CNP biosynthesis did not appear to be affected by single administration of 
TransCon CNP, as evidenced by no changes in plasma NTproCNP levels irrespective of CNP 
dose le vel. 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 42 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  5.4. TRIAL RATIONALE   
Because of the short half -life of native CNP  (2-3 minutes) , continuous IV administration is 
required to restore bone growth in ACH mice (Yasoda  2009 ).  Proof -of-principle for a mutated 
CNP analogue (vosoritide) with increased  resistance to degradation by  neutral endopeptidase  has 
been obtained in the nonclinical setting.  Daily adminis tration of CNP to mice, with phenotypical 
traits similar to th ose observed in individuals with ACH, suggests that the daily administration of 
the CNP analogue vosoritide is capable of improving the major phenotypical dwarfism traits 
(Lorget  2012 , Wendt  2015 ).  In clinical trials in ACH children employing daily administration of 
vosoritide, the impact on bone growth, measured as AHV , amounts to  an additional 1 -2 cm per 
year (BioMarin  2018 ), from a baseline average growth velocity of approximately 5 cm/year 
(Hoover -Fong  2008 , BioMarin  2018 ). 
TransCon technology is designed to provide sustained exposure of active  CNP.  Applying the 
TransCon technology to CNP results in a mean apparent half -life of Free CNP  of approximately  
120 h in human  adult volunteers .  This is in contrast to the short systemic half -life of endogenous 
CNP in humans of only 2 to 3 minutes (Hunt  1994 ), and the half -life of v osoritide of 
20-23 minutes (BioMarin  2018 ).  The aim of TransCon CNP therapy is to treat the underlying 
pathophysiology of ACH by inhibiting  the effects of constitutive FGFR3 overactivation  24 hours 
a day, aiming to ameliorate and prevent the comorbidities of ACH.   
A study in a mouse model of ACH (FGFR3 gain of function mutation) demonstrated that 
TransCon CNP exposure was able to modify synchondrosis closure and long -bone growth -plate 
cartilage homeostas is.  In a 6 -month pharmacology study in healthy juvenile monkeys an 
increase in long bone growth was observed.  
The data from the non -IND Phase 1 clinical trial (TransCon CNP TCC -101) demonstrated the 
ability of TransCon CNP to sustain elevated plasma level s of CNP with a weekly  SC injection.  
TransCon CNP is intended to promote growth of bones by acting on the chondrocytes within the 
growth plates. Therefore, clinical trials to assess the efficacy of TransCon CNP are conducted in 
children with open growth pl ates. 
5.5. SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT RISKS AND POTENTIAL BENEFITS   
5.5.1.  Important Risks   
TransCon CNP has  not been investigated in individuals with ACH, and therefore the risks are 
unknown.  In the Phase  1 clinical trial investigating single doses of TransCon  CNP up to 
150 μg CNP/kg in healthy adult male participant s, TransCon  CNP was generally well tolerated.   
In the general toxicity studies with healthy juvenile animals, no off -target (non -bone related) 
adverse findings were observed.  The only significant adverse findings were related to the 
expected pharmacology of CNP on bone growth  and are regarded to be a c onsequence of the 
exaggerated pharmacology when dosing animals without the activating FGFR3 mutation to 
counterbalance the effect of exogenous CNP administration .   
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 43 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  5.5.2.  Potential Risks   
The following effects are considered potential risks with the use of TransCon  CNP in children 
with ACH : 
5.5.2.1.  Cardiovascular Changes   
Decreased blood pressure, increased heart rate ( HR), and increased heart rate corrected QT 
(QTc) interval were observed in cynomolgus monkeys at doses of ≥300 µg CNP/kg.  The 
changes did not result in any clinical signs, and the QTc interval increases were not biologically 
significant (Ando  2005 ).  Throughout the non -clinical studies, a no observed effect limit (NOEL) 
for cardiovascular (CV) findings of 100 µg CNP/kg/wk was established.  The predicted steady 
state Total CNP C max at 6 µg CNP/kg/wk in the pediatric population is 22 to 23 -fold lower than 
the observed C max at the NOEL dose (100 µg CNP/kg/wk) in cynomolgus  monkeys .  
Hypotensive effects were reported to correlate with high peak plasma CNP concentrations in 
adults administe red exogenous CNP (Igaki  1998 ).  However, this correlation was not observed in 
the phase 1 clinical trial, TCC -101 (tested up to 150 µg CNP/kg), likely due to the much lower 
Cmax and peak -to-trough ratio wi th TransCon CNP, and no clinically relevant effects on the 
studied ECG parameters were found.   
5.5.2.2.  Adverse Bone Overgrowth   
TransCon  CNP has not been tested in children with ACH and, therefore, whether adverse bone 
overgrowth could occur is unknown.  Mutations leading to an overproduction of CNP in people 
without activating mutations in FGFR3 re sult in skeletal overgrowth , including long hands and 
feet, scoliosis and ankle val gus deformity  (Bocciardi  2007 , Moncla  2007 , Tassano  2013 , 
Ko 2015 ).   
In the repeat -dose toxicity studies of T ransCon  CNP i n healthy juvenile animals without an 
activating mutation in FGFR3, an exaggerated effect related to CNP ’s biology on the growth 
plate was observed.  Skeletal overgrowth and sequelae thereof such as physeal clefting, physeal 
fractures (Salter -Harris Type  1) and bone deformities were found. When administering CNP to 
animals without the ACH mutation, the balance between the activity of FGFR 3 and CNP is 
disturbed.  In the context of ACH, in which FGFR3 is overactivated, sustained increase in CNP 
exposure is expected to modulate/decrease FGFR3 signaling and promote a more physiologic 
balance between the two pathways.  The aim of treatment with  TransCon CNP is to normalize 
the effect of constitutively overactivated FGFR3.  
5.5.3.  Potential Benefits   
Clinical trials of TransCon  CNP in children with ACH have not been conducted.  Based on the 
published studies of CNP administration in m ouse models of ACH (Lorget  2012 , Wendt  2015 ) 
and nonclinical studies using TransCon  CNP, treatment with TransCon CNP may promote 
proportional growth of the long bones and alleviate the comorbidities associated with premature 
closure of the synchondroses in children with ACH.  Body disproportionality is a hallmark of 
ACH that leads to com mon comorbidities that may limit functioning and well-being , as well as 
caregiver burden, such as short limbs, joint and back pain, and limited range of motion 
(Horton  2007 , Ireland  2014 , Unger  2017 ).  Premature closure of the synchondroses contribute to 
hydrocephalus, spinal stenosis, ear infections,  hearing problems, and respiratory p roblems.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 44 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  The PK profile observed for TransCon  CNP in healthy adult male participant s (Trial  TCC -101) 
showed dose -proportional increases in C max, with  apparent  t1/2 of Free CNP ranging from 112 to 
128 h.  TransCon CNP has the potential to provide full 7 -day (168-h) CNP coverage at expected 
therapeutic ranges.  Delivery of  CNP via the TransCon technology is expected to provide the 
following benefits:  
x Maximize growth -promoting effects of CNP by maintaining CNP levels in circulation at 
therapeutic levels for th e entire duration between doses.  
x Minimize potential non -skeletal effects of CNP, such as hypotensive and natriuretic effects, 
by reducing the fluctuations between peak and trough levels.  Hypotensive effects have been 
reported to correlate with high peak p lasma CNP concentrations in adults administered 
exogenous CNP (Igaki  1998 ), but this correlation was not obse rved in the Phase  1 clinical 
trial (Trial  TCC -101) at doses up to 150  μg CNP/kg.  Results  of nonclinical studies have not 
indicated a natriuretic potential at the studied dose levels.  
6. OBJECTIVES   
6.1. PRIMARY OBJECTIVE S  
In prepubertal children with achondroplasia  (ACH ) at 52 weeks  
x To determine the safety of once weekly subcutaneous (SC) doses of TransCon CNP  
x To evaluate the effect of once we ekly SC doses of TransCon CNP on AHV  
6.2. SECONDARY OBJECTIVES   
x To evaluate the effect of once we ekly SC doses of TransCon CNP on  body proportionality 
(upper to lower body segment ratio)  in prepubertal children with ACH  at 52 weeks  
x To evaluate the pharmacokinetic (PK) properties of once weekly SC doses of TransCon CNP  
x To assess the potential immunogenic response to once weekly SC doses of TransCon CNP  
6.3. EXPLORATORY OBJECTIV ES  
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 45 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  7. TRIAL DESIGN   
7.1. OVERALL TRIAL DESIGN  AND PLAN   
This trial is a multicenter trial consisting of two treatment periods: A 52 week double -blind, 
randomized, placebo controlled, dose escalation trial evaluating up to 5 different dose levels of 
weekly TransCon CNP administered subcutaneously in prepubertal children 2 to 10 years old, 
inclusive, with ACH. For this part of the trial participants are ra ndomized into 2 treatment groups 
for each cohort in a 3:1 TransCon CNP:  placebo ratio, with approximately ≥9 participants on 
TransCon CNP and ≥3 participants on placebo in each cohort.  Participants are to remain on the 
same dose of study drug throughout t he entire 52 -week Randomized Treatment Period.  
After completing 52 weeks of their assigned cohort dose (or placebo), participant s who fulfill  the 
rollover criteria can continue into the 104 weeks Open -Label Extension Period . In this extension 
period, parti cipants may receive the highest dose level of Tran sCon CNP that has been reviewed 
and recommended  by the Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) for  safety  and has passed DMC 
safety review .  
The total duration of the randomized trial period for an individual parti cipant is:  
For participant s who do not continue in the Open -Label Extension Period : Up to approximately 
61 weeks (including approximately 4 weeks of sc reening plus 52 weeks of treatment, and a 
5 weeks follow -up period).  
For participant s who continue in t he Open -Label Extension Period s: Up to approximately 
165 weeks (up to approximately 4 weeks of screening plus 156  weeks of treatment, including 
52 weeks of placebo -controlled treatment period followed by an additional 104 weeks of 
treatment in the Open -Label Extension Period  and a 5 weeks follow -up period).  
This is summarized in the scheme below:  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 46 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Trial Design Scheme  
 
Figure  2: Trial Design Scheme   
 
(Figure  2) Trial design scheme in the Randomized and Open -Label Extensio n period. In the 
Randomized Period, participants in each cohort will receive their allocated cohort dose for 
52 weeks, after which they are rolled over into the Open -Label Extension. T he initiation of a 
new, subsequent cohort in the Randomized Period  is gated by a DMC that reviews 3 months of 
safety data of the current cohort to determine if the dose is safe, after which the DMC can 
recommend to proceed with the next cohort  (including dose escalation ).  
In the Open -Label Extension Period,  participants  may receive the highest dose level of TransCon 
CNP that has been reviewed and recommended by the Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) 
for safety and has passed DMC safety review.    
x  Screening Period:  Up to approximately 4 weeks  
x Randomized Treatment Period:  52 weeks  
x Open -Label Extension Period : 104 weeks  
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 47 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Cohort  Planned Dose Level  Approximate Number of Participants ** 
1 6 µg CN P/kg/week  9 on TransCon CNP, 3 on placebo  
2 20 µg CNP/kg/week  ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on placebo  
3 50 µg CNP/kg/week  ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on placebo  
4 100 µg CNP/kg/week  ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on placebo  
5 > 100 µg CNP/kg/week*  ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on place bo 
* At a dose to be determined, if needed, based on emerging data  
**Minimum of 12 participants per cohort wil l be enrolled. Plan to enroll approximately 14 participants per cohort to 
account for potential dropouts due to COVID -19. 
Visit Schedule Diagram in the Randomized and Open -Label Extension Period s: 
 
7.1.1.  Measures Taken to Maximize Study Integrity and Minimize Bias  
The randomized , double -blind ed, placebo -controlled  period of this trial is included to minimize 
bias in the assessment of the effect and safety of TransCon CNP.  Participants will be randomized 
to either TransCon CNP or placebo in 3:1 ratio within each cohort.   
Once all participants enrolled in a dose cohort have completed (or withdrawn from) their 
Randomized Period and the database has been locked, the treatment allocation for that dose 
cohort will be unblinded.  
This Randomized Period will be followed by a 104 -week Open -Label Extension treatment period 
where all participants will receive TransCon CNP.  
Participant  visits should be performed at approximately the same time of day  for all visits .  Also, 
assessments should be performed in a similar fashion at each visit.  Additionally, all efforts will 
be made to keep missing data to a minimum, including the following:  
• Investigators  will be trained about the importance of participant  retention  
• Investigators  will be instructed to encourage participant s to complete all scheduled  visits, 
including any participant s who discontinue the study drug early  

Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 48 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  • The Informed Consent F orm (ICF) will include a statement educating participant s about the 
scientific importance of their data even if the participant  discontinues study drug early  
• Special  efforts will be made to provide assistance to participant s/families who might 
discontinue due to travel or cost barriers, such as offers of transportation to the clinic  
• All study visits have visit windows to allow flexibility for clinic attendance ( See Appendix  1 
and Appendix  2: Schedule of Events in the Randomized and Open -Label Extension Period , 
respectively ) 
• Every  effort will be made to maintain contact with participant s or other family members  
7.2. TRIAL SITES   
The trial will be conducted at approximately 35 sites worldwide . 
8. PARTICIPANT  POPUL ATION   
Minimum of sixty (60)  male and female prepubertal children  with ACH , age 2 to 10 years, 
inclusive . 
8.1. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA   
8.1.1.  Inclusion Criteria   
1. Clinical diagnosis of ACH  with genetic confirmation  (See Section  11.11 ) 
2. Age between  2 to 10 years  old (inclusive ) at Screening  Visit  
3. Prepubertal (Stage 1 breasts for girls or testicular volume < 4ml for boys) at Screening  Visit  
(See Section  11.3) 
4. Able to stand wit hout assistance  
5. Caregiver willing and able to administer subcutaneous injections of study drug   
6. Written, signed informed consent of the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of the participant and 
written assent of the participant as required by the institutional review board/human research 
ethics committee/independent ethics committee (IRB/HREC/IEC)   
8.1.2.  Exclusion Criteria   
1. Clinically significant findings at Screening that:  
• are expected to require surgical intervention during participation in the trial or  
• are musculoskeletal in n ature, such as Salter -Harris fractures and severe hip pain or  
• otherwise are considered by investigator or Medical Monitor to make a participant unfit 
to receive study drug  or undergo trial related procedures  
2. Have received treatment (>3 months) of human gro wth hormone (hGH) or other medications 
to affect stature or body proportionality at any time  
3. Have received any dose of medications intended to affect stature or body proportionality 
within the previous 6 months of Screening  Visit  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 49 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  4. Have received any study dr ug or device intended to affect stature or body proportionality at 
any time  
5. History or presence of injury or disease of the growth plate(s), other than ACH, that affects 
growth potential of long bones  
6. History of any bone -related surgery that affects grow th potential of long bones, such as 
orthopedic reconstructive surgery and osteotomy (Limb -lengthening with full recovery is 
allowed with a minimum of 12 months of bone healing. Foramen magnum decompression 
and laminectomy with full recovery are allowed wit h minimum of 6  months of bone healing . 
History of 8 plate epiphysiodesis is allowed, but the plates must have been removed prior to 
Screening with minimum 4 weeks of healing. )  
7. Have a form of skeletal dysplasia other than ACH or known medical conditions that result in 
short stature or abnormal growth [such as severe achondroplasia with developmental delay 
and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN), hypochondroplasia, growth hormone deficiency, 
Turner syndrome, pseudoachondroplasia, inflammatory bowel disease,  chr onic renal 
insufficiency, active celiac disease1, Vitamin D deficiency2, untreated hypothyroidism3, 
poorly controlled diabetes mellitus (HbA1c ≥8.0%) or diabetic complications4] 
1Celiac disease responsive to a gluten -free diet is allowed .  
2Vitamin D defic iency or insufficiency treated  with supplementation is allowed . Vitamin D 
deficiency is defined as 25(OH)D level <20ng/mL (<49.9 nmol/L). Vitamin D insufficiency 
is defined as 25(OH)D level 20 -30ng/mL (49.92 -74.86 nmol/L).  Participants with Vitamin D 
deficiency or insufficiency must be on Vitamin D regimen before randomization.  
3Participants with hypothyroidism must be clinically euthyroid for 3 months prior to 
Screening Visit  and, in the opinion of the investigator, have achieved any catch -up growth 
expe cted from thyroxine replacement  
4Participants with diabetes mellitus must have been on stable medication regimen for 
3 months prior to randomization (dose adjustments are allowed but addition or 
discontinuation of medications in this time period is disallo wed)  
8. History  or presence of malignant disease, other than basal cell epithelioma/carcinoma or 
completely resected squamous skin cancer with no recurrence for 12 months per medical 
records  
9. History  or presence of the following:  
• Chronic anemia (resolved iron deficiency anemia is allowed)  
• Significant cardiovascular disease per the judgement of the investigator, such as 
congenital heart disease (uncomplicated patent ductus arteriosus and atrial or ventricular 
septal defect with repair are allowed), aortic insuff iciency, clinically significant 
arrhythmias, congestive heart failure with NYHA class II and above,  or other conditions 
that impair regulation of blood pressure or heart rate  
• Condition that impacts hemodynamic stability (such as autonomic dysfunction, 
orthostatic intolerance)  
• History of chronic renal insufficiency  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 50 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  • Chronic or recurrent illness that can affect hydration or volume status.  This may include 
conditions associated with decreased nutritional intake or increased volume loss . 
• Bone fracture within 6 months prior to Screening Visit (within 2 months for fracture of 
digits)  
• Any disease or condition that, in the opinion of the investigator, may make the participant 
unlikely to fully complete the trial, may confound interpretation of  trial results, or 
presents undue risk from the receiving study drug  
10. Child  has significant electrocardiogram abnormalities , including evidence of a previous 
myocardial infarction, left ventricular hypertrophy, flat T waves (particularly in the inferior 
leads) or more than minor non -specific ST -T wave changes or:  
• QRS >90 milliseconds (msec)  
• QT interval corrected using Fridericia ’s formula (QTcF) >440 msec  
• PR interval >170 msec  
• Complete right or left bundle branch block  
11. Requires , or anticipated to require , chronic  (> 4 weeks)  or repeated (more than twice per 
year) treatment with oral corticosteroids during participation in the trial (low and mid -dose 
inhaled corticosteroids are allowed. High -dose inhaled corticosteroids  are not allowed. ). See 
Appendix  5 for definition of high doses of inhaled corticosteroids.  
12. Use of medication known to prolong the QT/QTc interval within 7 days or 5 half -lives 
(whichever is longer) prior to  the Scre ening Visit (see https://crediblemeds.org/  for the list of 
medications that are known to prolong the QT/QTc interval.   Note: Only medications on the 
Known Risk list are excluded, not those on the Possible or Condit ional Risk lists)  
13. Ongoing  treatment with any medicati on that affect s blood pressure or heart rate  
14. Known  hypersensitivity to the components of the study drug  [trehalose, 
tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, succinate and PEG ] 
15. Any other reason that in the opinion of the investigator would prevent the child from 
complying with the trial requirements or completing the trial 
8.1.3.  Rollover Criteria for Open -Label Extension Period   
Participant s are eligible for the Open -Label Extension Period  if they fulfil l the following rollover 
criteria: 
1. Have completed  the 52 weeks randomized  treatment period  
2. Written, signed informed consent of the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) o f the 
participant and written assent of the participant as required by the institutional review 
board/human research ethics committee/independent ethics committee 
(IRB/HREC/IEC)  to continue into the Open -Label Extension (OLE) Period    
3. Do not fulfil l any of  the holding/stopping study drug conditions or symptoms (see 
Section  9.6) 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 51 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  8.2. PREMATURE PARTICIPANT  WITHDRAWAL   
Premature participant  withdrawal occurs when an enrolled participant  ceases part icipation in the 
trial, regardless of the circumstances, prior to  the expected completion of the trial.   
In the case of premature participant  withdrawal , the investigator should schedule an Early 
Termination  (ET) Visit to collect data, particularly AE follow -up data (if applicable), and to 
collect blood for final laboratory evaluations.  This visit should contain all appropriate 
assessments  and the reason(s) for trial discontinuation  should be documented .   
The inv estigator/site staff should make every attempt to contact the participant  to arrange the 
appropriate follow -up assessment(s) for such participant s. 
Participant s may voluntarily withdraw consent to participate in the study for any reason at any 
time.  
8.2.1.  Study Drug Discontinuation  and Participant  Withdrawal   
8.2.1.1.  Study Drug Discontinuation   
Unless informed con sent is withdrawn *, participant s who permanently discontinue study drug  
should :  
x Attend all subsequent visits up to Visit 7 if discontinued during the Randomized Period , and 
up to Visit 1 6 if discontinued during the Open -Label Extension Period . Additionall y, ET 
Visit should be completed as soon as possible after discontinuation of study medication . 
* If the participant  is not willing to attend all subsequent trial visits, an ET Visit should be 
scheduled  and this should be considered a withdrawal of consent from further participation in 
the trial .  
See Section  10.1.5  for details on ET Visit.  
8.3. PARTICIP ANT  REPLACEMENT CRITERI A  
Participant s who terminate early are  not expected to  be replaced.  
9. TREATMENTS   
9.1. INVESTIGATIONAL PROD UCT   
TransCon CNP is a long-acting  essentially inactive prodrug  
  TransCon CNP releases 
active CNP via auto -cleavage of the TransCon Li nker in a controlled manner based on 
physiologic pH and temperature.  As such, the TransCon technology is designed to provide 
sustained exposure of circulating CNP over 7 days, allowing an optimal pharmacokinetic profile 
for use in ACH .  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 52 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  The drug product f ormulation containing TransCon CNP is a lyophilized powder in a single -use 
vial, .  Prior to use, the lyophilized powder must be 
reconstituted with sterile water for injection from a prefilled syringe.   
  This solution will be administered by SC injection via 
syringe and needle.  
9.1.1.  Labeling   
All study drug will be labeled according to Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP)  and local 
regulatory requirements.  The labels are trial -specific and carry unique identification pack 
numbers. Participant s will be provided with dosing and storage instructions.  
9.1.2.  Accountability, Storage , and Dispensing   
Investigator will be responsible for study drug, ancillary supplies,  and associated procedures, 
exercising accepted medical and pharmaceutical practices.   
Study drug must be kept in a locked, temperature -controlled, and temperature -monitored area 
with limited access and stored according to its labeling.  Investigator or d edicated  trial staff must 
evaluate the storage temperature and inform Ascendis Pharma immediately if study drug has 
been stored outside the specified conditions on the label.   TransCon  CNP must be stored at 2°C 
to 8°C and protected from light. The prefilled syringe with sterile Water for Injection ( sWfI) 
(diluent) must be stored at 2°C to  30°C.  
The trial will use an internet -based interactive web response system (IWRS) to capture drug 
inventory and accountability data, including receipt of study drug and supplies by the site, 
treatment assignment for each participant , distribution to participant s, return to the site fr om 
participant s, and return to the Sponsor (or destruction with the Sponsor ’s approval).  The IWRS 
system complies with all applicable regulatory requirements for record keeping and record 
retention in clinical trials [21 CFR Part 11 and ICH E6 (R2) GCP ].   
Investigator will be responsible for  ensuring  accountability and reconciliation of study drug.  
Site staff will provide training  on proper storage to each participant  at Visit 1.  Once Placebo for 
TransCon CNP drug product becomes available, t his training will also include a review of the 
Instructions for Use (IFU) and on -site administration of the first dose of study drug by the 
caregiver.  A copy of the IFU will be provided to the participants to take home. For participants 
that begin partici pation in the trial prior to the Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product 
becoming available, site staff will provide traini ng on study drug administration at the next visit 
following availability of Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product.   
NOTE : Under no circumstances will the invest igator allow study drugs to be used for other 
than as directed by this protocol.  
See Pharmacy M anual  and IFU for further details . CCI
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 53 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  9.2. REFERENCE PRODUCT   
Reference product will be supplied as one of two placebos : 
• Placebo for TransCon CNP drug produc t 
• sWfI Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product  
Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product contains the same excipients as TransCon CNP drug 
product but does not  contain TransCon CNP.  Prior to use, the lyophilized powder must be 
reconstituted with sWfI from a prefilled syringe.  This solution will be administered by SC 
injection via syringe and needle . 
sWfI Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product consists of sWfI. The sWfI is supplied in the 
same prefilled syringe as the one used for reconstitution of the lyophilized powder of the Placebo 
for TransCon CNP drug product. The procedure for preparation and administration of sWfI 
Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product is the same as for Placebo for TransCon CNP drug 
product, only the vial with excipients will be replaced with an empty, sterile vial. The diluent 
(sWfI) is injected into the empty vial and the dosing volume of sWfI will be drawn from the vial 
into the injecti on syringe and administered SC.  
If Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product is not available, sWfI Placebo for TransCon CNP 
drug product will be used until Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product becomes available.  
Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product will be available prior to the start of Cohort 2, so this 
procedure will only be utilized in Cohort 1.  When Placebo for TransCon CNP drug product is 
available for Cohort 1 , study drug will be prepared and administered by a caregiver (after proper 
training). Total  dose volume for participants in Cohort 1 is expected to be ≤ 0.05ml (based on 
95th percentile weight of 32.5 kg for children with ACH at 10.5 years of age). At such low 
volumes, risk of possible discomfort associated with hypotonicity is minimal and does not pose a 
significant safety concern.  
The dose of Cohort 1 is 6 µg CNP/kg/week (0.006 mg/kg/week) and the concentration of 
reconstituted study drug is 3.6 mg CNP/mL. Therefore, study drug will be administered at 
0.006/3.6 = 0.0017mL/kg.  
The 5%ile for wei ght for a 2 -year-old female with achondroplasia is approximately 9kg and the 
95%ile for a 10 -year-old male with achondroplasia is approximately 30kg (Hoover -Fong  2007 ).  
Therefore, the anticipa ted dose range is approximately 0.0017×9 = 0.015mL to 
0.0017×30  = 0.05mL.  As study drug will be adm inistered using insulin syringes, volumes will 
be rounded to the nearest unit  (0.01m L). Further details regarding dose volume is provided in the 
Pharmacy Manual . 
9.3. TREATMENT ADMINISTER ED  
Until Placebo for TransCon CNP  become s available, every dose of study drug  will be prepared 
and administered by an unblinded site staff or home healthcar e service . In order to maintain the 
blind,  study drug will be prepared out of sight of the investigator, caregiver and the participant. 
When Placebo for TransCon CNP is available , study drug  should be administered by the 
caregiver . The injections will be given  SC once weekly ( approximately every 7 days ).  The 
initial volume of study drug (TransCon CNP or placebo) administered will be calculated using 
the weight measurement obtained at Visit 1. The dose (volume ) of study drug  will be adjusted 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 54 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  according to  the participant ’s weight at each visit . Study drug will be dispensed for weekly 
administration by the caregiver, except for the first dose administered at the trial site.  The last 
dose of study drug in the Randomized Period  will be administered at least 6 d ays prior to Visit 7.  
For the first four weeks of study drug administration by the caregiver, once weekly home 
healthcare service will be offered to accommodate home administration of study drug. Extended 
support might be offered until participants/caregiv ers are comfortable to take over administration 
of the study drug.   
Each participant will receive their assigned  cohort  dose for 52 weeks  in the Randomized Period , 
after which they may roll over to  the Open -Label Extension Period  where all participants will 
receive TransCon CNP.   
In the Open -Label Extension Period , participants may receive the highest dose level of TransCon 
CNP that has been reviewed and recommended by the Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) 
for safety  and has passed  DMC safety review.    
Each injection  will have  a volume ≤ 750 µL and is to be administered  by the caregiver  (following 
training by study staff).  Participants may participate in the administration of study drug if 
deemed developmentally appropriate by the i nvestigator and supervised by the caregiver. Study 
drug should always be drawn up by caregiver or healthcare professional . One dose may need to 
be administered as 2 or more injections depending on the dose volume.  There are a total of 
8 possible injection  areas: right abdomen, left abdomen, right anterior thigh, left anterior thigh , 
right buttocks, left buttocks , right posterior  upper arm, and left posterior  upper arm, with 
multiple possible sites within each of these 8 injection areas .  Participant s shoul d be instructed to 
rotate injection sites. If multiple injections are required to give one dose, each injection should  be 
administered at different injection area.  
All presentations of  study drug  are provided in a single -use vial .  
9.4. SELECTION OF TRIAL D OSES   
TransCon CNP  is an inactive prodrug.  The Phase  1 clinical trial with TransCon CNP  
demonstrated that a dose range up to 150 µg CNP /kg was well -tolerated  in healthy adult male 
volunteers .  Plasma concentration of Free CNP, the active form of drug, reached a C max of 
approximately 40  pmol/L  after single injection of 150 µg CNP/kg in adult males , which is 
approximately 20-fold higher than endogenous levels seen in children with ACH .  With a 
half-life of ~120 h, free CNP levels in plasma were  sustained above anticipated effective 
threshold for 7 days following administration w ithout affecting production of endogenous  CNP.  
Based on the available non -clinical safety data with a NOAEL o f 30 µg CNP/kg/wk in the 
26-week cynomolgus monkey toxicity study and the only adverse effect seen in the chronic 
toxicity studies being related to exaggerated pharmacology in animals with a normal 
FGFR3  pathway, a safety factor of 5, based on dose -levels,  was considered acceptable.  This 
results in a starting dose of 6 µg CNP/kg/wk.   
In individuals with ACH, CNP levels are normal or marginally elevated (Olney  2015 ).  
Additionally, it has been demonstrated that a high FGFR3 activity in chondrocytes can 
de-sensitize the NPR -B receptors towards CNP activation (Robinson  2017 , Shuhaiba r 2017 ).  As 
FGFR3 is constitutively active in ACH individuals, this could potentially induce tissue resistance 
to CNP activation of NPR -B receptors.  Higher ex posure to CNP may thus be need ed to 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 55 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  sufficiently suppress the FGFR3 -pathway in children with ACH .  Because the NOAEL was 
established in animal s without the activating FGFR3 mutation, CNP exposures above the 
non-clinical NOAELs of 30 µg CNP/kg/week may be needed and tolerated in children with 
ACH.  
The starting dose is substantially below the NOEL for cardiovascular changes in cynomolgus 
monkeys (100 µg CNP/kg) and the highest dose in the clinical Phase 1 trial (TCC -101) where 
extensive cardiovascular monitoring was included and none of the cardiovascular findings in the 
non-clinical studies were observ ed.   
Additionally, simulation estimation s of steady state exposure in the anticipated weight range 
(~10 to 35 kg) of the ACH children in the proposed TransCon CNP TCC -201 trial have been 
performed based on Phase 1 data in adults and subsequent allometric scaling to the paediatric 
population.  The modelling showed that 6 µg CNP/kg/week dose is expected to result in a  plasma  
Free CNP -38 C max at steady state of ~ 0.77 – 1.1 pM. This range overlaps with endogenous 
plasma CNP levels of 1 -3 pM, and thus represents a conservative choice for starting dose in a 
dose escalation trial.   
Maximum dose level of 200 µg CNP/kg/w eek was set based on the same simulation estimation 
of steady state exposure, which predicted a comparable Free CNP -38 Cmax between a child 
weighing 35 kg (approximately 95th percentile for weight in a 11-year-old child with ACH) 
receiving weekly dose of 200 µg CNP/kg at steady state and the mean Free CNP -38 Cmax that 
was observed after single dose of 150 µg CN P/kg in healthy adults in TCC -101. Free CNP 
38 Cmax is predicted to be lower in smaller children ( e.g. 2 year old child with ACH) when 
administered the same dose level. The dose levels to be investigated in TransCon CNP 
TCC -201 trial are designed to invest igate exposure levels previously tested and shown to be safe 
and well -tolerated in healthy adult males.  As PK data become available from TCC -201, the data 
will be reviewed to ensure children are not overexposed to TransCon CNP.  Prior to determining 
if cohort 5 should be initiated at a dose > 100 μg CNP/kg/week, the safety data and height 
velocity at 6 months in cohort 4 for all participants will be assessed, in addition to all data from 
prior cohorts. The dose level of Cohort 5 will be determined taking i nto consideration the 
updated PK model that will incorporate the available PK data from TCC -201 to ensure exposure 
to Free CNP -38 does not exceed levels observed in TCC -101. 
9.5. TREATMENT ASSIGNMENT   
9.5.1.  Treatment Assignment During  Randomized Period   
At Visit 1 , participant s will be randomized to TransCon CNP or placebo  in a 3:1 ratio  in one of 
the following  cohorts : 
Cohort 1:  TransCon CNP  6 µg CNP /kg/week  or placebo  
Cohort 2:  TransCon CNP  20 µg CNP /kg/week  or placebo  
Cohort 3:  TransCon CNP  50 µg CNP /kg/week  or placebo  
Cohort 4 : TransCon CNP  100 µg CNP /kg/week  or placebo  
Cohort 5 : TransCon CNP > 100  µg CNP /kg/week * or placebo  
*Up to 200 µg CNP/kg /week , if needed, at a dose to be determined based on emerging data  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 56 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Each participant will receive their assigned cohort  dose for 52 weeks  in the Randomized Period , 
after which they may roll over to  the Open -Label Extension Period  where all participants will 
receive TransCon CNP.   
9.5.2.  Dose Escalation   
Data Monitoring Committee  meeting s will be held by the Sponsor upon review of the following 
data to assess whether the next cohort should be initiated as planned:  
• Initiation of Cohort 2: Cohort 1 data with a minimum of 12 weeks  of follow up for all 
participant s 
• Initiation  of Cohort 3: Cohort 2 data with a minimum of 12 weeks of follow up for all 
participant s and available data from all other cohorts  
• Initiation  of Cohort 4: Cohort 3 data with  a minimum of 12 weeks of follow up for all 
participant s and available data from all other cohorts  
An independent  Data Monitoring Committee  (DMC) will attend each meeting to provide 
recommendations on the action to be taken ( i.e. proceed to the next dose level as planned , 
modify the dose of the next cohort, or stop dose escalation).  
The DMC  will be provided with the following unblinded data at each Data  Monitoring 
Committee  meeting:  
1. Summary of safety data including but not limited to AEs, vital signs, and laboratory findings  
2. Details  of SAEs and AEs leading to discontinuation of study drug  
3. Summary of anthropometric measurements of cohorts that completed  at least 26 weeks  
4. Other relevant available data at the request of the DMC, including available PK data  
Following the Data Monitoring Committee  meeting, the Sponsor will take into consideration the 
recommendation of the DMC to decide to  either proceed to the next dose cohort  as planned, 
modify the dose of the next cohort, or stop dose escalation.  If available data are inadequate to 
decide on the action to be taken, the decision may be deferred until after data through 
Visit  5 (Week 26) of the highest d osed cohort are available, at which time the DMC  meeting will 
be reconvened.   
A DMC meeting will also be held when all participants in Cohort 4 have a minimum of 12 weeks 
of follow up . If 100 µg CNP/kg/week  is deemed safe at this meeting,  then participants  in the 
Open -Label Period may be dose increased to 100 µg CNP/kg/week .   
Upon completion of 26 weeks  of treatment  (Visit 5) for all participants  in Cohort 4, a DMC  
meeting will be held to assess whether additional higher dose levels (up to 200 µg CNP/kg /week ) 
should be investigated based on emerging data.  After  review of the data and consultation with 
the DMC, the Sponsor will decide whether a higher dose level should be investigated.   
The DMC  will make the recommendation regarding dose escalation for co horts in the Open -
Label Extension Period , which could be up to the highest dose level of TransCon CNP that has 
been reviewed by the DMC for  safety  and has passed DMC safety review. Dose escalation for 
the individual participant should be implemented at the  next scheduled visit (except Visit 8) in 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 57 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  the Open -Label Extension Period . After discussion with the Medical Monitor, an Investigator 
may choose to not increase the dose for an individual participant or may decrease to a prior dose.  
If one serious adverse drug reaction or two severe adverse drug reactions occur in a particular 
cohort, dose escalation will be halted. Additionally, an urgent DMC meeting will be called to 
determine whether dosing should be halted in that cohort or across the entire trial. If d eemed 
appropriate after review of all available safety data, the DMC may recommend that dose 
escalation be re -started. If the DMC does not feel that enough data is available to make a 
recommendation, they may defer a decision and recommend a time at which the data should be 
re-evaluated.  
Additionally,  the DMC will be notified and a meeting may be called for each inciden t of study 
drug discontinuation for reasons related to safety . 
If dose escalation is discontinued prior to initiating the 4th cohort, participants to be enrolled in 
the cohorts not yet filled may receive the highest tolerated dose level investigated (or placebo), 
instead of the planned higher doses.  The decision to complete all four planned cohorts  will be 
made by the Sponsor after revi ew of available data and consultation with the DMC.    
In addition, ad hoc DMC  meetings may be called by the Sponsor at any time for review of newly 
identified safety concerns.   
Refer to the DMC charter for further details.  
9.6. HOLDING/ STOPPING  STUDY DRUG   
The investigator or Medical Monitor (and, if needed, with DMC review) may temporarily hold or 
stop the dosing of study drug to a participant at any time during the trial. For partici pants that 
discontinue study drug for reasons related to safety, unblinding of the treatment assignment for 
the participant may occur if deemed necessary by the Sponsor to assess a potential safety signal 
or by the investigator to provide adequate medical care to the participant.  In case of medical 
emergency, the investigator will have direct access to unblinding of the treatment through the 
Interactive web response system.  Examples of conditions or symptoms that may warrant holding 
or stopping study drug at the investigator ’s or Medical Monitor ’s discretion include:  
1. Severe fracture of long bones or growth plates regardless of causality  
2. Evidence of symptomatic persistent orthostatic intolerance, lasting over 24 hours not 
explained by other probable causes . Orthostatic hypotension  is defined as decrease in SBP of 
≥20 mmHg (Stewart  2018 ). Accompanying tachycardia is defined as change of heart rate 
increment of ≥40 bpm and absolute orthostatic HR ≥130 bpm (for ages 13 years and 
younger) (Singer  2012 ) 
3. Skeletal abnormalities typically not associated with ACH, growth or other concurrent 
medical conditions, such as  
• Scoliosis  
• Severe hip pain  
• Findings from thorough skeletal exam requiring imaging or consultation with orthopedics 
specialist  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 58 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  • Clinically relevant findings on radiologic assessments (new onset or worsening of tibial 
bowing, joint abnormalities at the elbows, evidence of slipped capital femoral epiphysis)  
4. A severe or serious adverse reaction  
5. QTc value > 500 msec, or an extension > 60 msec from baseline in absence of possible 
causes other than the study drug  
6. Diagnosis of heart disease requiring pharmaceutical or surgical intervention to maintain heart 
function  
7. Any other sign that warrants hold ing or discontinuing study drug at the discretion of the 
investigator or Medical Monitor  
The investigator, with Sponsor Medical Monitor notification, must stop study drug for an 
individual participant in the presence of the following symptoms at any time d uring the trial:  
1. Closed epiphysis (bone age >14.0 years for females or >16.0 years for males)  
2. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis  
3. Pregnancy, intention of becoming pregnant, and females who become of childbearing 
potential  and who do not use highly effective contraceptive measures. Highly effective 
contraceptive measures are methods that can achieve a failure rate of less than 1% per year 
when used consistently and correctly (see Appendix  6).  
If study drug is held or discontinued due to safety concerns, approval by the Medical 
Monitor is required prior to resumption of study drug . Consideration of dose changes due 
to saf ety concerns may occur on an individual basis.  
Any participant  who discontinues study drug should be encouraged to remain in the trial and 
attend all subsequent trial visits  and complete all assessments . However, if trial participation is 
fully discontinue d, an E T Visit should be performed.  
9.7. PRIOR AND  CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS   
Prior and c oncomitant medications  include all prescription  or over -the-counter  medications, 
vitamin s and herbal /nutritional supplements .   
Prior medication  is considered any therapy/medication(s) that the participant  has taken prior to  
the Screening Visit and will be recorded on the appropriate eCRF page . At minimum, all 
medications taken within 90 days prior to Screening Visit should be recorded.  Additionally, 
medications taken at any time prior to signing the informed consent  that affect stature must be 
reported , such as hGH  and chronic oral corticosteroid use, regardless of when the medication 
was last  taken.   
Concomitant medication  is considered any medication other than the study drug  that is 
administered after signing the informed consent up  until the last completed trial visit .  Any 
change in documented, permitted concomitant medication being taken  at the  beginning of the 
clinical trial must be recorded in the eCRF.  
Medications that are considered necessary for the children ’s welfare may be given at the  
discretion of the investigator.  The administration of medication must be recorded in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 59 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  appropr iate source document and on the case report form (CRF) for the duration of participation 
in the trial . 
9.7.1.  Prohibited Therapies   
The following medications  are prohibited throughout the trial:  
• hGH or other medicinal products known to promote growth of long bones  
In case of any questions regarding current or prior medication , Sponsor Medical Monitor should 
be contacted.  
If use of a prohibited medication becomes necessary, administration of study drug may be 
discontinued at the discretion of the  Investigator and Sponsor Medical Monitor.   The participant  
should be encouraged to complete all scheduled visit s per protocol . 
10. TRIAL PROCEDURES   
10.1. TRIAL DURATION   
The total duration o f the trial for an individual participant is approximately 165 weeks .  
• Screening Period:  Up to approximately  4 weeks  
• Randomized Treatment Period : 52 weeks  and for participant s who do not continue in the 
Open -Label Extension Period  a follow -up period  of 5 weeks . 
• Open -Label Extension Period : 104 weeks  and a follow -up period  of 5 weeks . 
All visits  for each participant  should be scheduled at approximately the same time  of day . 
10.1.1.  Trial Periods and Visits   
See Appendix  1 and Appendix  2 for Schedule s of Events .  
Following the Screening Visit , each partic ipant  attend s: 
− Visit 1  (Randomization/ Week 0).  The visit will be the date of randomization.  
− Phone Visit (Week 2) ±3 days . This visit will occur 11 to 17 days after Visit 1.  
− Visit  2 (Week 4) ±3 days (trough visit , pre-dose).  The visit will occur 2 5 to 31 days 
after Visit  1. 
− Visit 3 (Week 8) ±7 days (any time) .  The visit will occur 49 to 63 days after Visit 1.  
− Visit 4  (Week 1 2) ±7 day s (any time) .  The visit will occur 77 to 91 days after Visit 1.  
− Visit 5  (Week 26) ±7 day s (trough visit , pre-dose).  The visit will occur 1 75 to 18 9 days 
after Visit 1.  
− Visit 6  (Week 39) ±7 day s (any time) .  The visit will occur 2 66 to 280 days after Visit 1.  
− Visit 7 (Week 5 2) ±7 day s (trough visit , pre-dose).  The visit will occur 357 to 371 days 
after Visit 1.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 60 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  − Follow -up Visit (Week 57) ±7 days . The visit will occur 393 – 407 days after Visit 1 . 
Only for participants not continuing in the Open -Label Extension Period . 
Open -Label Extension Period : 
− Visit 7 (Week 52) ±7 days. The visit will occur 357 to 371 days after Visit 1.  The visit 
must be conducted on the same day as Visit 7 in the Randomized Period . 
− Phone Visit (Week 54) ±3 days . This visit will occur 375 to 381 days after Visit 7.  
− Visit 8 (Week 56) ±3 days (any time).  The visit will occur 389 to 395  days after Visit 1.  
− Visit 9 (Week 65) ±7 days (any time).  The visit will occur 448 to 462 days after Visit 1.  
− Visit 10 (Week 78) ±7 days (any time).  The visit will occur 539 to 553 days after Visit 
1. 
− Visit 11 (Week 91) ±7 days (any time).  The visit wi ll occur 630 to 644 days after Visit 
1. 
− Visit 12 (Week 104) ±7 days (any time).  The visit will occur 721 to 735 days after 
Visit  1. 
− Visit 1 3 (Week 1 17) ±7 days (any time).  The visit will occur 812 to 826 days after 
Visit  1. 
− Visit 1 4 (Week 1 30) ±7 days (a ny time).  The visit will occur 903 to 917 days after 
Visit  1. 
− Visit 1 5 (Week 143) ±7 days (any time).  The visit will occur 994 to 1008  days after 
Visit  1. 
− Visit 1 6 (Week 156) ±7 days (any time).  The visit will occur 1085  to 1099  days after 
Visit  1. 
− Follow -up Visit (Week 161) ±7 days . The visit will occur 1120 – 1134  days after Visit 
1. 
Visit windows for all visits after Visit 1 may be increased due to extenuating circumstances such 
as Covid -19 travel restrictions, with the approval of the Medical Mon itor. 
10.1.2.  Screening Visit  (approximately Week -4 to -1)  
The Screening Visit may occur  up to approximately 4 weeks  prior to randomization , during 
which clinical data will be collected and screening procedures will be performed to determine 
eligibility.   The Screening Visit  window may be extended at the discretion of the Medical 
Monitor.  
Prior to any protocol related activities , screening procedures , or assignment of a Participant  
Number, informed consent will be obtained from each potential participant  in accordance with 
GCP and regional regulatory requirements.  The format and content of the ICF must be approved 
by the appropriate institutio nal review board/ethics committee (IRB/ EC) prior to 
implementation.   
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 61 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  The following must be performed during the Screening Period : 
1. PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Verification of eligibility  
3. Demographics  (date of birth , age at screening , biological sex, ethnicity, race) 
4. Medical history  including family history of ACH , age of diagnosis, date of diagnosis  (if 
available), type of mutation , and historical anthropometric measurement s, as available  
5. Prior and concomitant medications  
6. Vital sign measurements (Temperature, HR, BP)  
7. Full p hysical examination, including assessment of pubertal status and thorough skeletal 
exam  
8. Baseline qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  (clinical assessment for 
monitoring)  
9. Weigh t 
10. Standing heigh t 
11. Sitting height  
12. 12-lead ECG  
13. Genetic confirmation of ACH  (if not done previously) .  See Section  11.11 . 
14. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. TSH  
c. Hemoglobin A1c  
d. Hematology  
e. Lipid panel  
f. 25(OH) Vitamin D  
g. Anti-drug antibodies  
h. Biomarkers  
15. Urine collection  
16.  
NOTE : PRO/ObsRO validation battery  must be completed by the caregiver without 
assistance and should be completed prior to conducting any clinical assessments.  The same 
caregiver should complete all PRO/ObsRO validation batteries  throughout participation in 
the trial.  The PRO/ObsROs should be completed at the visit if possible. If the same  caregiver is 
unable to attend a particular visit, an alternate caregiver may complete the PRO/ObsROs at the 
visit.  
The  should be completed by the investigator after all clinical assessments are completed.  CCI
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 62 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Screening Visit may be conducted remotely ( e.g. at the participant ’s home), at the discretion of 
the investigator, to minimize the risk of  exposure to an infection during a pandemic or due to 
other restrictions that prevent the participant from being able to travel to the site. In such an 
event, consent may be obtained remotely as allowed by the applicable IRB/EC requirements, and 
the Investigator will conduct the sc heduled assessments remotely with assistance from the home 
health nurse (HHN) who will be with the participant.  
If the PRO/ObsRO validation battery cannot be completed during the Screening Visit due to the 
visit being conducted remotely, the battery should  be completed separately at approximately 
14 days prior to Visit 1, up to 7 days prior to Visit 1.  
All anthropometric  measurements per medical records for up to one year prior to Screening Visit  
should be collected .  If measurement (s) are not available wi thin one year, the last available 
measurement (s) prior to Screening Visit should be collected.  Method of measurement (standing 
vs recumbent, wall-mounted vs free -standing stadiometer in medical clinic vs other setting) 
should also be recorded.  
Thorough skeletal physical exam will be performed by palpating the bone structure and joints for 
tenderness and mobility and other abnormal changes not normally found in children with ACH. 
Special attention will be paid to the hip exam, which will include a supine assessment of 
abduction  and adduction of hips to assess for pain and any limitation of range of motion. If 
changes are noted further evaluation will be required as clinically indicated, including imaging 
and/or orthopedic consultation. DMC will be apprised of any safety findings . 
Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern should include questions about neck 
hyperextension during sleep, loud and irregular snoring, glottal stops, observed sleep apnea, deep 
compensatory sighs, self -arousals, secondary enuresis, night -time e mesis, morning headaches, 
daytime somnolence, or changes in school performance or behavior (Pauli  2019 ).  See 
Section  11.4 for details .  
For the assessment of pubertal status, boys will be assessed for testis volumes, and girls for 
breast development according to Tanner stages (Tanner  1976 ).  Pubic hair rating will also be 
recorded according to Tanner stages but will not be used to assess eligibility.  All participants 
must be Tanner Stage 1 for breast development (girls) - no glandular development/breast buds, 
and Tanner Stage 1 for gonadal  development (boys) - testicular volume < 4 mL  
(Emmanuel  2019 ).  Tanner stage progression during the course of the trial will not impact study 
treatment.  See Appendix  3 for details.  
In case the Screening Visit is conducted remotely, full physical exam including pubertal 
assessment and thorough skeletal exam, may be conducted at Visit 1 before ad ministration of 
study drug, with the understanding that an exam consistent with Tanner stage ≥ 2 is 
exclusionary . If the full physical exam and thorough skeletal exam are done pre -dose at Visit 1; 
an additional thorough skeletal exam and limited symptom di rected physical exam at Visit 1 are 
not required  
The analysis of anti -drug antibodies may only be conducted after randomization and is not 
required for eligibility verification .   
Upon confirmation of eligibility , the participant  will be randomized following Medical Monitor 
or designee confirmation.   
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 63 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  If unavailable from medical records, genetic test for ACH  will be performed. The test may be 
performed at any time after signing the consent and before Visit 1.  Further testing may be 
pursued on an individual basis as indicated. Mutations other than those resulting in G380R 
substitution in FGFR3 may be used as genetic confirmation of ACH, pending review of Medical 
Monitor.  
Participant s who sign the informed consent form but do not meet one  or more eligibility criteria 
(including withdrawing of consent) prior to first study drug dosing will be considered screen 
failures.  A minimal set of screen failure information is required to ensure transparent reporting 
of screen failure participants.  Minimal information includes demography  and screen failure 
details (eligibility criteria ). 
The decision to rescreen will be made on a case by case basis after discussion with Medical 
Monitor, including which screening procedures may not need repeating.  Rescreened participant s 
will receive a new Screening ID upon rescreening if they have not previously participated in 
ACHieve study (TC C-NHS -01).  Participants that participated in ACHieve will not be given a 
new Screening ID if they are Rescreened.  For all re-screened participants, the reason for the 
initial screen failure must be documented.   
See Section  11 for further details on procedures listed ab ove.  
10.1.3.  Randomized Treatment Period  (Week 0 to Week  52) and Open -Label Extension  
Period (Week 5 2 – Week 1 56)  
During the Treatment Period , participant s are randomized in a 3:1 ratio of TransCon CNP to 
placebo .  The dose is dependent on the cohort the participant  is enrolled into :  
• Cohort 1: TransCon CNP  6 µg CNP /kg/week  (Estimated 9 on TransCon CNP, 3 on placebo ) 
• Cohort 2: TransCon  CNP  20 µg CNP /kg/week  (Estimated ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on 
placebo ) 
• Cohort 3: TransCon CNP  50 µg CNP /kg/week  (Estimate d ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on 
placebo ) 
• Cohort 4: TransCon CNP 100 µg  CNP /kg/week  (Estimate d ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on 
placebo ) 
• Cohort 5*: TransCon CNP >100 µg  CNP /kg/week  (Estimated ≥9 on TransCon CNP, ≥3 on 
placebo ) 
* Up to 200 µg CNP/kg/week, if needed, at a dose to be determined based on emerging data   
NOTE : Participant s remain on the same dose of study drug throughout the 52 week 
Treatment Period  
During the Open -Label Extension Period , all participants receive TransCon CNP at the highest  
dose determined  to be safe by DMC  based on the data from the Randomized Period .  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 64 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  10.1.3.1.  Visit 1 ( Randomization/ Week 0)  
Participant s meeting all entry criteria will return to the clinic for Visit 1.   
The following will be performed  prior to randomization and  study drug administration : 
1. Subset of PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in medical history  
3. Review of concomitant  medications  
4. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
5. Vital sign measurements (Temperature, HR, BP) , including orthostatic HR and BP  
6. Limited  symptom -directed  physical examination (at investigator ’s discretion ), injection site 
inspection , and thorough skeletal exam  
7. Qualitative assessment of changes of sleep and snoring pattern  
8. Weight  
9. All anthropometric measurements   
10. Radiographic assessment of bone  
a. Left hand and  wrist b one age  X-ray 
b. Dual -energy X -ray absorptiometry (DXA)  
c. Anterior -posterior (AP) Standing lower extremity  X-ray 
d. AP and lateral spin e X-ray 
11. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Pharmacokinetics  
d. Biomarkers  
e. Anti-drug antibodies  
12.  
13. After completion of these assessment, particip ants can proceed to randomization and study 
drug administration:  
a. Randomization  
b. Study drug administration at site and diary dispensing  
If for any reason the PRO/ObsRO validation battery for  the Screening Visit was not completed 
prior to Visit 1, the same battery should be completed during Visit 1 prior to study drug 
administration in lieu of the subset scheduled for Visit 1.  
Orthostatic vital signs (HR and BP) will be taken at rest (preferab ly supine) and upon standing. 
Orthostatic hypotension  is defined as decrease in SBP of ≥ 20 mmHg (Stewart  2018 ).  
Accompanying tachycardia is defined as change of heart rate increment of ≥40 bpm and absolute 
orthostatic HR ≥130 bpm (for ages 13 years and younger) (Singer  2012 ). CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 65 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Limited symptom -directed physical examination of other systems should be performed at the 
discretion of the investigator to verify no clinically relevant change s have occurred since the 
Screening Visit.  Injection site must be visually inspected prior to dosing.   
If the Screening Visit was conducted remotely, full physical examination , including pubertal 
status a ssessment,  must be performed at Visit 1 before administration of study drug.  Additional 
thorough physical exam and limited symptom directed physical exam are not required . 
Thorough skeletal physical exam will be performed and additional imaging assessments  may be 
conducted as clinically indicated based on the physical exam findings.   
Anthropometric measurements  should be taken  following the Anthropometric Parameter Manual.  
For any anthropometric parameters that could not be measured during the visit, the reason must 
be documented.  
Radiographic assessments may not be required at Visit 1, with Medical Monitor approval, if the 
same assessments were conducted within approximately 3 months prior to Visit  1. If 
radiographic assessments cannot be completed prior to study drug administration due to 
scheduling conflicts, the assessments may be completed at up to 24 hours after study dr ug 
administration.  
Bone age using X-ray imaging will be assessed in the left hand and wrist for all participants 
unless a medical reason prohibits.  
DXA will be performed only for participants aged 5 years and older.  
The first dose of study drug will be ad ministered on -site to provide training to the caregiver on 
study drug administration. Participant will be monitored for at least 2 hours in the clinic after 
injection for any acute reactions. Visual inspection of the injection site and vital signs 
measurem ents ( Temperature, HR, and BP) will be performed at 1 hour and 2 hours after 
injection.  Participants should be monitored longer as clinically indicated based on any clinically 
significant changes that emerge during the 2 hours.   
For participants who weigh ≥11 kg, the following will also be performed after injection of study 
drug:  
• Blood collection for pharmacokinetic analyses at approximately 8, 24, and 48 hours after 
injection  
• Orthostatic vital signs (HR and BP) at rest (preferably supine) and upon standing  prior to 
blood collection at approximately 8, 24, and 48 hours after injection  
• Inspection of injection site at approximately 8, 24, and 48 hours after injection  
• ECG collection at approximately 48 hours after injection prior to PK blood collection  
Allowanc es will be made for accommodation.  Exceptions to the extended PK blood collection 
will be considered on an individual basis ( e.g. if travel creates an undue hardship for a family).  
Assessments at 24 hours and 48 hours after injection, including orthostat ic vital signs, ECG 
collection, blood collection, and injection site assessment may be conducted remotely by HHN.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 66 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  10.1.3.2.  Phone Visit (Week 2 ±3 days )  
All participants will be contacted by phone during Week 2 (±3 days ) for follow up. During the 
call, the study staff will ask the caregiver about the general well -being of the child, inquire 
regarding correct administration of study drug procedures, record any AEs, record any 
concomitant medication changes , and answer any questions.  
10.1.3.3.  Visit 2 (Week 4 ±3 days)  
At Visit 2, blood collection for pharmacokinetics must be at trough level. Therefore, study drug 
cannot be administered within 6 days prior to the visit.  Study drug may be administered after all 
blood collection is completed.  Visit 2 may be conducted remotely with assistance from the home 
health nurse (HHN).  A portable stadiometer will be used to measure standing and sitting height 
and a portable scale to measure weight.  
The following will be performed : 
1. Review changes in concomitant medications   
2. Review adverse events  (including r eview of ACH comorbidities base d on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC ) 
3. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP)  
4. Limited , symptom -directed  physical examination at investigator ’s discretion , injection site 
inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam   
5. Qualitative assessme nt of changes of sleep and snoring pattern   
6. Weight  
7. Standing height and sitting height only  
8. 12-lead ECG  
9. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
10. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Pharmacokinetics  
d. Biomarkers  
e. Anti-drug antibodies  
10.1.3.4.  Visit 3 (Week 8 ±7 days)   
Visit 3 may be conducted remotely with assistance from the home health nurse (HHN).  A 
portable stadiometer will be used to measure standing and sitting height and a portable scale to 
measure weight.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 67 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  The following will be performed:  
1. Subset of PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, BP, HR)  
5. Limited , symptom -directed  physical examination at investigator ’s discretion , injection site 
inspection, and thorough  skeletal physical exam  
6. Qualitative assessment of changes of sleep and snoring pattern  
7. Weight  
8. Standing height and sitting height only  
9. 12-lead ECG  
10. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
11. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematolo gy  
c. Lipid panel  
d. Pharmacokinetics  
12.  
10.1.3.5.  Visit  4 (Week 1 2 ±7 days):   
Visit 4 may be conducted remotely with assistance from the home health nurse (HHN).  A 
portable stadiometer will be used to measure stan ding and sitting height and a portable scale to 
measure weight.  
The following will be performed:  
1. Subset of PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review adverse events  (inclu ding review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, BP, HR)  
5. Limited , symptom -directed physical examination at investigator ’s discretion , injection site 
inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
6. Qualitative assessment of changes of sleep and snoring pattern  
7. Weight  
8. Standing height and sitting height only  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 68 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  9. Radiographic assessment of bone  
a. AP standing lower extremity  X-ray 
b. AP and lateral spine X -ray 
10. Study drug and diary dispensing  
11. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Pharmacokinetics  
d. Biomarkers  
e. Anti-drug antibodies  
12. Urine collection   
13.  
Scheduled r adiographic assessments may be performed  within 1 week  prior to or after  the visit if 
all scheduled assessments cannot be completed within the same day . Radiographic assessments 
at Visit 4 may be conducted remotely ( e.g. at a community imaging center).  
10.1.3.6.  Visit 5 (Week 26 ±7 days):   
At Visit 5, blood collection for pharmac okinetics must be at trough level.  Therefore, study drug 
cannot be administered within 6 days prior to the visit.  Study drug may be administered after all 
blood collection is completed.  Visit 5 may only be conducted remotely when 
regional/institutional restrictions prohibit site visits ( e.g. facility closed due to pandemic).  If Visit 
5 is conducted remotely, a portable stadiometer will be used to measure standing and sitting 
height and a port able scale to measure weight, but full anthropometric measurements will be 
deferred until the participant is able to travel to the site. A physical assessment will be performed 
by the HHN under the remote supervision of the Investigator, but the pubertal a ssessment will be 
deferred until the next on -site visit.  
The following will be performed:  
1. Subset of PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP ) 
5. Full physical examination , including assessment of pubertal status, injection site inspection, 
and thorough skeletal physical exam  
6. Qualitative assessment of changes of sleep and snoring pattern  
7. Weight  
8. All anthropometric measurements  
9. 12-lead ECG  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 69 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  10. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
11. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. 25(OH) Vita min D  
d. Pharmacokinetics  
e. Biomarkers  
f. Anti-drug antibodies  
12. Urine collection  
13.  
10.1.3.7.  Visit 6 (Week 39 ±7 days):   
Visit 6 may be conducted remotely with assistance from the home health  nurse (HHN).  A 
portable stadiometer will be used to measure stan ding and sitting height and a portable scale to 
measure weight.  
The following will be performed:  
1. Subset of PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review advers e events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP)  
5. Limited , symptom -directed  physical examination at investigator ’s discretion , injection site 
inspection, and t horough skeletal physical exam  
6. Qualitative assessment of changes of sleep and snoring pattern  
7. Weight  
8. Standing height and sitting height only  
9. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
10. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Lipid panel  
d. Pharmacokinetics  
e. Biomarkers   
f. Anti-drug antibodies  
11. Urine collection  
12.  CCI
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 70 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  10.1.3.8.  Visit 7 (Week 5 2 ±7 days)  or ET Visit :  
This visit will serve as the last visit in th e Randomized Period and the first visit in the Open -
Label Extension Period.  
At Visit 7, blood collection for pharmac okinetics must be at trough level.  Therefore, study drug 
cannot be administered within 6 days  prior to the visit.  For participant s who do not roll  over to 
the Open -Label Extension Period , no further dose of study drug will be administered. 
Visit  7 may only be conducted remotely when regi onal/institutional restrictions prohibit site 
visits ( e.g. facility closed due to pandemic).  If Visit 7 is conducted remotely, a portable 
stadiometer will be used to measure standing and sitting height and a portable scale to measure 
weight. A physical assessment will be performed by the HHN under the remote supervi sion of 
the Investigator.  
The following will be performed:  
1. PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital signs measurement ( Temperature, HR, BP)  
5. Full physical examination  including assessment of pubertal status, injection site inspection, 
and thorough skeletal physical exam  
6. Qualitative assessment of changes of sleep and snoring pattern  
7. Weight  
8. All anthropometric mea surements  
9. Radiographic assessment of bone  
a. Left hand and wrist Bone age  X-ray 
b. DXA 
c. AP Standing lower extremity X -ray 
d. AP and lateral spine X -ray 
10. 12-lead ECG  
11. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments:  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. 25(OH) Vitamin D  
d. Lipid panel  
e. Pharmacokinetics  
f. Biomarkers  
g. Anti-drug antibodies  
12. Urine collection  
13.  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 71 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Radiographic assessments at Visit 7 may be conducted remotely ( e.g. at a community imaging 
center). Alternatively, radiologic assessments may be deferred until the parti cipant is able to 
travel to the site.  Radiographic assessments may not be required at Visit 7, with Medical 
Monitor approval, if the same assessments were conducted within approximately 3 months prior 
to Visit 7.  
Immediately following completion of 52 wee ks in the Randomized Period , all participants, 
including those randomized to placebo, may continue into the Open -Label Extension Period  to 
receive TransCon CNP  if they fulfill the rollover criteria (see  Section  8.1.3  ). If the Investigator 
or Medical Monitor has concerns about continuing the participant in the Open -Label Extension 
Period  (e.g. potential safety concerns or emergent fulfillment of holding/ stopping criteria) 
participant may end treatment at the end of the Randomized Period .  
10.1.3.9.  Follow -up Visit  (Week 57 ±7 days):  For Participants  Not Continuing in the 
Open -Label Extension   
Participants who are not continuing in the Open -Label Extension Period  will attend a follow -up 
visit 5 weeks after Visit 7 to review any adverse events, to collect blood samples for assessment 
of anti -drug antibodies  and answer any questions . The Foll ow-up visit may be conducted 
remotely (e.g. at the participant ’s home) by the HHN at the discretion of the investigator to 
minimize the risk of exposure to an infection during a  pandemic, or due to other restrictions that 
prevent the participant from being  able to travel to the site for the blood collection.  
OPEN -LABEL EXTENSION PERIOD  VISITS : 
10.1.3.10.  Visit 7 (Wee k 52 ±7 days):   
For participants continuing in the Open -Label Extension Period , all Visit 7 assessments for the 
Open -Label Extension Period  must be done immediately following the Visit 7 assessments for 
the Randomized Period . 
Prior to any protocol related activities for the Open -Label Extension Period , signed informed 
consent will be obtained for each potential participant in accordance with GCP and regional 
regulatory requirements. The format and content of the ICF must be approved by the appropriate 
institutional review board/ethics committee (IRB/EC) prior to implementation.    
During the Open -Label Extension Period , the Investigator should ascertain an individual ’s risk 
for becoming pregnant or fathering a child  and take appropriate steps for participants that attain 
reproduct ive potential during participation in the trial . This should be captured in the eCRF. 
Pregnancy prevention counseling and pregnancy testing should be provided as appropriate and 
can be tailored per the Investigator ’s judgement based on maturity and cultural norms.  (see 
Appendix  6). 
After completion of all scheduled assessments for the Randomized Period , the following will be  
performed:  
1. Informed consent  
2. Assessment of childbearing potential  according to  Appendix  6  
3. Urinary hCG test (for females of childbearing potential  according to Appendix  6) 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 72 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  4. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
For participants who received placebo during the Randomized Period , this will be the  first dose 
of TransCon CNP , and in order to maintain the blind, all participants must unde rgo the same 
safety monitoring. Study drug  must  be administered on -site and p articipant s will be monitored 
for at least 2 hours in the clinic after injection for any acute reactions. Visual inspection of the 
injection site and vital signs measurements ( Temperature, HR, and BP) will be performed at 1 
hour and 2 hours after injection.  Participants should be monitored longer as clinically indicated 
based on any clinically significant changes that emerge during the 2 hours.  
For participants who weigh ≥11 kg,  the following will also be performed after injection of study 
drug:  
• Blood collection for pharmacokinetic analyses at approximately 8, 24, and 48 hours after 
injection  
• Orthostatic vital signs (HR and BP) at rest (preferably supine) and upon standing prior to 
blood collection at approximately 8, 24, and 48 hours after injection  
• Inspection of injection site at approximately 8, 24, and 48 hours after injection  
• ECG collection at approximately 48 hours after injection prior to PK blood collection  
Allowances will  be made for accommodation.  Exceptions to the extended PK blood collection 
will be considered on an individual basis (e.g. if travel creates an undue hardship for a family).  
Assessments at 24 hours and 48 hours after injection, including orthostatic vita l signs, ECG 
collection, blood collection, and injection site assessment may be conducted remotely by HHN.  
10.1.3.11.  Phone Visit (Week 54  ±3 days):   
All participants will be contacted by ph one during Week 54 (±3 days)  for follow up. During the 
call, the study staff will ask the caregiver about the general well -being of the child, inquire 
regarding correct administration of study drug procedures, record any AEs, record any 
concomitant medicat ion changes , and answer any questions.  
10.1.3.12.  Visit 8 (Week 56 ±3 days):    
Visit 8 may be conducted remotely with assistance from the home health nurse (HHN). A  
portable stadiometer will  be used to measure standing and sitting height and a portable scale to  
measure weight.  Pubertal assessment will be deferred until the next on -site visit.  
The following will be performed:  
1. Review changes in concomitant medications  
2. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
3. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP) 
4. Limited, symptom -directed physical examination at investigator ’s discretion, injection site  
inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
5. Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  
6. Assessment of pubertal status and childbearing potential  according to  Appendix  6 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 73 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  7. Weight  
8. Standing height and sitting height  
9. 12-lead ECG  
10. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Pharmacokinetics  
d. Biomarkers  
e. Anti-drug antibodies  
11. Urine collection  (including hCG test for females of childbearing potential  (according to 
Appendix  6) 
12. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
10.1.3.13.  Visit 9 (Week 65) ±7 Days   
Visit 9 may be conducted remotely with assistance from the home health nurse (HHN). A 
portable stadiometer will be used to measure standing and sitting height and a portable scale to 
measure weight. Pubertal assessment will be deferred until the next on -site visi t. 
The following will be performed:  
1. Review changes in concomitant medications  
2. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
3. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP ) 
4. Limited, symptom -directed physical examination at investigator ’s discretion, injection site  
inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
5. Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  
6. Assessment of pubertal status and childbearing potential  according to  Appendix  6 
7. Standing height and sitting height  
8. 12-lead ECG  * 
9. Weight  
10. Radiographic assessments  
a. Anterior -posterior (AP) standing lower extremity X -ray 
b. Anterior -posterior and lateral spine X -ray  
11. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments : 
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Pharmacokinetics * 
d. Biomarkers  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 74 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  e. Anti-drug antibodies  
12. Urine collection (including hCG test for females of childbearing potential  accord ing to 
Appendix  6) 
13.  
14. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
15. Scheduled radiographic assessments may be perf ormed within 1 week prior to or after the 
visit if  all scheduled assessments cannot be completed within the  same day. Radiographic 
assessments  at Visit 9 may be conducted remotely (e .g. at a community imaging center).  
* ECG and blood collection for pharmacokinetics should  be performed prior to study drug 
administration and only at visits where the dose is escal ated. 
10.1.3.14.  Visit  10 (Week 78) ±7 Days   
Visit 10 may only be conducted remotely when  regional/institutional restrictions prohibit site 
visits (e .g. facility closed due to pandemic). If V isit 10 is conducted remotely, a portable 
stadiometer will be used to measure standing and  sitting height and a portable scale to measure 
weight, but full anthropometric measurements will  be deferred until the partici pant is able to 
travel to the site. A physical assessment will be  performed by the HHN under the remote 
supervision of the Investigator, but the pubertal  assessment will be deferred until the next on -site 
visit.  
The following will be performed:  
1. Subset of PRO /ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP ) 
5. All anthropometric measur ements  
6. 12-lead ECG  
7. Full physical examination, injection site in spection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
8. Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  
9. Assessment of pubertal status and childbearing potential  according to  Appendix  6 
10. Weight  
11. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments : 
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. 25(OH) Vitamin D  
d. Lipid panel  
e. Pharmacokinetics  
f. Biomark ers CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 75 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  g. Anti-drug antibodies  
12. Urine collection (including hCG test for females of childbearing potential  according to 
Appendix  6) 
13.  
14. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
10.1.3.15.  Visit 11 (Week 91) ±7 Days   
Visit 11 may be conducted remotely with assista nce from the home health nurse (HHN). A 
portable stadiometer will be used to measure stan ding and sitting height and a portable scale to 
measure weight. Pubertal assessment will be deferred until the next on -site visit.  
The following will be performed:  
1. Review changes in concomitant medications  
2. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
3. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP ) 
4. Limited, symptom -directed physical examination at inve stigator ’s discretion, injection site  
inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
5. Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  
6. Assessment of pubertal status and childbearing potential  according to  Appendix  6 
7. Standing height and sitting height  
8. 12-lead ECG  * 
9. Weight  
10. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments : 
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Pharmacokinetics * 
d. Biomarkers  
e. Anti-drug antibodies  
11. Urine collection (including hCG test for females of childbearing potential  according to 
Appendix  6) 
12.  
13. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
* ECG and blood collection for pharmacokinetics should be performed prior to study drug 
administration and only at visits where the dose is escalated.  CCI
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 76 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  10.1.3.16.  Visit 12 (Week 104) ±7 Days   
Visit 1 2 may only be conducted remotely when regional/institutional restrictions prohibit site 
visits (e .g. facility closed due to pandemic). If Visit 1 2 is conducted remotely, a portable 
stadiometer will be used to measure standing and sitting height and a portable scale to measure 
weight, but full anthropometric measurements will be deferred until the participant is able to 
travel to the site. A physical assessment will be performed by the HHN under the remote 
supervision of the Investigator, but the pube rtal assessment will be deferred until the next on -site 
visit.  
The following will be performed:  
1. PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP ) 
5. All anthropometric measurements  
6. Full physical examination, injection site inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
7. Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  
8. Assessment of pubertal status and childbearing potential  according to  Appendix  6 
9. Weight  
10. Radio graphic assessments  
a. X-ray of left hand and wrist for bone age  
b. Dual -energy X -ray absorptiometry (DXA) for bone mineral density (participants 5 years 
and older only)  
c. Anterior -posterior and lateral spine X -ray  
d. Anterior -posterior (AP) standing lower extremity  X-ray 
11. 12-lead ECG  
12. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. 25(OH) Vitamin D  
d. Lipid panel  
e. Pharmacokinetics  
f. Biomarkers  
g. Anti-drug antibodies  
13. Urine collection (including hCG test for females of childbearing potential  according to 
Appendix  6) 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 77 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  14.  
15. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
Radiographic assessments at Visit 12 may be conducted remotely (e .g. at a community imaging  
center). Alternatively, radiologic assessments may be deferred until the participant is able to  
travel to the site.  
10.1.3.17.  Visit 13 (Week 117) ±7 Days   
Visit 13 may be conducted remotely with assistance from the home health nurse (HHN). A 
portable stadiometer will be used to measure stan ding and sitting height and a portable scale to 
measure weight. Pubertal assessment will be deferred until the next on -site visit . 
The following will be performed:  
1. Review changes in concomitant medications  
2. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
3. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP)  
4. Limited, symptom -directed physical examination at investigator ’s discretion, injection site 
inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
5. Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  
6. Assessment of pubertal status and childbearing potential  according to  Appendix  6 
7. Standing height and sitting height  
8. Weight  
9. Radiographic assessments  
a. Anterior -posterior (AP) standing lower extremity X -ray 
b. Anterior -posterior and lateral spine X -ray  
10. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Biomarkers  
d. Anti-drug antibodies  
11. Urine collection (including hCG test for females of childbearing potential  according to 
Appendix  6) 
12.  
13. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
14. Scheduled radiographic assessments may be perf ormed within 1 week prior to or after the 
visit if  all scheduled assessments cannot be completed within the same day. Radiographic 
assessments  at Visit 13 may be conducted remotely (e .g. at a community imaging center).  CCI
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 78 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  10.1.3.18.  Visit  14 (Week 130) ±7 Days   
Visit 1 4 may only be conducted remotely when regional/institut ional restrictions prohibit site 
visits (e .g. facility closed due to pandemic). If Visit 1 4 is conducted remotely, a portable 
stadiometer will be used to measure standing and sitting height and a portable scale to measure 
weight, but full anthropometric me asurements will be deferred until the participant is able to 
travel to the site. A physical assessment will be performed by the HHN under the remote 
supervision of the Investigator, but the pubertal a ssessment will be deferred until the next on -site 
visit.  
The following will be performed:  
1. Subset of PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP)  
5. All anthropometric measurements  
6. Full physical examination, injection site in spection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
7. Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  
8. Assessment of pubertal status and childbearing potential  according to  Appendix  6 
9. Weight  
10. 12-lead ECG  
11. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. 25(OH) Vitamin D  
d. Lipid panel  
e. Pharmacokinetics  
f. Biomarkers  
g. Anti-drug antibodies  
12. Urine collection (including hCG test for females of childbearing potential  according to 
Appendix  6) 
13.  
14. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
10.1.3.19.  Visit 1 5 (Week 143) ±7 Days   
Visit 1 5 may be conducted remotely with assist ance from the home health nurse (HHN). A 
portable stadiometer will be used to measure stan ding and sitting height and a portable scale to 
measure weight. Pubertal assessment will be deferred until the next on -site visit.  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 79 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  The following will be performed:  
1. Review changes in concomitant medications  
2. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
3. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP)  
4. Limited, symptom -directed physical examination at investigator ’s discretion, injection site 
inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
5. Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  
6. Assessment of pubertal status and childbearing potential  according to  Appendix  6 
7. Standing height and sitting height  
8. Weight  
9. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. Biomarkers  
d. Anti-drug antibodies  
10. Urine collection (including hC G test for females of childbearing potential  according to 
Appendix  6) 
11.  
12. Study drug  and diary dispensing  
10.1.3.20.  Visit 1 6 (Week 156) ±7 Days/Early Termination Visit   
No further dose of study drug will be  administered after Visit 16. Visits 16 may only be 
conducted remotely when  regional/institutional restrictions prohibit site visits ( e.g. facility closed 
due to pandemic). If Visit  16 is conducted remotely, a portable stadiometer will be  used to 
measure standing and  sitting height and a portable scale to measure weight. A physical 
assessment will be performed  by the HHN under the remote supervision of the Investigator.  
The following will be performed:  
1. PRO/ObsRO validation battery  
2. Review changes in concomitant medications  
3. Review adverse events  (including review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk 
of sleep apnea and CMC)  
4. Vital sign measurements ( Temperature, HR, BP)  
5. All anthropometric measurements  
6. Full physical examination, in jection site inspection, and thorough skeletal physical exam  
7. Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 80 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  8. Assessment of pubertal status and childbearing potential  according to  Appendix  6 
9. Weight  
10. 12-lead ECG  
11. Radiographic assessments  
a. X-ray of left hand and wrist for bone age  
b. Dual -energy X -ray absorptiometry (DXA) for bone mineral density (participants 5 years 
and older only)  
c. Anterior -posterior and lateral spine X -ray  
d. Anterior -posterior (AP) standing lower extremity X -ray 
12. Blood collection for the following laboratory assessments  
a. Chemistry  
b. Hematology  
c. 25(OH) Vitamin D  
d. Lipid panel  
e. Pharmacokinetics  
f. Biomarkers  
g. Anti-drug antibodies  
13. Urine collection (including hCG test for females of childbearing potential  according to 
Appendix  6) 
14.  
Radiographic assessments at Visit 16 may be conducted remotely ( e.g. at a community imaging  
center). Alternatively, radiologic assessments may be deferred until the participant is able to  
travel to the site. Radiographic assessments may not be required at Visit 16, with Medical  
Monitor/Medic al Expert approval, if the same assessm ents were conducted within approximately  
3 months prior to Visit 16. 
Immediately following completion of treatment in the study at Visit 16 , all participants  may be 
offered to continue in a separate l ong-Term Open-Label _Extension Study (ASND0039)  if they  
fulfill the eligibility criteria for the study . In the separate study, participants will continue to 
receive TransCon CNP . If the Investigator or Medical Monitor has concerns about continuing the 
participant in the separate Long-Term Open-Label Extension Study (e.g. potential safety 
concerns or emergent fulfillment of holding/ stopping criteria) , the participant will end treatment 
with TransCon CNP .  
10.1.3.21.  Follow -Up Visit (Week 161 ±7 days):   
Participants who will not continue in the separate Long-Term Open-Label Extension Study 
(ASND003 9), will attend a follow -up visit 5 weeks after Visit 16 to review any adverse ev ents, 
to collect blood samples for assessment of anti -drug antibodies  and answer any questions . The 
Follow -up visit may be conducted remotely (e.g. at the participant ’s home) by the HHN at the 
discretion of the investigator to minimize the risk of exposure  to an infection during a pandemic, 
or due to other restrictions that prevent the particip ant from being able to travel to the site for the 
blood collection.  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 81 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  10.1.4.  Unscheduled Visits (UV)   
Unscheduled Visits are those visits that occur between regularly scheduled visits at investigator 
discretion to manage an already documented AE, assess a potential AE,  abnormal/alarming 
laboratory values, and/or  clinical findings .  Unscheduled Visits m ay be conducted remotely with 
assistance from the home health nurse (HHN). Only focused assessments (guided by the reason 
for the visit) will occur at these visits.   In such cases, the participant ’s caregiver  will be contacted 
to arrange an UV. 
10.1.5.  Early Termi nation  (ET)  Visits   
ET Visits are performed for any early termination/withdrawal of a participant  from  this clinical 
trial.  This does not apply to participant s who have discontinued study drug but consented to 
continue trial visits.  The structure and assessments of the ET Visit  should as much as possible be 
similar to Visit 7 if performed during the Randomized Period  and Visit 16 if performed during 
the Open -Label Extension Period . Radiographic assessments may not be required, with Medical 
Monitor approval, if the same assessments were conducted within approximately 3 months prior 
to the ET Visit.  
11. ASSESSMENTS   
11.1. VITAL SIGN MEASUREME NTS   
Participant s should rest for at least 5 minutes before vital sign measurement  and vital signs 
should be taken prior to any blood draws .  The following vital signs should be measured:  
• Heart Rate  (measured in beats per minute)  
• Blood Pressure  (seated BP will be taken measured in mm H g) 
• Temperature  [measured in degrees Celsius ( °C) or Fahrenheit (°F) ] 
All vital signs above must be measured at all visits .  Orthostatic HR and systolic/diastolic BP 
will also be measured at Visit 1 prior to administration of study drug when the participant is at 
rest for 5 minutes (preferably supine) and again after standing at 3 minutes for assessment of 
orthostatic  hypotension . Orthostatic hypotension  is defined as decrease in SBP of ≥ 20 mmHg 
(Stewart  2018 ). Accompanying tachycardia is defined as  change of heart rate increment of 
≥40 bpm and absolute orthostatic HR ≥130 bpm (for ages 13 years and younger) (Singer  2012 ).  
Additionally , at Visit 1  and Visit 7 (in the Open -Label Extension Peri od), all vital signs  must be 
monitored at 1 hour and 2 hours post injection of the study drug.   
For participants that undergo blood collection  for pharmacokinetic analyses  at 8, 24, and 
48 hours following first dose  (at Visit 1 in the Randomized Period  and Visit 7 in the Open -Label 
Extension Period ), orthostatic systolic/diastolic BP and HR  will be measured  prior to each PK 
blood collection.   
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 82 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  11.2. ELECTROCARDIOGRAM  (ECG )  
An ECG must be collected  at Screening and Visits 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7/ET in the Randomized 
Period , and at Visits  8, 10, 12, 14, and 16/ET in the Open -Label Extension . In addition, ECGs 
will be collected at Visits 9 and 11 if the dose is escalated at the visit.  This schedule allows any 
child who switches from placebo to study drug to have ECGs  performed  in the same schedule as 
those who began study drug  treatment  in the Randomized Period . At Visit 1  on the Randomized 
Period  and Visit 7 in the Open -Label Extension Period , ECG will be collected only at 
approximately 48 hours  after the first dose for participants that undergo blood collection for PK 
analysis at that time . Standard 12 -lead ECG will be recorded when the participant  is in a resting 
state, prior  to blood collection if scheduled at the same time.  ECGs will be read centrally.   If 
adequate tracing is unable to be collected at the site, e xternal ECGs may be allowed for safety 
monitoring .   
11.3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION S  
Full physical examination must be performed at the Screening Visit, Visit 5 (Week 26), 
Visit 7 (Week 5 2)/ET, and in the Open -Label Extension Period  Visit 10 (Week 78), 
Visit  12 (Week 104),  Visit 14 (week 130), and Visit 16/ET (week 156) and includes assessment  
of all major body systems including general appearance, HEENT, Neck (including thyroid), 
Lung/pulmonary, Chest, CV, Abdomen, Back, GU, Neurological, Extremities, and Skin .  
At the Screening Visit , Visit 5,  and at Visit 7/ET  in the Randomized Period  and at all visits in the 
Open -Label Extension Period , physical examination must also include an assessment of pubertal 
status .  Boys will be assessed for testis volumes, and girls for breast  development according to 
Tanner stages (Tanner  1976 ).  Pubic hair rating will also be recorded  according to Tanner stages  
but will not be used to assess eligibility .  At randomization, a ll particip ants must be Tanner Stage 
1 for breast development  (girls) - no glandular development/breast buds, and Tanner Stage 1 for 
gonadal development  (boys) - testicular volume < 4 mL (Emmanuel  2019 ).  Tanner stage 
progression during the course of the trial will not impact study treatment.  See Appendix  3 for 
details.  In the Open -Label Extension Perio d, assessment for child -bearing potential will also be 
performed, if applicable (see Appendix  6).   
At all other on -site visits, limited  physical exam ination should be performed. Limited, symptom -
directed physical examination  should include assessment of all major body systems  (as listed 
above) at the investigator ’s discretion .  
Physical examination should include a  visual inspection  of the injection sites at every visit.  At 
Visit 1  in the Randomized Period  and Visit 7 in the Open -Label Extension Period , visual 
inspection of  the injection site must be performed prior to injection of study drug and at 1 hour  
and 2 hours after injectio n of study  drug.  For participants that undergo blood collection  for 
pharmacokinetic analyses  at 8, 24, and 48 hours following first dose, injection site will be 
inspected at the time of each blood collection . Clinically significant findings should be assessed 
for whether they qualify as AEs as defined in Section  12 Adverse Event Assessment and 
Reporting . 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 83 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Additionally, t horough skeletal physical exam will be performed at all visits in both the 
Randomized Period  and the Open -Label Extension Period  by palpating the bone structure and 
joints for tenderness and m obility and other abnormal changes not normally fou nd in children 
with ACH .  Special attention will be paid to the hip exam, which will include a supine 
assessment of ab duction  and adduction of hips to assess f or pain and any limitation of range of 
motion. If changes are noted further evaluation will be re quired as clinically indicated, including 
imaging and/or orthopedic consultati on. DMC will be apprised of any safety findings .  Such 
findings should be assessed for whether they qualify as AEs as defined in Section  12 Adverse 
Event Assessment and Reporting.  
11.4. QUALITATIVE ASSESSME NT OF SLEEP AND SNORING PATTERN   
Qualitative asses sment of  sleep and s noring pattern  is required  at all visits in both the 
Randomized Period  and the Open -Label Extension Period , and a sleep study co nsidered if any 
changes are noted.  Assessment should include questions about neck hyperextension  during 
sleep , loud and irregular snoring, glottal stops, observed sleep apnea, deep compensatory sighs, 
self-arousals, secondary enuresis, night -time emesis, morning headaches, daytime somnolence, 
or changes in school performance or behavior (Pauli  2019 ).  Such findings should be assessed for 
whether they qualify as AEs as defined in Section  12 Adverse Event Assessment and Reporting.  
11.5. ANTHROPOMETRIC MEASU REMENT S  
Anthropometric measurements , including weight,  should be taken following the procedure s 
described in the Anthropometric Parameter Manual.  All individuals  involved in anthropometry  
measurements must have a documented record of understanding of the manual prior to taking 
measurements for the trial. Refer to the anthropometric measurement manu al for detailed 
instructions.  
11.6. PRO/OBS RO VALIDATION BATTERY   
Three child/parent experience meas ures are currently being developed  and are collectively 
referred to as the Achondropl asia Experience Measures (AEMs) .  They  consist of:  
CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol  Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022  Page 84 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0 CONFIDENTIAL  The Validation Battery consists of the AEMs and other questionnaires needed for the 
psychometric testing.  The Validation Battery must be completed at  the Screening Visit and Visit 
7/ET  in the Randomized Period , and at Visits 12 and 16/ET in the Open -Label Extension Period .  
Completion of the Validation Battery is expected to take approximately 30 -45 minutes.  If the 
PRO/ObsRO validation battery cannot be completed during the Screening Visit  due to the visit 
being conducted remotely, the battery should be completed separately at approximately 14  days 
prior to Visit 1, up to 7 days prior to Visit 1. If for any reason the PRO/ObsRO validation battery 
for the Screening Visit was not completed pr ior to Visit 1, the same battery should be completed 
during Visit 1 prior to study drug administration in  lieu of the subset scheduled for Visit 1. A 
subset of the Validation Battery must  also be completed at Visits 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6  in the 
Randomized Peri od, and at Visits 1 0 and 1 4 in the Open -Label Extension Period .  
The measures in the validation battery are Generic Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement 
Information System ( PROMIS ) Parent Proxy SF Upper Extremity, Global Health and SF 
Depressive Symptoms, Satisfaction with Life Scale – Child (SWLS -C), Pediatric Quality of Life 
Inventory (PedsQL), , Growth Hormone Defi ciency -Child 
Impact Meas ure (GHD -CIM), DISABKIDS Chronic Generic Module  (DCGM -37), Sheehan 
Disability Scale, , Parent Experience of 
Child Illness (PECI), Activity Impairment Assessment (AIA), Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), 
 and Endicott Work Productivity Scale (EWPS) , Euroqol 
5-Dimensional Questionnaire Youth Proxy version 1 (EQ -5D-Y Proxy1), and a resource
utilization questionnaire.
NOTE : PRO /ObsRO  validation batteries  must be completed by the caregiver without 
assistance and  should be completed prior to cond ucting any clinical assessments.  The s ame 
caregiver should complete all PRO /ObsRO  validation batteries  throughout participation in 
the trial .  The PRO/ObsRO valida tion batteries  should be completed at the visit if possible. If 
the same caregiver is unable to attend a particular visit, an alternate caregiver may complete the 
PRO/ObsRO validation batteries  at the visit.  All PRO /ObsRO s should be done when scheduled 
even if the same meaures where not completed at  Screening Visit and/or Visit 1.   
Refer to the PRO/ObsRO Validation Battery and instructions  for further details . 
In countries where  these PRO/ObsRO batteries are  available, a ll participants will be expected to 
complete the PRO/ObsRO  validation batteries .  For Cohort 1, completion of the PRO/ObsRO  
validation batteries  is expected for participants from sites in US.  
11.7.  CCI
CCICCI
CCICCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 85 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  11.8. RADIOGRAPHIC ASSESSMENT OF BONE   
The type and frequency of radiographic assessments has been carefully chosen to minimize 
exposure to radiation for the trial part icipants as shown below. Total exposure during the trial is 
expected to be approximately  7.4 mSv/participant.   
Randomized Period : 
• AP standing lower extremity X -ray 3 times over 12 months – 0.18 mSv  
• AP and lateral lumbar spine X -ray 3 times over 12 months – 3.0 mSv  
• Bone age of left hand and wrist 2 times over 12 months – 0.002 mSv  
• DXA 2 times  over 12 months – 0.002 mSv  
Open -Label Extension Period : 
• AP standing lower extremity X -ray 4 times over 24 months – 0.24 mSv 
• AP and lateral lumbar spine X -ray 4 times over 24 months – 4.0 mSv  
• Bone age of left hand and wrist 2 times over 24 months – 0.002 mSv 
• DXA 2 times  over 24 months – 0.002 mSv 
Radiographic assessments may not be required at Visit 1 with Medical Monitor approval, if the 
assessments were conduct ed within approximately 3 months  prior to  Visit 1. If radiographic 
assessments cannot be completed prior to study drug administration at Visit 1 due to scheduling 
conflicts, the assessments may be completed at up to 24 hours after study drug administration.  
On Visit 4  in the Randomized Period  and Visits 9 , 12 and 13 in the Open -Label Extension 
Period , scheduled radiographic assessments may be performed within 1 week prior to or after the 
visit if all scheduled assessments cannot be completed within the sam e day. They  may also be 
conducted remotely ( e.g. at a community imaging center).  
Radiographic assessments at Visit 7 /ET and 16/ET  may be conducted remotely ( e.g. at a 
community imaging center). Alternatively, radiologic assessments may be deferred until the 
participant is able to travel to the site. Radiog raphic assessments may not be required at Visit 
7/ET and 16/ET , with Medical Monitor approval, if the same assessments were conducted within 
approximately 3 months prior to Visit 7  or Visit 16/ET, respectively . 
Refer to the radiographic assessment manual f or details of the procedures for the radiographic 
assessment of bone.  
11.8.1.  Hand and Wrist  X-ray  
Hand and wrist X -ray imaging  will be conducted at Visit 1 , Visit 7/ET , and in Visit s 12 and 
16/ET  (in the Open -Label Extension Period ). The assessment will be in the left hand and wrist 
for all participants unless a medical reason prohibits , in which case the right hand and wrist may 
be used . Images will be used to assess  bone age and  bone growth .  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 86 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  11.8.2.  Anterior -posterior (AP) Standing Lower Extremity X-ray  
Standing X-ray films of lower extremity along the AP axis  will be collected at Visit 1 , 4 and 
7/ET  in the Randomized Period , and Visit 9, 12, 13, 16/ET in the Open -Label Extension Period . 
Standing lower extremity X -ray will be used to monitor changes in varus deformities , bone 
growth  and possible adverse changes in growth plates.  
11.8.3.  Dual -energy X -ray Absorptiomet ry (DXA)   
DXA will be performed at Visit 1 , and Visit 7/ET  in the Randomized Period  and Visit s 12 and  
16/ET  (in the Open -Label Extension Period ).  The assessment will be done only  for participants 
aged 5 years and older.  DXA will be used to assess any changes in bone mineral density  (BMD) .  
11.8.4.  Anterior -posterior and Lateral Spine X-ray  
X-ray of the spine, al ong the AP and lateral ax es, will be taken at Visit 1, 4, and 7/ET  in the 
Randomized Period  and at Visits 9, 12, 13, 16/ET  in the Open -Label Extension Period . Spine 
X-ray will be used to monitor any changes in kyphosis, lordosis, scoliosis, and morphology of 
vertebral bodies.  
11.9. WEEKLY  DIARY   
Participant s/caregivers  are trained on the weekly  diary  during Visit 1  and instructed to return the 
diary at every visit for site st aff review as part of concomitant medication review, adverse event 
review  and study drug compliance.  Diary must be completed from Visit 1 until completion of 
Visit 7/ET Visit  in the Randomized Period , and from Visit 7 in the Open -Label Extension Period  
until completion of Visit 16/ET . 
Participants/caregivers will be required to complete a weekly  diary to capture the following:  
• Study drug, starting at Visit 1 (dose, administration date and time , and injection location ) 
• Changes to concomitant medications   
• Changes to the participant ’s health or well -being, including any procedures, ER visits, and 
hospitalizations.  
11.10.  ADVERSE EVENT REVIEW   
At each visit, the participant  and/or caregiv er should be asked about the following to assess for 
any potential AEs:  
• General well -being  
• Any changes to health or medications since the previous visit ; specifically, any ear infections  
or sleep apnea or neurological symptoms suggestive of cord compression  
• Symptoms of hypotension such as dizziness, headache, lightheadedness, blurry vision, and 
loss of consciousness  since the previous visit  
• Emergency /urgent care visits or hospitalizations  since the previous visit  
At each visit, s ite staff will review diary with the participant  and the caregiver , and any data 
related to changes in health or medications should be further assessed for potential AEs.   
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 87 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Additionally, changes from baseline noted  during a physical examination should be assessed for 
potential AEs.  
Additional assessments, including a physical examination or additional laboratory assessment, 
may be performed at the discretion of the investigator even if not required at the specific s tudy 
visit or if an U V must be scheduled.   
See Section  12 for details on reporting AEs.  
11.11.  LABORATORY ASSESSMEN TS  
Safety  labs and immunogenicity samples are important for safety assessment in this trial.  
Samples for immun ogenicity ( antibody measurements ) are stored for up to 8 years after the end 
of the trial in order to make additional antibody tests and charact erizations  possible at the request 
of health authorities. All other samples will be destroyed no later than the end of the trial.  
The objective of the PK assessments is to understand the relation between exposure and biologic 
activity.  Pediatric blood volume limit guidelines were utilized to minimize blood collection 
volumes and assay technologies were chosen that are capable of sensitively detecting analytes 
using the lowest possible volume of blood for analysis.  
The TCC -201 trial has been designed to minimize deviations from the normally conducted 
procedures for the diagnosis and treatment of ACH.  To reduce stress and pain and at the same 
time ensure safety of the children that participate in TCC -201, sparse samp ling of PK blood 
collection is employed and the volume of blood to be drawn at each tri al visit will be restricted 
based on the weight of the child at each visit following the recommendations published by the 
European Commission titled “Ethical considerati ons for clinical trials on medicinal products 
conducted with minors ”, dated 18 September 2017.   See Appendix  4 for details.  
The following laboratory as sessment s are performed .  See Appendix  1 and Appendix  2 for the 
Schedule of Events . 
1. Genetic confirmation of ACH  
If unavailable f rom medical records , a blood sample  will be collected and used to identify the 
FGFR3 muta tion for ACH .  The test may be performed at any time after signing the consent and 
before Visit 1.  The c entral lab will test for the G380R  substitution in FGFR3  (i.e. G to A 
transition or G to C transversion at nucleotide 1138 of FGFR3  gene) , but further testing may be 
pursued on an individual basis as indicated.  Other mutations  may be used as genetic 
confirmation of ACH, pending review of Medical Monitor.  
2. Chemistry  
a. Sodium  
b. Potassium  
c. Chloride  
d. Bicarbonate  
e. Magnesium  
f. Phosphate  
g. Calcium  
h. Glucose  
i. Alkaline Phosphatase  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 88 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  j. Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST)  
k. Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT)  
l. Creatinine  
m. Creatine Phosphokinase  
a. Albumin  
b. Direct Bilirubin  
c. Total Bilirubin  
d. BUN  
e. Gamma Glutamyl Transferase  
f. Lactate Dehydrogenase  
g. Total Protein  
h. Uric Acid  
3. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)  
4. Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c)  
5. Hematology  
a. Hemoglobin  
b. Hematocrit  
c. RBC Count  
d. WBC Count  
e. Differential Cell Count  
f. Platelet Count  
6. Lipid panel  
a. Total cholesterol  
b. LDL  
c. HDL  
d. Triglycerid es 
7. 25(OH) Vitamin D  
8. Urinalysis  Panel  
9. Urine Chemistry  
a. Urine Calcium  
b. Urine Creatinine  
c. Urine Phosphate  
10. PK Assessments  
a. Free CNP  
b. Total CNP  
c. mPEG  and mPEG -linker  
11. Biomarkers  (blood)  
a. Exploratory biomarkers of pharmacodynamic response to treatment with TransCon CNP,  
 CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 89 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  12. Immunogenicity Assessments  
a. Anti-drug antibodies  
11.12.  TREATMENT PERIOD  ADMINISTRATION   
The first dose of study drug  will be administered by the  caregiver  in the clinic, and the 
participant  will be observed for at least 2 hours  for assessment of adverse reactions .  Caregiver  
will administer all subsequent weekly doses of study drug  for 52 weeks  during the Randomized 
Period  plus 104 weeks during the Open -Label Extension Period . The last dose of randomized 
study drug will be administered at least 6 days  prior to Visit 7 (Week 52).   At each visit, 
injection sites should be examined, and injection site rotation should be reinforced.  
12. ADV ERSE EVENTS, SERIOUS  ADVERSE EVENTS, AND  REPORTING   
12.1. ADVERSE EVENTS   
12.1.1.  Definition   
An AE is any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), 
symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of an investigational medicinal p roduct 
(IMP) or other protocol -imposed intervention, regardless of attribution. This includes the 
following:  
• AEs not previously observed in the participant  that emerge during the protocol -specified AE 
reporting period, including signs or symptoms associate d with achondroplasia that were not 
present prior to the AE reporting period.  
• Complications that occur as a result of protocol -mandated interventions ( e.g. invasive 
procedures such as cardiac catheterizations).  
• If applicable, AEs that occur prior to assi gnment of study treatment associated with 
medication washout, no treatment run -in, or other protocol -mandated intervention.  
• Preexisting medical conditions (other than the condition being studied) judged by the 
investigator to have worsened in severity or frequency or changed in character during the 
protocol -specified AE reporting period.  
Serious Adverse Events Definition  
An AE should be classified as an SAE if any of the following criteria are met:  
• It results in death ( i.e. the AE cause or leads to death).  
• It is life threatening ( i.e. the AE, in the view of the investigator, places the participant  at 
immediate risk of death. It does not include an AE that, had it occurred in a more severe form 
or was allowed to continue, mi ght have caused death).  
• It requires or prolongs inpatient hospitalization (see Section  12.3.3 ). 
• It results in persistent or significant disability/inc apacity ( i.e. the AE results in substantial 
disruption of the participant ’s ability to conduct normal life functions).  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 90 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  • It results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect in a neonate/infant born to a mother exposed to 
the study drug.  
• It is considered a sign ificant medical event by the investigator based on medical judgment 
(e.g. may jeopardize the participant  or may require medical/surgical intervention to prevent 
one of the outcomes listed above).  
The terms “severe ” and “serious ” are not synonymous.  Severity refers to the intensity of an 
adverse event ( e.g. rated as mild, moderate, or severe according to Table  1; see Section  12.2.2.1 ); 
the event itself may be of relatively minor medical significance (such as severe headache without 
any further findings).  
Severity and seriousn ess need to be independently assessed for each adverse event recorded on 
the eCRF.  
Serious adverse events are required to be reported by the investigator to the Sponsor immediately 
(i.e. no more than 24 hours after learning of the event; see Section  12.4.2  for reporting 
instructions).  
Special Situation Definition  
Special situations are non -standard medical conditions that provide valuable information ( e.g. 
clinical, safety) about a medicinal product, even when they do not occur in association with an 
adverse event or medical condition. Examples of special situations include and should all be 
captured in the eCRF:  
• Pregnancy  
• Breastfeeding  
• Overdose  
• Drug ab use 
• Misuse  
• Off label use  
• Occupational exposure  
• Lack of therapeutic efficacy  
• Medication error  
The Medical Monitor will review all safety information on an ongoing basis. The key safety data 
will also be reviewed periodically by Data Monitoring Committee (DM C) in accordance with its 
governing charter).   
12.2. METHODS AND TIMING F OR ASSESSING AND REC ORDING SAFETY 
VARIABLES   
The investigator is responsible for ensuring that all AEs  and SAEs  that are observed or reported 
during the study are collected and reported to  Ascendis  Pharma, in accordance with FDA CFR 
312.32 (IND Safety Reports) and ICH E6 . 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 91 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  12.2.1.  Adverse Event Reporting Period   
The Adverse Event Reporting Period is the period requiring reporting of AEs  and SAEs for any 
patients exposed to  the study drug  and/or study related procedures . Reporting period begins from 
the time informed consent is obtained and ends at the last study visit . After this period, 
investigators should only report SAEs that are attributed to prior study treatment . 
12.2.2.  Severity, Causality, and Outcome Assessment   
12.2.2.1.  Severity Rating   
Assessment of Severity of Adverse Events  
The World Health Organization (WHO) toxicity grading scale will be used for assessing adverse 
event severity.  Table  1 will be used for assessing severity for adverse events that are not 
specifically listed in the WHO toxicity grading scale.  
Table  1: Adverse Event Severity Grading Scale for Events Not Specifically Listed in 
WHO Toxicity Grading Scale   
Grade  Severity  
1 Mild; transient or mild discomfor t ( 48 hours); no medical intervention or therapy required  
2 Moderate; mild to moderate limitation in activity; some assistance may be needed; no or 
minimal medical intervention or therapy required  
3 Severe; marked limitation in activity; some assistance usually required; medical intervention 
or therapy required; hospitalization possible  
4 Life-threatening; extreme limitation in activity; significant assistance required; significant 
medical intervention or therapy required, hospitalization or h ospice care probable  
Regardless of severity, some events may also meet seriousness criteria.  Refer to definition of a 
serious adverse event (see Section  12.1.1 ). 
12.2.2.2.  Causality Rating   
All AEs and SAEs whether volunteered by the participant , discovered by study personnel during 
questioning, or detected through physical examination , laboratory test, or other means must be 
reported appropriately.  
Each reported AE or SAE must be described by its duration ( i.e. start and end dates), regulatory 
seriousness criteria if applicable, suspected relationship to the study drug (see following 
guidance), and actions taken. To ensure consistency of AE and SAE causality assessments, 
investigators should apply the following general guideline:  
Related (Yes)  – There is a plausible temporal relationship between the onset of the AE and 
administration of  the study drug . The AE cannot be readily explained by the participant ’s 
clinical state, intercurrent illness, or concomitant therapies. The AE follows a known pattern 
of response to the study drug or with similar treatments. And/or the AE abates or resolv es 
upon discontinuation of the study drug or dose reduction and, if applicable, reappears upon 
re-challenge.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 92 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Not Related (No)  – Evidence exists that the AE has an etiology other than the study drug 
(e.g. preexisting medical condition, underlying disease, i ntercurrent illness, or concomitant 
medication). The AE has no plausible temporal relationship to study drug administration ( e.g. 
cancer diagnosed 2 days after first dose of study drug).  
Expected adverse events are those adverse events that are listed or c haracterized in the current 
Investigator Brochure (IB). There  are no events that are considered to be expected  for assessment 
of Serious Adverse Reactions based on the reference safety information  in the current version of 
the IB . Unexpected adverse events  are those not listed in the current IB or not identified. This 
includes adverse events for which the specificity or severity is not consistent with the description 
in the P.I. or IB (For example, under this definition, hepatic necrosis would be unexpected  if the 
P.I. or IB only referred to elevated hepatic enzymes or hepatitis). In the case of TransCon CNP, 
all events are considered to be unexpected.  
12.2.2.3.  Outcome Assessment   
Participant s will be followed until AEs have either resolved, participant s have returned to their 
baseline status, or participant s are deemed stable or commensurate with ongoing disease 
processes. One of five outcomes listed below must be recorded:  
Recove red/Resolved  – The event has stopped. The stop date of the event must be recorded.  
Recovering/Resolving  – The participant  is clearly recovering from an event. The event is not 
yet completely resolved.  
Not Recovered/Not Resolved  – The event is still ongoing . (Could include stable and 
commensurate with ongoing disease processes).  
Recovered/Resolved with Sequelae  – The event has reached a state where no further 
changes are expected, and the residual symptoms are assumed to persist. An example is 
hemiparesis af ter stroke.   
The stop date of the event must be recorded. In case of SAE, the sequelae should be 
specified.  
Fatal  – The participant  has died as a consequen ce of the event. Date of death is recorded as 
stop date for the AE.  
Unknown  – Unknown to investigato r, e.g. participant  lost to follow up.  
12.3. PROCEDURES FOR ELICI TING, RECORDING AND REPORTING ADVERSE 
EVENTS   
12.3.1.  Eliciting Adverse Events   
A consistent methodology for eliciting AEs at all participant  evaluation time points should be 
adopted. Examples of non -directive questions include:  
• “How have you felt since you r last clinical visit? ” 
• “Have you had any new or changed health problems since you were last here? ” 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 93 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  12.3.2.  Recording Procedures for All Adverse Events   
All AEs will be documented in resp onse to question about the participant ’s well -being and 
whether any possible changes in well -being have occurred since the previous visit. Additionally, 
at each visit, site staff will review participant  diary data with the participant /caregiver, to 
determi ne if diary entries reflect any AEs.  
AEs, including SAEs, will be documented through to the end of the participation  in the trial. All 
AEs must be recorded on the appropriate eCRF. AEs either observed by the investigator or 
reported by the participant  must  be recorded regardless of causality. For any participant who 
withdraws from treatment, correspondence with the participant ’s caregiver ( e.g. phone call, 
email) will be conducted at least 5 weeks after final dose to evaluate for AEs. The following 
attribut es must be documented for each reported AE:  
• Subject ID  
• Description  
• Onset date (if AE was present on Day 1, include whether onset was prior to or after the first 
dose of the study drug)  
• Resolution date, if applicable  
• Severity  
• Causality (relationship to th e study drug)  
• Outcome  
• Action taken  
• Determination of “seriousness criteria ” (whether serious or not serious)  
Any pre -existing condition , medical history,  signs, symptoms, and illnesses present at  the 
Screening visit will be captured as baseline (preexisting) events, if appropriate, to assure that any 
change(s) in these experiences during the trial also are recorded as an AE and a complete safety 
profile is obtained. An event that occurs after sign ing of ICF but prior to the first study drug 
administration will be reported as a non –treatment -emergent AE. Any new or worsening pre -
existing medical conditions that occurs from the time of the first study drug administration until 
the last study visit wi ll be recorded as a n AE. 
Routine titration of chronic, concomitant medications will not be considered to meet the criteria 
for AEs.  
Investigators should use correct medical terminology/concepts when reporting AEs or SAEs. 
Avoid colloquialisms and abbreviat ion (e.g. hypertension for elevated BP that persists and 
requires chronic treatment and follow -up, or increased blood pressure for elevated blood pressure 
that occurs for a limited time and does not persist or require ongoing treatment).  
An accidental over dose is not an AE if there are no signs or symptoms. Any undesirable medical 
occurrence resulting from an accidental overdose is an AE and should be recorded and reported 
on the appropriate eCRF. Regardless of classification as an AE or not, all overdoses should be 
documented, and the participant (s) monitored. Since accidental overdoses with the study drug 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 94 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  could have serious clinical consequences and/or represent a compliance issue, they should be 
reported to the Medical Monitor immediately and evaluated by  the Sponsor.  
12.3.3.  Specific Instructions for Recording Adverse Events   
Abnormal Laboratory Values  
Not every laboratory abnormality qualifies as an adverse event.  A laboratory test result must be 
reported as an AE if it meets any of the following criteria:  
• Is accompanied by clinical symptoms  
• Results in a change in study treatment ( e.g. dosage modification or titration, treatment 
interruption, or treatment discontinuation)  
• Results in  a medical intervention ( e.g. potassium supplementation for hypokalemia) or a 
change in concomitant therapy  
• Is clinically significant in the investigator ’s judgment  
It is the investigator ’s responsibility to review all laboratory findings. Medical and sci entific 
judgment should be exercised in deciding whether an isolated laboratory abnormality should be 
classified as an adverse event.  
If a clinically significant laboratory abnormality is a sign of a disease or syndrome ( e.g. 
significant increase of alkali ne phosphatase and bilirubin associated with cholestasis), only the 
diagnosis ( i.e. cholestasis) should be recorded on the Adverse Event eCRF.  
If a clinically significant laboratory abnormality is not a sign of a disease or syndrome, the 
abnormality itself  should be recorded on the Adverse Event eCRF, along with a descriptor 
indicating whether the test result is above or below the normal range ( e.g. “elevated potassium, ” 
as opposed to “abnormal potassium ”).  If the laboratory abnormality can be characterize d by a 
precise clinical term per standard definitions, the clinical term should be recorded as the adverse 
event.  For example, an elevated serum potassium level of 7.0 mEq/L should be recorded as 
“hyperkalemia. ” 
Observations of the same clinically signifi cant laboratory abnormality from visit to visit should 
only be recorded once on the Adverse Event eCRF.  
Abnormal Vital Sign Values  
Not every vital sign abnormality qualifies as an adverse event.  A vital sign result must be 
reported as an adverse event if it meets any of the following criteria:  
• Is accompanied by clinical symptoms  
• Results in a change in study treatment ( e.g. dosage modification, treatment interruption, or 
treatment discontinuation)  
• Results in a medical intervention or a change in concomitant  therapy  
• Is clinically significant in the investigator ’s judgment  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 95 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  It is the investigator ’s responsibility to review all vital sign findings.  Medical and scientific 
judgment should be exercised in deciding whether an isolated vital sign abnormality should be 
classified as an adverse event.  
If a clinically significant vital sign abnormality is a sign of a disease or syndrome ( e.g. high 
blood pressure), only the diagnosis ( i.e. hypertension) should be recorded on the Adverse Event 
eCRF.  
Observations of the sa me clinically significant vital sign abnormality from visit to visit should 
only be recorded once on the Adverse Event eCRF.  
Diagnosis vs. Signs and Symptoms  
If known at the time of reporting, a diagnosis should be reported rather than individual signs and  
symptoms ( e.g. record only liver failure or hepatitis rather than jaundice, asterixis, and elevated 
transaminases). However, if a constellation of signs and/or symptoms cannot be medically 
characterized as a single diagnosis or syndrome at the time of rep orting, it is acceptable to report 
the information that is currently available as separate AEs. If a diagnosis is subsequently 
established, it should be reported as follow -up information.  
Injection Related Reaction  
Each sign or symptoms will be recorded as a separate adverse event on the adverse event eCRF.  
Adverse events that occur during or within 24 hours after study drug administration, should be 
captured as individual signs and symptoms on the Adverse Event eCRF rather than an overall 
diagnosis ( e.g. record hypertension and dyspnea as separate events rather than a diagnosis of 
infusion related reaction or anaphylactic reaction).  
Deaths  
All deaths that occur during the protocol -specified AE reporting period, regardless of attribution, 
will be reported  to the appropriate parties. When recording a death, the event or condition that 
caused or contributed to the fatal outcome should be reported as the single medical concept. If 
the cause of death is unknown and cannot be ascertained at the time of reportin g, report 
“Unexplained Death ”. 
Hospitalizations for Medical or Surgical Procedures  
Any AE that results in hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization should be documented and 
reported as an SAE. If a participant  is hospitalized to undergo a medical or su rgical procedure as 
a result of an AE, the event responsible for the procedure, not the procedure itself, should be 
reported as the SAE. For example, if a participant  is hospitalized to undergo coronary bypass 
surgery, record the heart condition that necessitated the bypass as the SAE. Hospitalizations for 
the following reasons do not require reporting:  
• Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization for diagnostic or ele ctive surgical procedures for 
preexisting conditions  
• Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization required to allow efficacy measurement for the 
study or  
• Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization for scheduled therapy of the target disease of the 
study  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 96 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Preexisting Medical Conditions  
A preexisting medical condition is one that is present at the start of the study. Such conditions 
should be reported as medical and surgical history. A preexisting medical condition should be 
re-assessed throughout the tr ial and reported as an AE or SAE only if the frequency, severity, or 
character of the condition worsens during the study. When reporting such events, it is important 
to convey the concept that the preexisting condition has changed by including applicable 
descriptors ( e.g. “more frequent headaches ”). 
Pregnancy  
If a female participant  becomes pregnant while receiving the study drug or within 5 weeks after 
the last dose of study drug, or if the female partner of a male study participant  becomes pregnant 
while  the study participant  is receiving the study drug or within 5 weeks , a Pregnancy report 
should be completed and expeditiously submitted to Ascendis Pharma  within 24 hours . Follow -
up to obtain the outcome of the pregnancy should also occur and the outcome reported to 
Ascendis Pharma. Abortion, whether accidental, therapeutic, or spontaneous, should always be 
classified as serious, and expeditiously reported as an SAE. Similarly, any congenital 
anomaly/birth defect in a child born to a female participant  exposed to the study drug should be 
expeditiously reported as an SAE. Additional information regarding pregnancy can be found in 
Appendix  6. 
Product Compl aints  
A Product Complaint is defined as any written or oral information received from a complainant 
that alleges deficiencies related to identity, quality, safety, strength, purity, reliability, durability, 
effectiveness, or performance of a product after  it has been released and distributed to the 
commercial market or clinical trial.  
12.4. SERIOUS ADVERSE EVEN TS (SAE) AND SUSPECT ED UNEXPECTED 
SERIOUS ADVERSE REAC TIONS (SUSAR)   
12.4.1.  Non-Serious Adverse Events Leading to Discontinuation   
If situation permits, non -serious events (including laboratory abnormalities and pregnancies) that 
may require permanent discontinuation of study drug should be discussed with the Medical 
Monitor prior to making any final decision.  
12.4.2.  Reporting   
All initial and follow -up information regarding SAEs  and Special Situations reporting must 
be reported by the investigator to the Sponsor or its representatives within 24 hours of 
discovery , including those related to protocol -mandated procedures and regardless of suspected 
causality.  
For each adverse event reco rded on the Adverse Event eCRF, the investigator will make an 
assessment of seriousness (see Section  12.1.1  for seriousness criteria), severity (see 
Section  12.2.2.1 ), and causality (see Section  12.2.2.2 ).   
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 97 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Reporting must not be delayed by waiting for additional information. The minimum information 
required for reporting an SAE  and Special Situations are the AE term (diagnosis), patient, study 
drug, reporter, and the investigator ’s initial causality assessment. Additional information must be 
reported to the Sponsor or its representatives as a follow -up report. All SAEs and Pregnancies 
(including follow -up information) must be  submitted via : 
safety.ascendispharma.com  
SAEs  and Special Situations information is collected and reported via SAE Forms provided by 
the Sponsor or its representative. Pregnancy information is collected and reported via Pregnancy 
Forms provided by the Sponsor or its representative. The Sponsor (or its representat ives) is 
responsible for reporting within the time frame required by applicable regulations all SAEs 
qualifying as SUSARs to:  
• Investigators  
• Central IRBs/HRECs/IECs (if applicable)  
• National ethics committees (if applicable)  
• Appropriate regulatory authoritie s 
It is the investigators ’ responsibility to comply with the requirements of their local 
IRB/HREC/IEC for reporting SUSARs, other SAEs, and any new and/or relevant safety 
information provided by the Sponsor or its representatives. At minimum, SUSARs must b e 
brought to the attention of these review boards in accordance with regional regulations.  
13. SAFETY MONITORING   
The Sponsor will conduct an ongoing review of all trial data, with pa rticular attention given to 
laboratory findings, AEs, and concomitant medications. Any important safety trends or other 
findings considered related to the study drug will be reported to the investigators and to 
regulatory authorities. In particular, the Sp onsor will notify investigators and regulatory 
authorities of AEs that:  
• Fulfill the criteria for SUSARs.  
• Occur at a meaningfully greater frequency than described in the current Investigator ’s 
Brochure or Reference Safety Information.  
Any AE that occurs d uring the clinical trial must be monitored and followed up until:  
• It has resolved or receded  
• Pathology laboratory findings have returned to normal  
• Steady -state has been achieved  
• It has been shown to be unrelated to the study drug and/or trial related proce dure 
Details will be described in the Safety Management Plan.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 98 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  14. STATISTICS   
14.1. GENERAL   
Details of applicab le statistical methods will be provided in a statistical analysis plan (SAP)  
which will be finalized before database lock.  If discrepancies exist between the text of the 
statistical analysis as planned in the protocol and the final SAP, the final SAP will  define the 
planned analysis of record.  
In general, analys es will be done by dose cohort, and placebo  participants  will be pooled as 
placebo  group.   Data from clinical assessments will be summarized using descriptive statistics.  
Categorical data will be presented using counts and percentages of participants.   Continuous 
variables will be presented using number of participants, mean, standard deviation (SD), 
standard error (SE), median, minimum and maximum.  Statistical significance is defined as 
P <0.05 ( 2-sided).  
14.2. ENDPOINTS   
14.2.1.  Safety Endpoints   
The following safety  endpoints will be assess ed for both blinded Randomized Period  and 
Open -Label Extension Period : 
• Incidence  of AEs  
• All blood chemistry, hematology, lipid panel, and urinalysis parameters  
• Vital sign measurements and physical examination assessments  
• 12-lead ECG  
• Radiographic  findings fro m: 
− Bone age X -ray 
− DXA  
− AP standing lower extremity X -ray 
− AP and lateral spine X -ray 
• Incidence  of antibodies against drug  
14.2.2.  Efficacy Endpoints   
Primary Endpoint:  
• AHV  as measured at 52 weeks  of weekly TransCon CNP treatment or placebo  
Secondary Endpoints:  
• Change  in upper to lower body segment ratio as measured at 52 weeks  of weekly TransCon 
CNP treatment or placebo  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 99 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Exploratory Endpoints:  
14.2.3.  Pharmacokinetic Endpoints   
x Plasma  concentration of Total  CNP  
x Plasma  concentration of Free CNP  
x Plasma  concentration of mPEG  and mPEG -linker  
14.3. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS   
The Full Analysis Set will include all randomized participants  who have received at least one 
dose of investigational product and have a non -missing baseline height as well as at least one 
post-baseline height measurement. Participant s will be analyzed according to study treatment as 
randomized. The Safety Analysis Set will include all randomized participant s who have received 
at least one dos e of investigational product. Participant s will be analyzed according to study 
treatment as treated. The efficacy analyses will  be based on the Full Analysis Set and safety 
analyses will be based on the Safety Analysis Set.  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 100 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  In general, analysis will be don e by dose levels, and placebo participants will be pooled.   Data 
from clinical assessments will be summarized using descriptive statistics.  Categorical data will 
be presented using counts and percentages of participants. Continuous variables will be 
prese nted using number of participants, mean, standard deviation (SD), standard error (SE), 
median, minimum and maximum.  
For the primary efficacy endpoint, AHV  at Week 52 , the primary analysis is ANCOVA model 
with the AHV  at Week 52 as the response variable, treatment (dose groups and placebo) as 
factors, baseline age, sex, and baseline height SDS as covariates.  The similar ANCOVA model, 
with the baseline of the corresponding parameter as a covariate, will be applied to secondary and 
exploratory efficacy endpo ints. As a sensitivity analysis  for the primary efficacy endpoint, AHV  
at Week 52, the change from baseline to Week 52 in AHV  will be analyzed using ANCOVA 
model with treatment and sex as factors, baseline age, baseline height SDS, and baseline AHV  as 
cova riates.  
Once the highest tolerated dose is established, the following sequential testing procedure  will be 
used for the comparison between the highest tolerated dose group and pooled placebo group.  
The primary analysis for AHV  at Week 52 will be performed first. If the p -value for comparing 
the highest tolerated dose group and pooled placebo is <0.05, then the formal hypothesis test for 
upper to lower body segment ratio will be performed.  
Reporting of the safety data is descrip tive and will mainly include the incidence and type of 
adverse events, laboratory changes, vital signs, radiographic findings, 12 -lead ECG parameters 
and incidence of anti -drug antibodies. Abnormal laboratory data and abnormal physical 
examinations will be  listed as appropriate.   
Refer to SAP for details.  
All participants who will receive the study drug and for whom the primary PK data are 
considered sufficient and interpretable will be included in the PK analysis. The PK parameters 
and their statistical e valuation will be included in the Clinical Study Report or as an appendix.  
Potential impact of any anti -drug antibodies detected will be included in the evaluation.  
Refer to PK Analysis Plan for details.  
14.4. PLANNED ANALYSIS   
Planned Analysis will include the following:  
• DMC analysis: Summary analysis for DMC meetings are planned to monitor safety and 
determine dose escalati on (the analysis scope and frequency will be specified in the DMC 
charter).  
• Interim by -cohort analysis: In each cohort, after all participants have completed or withdrawn 
from the Randomized Period and the database for the Randomized Period has been locked 
and unblinded for the same cohort, interim by -cohort analysis will be performed.  
• Primary analysis: The primary analysis will be performed after all participants have 
completed or withdrawn from the Randomized Period and the database for the  Randomized 
Perio d has been locked  and unblinded . 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 101 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  • Final analysis: The final analysis will be performed after all participants have completed or 
withdrawn from the study and the clinical trial database has been locked.  
14.5. SAMPLE SIZE CALCULATION   
A sample size of 9 in active group s (per cohort) and 12 in the placebo  group (combined across 
cohorts) will provide 97% power to detect a treatment difference of 2 cm/year in 12 -month AHV  
at a 2 -sided significance level of 5%, assuming the SD is 1.1 cm/yr.  
14.6. SIGNIFICANCE   
Statistical significance is defined as P <0.05 (2 -sided).  
15. TRIAL CONDUCT   
15.1. SITE INITIATION   
Prior to participation, investigational sites and investigators will be evaluated for appropriate 
qualifications and abil ity to execute the trial.  Each investigational site must undergo appropriate 
training on the trial protocol and ancillary trial procedures and documents through participation 
in a Site Initiation Visit (SIV) or Investigator Meeting (IM).  Protocol and GCP  training must 
take place before any participant s are enrolled at a site.  SIVs and IMs will include, but may not 
be limited to, study drug preparation and administration procedures, data collection 
requirements, and participant  eligibility requirements.  
15.2. DATA HANDLING AND REC ORD KEEPING   
15.2.1.  Collection of Data   
Data will be collected in the eCRF.  The eCRF is an integral part of the trial and subsequent 
reports. It must be used to capture trial -specific data collected and must be kept current to reflect 
participant  status during the course of the trial.  Only a Participant  Identification Number will be 
used to identify the participant .  The investigator must keep a separate Participant  Identification 
Code List with participant  names and medical record numbers or other personal identifier (s). 
The trial will use an Internet -based remote data entry system to collect clinical trial data at the 
investigational sites.   The system complies with 21 CFR Part 11 and ICH E6 (R2) GCP.  The 
system will be used to enter, modify, maintain, archive, retrieve, and transmit data.  The system 
is configured based on the requirements from the Sponsor.   Source documents are to be retained 
to enable a reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  Source documents include the site files and 
trial worksheets provided by the Sponsor.  Data will be reco rded in the trial worksheets as 
appropriate to complete and/or clarify the source data.  
The design of the computerized system complies with all the applicable regulatory requirements 
for record keeping and record retention in clinical trials [21 CFR Part 11 and ICH E6  (R2) GCP ].  
Clinical investigators must retain either the original or a certified copy of all source documents, 
including query resolution correspondence.  The system is designed so that changes to any 
record do not obscure the original infor mation.  The audit record clearly indicates that a change 
was made and clearly provides a means to locate and read the prior information.  All changes to 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 102 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  the data have an electronic audit trail, in accordance with 21 CFR 11.10(e).  Electronic signatures 
will be used in conformance with 21 CFR Part 11.  
15.2.2.  Coding Dictionaries   
Prior and concomitant medications entered into the database will be coded using the WHO Drug 
Reference List, wh ich employs the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical classification system.  
Coexistent diseases and AEs will be coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory 
Activities (MedDRA).  See Data Management Plan for details.   
15.2.3.  Data H andling   
eCRFs should be completed in a timely manner to enable the Sponsor or designee to perform 
central monitoring of safety data.   Subsequent to data entry, a study monitor will perf orm source 
data verification within the EDC system.  Original entries as well as any changes to data fields 
will be stored in the audit trail of the system.   Prior to database lock, the investigator will use 
her/his log in credentials to confirm that the f orms have been reviewed, and that the entries 
accurately reflect the information in the source documents.  The eCRF captures the data required 
per the protocol schedule of events and procedures.  System -generated or manual queries will be 
issued to the inv estigative site staff as data discrepancies are identified by the monitor or 
sponsor, who routinely review the data for completeness, correctness, and consistency.  The site 
is responsible for responding to the queries in a timely manner, within the system , either by 
confirming the data as correct or updating the original entry, and by providing the reason for the 
update ( e.g. data entry error).  At the conclusion of the trial, Sponsor will provide the site with a 
certified  copy of the electronic CRFs submi tted by that site.  This archive must be stored in 
accordance with the records retention requirements outlined in Section  15.2.1 . 
15.2.4.  Direct Access  to Source Data/Documents   
The investigator/trial site is to provide direct access to source data/documents for trial -related 
monitoring, audits, IRB/ EC review, and regulatory inspection.   This includes access to Electronic 
Medical Rec ord system and any other electronic systems containing source data or trial -related 
documents.  
15.2.5.  Record Keeping   
The investigator is responsible for maintaining adequate records to fully document the conduct 
of the trial consistent with that noted in ICH E6  (R2), including but not limited to the following:  
1. All versions of the Investigator ’s Brochure  
2. Signed Protocol and Amendments in effect during the conduct of the trial  
3. Signed ICFs  
4. Source documents, including adequate case histories, questionnaires, and participant  diaries  
5. Signed, dated, and completed eCRFs and documentation of data corrections  
6. Notific ation of SAEs and related reports  
7. Dated and documented IRB/ EC approvals and approval by regulatory authorities, as required  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 103 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  8. Normal laboratory reference ranges   
9. Laboratory certifications  
10. Curricula Vitae of all clinical investigators  
11. Completed Forms FDA 1572 , as applicable  
12. SIV documentation  
13. Delegation of Authority Log  
14. Participant  Screening & Enrollment Log(s)  
15. Participant  Identification Code List  
16. Study drug accountability documentation  
17. Signed agreements between involved parties  
18. Relevant communication, including that related to monitor site visits ( e.g. letters, meeting 
notes, notes from telephone calls)  
19. Interim, annual, or final reports to IRBs/ ECs and regulatory authorities, as required  
20. Audit certificate(s), if applicable  
15.3. DATA QUALITY CONTROL   
15.3.1.  Monitoring  Procedures   
The Sponsor and/or its representative may make periodic visits to the investi gational site to 
assess compliance  with trial procedures and regulatory requirements; to ensure that the safety, 
welfare, and privacy of participant s are being protected; and to verify the accuracy and integrity 
of the trial data.   In addition, independent  Quality Assurance site audits may be conducted as 
verification of the quality and compliance of trial conduct.  
The Sponsor and/or its representative will periodically review the trial data to ensure that data 
are being appropriately collected and reported .  Queries and corrections will be made as needed.  
15.3.2.  Data  Management   
Sponsor or designee will be responsible for activities associated with the data management of 
this trial.  The standard procedures for handling and processing records will be followed per GCP 
and CRO ’s standard operating procedures (SOPs).  A comprehensive data management plan will 
be developed including a data management overview, database development, validation and 
maintenance, data entry and processing, external data transfer, data validation and archive, and 
medical coding processes.  Trial site personnel will be responsible for providing resolutions to all 
data queries.  The investigator will be required to do cument electronic data review to ensure the 
accuracy of the corrected and/or clarified data .   
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 104 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  15.4. AUDITING PROCEDURES   
In addition to the routine monitoring , a GCP Quality Assurance audit may be initiated by the 
Sponsor.  The investigator must ensure that participant s/caregivers  are aware of and consent to 
personal information being reviewed during the data verification p rocess as a part of 
monitoring/auditing/inspection by the Sponsor, properly authorized agents of the Sponsor, or 
competent authorities.  In addition, participation and personal information is treated as strictly 
confidential to the extent that applicable l aw permits and to which it is not publicly available.  
The purpose of audits and inspections is to evaluate compliance with the principles of GCP, 
international and local regulatory requirements, and the trial protocol.  The audit or inspection 
may include , for example, a review of all source documents, drug records, original clinic medical 
notes, and some or all of the facilities used in the trial.  
The audits may be conducted by the Sponsor or Sponsor ’s selected agent in accordance with 
Sponsor ’s SOP or SO Ps of the selected and properly authorized agent.  A competent authority 
may also wish to conduct an inspection during the trial or after its completion.  If an inspection is 
requested by a competent authority, the investigator must inform the Sponsor imme diately that 
this request has been made.  The investigator and his/her institution will permit all monitoring, 
audits, and regulatory inspections, providing direct access to source data.  
15.5. LABORATORY QUALITY S TANDARDS   
Laboratory tests or evaluations  for safety  described in this protocol will be conducted in 
accordance with quality laboratory standards as described in the SOPs of the central laboratories.  
Some blood samples  may be u sed for laboratory test validation.  
The safety laboratories must provide a list of reference ranges for applicable analyses .  The 
methods employed for each assay should be available on request.  Any change in the laboratory 
procedures, reference values, etc., during the trial must promptly be communicated to the 
Sponsor.  The laboratories may also be audited by the Sponsor or by competent authorities.  
15.6. TRIAL TERMINATION OR  COMPLETION   
The investigator should notify the IRB/ EC in writing of the completion or early termination of 
the trial.  Completion of  the trial is defined as the completion of the last participant ’s last visit.   
Upon trial completion or termination, applicable regulatory reporting requirements will be 
followed.  The Sponsor reserves the right to terminate the trial at any time for any r eason.   The 
Sponsor may stop this trial at a particular site for any of the following reasons:  
• The site cannot enroll an adequate number of participant s 
• Serious and/or persistent non -compliance with the protocol or clinical trial conduct  
• Careless or premed itated false documentation in the electronic case report form (eCRF)  
• Inadequate cooperation with the investigator  
• Non-compliance with GCP and/or regulatory requirements  
• The investigator requests discontinuation  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 105 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  15.7. CHANGES TO THE PROTO COL   
Changes in any portion of this protocol must be documented in the form of an amendment from 
the Sponsor and must be approved by the investigational site ’s IRB/ EC and regulatory 
authorities, as required, before the amendment is implemented.  However, in the event of 
apparent immediate hazard to a participant , a deviation from the protocol is allowed to eliminate 
the hazard.  In this case, the deviation and the reason for it must b e promptly reported  as required 
by regional regulations to the applicable IRB/ EC and regulatory authorities, along with a 
proposed protocol amendment if appropriate.  
Protocol amendments may only be made with prior written approval of the Sponsor and/or its  
representative and documented approval or favorable opinion from applicable regulatory 
authorities or regional IRB/ EC, as required.  The investigator must send a copy of the 
documented approval to the Sponsor and/or its representative.  
15.8. OTHER CHANGES IN TRIAL CONDUCT   
Changes in trial conduct are not permitted.  Any unforeseen changes in trial conduct will be 
recorded in the clinical study report.  
15.9. USE OF INFORMATION A ND PUBLICATI ON  
The data and information generated in this trial are the exclusive property of the Sponsor and are 
confidential.  Written approval from the Sponsor is required prior to disclo sing any information 
related to this trial.  Publication of the results will be based on appropriate analyses and review of 
the complete data.  Authorship will be determined based on  ICMJE criteria .  Publication of any 
data of this trial without prior Spon sor approval is not permitted.  
16. ETHICAL AND LEGAL CO NSIDERATIONS   
This trial will be conducted in accordance with the following:  
• Protocol -related and trial -related documents  
• Declar ation of Helsinki  
• GCPs as outlined in ICH E6 (R2) and regional regulations  
• Regional participant  data protection laws and regulations  
• Other a pplicable regional and local regulations  
• US Federal Regulations, as applicable  
16.1. DATA MONITORING COMMITTEE   
An independent Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) will attend each DMC meeting to provide 
recommendations on : (A) the action to be taken ( i.e. proceed to the next dose level as planned , 
modify  the dose of the next cohort, or stop dose escalation) ; and (B) the escalation  of dose for 
cohorts  in the extension based on review of unblinded data.  The DMC may request to invite 
guests (on an as -needed basis) to DMC meetings for their expertise or may request advice from 
an ad hoc expert related to a specific safety concern . A guest/expert may be a specialist in a field 
where expertise is required.   Refer to the DMC Charter for further details.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 106 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  In addition, ad hoc DMC meetings may be called by the Spons or at any time for review of newly 
identified safety concerns.  
16.2. INFORMED CONSENT   
The draft ICF must be reviewed by the Sponsor and/or its representative prior to submission to a 
regional IRB/ EC for approval.  A copy of the ICF approved by the review board must be 
forwarded to the Sponsor and/or its representative.  
The ICF (and Participant  Information Sheet, if applicable) documents the trial -specific 
information the investigator pr ovides to the participant  and the participant ’s agreement to 
participate.  The investigator or designee will fully explain in layman ’s terms the nature of the 
trial along with the aims, methods, anticipated benefits, potential risks, and any discomfort 
participation may entail.  The ICF and Participant  Information Sheet must be appropriately 
signed and dated before the participant  under goes any trial -related procedure.  The original and 
any amended signed and dated ICFs and participant  information sheets must be retained at the 
trial site with a copy of each provided to the participant . 
16.2.1.  Subject Identification Card   
Participants  will be provided with a Subject Identification  Card contain ing the following 
information:  
• Subject number  
• Participation status: t hat he/she is participating in a clinical study.  
• That the study includes a treatment regimen with TransCon CNP . 
• The name and phone number of the Investigator.  
• Name of main Sponsor / local Sponsor / CRO (note: as required by local regulations)  
The participant will be instructed to carry the card at all ti mes during the participation in the 
study and asked to return the Subject Information Card at the end -of-trial visit.  
16.3. IRB/ EC APPROVALS   
The Principal Investigator at each site is responsible for obtaining approval from the appropriate 
regional IRB/ EC for the final protocol, Sponsor -approved ICF and participant  information sheet 
(if applicable), and any advertisements to recruit participant s.  Written approval of these 
documents mus t be obtained from the committee before any participant  is enrolled at a trial site.   
The IRB/ EC must comply with all applicable ICH E6 GCP requirements, as well as all regional 
and local requirements.  
The Principal Investigator is also responsible for the  following interactions with the regional 
IRB/ EC: 
1. Obtaining review board approval for any protocol amendments and ICF revisions before 
implementing the changes  
2. Providing the review board with any required information before or during the trial  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 107 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  3. Submitting p rogress reports to the review board as required  during the conduct of the trial, 
requesting continuing  review and approval of the trial as needed  and providing copies of all 
review board re -approvals and relevant communication to the Sponsor and/or its 
representative  
4. Notifying the review board of all serious and unexpected AEs related to the study drug 
reported by the Sponsor and/or its representative, as required  
5. Notifying the review board of the end of trial participation, in accordance with regional 
guidelines and regulations . End of trial is defined as last subject last visit.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 108 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  17. REFERENCES   
Ando K, Hombo T, Kanno A, et al. QT PRODACT: in vivo QT assay with a conscious monkey 
for assessment of the potential for drug -induced QT interval prolongation. J Pharmacol Sci. 
2005;99(5):487 -500. 
BioMarin R&D Day. 2018.  
Bocciardi R, Giorda R, Buttgereit J, et al. Overexpression of the C -type natriuretic peptide 
(CNP) is associated with overgrowth and bone anomalies in an individual with balanced t(2;7) 
translocation. Hum Mutat. 2007;28(7):724 -731. 
Cacciaguerra F. Behaviour and dynamics in the family environment of the achondroplast. ACTA 
MEDICA AUXOLOGICA. 1981;13(1):97 -108. 
Carlisle ES,  Ting BL, Abdullah MA, et al. Laminectomy in patients with achondroplasia: the 
impact of time to surgery on long -term function. Spine. 2011;36(11):886 -892. 
Chusho H, Tamura N, Ogawa Y, et al. Dwarfism and early death in mice lacking C -type 
natriuretic pept ide. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98(7):4016 -4021.  
Colvin JS, Bohne BA, Harding GW, et al. Skeletal overgrowth and deafness in mice lacking 
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3. Nat Genet. 1996;12(4):390 -397. 
Dhiman N, Albaghdadi A, Zogg CK, et al Factors  associated with health -related quality of life 
(HRQOL) in adults with short stature skeletal dysplasias. Qual Life Res. 2017;26(5):1337 -1348.  
Dogba MJ, Rauch F, Douglas E, et al. Impact of three genetic musculoskeletal diseases: a 
comparative synthesis of  achondroplasia, Duchenne muscular dystrophy and osteogenesis 
imperfecta. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2014;12:151.  
Emmanuel M, Bokor BR. Tanner Stages. [Updated 2019 May 13]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. 
Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2019 Jan -. Available from: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK470280/  
European Commission. Ethical considerations for clinical trials on medicinal products conducted 
with minors. Recommendations of the expert group on clinical trials for the implementation of 
Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 on clinical trials on medicinal products for human use Revision 1. 
18 September 2017.  
FDA. The Joint Meeting of the Paediatric Advisory Committee and the Endocrinologic and 
Metabolic Drugs Advisory Committee of the US Food and Drug  Administration held for 
Biomarin ’s vosoritide program on 11 May 2018. 2018. [Available from: 
https://www.fda.gov/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/PediatricAdvisoryCom
mittee/ucm592546.htm . 
Hannema SE, van Duyvenvoorde HA, Premsler T, et al. An activating mutation in the kinase 
homology domain of the natriuretic peptide receptor -2 causes extremely tall stature without 
skeletal deformities. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98(12):E1988 -998. 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 109 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Heads of Medicine Agencies. Clinical Trials Facilitation an d Coordination Group, 2020, 
Recommendations Related to Contraception and Pregnancy Testing in Clinical Trials, 
www.hma.eu/fileadmin/dateien/Human_Medicines/01 -
About_HMA/Working_Groups/CTFG/2020_09_HMA_CTFG_Contraception_guidance_Versio
n_1.1_updated.pdf .  
Hirota K, Furuya M, Morozumi N, et al. Exogenous C -type natriuretic peptide restores normal 
growth and prevents early growth plate closure in its deficient rats. PLoS One. 
2018 ;13(9):e0204172.  
Ho NC, Guarnieri M, Brant LJ, et al. Living with achondroplasia:  quality of life evaluation 
following cervico -medullary decompression. Am J Med Genet A. 2004;131(2):163 -167. 
Hoover -Fong JE, McGready J, Schulze KJ, et al. Weight for age charts for children with 
achondroplasia. Am J Med Genet A. 2007;143A(19):2227 -2235.  
Hoover -Fong JE, Schulze KJ, McGready J, et al. Age-appropriate body mass index in children 
with achondroplasia: interpretation in relation to indexes of height. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2008;88(2):364 -371. 
Horton WA, Hall JG, Hecht JT, Achondroplasia. Lancet. 2007; 370(9582):162 -172. 
Hunt PJ, Richards AM, Espiner EA, et al. Bioactivity and metabolism of C -type natriuretic 
peptide in normal man. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1994;78(6):1428 -1435.  
Igaki T, Itoh H, Suga SI, et al. Effects of intravenously administered C -type natriuretic peptide in 
humans: comparison with atrial natriuretic peptide. Hypertens Res. 1998;21(1):7 -13. 
Ireland PJ, McGill J, Zankl A, et al. Functional performance in young Au stralian children with 
achondroplasia. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2011;53(10):944 -950. 
Ireland PJ, Pacey V, Zankl A, et al. Optimal management of complications associated with 
achondroplasia. Appl Clin Genet. 2014;7:117 -125. 
Ko JM, Bae JS, Choi JS, et al. Skele tal overgrowth syndrome caused by overexpression of C 
type natriuretic peptide in a girl with balanced chromosomal translocation, t(1;2)(q41;q37.1). Am 
J Med Genet A. 2015;167A(5):1033 -1038.  
Koller KJ, Lowe DG, Bennett GL, et al. Selective activation of th e B natriuretic peptide receptor 
by C -type natriuretic peptide (CNP). Science. 1991;252(5002):120 -123. 
Krejci P, Masri B, Fontaine V, et al. Interaction of fibroblast growth factor and C -natriuretic 
peptide signaling in regulation of chondrocyte proliferat ion and extracellular matrix homeostasis. 
J Cell Sci. 2005;118(Pt 21):5089 -5100.  
Laederich MB, Horton WA. Achondroplasia: pathogenesis and implications for future treatment. 
Curr Opin Pediatr. 2010;22(4):516 -523. 
Lorget F, Kaci N, Peng J, et al. Evaluation  of the therapeutic potential of a CNP analog in a 
Fgfr3 mouse model recapitulating achondroplasia. Am J Hum Genet. 2012;91(6):1108 -1114.  
Matsukawa N, Grzesik WJ, Takahashi N, et al. The natriuretic peptide clearance receptor locally 
modulates the physiolo gical effects of the natriuretic peptide system. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
1999;96(13):7403 -7408.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 110 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Matsushita M, Kitoh H, Mishima K, et al. Physical, Mental, and Social Problems of Adolescent 
and Adult Patients with Achondroplasia. Calcif Tissue Int. 2019;1 04(4):364 -372. 
Miyazawa T, Ogawa Y, Chusho H, et al. Cyclic GMP -dependent protein kinase II plays a critical 
role in C -type natriuretic peptide -mediated endochondral ossification. Endocrinology. 
2002;143(9):3604 -3610.  
Moncla A, Missirian C, Cacciagli P, et al. A cluster of translocation breakpoints in 2q37 is 
associated with overexpression of NPPC in patients with a similar overgrowth phenotype. Hum 
Mutat. 2007;28(12):1183 -1188.  
Nakao K, Osawa K, Yasoda A, et al. The Loc al CNP/GC -B system in growth plate is responsible 
for physiological endochondral bone growth. Sci Rep. 2015;5:10554.  
Olney RC, Prickett TC, Espiner EA, et al. C -type natriuretic peptide plasma levels are elevated 
in subjects with achondroplasia, hypochondr oplasia, and thanatophoric dysplasia. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100(2):E355 -359. 
Ornitz DM, Legeai -Mallet L. Achondroplasia: Development, pathogenesis, and therapy. Dev 
Dyn. 2017;246(4):291 -309. 
Ornitz DM, Marie PJ. Fibroblast growth factor signaling i n skeletal development and disease. 
Genes Dev. 2015;29(14):1463 -1486.  
Pauli RM. Achondroplasia: a comprehensive clinical review. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019;14(1):1.  
Peake NJ, Hobbs AJ, Pingguan -Murphy B, et al. Role of C -type natriuretic peptide signalling in 
maintaining cartilage and bone function. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014;22(11):1800 -1807.  
Potter LR, Abbey -Hosch S, Dickey DM. Natriuretic peptides, their receptors, and cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate -dependent signaling functions. Endocr Rev. 2006;27(1 ):47-72. 
Robinson JW, Egbert JR, Davydova J, et al. Dephosphorylation is the mechanism of fibroblast 
growth factor inhibition of guanylyl cyclase -B. Cell Signal. 2017;40:222 -229. 
Shuhaibar LC, Robinson JW, Vigone G, et al. Dephosphorylation of the NPR2 gua nylyl cyclase 
contributes to inhibition of bone growth by fibroblast growth factor. Elife. 2017;6.  
Singer W, Sletten DM, Opfer -Gehrking TL, et al. Postural tachycardia in children and 
adolescents – what is abnormal? J Pediatr. 2012 Feb;160(2):222 -6. 
Sommer R, Blömeke J, Dabs M, et al. An ICF -CY-based approach to assessing self - and 
observer -reported functioning in young persons with achondroplasia - development of the pilot 
version of the Achondroplasia Personal Life Experience Scale (APLES). Disabil R ehabil. 
2017;39(24):2499 -2503.  
Stewart JM, Boris JR, Chelimsky G, et al. Pediatric Disorders of Ort hostatic Intolerance. 
Pediatrics. 2018;141(1). pii: e20171673.  
Tanner JM, Whitehouse RH. Clinical longitudinal standards for height, weight, height velocity,  
weight velocity, and stages of puberty. Arch Dis Child. 1976;51(3):170 -179. 
Tassano E, Buttgereit J, Bader M, et al. Genotype -Phenotype Correlation of 2q37 Deletions 
Including NPPC Gene Associated with Skeletal Malformations. PLoS One. 2013;8(6):e66048.  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 111 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Trotter TL, Hall JG; American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics. Health 
supervision for children with achondroplasia. Pediatrics. 2005;116(3):771 -783. 
Unger S, Bonafé L, Gouze E. Current Care and Investigational Therapies in Achondroplasia. 
Curr O steoporos Rep. 2017;15(2):53 -60. 
Wendt DJ, Dvorak -Ewell M, Bullens S, et al. Neutral endopeptidase -resistant C -type natriuretic 
peptide variant represents a new therapeutic approach for treatment of fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 3 -related dwarfism. J P harmacol Exp Ther. 2015;353(1):132 -149. 
Wigg K, Tofts L, Benson S, et al. The neuropsychological function of children with 
achondroplasia. Am J Med Genet A. 2016;170(11):2882 -2888.  
Wright MJ, Irving MD. Clinical management of achondroplasia. Arch Dis Child . 
2012;97(2):129 -134. 
Yasoda A, Kitamura H, Fujii T, et al. Systemic administration of C -type natriuretic peptide as a 
novel therapeutic strategy for skeletal dysplasias. Endocrinology. 2009;150(7):3138 -3144.  
Yasoda A, Komatsu Y, Chusho H, et al. Overexpre ssion of CNP in chondrocytes rescues 
achondroplasia through a MAPK -dependent pathway. Nat Med. 2004;10(1):80 -86. 
 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 112 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  SIGNATURE OF AGREEMENT  
In signing this protocol, the investigator agrees to:  
1. Conduct the trial in accordance with the relevant, current protocol and make changes only 
after notifying the Sponsor or its representative, except where necessary to eliminate 
apparent immediate hazards to human participants  
2. Comply with the International Conference on Harmonization  Tripartite Guideline on Good 
Clinical Practice plus appropriate regional regulatory laws and requirements, including US 
Federal Regulations, as applicable  
3. Personally conduct or supervise the described investigation  
4. Inform any participants or persons used as controls that the study drugs  are being used for 
investigational purposes  
5. Ensure requirements relating to obtaining informed consent and regional ethical or 
institutional review board approval have been met  
6. Report to the Sponsor or its representative any AEs that occur in the course o f the 
investigations, as specified in Section  12  
7. Read and understand the Investigator ’s Brochure, including potential risks and side effects of 
the study drug  
8. Ensure all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the trial are 
informed of their obligations in meeting their commitments  
9. Maintain adequate and accurate records and make these available for inspection by the 
Sponsor and/or its representative or any regulatory agency authorized by law  
10. Promptly report to the r egional ethical or institutional review board all changes in research 
activity and all unanticipated problems involving risks to human participants or others  
11. Comply with all other requirements regarding the obligations of clinical investigators and all 
other pertinent requirements  
12. Administer study drug only to participants who meet trial entry criteria and are enrolled in 
the trial and only according to the guidelines set forth in this protocol  
13. Sign a Form 1572, as applicable  
 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 113 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  SIGNATURE OF AGREEME NT  
I have read and understand the information in this clinical trial protocol, including the potential 
risks and side effects of the study drug, and agree to personally conduct or supervis e the 
described investigation(s) in accordance with the relevant, current protocol(s) and will not 
deviate from the protocol, except when necessary to protect the safety, rights, or welfare of 
participant s.  I agree to inform all participant s that the stud y drug is being used for experimental 
purposes, and I will ensure that the requirements related to obtaining informed consent are met.   I 
agree to report to the Sponsor any adverse events that occur in the course of the investigation(s).  
1. I agree to ensure that all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the 
trial are informed about their obligations in meeting the above commitments.  
2. I will not make any changes in the research without IRB/ EC approval, except where 
necessary to elimi nate apparent immediate hazards to human participant s. 
3. I agree to maintain all information in this document and regarding the stud(ies) as 
confidential and to use it only for the purpose of conducting the stud(ies).  I agree not to 
forward this document to  any other party without the prior written authorization of the 
Sponsor.  
Investigator:   
 
Printed Name and Title:    
  
 
Signature:    
  
 
Date:    
  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 114 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  18. APPENDICES   
Appendix  1 Schedule of Events  in the Randomized Period  
Appendix  2 Schedule of Events in the Open -label Period  
Appendix  3 Tanner Staging Criteria  
Appendix  4 Blood Volume Drawn at Each Visit  for the Randomized and Open -Label Extension 
Period  
Appendix  5 Definition of High Doses of Inhaled Corticosteroids  
Appendix  6 Definition of Childbearing Potential and Contraceptive Requirements  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 115 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  APPENDIX  1. SCHEDULE OF EVENTS I N THE RANDOMIZED PERIOD   
Visit  Screen  1 Phonea 2b 3 4 5b 6 7/ETb Follow -Upc 
Week   0 2 4 8 12 26 39 52 57 
Window  -4 to -1 
weeks   ±3 days  ±3 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  
Consent  X          
Demographics  X          
Verification of eligibility, including genetic test for 
ACHd X          
Medical historye X X         
Prior/Concomitant medication  X X X X X X X X X  
Adverse events reviewf  X X X X X X X X X 
Limited, symptom -directed physical examinationg  X  X X X  X   
Full physical  examinationh X      X  X  
Thorough skeletal physical exami X X  X X X X X X  
Assessment of pubertal statusj X      X  X  
Vital signsk X X  X X X X X X  
Weight  X X  X X X X X X  
Standing height and sitting height  X   X X X  X   
All anthropometric measurements   X     X  X  
12-lead ECG  X Xl  X X  X  X  
Hand and Wrist  X-ray  Xm       Xm  
DXAn  Xm       Xm  
AP standing lower extremity X -ray  Xm    Xo   Xm  
AP and lateral Spine X -ray  Xm    Xo   Xm  
Qualitative assessment of sleep and snoring pattern  X X  X X X X X X  
Pharmacokinetics   Xp  X X X X X X  
Blood chemistry  X X  X X X X X X  
Hematology  X X  X X X X X X  
Lipid panel  X    X   X X  
25(OH) Vitamin D  X      X  X  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 116 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Visit Screen 1 Phonea 2b 3 4 5b 6 7/ETb Follow-Upc 
Week  0 2 4 8 12 26 39 52 57 
Window -4 to -1 
weeks  ±3 days ±3 days ±7 days ±7 days ±7 days ±7 days  ±7 days ±7 days 
Biomarkers X X  X  X X X X  
Anti-drug antibodies X X  X  X X X X X 
Urine collection X     X X X X  
PRO/ObsRO Validation Batteryq X        X  
Subset of PRO/ObsRO Validation Batteryq  X   X X X X   
r X X   X X X X X  
Dispensing of study drug and diary  X  X X X X X   
Study drug administration on site  X         
a All participants will be contacted by phone during Week 2 for fo llow up.  During the call, the study staff will ask the careg iver about the general well -being of 
the child, inquire regarding correct administration of study drug procedures, record any AEs, record  any concomitant medication changes and answer any 
questions.  
b Visit 2 (Week 4), Visit 5 (Week 26), and Vi sit 7 (Week 52) labs are drawn at trough. Th erefore, study drug cannot be administ ered within 6 days prior to these 
visits. The last dose of study drug will be ad ministered at least 6 days prior to Visit 7  
c Only for participants not proceeding to the Open -Label Extension Period.  
d Previous genetic testing will be accepted.  The documented lab result shou ld be reviewed by the investigator to co nfirm the result along with the specific 
FGFR3 mutation. If not available in medical record, Screening will include testing for G380R mutation, but further testing ma y be pursued on an individual 
basis as indicated.  
e Medical history should elicit all major illnesses, diagnoses, and surgeries that the participant ha s ever had, and any prior or existing medical conditions that 
might interfere with study participation or sa fety. Medical history includes historical anthr opometric measurements, as available.  
f Includes review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk of sleep apnea and CMC.  
g Limited, symptom -directed physical examination should be performed as needed at the discretion of the investigator to provid e appropriate medical care to the 
participants and to verify no clinically r elevant changes have occurred since the Screening Visit. On Visit 1, injection site  must be visually inspected prior to 
dosing and at 1 hour and 2 hours after injection of study dr ug.  For participants that undergo blood collection for pharmacokinetic analyses at 8, 24, and 48 
hours following first dose, injection site will be inspected at the time of each blood collection. All subsequent visits shou ld also include a visual inspecti on of 
injection sites.  
h Includes assessments of all major body systems including general appearance, HEENT, Neck (including thyroid), Lung/pulmonary,  Chest, CV, Abdomen, 
Back, GU, Neurological, Extremities, and Skin. All visits, except at the Screening Visit, should also include a visual inspection of injection sites.  
i Thorough skeletal physical exam will be performed by palpating th e bone structure and joints fo r tenderness and mobility and other abnormal changes not 
normally found in children with ACH . Special attention will be paid to the hip exam, which will include a supine assessment of abduction and adduction of 
hips to assess for pain and any limitation of range of motion. If changes are noted further evaluation will be required as cl inically ind icated, including imaging 
and/or orthopedic consultation. DMC will be  apprised of any safety findings.  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 117 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  j Boys will be assessed for testis volumes, and girls for breast development according to Tanner stages ( Tanner  1976 ).  Pubic hair rating will also be recorded 
according to Tanner stages but will not be used to assess eligi bility.  All participants must be  Tanner Stage 1 for breast de velopment (girls) - no glandular 
development/breast buds, and Tann er Stage 1 for gonadal development (boys) - testicular volume < 4 mL ( Emmanuel  2019 ).  Tanner stage progression during 
the course of the trial will not impact study treatment.  See Appendix  3 for details.  
k Participants should rest for at least 5 minutes before vital sign  measurement and vital signs are to be taken before blood sa mples are drawn. Temperature 
measured in degrees Ce lsius (°C) or Fahrenheit (°F), blood pressu re, and heart rate must be measured at Sc reening Visit and Visit 1.  Orthostatic H R and 
systolic/diastolic BP will also be measured at Visit 1 prior to administration of stud y drug following first dose when the pa rticipant is at rest for 5 minutes 
(preferably supine) and again after standi ng at 3 minutes for assessment of orthostatic hypotension. Additionally, at Visit 1 , all vital signs must be monitored at 
1 hour and 2 hours post injection of the study drug. For participants that undergo blood collection for phar macokinetic analyses at 8, 24, and 48 hours 
following first dose, orthostatic vital signs (HR, and BP) will al so be measured prior to each PK blood collection.  At all o ther visits, resting heart rate and 
blood pressure must be measured.  
l At approximately 48 hours after the first dose for participants  that undergo PK blood collection for PK analysis at that time . 
m Radiographic assessments may not be required, with Medical Monitor approval, if the same as sessments were conducted within approximately 3 months prior 
to the visit. If radiographic assessments cannot be completed prior to study drug administration at Visit 1 due to scheduling  conflicts, the assessments may be 
completed at up to 24 hours after s tudy drug administration.  
n DXA scan are at Visit 1 and Visit 7 for children aged 5 years and older only.  
o Scheduled radiographic assessments may be performed within 1 week prior to or after the visit if all scheduled assessments ca nnot be completed withi n the 
same day.  
p PK blood collection will be performed for all participants prior to injection of study drug. For participants who weigh ≥11 kg, blood collection will be 
performed at approximately 8, 24, and 48 hours after injection at Visit 1 for pharmac okinetic analyses. Allowances will be made for accommodation.  
Exceptions to the extended PK blood collectio n will be considered on an individual ba sis (e.g. if travel creates an undue har dship for a family).  
q PRO/ObsRO validation batteries must be comple ted by the caregiver without assistance and should be  completed prior to conducting any clinical assessments.  
The same caregiver should complete all PRO/ ObsRO validation batteries throughout part icipation in the trial. If the same care giver is unable to a ttend a 
particular visit, an alternate caregiver may comple te the PRO/ObsRO validation batteries at the visit.  
r The  must be completed by the investigator who medically assess ed the participant at the visit after all clinical assessments ar e complete d.  The same 
assessor should assess the participant at every visit.  
 CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 118 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  APPENDIX  2. SCHEDULE OF EVENTS I N THE OPEN -LABEL PERIOD   
Visit  7 Phonea 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16/ET  Follow -
Up OLEq 
Week  52 54 56 65 78 91 104 117 130 143 156 161 
Window   ±3 days  ±3 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  ±7 days  
Consent  X            
Prior/Concomitant medication   X X X X X X X X X X  
Adverse events reviewb X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Vital signsc Xd  X X X X X X X X X  
Limited physical examinatione   X X  X  X  X   
Full physical examinationf     X  X  X  X  
Thorough skeletal physical examg   X X X X X X X X X  
Assessment of pubertal status and 
childbearing potentialh X  X X X X X X X X X  
Weight    X X X X X X X X X  
Standing height and sitting height    X X  X  X  X   
All anthropometric measurements      X  X  X  X  
12-lead ECG  Xi  X Xp X Xp X  X  X  
Hand and Wrist  X-rayj       X    X  
DXAj, k       X    X  
AP standing lower extremity X -rayj    X   X X   X  
AP and lateral Spine X -rayj    X   X X   X  
Qualitative assessment of sleep and 
snoring pattern    X X X X X X X X X  
Pharmacokinetics  Xl  X Xp X Xp X  X  X  
Blood chemistry    X X X X X X X X X  
Hematology    X X X X X X X X X  
Lipid panel      X  X  X  X  
25(OH) Vitamin D      X  X  X  X  
Anti-drug antibodies    X X X X X X X X X X 
Biomarkers    X X X X X X X X X  
Urine collection  X  X X X X X X X X X  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 119 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  Visit 7 Phonea 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16/ET Follow-
Up OLEq 
Week 52 54 56 65 78 91 104 117 130 143 156 161 
Window  ±3 days ±3 days ±7 days ±7 days ±7 days ±7 days ±7 days ±7 days ±7 days ±7 days ±7 days 
Urine collection for hCG testing for 
females of childbearing potentialm X  X X X X X X X X X  
PRO and ObsRO Validation 
Batteryn       X    X  
Subset of PRO/ObsRO Validation 
Batteryn     X    X    
    X X X X X X X X  
Dispensing of study drug and diary X  X X X X X X X X   
Study drug administration on site X            
a All participants will be contacted by phone during Week 54 fo r follow up.  During the call, the study staff will ask the care giver about the general well -being of the 
child, inquire regarding correct administration of study drug procedures, record any AEs, record any concom itant medication changes and answer any questions.  
b Includes review of ACH comorbidities based on age, including risk of sleep apnea and CMC.  
c Participants should rest for at least 5 minutes before vital sign measurement and vital signs are to be taken before  blood samples are drawn. Temperature measured 
in degrees Celsius (°C) or Fahrenheit (°F).  
d Orthostatic HR and systolic/diastolic BP will be measured at Visit 7 following first dose when the participant is  at rest for 5 minutes (pre ferably supine) and again 
after standing at 3 minutes for assessment of orthostatic hypote nsion. Additionally, at Visit 7, all vital signs must be moni tored at 1 hour and 2 hours post injection 
of the study drug. For participants  that undergo blood collection for pharmacokinetic analyses at 8, 24, and 48 hours following first dose, orthostatic vital sig ns (HR, 
and BP) will also be measured prior to each PK blood collection.  
e Limited, symptom -directed physical examination should b e performed as needed at the discretion of the inve stigator to provide appropriate medical care to the 
participants and to verify no clinically r elevant changes have occurred since the last visit. On Visit 7, injection site must  be visually inspected prior  to dosing and at 
1 hour and 2 hours after injection of study drug.  For particip ants that undergo blood collection for pharmacokinetic analyses at 8, 24, and 48 hours following first 
dose, injection site will be inspected  at the time of each blood collect ion. All subsequent visits should also incl ude a visual inspection of injection sites.  
f Includes assessments of all major body systems including general appearance, HEENT, Neck (including thyroid), Lung/pulmonary,  Chest, CV, Abdomen, Back, 
GU, Neurologica l, Extremities, and Skin. All visits should also  include a visual inspection of injection sites.  
g Thorough skeletal physical exam will be performed by palpating th e bone structure and joints fo r tenderness and mobility and other abnormal changes not normally 
found in children with ACH. Special attention will be paid to th e hip exam, which will include a supine assessment of abducti on and adduction of hips to assess for 
pain and any limitation of range of motion. If changes are noted further evaluation  will be required as clinically indicated, including imaging and/or orthopedic 
consultation. DMC will be apprised of any safety findings.  
h Boys will be assessed for testis volumes, and girls for breast development according to Tanner stages ( Tanner  1976 ).  Pubic hair rating will also be recorded 
according to Tanner stages but will not be used to assess eligi bility.  Tanner stage progression during the course of the tri al will not impact study treatm ent.  See 
Appendix  3. During the open -label period, the Investigator should ascertain an individual ’s risk for becoming pregnant or fathering a child a nd take appropriate 
steps. Pregnancy prevention counseling and pregnancy testing sh ould be provided as appropr iate and can be tailored per the In vestigator’s judgement based on 
maturity and cultural norms. See Appendix  6 for details on childbearing potential in  females, wherever applicable.  
i At approximately 48 hours after the first dose for participants that undergo PK blood collection for PK analysis at that time.  CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 120 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  j Scheduled radiographic assessments may be performed within 1 week prior to or after the visit if all scheduled assessments ca nnot be completed within the same 
day. Radiographic assessments may not be required, with Medical Monitor approval, if the same assessments were conducted within approximately 3 months prior 
to the visit for Visit 16/ET.  
k For children aged 5 ye ars and older only.  
l For participants who weigh ≥11 kg, blood collection will be performed at approximately 8, 24, a nd 48 hours after injection at Visit 7 for pharmacokinetic analyses. 
Allowances will be made for accommodation.  Exceptions to the extended PK blood collection will be considered on an individua l basis (e.g. if travel creates an 
undue hardship for a family ). 
m Urinary hCG test for females of childbearing potential according to Appendix  6 will be performed for all visits.  
n PRO/ObsRO measures must be com pleted by the caregiver without assistance and should be comp leted prior to conducting any clinical assessments.  The same 
caregiver should complete all PRO/ObsRO measures throughout participa tion in the trial.  The PRO/ObsRO measures must be compl eted at the visit. If the same 
caregiver is unable to attend a particular visit, an alternate caregiver may complete the PRO/ObsRO measures at the visit.  
o The  must be completed by the study staff who medica lly assessed the participant at the visit after all  clinical assessments are completed.  The same assessor 
should assess the participant at every visit.  
p ECG and blood collection for pharmacokinetics sh ould be performed prior to study drug administration and only at visits where  the dose is escalated  
q    Only for participants not proceeding to the separate Long-Term Open-Label Extension Study ( ASND0039). 
 CCI
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 121 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  APPENDIX  3. TANNER STAGING CRITE RIA  
(From Emmanuel  2019 ) 
Below are the Tanner Stages described in detail for clinical reference. For all three sites of 
development, Tanner Stage 1 corresponds to the prepubertal form with progression to Tanner 
Stage 5, the final adult form. Breast and genital staging, as well as other physical markers of 
puberty such as height velocity, should be relied on more than pubic hair staging to assess 
pubertal development because of the independent maturation of adrenal axis.   
Pubic Hair Scale (both males and females)  
• Stage 1: No hair  
• Stage 2: Downy hair  
• Stage 3: Scant terminal hair  
• Stage 4: Terminal hair that fills the entire triangle overlying the pubic region  
• Stage 5: Terminal hair that extends beyond the inguinal crease onto the thigh  
Female Breast Development Scale  
• Stage 1: No glandular breast tissue palpable   
• Stage 2: Breast bud palpable under areola (1st pubertal sign in females)  
• Stage 3: Breast tissue palpable outside areola; no areolar development  
• Stage 4: Areola elevated above contour of the breast, formin g “double scoop ” appearance  
• Stage 5: Areolar mound recedes back into single breast contour with areolar 
hyperpigmentation, papillae development and nipple protrusion  
Male External Genitalia Scale  
• Stage 1: Testicular volume < 4 ml or long axis < 2.5 cm  
• Stage 2: 4 ml -8 ml (or 2.5 -3.3 cm long), 1st pubertal sign in males  
• Stage 3: 9 ml -12 ml (or 3.4 -4.0 cm long)  
• Stage 4: 15 -20 ml (or 4.1 -4.5 cm long)  
• Stage 5: > 20 ml (or > 4.5 cm long)   
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 122 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  APPENDIX  4. BLOOD VOLUME DRAWN A T EACH VISIT   
1. Blood Volume Drawn at Each Visit in the Randomized Period  
 Blood Volume Drawn (ml)  
 Visit  
Weight (kg)  Screening  
(Week -4 to -1) 1 at Predose  
(W 0) 1 at 8h  
(W 0)  1 at 24h  
(W 0)  1 at 48h  
(W 0)  2 
(W 4)  3 
(W 8)  4 
(W 12)  5 
(W 26)  6 
(W 39)  7 
(W 52)  F-U Visit  
(W 57)a  Cumulative  
6.0-9.9 5.5 5.0 0 0 0 5.0 6.0 5.0 5.5 5.0 5.0 2.0 44 
10.0-10.9 9.5 9.0 0 0 0 9.0 6.0 9.0 9.5 9.0 9.0 2.0 72 
11.0-13.9 9.5 9.0 2 2 3 10.0 6.0 10.0 10.5 10.0 10.0 2.0 84 
14.0-15.9 12.5 9.0 2 2 3 13.0 6.0 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.0 2.0 102 
16.0-16.9 12.5 10.0 2 2 3 13.0 6.0 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.0 2.0 103 
17.0-17.9 12.5 10.0 2 3 3 13.0 6.0 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.0 2.0 104 
18.0-20.9 12.5 10.0 3 3 3 13.0 6.0 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.0 2.0 105 
≥21.0  12.5 13.0 3 3 3 13.0 6.0 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.0 2.0 108 
a Only for participants  who are not continuing in the Open -Label Extension Period  
2. Blood Volume  Drawn at  Each Visit in the Open-Label Extension  Period  
Weight 
(kg) 7 at 8h  
(W 52)  7 at 24h  
(W 52)  7 at 48h  
(W 52)  8 
(W 56)  9a 
(W 65)  10 
(W 78)  11 
(W 91)  12 
(W 104)  13 
(W 117)  14 
(W 130)  15 
(W 143)  16/ET  
(W 156)  F-U Visit OLE  
(W 161)  Cumulative  
6.0-9.9 0 0 0 5.0 5.0 
(3.0)  5.5 5.0 
(3.0)  5.5 3.0 5.5 3.0 5.5 2.0 45 
10.0-10.9 0 0 0 9.0 9.0 9.5 9.0 9.5 7.0 9.5 7.0 9.5 2.0 81 
11.0-13.9 2 2 3 10.0 10.0 
(9.0)  10.5 10.0 
(9.0)  10.5 7.0 10.5 7.0 10.5 2.0 95 
14.0-15.9 2 2 3 13.0 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.5 10.0 13.5 10.0 13.5 2.0 122 
16.0-16.9 2 2 3 13.0 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.5 10.0 13.5 10.0 13.5 2.0 122 
17.0-17.9 2 3 3 13.0 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.5 10.0 13.5 10.0 13.5 2.0 123 
18.0-20.9 3 3 3 13.0 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.5 10.0 13.5 10.0 13.5 2.0 124 
≥21.0  3 3 3 13.0 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.5 10.0 13.5 10.0 13.5 2.0 124 
a In case of dose escalation at Visit 9 or 11, total blood volume includes additional blood sampling for pharmacokinetics. In case dose escalation is not done at the 
visits, the total blood volume is indicated in parenthesis  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 123 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  APPENDIX  5. DEFINITION OF HIGH DOSES OF INHALE D 
CORTICOSTEROIDS   
Dose of inhaled corticosteroids li sted in the table below are considered high doses of inhaled 
corticosteroids and are not allowed to be used during participation in the TCC -201 trial.  
Medication  Daily Dose (µg)  
Beclometasone (CFC)  >400  
Declometasone (HFA)  >200  
Budesonide (DPI)  >400  
Budesonide (nebules)  >1,000  
Ciclesonide  >160  
Fluticasone propionate (DPI)  >400  
Fluticasone propionate (HFA)  >500  
Mometasone  ≥440  
Triamcinolone  >1,200  
 
 
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 124 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  APPENDIX  6. DEFINITION OF CHILDB EARING POTENTIAL AND  
CONTRACEPTIVE REQUIR EMENTS   
Participants are not expected to attain reproductive potential during the first year of the trial 
because progression from Tanner stage 1 to menarche within 12 months would be c onsidered 
pathological and would lead to study drug discontinuation under Stopping Criteria #8. Abnormal 
pubertal development would be detected via full physical examination scheduled at Week 26, 
which includes Tanner staging, and such findings will be fur ther investigated by the Investigator 
as clinically indicated.  
However, during the open -label period, the Investigator should ascertain an individual ’s risk for 
becoming pregnant or fathering a child and take appropriate steps . This should be captured in the 
eCRF. Pregnancy prevention counseling and pregnancy testing should be provided as appropriate 
and can be tailored per the Investigator ’s judgement based on maturity and cultural norms.  
If contraception is indicated, highly effective methods with a fail ure rate <1% per year are 
required. Abstinence is only considered an acceptable method of contraception if it is a 
pre-existing part of a participant ’s lifestyle. Symptom -thermal methods (basal body temperature  
in degrees Celsius ( °C) or Fahrenheit ( °F), cervical mucous, or calendar/rhythm) or withdrawal 
are not considered adequate forms of contraception for the purposes of this trial  (Heads  of 
Medicine Agencies  CTFG  2020 ) 
1) Definition of Female of  Childbearing Potential and Fertility in Males  
Female participants who are post -menarchal, regardless of amenorrhea of any duration, will be 
considered to be of childbearing potential unless they have had a hysterectomy, bilateral 
oophorectomy, or medicall y documented ovarian failure.   
Male participants at Tanner Stage 3 will be considered fertile, unless they have medically 
documented infertility.  
2) Contraceptive Requirements for Females  
Female participants requiring contraception must use a recommended  highly effective  method 
consistently during the trial and at l east 5 weeks after the last dose of TransCon CNP (equal to 
5 half-lives of TransCon CNP).  Acceptable highly effective methods include:  
• Combined (estrogen and progestogen containing) hormonal c ontraception associated  
• with inhibition of ovulation: oral, intravaginal or transdermal  
• Progestogen -only hormonal contraception associated with inhibition of ovulation1: oral, 
injectable, or implantable  
• Intrauterine device (IUD)  
• Intrauterine hormone -releasing system (IUS)  
• Bilateral tubal occlusion  
Clinical Trial Protocol   Ascendis Pharma  
TCC -201, Version 5.0, 28 December 2022   Page 125 of 125 
VV-SUB -011508  – 8.0  CONFIDENTIAL  • Vasectomised partner1 
• Sexual abstinence2 
1 Vasectomised partner is a highly effective birth control method provided that partner is the sole sexual 
partner of the WOCBP trial participa nt and that the vasectomised partner has received medical assessment 
of the surgical success.  
2 In the context of this guidance sexual abstinence is considered a highly effective method only if defined as 
refraining from heterosexual intercourse during th e entire period of risk associated with the study 
treatments. The reliability of sexual abstinence needs to be evaluated in relation to the duration of the 
clinical trial and the preferred and usual lifestyle of the participant . 
3) Contraceptive Requiremen ts for Male Participants (and their female partners)  
Male participants requiring contraception must agree to consistently and correctly use a condom 
until 5 weeks  after administration of the last dose of study medication. If their female partner is 
of chil dbearing potential (as defined above), their female partner must use 1 of the methods of 
birth control listed above from the date of Screening until 5 weeks  after administration of the last 
dose of study medication.  
If applicable, male participants must ag ree to refrain from sperm donation for at least 5 weeks  
after the last dose of study medication.  
4) Procedures to be Followed in the Event of Pregnancy  
Participants will be instructed to notify the Investigator if they or their partner become pregnant 
at any time during the study, or if they become pregnant within 5 weeks of the last dose of study 
medication. Participants who become pregnant or who suspect that they are pregnant must report 
the information to the Investigator. Participants whose partner ha s become pregnant or suspects 
she is pregnant must report the information to the Investigator. All pregnancies (participants and 
their partners) should be followed up until resolution if possible.  
 
   Approval Signatures
Document Name: TCC-201 Protocol
Document Number: VV-SUB-011508
Version: 8.0
This is a representation of an electronic record that was signed electronically in Veeva Vault. This page is
the manifestation of the electronic signature(s) used in compliance with the organizations electronicsignature policies and procedures.
 ApprovedSIGNATURE INFORMATION:
11-Jan-2023 12:54:08 GMT+0000
 ApprovedSIGNATURE INFORMATION:
11-Jan-2023 13:06:31 GMT+0000
 ApprovedSIGNATURE INFORMATION:
12-Jan-2023 06:32:50 GMT+0000
 ApprovedSIGNATURE INFORMATION:
12-Jan-2023 16:15:39 GMT+0000PPD
PPD
PPD
PPD
PPD
PPD
PPD
PPD