  01/10/2018  
1 
 THE EFFECT OF ADDING  HIGH DOSE SIMETHICON E TO A STANDARD POLY ETHYLENE 
GLYCOL PREPARATION O N ADENOMA DETECTION RATE DURING SCREENIN G 
COLONOSCOPY: A RANDO MIZED CONTROLLED PIL OT TRIAL  
 
 
ABSTRACT  
Screening colonoscopy is a procedure that can effectively prevent colorectal cancer.  Adequate mucosal 
visualization is a critical aspect of this procedure and yet, several factors can interfere with it and 
consequently result in missed lesions.  One of th e most commonly encountered factors affecting 
mucosal visualization is a poor preparation and/or the presence of multiple bubbles at the time of 
colonoscopy.  When a large amount of bubbles is found , simethicone  (SIM)  is commonly injected 
through the colon oscop y in order to eliminate the m and get a better  view of the mucosa.  However, this 
practice has been recently associated with outbrea ks of multi -drug resistant  bacterial infections , in 
several endoscopy centers. A few studies have used SIM in conjunctio n with colon preparation agents  
(CPA ) such  as polyethylene glycol  (PEG) , magnesium citrate,  and sodium phosphate , in an attempt to 
improve the overall quality of the preparation.  Unfortunately, these studies have reported conflicting 
results due to a wide  heterogeneity in their methodology  and each  study has used different CPAs  and 
SIM doses.  Furthermore,  with the exception of one recently published study from C hina, no study in 
western literature has reported an increase in adenoma detection rate (ADR) when SIM is added to a 
CPA.  Given this gap in knowledge, we are planning to conduct a pilot study  to determine whether 
adding a high dose of SIM  to a CPA results in a statistically significant difference in ADR.  
SPECIFIC AIMS  
The study’s primary aim is t o establish if  the ADR improve s with the addition of high dose SIM 
suspension to a polyethylene glycol (PEG) preparation.  Secondary aims are to determine if this 
intervention results in  shorter withdrawal times, better colon preparation , less in tra proced ure use of 
SIM and a higher polyp detection rate (PDR) .  
BACKGROUND/SIGNIFICANCE  
An adequate bowel preparation is paramount for a screening colonoscopy.  Mucosal visualization  can be 
dramatically affected by residual stool, bubbles, bile, intraluminal flui d or debris (1, 2).  Any of  these 
features can ultimately lead to missed lesions, prolonged endoscopy duration, and decreased patient 
tolerance .  PEG is one of the most commonly used CPAs .  A few studies have r eported that the addition 
of low to medium dose s of SIM to lower volume PEG regimens  (2L) or other CPAs  such as sodium 
phosphate results in overall better colon preparations based on a standardized bubble scale (BS) and 
Boston preparation scale s (BPS)  (3-9).  Some of t hese studies ha ve also reported a trend towards a 
higher number of polyps detected in the patients who  added SIM  to their CPA. T his finding did not reach 
statistical significance likely  due to the fact that they were neither powered  enough nor primarily 
designed to do so .   
  01/10/2018  
2 
 It is important however, to understand that SIM is not a CPA.  It is and anti - foam medication and its 
purpose  is to decrease the amount of bubbles interfering with visualization, provided that there is no 
stool present.  In clinical practice, it is ve ry common to use it as a flush through the endoscope at the 
time of the procedure for that purpose.  Nevertheless, such use of SIM  has been recently associated 
with the formation of biofilm inside the endoscope ’s operative  channels that is not eliminated b y 
standard disinfecting and reprocessing techniques (10).   This biofilm leads to persistent moisture that 
has been noted as a contributing factor to outbreaks of multi -drug resistant microorganisms in a few 
high level endoscopy centers (11).    
In summary, previous studies have shown a trend towards a better overall preparation, and a higher 
polyp detection rate  when a low to medium dose of SIM  is added to a CPA. Therefore, the present  pilot 
study  is designed to determine if adding high dose SIM to a regular  4L PEG has the potential to positively  
impact  the ADR, a benchmark quality indicator  of screening colonoscopy.  Adding a high dose SIM to a 
CPA could not only result in a higher ADR , but also in a decrease use  of SIM  through the endoscope  at 
the time of the procedure, reducing the risk of  possible  life threatening infections  for future  patients . 
The intervention in this study although simple and inexpensive  has the potential of making a significant 
impact in the health of our already underserv ed population. Our health sciences center is the only 
academic medical facility performin g clinical and basic science research in southwest Texas  and we serve 
a large number of patients,  most of which are Hispanic Am ericans with only limited access to heal thcare.  
RESEARCH PLAN  
Study Design :  
This is a single -center, prospective, random ized controlled, observer -blinded study of patients 
undergoing screening colonoscopy at a tertiary care medical facility.   
Primary endpoint  
To establish if  the ADR improve s with the addition of high dose SIM suspension to a 
polyethylene glycol (PEG) preparation  
Secondary endpoints  
1. Determine if adding a high dose of SIM to PEG reduces the withdrawal times during the 
screening colonoscopy . 
2. Determine if adding a high dose of S I to PEG results in an overall better colon preparation . 
3. Determine if adding a high dose of SIM to PEG results in less intra -procedural use of SIM . 
4. Determine if adding a high dose of SIM to PEG results in a higher polyp detection rate  
Inclusion criteria : 
1. Patients betwee n the ages of 30-75 scheduled for screening colonoscopy.  
2. Male and female patients  
  01/10/2018  
3 
 3. Ambulatory patients  
4. Signed informed consent form  
5. Colonoscopy performed by an attending gastroenterologist  
6. The use of both Moderate Sedation and Monitored Anesthesia Care (MAC) sedation  
Exclusion criteria :  
1. Previous colonic surgery  
2. Patient with mental/physical condition that impairs oral ingestion of preparation  
3. Allergy or hypersensitivity to simethicone  
4. Patients with limited mobility (b edridd en patients ) 
5. Patients with gastrointestinal obstruction  
6. Patients with GI motility disorders( e.g. achalasia, gastroparesis , chronic constipation)  
7. Colonoscopy performed by GI fellows  
 
Patient Enrollment :  
Enrollment will be done prospectively until the desi red number of patients is reached .  This study is 
planned as a parallel group randomized trial. One group of patients will be randomized to SIM plus PEG 
while the other group will be randomized to PEG only. The dose of SIM that will be used in this study i s 
480 mg (2 -times higher than the dose used in previous studies). The rationale for using a high dose is to 
maximize our outcome yield. Our proposed sample size is 300 patients. In our unit, we perform 
approximately 60 screening colonoscopies per week. We anticipate that approximately 10% of these 
patients will be eligible to participate in the study. Therefore, we expect to enroll the desired number of 
patients in approximately 24 months.  
Data Collection :  
 For each patient, the following data will be col lected:  
1. Age (years)  
2. Gender  (male/female)  
3. Ethnicity  (Hispanics/non -Hispanics)  
4. Past medical and surgical history  (yes/no)  
5. Bowel preparation quality (poor, fair, good, very good, excellent)  
6. Boston preparation scale score   
7. Bubble scale score  
8. Cecal intubation time  (minutes  and seconds ) 
9. Withdrawal time  (minutes  and seconds ) 
10.  Effective procedure time (minutes  and seconds ) 
11. Number and size of polyps detected  
12. Number of adenomas detected  
  01/10/2018  
4 
 13. Intra -procedure use of SIM  
Sample size calculation  
The dose of simethicone that will be used in this study is 480 mg (2 -times higher than the dose used in 
previous studies).   The rationale for using a high dose is to maximize our outcome yield. Our sample size 
calculation was based on articles by Yoo et a l 8, Jansen et al 9 and Bai et al10 using the following formula 
considering ADR as the primary outcome:  
 
Where p1 was the % of outcome in the intervention group and p2 the % of outcome in the control 
group.  Bai et al10 reported ADR of 21.0% in the PEG+S IM group and 14.3% in the PEG group. With these 
results, a sample size of 509 per group would be suitable for the parent study. For the pilot study, 10% 
of the calculated sample size for the parent study would be an acceptable estimation 13.  Considering t he 
heterogeneity of the study by Bai et al, we decided to include 20% of the total calculated sample size in 
this pilot study. Therefore, 102 patients per group would be an appropriate sample size to compare ADR 
in this pilot study.  
Other outcomes to expl ore in the current study include preparation quality and PDR.  Yoo et al 8 
reported that 99% of patients receiving PEG+SIM had BPS scores of 6 -9 compared to only 84% in the 
patients who received PEG.  Considering BPS scores as the outcome (p1=99% and q1=84 %), with α=0.05 
and β=0.2, a total of 110 patients will be needed, 55 in each arm.  On the other hand, Jansen et al 9 
reported that PDR in patients who received PEG+SIM was 26.7% compared to 13.7% in those who 
received PEG.  With these results and followin g the same formula, a sample size of 150 patients per 
group will be needed to evaluate both bowel preparation and PDR.  Therefore, in order to have a 
sufficient study power and examine all parameters (ADR, PDR and bowel preparation quality), we 
decided to include 150 patients per group for a total of 300 patients.  
Statistical analysis  
1. Continuous data (e.g. effective procedure time, withdrawal time) will be described using mean 
and standard deviation (SD) or Median (Q1, Q3) based on D'Agostino -Pearson norma lity test in 
each group and will be compared with either independent t -test or nonparametric Mann -
Whitney.  Interval data (e.g. BPS, BS) will be presented as Median (Q1, Q3) in each group and 
compared with nonparametric Mann -Whitney. Categorical data (e.g.  ADR) will be described 
using frequency and proportion (%) in each group and will be compared using Chi -square or 
Fisher's exact test where appropriate.  Further, number needed to treat (NNT) using SIM+PEG 
will be determined. Cohen's kappa coefficient will  be used to measure inter -rater agreement 
between two endoscopists who will score BS and BPS.  In the eventual presence of baseline 
differences in cofactors, a relative risk regression developed by our biostatistician14 will be used 

  01/10/2018  
5 
 to determine adjusted e ffect of SIM+PEG compared to PEG alone on PDR and ADR. Other 
findings at colonoscopy  
 
All the statistical analyses will be performed using STATA  14 and p -values less than 5% will be considered 
significant results. All the statistical analyses will be performed by our Biostatistics and Epidemiology 
Consulting Lab (BECL) under the supervision of Dr. Dwivedi.  
METHODS  
Patients will be included in the  study in a prospective manner at University Medical Center of El Paso 
endoscopy unit.  At the time of the pre -op appointment, the assessment nurse will provide all patients 
with routine instructions for colonoscopy including diet, hydration and fasting .  At th e same 
appointment , the research coordinator , and/or an  investigator  will consent the patients and the 
research coordinator will randomize the m using a random number list generated by a simple block 
randomization scheme by our stud y statistician , to one of two possible preparation s: PEG+ SIM or PEG  
alone .  The randomization will be via sealed envelopes that will contain cards with the type of 
preparation to be used.  These coded  envelopes will be randomly chosen by the patient.  Following 
randomization  each patient will be assigned a code corresponding to one of the two preparation 
regimens.  This code will be noted and placed in a master spreadsheet that only the study coordinator 
and/or assigned research personnel will handle. The simethicone and  instructions will be provided to 
the patients by the research coordinator. Patients randomized to PEG+SIM will drink 2L of PEG at 5 PM 
the evening before colonoscopy, and 2L 4h rs prior to the colonoscopy.  Patients in this group will be 
instructed to fill a standard 0.6 ml dropper  with SIM suspension  (40 mg/0.6 ml) a total of   12 times and 
add it to  the gallon  of PEG  solution . Patients assigned to PEG will drink the preparation in the exact 
same manner but without SIM.   
Prior to the procedure, a safet y assessment of each patient will be completed which will include vital 
signs and a general examination. Patients will also complete a questionnaire evaluating compliance and 
side effects from the preparation.  This questionnaire will be administered and c ollected by an assigned 
research team member.  The patients will be instructed not to disclose  any information regarding the 
preparation regimen to the endoscopist  or any of the procedure nurses .  
Colonoscopies will be performed by  4 experienced endoscopis ts who will be blind  to the type of 
preparation the patient received.   All procedures will be performed using Olympus 190 colonoscopes. 
During colonoscopy, standard parame ters such as  cecal intubation time, withdrawal time and number of 
polyps detected wil l be recorded.  For the purpose of this study, withdrawal time will be measured as 
follows: the timer will be started upon initiation of endoscope withdrawal once the cecum has been 
reached, and it will be paused every time the endoscopist needs to perform  any maneuver or 
intervention such as polypectomy, biopsy, clip placement, hemostasis, suction for >5 sec onds etc.  Once 
the endoscopist is done performing any of these, the timer will be re -started.  Endoscopists will be free 
to ask for SIM during the p rocedure if he/she deems it necessary and the amount will be recorded by 
the research coordinator .  In addition,  endoscopists will be asked to score the preparation according to 
  01/10/2018  
6 
 the standardized BS (0-3; 3 being the worst) and the BPS  (3-0; 3 being the bes t) .  A total BPS score of >6 
and a BS of <2 will be considered adequat e preparations.   
The BS that will be used in this study is the one previously used by Sudduth et al (7). This score grades 
different sections of the colon as follows: 0 = no or minimal , scattered bubbles believed not to be 
interfering with the examination ; 1 = bubbles covering at least half  the luminal diameter; 2 = bubbles 
covering the circumference of the lumen; 3 = bubbles filling the entire lumen.  The overall BS and BPS 
scores will  be determined by adding the scores of each segment of the colon (rectosigmoid, transverse 
and ascending). For example, in a patient whose individual segment BS scores  are as follows: 0,2,1; the 
final score is 3.  All endoscopists will be trained in the us e of both scales prior to their participation in the 
study .  The bubble scale and the BPS scores will be independently determined by the endoscopist 
performing the procedure and by a second endoscopist who will review the still previously selected and 
labe led by the performing endoscopist and will assign his own score based on these images.  Each 
endoscopist will be blind to the score provided by the other one and inter -observer agreement will be 
calculated.  
The ADR will be calculated once the pathology res ults of the polyps removed become available.  
INNOVATIONS  
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study designed specifically to evaluate the effect of high 
dose of SIM in conjunction with 4 L PEG preparation on ADR in a western population.  Our pilot design 
will produce rapidly available data that will be then used to design a full sized trial that will definitively 
confirm or refute our hypothesis, which is that adding SIM to PEG improves ADR.   Our study is 
innovative in its methodology in the following aspects:  1. It is the first one to use a 4 L PEG preparation 
in both arms (previous studies have used 2 L PEG or other CPAs); 2. It is the first one performed in a 
standardized average risk western population undergoing screening colonoscopy (pr evious studies have 
included both screening and diagnostic colonoscopies); 3. It is a randomized controlled trial and its 
proposed methodology is a cost -effective approach compared to other alternatives; and 4. Inter -
observer agreement of both BPS and BS w ill be calculated, reducing the potential for bias.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  01/10/2018  
7 
 REFERE NCES 
1. Rex DK, Petrini JL, Baron TH, et al. Quality indicators for colonoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc.  
2006;63:S16 -28. 
2. Hassan C, Fuccio L, Bruno M, et al. A predictive model identifies patients most likely to have 
inadequate bowel preparation for colonoscopy. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol.  2012;10:501 -506.  
3. Repici A, Cestari R, Annese V, et al. Randomised clinical trial: low -volume bowel preparation for  
colonoscopy - a comparison between two different PEG -based formulations. Aliment Pharmacol 
Ther 2012; 36: 717 –724 
4. Valiante F, Bellumat A, De Bona M, et al.  Bisacodyl plus split 2 -L polyethylene glycol -citrate -
simethicone impro ves quality of bowel preparation before screening colonoscopy. World J 
Gastroenterol 2013 September 7; 19(33): 5493 -5499.  
5. Park JJ, Lee SK, Jang JY, et al. The effectiveness of simethicone improving visibility during 
colonoscopy. Hepato -Gastroenterology. 20 09 56 1321 -1325.  
6. Matro R, Tupchong K, Daskalakis C, et al.  The effect on colon Visualization during colonoscopy 
of the addition of simethicone to polyethylene glycol -electrolyte solution: a randomized single -
blind study. Clin Transl Gastroenterol. 2012 No v; 3(11): e26  
7. Sudduth R, DeAngelis S, et al.  The effectiveness of simethicone in improving visibility during 
colonoscopy when given with a sodium phosphate solution: a double -blind randomized study. 
Gastrointest Endosc. 1995 Nov;42(5):413 -5. 
8. Yoo IK, Jeen YT, Kang SH, et al. Improving of bowel cleansing effect for polyethylene glycol with 
ascorbic acid using simethicone: A randomized controlled trial. Medicine (Baltimore).  
2016;95:e4163  
9. Jansen SV, Goedhard JG, Winkens B et al. Preparation before colonoscopy : a randomized 
Controlled trial comparing different regimes. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Oct;23(10):897 -
902.   
10. Ofstead CL, Wetzler HP, Johnson EA, et al. Simethicone residue remains inside gastrointestinal 
endoscopes despite reprocessing.  Am J Infec t Control. 2016 Nov 1;44(11):1237 -1240.  
11. US Senate. Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee Minority Staff Report: 
Preventable Tragedies: Superbugs and How Ineffective Monitoring of Medical Device Safety Fails 
Patients. Patty Murray, Ranking Member Jan13, 2016 
http://www.help.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Duodenoscope%20Investigation%20FINAL%20Rep
ort.pdf . [Accessed 22 Nov 2016]. A comprehensive summary of the issues related to 
duodenoscope -related outbreaks prepared for the Senate HELP Committee .Ofstead CL, Wetzler 
HP, Johnson EA, et al. Simethicone residue remains inside gastrointestinal endoscopes despite 
reprocessing.  Am J Infec t Control. 2016 Nov 1;44(11):1237 -1240.  
12. Ofstead CL, Wetzler HP, Johnson EA, et al. Simethicone residue remains inside gastrointestinal 
endoscopes despite reprocessing.  Am J Infect Control. 2016 Nov 1;44(11):1237 -1240.  
13. Dwivedi AK, Mallawaarachchi I, Lee S et al. Methods for estimating relative risk in studies of 
common binary outcomes. J Appl Stat 2013;41(Aug 2014):484 -500 
14. Francis DL, Rodriguez -Correa DT, Buchner A et al. Application of a conversion factor to estimate 
the adenoma detection rate from the polyp detection rate. Gastrointest Endosc. 2011 
Mar;73(3):493 -7. 