1 
Version 10/31 /2013   
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON SCHOOL OF MEDICINE  
Current version:  10/31/ 2013  
 
Title of Protocol:  
Pulmonary Functional Imaging for Radiation Treatment Planning for Lung Cancer  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator : 
Jing Zeng, MD  
 Assistant Professor  
Department of Radiat ion Oncology  206-598-4100  
Co-Investigator List:  
Adam M. Alessio, PhD  
 Associate Professor  
Department of Radiology  206-543-2419  
Stephen R. Bowen , PhD 
 Assistant Professor  
Department of Radiation Oncology & Radiology  206-598-1128   
Robert S. Miyaoka, PhD  
 Associate Professor  
Department of Radi ology  206-598-2084  
Matthew J. Nyflot, PhD  
 Acting Instructor  
Department of Radiation Oncology  206-598-6657  
Shilpen A. Patel, MD  
 Associate Professor  
Department of Radiation Oncology  206-598-4100  
Ramesh Rengan, MD,  PhD 
 Associate Professor  
Department of Radiation Oncology  206-598-4100  
Lauren Toney, MD  
 Resident  
Department of Radiology  206-543-3320  
Hubert Vesselle, MD, PhD  
 Professor  
Department of Radiology  
Director, Division of Nuclear Medicine  206-616-5781  
Rese arch Staff:  
Jennifer Revall  
 Research Coordinator  206-598-8629  
 
 
 
 
2 
Version 10/31 /2013  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION  3 
  
2.0 BACKGROUND   
2.1 Study Disease  3 
2.2 Rationale for Use of SPECT/CT 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA Scans   
2.3 Clinical Data to Date   
2.4 Risks/B enefits   
  
3.0 STUDY OBJECTIVES  5 
3.1 Primary Objectives   
3.2 Secondary Objectives   
3.3  Exploratory Objectives   
  
4.0 STUDY DESIGN  6 
4.1 General Design   
4.2 Endpoints   
  
5.0 SUBJECT SLECTION  7 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria   
5.2 Exclusion Criteria   
5.3  Recruitment   
  
6.0 SUBJECT REGISTRATION  8 
  
7.0 TREATMENT PLAN/STUDY CALENDAR  8 
7.1 Imaging Protocol   
7.2 Criteria for Removal/Withdrawal from Study   
  
8.0 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  10 
  
9.0 DATA MANAGEMENT/CONFIDENTIALITY  10 
  
REFERENCES  10 
 
3 
Version 10/31 /2013   
1.0 INTRODUCTION  
 
Title  Pulmonary Functional Imaging for Radiation Treatment Planning for 
Lung Cancer  
Short Title  SPECT/CT for Radiation in Lung Cancer  
Phase  Pilot Study  
Methodology  Single Arm Open -Label  
Study Duration  2 years  
Study Center(s)  Univers ity of Washington Medical Center  
Objectives  To utilize SPECT/CT imaging with 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA to 
accurately identify functional lung in patients receiving radiation 
treatment for lung cancer , and characterize tissue response to radiation . 
The lon g-term goal being to use functional imaging to guide radiation 
treatment planning, so functional lung tissue can be preferentially 
avoided, which will reduce radiation induced pulmonary toxicity 
allowing for increased dose delivery to the primary tumor.  
Number of Subjects  20 evaluable subjects  
Diagnosis and Main 
Inclusion Criteria  Patients diagnosed with non -metastatic lung cancers receiving  radiation 
treatment , with impaired pulmonary function  
Study Product, Dose, 
Route, Regimen  99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA  SPECT/CT scans  
Duration of 
administration  Drug administration will consist of 3 SPECT/CT scans with 99mTc-MAA 
and 99mTc-DTPA (one baseline scan which is standard of care, two 
follow up scans which are experimental and paid for by departmental 
research fu nds).  The two experimental scans will be at mid -radiation 
treatment and approximately 3 months post -treatment.  
Statistical 
Methodology  Outside the radiation field, normal lung tissue ventilation and perfusion 
over serial imaging will be assessed for stab ility using r egression 
analysi s, Pearson correlation , and D ice coefficient. Inside the radiation 
field, dose response curves will be developed for radiation dose versus 
changes in ventilation and perfusion. Gradient search algorithm in MIM 
6.0. will be use d to identify perfused and ventilated lung.    
 
 
This document is a protocol for a human research study. This study is to be conducted according to US 
and international regulations , applicable government regulations and Institutional research policies and  
procedures.  
 
2.0 BACKGROUND  
 
2.1 Study Disease  
 
Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer related mortality in the US.  Radiation therapy 
is a main treatment modality for lung cancer: for resectable tumors, radiation can be given pre -
operatively or post -operatively to improve local tumor control and outcomes; for unresectable tumors, 
radiation can be given as definitive treatment for the cancer, either alone or in combination with 
chemotherapy.   
 
4 
Version 10/31 /2013  Local recurrence remains a main cause of treatment failure in  lung cancer.  For stage III lung 
cancer treated with definitive chemoradiation, local failure rates range from 30% to 50% [1, 2].  
Escalating radiation dose is one approach that may improve local control [3-5]. However, this approach 
has seen little success in recent dose esca lation trials [6].  One potential limitation to radiation dose 
escalation is radiation induced t oxicity.  In the thoracic region, pulmonary toxicity is one major source 
of dose limitation.  Many lung cancer patients are smokers and have poor baseline pulmonary function 
secondary to pulmonary co -morbidities, such as COPD.  Moderate to severe radiation  induced 
pulmonary toxicity occurs in 10-20% of patients receiving definitive treatment to a therapeutic dose of 
60Gy and is fatal in 2 -3% of these patients. [7]   
 
Due to the prevalence of tobacco use in the lung cancer population, a significant percentage of 
patients have underlying parenchymal lung disease, which frequently has heterogeneous involvement.  
Differences in perfusion and ventilation leads to regional variations in pulmonary function. Perfusion 
imaging is an established technique to identify functiona l and non -functional zones within normal lung 
and is routinely used to predict post -operative pulmonary function in patients planned for pulmonary 
resection [8]. Current radiation treatment planning treats the l ung as a homogenously functioning organ 
and does not take regional variances in pulmonary function into account. Recent advances in radiation 
treatment planning and delivery, such as 3 -D conformal radiation therapy and intensity modulated 
radiotherapy allo w for preferential sparing of anatomic substructures in close proximity to the primary 
tumor.  Other radiation treatment modalities, such as proton radiation therapy, provide greater ability to 
carefully choose radiation beam path, to selectively avoid lun g regions.  
  
2.2 Rationale for Use of SPECT/CT 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA Scans  
 
SPECT imaging is a sensitive method of detecting regional lung function such as ventilation and 
perfusion.  Radiation has been shown to affect both lung ventilation and perfusion.   Data from Duke 
University and NKI using SPECT imaging have suggested a dose -response relationship between 
decrease in lung ventilation and perfusion and radiation dose delivered [9].  With more advanced 
imaging methods and the addition of CT scan to SPECT imaging, it is possible to improve contrast 
resolution relative to planar scintigraphy, and quantitative accuracy from attenuation correction [10, 11].  
By integrating SPECT/CT scans into the radiation planning process, it is also possible to obtain scans in 
the radiat ion treatment position, allowing for more accurate calculation of radiation dose and functional 
image intensity at the voxel scale, leading to more precise dose -response characterization.   
 
2.3 Clinical Data to Date  
 
SPECT/CT 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA scans ar e both in use clinically for evaluating lung 
perfusion and ventilation, respectively.  A landmark study showed that intravenous 99mTc 
macroaggregates were shown to accurately predict functional loss (FEV 1) 3 months 
postpneumonectomy [12].  Radionuclide -labeled  tracers for  perfusion scanning remains the gold 
standard for predicting postoperative lung function [13].  The radiation oncology community has not  
adopted the use of functional imaging to aid in radiation planning.  The standard of care in radiation 
oncology is to treat all lung tissue as identical when calculating radiation dose and probability of 
complications.   
 
2.4 Risks/Benefits  
 
The only risk to patients in this study is the risk associated with the two additional SPECT/CT 99mTc-
MAA and 99mTc-DTPA scans.  The radiation treatment patients receive will be standard of care.  Risks 
associated with the two SPECT/CT 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA scans  includ e: patient time; radiation 
dose from radioactive tracers and scans  (~ 30 mSv per session , which is about 0.1% of the usual 
5 
Version 10/31 /2013  radiation dose for lung cancer treatment, typically around 60 Gy ), and intravenous injection and 
potential for bleeding, pain, infect ion, and injection site reaction.   Please see consent form for further 
details on potential risks.  
 
The benefit gained from this study is the knowledge of whether SPECT/CT 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-
DTPA scans can identify functional lung tissue that remains vent ilated and perfused over time.  If we are 
able to reliably identify functional lung tissue, we can preferentially protect those lung regions from 
radiation, which can decrease radiation induced lung injury.  We will also learn about the effect of 
radiation  on the spatial and temporal dynamics of lung ventilation and perfusion, which can better help 
us design radiation treatments to safely treat tumors while minimizing lung toxicity.   
 
3.0 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
3.1 Primary Objective  
 
To utilize SPECT/CT imaging wit h 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA to identify functional lung on serial 
imaging in patients receiving radiation treatment for lung cancer , as well as to characterize 
reproducibility of perfusion and ventilation in non -irradiated lung tissue.  
 
Hypothesis :  For lun g tissue outside the radiation field, perfusion and ventilation  as defined by  
SPECT/CT imaging with 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA will exhibit smaller changes over time  than 
tissue inside the radiation field .  Compared to the pre -radiation scan, lung tissue rec eiving  radiation  dose 
below the 2 0th percentile of total lung will have perfusion and ventilation that remain constant or 
increase at the mid -radiation treatment scan and 3 -months post -treatment scan s.  By contrast, lung tissue 
receiving radiation dose above the 8 0th percentile of total lung will have perfusion and ventilation that 
decrease at the mid -radiation treatment scans and 3 -months post -treatment scans.  
 
3.2 Secondary Objective  
 
a) To estimate the dose response relationship on multiple spatial scale s (global lung, regional lung, lung 
image voxel) between radiation dose and changes in lung ventilation and perfusion, both acutely (mid -
radiation treatment) and long term (3  months post -treatment), using SPECT/CT imaging with 99mTc-
MAA and 99mTc-DTPA.  
 
Hypothesis :  Compared to the current models of radiation dose response for lung tissue, u sing CT in 
addition to SPECT imaging acquired in the radiation treatment position, a more accurate regional dose 
response relationship between radiation dose and changes  in lung function can be generated with 
superior volumetric and quantitative data.   
 
b) To estimate the degree of radiation response in lung tissue with varying levels of function (i.e. 
compare radiation dose response of well ventilated and well perfused tissue against lung tissue with poor 
perfusion and ventilation).  This may establish a threshold of lung tissue that would be “safe” to treat 
without significantly affecting lung function.  
 
Hypothesis : Well -perfused and ventilated lung tissue has a differ ent radiation dose response curve than 
lung tissue that receives poor ventilation and perfusion  (upper quartile versus lower quartile of perfused 
and ventilated tissue  image intensity distributions ). The dose -response relationship can be modeled 
either as a linear or sigmoid function.  
 
3.3 Exploratory Objective  
6 
Version 10/31 /2013   
To evaluate proton radiation therapy for functional lung sparing in lung cancer  through treatment 
planning comparisons to conventional photon radiation therapy.   
 
Hypothesis:   Unique physical chara cteristics of proton radiation allow for fewer  external radiation beam 
pathways  through normal tissue to achieve similar tumor dose coverage with photon radiation , leading 
to superior functional lung sparing.  
 
4.0 STUDY DESIGN  
 
4.1 General Design  
 
This is a pilot study of utilizing SPECT/CT imaging with 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA to 
accurately identify functional lung tissue on serial imaging in patients receiving radiation treatment for 
lung cancer. The long -term goal being to use functional imaging to help with rad iation planning, which 
can preferentially spare functional lung tissue, leading to reduced pulmonary toxicity.  Conversely, t his 
has the potential for allowing increased radiation dose to the tumor  while keeping normal tissue dose the 
same as conventional photon radiation therapy . 
 
Patients will have a total of 3 SPECT/CT imaging with 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA .  The first 
scan will be routine medical care (not experimental) and will take place prior to initiation of radiation 
treatment.  Two follow up scan s will be part of the protocol, one at mid -radiation treatment, and one 
about 3 months post -radiation treatment.  
 
4.2 Endpoints  
 
4.2.1  Primary Endpoint  
 
In this study, patients with lung cancer will undergo SPECT/CT imaging with 99mTc-MAA and 
99mTc-DTPA at the time of radiation treatment planning. All image dataset s will b e imported into MIM 
6.0, and fused with the radiation  treatment planning CT and radiation plan.  Lung tissue will be divided 
into tissue outside the radiation field (dose < 20th percentile of total lu ng dose ) and tissue inside the 
radiation field (dose >  80th percentile of total lung dose ).  This process will be repeated for the mid -
treatment scan and 3 months post -treatment scan.  Lung tissue outside the radiation field will be 
compared on serial scan s and their perfusion and ventilation quantified.  There should be insignificant 
changes in  perfusion and ventilation in >80% of lung tissue outside the radiation field.  Lung tissue 
inside the radiation field will also be compared, and should yield signifi cant differences in ventilation 
and perfusion between pre, mid, and post -treatment scans.  
 
We will analyze the perfusion and ventilation data through multiple methods.  Image sets from 
all 3 time points (before radiation, mid -radiation, 3 -months post -radia tion) will be fused using rigid 
registration.  Regions of interest within the lung will be defined using automated and semi -automated 
methods, including  simple thresholds and gradient -search  algorithms .  For each tracer, uptake value will 
be calculated for  each voxel.  For lung tissue outside the radiation field, s ummary statistics such as total 
regional uptake and mean regional uptake by lobe  will be compared across the time points  using 
parametric and non -parametric statistical testing .  Voxel -based corre lation , including Pearson linear and 
Spearman rank, will be performed to measure the stability of uptake between time points.  Lastly, metrics 
of ventilation and perfusion volume overlap between time points will be estimated using the Dice 
coefficient.   
  
7 
Version 10/31 /2013  4.2.2  Secondary Endpoint  
 
For the second aims (a) and (b)  looking at lung tissue inside the radiation field, the images will 
be process similar to primary endpoint. For lung tissue inside the radiation field, changes in tracer 
uptake at the global lung, regional lung, and lung image  voxel  scales  (compared to baseline scan) will be 
plotted against the radiation dose at the same scales to generate multiscale radiation dose response 
curve s.  These curves will be fit to linear and sigmoid dose-response functions . We w ill also separate out 
lung regions in the upper quartile and lower quartile of ventilation and perfusion, and generate separate 
radiation dose response curves per region, to assess for potential differences in radiation dose response 
of functional lung ver sus non -functional lung.   
 
4.2.3  Exploratory Endpoint  
 
 Comparison planning with proton radiation will also be performed, to explore whether superior 
functional lung sparing can be achieved with proton radiation, compared with conventional photon 
radiation ther apy.  Two planning paradigms will be utilized: (1) fixed tumor dose objectives  and 
comparison of normal tissue dose sparing, (2) fixed normal tissue objectives and comparison of tumor 
dose escalation.  
 
 
5.0 SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 
5.1.1 Lung cancer p atients receiving radiation treatment to the thorax to at least 45 Gy.  Both non -
small cell and small cell patients are eligible.  Patient must have pathologic confirmation of 
diagnosis, or have an enlarging lung mass on at least two scans spaced 3 months apart, and FDG 
avidity on PET scan.   
 
5.1.2 All stages of lung cancer are eligible, but patients must be planned for at least 45 Gy  of radiation . 
 
5.1.3 Patients are not required to have measurable disease.  Post -operative patients (patients who have 
had surgical res ection of lung cancer) are eligible.   
 
5.1.4 Patients must have pulmonary function as defined below:  
5.1.4.1  Abnormal pulmonary function test within 3 months of study entry  
5.1.4.2    Prior radiation to the lungs  
5.1.4.3  Prior surgical resection of lung tissue (i.e. wedge resection, lo bectomy, or 
pneumonectomy)  
5.1.4.4  Clinical d iagnosis of COPD or emphysema  
5.1.4.5  Ongoing oxygen us e 
 
5.1.5 There are no limits on prior therapy.  Patients are allowed to have prior chemotherapy, radiation 
therapy, and surgery.  Patients are allowed to have concurrent chemothe rapy with radiation 
treatment.  Patients are allowed to have chemotherapy after radiation treatment.  Patients are not 
allowed to have planned lung resection after radiation.   
 
5.1.6 Patients >18 years old.   
 
5.1.7 Ability to understand and the willingness to sign a  written  informed consent document . 
 
8 
Version 10/31 /2013  5.1.8 Patients will typically be enrolled on this trial prior to beginning the radiation treatment course.  
However, if a patient has had a SPECT/CT 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA  scan as part of routine 
medical care within 6 weeks  prior to initiation of radiation treatment,  he/she is eligible for trial 
enrollment up to the last day of the radiation treatment course . 
 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
5.2.1 Patients must not be planned for lung resection after radiation therapy.   
 
5.2.2 Patients receiving <  45 Gy radiation.  
 
5.2.3 Patients who received radiation to the chest within the past 6 months.  
 
5.2.4 Patients unable to tolerate a SPECT/CT 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA scan.   
 
5.2.5 Patients who are not planning to adhere to the required follow up schedule as outlined in this 
protocol.   
 
5.2.6 Pregnant women  
 
5.2.7  Women of childbearing potential and men who are sexually active and not willing/able to use 
medically acceptable forms of contraceptio n. 
 
5.2.8 Patients unable to provide informed consent.   
 
5.3 Recruitment  
 
Subjects will be recrui ted from investigator clinical practices and include men and women with lung 
cancer who will be receiving radiotherapy to at least 45 Gy.  Subjects will undergo an informed consent 
process in accordance with GCP (see section 11 Ethical Considerations). Inf ormed consent will be 
obtained prior to the performance of any screening procedures.  
 
6.0 SUBJECT REGISTRATION  
  
Subjects will be registered by the FHCRC/UW Study Coordinator and entered into the Protocol Accrual 
Tracking System (PATS).  Information regarding t he PATS system is available at 
http://www.cancerconsortiumorg/rto/protocol_office/pats/ . A complete , signed , study consent and 
HIPAA consent are required for registration.  
 
 
7.0 TREATMEN T PLAN  
 
All patients will receive radiation treatment per standard of care.  As part of this study, a ll patients will 
undergo 3 SPECT/CT scans: 1) first scan will be at the time of radiation treatment planning, in the 
treatment position.  This scan will be  standard of care clinically for patients with compromised lung 
function (such as COPD); 2) second scan will be mid -radiation treatment  (up to 1 week post -completion 
of radiation is acceptable) , to assess the acute response of functional lung to radiation;  3) third scan will 
be 3 months post -radiation  (up to 6 months is acceptable) , to assess the longer term response of 
functional lung tissue.  Follow up of all patients will occur via standar d clinical follow -up by treating 
physician. This clinical follow -up may include clinical  exam, pulmonary function test (PFT), and FDG 
PET/CT scan. Research staff will review clinical  record  at 3 months post -treatment .  See Table 1 below 
for summary.  
9 
Version 10/31 /2013   
Table 1. Study Calendar.  
 
 Screening  Prior to Start of 
Radiation 
Treatm ent Mid-
Radiation 
Treatment  3-Months Post -
Radiation 
Treatment End  
Informed Consent  X*    
Physical Exam  X  X X 
Medical History  X   X 
Pulmonary Function 
Tests (PFTs)  X   X 
Serum Pregnancy 
Test**  X    
FDG PET/CT Scan  X***    X, X# 
SPECT/CT with 
99mTc-MAA and 
99mTc-DTPA   X X* X* 
* Denotes a Research Procedure, all others are standard of care  
**For women of child bearing potential only  
***FDG PET/CT simulation scan preferred over CT simulation scan, but both are acceptable   
#CT scan only is also accepta ble in the follow -up period  
 
7.1 Imaging Protocol  
 
SPECT/CT with 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA will be performed per standard protocol, which is 
currently in routine clinical use.   The imaging session is comprised of an inhalation of the 99mTc-DTPA 
tracer and SPECT  static acquisition, followed by intravenous injection of the 99mTc-MAA tracer and 
second SPECT static acquisition.  This rapid serial process ensures the efficient imaging of ventilation 
and perfusion in the same imaging session. An initial scan at the ti me of radiation planning will identify 
functional lung that is ventilated and perfused.  This scan will be in the radiation treatment position 
which can be fused precisely with the radiation treatment planning scan, and will be used to identify 
functional lung tissue both inside and outside the radiation fields .  Two follow up scans will track lung 
response to radiation (one scan at mid -treatment for acute radiation response, and one scan at 3 -months 
post-treatment for longer term assessment).  Detailed ven tilation and perfusion dose response curves will 
be generated from this data.  Comparison planning with proton radiation will be performed to evaluate 
the feasibility of improved functional lung sparing with proton beam radiation.  
 
7.2 Criteria for Removal/Wit hdrawal from Treatment  
 
Patients will be withdrawn from treatment if their clinical conditions decline so they are no longer able 
to tolerate SPECT/CT with 99mTc-MAA and 99mTc-DTPA .  They will be withdrawn from treatment if 
they are enrolled with hospice.   
 
Patients will still receive follow up care per standard of care even if they withdraw from the study.  If a 
subject withdraws consent to participate in the study or aspects of the study, attempts will be made to 
obtain permission to record at least surv ival data up to 6 months post -treatment.   
 
 
 
10 
Version 10/31 /2013  8.0 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
 
Oversight for this study at UWMC will be provided by the Principal Investigator with delegation of 
appropriate responsibilities to sub -investigators and designated study personn el.  They will ensure all 
entry criteria are met prior to the initiation of the protocol and all study procedures and reporting of 
adverse events are performed according to the IRB-approved protocol.  
 
 
9.0 DATA MANAGEMENT/CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
The investigator wil l ensure that data collected conform to all established guidelines.  Each subject is 
assigned a unique patient number to assure subject confidentiality.  Subjects will not be referred to by 
this number, by name, or by any other individual identifier in any p ublication or external presentation.  
The licensed medical records department, affiliated with the institution where the subject receives 
medical care, maintains all original inpatient and outpatient chart documents.  
 
Subject research files are stored in a secure place (or database).  Access is restricted to authorized 
personnel.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Auperin, A., et al., Meta -analysis of concomitant versus sequential radiochemotherapy in locally advanced non -
small -cell lung cancer.  J Clin Onco l, 2010. 28(13): p. 2181 -90. 
2. Curran, W.J., Jr., et al., Sequential vs. concurrent chemoradiation for stage III non -small cell lung cancer: 
randomized phase III trial RTOG 9410.  J Natl Cancer Inst, 2011. 103(19): p. 1452 -60. 
3. Rengan, R., et al., Improv ed local control with higher doses of radiation in large -volume stage III non -small -cell 
lung cancer.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 2004. 60(3): p. 741 -7. 
4. Socinski, M.A., et al., Dose -escalating conformal thoracic radiation therapy with induction and co ncurrent 
carboplatin/paclitaxel in unresectable stage IIIA/B nonsmall cell lung carcinoma: a modified phase I/II trial.  
Cancer, 2001. 92(5): p. 1213 -23. 
5. Stinchcombe, T.E., et al., Long -term follow -up of a phase I/II trial of dose escalating three -dimens ional conformal 
thoracic radiation therapy with induction and concurrent carboplatin and paclitaxel in unresectable stage IIIA/B 
non-small cell lung cancer.  J Thorac Oncol, 2008. 3(11): p. 1279 -85. 
6. Cox, J.D., Are the results of RTOG 0617 mysterious?  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 2012. 82(3): p. 1042 -4. 
7. Mehta, V., Radiation pneumonitis and pulmonary fibrosis in non -small -cell lung cancer: pulmonary function, 
prediction, and prevention.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 2005. 63(1): p. 5 -24. 
8. Ryo, U.Y., Prediction of postoperative loss of lung function in patients with malignant lung mass. Quantitative 
regional ventilation -perfusion scanning.  Radiol Clin North Am, 1990. 28(3): p. 657 -63. 
9. Robbins, M.E., et al., Imaging radiation -induced normal tissue inj ury. Radiat Res, 2012. 177(4): p. 449 -66. 
10. Patton, J.A. and T.G. Turkington, SPECT/CT physical principles and attenuation correction.  J Nucl Med Technol, 
2008. 36(1): p. 1 -10. 
11. Pazhenkottil, A.P., et al., Improved outcome prediction by SPECT myocardi al perfusion imaging after CT 
attenuation correction.  J Nucl Med, 2011. 52(2): p. 196 -200. 
12. Olsen, G.N., A.J. Block, and J.A. Tobias, Prediction of postpneumonectomy pulmonary function using quantitative 
macroaggregate lung scanning.  Chest, 1974. 66(1): p. 13 -6. 
13. Koegelenberg, C.F. and C.T. Bolliger, Assessing regional lung function.  Thorac Surg Clin, 2008. 18(1): p. 19 -29, v -
vi. 
 
 