 
Date  of last protocol revision : ____ 3/7/2022 ______  
Principal Investigator: _Jacqueline Harris___  
JHM IRB Application Number:  ___IRB00250195___  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/20 21 
Page 1 of 8 
  
 
 
 
Pilot Study of Modified Atkins Diet in Kabuki Syndrome  
ID:00250195 
NCT 04722315 
Date of Last Approval: 1/31/2024  
 
 
Date  of last protocol revision : ____ 3/7/2022 ______  
Principal Investigator: _Jacqueline Harris___  
JHM IRB Application Number:  ___IRB00250195___  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/20 21 
Page 2 of 8 
 1. Abstract  
Kabuki syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by intellectual disability and a 
unique cognitive profile. Studies in a  mouse model of Kabuki syndrome have 
demonstrated hippocampal memory defects and a disruption of adult neurogenesis in the the dentate gyrus. Interestingly, these deficits were normalized in postnatal life with agents that inhibit histone deacetylases, indicating that Kabuki syndrome may be a treatable cause of intellectual disability. Preliminary data shows that patients with Kabuki syndrome have deficits in visuospatial reasoning and memory. This proposal aims to build upon the basic science and clinical work to evaluate a potential treatment using disease -specific outcome measures. If successful, these studies will yield insights 
into the pathogenesis of Kabuki syndrome and lead to the first therapeutic strategy.  
 
2. Objectives   
Objective  1: Test whether HDAC inhibition through modified Atkins diet modifies the  
neurocognitive or neurobehavioral phenotype in individuals with Kabuki syndrome. Previously, a ketogenic diet has been shown to ameliorate cognitive and neurohistological  defects in a mouse model of Ka buki syndrome. This proposal aims to 
conduct a pilot study of 10- 15 adult patients with Kabuki syndrome given 12 weeks of 
HDAC inhibition through diet and determine whether performance on the cognitive assessment protocol changes.  
  
3. Background   
Kabuki synd rome (KS; MIM 147920) is a genetic disorder occurring in about 1 in every  
32,000 births characterized by five cardinal features; dysmorphic facial features, skeletal 
anomalies,  persistence of fetal fingertip pads, postnatal growth deficiency, and 
intellectual disability (ID). The most  common variants in patients with KS are found in 
KMT2D – a histone methyltransferase that adds mono -, di- and trimethylation to K4, 
changes found at enhancers and actively transcribed promoters. Mutations in KDM6A – a histone demethylase that removes H3K27me3, a modification seen in closed chromatin – represent another known, but less common cause of KS (MIM 300867).  Mutations in KMT2D or KDM6A thus  result in widespread changes in normal cellular transcription 
due to loss of histone modifications resulting in  too much closed chromatin. Kabuki 
syndrome is thus an excellent example of a Mendelian disorder of histone  machinery 
(MDEM), most of which, like KS, result in intellectual disability. In addition to information about a  specific rare disease, understanding more about the cellular 
mechanisms resulting in impaired cognition in KS  gives insight into the whole group of 
MDEMs. Understanding these as a group, in turn, may provide a window  into the 
mechanisms underlying normal cognition and memory and learning, and pathologic states – specifically intellectual disability.   
Intellectual disability (ID) is a heavy burden on patients, family and society. Many genetic syndromes result in intellectual disability; however, although the ca usative genes 
of these syndromes are known, little is understood about how these variants lead to intellectual disability. Only recently, basic science has begun to try to characterize the mechanisms underlying cognitive impairment. This work has led to tr eatment trials in 
diseases such as Fragile X syndrome and Angelman syndrome. The Bjornsson lab has demonstrated that Kmt2d is highly expressed in the granule cell layer of the dentate 
 
Date  of last protocol revision : ____ 3/7/2022 ______  
Principal Investigator: _Jacqueline Harris___  
JHM IRB Application Number:  ___IRB00250195___  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/20 21 
Page 3 of 8 
 gyrus. Kmt2d +/βGeo mice have many physical features of humans with KS as well as 
abnormalities in visuospatial memory and deficits in neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus region of the hippocampus seen in association with a thinner granule cell layer. Import antly, these cognitive and histopathologic deficits were corrected with postnatal 
administration of a histone deacetylase inhibitor and with the ketogenic diet. The dentate gyrus – and postnatal neurogenesis in this region – has been linked to spatial patt ern 
separation and thus tests that examine visuospatial reasoning and memory at least partially localize to this brain region. While problems with visuospatial areas of cognition are far from a 1:1 correlation with dentate gyrus neurogenesis, there is certainly an important correlation. Thus, we would expect this neuroanatomical region 
to be abnormal in individuals with KS if mouse studies are predictive. Our recently published study of 23 patients solidified the visuospatial/verbal differences in the KS cognitive profile and more specifically linked the weaknesses in the profile to the 
dentate gyrus region. Additionally, by comparing the KS patients to age and IQ -matched 
controls, we established that this cognitive phenotype is specific to Kabuki syndrome and different from what is seen in other causes of ID. In addition, impaired neurogenesis 
in the hippocampus has been strongly linked to anxiety and anecdotally we have noticed a significant burden of anxiety in patients with Kabuki syndrome. Thus it is important to examine emotion and behavior in totality as well as anxiety in depth in this population and determine whether anxiety moderates the cognitive performance. As a next step, a biologically relevant and evidence -based treatment must be selected as an  intervention 
for a clinical trial.  The Bjornsson lab has demonstrated that in the Kmt2d +/βGeo mice, a ketogenic diet is equally effective in reversing the visuospatial deficits and increasing neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus. This is a treatment that is used clinically for many conditions including 
ones that affect the central nervous system like epilepsy. Modified Atkins diet has been shown to be effective in these conditions in place of stricter ketogenic diet and is easier for patients to tolerate. T he pilot treatment trial we propose here could lead to a larger 
trial which could have immediate benefit to patients and change clinical practice. The Bjornsson lab demonstrated in 2016 that neurogenesis and memory deficits in the mouse model of KS was not  only rescued by administration of HDAC inhibitor AR -42, but that 
it was also rescued with the ketogenic diet
 (Figure 2). Beta hydroxybutyrate, a ketone 
body that is actively transported into the central nervous system and enters the hippocampus during ket osis, is a potent HDAC inhibitor. Modified Atkins diet (MAD) 
has been shown to be an effective, safer to initiate, and easier to comply with substitute for the ketogenic diet in other CNS processes like epilepsy. Thus we believe the 
rationale is there to a ttempt a low -risk pilot study using this intervention in patients with 
KS. The Neurology teams at Johns Hopkins include nutritionists, clinicians, and 
researchers who have extensive experience with MAD and they will be available for 
consultation and for an y diet -related needs. 12 weeks was chosen because that is the 
minimum amount of time used to see effect in studies on the ketogenic diet or MAD.
 
Additionally, 8 weeks is the approximate length of time of neurogenesis of a new 
neuron. Since we suspect neuro genesis plays a role in cognitive performance in KS, the 
12 week duration allows for neurogenesis to take place. To date, no study of treating epilepsy in KS with ketogenic diet or MAD exists.  
 
 
 
Date  of last protocol revision : ____ 3/7/2022 ______  
Principal Investigator: _Jacqueline Harris___  
JHM IRB Application Number:  ___IRB00250195___  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/20 21 
Page 4 of 8 
 4. Study Procedures  
a. Participants with Kabuki syndrome 18 years a nd old er will be recruited to 
participate.  Recruitment will stop once fifteen participants are consented. This 
number allows for the ~30% rate of dropout  expected based on difficulty complying 
with the diet in order to have data from 10 participants. Exclusion criteria would be 
inability to tolerate or comply with modified Atkins diet, inability to do repeat blood and urine  testing, and inability to travel to Baltimore for 2 study visits 3 months 
apart. Participants will begin whenever they have their initial visit and conclude 12 weeks later. See Figure 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Neurocognitive and Neurobehavioral Testing  
Protocol  (Repeated 
Day 1 and Week 12)  Purpose of Test  Area of Cognition or Behavior 
Evaluated  Neurocognitive Subtest Current Battery  
 
 
 
 
Cognitive 
Assessment Protocol  
  
 
 
 
Outcome Measure 
Development  Visuospatial reasoning  Benton Judgement of Line Orientation  
Visuospatial perception, construction, 
and memory  Brief Visuospatial Memory Test, NIH 
Toolbox Picture Story M emory  
Language  Wechsler verbal portion of IQ testing  
Visual motor integration  Beery Developmental Test of Visual Motor 
Integration  
Visual perception  Beery Developmental Test of Visual 
Perception  
Executive function – inhibition, attention, 
and switching  NIH Toolbox Flanker Inhibition and Card 
Sorting  
Visuospatial perception and construction  Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children -V 
Block Design  
Neurobehavioral 
Questionnaires  
  
Characterize Cognitive 
Phenotype and Brain-
Behavior Relationshi p 
Anxiety and Behavioral Phenotype  Caregiver Rating Scales: SCARED and 
Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) or Adult 
Behavior Checklist (ABCL) and NIH 
Toolbox Emotion Measures  
Verbal Hippocampal 
Measure  Brain -Behavior 
Relationship  Verbal memory  Hopkins Verbal Learning Test  12 weeks  
Daily: Diet logs  
Twice weekly: 
Urine ketones  
Every 3 weeks: 
Blood draw  Initial Study  Visit 
Cognitive and 
Behavioral testing  
Initial Blood Draw  
Modified Atkins Diet  
Education 
End Week 12  
Blood draw  
Cognitive 
assessment  
Behavioral 
questionnaires  FINISH  Figure 1: Study Flow  
 
 
Date  of last protocol revision : ____ 3/7/2022 ______  
Principal Investigator: _Jacqueline Harris___  
JHM IRB Application Number:  ___IRB00250195___  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/20 21 
Page 5 of 8 
  
The study flow is outlined in Figure 1. These consented adult participants will 
participate in an initial study visit. These participants will undergo cognitive and neurobehavioral testing and also will have baseline labs drawn and will mee t with a 
study team member  trained in modified Atkins diet for education. The labs are standard 
of care for diet initiation to rule out contraindications ( CBC, CMP, lipids, UA, urine 
amino acids, free and total carnitine, Vitamin D, selenium ). Blood will a lso be taken for 
genome -wide DNA methylation analysis  to look for the known abnormal signature in 
Kabuki syndrome and see if it changes over time with the diet. Participants and /or their 
caregivers will keep a daily diet log and /or will be asked to downloa d the free Carb 
Manager application onto their smartphone. They will send the logs and data back weekly.  The application is optional, only if participants prefer it to keeping their own 
logs.  Participants will be given urine ketone strips and asked to use and record in their 
diet log twice weekly. Participants will have blood ordered and drawn remotely every 3 weeks and sent securely to the study team. Beta- hydroxybutyrate will be measured on 
this sample as well as genome -wide DNA methylation measured every  3 weeks to see if 
it changes over the course of the trial. At the 6 week mark participants will also securely send a urine sample for measurement of urine ketones and amino acids to investigate metabolism while on the diet. Participants will return to Baltimore at the end of 12 weeks for a one day visit to repeat the cognitive assessment protocol, neurobehavioral measures, and repeat the initial lab tests  including genome -wide DNA methylation  
(Figure 1).  
 
 
b. The study will last for 12 weeks for each particip ant. There will be 2 on site study 
visits. Participants will then return home for the 12 week diet. They then will return 
to Baltimore for a 1 day study visit.  
 
c. This study is not blinded for participants or investigators because that would be too difficul t logistically since the participants have to keep the diet. Additionally, 
because this is just a very small pilot study, blinding is not necessary.  
 
d. Participants  will receive all standard of care and treatments. None will be stopped.  
 
e. No placebo group w ill be used because this is only a pilot study and placebo groups 
will come in later studies.  
 
f. If participants cannot tolerate and/or adhere to the diet during the 12 weeks by their own self report and diet logs, they will be removed from the study.  
 
g. Participants can go back to their typical diet after the study ends or if they end the 
study early.  
 
 
h. Participants will have blood drawn 5 times and urine collected 2 times. Blood and urine collection at the initial and final study visits will be done at KKI. Most of the blood and urine will be sent to JHH core lab and are standard of care for diet 
 
Date  of last protocol revision : ____ 3/7/2022 ______  
Principal Investigator: _Jacqueline Harris___  
JHM IRB Application Number:  ___IRB00250195___  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/20 21 
Page 6 of 8 
 initiation and monitoring to rule out contraindications  or severe side effects  (CBC, 
CMP, lipids, UA, urine amino acids, free and total carnitine, Vitamin D, selenium ). 
Another 2 purple top tubes of b lood will also be taken and transported to the 
Bjornsson lab by a study team member to run a  genome -wide DNA methylation 
array to look for the known abnormal signature in Kabuki syndrome and see if it 
changes over time wi th the diet.  The total additional blood volume taken beyond the 
standard of care labs for the diet will be 6 mL.  In addition, participants will have 
blood ordered and drawn remotely every 3 weeks and sent securely to the study 
team. Once the study team receives it, one vial will go to JHH core lab and one to the Bjornsson lab. Beta -hydroxybutyrate will be measured on this sample by JHH 
core lab every 3 weeks and the other tube will again be taken to the Bjornsson lab to perform genome -wide DNA methylation a rrays at 6 weeks  to see if it changes over 
the course of the trial.  
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
We will recruit 15 total participants with clinically -definite and genetically -confirmed 
Kabuki syndrome type 1 age 18 years and olde r. Clinical diagnosis of  KS will be made 
based on recently published consensus diagnosis criteria. Genetic confirmation of a pathogenic mutation in KMT2D will also be required. Exclusion of participants younger than 18 years old is based on: 1) adults being able to consent to the ir own diet therapy,  
2) ability to adhere to the diet , and 3) ability to standardize one cognitive battery to 
compare across and between participants. Other exclusion criteria include presence of another known genetic syndrome , a health problem that would make a modified Atkins 
diet harmful, inability to travel to Baltimore for 2 visits separated by 12 weeks . 
Recruitment of participants will be done solely by asking adults already participating in IRB00240569 to participate in this study as well. No recruit ment will be done of 
participants not already enrolled in the other study.  
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  
a. The Bjornsson lab demonstrated in 2016 that neurogenesis and memory deficits in the mouse model of KS was not only rescued by administration of HDAC inhibitor AR-42, but that it was also rescued with the ketogenic diet
 (Figure 2 ). Beta 
hydroxybutyrate, a ketone body that is actively transported into the central nervous system and enters the hippocampus during ketosis, is a potent HDAC inhibitor . 
Modified Atkins diet (MAD) has been shown to be an effective, safer to initiate, and easier to comply with  substitute for the ketogenic diet in other CNS processes like epilepsy. Thus we believe the rationale is there to attempt a low -risk pilot study 
using this i ntervention in patients with KS. The Neurology teams at Johns Hopkins 
include nutritionists, clinicians, and researchers who have extensive experience with MAD and they will be available for consultation and for any diet -related needs. 12 
weeks was chosen because that is the minimum amount of time used to see effect in studies on the ketogenic diet or MAD.
 Additionally, 8 weeks is the approximate 
length of time of neurogenesis of a new neuron. Since we suspect neurogenesis plays a role in cognitive performa nce in KS, the 12 week duration allows for neurogenesis 
to take place. To date, no study of treating epilepsy in KS with ketogenic diet or MAD exists.  AR42 and Vafidemstat were chosen as in vitro comparisons (no in vivo 
use of these drugs) because of the p revious evidence from the Bjornsson lab that 
 
Date  of last protocol revision : ____ 3/7/2022 ______  
Principal Investigator: _Jacqueline Harris___  
JHM IRB Application Number:  ___IRB00250195___  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/20 21 
Page 7 of 8 
 both HDAC inhibition and LSD1 inhibition also ameliorate the phenotype in mice 
like ketogenic diet does.  
 
7. Study Statistics  
a. Primary outcome variable: Change in cognitive testing protocol before and after 12 week s of the diet  
b. Secondary outcome variables : 1) Change in anxiety measure scores after 12 
weeks on the diet. 2) Change in genome -wide DNA methylation array 
signature while on the diet. 
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification: We will recruit 15 
participants to this study with a goal of having 10 participants who complete the whole 12 weeks. We will only analyze data from participants who complete the whole 12 weeks. This number is  completely generated based on 
the rarity of the disease model and therefore how many participants were felt  
were feasible to recruit. This is a very early stage, non -masked trial with no 
control group so no power analysis  was done. To analyze the data, we will do 
intra-subject comparisons of the testing measures before a nd after  12 weeks 
of the diet, controlling for practice effects and for the fact the cognitive assessment protocol will be  repeated 3 times in these participants. We will 
perform regression analysis to determine if the change is  dependent on BHB 
levels. We will investigate whether scores on a measure of anxiety and if genome -wide DNA methylation analyses change after 12 weeks  of diet and 
also if these potential changes  moderate any change seen on cognitive 
assessment protocol.  
d. Participants will only stop e arly based on inability to tolerate the diet. With 
only 15 participants, there will be no interim data analysis to stop early.  
 
 
8. Risks  
a. The main risk of this study is the modified Atkins diet. Potential risks of the 
diet include kidney stones, constipation, acidosis, diminished growth, weight 
loss, and hyperlipidemia. The rest of the proposed research presents no more than minimal physical, psychological, legal, or financial risk to participants. Neurological examination is part of a routine physical examin ation and 
involves no more than minimal  risk to the participants. Neuropsychological 
testing can take a prolonged amount of time and can cause anxiety and discomfort in participants. Venipuncture can cause discomfort and mild 
bruising or bleeding at the si te. Risk of infection is minimal. Patients may be 
disturbed by seeing their blood drawn. Risk of using the CarbManager 
application is minimal.   Participants do not enter name or date of birth. They 
do enter a username (which will be their subject ID), sex,  and year of birth. 
However sex and year of birth can be skipped.  Other than that, participants only enter diet logs daily.   The participant then generates weekly reports 
through the app that will be saved as a pdf to their device which they then will sec urely email to the study team.   Use of the app is optional for 
participants and they can opt to just type their diet logs and securely email them  
 
Date  of last protocol revision : ____ 3/7/2022 ______  
Principal Investigator: _Jacqueline Harris___  
JHM IRB Application Number:  ___IRB00250195___  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/20 21 
Page 8 of 8 
 b. Labs and an exam will be done at the initial study visit to ensure that 
participants are healthy enough for 12 weeks of diet. Additionally, participants will be thoroughly educated about the diet at their initial study visit including potential adverse effects. Weekly check- ins with participants 
will be done to ensure they are complying with the diet and hear about any adverse effects. Subjects will be allowed to take breaks during 
Neuropsychological testing if significant anxiety or discomfort occurs.  We will reinforce at each study visit that subjects can stop study procedures at any time if needed.   
c. Any proble ms should be reported directly to Dr. Harris and she will be 
responsible for reporting the adverse events and responding to them. This study does have a DSMB consisting of 4 JHH faculty members.  
d. Any physical data forms will be kept in a locked office in a  locked cabinet to 
which only the PI has the key.  The linking document with patient identifiers and study ID numbers will be kept on a password protected computer in the locked office, within a password protected file. This file will be kept separate from  all data files including imaging data and testing results.  These files will 
be deidentified and marked with a study identifier only and stored on a secure server   - JHH OneDrive . Data collected through the CarbManager 
app, for those who choose to use it, will not have any identifiable information in it and will be emailed securely to the study team.  
e. Participants may incur a financial toll by having to travel to Baltimore. We will minimize this by making the needed travel clear in screening.  
 
9. Benefits  
a. There is a possibility that patients may experience improvement in their 
cognition after 12 weeks on the diet. Other benefits of the study include furthering the scientific knowledge about Kabuki syndrome specifically and brain -behavior relationships in gener al 
  
10. Payment and Remuneration 
a. Participants will not receive any payment as part of this study but will be provided lunch and parking  during the study visit s.  
 
11. Costs  
a. Participants will not incur significant costs as part of this study. 
Neurobehavioral testi ng and laboratory  costs will be paid for by PI’s grant 
funding. Participants will be responsible for their own travel costs to 
Baltimore. Participants will also be responsible for the cost of their own food during the diet period.  
 
 
 