Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 1 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)   
    
 
 
         
Title of Study:  A Double -Blind Trial of Adjunctive Valac yclovir to Improve Cognition 
in Early Phase Schizophrenia  
 Funding Source:   Stanley Medical Research Institute  
 
   NCT 02008773 
                       
 
   
  
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 2 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Introduction  
2.0 Scientific Background and Rationale  
3.0 Specific Aims  
4.0 Study Design  
5.0 Study Population (Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria)  
6.0 Subject  Recruitment  
7.0 Study Procedures  
8.0 Clinical Assessments and Procedures  
9.0 Safety Assessments and Procedures  
10.0 Criteria for Repeat Assessments, Rescreening, and Discontinuation  
11.0 Laboratory Assessments  
12.0 Study Medication  
13.0 Concomitant Medication  
14.0 Adverse Events  
15.0 Monitoring Randomization Assignments and Data Safety Monitoring 
Board  
16.0 Statistical Analysis  
17.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
18.0 Record Retention  
19.0 References  
 ATTACHMENTS  
1 Study Procedures Table  
2 Concomitant Medication Table  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 3 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  1.0 Introduction  
 
Schizophrenia  is a serious mental illness  whose etiology is unknown. Cognitive impairments  are 
a prominent feature of the illness and contribute to the social disability that is common in 
individuals with the disorder .1  Currently there are no established  treatments for the cognitive  
impairments  associated with  the disorder.  A previous pilot study found that early course 
individuals with schizophrenia who were seropositive for the Herpes Simplex Virus 1 (HSV -1) 
and received adjunctive valacyclovir  showed improvement in performance on some cognitive 
tasks compared to those who received adjunctive placebo.2  Schi zophrenia subjects who were 
HSV- 1 seronegative were excluded from the trial.  The current study is undertaken to confirm 
and extend these findings  and determine if HSV -1 seropositive status confers cognitive 
enhancing effects of valacyclovir.   
 
We intend to test  the hypothesis that cognitiv e functioning in early course schizophrenia  will be 
improved by treatment with the antiviral drug , valacyclovir , in subjects who are seropositive for 
HSV- 1. We will enroll 70 adult subject s who are HSV -1 positive and 105 who are HSV -1 
negative  across US study sites ; subject s will be individuals  early in the course of schizophrenia .  
Subject s will be randomized to receive adjunctive valacyclovir , 1.5 g twice per day , or placebo 
over the 16 weeks of the trial.  All subject s will continue to seek regular medical care and adhere 
to a regimen of psychiatric medications prescribed by their treating psychiatrist.     
 
 
2.0 Scientific Background and Rationale  
 
Cognitive Impairment s in Schizophrenia  
As a group, individuals  with schizophrenia perform more poorly than age -matched controls on 
measures of verbal memory, executive functioning, attention, and processing speed.3,4  Along 
with the characteristic positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia, t hese cognitive 
impairments  are a central feature of the disease and do not remit when psychotic symptoms 
subside.  Cognitive impairments have been identified as a major contributing factor to the social 
disability associated with the disorder and its  high burden of disease .5  Given the importance of 
cognitive impairments in schizophrenia, a number of interventions, both pharmacologic and 
psychosocial, have been developed for their remediation.6,7 However, to date, none has been 
established as clearly effective and implemented in routine clinical care.    
 The etiology of cognitive impairments in schizophrenia is not known.  However, recent studies  
(reviewed by Prasad et al. , 2012) show an associat ion between  exposure to Herpes  viruses, 
particularly Herpes  Simplex Virus Type 1 (HSV -1), and the severity  of cognitive impairment in 
schizophrenia.  Herpes  viruses are enveloped, double stranded DNA viruses that are capable of 
infecting humans and many other animal species.  HSV -1 can infect the central nervous system 
of otherwise healthy individuals and establish latency resulting in a lifelong infection .
8  In a 
previous study of 229 outpatients with schizophrenia, Dickerson et al. found that serological 
evidence of HSV -1 was an independent predictor of cognitive dysfunction; much of the 
difference in cognitive functioning between HSV -1 seropositive and seronegative groups could 
be at tributed to immediate memory performance .9 An association between seropositivity to 
HSV- 1 and cognitive deficits was also found in three other  independent schizophrenia  samples10-
12 and further supported by neuroimaging data .10,13 Evidence further suggests that brain related 
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 4 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  impairments associated with HSV -1 exposure appear to worsen with time in early course HSV -1 
exposed individuals with schizophrenia.14 
 
Valacyclovir   
Valacyclovir is the oral L -valyl ester prodrug of acyclovir and is converted to acyclovir via first -
pass hepatic metabolism.  Valacyclovir’s properties have been reviewed .15,16 Valacyclovir is 
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) for the treatment of herpes 
zoster and genital herpes  and for the suppression of herpes virus infections including HSV- 1.17 
Acyclovir is phosphorylated by viral thymidine kinases to its active form.  This form inhibits 
DNA synthesis through competitive inhibition of viral DNA polymerase.  Maximum plasma 
concentration of acyclovir is achieved in 1- 3 hours after oral administration and the elimination 
half-life is 2.5 -3.6 hours.  Acyclovir is predominantly  eliminated by glomerular filtration and 
tubular secretion.  Valacyclovir is widely prescribed and considered to be relatively safe and well tolerated .
17  
 
Risks and Discomforts Associated with valacyclovir:    
In clinical trials in adult patients, adverse events commonly observed more frequently with valacyclovir than placebo and at a rate of > 10% are:  
• Headache  
• Nausea  
• Stomach pain  
 
In clinical trials in adult patients, adverse events observed more frequently with valacyclovir than placebo 
and occurring at a rate of <10% but >1% are:  
• Dizziness 
• Painful periods (females only)  
• Joint pain  
• Depression  
• Vomiting  
• Fatigue (sleepiness)  
• Rash  • Low blood cell counts (n eutrophil and 
platelet)  
• Inflammation of the nose and throat  
• Upper respiratory tract infection  
• Increased liver enzyme levels (signs of 
liver damage)  
 The following are rare but are considered serious adverse reactions:  
• Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura/Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome (TTP/HUS): This is 
a blood clotting problem which can be fatal.  Cases of TTP/HUS, in some cases resulting in death, have been reported in patients who have advanced HIV disease and in patients who have 
had transplants and are on valacyclovir  
• Acute Renal Failure (kidney failure): cases have been reported in elderly patients, those with 
underlying kidney disease, patients taking other drugs that may cause damage to the kidneys, and 
patients withou t adequate hydration (dehydrated)  
• Central Nervous System Effects: agitation, hallucinations, confusion, delirium, seizures, and encephalopathy (brain swelling) have been reported in adult patients who received higher -than-
recommended doses of valacyclovir
17 
 
The recommended dosage for suppression of recurrent genital herpes is 500- 1000 mg taken once 
daily.  Safety and efficacy of this regimen have been established for patients receiving these 
doses for up to 1 year.  In a large -scale, 1 year, dose finding study for valacyclovir use in genital 
herpes suppression, 5.1% of all patients enrolled had discontinued their therapy because of an adverse event .
18 The percentages for discontinuing therapy were similarly distributed among the 
6 treatment groups of the study (4 valacyclovir groups at 250 mg, 500 mg, 1 g once daily, or 250 
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 5 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  mg twice daily; 1 acyclovir group at 400 mg twice  daily; and 1 place bo group).18  Valacyclovir 
adverse events  reported in this study include headache, rhinitis, infection, flu- like syndrome, 
pharyngitis, nausea, back pain, diarrhea, abdominal pain, sinusitis, and dyspepsia.  The 
frequency of these adverse events  to valacyclovir was similar to that observed in patients 
receiving placebo.  Abnormal laboratory tests for anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, AST (SGOT), and serum creatinine were also evaluated and the frequency of a dverse events  to 
valacyclovir was similar to that observed in patients given placebo  and no association was 
observed between valacyclovir treatment and any abnormal laboratory test .
18 Doses up to 8 
grams per day were used in pre marketing studies .17 The study medication dose for this study 
will be 1.5 g by mouth, twice daily.  This dose is identical to the University of Pittsburgh pilot trial (see below) and it is adequate for suppressive HSV -1 therapy.
17 We are proposing to use the 
dose of 1.5 g twice daily because this  was the dose shown to be effective in the Prasad study .  
  
Pilot trial of valacyclovir augmentation in early course schizophrenia  
In a recent pilot study  at the University of Pittsburgh, Prasad et al  randomized 24 HSV -1 
seropositive individuals with schizophrenia  who were within 10 years of illness onset to receive 
valacyclovir 1 g orally twice daily for 2 weeks followed by 1.5 g orally twice daily for 16 weeks vs. identical appearing placebo.
2  All patients were maintained on prescribed antipsychotic 
medication throughout the course of the trial.   At the end of the trial, subject s in the valacyclovir 
group showed significantly greater improvement in -  working memory and visual memory  than 
did subject s receiving adjunctive placebo .  There were no significant differences between groups 
in psychotic symptom severity or in other cogni tive domains.  The medication was well tolerated 
by study subject s and the dropout rates were similar between the valacyclovir and the placebo 
group. Because there was not a  HSV- 1 seronegative comparison group, it could not be 
determined if the seropositiv ity of the cohort was the key factor that contributed to the positive 
cognitive results.    
3.0 Specific Aims  
 
The P rimary A im of the S tudy is : 
1. To determine  the efficacy of adjunctive valacyclovir , in comparison to placebo, to improve 
visual (Brief Visuospatial Memory Test) and working (composite score of the Spatial Span and Letter Number Span  tests) memory in individuals who are HSV- 1 positive and early in 
the course of schizophrenia .  We hypothesize that individuals who are HSV -1 positive, but 
not those who are HSV -1 negative, will demonstrate significant valac yclovir efficacy for 
visual and working memory.   
 
The S econdary A ims of the S tudy are:  
 
1. To evaluate the efficacy of adjunctive valacyclovir, in comparison to placebo, to improve general cognitive performance as measured by the MATRICS composite score in HSV- 1 
positive and negative subject s.    
2. To evaluate the efficacy of adjunctive valacyclovir , in comparison to placebo, to improve 
functional performance  and quality of life as measured by the U SCD Performance- Based 
Skills Assessment, Version B (UPSA -B), Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction 
Questionnaire – Short Form  (Q-LES-Q-SF) and Personal and Social Performance Scale 
(PSP)  and to improve global functional ass essments as measured  Clinical Global 
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 6 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  Impressions Severity Scale (CGI -S) and Clinical Global Impressions Severity 
Improvement scale ( CGI-I) scores  in HSV- 1 positive and negative subject s. 
3. To evaluate the efficacy of adjunctive valacyclovir , in comparison to placebo, for general  
and positive symptoms as measured by the PANSS total and Marder subscale factor scores  
and negative symptoms as measured by the NSA -16 in HSV- 1 positive and negative 
subject s.  
4. To evaluate the tolerability and s afety  of valacyclovir t reatment in this population . 
5. To explore changes in the levels of inflammatory markers  - HSV2, CMV, EBV, CRP, and 
Toxo plasmosis – and their relationship to treatment outcomes.  
 
 
4.0 Study Design  
 
One hundred and seventy -five subject s (N=70 HSV- 1 seropositive and N=105 HSV -1 
seronegative) will be randomized 1:1 to receive adjunctive valacyclovir or adjunctive placebo for a 16 week period. The primary outcome that will be assessed is improvement in changes in visual and working memory  scores in HSV- 1 positive and negative subject s over the course of 
the study. We will also measure the  overall cognitive functioning and the  severity of psychiatric 
symptoms over the course of the study and will evaluate the tolerability and s afety  of 
valacyclovir treatment in this population.  In addition, we will explore the relationship between changes in the levels of inflammatory markers  (HSV2, CMV, EBV, CRP, and Toxoplasmosis ) 
and treatment response  over the course of the study.  
 
 
5.0 Study Population (Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria)  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. 18 to  40 years of age at study entry . 
2. Able to give  written informed consent.  
3. DSM IV -TR Diagnosis of schizophrenia , schizophreniform, or schizoaffective 
disorder as confirmed by Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV-TR (SCID)  
4. Onset of schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia, or schizoaffective disorder within the past eight  years  as defined by  first medical records documentation of  
these conditions  
5. Outpatient or inpati ent. 
6. Clinical stability as defined by:  
a. CGI-S score of less than or equal to 4 (moderately ill) at randomization AND  
b. Subject s must not have experienced an exacerbation of their illness within 4 
weeks prior to randomiza tion leading to an intensification of psychiatric care 
in the opinion of the investigator. Examples of intensification of care include, but are not limited to: inpatient hospitalization, day/partial hospitalization, outpatient crisis management, or psychia tric treatment in an emergency room 
AND  
c. Antipsychotic treatment stability for at least 4 weeks prior to randomization (no change in antipsychotic dosing , addition of any new antipsychotic 
medication , or discontinuing an antipsychotic medication)  
7. Fluent in English.  
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 7 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  8. Female subject s of childbearing potential must test negative for pregnancy at 
screening visit and agree to use a single, effective, medically acceptable method of 
birth control for the duration of the study . 
 Exclusion
 Criteria  
1. Known IQ less than 70 as determined by medical history . 
2. IV drug use  within previous three month prior to study entry . 
3. Any serious active medical condition that affects brain or cognitive functioning (e.g., epilepsy, serious head injury, brain tumor or other neurological disorder ) in the 
investigator’s opinion.  
4. Known medical history of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)  
5. Receipt of  valacyclovir or chemically -related medication  within 2 weeks  prior to 
randomization. 
6. History of hypersensitivity to valacyclovir or acyclovir as determined by self -report and 
medical history . 
7. DSM -IV diagnosis of substance dependence  within  3 months of study entry (with the 
exception of nicotine or caffeine dependence).  
8. Subject s who have pa rticipated in a clinical trial with any pharmacological treatment 
intervention for which they received study -related medication in the 4 weeks prior to 
screening AND subject s currently receiving treatment (within 1 dosing interval plus 4 
weeks) with an investigational depot formulation of an antipsychotic medication. 
9. Females who are p regnan t or planning to become pregnant  or breastfeeding or planning 
to do so during the study period. 
10. Subject s with current acute, serious, or unstable medical conditions, including, but not 
limited to: inadequately controlled diabetes, asthma, COPD,  recent cerebrovascular accidents, acute systemic infection or immunologic disease, unstable cardiovascular disorders, malnutrition, or hepatic  or renal disease, renal including  renal failure, 
gastroenterologic, respiratory, endocrinologic, neurologic, hematologic  including 
thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura/hemolytic uremic syndrome , or infectious diseases  
11. Subject s who require concomitant treatment with any other medication oth er than those 
allowed as specified  in A ttachment 2, or with any other medication specifically excluded in 
Attachment 2.  
12. Clinically significant electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormality prior to randomization as defined by: subject s with a corrected QT interval (Bazett’s; QTcB) >450 msec (male) or 
>470 msec (female) prior to randomization. Repeat ECGs will be conducted at the discretion of the principal investigator  or medical designee.  
13. Test positive for (1) Hepatitis C virus antibody , (2) Hepatitis B surface ant igen (HBsAg) 
with or without positive Hepatitis B core total antibody . 
14. Subject s with moderate to severe renal impairment as defined by creatinine clearance 
(CrCl) < 60 ml/min (measured by the Cockcroft -Gault equation) at screening . 
15. Subject s with hepatic impairment as defined by liver transaminases or total bilirubin > 3 
× upper limit of normal ( ULN ). 
16. Subject s considered a high risk for suicidal acts – active suicidal ideation as determined 
by clinical interview OR any suicide attempt in 90 days prior to scr eening .  
17. Subject s who demonstrate overtly aggressive behavior or who are deemed to pose a 
homicidal risk in the investigator’s opinion.  
18. Subject s currently receiving cognitive remediation therapy at time of study entry  
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 8 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  19. Subject s who have had electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) within 12 months of study entry or 
who will have ECT at any time during the study.   
 
 
6.0 Subject  Recruitment  
 
Subject s will be recruited through referring community mental health centers, treatment 
providers  (including day treatment centers and inpatient units), and self -referrals through 
advertisement and word- of-mouth. Additionally, subject s will be invited to participate if they are 
included in previously established site  registr ies. 
 
 
7.0 Study Procedures  
 
See Study Procedures Table Attachment 1 . 
 
 
8.0 Clinical Assessments and Procedures  
 
The following assessments will be administered at one or more visits during the duration  of the 
study according to the Study P rocedures Table (Attachment 1). All assessments will be 
completed by study personnel based on interviews with the subject  or based on questionnaires 
completed by the subject .  
 
Diagnostic Interview  
The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV-TR (SCID -I/P Patient Edition) will be used to 
confirm the diagnosis of a psychotic disorder and/or rule out other diagnoses. The SCID -IP is a 
semi -structured interview designed to evaluate DSM -IV-TR Axis I diagnoses .19 An abbreviated 
version of the SCID may be used at the discretion of the principal investigator. Inclusion 
diagnosis criteria will be verified.  
 
Clinical Global Impressions Severity Scale (CGI -S)  
The CGI -S will be used for repeated evaluations of global psychopathology . The CGI -S scale is 
widely used in schizophrenia research and is a single 7 -point Likert scale rating severity of 
psychopathology on a scale of 1 (normal, not ill) to 7 (very severely ill).20 
 
Clinical Global Impressions Severity Im provement Scale (CGI -I)  
The CGI -I is used to assess the clinical change as compared to symptoms at baseline using a 7 -
point Likert scale, ranging from very much improved (1) to very much worse (7) .20 
 
The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS)  
The PANSS will be the primary assessment ins trument for psychopathology . The PANSS 
contains 30 items that assess symptoms of psychotic disorders including positive, negative and 
general psychopathology. The PANSS was chosen because of its widespread use in clinical studies of psychosis, and its demonstrated reliability in assessing psychopathology across diverse patient populations.
21  
   
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 9 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery (MCCB)   
The MCCB will be administered  according to Attachment 1.  It is a reliable cognitive battery 
(test-retest reliability ~0.7 for most tests.  Small but statistically significant practice effects have 
been noted with speed of processing and problem -solving subtests (1/5th of standard 
deviation).  To overcome these practice effects, alternate forms of MCCB will be implemented in 
this study.   The total average administration time of MCCB is approximately 75 
minutes.   MCCB is comprised of seven cognitive domains and 10 re lated tests (Trail Making 
Test: Part A; Brief Assessment in Cognition in Schizophrenia: Symbol Coding; Hopkins Verbal Learning Test -Revised; Wechsler Memory Scale- Third Ed: Spatial Span; Letter -Number 
Sequencing; Neuropsychological Assessment Battery: Mazes; Brief Visuospatial Memory Test-Revised; Category Fluency: Animal Naming; Mayer -Salovey -Caruso Emotional Intelligence 
Test: Managing Emotions; and Continuous Performance Test -Identical Pairs.  For each cognitive 
test, a multi- item score will be derived b ased on the raw item values according to the MCCB 
scoring manual.  Each of the individual item raw scores is standardized to age - and gender -
corrected t -scores (mean=50, standard deviation=10).  Each test will be converted in to a domain 
score, with Working Memory and Speed of Processing domains consisting of 2 and 3 tests, respectively.  The visual and working components of the MCCB will be administered first 
because they represent the primary aims of the study.
22 
 
UCSD Performance -Based Skills Assessment -B (UPSA -B) 
The UPSA -B is a performance- based assessment of improvem ent in functional capacity. 
Partic ipants are asked to role -play tasks in 2 areas of functioning: communication and finances. 
The communication subtest revolves around a series of 9 role -play exercises using an unplugged 
telephone. The finance subtest tests the patient’s ability to count change, read a utility bill, and write checks. Scores are assigned for each of the 2 subscales and a provided formula is used to 
calculate an UPSA -B Total Score (range = 0 -100).
23 
 
Personal and Social Performance Scale (PSP)  
The PSP scale is a 100- point, single item, clinician rated scale to assess 4 domains of 
functioning, including personal and social relationships, socially useful activities, self -care and 
disturbing and aggressive behaviors.24  
 
Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire – Shor t Form ( Q-LES-Q-SF) 
The Q -LES-Q-SF), a 16-item scale based on subject report of life satisfaction and to assess 
deficit symptoms.25  
 
Negative Symptom Assessment Scale – 16- item (NSA -16), a primary outcome measure, is 
used to help clinicians rate behaviors (not ps ychopathology) commonly associated with negative 
symptoms of schizophrenia.  The scale rates subjects on 16“anchors,” is a semi -structured, 
clinical interview, and each item is rated from 1 to 6.  The total score is the sum of the 16 
specific items and ran ges from 16 to 96; a higher score indicates greater severity of illness.  In 
addition, there is a global rating which represents the overall assessment of a subject’s negative symptoms. The rating should not be an average of any particular behavior, but a gestalt of everything observed in the interview.
26 
 
Habits  
Use of alcohol, tobacco, and recreational drugs since last assessment will be collected at each 
visit.  
 
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 10 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  Heath Resource Utilization  
Resource utilization data (outpatient community based medical and psychiatric visits) will be 
collected for comparative purposes.  
  
9.0 Safety Assessments and Procedures  
 The investigator is responsible for appropriate medical care of subject s during the study. The 
investigator remains responsible for the following, through an appropriate health care option, adverse events that are serious or that caused the subject  to discontinue before completing the 
study. The subject  should be followed unt il the event is resolved or explained. Frequency of 
follow -up evaluation is left to the discretion of the investigator.  
 
Vital Signs: Vital signs will be assessed at study visits per Stud y Procedures Table (Attachment 
1).  Vital signs include: body weight, height (Visit 1 only), blood pressure, heart rate , waist 
circumference (optional per study site), and temperature (optional per study site) . Blood pressure 
and heart rate will be taken in a seated position or supine position after a rest period of five 
minutes.   
 
Medical History: The subject ’s lifetime medical history will be taken during the screening 
period. Medical history includes previous and current diseases.  
 
Physical Examination: A physical examination including a neurological examination  and an 
assessment for active infections , including orolabial lesions.   
 
Electrocardiograph (ECG): A supine, 12 lead ECG will be performed according to the Study 
Procedures Table (Attachment 1). Potentially clinically significant ECG abnormalities will be  
interpreted by a local cardiol ogist at the discretion of the investigator  and/or medical designee.  
 
Suicidality:  Suicide -related events will be assessed and evaluated at every visit through a 
clinical interview by a trained clinician  designated by the sit e PI.  
 
*Any abnormal findings and severity, causality o r sequelae will be documented.   Clinically 
significant changes in vital sign measurements, ECGs, labs, or findings during physical 
examination  (including orolabial lesions ) and findings during the clinical interview from baseline 
will be documented as adverse events and causality will be assessed.  
 
 
10.0 Criteria for Repeat Assessments, Rescreening, and Discontinuation  
 
Repeat Assessments  
Screening assessments can be repeated within the screening window under the same screening 
number with the exception of eligibility criteria related rating scales/questionnaires. Subject  
diagnosis confirmation will not be repeated.  
    
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 11 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  Rescreening  
Subject s who screen fail may be rescreened one time, under a new screening number. If a subject  
is rescreened, all screening assessments (with the exception of the diagnosis confirmation) must 
be repeated and the stability criteria timelines must be met.    
Discontinuation  
Subject s will be discontinued under the following circumstances:  
1. Study Medication Non- Compliance:  Significant noncompliance is defined as missing 
seven  or more consecutive days of study medication or more than 24 cumulative days of 
study m edication  during the entire study.  
2. Subject s who have the following lab values while on study medication:  
o Liver trans aminase levels >3 times the ULN  
o Hemoglobin <9  
o White blood cells <1500 
o Serum creatinine >1.5  
3. Subject s who develop moderate or severe renal impairment as defined by CrCl <5 0 
ml/min (measured by the Cockcroft- Gault equation) while on study medication 
4. Female subject s who become pregnant while on study medication 
5. Subject s who require more than 50% increase in their dos e of antipsychotic medicatio n 
OR the addition of a new antipsychotic medication will be reviewed by the principal 
investigator and discontinuation will be addressed on a case -by-case basis as clinically 
indicated.  
6. Subject s who require treatment with any excluded concomitant medications (See 
Attachment 2)  
If a subject  discontinues from the study, discontinuation assessments will be at  the discretion of 
the investigator.  
 A subject  may withdraw from the study medication at any time at his/her own request, or may be 
withdrawn at any time at  the discretion of the  investigator for safety, behavioral, or 
administrative reasons.  
 
 
11.0 Laboratory Assessments  
 
Study associated laboratory assessments (blood and urine) will be collected at time points specified in Study Procedures Table (Attachment  1) and analyzed by a local laboratory with the 
exception of the urine dipstick assessments which will be  collected and analyzed onsite  
 A total of 36 mL of blood will be collected for sc reening assessments (Visit 1), 30 mL of blood 
will be collected at Visits , 6, and 10.      
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 12 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  Laboratory assessments to be completed:  
1. complete blood count with differential (CBC w/diff)  
2. comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP)  
3. uric acid level  
4. creatin ine clearance  
5. calcium  
6. lipid panel  
7. hemoglobin A1c (HgbA1c)  
8. thyroid stimulating hormone level (TSH)  
9. pregnancy test  (urine)  
10. urine toxicology screen  
11. urinalysis  
12. hepatitis panel  
13. serological assessment of antibodies to HSV1 
14. inflammatory markers ( HSV1, HSV2,  EBV,  HHV6, CMV, CRP, VZV, and 
Toxoplasmosis)  
 
*All clinically significant abnormal laboratory findings subsequent to randomization will be repeated at appropriate intervals to establish resolution or until appropriate clinical follow -up can 
be established.  
 
Serological Assessment of Antibodies to HSV1:  
A serological assessment of antibodies  to HSV1 will be completed by a central laboratory, Mayo 
Clinic Mayo Medical Laboratories , and results will be reported  during the screening period prior to 
randomization for each subject . Results will be sent el ectronically to Indiana University Department 
of BioStatistics who will release the result to identified unblinded study personnel at each study site. The unblinded study personnel will be responsible for randomizing subjects to study treatment according t o the  stratified randomization block.  
 
Inflammatory Markers  
Inflammatory markers  (HSV1, HSV2,  EBV, HHV6, CMV, CRP, VZV, and Toxoplasmosis ) will 
be assessed with methods previously described.27 These serologic assessment s will be performed 
centrally in Dr. Robert Yolken’s laboratory at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medici ne. 
These b lood samples will be  de-identified at sites prior to sending for analysis . Study site 
investigators  will remain blinded to the results of these assessments until after the trial has been 
completed .  
 
Optional Repository Participation  
An additional 4ml of whole blood will be collected (2ml serum) and sent to Robert Yolken, MD at  
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine  repository from all consented subject s in the main 
study (collected at screening) for later unspecified inflammatory marker analyses  related to 
psychiatric disorders . Subject s may refuse to participate in the repository  without conse quence to 
their participation in the main study . These samples will be given a unique subject  number linking 
the main study subject  number to the repository subject  number at the site level. Samples will be 
sent to the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine repository using  the repository subject  
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 13 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  number only. Non- identifying demographic information will be submitted to Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine repository at the time of sample submission. The code linking 
subject  to repository subject  number will be destroy ed by sites at the end of the main study, truly de -
identifying the samples. Subject s will be able to request sample destruction from the Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine repository by formal request to the main study site until the time the identifying code is destroyed at the site level. 
 
 
 
12.0 Study Medication /Treatment  
 
Valacyclovir hydrochloride and matching placebo capsules  will be used as study medication for 
this study. Placebo capsule s will look like  valacyclovir capsules , with matching shape, taste, and 
color. Subject s will be instructed to take 6 capsules of study medication daily.  
 The investigator or his/her designee is responsible for explaining the correct use of the study medication to the subject s, verifying  subje ct understanding and agreement , maintaining accurate 
records of dispensing and collection, and destroying  all unused medication according to their 
pharmacy standard operating procedures at the end of the st udy. Subject s will be instructed to 
contact the in vestigator as soon as possible if they have a complaint or problem with the study 
medication  so that the situation can be assessed.  
 
Method of Assignment to Treatment  
Subject s who meet all criteria for enrollment will be 1:1 randomized in a double -blind fashion to 
adjunctive treatment with valacyclovir or placebo at Visit 2. Assignment to treatment groups will 
be determined by a computer -generated random  sequence provided to sites by an unblinded 
biostatistics team at Indiana University. To minimize poten tial imbalance among treatment 
groups of factors that may influence efficacy  outcomes, a stratif ied random assignment of 
subject s to therapy will be used  to insure equal representation of HSV1 positive and negative 
subject s in the placebo and valacyclovir arms. The stratification  factors used for this study 
include the investigative site.   
 
Compounding  and Pharmacy Oversight  
Study medications will be sent to study sites at regular intervals from the University of Iowa which is contracted by Indiana University for preparation and shipping study medication for this study.  
 Study medication will be purchased directly through Indiana University. University of Iowa 
pharmacy  will over -encapsulate th e valacyclovir  and create matching placebo capsules.  Study 
medication will be stored according to th e details on the product label (59
 o to77o F).  
 
Dosing  
The dosing used in this study is 3 capsules of either valacyclovir or /placebo by mouth twice  per 
day, given without regard to meals . Each valacyclovir capsule will contain 500 mg of active 
ingredient  for a total daily dose of 3 grams per day.  Dose reducti ons of 2 capsules per day will be 
permitted to address adverse events  at the discretion of the site investigator.  
 
Dispensing  
Dispensing method will be chosen by each site and will include one of the following options:  
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 14 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)   
Option 1: Bulk Supply/ Local Pharmacy  
Each investigative site will identify their local pharmacy used for dispensation to subject s. 
Indiana University will provide randomization numbers to each site. The local pharmacy will be 
responsible for randomizing subject s to groups and dispens ing medication to subject s according 
to their local standard operating procedures. Each investigative site will remain blinded, but each site’s pharmacy will hold their subject s treatment assignment which may be broken in the case of 
an emergency.  
 
Option 2: Individual Blinded Packages/ Unblinded Site Personnel  
University of Iowa will label and package medication into individual packages for subject  
assignment by unblinded site personnel. Indiana University will provide randomization numbers to each site. E ach investigative site will identify their unblinded site personnel to be used for 
package assignment to subject s. The unblinded site personnel will be responsible for 
randomizing subject s to groups and dispensing medication to subject s according to their local 
standard operating procedures. Each investigative site will remain blinded, but the unblinded site personnel will hold their subject s treatment assignment which may be broken in the case of an 
emergency.  
 
Compliance  
Compliance will be assessed at each visit by direct questioning and medication count of unused medication and packaging to be returned at each visit. Adequate study medication dispensing records will be obtained.  
  
13.0 Concomitant Medication  
 The list of excl uded medications and procedures is provided in Attachment 2 . 
 
Benzodiazepine  Equivalents Use  
The use of benzodiazepines/hypnotics/anxiolytics is permitted during the study (all  study periods).  
Benzodiazepines should not be administered 8 hours before psychiatric evaluations during all 
study periods. Every effort should be made to use the smallest amount possible. Benzodiazepines 
should only be taken “as needed” (PRN), and not as a standing dose unless the subject  has been 
receiving a stable dose of a benzodiazepine/hypnotic/ anxiolytic for at least 30 days immediately prior to Visit 1. Benzodiazepine usage, however, must be recorded in mg with valid start and stop dates, and should not be recorded with a “PRN” frequency.  
 Table 1 lists the only allowed benzodiazepine equivalents to be prescribed in this study.  Subjects 
should not exceed the maximum daily dose of any individual agent as specified in Table 1 . 
 The use of multiple benzodiazepines concurrently is discouraged.  
  Table 1. List of Benzodiazepine  Equivalents  
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 15 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)   
 
 
Anticholinergic  Therapy  
The use of  anticholinergic medications  is permitted during the study (all study periods) (Table 
3). PRN anticholinergics  should not be administered 8 hours before psychiatric evaluations 
during all study periods. Every effort should be made to use the smallest amount possible. 
Anticholinergic medications  should only be taken “as needed” (PRN), and not as a standing dose 
unless the subject  has been receiving a  stable dose of  the anticholinergic medication  for at least 
30 days immediately prior to randomization.  In those cases the anticholinergic medication 
should be taken at the regularly scheduled time. Anticholinergic medication  usage, however, 
must be recor ded in mg with valid start and stop dates (and frequency if scheduled), and should 
not be recorded with a “PRN” frequency.   If multiple anticholinergic medications are in use then 
use the equivalency table to determine maximum allowable daily dose (Table 4 ). 
 Table 3. Allowed Anticholinergic  Medication  
 
      
    Benzodiazepine Max Daily Dose
Lorazepam 6 mg
Temazepam 30 mg
Diazepam  30 mg
Flunitrazepam 6 mg
Phenazepam 2 mg
Clonazepam 1.5 mg
Nitrazepam  5 mg
Flurazepam 30 mg
Triazolam 0.25 mg
Oxazepam  60 mg
Chloral hydrate  2000 mg
Chlordiazepoxide 75 mg
Alprazolam 3 mg
Zolpidem 10 mg
Eszopiclone  3 mg
Anticholinergic Maximum Daily Dose
Benztropine mesylate 6 mg
Biperiden 6 mg
Procyclidine 15 mg
Trihexyphenidyl (Benzhexol) 15 mg
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 16 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  Table 4. Estimated Anticholinergic Equivalency  
 
 
 
14.0 Adverse Events and Reporting  
 For the purposes of collecting and evaluating all information found during this clinical study, an adverse event  is any undesirable or unexpected experience that occurs after informed consent 
has been obtained without regard to the possibility of a causal relationship, and without regard to 
treatment group assignment.  All adverse events will be documented and all s erious adverse 
events will be reported following local IRB requirements .   
 
For non- serious adverse events, research staff will question each subject  and will document the 
occurrence and nature of presenting condition(s).  Pre -existing condition(s) and any  change in 
the pre -existing condition(s) will be documented and/or the occurrence and nature of any adverse 
event.   
 
A serious adverse event  is any adverse drug experience occurring at any dose that: results in 
death , is life threatening , results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization , results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity , or results in congenital 
anomaly/birth defect. 
 All serious adverse events will be documented and reported to a ppropriate regulatory bodies.   
  
15.0 Monitoring Randomization Assignments and Data Safety Monitoring 
Board  
 Throughout the course of the study, the study’s senior statistician will evaluate unblinded randomization assignments to assess the equivalence of the two groups.  If the randomized 
groups are not matched, the randomization procedures may be altered to ensure that the two groups do not differ on relevant variables.   
 
Each investigative site will a have site specific Data Safety Monitoring Board  (DSMB)  which 
will be responsible for data and safety monitoring  for each site.  DSMB is responsible for 
reviewing study procedures, AEs, safety mailings (if applicable), enrollment, active subject  
progress, drop- out rates, and ongoing conduct of the research.  The  DSMB members can ask 
questions and make comments and/or recommendations to the investigators.  The Institutional Review Boards (IRB) and SMC’s are notified of significant findings by way of the DSMB meeting minutes at the time of continuing review  accordi ng to each site’s standard operating 
procedures. DSMB members must consist of physicians and scientists not listed as site investigators on this study. Data on the number of subject s enrolled and the number of A Es will Anticholinergic E stimated Anticholinergic E quiv alency
Benztropine 1 mg
Biperiden 1 mg
Diphenhydramine   67 mg
Procyclidine 2.5 mg
Trihexyphenidyl  2.5 mg
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 17 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  be reviewed by the DSMB at least bi -annually  and more frequently if needed.  The resulting  
report will be issued to the site specific IRBs and SMC at least at the time of IRB continuing 
review or more frequently by request.  Any unanticipated events will be immediately directed to 
the lead in vestigators at each site who will follow their IRB reporting procedures.  
  
16.0 Statistical Analysis  
 
Power analysis  
The effect sizes observed in the completed Prasad et al. 2012 study were used to estimate the 
sample size necessary for adequate power to detect differences in cognitive variables for the current study.  The earlier study, which enrolled 12 patients in each group, saw changes in cognitive function with effect sizes  that ranged from small (d=0.25) to quite large(d=1.21) .   
An intent -to-treat (ITT) analysis will be adopted, which includes all randomized subject s.  We 
will use two cognitive domains from the MATRICS battery , visual memory and working 
memory, as the primary outcome variables.  Prasad reported effect sizes of Cohen’s d=0.79 for working memory and d=0.97 for visual object learning when comparing valacyclovir to place bo 
in HSV- 1-seropositive subject s.  Forty per cent of patients with schizophrenia are HSV -1 positive 
(Prasad et al in press; Dickerson et al 2003). A total of 175 subject s will be enrolled at 5 sites, 
with the expectation that 70 subject s will be HSV- 1-seropostive and 105 subject s will be 
seronegative .  With 70 HSV -1 positive subject s enrolled (35 per treatment group), we would be 
able to detect a minimum effect size of d=0.63 (a conservative estimate based on the Prasad study) for each of the two primary outcome measures at significance level alpha=0. 05 using two -
sided t tests.  The Hochberg modification of the Bonferroni method to control Type 1 error will be used.  With t his method, the smallest of the p -values for the two outcomes is tested at 
p<alpha/2; if that test is rejected, the second outcome is tested at p<alpha  We will achieve the 
same power when testing HSV -1 positive vs. negative subject s who are on valacyclovir using 
similar methods.  We will test the treatment effects on the two primary efficacy measures (visual and working memory) with one -tailed tests at an overall alpha=0.1.    S tratified randomization 
will be used to ensure the balance of H SV-1 status between the valacyclovir  group and the 
placebo group.   
 
Data Analysis  
The primary objective of this study is to determine : 1) whether  valacyclovir improves cognit ive 
funct ioning in schizophrenia subject s who are HSV1 seropositive and early in the course of their 
illness , and 2)  whether the improvement from valacyclovir differs in HSV1 seropositive and 
negative subject s.  We hypo thesize that subject s who received valacyclovir will show 
improvement in memory functioning, as measured by t he visual and working memory domains 
of the MATRICS cognitive battery relative to their counterparts who received placebo , and the 
improvement exists in HSV -1 seropositive subjects compared to the seronegative subject s.  All 
randomized subject s will be use d using ITT analysis .  This is the most conservative approach for 
detecting a treatment effect, because the inclusion of subject s who did not complete the 
intervention will serve to underestimate rather than overestimate any treatment effect.   
Sensitivity analyses including a subset analysis using completers only analysis will also be performed to test the robustness of the findings. Statistical tests will be performed based on one -
sided test at the 10% level of significance with an adjustment for multiple comparisons for the 2 primary efficacy outcome measures with each primary measure tested at an alpha threshold of p<0.05 as noted above.  One -tailed tests are planned because the main interest of this study is to 
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 18 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  determine if valacyclovir  is superior to pl acebo and thus has produced a sufficient efficacy signal 
in one or more of the two  primary efficacy outcome measures to warrant further assessment in 
subsequent larger, confirmatory trials. 
 
 Baseline analysis will be conducted to summarize patients’ characteristics in the two treatment 
groups for HSV -1 seropositive and seronegative subjects respectively. Demographics and 
relevant clinical variables, including symptom severity and antipsychotic dose equivalents, will be compared between treatment groups using two -sample t tests (for continuous variables) and 
chi-square tests (for categorical variables).  
 
The primary outcome measures  are the visual and working memory domains of the MATRICS 
battery .  For each subject , a change score will be calculated for  this domain, which quantifies the 
difference in cognitive performance from pre -treatment baseline to post randomization study 
visits.  Unadjusted p- values from direct comparison of valacyclovir vs. placebo among HSV -1 
positives , and HSV -1 positive vs. neg ative with active treatment will be reported using two -
sample one -sided t tests.  
 The primary outcome measures (visual memory and working memory) and important secondary cognitive (MCCB composite score) and functional (UPSA -B, Q -LES-Q-SF) outcome measures 
will be assessed at baseline, visit 6 and visit 10.  To analyze these measures, we will employ a mixed model for repeated measures ANCOVA, of the general form for each measure:  Post -
baseline score at visit i = baseline score + treatment + visit + HSV -1 status + interactions among 
treatment, visit, and HSV -1 status + other baseline covariates, where visit is a categorical 
measure denoting whether the post baseline score came from visit 6 or 10.   Within- subject 
correlation will be modeled with an unstructur ed covariance matrix with 3 parameters (variances 
at visit 6 and 10, covariance between visits 6 and 10).  In this model, the treatment effect estimates the average magnitude of the treatment differences at visits 6 and 10, and the treatment x visit intera ction the difference in the magnitude of the treatment difference at visit 10 vs visit 6.  
Additional interactions involving treatment, HSV -1 and week estimate how the magnitude of 
treatment differences, on average or at visits 6 versus 10, is altered by H SV-1 status. No 
imputation will be needed to address missing data issue using the linear mixed model approach.  
 For PANSS scores, which are assessed at 4 post -baseline visits, we will also use mixed model 
ANCOVA with a similar set of fixed effects, but will compare the fit of linear or higher order polynomials to estimate time trends in treatment effects. In past studies in schizophrenia using the CGI, we have observed that 1) most values are clustered tightly among 3 or 4 of the 7 possible grades of severi ty, and 2) few subjects change more than 1 or 2 points.  These features 
that suggest linear mixed models may be inappropriate for detecting change in the CGI.  Accordingly, we will assess change in the CGI as follows: 1) For each subject, we will compute the Spearman rank correlation between visit number and CGI score for all visits observed, as a 
nonparametric measure of trend; and, 2) a Wilcoxon test will be used to compare the average magnitude of within -participant Spearman trend scores a) between all p articipants on 
Valacyclovir and Placebo; b) between participants on are HSV -1 sero positive and on 
valacyclovir or placebo; or, c) between participants on are HSV -1sero  negative and on 
valacyclovir or placebo.  We will use multiple imputation of    missing CGI data to assess the 
sensitivity of these analyses to missing data.  
 
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 19 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  Another analysis objective is to assess the safety and tolerability of valacyclovir treatment in this 
patient population.  Safety data will be analyzed using incidence density analysis to compare the 
rates of adverse events (AEs) across groups. Incidence density a nalysis is ideal for adverse 
events comparisons, because event frequencies are adjusted for the total duration of follow -up, 
and thus corrects for different rates of follow -up between study groups.  The occurrence of all 
adverse events will be compared, as  will the occurrence of the following categories of adverse 
events: total AEs, serious AEs, psychiatric AEs, and AEs grouped by organ system.  Survival analysis techniques will also be employed to compare retention time across groups.  In addition, 
seconda ry analyses will include testing for drug versus placebo effects in all partici pants without 
consideration of HSV -1 sero status. All statistical analyses will be conducted using SAS 9.1.  
  
17.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 
Confidentiality will be protected by ensuring all research staff have been properly trained in confidentiality and human subject  resear ch procedures, coding all subject  information when 
possible, and by securing subject  files in a locked filing cabinet or on secured databases with 
access  available only to the  investigator and research staff. Furthermore, data entered into a 
computer database will only use subject  codes on secured computers that will be password 
protected with access  available only to the  investigator and research staff. Any screening 
information obtained from potential research subject s who subsequently do not participate in the 
research study will be destroyed.  
  
18.0 Record Retention  
 Paper copies of medical records and source documentation will be kept for at least seven years after the study is closed with the IRB. One year after study closure, the documents may be shipped site specific long- term storage facility until destruction.  
  
19.0 References  
 
1. Green MF. What are the f unctional consequences of neurocognitive deficits in schizophrenia? Am 
J Psychiatry. Mar 1996;153(3):321- 330. 
2. Prasad KM, Eack SM, Keshavan MS, Yolken RH, Iyengar S, Nimgaonkar VL. Antiherpes Virus–
Specific Treatment and Cognition in Schizophrenia: A Test -of-Concept Randomized Double -
Blind Placebo- Controlled Trial. Schizophrenia Bulletin. 2013;39(4):857- 866. 
3. Heinrichs RW, Zakzanis KK. Neurocognitive deficit in schizophrenia: a quantitative review of 
the evidence. Neuropsychology. Jul 1998;12(3):426 -445. 
4. Sponheim S, Jung R, Seidman L, et al. Cognitive deficits in recent -onset and chronic 
schizophrenia. Journal of psychiatric research. 2010;44(7):421- 428. 
5. Green MF. What are the functional consequences of neurocognitive deficits in schizophrenia? The American journal of psychiatry. 1996.  
6. Buchanan RW, Freedman R, Javitt DC, Abi -Dargham A, Lieberman JA. Recent  advances in the 
development of novel pharmacological agents for the treatment of cognitive impairments in 
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia bulletin. 2007;33(5):1120- 1130.  
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 20 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  7. Wykes T, Huddy V, Cellard C, McGurk SR, Czobor P. A meta -analysis of cognitive remedi ation 
for schizophrenia: methodology and effect sizes. American Journal of Psychiatry. 
2011;168(5):472- 485. 
8. Daheshia M, Feldman LT, Rouse BT. Herpes simplex virus latency and the immune response. 
Current opinion in microbiology. 1998;1(4):430- 435. 
9. Dickerson FB, Boronow JJ, Stallings C, Origoni AE, Ruslanova I, Yolken RH. Association of 
serum antibodies to herpes simplex virus 1 with cognitive deficits in individuals with 
schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. May 2003;60(5):466- 472. 
10. Schretlen DJ, Van norsdall TD, Winicki JM, et al. Neuroanatomic and cognitive abnormalities 
related to herpes simplex virus type 1 in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research. 
2010;118(1):224- 231. 
11. Yolken RH, Torrey EF, Lieberman JA, Yang S, Dickerson FB. Serological eviden ce of exposure 
to Herpes Simplex Virus type 1 is associated with cognitive deficits in the CATIE schizophrenia 
sample. Schizophrenia research. May 2011;128(1- 3):61 -65. 
12. Shirts BH, Prasad KM, Pogue -Geile MF, Dickerson F, Yolken RH, Nimgaonkar VL. Antibodies 
to cytomegalovirus and Herpes Simplex Virus 1 associated with cognitive function in 
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research. Dec 2008;106(2- 3):268- 274. 
13. Prasad KM, Bamne MN, Shirts BH, et al. Grey matter changes associated with host genetic 
variation and exposure to Herpes Simplex Virus 1 (HSV1) in first episode schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia research. 2010;118(1):232- 239. 
14. Prasad KM, Eack SM, Goradia D, et al. Progressive gray matter loss and changes in cognitive 
functioning associated with exposure to herpes simplex virus 1 in schizophrenia: a longitudinal 
study. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2011;168(8):822- 830. 
15. Acosta EP, Fletcher CV. Valacyclovi r. The Annals of pharmacotherapy. 1997;31(2):185- 191. 
16. Alrabiah FA, Sacks SL. New antiherpesvirus agents. Drugs. 1996;52(1):17 -32. 
17. Valtrex. In: Kline GS, ed2013. 
18. Reitano M, Tyring S, Lang W, et al. Valaciclovir for the suppression of recurrent g enital herpes 
simplex virus infection: a large -scale dose range- finding study. Journal of Infectious Diseases. 
1998;178(3):603- 610. 
19. First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, Williams JBW. SCID -I/P. 2007. 
20. Guy W. ECDEU assessment manual for psychopharmacology,  revised 1976 Rockville, MD: 
National Institute of Mental Health. Psychopharmacology Research Branch. 217-331. 
21. Kay SR, Flszbein A, Opfer LA. The positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for 
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia bulletin. 1987;13(2):261.  
22. Nuechterlein K, Green M, Kern R, et al. The MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery, part 1: test 
selection, reliability, and validity. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2008;165(2):203- 213. 
23. Mausbach BT, Harvey PD, Goldman SR, Jeste DV, Patterson TL. Development of a brief scale of 
everyday functioning in persons with serious mental illness. Schizophrenia bulletin. 
2007;33(6):1364- 1372. 
24. Morosini P, Magliano L, Brambilla L, Ugolini S, Pioli  R. Development, reliability and 
acceptability of a new version of the DSM‐ IV Social and Occupational Functioning Assessment 
Scale (SOFAS) to assess routine social funtioning. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. 
2000;101(4):323- 329. 
25. Endicott J, Nee J, Harr ison W, Blumenthal R. Quality of life enjoyment and satisfaction 
questionnaire. Psychopharmacol Bull. 1993;29(2):321 -326. 
26. Alphs LD, Summerfelt A, Lann H, Muller RJ. The negative symptom assessment: a new 
instrument to assess negative symptoms of schizo phrenia. Psychopharmacol Bull. 
1989;25(2):159- 163. 
27. Dickerson FB, Boronow JJ, Stallings C, Origoni AE, Ruslanova I, Yolken RH. Association of 
serum antibodies to herpes simplex virus 1 with cognitive deficits in individuals with 
schizophrenia. Archives of general psychiatry. 2003;60(5):466.  
 
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 21 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  ATTACHMENT 1  
Study Procedures Table
 
 Screening BaselineTerm-             
ination
Period
Visit 1 Visit 2aVisit 10
Day 0 14 28 42 56 7084 98112
Visit Window Intervals 12-16 days 12-16 days 12-16 days 12-16 days 12-16 days 12-16 days 12-16 days 12-16 days
(in days) (+/- 2 days) (+/- 2 days) (+/- 2 days) (+/- 2 days) (+/- 2 days)(+/- 2 days) (+/- 2 days)(+/- 2 days)
Informed Consent X
Demographics, Substance/ 
Medical/Psychiatric History, 
review of current and previous 
medicationsX
SCI D X
Physical Exam X X
Health Resource Utilization X X X
Habit sdX X X X X X X X X X
ECG (triplicate 1 min apart) X
Vitals X X X X
Labs (CMPb, CBC w/ diff) X X X
T SH X X
Hepatitis Panel X
Uric Acid X X
Lipid Panel X X
HgbA1c X X
Creatinine Clearance X X X
HSV1 X
Urinalysis X X X
Urine pregnancy test X X X X
Urine toxicology X X X X
Inflammatory markers X X
RepositorycX
CGI-I X X X X X X X X
CGI-S and Suicidality clinical 
interviewX X X X X X X X X X
P SP  &  Q- L E S- Q- SF X X X
MATRICS & UPSA-B X X X
NSA-16 X X X X X
PANSS X X X X X
Adverse Events X X X X X X X X X
Concomitant Meds X X X X X X X X X X
Medication Dispensation X X X X X X X X
Medication Accountability X X X X X X X X
bNote: Calcium level is included in the CMP panel. 
cOptional. Consent must be obtained for participation in repository
dBaseline/Lifetime Habits is collected at the screening visitVisit 3 Visit 4 Visit 5 Visit 6 Visit 7
aNote: Visit 2 procedures may be split over 2 visits at the site discretion. Assessments should be no more than 7 days apart if split 
visit occurs. Visit 8 Visit 9
0-30 days N/A
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 22 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  ATTACHMENT 2  
Concomitant Medication Table  
 
 
                                                                                       (continues)  
  Alpha 2 agonists (eg., Clonidine)Stable dose,  no changes or 
additions
Aminoglycoside antibiotics (systemic) No
Anticholinergics Conditionala
AntidepressantsStable dose,  no changes or 
additions
Antiemetics (eg., metoclopromide, domperidone, other dopamine receptor 
blockers)Stable dose,  no changes or 
additions                                    
Conditionalb
Antiepileptic mood stabilizers (Divalproex, Oxcarbazepine, Lamotrigine, 
or Carbamazepine) & LithiumStable dose,  no changes or 
additionsg
Antiepileptics, non-mood stabilizersStable dose,  no changes or 
additions                       
EXCEPT topiramate not 
allowed
Antifungals (systemic) No
Antineoplastics No
Antipsychotic medications Conditionalc
Antivirals (including trantadine) No
Barbiturates Conditionalb
Benzodiazepines & related sedatives (eg. Zolpidem) Conditionala
Bisphosphonates No
Contraceptives Stable regimeng
Creatine No
Cyproheptadine Conditionalb
Decongestants (eg., pseudophedrine) Conditionale
Dextromethorphan Conditionalb
Dicyclomine No
Herbal medications or Over the Counter Medications w/ primary CNS 
activityNo                                    
EXCEPT fish oil is 
acceptable
H2-Blockers (cimetidine, probenecid, and ranitidine)fNof
Interferons No
Hydroxyzine Conditionalb
Immunoglobulins No
Immunosupressants (DMARDs) (systemic) No
Live attenuated vaccine Cautiond
Midrin Conditionalb
Minocycline No
Muscle relaxantsStable dose,  no changes or 
additions                                    
ConditionalbMedication Use approved in st udy
Valacyclovir: Stanley Medical Research Institute  
Page 23 of 23 
Version: 04.08.15 (E)  Concomitant Medication Table (continued)  
 
 
 Opiates/OpioidsStable dose,  no changes or 
additions                                    
Conditionalb
Other Psychotropics Not Mentioned Elsew hereStable dose,  no changes or 
additions
Penicillamine No
Pentamidine No
RoflumilastStable dose,  no changes or 
additions
TramadolStable dose,  no changes or 
additions                                    
Conditionalb
TrazodoneStable dose,  no changes or 
additions                                    
Conditionalb
Vancomycin No
gFor female patients on carbemazepine, ox carbazepine, and lamotrigine, oral estrogen-
containing contraceptives may not be effective (due to cytochrome p450 3A4 
interactions).dCaution. Concomitant use of valacyclovir with live attenuated vaccinations can 
deminish the effectiveness of the vaccine. The CDC recommends stopping oral antiviral 
medication for 24 hours before the varicella zoster vaccine and for two weeks following 
vaccination.
eConditional. Recommended for "as needed"/PRN use, no longer than 7 consecutive 
days and no administration 24 hours prior to cognitive testing. Participants may take an 
ex pectorant in lieu of a decongestant.   
fEx clusionary H2 blockers include: cimetidine, probenecid, and ranitidine. Other H2 
blockers are not ex plicitly ex clusionary, but use caution when prescribed as all are 
renally ex creted with a potential to interfere with renal ex cretion & increase acyclovir 
levels. aConditional. See section 13.0 of protocol
bMay be used PRN but should be avoided 8 hours prior to cognitive testing. Record 
time and date of last administration prior to assessments.
cStable dose prior to study for four weeks prior to randomization with no more than 50% 
change in dose from baseline over course of study.  May be used PRN but should be 
avoided 8 hours prior to assessments.