 
 1 DETAILED PROTOCOL  
 
Assessing efficacy of  IV acetaminophen  for perioperative  pain control for oocyte retrieval : a 
randomized, double blind , placebo -controlled trial  
 
Principal Investigator : John C. Petrozza, MD  
Version Date: July 10 , 2019  
 
I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
a. Historical background  
 
Due to the current opioid crisis, non -opioid options for effective multimodal postoperative 
anesthesia have been explored in many recent studies. Intravenous acetaminophen  has rapid 
onset and potent analgesic properties , but due to its high cost and relatively limited clinical data  
concerning its efficacy compared with other agents, physicians are hesitant to use  intravenous 
acetaminophen in the perioperative period.  Importantly, f or minor outpatient procedures such as 
oocyte retrievals, use of IV acetaminophen  offers the opportunity to greatly reduce perioperative 
narcotic inta ke in women of reproductive age.  
 
b. Previous pre -/clinical studies supporting the proposed research  
 
Postoperative pain  
The majority of postoperative patients experience moderate to severe p ostsurgical pain , which 
can lead to complications such as impaired wound healing .1,2 Although we rely heavily on 
opioids to alleviate much of postoperative  pain, this analgesia  is not without adverse effects. 
Opioids are associated with  drowsiness, postopera tive nausea and vomiting, ileus, respiratory 
depression,  and bladder dysfunction , all of which can hamper post -operative recovery and 
discharge .3 Thus,  as we attempt  across surgical specialties  to reduce the use of opiates for 
outpatient procedures,  IV acetaminophen is an important consideration for multimodal 
anesthesia for oocyte retrievals.4 
 
Safety of IV acetaminophen  
Although IV acetaminophen is more expensive than PO acetaminophen  and less likely to be fully 
reimbursed by insurance companies , there is evidence that  favors the intravenous  formulation 
over the oral agent. The bioavailability of IV acetaminophen in cerebrospinal fluid  compared 
with oral acetaminophen afte r the administration of 1 gram over 6 hours  is 24.9 versus 14.2 
μg•hr/mL.5 IV acetaminophen produces more consistent plasma concentrations of 
acetaminophen over time than PO administration, leading to a longer duration of therapeutic 
drug plasma level .1 The intravenous route also peaks much  faster (15 minutes vs. 45 minutes).1 
Though the risk for overdose always exists, there is  evidence that IV acetaminophen may be 
safer than the same dose of PO acetaminophen: IV administration creates a lower accumulation 
of acetaminophen’s toxic metabolite (n -acetyl -p-benzoquinoneimine) than oral administration  
and produces a  peak acetaminophen concentration in the liver estimated to be 50% less than the  
same oral dose.6  
 
 
 2 IV acetaminophen  for postsurgical analgesia  
A recent review of 14 randomized controlled trials  examining the efficacy of IV acetaminophen 
for postoperative pain in a wide variety of surgeries  found that patients receiving IV 
acetaminophen  had improved analgesia in 12 of the s tudies examined.7 Sinatra et al. showed that  
IV acetaminophen use (one gram every six hours) was associated with  a decrease in morphine 
consumption by  46% (p=0.0003) on postoperative day one after total hip replacement or total 
knee  replacement and increased time until rescue morphine (hip  replacemen t, 3.9 hours and knee 
replacement, 2.1 hours) compared with placebo  (0.8 hours).8 Other studies in hysterectomy and  
laminectomy patients suggest that patients receiving IV acetaminophen may have a reduction in  
postoperative nausea and vomiting, although this has yet to be formally evaluated .7 Furthermore , 
both preemptive (before surgical incision)  and preventive (after surgical incision) use of IV 
acetaminophen appear s to produce a  decrease in pain scores 6 hours  after surgery c ompared with 
placebo (p<0.001).9 Therefore, the available evidence suggests that the addition of IV 
acetaminophen  can bolster effective analgesia in patients while decreasing the amount of opioids 
required.2,3,9,10 
 
c. Rationale behind the proposed research, and potential benefits to patients  
and/or society.  
 
The use of IV acetaminophen i s approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the  
management of mild to moderate pain, the management of moderate to severe pain  with opioid 
analgesic adjuncts, and fever reduction in adults and children over the  age of 2.11 As discussed 
above, r ecent studies have shown several benefits of  using IV acetaminophen perioperatively, 
including a reduction in opiate consumption, improved  analgesia, and reduced postoperative 
nausea and vom iting.3,10 While  the cost effectiveness of using IV acetaminophen  has not been 
extensively evaluated in su rgical  patients , a randomized controlled trial of bariatric surgery 
patients suggests that IV acetaminophen  significantly decreases mean direct hospital costs and 
emergency department v isits within 30 days of surgery.12 However, m ore research is needed to 
better assess the efficacy  of IV acetaminophen  compar ed to PO acetaminophen in treating 
postoperative pain and to  further evaluate the potential reduc tion in opioid use.  
 
In our field, recent attention has focused on prescribing pra ctices after oocyte retrievals as many 
opiate addictions begin  with prescription medications.13,14 However, there are no studies to our 
knowledge assessing mu ltimodal options for optimal pain control in the perioperative period, 
which may also impact the perceived need for pain medication prescriptions. Additionally, since 
cost is one of the limiting factors for giving patients IV acetaminophen , studies like this one that 
compare IV acetaminophen  to oral acetaminophen and assess the impact on time to PACU 
discharge in both inpatient and outpatient settings are warranted. Our primary goal is to assess 
the efficacy of pre-operative IV versus  PO Acetaminophen  compared to placebo (standard of 
care)  for pain control after oocyte retrieval, with the hypothesis that IV acetaminophen  will 
reduce  pain scores, reduce  overall narcotic burden, shorten time to discharge from PACU, 
increase time to rescue medi cation, and decrease opi ate-associated side effects.  
 
Investigating  the use of  non-opiate alternatives for perioperative anesthesia is a crucial aspect  of 
reducing the overall use of opiates in outpatient procedures. IV acetaminophen  has the potential 
 
 3 to be a versatile and worthwhile addition to achieving adequate postoperative analgesia in 
patients undergoing a wide variety of surgical procedures and in numerous hospital settings.  
 
II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
a. Specify objective and hypotheses to be tested in the project  
 
Objective:  
- To compare  the efficacy of  pre-operative IV acetaminophen versus PO acetaminophen , versus  
placebo  (standard of care) for adjunctive  pain control in the setting of oocyte retrieval in an in 
vitro fertilization clinic setting.  
 
Hypothesis:  
- Our hypothesis is that patients receiving IV acetaminophen  pre-operatively will have improved 
postoperative pain scores,  lower overall  opiate consumption , and shortened  time to discharge 
from PACU than those receiving PO acetaminophen or placebo.  
 
III. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
 
This randomized, double blind, placebo -controlled  study will be conducted over approximately 
12 months  at the MGH Fertility Center . Our g oal recruitment is 174 patients to achieve statistical 
power for our primary outcomes.  
a. Inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
[ ] Patient is 18 years or over, undergoing oocyte retrieval.  
[ ] Patient is English -speaking.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
[ ] Allergy  to acetaminophen or opiates . 
[ ] Any history of l iver disease, history of alcohol depending, or renal impairment  as reported in 
the electronic health record . 
[ ] Any history c hronic opiate use or chronic pain disorder  as reported in the electronic health 
record . 
[ ] Weight less than 50kg  as reported in the medical record.  
 
b. Source of subjects and recruitment methods.  
 
Adult patients from the reproductive endocrinology practice at MGH undergoing  oocyte  
retrieval. Patients will be recruited at the time of their IVF cycle.  
 
IV. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
 
a. Methods of enrollment, including procedures for pat ient registration and/  
or randomization  
 
 
 4 All patients  will be offered the chance to enroll in the study by a licensed MD at the time of their 
baseline ultrasound (IVF cycle start) . The licensed physician will introduce the study and provide 
an information packet containing the study recruitment letter and informed consent at that time . 
The patient will have the opportunity to opt out of the study at any time . Study staff  will confirm  
patients ’ study eligibility by telephone  during the cycle  and indicate their participation on their 
IVF cycle monitoring schedule  if they are eligible . Consent will occur in person during the IVF 
cycle by a licensed MD (see below).  
 
When the enrolled patient’s  egg retrieval is scheduled (two days in advance of procedure), study 
staff will order the research medications in EPIC and will notify the IVF team and research  
pharmacy via secure email of the study patient’s procedure date/time to coordinate me dication 
pick up.  
 
A computer -generated blocked randomization schema with alternating block sizes 
(http://www.randomization.com ) will be generated  by the research pharmacy . The fellow will 
enter a randomization number  into the study patient’s EPIC medication order, and the pharmacist 
will associate this number to the patient’s assigned study group . The research pharmacist will  
prepare the appropriate medications, and the IVF care team will be blinded to the medication s.  
 
b. Procedures for obtaining informed consent  
A licensed MD will consent the patient during one of their morning ultrasound appointments 
prior to the egg retrieval. It should be noted at the time of consent that participation in the study 
will in no way i mpact their infertility treatment or cycle management, that they will receive 
standard of care anesthesia, and  that all perioperative pain will be treated. Consented patients 
must agr ee to avoid taking pain medications (including acet aminophen or NSAIDs ) during the  
24hrs prior to their procedure, which will be confirmed prior to data collection on the day of 
procedure , as this would necessitate exclusion from study.  
 
c. Study interventions and data collection  
The study staff will transport the blinded medications from the research pharmacy to the IVF 
suite  on the day of the procedure. Anesthesia will log medications  in EPIC per research 
pharmacy protocols.  
 
Group 1: In the pre -op suite, these patients will rece ive 1000mg IV acetaminophen and PO 
placebo, followed by standard protocol anesthesia and pain control as needed.  
 
Group 2: In the pre -op suite, these patients will receive 1000mg PO acetaminophen and IV 
placebo, followed by standard protocol anesthesia and  pain control as needed.  
 
Group 3:  
In the pre -op suite, these patients will receive PO and IV placebo, followed by standard protocol 
anesthesia and pain control as needed.  
 
In all groups, pain control  will be provided by anesthesia  peri-operatively  as needed . Pain 
medication  such as opiates  may be given post-operatively as needed for pain measured by VAS 
score. In order to be consistent in assessment of immediate post -operative pain, narcotic use, and 
 
 5 discharge timing per our primary outcomes,  NSAID s will be avoided in the recovery room for all 
study patients , regardless of embryo transfer timing , as they are routinely contraindicated in our 
practice for any patient undergoing a fresh embryo transfer . However, patients not undergoing 
fresh transfer m ay take NSAIDs at home post -operatively as needed per standard of care.  
 
The PACU nurses  will assess and document VAS numeric pain scores as they do routinely in 
EPIC as well as on the study data collection sheet for the study patients. Data collection sheets 
will be secured in a lock box until input into  Redcap by study staff. Study staff will review the 
data collection and study pro tocols with the PACU nurses prior to the start of patient enrollment.  
 
After same -day discharge from the PACU, patients will receive a call from a trained member of 
the study staff on POD 2 to assess their recovery  and pain medication use . The POD2  phone visit  
data collection form will be completed at this time.  Ability to use NSAIDs in the non -transfer 
subgroup will be taken into account at the time of the statistical analysis.  
 
The anesthesia and IVF providers wil l retain the discretion to exclude patients on the day of the 
procedure from the study if they took extra analgesics in the 24 hours prior to the procedure or 
experience any non -study related complications of anesthesia and/or surgery.  
d. Current standard of care  
Current standard of care for patients undergoing oocyte retrieval involves monitored MAC 
anesthesia  with opiates  for pain control.  
e. Risks  
Risks to the patients will be minimized because they will be undergoing anesthesia that is the 
current standard of care, and pain will be treated, as the patient requires.  The patients’ IVF cycle 
management and oocyte retrieval approach will not be altered in any way by participation in the 
study.  
An adverse reaction to acetaminophen could occur. Hepatotoxicity is possible but unlikely i n the 
setting of one dose of IV acetaminophen . 
f. Equitable selection of patients  
All patients presenting for oocyte retrieval≥ 18 years old who speak English and do not possess 
any other exclusion criteria may be eligible for inclusion. Our exclusion criteria are relat ively 
few and do not impair our ability to make conclusions that may benefit these patients.  
Peopl e who do not speak English wi ll be excluded from this study  due to the low volume of 
these patients in our clinic population and the inconsistent ability to arrange for appropriate 
interpreters during all study -associated interactions in the cycle.  
 
V. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
a. Spec ific data variables being collected for the study (e.g., data collection sheets).  
 
 
 6 Clinical data regarding pain levels, pain medication use, and time to discharge will be collected 
on a PACU data collection sheet and POD2 phone visit data collection sheet. The EPIC record 
will be used to record clinical and IVF cycle history, perioperative care, embry ology findings, 
and pregnancy outcomes.  
 
b. Study endpoints.  
 
The p rimary study endpoints  will include post -operative pain  levels  in PACU and after discharge 
through POD2 , post -operative pain medication requirements  and timing  in PACU and through 
POD2 , and time to discharge  from PACU . Secondary endpoints include procedure length, post-
operative nausea, embryology outcomes, and pregnancy outcomes.  
 
c. Statistical methods.  
The difference in pain scores will be assessed by using Fisher’s Exact and chi -square tests as 
appropriate. A multivariable regression model will be performed to control for potentially 
confounding variables, such as maternal age, BMI, medical comorbidities, procedure duration, 
and oocytes retrieved.  
 
d. Power analysis (e.g., how sample size determined, evaluable subjects, etc.)  
 
We plan to enroll 58 patients in each of the three treatment groups (n = 17 4). Allowing for 
attrition of 5 patients per group (approximately 10%), we assume that we will be able to evaluate 
outcome data  for 159 patients. Based on OR times from 13 patients, w e estimate a mean 
recovery time of 88 minutes, with a standard deviation (SD) of 19 minutes.  Using this SD, we 
anticipate 80% power to detect a difference in mean recovery tim e between either of the two 
treatment groups and the standard of care of 8 minutes or greater in absolute value, or 
approximately 10%, based on two -sample t -tests at the 0.025 two -tailed significance level, where 
this significance level reflects adjustment  for the two comparisons with the control group.  
 
From these 13 patients, we also estimated the SD of the VAS post -operative pain rating to be 
approximately 2.8. Using this SD, we anticipate 80% power to detect a difference in mean post -
operative pain bet ween either of the two treatment groups and the standard of care of 1.7 or 
greater in absolute value, based on two -sample t -tests as above. Alternatively, assuming that the 
population mean pain scores for the three groups are 1, 1.5 and 2.5, respectively, then we will 
have 80% power to detect that the three group means are different, based on a one -way ANOVA 
at the 0.05 two -tailed significance level.  
 
VI. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS (STRATIFY BY COMMON AND UNCOMMON)  
 
Drug side effects and toxicities  
Potential side effects of acetaminophen include nausea, headache, loss of appetite, rash, and 
itching. However, acetaminophen is generally very well tolerated. All other medications 
proposed for this study are currently standard of care for perioperative analgesia.  
 
Serious:  
Acetaminophen : anaphylaxis, hepatotoxicity  
 
 7  
Risk to privacy:  
The collection and processing of personal data from subjects enrolled in this study will be 
limited to data that are necessary to investigate the efficacy of the study treatment protoco l. The 
treatment plans and medications will be blinded by the MGH Research Pharmacy, and the 
randomization key will be maintained securely per pharmacy protocols. Study members whose 
responsibilities require access to personal data agree to keep the identi ty of the study subjects 
confidential. The subject’s information will be kept confidential according to HIPAA guidelines.  
Psychosocial (non -medical) risks  
Because the treatment plan involves standard care for egg retrievals with immediate management 
of pai n with medications as needed , we estimate no psychosocial risks.  
 
VII. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
a. Potential benefits to participating individuals.  
- Improved analgesia postoperatively  
- Decreased overall consumption of opiates postoperatively which may reduce opiate related 
complications such as postoperative nausea and vomiting  
- Decreased time to discharge from the PACU  
 
b. Potential benefits to society (e.g., increased understanding of disease process, etc.)  
Investigating the use of non -opiate alterna tives for perioperative anesthesia is a crucial aspect of 
reducing the overall use of opiates in the outpatient setting and preventing new opiate addiction . 
IV acetaminophen  has the potential to be a versatile and worthwhile addition to achieving 
adequate postoperative analgesia in patients undergoing a wide variety of outpatient surgical 
procedures. This research  will help establish whether PO and IV acetaminophen are cost-
effective adjunct s for multimodal analgesia during oocyte retrievals.  
 
VIII. MONITOR ING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
a. Independent monitoring of source data  
Data wi ll be collected by study staff from the Department of Reproductive Endocrinology and 
Infertility. Eligible patients will be logged in a secure data form on a Partner’s password -
protected computer accessible only to study staff. Data collection sheets will be stored securely 
in a lock box  on Yawkey 10 during study recruitment and then entered into RedCap, a secure 
online database program, with de -identified patient ID numbers  assigned . Only the PI and 
research team will have access to the online and hard copy database, and identifying information 
will not be released. After the first subject has been enrolled, the data collection binder will be 
reviewed monthly by a member of the study  staff and the PI at a research meeting in a de -
identified manner. The PI will be responsible for determining whether the research should be 
altered or stopped.  
 
b. Safety monitoring (e.g. Data Safety Monitoring Board, etc.)  
The PI will evaluate all acute safety data. If 3 subjects experience a grade 2 or greater Adverse 
Event (AE) that is possibly related to study procedures, the study will be paused to fully evaluate 
 
 8 the safety of continuing enrollment. The PI will be responsible for reviewing the data an d 
determining whether the research should be altered, paused, or stopped. Any adverse events and/ 
or decision to stop enrollment will be reported to the IRB.  
 
c. Outcomes monitoring  
The research assistant and IVF fellows will collect and monitor the data c ollection forms and 
Redcap database monthly  for accuracy and completeness. The PI will also conduct periodic 
review of the case report forms and source documentation. The study staff will meet after 50% 
desired enrollment  to review data on enrolled subject s, CRFs, and source documentation.  
 
d. Adverse event reporting guidelines.  
Throughout the duration of the study, the PI will perform ongoing evaluation of subject safety 
data in order to identify AEs and trends as soon as possible. Any unanticipated proble ms, 
involving risks to subjects or others including AEs, will be reported to the IRB in accordance 
with PHRC unanticipated problems reporting guidelines.  
 
IX. References  
 
1. Smith HA. Perioperative intravenous acetaminophen and NSAIDs. Pain Medicine. 
2011;12:961 -981. 
2. Pergolizzi JV, Jr., Raffa RB, Tallarida R, Taylor R, Labhsetwar SA. Continuous 
multimechanistic postoperative analgesia: a rationale for transitioning from int ravenous 
acetaminophen and opioids to oral formulations. Pain practice : the official journal of 
World Institute of Pain. Feb 2012;12(2):159 -173. 
3. Memis D, Inal MT, Kavalci G, Sezer A, Sut N. Intravenous paracetamol reduced the use 
of opioids, extubation  time, and opioid -related adverse effects after major surgery in 
intensive care unit. Journal of critical care. Sep 2010;25(3):458 -462. 
4. Hartford LB, Van Koughnett JAM, Murphy PB, et al. Standardization of outpatient 
procedure (STOP) narcotics: a prospec tive non -inferiority study to reduce opioid use in 
outpatient general surgical procedures. J Am Coll Surg. 2018:S1072 -7515(1018)32038 -
32036.  
5. Singla NK, Parulan C, Samson R, et al. Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid pharmacokinetic 
parameters after single -dose administration of intravenous, oral, or rectal acetaminophen. 
Pain practice : the official journal of World Institute of Pain. Sep 2012;12(7):523 -532. 
6. Dart RC, Rumack BH. Intravenous acetaminophen in the United States: iatrogenic dosing 
errors. Pedia trics. 2012;129(2):349 -353. 
7. Macario A, Royal MA. A literature review of randomized clinical trials of intravenous 
acetaminophen (paracetamol) for acute postoperative pain. Pain practice : the official 
journal of World Institute of Pain. May-Jun 2011;11( 3):290 -296. 
8. Sinatra RS, Jahr JS, Reynolds L, et al. Intravenous acetaminophen for pain after major 
orthopedic surgery: an expanded analysis. Pain practice : the official journal of World 
Institute of Pain. Jun 2012;12(5):357 -365. 
9. Khalili G, Janghorba ni M, Saryazdi H, Emaminejad A. Effect of preemptive and 
preventive acetaminophen on postoperative pain score: a randomized, double -blind trial 
of patients undergoing lower extremity surgery. Journal of clinical anesthesia. May 
2013;25(3):188 -192. 
 
 9 10. McNicol ED, Ferguson MC, Haroutounian S, Carr DB, Schumann R. Single dose 
intravenous paracetamol or intravenous propacetamol for postoperative pain. The 
Cochrane database of systematic reviews. May 23 2016(5):CD007126.  
11. Pasero C, Stannard D. The role o f intravenous acetaminophen in acute pain management: 
a case -illustrated review. Pain Manag Nurs. 2012;13(2):107 -124. 
12. El Chaar M, Stoltzfus J, Claros L, Wasylik T. IV Acetaminophen Results in Lower 
Hospital Costs and Emergency Room Visits Following Bar iatric Surgery: a Double -
Blind, Prospective, Randomized Trial in a Single Accredited Bariatric Center. Journal of 
gastrointestinal surgery : official journal of the Society for Surgery of the Alimentary 
Tract. Apr 2016;20(4):715 -724. 
13. Wright TE. Opioid prescribing after oocyte -retrieval: a time for caution. Fertility and 
sterility. Oct 2018;110(5):852.  
14. Bortoletto P, Prabhu M, Garry EM, Huybrechts KF, Anchan RM, Bateman BT. Opioid 
dispensing patterns after oocyte retrieval. Fertility and sterility. 2018;110(5):905 -909. 
 