  
1 
 7-11-24 
 
 
Dear  Clinicaltrials.gov : 
 
The clinical trials.gov nu mber for the p rotocol is [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] . The preparation date for the study protocol 3 -26-2024.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Douglas F. Zatzick, MD        
Professor  
University of Washington - Harborview Medical Center  
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences  
Box 359911 325 Ninth Avenue  
Seattle, Washington  98104 -2499  
T: (206)744 -6701  
F:  (206)744 -9939  
Email:  dzatzick@u.washington.edu  
 
  

  
2 
  
A Comparative Effectiveness Trial of an Information Technology Enhanced Peer -Integrated Collaborative Care 
Intervention for US Trauma Care Systems: Study Protocol  
  
I. Background  ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  2 
II. Significance ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  4 
III. Study Design ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..  5 
IV. Selection of Appropriate I nterventions and  Comparators ……………………………………………………  7 
V. Study Procedures …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  8 
VI. Outcome Measures and Other Study Assessments ………………………………………………………………  11 
VII. Data Management ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  15 
VIII. Data Analyses ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  19 
IX. Additional Considerations Related to the Incorporation of Standards for Complex 
Interventions  ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  21 
X. References …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..  24 
  
3 
 I. Background . (RQ-1, Identify Gaps in Evidence , PC-1 Engage people representing the population of interest and other 
relevant stakeholders in ways that are appropriate and necessary in a given research context .)  
Physical injury, with and without traumatic brain injury (TBI), constitutes a major public health problem for US civilian 
and veteran trauma -exposed patients.1-3 Each year in the United States, over 30 million individuals present to acute care 
medical emergency department and trauma center settings for the treatment of traumatic injury; annually 1.5 -2.5 
million Americans are so severely injured that they require i npatient hospitalization.1,2,4 Estimates suggest that 
approximately 1.5 -3.5 million American youth and adults exp erience TBI  annually.5,6 Traumati c injury is a leading cause 
of death for individuals under the age of 45, and accounts for approximately 12% of medical expenditures nationally and 
9% of the burden of disease internationally .3,7,8 
Injured trauma survivors constitute a “high need” patient population wi th multiple complex medical and mental 
health  comorbidities , including posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD ).9,10 Highly prevalent comorbidities include  PTSD , 
depression and associated suicidal ide ation, and chronic medical conditions such as hype rtension, coronary artery 
disease , diabetes, and pulmonary disease.11-14 A series of US prospective cohort investigations suggest that between 20 -
40% of physically injured trauma survivors may go on to develop symptoms consistent with PTSD after hospitalization 
for injury.15-20 
After inju ry, PTSD and related comorbidities  are associated with a broad profile of functional impairments, including 
diminished physical function and inability to return to work.18,19,21-24 In both TBI and non -TBI patient populations, PTSD 
and depression independently account for post -injury functional impairments.25,26 PTSD and comorbidities  are 
associated with increase d health care and societal expenditures .27-31  
Physically injured trauma survivors with multiple comorbidities are at risk for fragmented care transitions and 
recurrent emergency department visits and hospitalizations.32-46 Literature review suggests that injured trauma survivors 
are a key vulnerable patient population with regard to care transitions , including recurrent emergency department visits 
and hospita lizations . Recent study team investigation suggests that an increasing burden of mental health, substance 
use and chronic medical condition comorbidit ies are  associated with an increasing risk of recurrent emergency 
department visits and hospitalizati ons in injured trauma survivors  after an initial index injury admission.14,47,48 
A series of PCORI position statement s, Institute of Medicine reports , and Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality ( AHRQ ) systematic reviews  provide support for the development and widespread implementation of health care 
system interventions targeting injured trauma survivors  at risk for mental and physical health co morbidities and 
associated post -injury emotional distress  (i.e. severe post -injury concerns and PTSD) , functional impairments, and 
fragme nted h ealth service utilization .9,49-52 PCORI guideline s emphasize the importance of patient -centered care 
transition enhancements and health care system technological innovations.9 Interventions considered responsive to the 
PCORI Health Care Systems announcement include multidisciplinary teams that incorporate peer interventionists and 
novel statewide  electronic health records.9 Institute of Medicine reviews of the top 100 priority health care topics for 
comparative effectiveness research rank comprehensive care coordination programs targeting care transitions in the top 
25 topics, and PTSD and depression in the top 50 topics.49,50 Recent  AHRQ reports stress the importance of screening 
and intervention development for trauma exposed patients at risk for the development of PTSD and related comorbid 
conditions.51,52 These combined reviews identify current gaps in the evidence that will be addressed by the findings of 
the current  investigation (RQ-1). 
Peer interventionists are becoming a mainstay of treatment delivery for multiple health conditions across  diverse US 
healthcare systems. The potential contribution of peer interventionists in the delivery of high quality patient -centered 
care has been espoused across disease conditions; literature documents completed and ongoing studies of peer 
interventionists for the care of multiple cond itions beyond injury.53-61  
However, unlike other areas of clinical medicine, acute post -injury interventions have yet to comprehensively 
integrate patient peer interventionists. Initial studies in the rehabilitation literature suggest that peer interventionists 
may aid care transiti ons after severe spinal cord and traumatic brain injury .62-65 Liter ature review, however, revealed no 
large scale, acute care medical comparative effectiveness trials  that have integrated injured peer interventionists  into 
multidisciplinary teams .  
Collaborative care interventions hold promise for the integration of peer interventionists into multidisciplinary 
teams in the treatment of injured pati ents . Derived from the chronic care mode l, collaborative car e interventions hold 
promise for the integration of treatment for patients with multiple chronic conditions within trauma care systems.47,66-71 
  
4 
 A large body of research now has established the effectiveness of collaborative care in reducing depressive, anxiety, and 
pain related sympto m presentations in primary care settings.70,72-76  
Prior study team investigations document the effectiveness of collaborative care treatment models targeting 
reductions in posttraumatic concerns, PTSD symptoms, functional limitations, and related comorbidities for injured 
patients treated within trauma care systems.47,67,68,71 Two recent trials have demonstrated the effectiveness of 
collaborative care treatment models  that included front -line MD, nursing and social work  providers in reducing PTSD 
symptoms and improving physical function.67,71 These prior investigations document enhanced post -injury quality of care 
processes including enhanced care linkage s and adherence to pharmacotherapy regimes.47,67,68,71 Literature review 
revealed few  collaborative ca re intervention trials in primary care settings and no comparative effectiveness trials in 
acute care settings that have integrated peer interventionists.77 
The study team is currently involved in the widespre ad implementation of collaborative care interventions across US 
acute care medical  trauma care systems.78 A growing body of literature supports the potential for the widespread 
implementation of peer -integrated collaborative care interventions across US trauma care systems, should effectiveness 
be established by comparative effectiveness trials. Recent meta -analyses of over 70 collaborative care intervention trials 
conducted in general medical settings suggest ef fect sizes of approximately 0.25 for mental health symptoms 
(confidence interval 0.18 -0.32).72,79 Collaborative care interventions conducted in acute care medical settings targeting 
PTSD and related comorbid conditions have been shown to have greater effect sizes of approximately 0.34.67,71 A 
number of civilian and military health care systems have adopted collaborative care intervention pr ograms as standard 
practice; Current Procedural Terminology  (CPT) codes now support the delivery and billing of collaborative care 
interventions in primary care settings.80-82 Members of the study team are  currently cond ucting a 25 site effectiveness -
implementation  hybrid  cluster randomized trial designed to assess the impact of a national roll -out of collaborative care 
for US trauma care syst ems.78 This national implementation study , however, does not incorporate peer interventionists  
into multidisciplinary teams .   
Information technology innovations , including the Emergency Department Information Exchange (EDIE) , can support 
the feasible and widespread implementation of peer -integrated collaborative care interventions for US  trauma care 
systems .44-46,83-85 In the study team’s  recently completed PCORI funded comparative effectiveness  trial, EDIE  was used  to 
track emergency department utilization at the population level.48 For the current trial, the EDIE system allows 
collaborative care team members to implement multisite electronic health care record innovations , such as the creation 
of care plan s that can be viewed by emergency departments statewide.  
Over the past two decades , the study team has completed a series of  patient -centered  investigations that provide 
key background f or the current investigation; the study team began th is work by aski ng large groups of injured patients,  
“Of everything that has h appened  to you since your injury, what concerns you the most?” (Measure Outcomes that 
People Representing the Population of Interest Notice and Care About, RQ-6)69,86 In an initial 2001 study, a series of brief 
open -ended questions that allowed patients an unconstrained oppo rtunity to describe their posttraumatic illne ss 
experiences were dev eloped .69,86 One or more posttraumatic concerns were readi ly elicited from 100% of randomly 
sampled injured trauma survivors and were easily followed over th e course of the year after injury.69,86 These open -ende d 
concern responses were reliably coded into six content domains that included physical health, work and finance, social, 
psychological, medical and legal concerns . In a subsequent study, the patient-centered posttraumatic conce rn outcome 
assessment was extended to include concern severity.86  
Between 2013 -2016 , study team members , including Co-Principal Investigators Douglas Zatzick, MD and Peter 
Thomas, JD , completed a PCORI -funded comparative effect iveness  trial; this previous trial has established collaborative  
team  engagement momentum upon  which the current trial builds  (PC-1).47,48,87 Patient  and peer sta keholder partners 
Peter Thomas, Mary Lou Walen, Stella Sieber,  Scott Shields,  Harry Teter and Heidi Hotz  all participated in the 
development and roll -out of the prior PCORI funded trial.  As has occurred or is proposed  for the current investigation, 
member of this stakeholder  gave input  into the selection of research questions, the planning of the study , study 
implementation and monitoring and the dissemination of study results  at policy summits.  
The prior PCORI comp arative effectiveness trial empl oyed a social work staffed care transition intervention to 
successfully reduce d the percentage of any severe post injury concerns endorsed by injured patients .48 The prior  PCORI 
funded comparative effectiveness trial randomized 171 acutely injured trauma survivors with high levels of emotional 
distress (i.e., ≥  3 post -injury concerns and high levels of PTSD symptoms ) to a care transition intervention (n=85) and 
nurse notification (n=86) conditions.  A key intervention element was the elicitation and addressing of in jured patient s’ 
  
5 
 most immediate post -injury concerns.  Care transition intervention patients demonstrated clinically and statistically 
significant redu ctions in the percentage of severe post -injury concerns when compared to nurse notification patients 
longitud inally (Wald Chi Square=11.29, P< 0.05 ).  
As recommended by the s tudy team patient stakeholder partners , including Peter Thomas , Patient Co-Principal 
Investigator , the study team conducted an additi onal study of an injured peer care transition intervention  (PC-1). 
Seventy percent of patients participating in the prior trial endorsed wanting peer interventionists as part of their care 
transition team . Study  team members trained Mary Lou Walen as a peer support interventionist. Training materials from 
the study team ’s care management interventi on and American Trauma Society Trauma S urvivors Network ma terials 
were integrated into the  training.88 The injured peer interventionist was supervised as the primary care transitio n case 
manager in a pilot study with 4 injured patients.  The peer interventionist met with patients by the bedside in the 
hospital, and in outpatient clinic s as well as talking over the phone as injured patients transitioned back to the 
community. The peer elicited and addressed concerns and provided care management navigation services . The patients 
rated their satisfaction with the peer as either satisfied or very satisfied . These preliminary data suggest ed the feasibility 
and acceptability of integrating a patient peer into a post -injury  multidisciplinary team intervention framework . 
Summary of evidence gaps and  the potential for the investigation to address those gaps (RQ -1). Collaborative care 
models are well established as a gold standard intervention for treating combined mental health and chroni c medical 
conditions in acute and primary care medical settings. Peer interventions are becoming a mainstay of treatment delivery 
for multiple health conditions across diverse US healthcare systems.  As study team patient stakeholders have voiced, 
acute care medical trauma center settings  have yet to comprehensively integrate patient peer in terventionists into the 
multidisciplinary teams that currently ca re for injured p atients. Institute of Medicine , PCORI and the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality  reviews support the need for comparative effectiveness trials  of health care system 
interventions targeting high need injured patient s with multiple complex mental health and medical comorbidities who 
are at risk for fragmented post -injury health service utilization.  
 
II. Significance . (RQ-3, Identify Specific Populations and Health Deci sion(s) Affected by the Research , PC-1 Engage people 
representing the population of interest and other relevant stakeholders in ways that are appropriate and necessary in a 
given research context , RQ-6 Measure Outcomes that People Representing the Population of Interest Notice and Care 
About .)  
American College of Surgeons’ Committee on Trauma policy prese nce on the research team facilitates  the 
understanding of nationwide implementation barriers and the integration of research results into  regulations that guid e 
US trauma center care . The College oversees the development of national policy mandates and clinical best practice 
guidelines that inform the integrated o peration of US acute care medical trauma centers .89,90 The study team has an 
established track record of using evidence derived from comparative effecti veness trials to inform College regulatory 
policy for alcohol screening and brief intervention mandates and PTSD screening and intervention best practice 
guidelines .89,90  
Results of the prior PCORI  trial47,48 were presented at the study team -conven ed September 2016 policy summit;  
PCORI has summarized the summit proceedings  as part of the “research -in-action ” series ;87 the September 2016 
summit , Co-Principal Investigator Peter Thomas and other study tea m patient  stakeholders voiced the need for peer -
integrated, multidisciplinary team, trauma care system interventions  (PC-1). The impetus for the current comparative 
effectiveness trial derives directly from our patient stakeholders’ input while also integrating other key national policy 
and trauma care system stakeholder perspectives. American College of Surgeons regulatory policy has derived from 
comparative effectiveness trials that compare an active intervention (e.g., collaborative care) with a comparator that is 
widely implemented and considered a standard of care, thus informing the current two arm study design and choice o f 
comparators.  
Injured patients  and their caregivers , front -line trauma center providers, and trauma care system policy makers 
need to better understand how peer -integrated interventions impa ct key  post -injury outcomes  (RQ-6). The study team 
has selected key outcomes of great relevance to  patients and their caregivers , front -line acute care providers  and 
trauma surgical policy makers  (RQ-3). The patient -centered outcome of posttraumati c concerns derives from patient s’ 
own concern narratives . Acute care medical emergency department/hospital health service utilization, PTSD symptoms  
and functional impairments  have all been used in prior investigation s that have influenced surgical policy 
stakeholders .67,68,71 The current investigation  seeks to answer  the critical question, “W ill a peer -integrated 
  
6 
 multidisciplinary collaborat ive care intervention improve key outcomes of relevance to injured patients  and their 
caregivers , as well as trauma center providers and policy stakeholders? ” 
 
III. Study Design . (RQ-2 Develop a Formal Study Protocol , RQ-4 Identify and Assess Participant Subgroups, RQ-5 Select 
Appropriate Interventions and Comparators, RQ-6 Measure Outcomes that People Representing the Population of 
Interest Notice and Care About , PC-1 Engage People Representing the Population of Interest and Other Relevant 
Stakeholders in Ways that are Appropriate and Necessary in a Given Research Context, IR-1 A priori, Specify Plans for 
Data Analysis that Correspond to Major Aims , PC-4 Support Dissemination and Implementation of Study Results , CI-I 
Specify the Causal Model Underlying the Research Q uest ion, SCI-2 Specify How Adaptations to the Form of the 
Intervention and Comparator Will be Allowed and Recorded, SCI-3 .) 
Design Overview . The overarching goal of this investigation is to develop and implement optima l peer -integrated 
collaborative  care interventions  for injured trauma survivors tre ated in US trauma care systems. Injured trauma 
survivors ≥ 18 years of age will undergo electronic health record  (EHR)  screening for hi gh levels of emotional distress  (i.e. 
severe post -injury concerns, PTSD symptoms) .91 Patients who are at risk on the EHR screen will be approached for informed 
consent. After informed consent is obtained , patients ’ posttraumatic concerns will be assessed and patients will be screened 
with the PTSD checklist;92 patients with ≥ 1 severe posttraumatic concern and scores of ≥ 35 on the PTSD checklist w ill be 
rando mized. A total of 424 patients  will be randomized to peer -integrated collaborative care (n = 212) and surgical team 
notification (n =212) conditions.  Intervention activity will continue for up to six months after the injury hospitalization , 
while follow -up continues for 12-months aft er the  hospitalization . Emer gency department use, pati ent concerns, PTSD 
symptoms, physical function and other outcomes will be assessed  at 1-, 3-, 6-, 9- and 12 -months after injury for all 
patients.  
Specific Aims. This randomized comparative effectiveness trial aims to evaluate two readily implementable 
approaches to the delivery of transitional care for injured patients treated emergently in US trauma care systems. A 
multidisciplinary team collaborative care intervention that integrates front -line trauma center staff with peer 
interventionists  will be compared with  trauma surgical team notification of patient emotional distress with 
recommendation for mental health consultation. The collaborative care intervention w ill be supported by a novel 
emergency department health information exchange technolog y platform.  
The primary aim of the investigation is to compare e mergency department health service use, severity of patient 
concerns, PTSD sym ptoms and physical function for patients randomized to the two conditions. T he study hypothesizes  
that patients receiving the peer -integrated collaborative care intervention , when compared to the surgical team 
notification condition , will demonstrate significant reductions in post -injury emergency department utilization as 
docum ented by EDIE data on the intent -to-treat sample. The investigation also hypothesizes the peer -integrated 
collaborative care intervention will be associated with significant reductions in the severity of post -injury concerns , as 
well as  reductions in PTSD symptom levels , when compared to the surgical team notification condition. Improvements in 
physical function are also hypothesized for patients receiving the p eer-integrated collaborativ e care intervention . 
Secondary analyses will assess the impact of  traumatic brain injury, ethnic/racial diversity , and gender subgroup status 
on hypothesized treatment effects.  A second ary aim of the study is to understand the care processes involved with the 
delivery of the pee r-integrated intervention. A final  aim of the investigation is for study team members to work with the 
American College of Surgeons’ Committee on Trauma, board members of the American Trauma Society, and the PCORI 
Transitional Care Evidence to Action Network to better understand barriers to widespread implementation of study 
results.  To facilitate this aim the study team will convene an American College of Surgeons policy summit in the final 
year of the contract.  
The project will be co nducted in three  Phases ; in the first phase of the project , the project Co -Principal Investigators,  
Douglas  Zatzick and Peter Thomas , convene d the study team members with the goal of develo ping the peer intervention 
model . As in the prior PCORI study team project, patient, peer advocate and provider stakeholder s will provide 
substantial input into all phases the project including input into the study design, review of study instruments and study 
protocols, development and implementation of the optimal peer intervention model, monitoring of the study as part of 
the data safety and monitoring  board and planning and implementing the year 5 policy summit .  
In Phase I of the study,  input was  obtained from stakeholders for the final selection of outcome  assessments, review 
of recruitment and follow -up procedures , and refinement  of patient and provider sub ject consent forms. A key focus of 
the Phase I treatment development  activities was to obtain patient and other stakeholder input into the design and 
  
7 
 implementation of a n optimal  peer intervention  model . The Co -Principal Investigators have had a series of in-person and 
telephone discussions with injured peer, front -line provider, clinical researcher and trauma surgical policy maker 
stakeholders that will aim to better understand what study team members consider an optimal integrated peer 
intervention mode l (PC-1). The randomized comparative effectiveness trial will be conducted  in Phase II  of the project . 
During Phase III of the investigation , in the final year of the contract, the Co-Principal Investigators, in collaboration with 
study team members Drs. Maier and Hoyt,  will again convene an American College of S urgeons’ policy summ it (PC-4). 
The major goal of the summit will be to understand barriers to the implementation of study findings across US trauma 
care systems. As with prior summits, the planning will  incorporate input from the Co-Principal I nvestigators, study team 
injured peer interventionists, front -line trauma center providers, and surgi cal policy maker stakeholders.  As in Phase I,  
Rapid Assessment Procedures will again be employed to harness themes drawn fr om these multiple stakeholder 
convers ations regarding potential barriers to widespread implementation of investigative results .78,93-97 
 The conceptual framework that links the peer -integrated collaborative care intervention with hypothesized 
treatment effects on key patient, provider and system level outcomes, i n the context of study health information 
technology (IT)  innovations  is described in Figure 1.9,37-39,41,44-46,48,98,99 The project follows guidelines for the conduct of 
comparative effectiveness trials developed by t he PCORI Methodology Committee , including attempt to specify the 
causal modeling underlying the research question .100 The peer -integrated collaborative care treatment model will bring 
together peer -led posttraumatic concern elicitation  and care transition intervention elements with multidisciplinary  
(e.g., nursing, social work ) team -supported , evidence -based psychotherapeutic and med ication interventions targeting 
PTSD and related co -morbidities.  
 
 The investigation will integrate injured peers as care managers with front -line acute care providers as part of a 
multidisciplinary team. In the hours, days , and weeks after injury , peer care managers will elicit patient post -injury 
concerns and target these concerns for amelioration while also working with other members of the intervention team to 
incorporate  patient and caregiver preferences into medical decision making. Additionally, the peer will work to link 
injured patients’ care from inpatient and e mergency department settings to primary care and community services. 
Working with peers , front -line trauma center providers will simultaneously deliver evidence -based medication and  
psychotherapeutic elements  to injured patien ts with high levels of PTSD and other symptoms . Evidence -based 
intervention elements will be  delivered during routine post -injury patient encounters in trauma wards and emergency 
departments, in outpatient clinics, in community settings, and over the telephone.  
A series of novel information technology features  support the peer -integrated collaborative care intervention.  The 
collaborative care treatment model begins with population -based screening for injured patients with high levels of 
emotional dist ress using a previously articulated 10 -domain electronic health record screen.91 The EDIE system allows 
collaborative care team members to implement electronic health care record innovations , such as the creation of care 
plans that can be viewed across sites .83-85 EDIE also provides  real-time work -flow integrated electronic alerts that allow 
collaborative team providers to be notified when injured patients make  recurrent visits  to the Harborvi ew Emergency 
Department. Finally, EDIE allows  the follow -up of population -level emergency department visits on the intent -to-treat 
sample. Furthermore , as in previous effective care transition interventions , injured patients  will have 24/7 study team 
telephone and text access.37,41,47  
 The introduction of this peer -integrated , coordinated team activity into trauma center multidisciplinary teams may 
concurrently serve to not only enhance coordination between trauma and primary care and community settings but also 
improve outcomes of great relevance to injured patients and their caregivers including each patient’s unique 
constellation of p osttraumatic concerns (RQ-6). For front -line providers, supervised collaborative care intervention 
delivery may improve care processes , including fidelity to evidence -based counseling and medication treatments.67,71 
Population-Based 
Screening for 
DistressPeer Integrated Collaborative Care
1) Peer elicits and addresses post-injury concerns
2) Concerns integrated into medical decision making 
with multidisciplinary team supportPeer-Led Trauma Center to Community 
Linkage
1) Peer care manager navigates care transition
2) Emotional distress addressed with multidisciplinary team evidence-based treatments3) Stepped-up community care linkage
Traumatic Injury Surgical hospitalization/emergency visit Primary Care & Community Follow UpImproved Outcomes
Patient-level
- Patient concerns
- PTSD symptoms
- Physical function
Provider-level
- Improved care process
Healthcare System-level
- Reductions in population 
-level ED utilizationAutomated EHR 
ScreenEDIE Care Plan and Emergency Visit Alerts EDIE Population-level ED UtilizationFigure 1. Peer-Integrated, IT Enhanced Stepped Collaborative Care 
Intervention Framework
IT 
Innovation:Collaborative 
Care 
Intervention:
Time:
  
8 
 Finally, from a trauma care system perspective , the peer -integrated collaborative ca re model may reduce unnecessary 
health service utilization.  
 
IV. Selection of appropriate interventions and comparators (RQ -5). The two approaches to be compared are a peer -
integrated  collaborative care int ervention versus trauma surgical team notification of patien t emotional distress . The 
two approaches were selected , in part , as they can be feasibly implemented in the acute care medical context.71,90,101 
Also, the study team has an established track record of implementing screening and intervention procedures derived 
from comparative effe ctiveness trials through engagement of  the American College of Surgeon as a stakeholder in  
regulatory policy .89,90 Previous College policy relevant trials conducted by the study team have compared an active 
intervention (e.g., peer -integrated collaborative care) with a comparator that is widely implemented and considered a 
standard of care (e.g ., traum a surgical team notification).89,90 These prior successful College policy experiences inform 
the current choice of comparators.  Below , the two appr oaches are described . 
a. Peer -Integrated Collaborative Care  Intervention . Previously injured peers will work alongside front -line acute 
care RN, MSW, MD, PhD, or other providers in the delivery of collaborative care. The peer -integrated collaborative care 
intervention is anticipated to last approximately six months from the time  of the subjects’ enrollment in the study. The 
collaborative care team may work to link injured patients’ care from inpatient and emergency department settings to 
primary care and community services. Care coordination will include a series o f intervention components that have been 
previously shown to improve acute care to primary care and community transitions. Injured patients randomized to the 
collaborative care intervention may be visited by the peer and/or other collaborative care team me mbers while in the 
hospital. Peers/study team care managers will elicit and target for improvement each patient’s concerns, needs, and 
preferences. Elements of the intervention may be delivered during routine post -injury patient encounters in trauma 
wards,  emergency departments, outpatient clinics, community settings, over the telephone, through secure web -based 
audio/video conferencing (e.g., Zoom) or other electronic means. In prior investigations care management conversations 
derived from concern elicita tion have spanned physical injury, work and finance, social (e.g., impact of injury on family 
and friends), legal, psychological and medical domains. Care managers are generally encouraged to discuss these topic 
areas with patients and then bring summaries  of these discussions back to supervision meetings. For two topic areas 
that may derive from general concern discussions, psychotropic medication side effects and suicidal ideation/intent, 
peer case managers will receive specific training on the procedures  for reporting back to the study team information 
derived from the se specific topics . For psychotropic medication side effects, while peers may initially hear from patients 
about these symptoms, only MSW, MD, or other study team licensed providers will fol low-up with formal psychotropic 
medication symptom a ssessments and recommendations.  
The peer/care manager may ask about treatment preferences and schedule ongoing times to meet/call the patient. 
Whenever possible, with the injured patient’s permission, family members and other primary post -injury caregivers will 
be incorporated into the c are management intervention. The peer/care manager may also give the patient the study 
team’s 24 -hour/7 days per week telephone and text message contact number and encourage texts/calls for 
spontaneous questions, needs, and concerns. It is acknowledged tha t the study team may not always be able to 
immediately call or text patients back; in general, study team members will attempt to answer calls promptly, but 
response time may vary.  
Collaborative care intervention team members may be trained in delivering evidence -based Motivational 
Interviewing (MI) and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) elements during routine post -injury patient encounters in 
trauma wards, emergency departments, ou tpatient clinics, community settings, over the telephone, through secure 
web -based audio/video conferencing (e.g., Zoom) or other electronic means. A body of evidence supports the 
effectiveness of brief MI interventions targeting alcohol use problems. Flex ibly delivered CBT interventions have been 
used to successfully target PTSD.   
A novel information technology feature supports the peer -integrated collaborative care intervention. The 
Emergency Department Information Exchange (EDIE) system allows collaborative care team members to implement 
electronic health care record innovations, such as the creation of care plan notifications that provide the study team 
contact information for the care of individual patients that can be viewed across emergency department sites utilizing 
the system. EDIE also provides real -time work -flow integrated  electronic alerts that allow collaborative team providers 
to be notified when injured patients make recurrent visits to an emergency department in the state of Washington , 
Alaska, California  and Oregon.  
  
9 
 Psychopharmacologic intervention, including the use of Serotonin Specific Re -uptake Inhibitor (SSRI) and Serotonin 
Norepinephrine Re -uptake Inhibitor (SNRI) antidepressants, are also recommended in the treatment of patients with 
PTSD and/or depression symp toms. The medication intervention component aims to initiate and ensure adequate 
follow -up of pharmacologic treatment targeting symptoms of PTSD and/or depression. Members of the study team may 
perform medication assessments, assessment of response to psyc hotropic medications, including side effects, 
medication recommendations to providers, and medication prescription in a number of settings including trauma 
inpatient wards, emergency departments, trauma surgery outpatient clinics, over the telephone, and i n the community. 
For all psychotropic medication prescriptions, the collaborative care team will attempt to consult with inpatient, 
outpatient, or primary care providers with regard to medication recommendations. On occasion, when patient subjects 
have dem onstrated symptomatic need/distress and cannot obtain timely prescriptions from a hospital, community or 
other pro vider study team members may prescribe psychotropic medication to patient subjects.  
During  Phase I  intervention development , stakeholder input suggested that peers on the collaborative care team 
would initially perform as “Universalist” interventionist s aiming to engage patients from  diverse  injury experiences and 
ethnic, cultural and linguistic backgrounds. The intervention team will also build in “stepped up” care procedures that 
facilitate linkages to more targeted peer experiences (e.g., amputee support groups, spinal cord injury programs) . These 
stepped up referrals represent potentia l adaptations in the intervention condition that will be documented by the study 
team in REDCap notations (SCI-3). 
Intervention Supervision  (PC-1) A novel aspect of the intervention is that the peers will receive two types of 
supervision. The peers and other study team members will receive standard post -injury collaborative care clinical 
supervision delivered by Dr. Zatzick and potentially other study team  members . These regular (e.g., weekly) supervisory 
sessions will review the progress of patients randomized into the protocol, the progress of the stepped care for 
intervention patients, and other topics. This regular caseload supervision will be facilitated by th e study intervention 
data management tool (e.g., REDCap). This computerized data management system will be password protected and 
accessibl e only to study team members. As information is available in real time, the system can be used by intervention 
team supervisors to monitor and support the standardized implementation of the peer -integrated collaborative care 
management procedure.  
The peers and potentially other study team members will also receive monthly peer/patient advocacy supervision 
from co -Principal investigators Peter Thomas, JD, and Douglas Zatzick, MD, or other members of the study Patient and 
Peer Stakeholder Advisory Gr oup (e.g., Stella Sieber). Peter Thomas and other members of the Patient and Peer 
Stakeholder advisory group have prior experience conducting peer interventions/performing in the peer interventionist 
role. A likely form this supervision may take is the pre sentation of cases by one or more of the study peer 
interventionists (e.g., Mary Lou Walen) on the monthly stakeholder group call. Beyond patient case presentations, the 
experiences of the peers as interventionists will also be a ke y topic discussed on the calls.  
b. Enhance Usual Care Control Condition. Trauma surgery team notification of patient emotional distress, with 
suggestions for mental health inpatient consultation (e.g., MD, PhD, MSW, addiction intervention, chaplaincy or other 
psychosocial consult service) will be the comparator condition . Surgical team notification of patient emotional distress 
with recommended mental health consultation constitutes a frequently employed, feasibly implemented comparator 
condition.  Prior investigation documents that nation ally between 50 -80% of US acute care centers routinely provide 
mental health consultation for high levels of emotional distress (e.g., PTSD and depressive symptoms) and/or substance 
use (e.g., alcohol use problems) .101 Previous data collected at the Harborview level I trauma center demonstrates that of 
207 patients with high PTSD symptom levels , 89% were seen by a social worker, 22% were seen by a chemical 
dependency counselor, 17% were seen by a clinical psychologist, and 8% were seen by a psychiatrist.102 These multiple 
potential mental health referrals represent potential adaptations in the enhanced usual care control condition that will 
be documented in REDCap (SCI-3). 
 
V. Study Procedures. (PC-2 Identify, Select, Recruit, and Retain Study Participants Representative of the Spectrum of the 
Population of Interest and Ensure that Data Are Collected Thoroughly and Systematically from All Study Participants,  PC-
3 Use of Patient -Reported Outcomes When Patients or People at Risk of a Condition Are the Best Source of Information 
for Outcomes of Interest,  IR 5 Provide Sufficient Information in Reports to Allow for Assessments of the Study’s Internal 
and External Validity, IR-6 Masking should be used when f easible , MD-3 Record and Report All Reasons for Dropout and 
Missing Data, and Account for All Patients in Reports.)   
  
10 
 Overview.  Patients included in the study will be female and male survivors of intentional and unintentional injuries 
ages ≥ 18, who speak English and are admitted to the University of Washington’s Harborview Le vel I Trauma Center  
inpatient surgical ward or emergency department for ≥ 24 hours.  All injured patients will undergo electronic health 
record screening for high levels of emotional distress. A previously developed electronic medical record screen will be used to 
assess the population of admitted inj ured trauma survivors at ri sk for the development of PTSD .91 The screen utilizes 10 data 
elements that are both associated with increased risk for PTSD and that are readily avai lable in any robus t EMR system; 
patients with ≥ 3 risk domains positive will be approached for informed consent. (see also Appendix). When the 10 data 
elements were used to predict scores on the PTSD Checklist of  ≥  35, the electronic medical record screen demonstrated 
adequate sensitivity (0.71),  specificity (0.66), and a rea under the ROC curve (0.72) .91   
Inclusion Criteria . Patients determined to be at risk o n the electronic health record  screen will be approached for 
informed consent. After informed consent is obtained , patients will be scree ned for emotional distress ; patients  who  score ≥ 
35 on the PTSD checklist and endorse  ≥ 1 severe posttraumatic concern w ill be randomized  into the longitudinal portion of 
the investigation .47,67,71 Prior to randomization , all patients will complete the full basel ine assessment . 
Exclusion Criteria . Patients will only be excluded if they required immediate psychiatric intervention (i.e., self -
inflicted injury, active psychosis), or are determined to be too psychiatrically distressed to be randomized to the control 
condition without acute psychiatric/mental health intervention , are not Washington ,  Oregon , Alaska, or California  State 
residents, or are currently incarcerated ; patients that do not speak English will also be excluded from the protocol. The 
trial will only include Englis h speaking patients as prior study team investigation has previously documented over 40 
different languages spoken by Harborview patients making the translation of consent documents and scales in multiple 
different languages  impractical.103,104 Attempted consent for patients who are disoriented or delirious will be postponed; 
if a potential patient subject’s combined score on the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)105 is < 15 and/or questions 1 and 2 of 
Mini Mental Status Exam (MMSE)106 is < 7, the baseline interview will be postponed.  Patients whose most recent COVID -
19 test was positive will also be excluded.  
Non -Entry  (MD -3). As in the previous PCORI funded projects, in order to document reasons for study non -entry, 
whenever patients decline participation, the recruiter will inquire as to why they did not want to participate.  Answers 
will then be recorded verbatim; in prior investigation , patient reasons for refusal fell into one of 5 categories that 
included inconvenience, privacy concerns, not interested in the study, undo distress, and refusal without giving a reason.  
Electronic Health Record 10 Domain PTSD Risk Factor Eligibility Screen . The study team will be accessing and 
obtaining PHI from Harborview electronic health records (EHR) for use in screening patient subjects. Each morning a 
study team member will review a list of all newly admitted injured patients with associated identifiabl e information and 
available 10 domain PTSD screening data. A computer algorithm or study team member will use the data collected from 
the EHR/Amalga to determine a patient’s potential for study inclusion based on inclusion/exclusion criteria and the 
number of positive 10 domain PTSD risk factors. The 10 domain PTSD risk factor items pulled from the EHR are: 1) 
Gender (Female), 2) Race (non -White), 3) Insurance (Veteran insurance or no c ommercial insurance), 4) Treated in ICU 
during the injury admission, 5), BAC positive, or any substance disorder ICD from EHR, 6) Any psychiatric disorder ICD 
from EHR, 7) PTSD ICD from EHR, 8) Tobacco use, 9) Injury inflicted by another (i.e., intentional  injury), 10) At least one 
prior hospitalization.  
Baseline Interview and Further Eligibility Screening.  The study team member will then administer the study 
eligibility screening questions on the baseline interview which includes concern and posttraumatic symptom 
assessments to each consenting subject. The concern assessment asks each subject “Of everything that has happened to 
you since you were injured, what concerns you the most?” Subjects will then be asked to rate the severity of each 
concern on a scale from one to five with one being not at all conce rning and five being extremely concerning. Subjects 
will also go through the PTSD Checklist – Civilian Version (PCL -C) for DSM -IV. Subjects will screen into the randomized 
portion of the study if they have ≥ 1 severe posttraumatic concern and ≥ 35 on the P CL at the time of injury.  
Randomization.  After completing the baseline assessment, subjects are randomized to one of two active 
comparator conditions. A total of 424 patients will be randomized to either receive surgical team notification to initiate 
a mental health consultation (n =212), or rece ive a peer -integrated collaborative care intervention (n =212). 
Randomization will occur in a 1:1 ratio according to a computer -generated random assignment sequence in blocks of 
either 4 or 6 patients, prepared by the study biostatistician. After a patient has been randomized, a member of the study 
team will return to the hospital as soon as feasibly possible to inform the patient if he/she has been randomly assigned 
to the enhanced usual care or intervention condition.  
  
11 
 Blinded telephone follow -up interviews.  Patient -reported outcomes will be assessed at  1-, 3-, 6-, 9- and 12 months 
after the injury event  by telephone interview . Telephone interviews have been found to be reliable and valid in the 
assessment patient reported outcomes for injured trauma survivors.67,71,107 In order to minimize bias, the research 
assistants conducting the telephone follow -up interviews will be blinded to the patient’s study group assignments  (IR-6). 
Follow -up Procedures.  Injured trauma survivors admitted to safety net hospitals constitute a low -income, 
ethnoculturally diverse patient population that can present challenges for longitudinal retention in comparative 
effectiveness trials; the study team has developed specific methods to obtain high follow -up rates with this vulnerable 
patient population (PC-2).108,109 In order to optimize retention of patients for follow -up interviews required for the 
patient -reported outcomes assessments , at the baseline interview  patient subjects will be asked for phone 
numbers/addresses of at least two contact sources ( e.g.,  friends or relatives).  After a trauma, patient subjects 
sometimes relocate temporarily in order to receive better care, such as movement from independent livin g to a skilled 
nursing facility;  many patients are also homeless. Therefore, in addition to contacting patient subjects through the 
information they provide during the initial baseline interview, the follow -up team will utiliz e several approaches to 
attempt to stay  in touch with patient subjects across the study window. All the approaches described below are only 
attempted for patients who consent to these pr ocedures. The approaches are : 1) Contacting other peopl e in the patient 
subject’s life, 2) Looking at hospital records. If the follow -up team is unable to reach a patient subject after repeatedly 
trying to contact them through the information provided, they may have the research coordinator review the hospital 
record  for any  updated contact information or 3 ) Conducting a public records search , or the use of social media . These 
follow -up procedures are further described below.  
At the time of recruitment in the hospital, the study team will ask patient subjects for at least two pieces of contact 
information (the absence of sufficient contact information is exclusion criteria). One piece will need to be a phone 
number, while the s econd piece of contact information could include the patient’s address, email address, social media 
(e.g., Facebook page) or any of the aforementioned pieces of contact information for a relative or friend (referred to as 
alternate contacts). In the event that the subject’s contact information changes (a common event after injury 
admission); the follow -up team may reach out to these alternate contacts in an effort to get back in touch with the 
subject. Over the 12 months after the injury, the follow -up team  may perform scheduling or check -in phone calls with 
subjects to ensure that the contact information on file is up to date. During these check -in calls or while scheduling 
upcoming interviews, study staff will confirm all contact information on file and as k for any new information relevant to 
the subject.  After a trauma, patient subjects sometimes lose or change their phone numbers, or relocate temporarily in 
order to receive better care, such as movement from independent living to a skilled nursing facility. Therefore, in 
addition to contacting patient sub jects through the information they initially provide at the baseline interview, the 
follow -up team may utilize several other approaches to try and stay in touch with subjects throughout the duration of 
the study.  If the follow -up team is unable to reach a patient subject after repeatedly trying to contact them through the 
information provided, the study team may utilize the Harborview EHR or EDIE records for any updated contact or 
appointment information that may h elp to reach the subject.  The follow -up team may also conduct a public records 
search to find new contact information. Examples of public records searches the study team may utilize include Google, 
the White Pages, public jail records, or other pai d public record searches. The follow -up team will search for records or 
information on forums that are open to the public either for free or at a cost.  If the follow -up team is given or finds a 
URL or a social media website (e.g., Myspace, Facebook, Google+, etc.) for the subject, they may view the profile 
information and status updates posted publicly. They may also attempt to contact a subject through t hese websites via 
private message from TSOS. They will only send this message if they are able to match at least two identifiers with 
information from public records or provided by the subject or their alternate contacts. This information may include: 
name, date of birth, email, phone number, links to other personal social media sites with two pieces of info rmation (e.g., 
GoFundMe), injury event, or picture. Given that this is a local trial, there will likely be too much overlap to utilize 
information such as location or friends as one of the two required identifiers, so this would be considered supplemental 
information to ascertain a subject’s social media page. Any messages will be sent to the subject’s private inbox and will 
not be viewable to the public. The study team will not browse subjects’ social media posts except to confirm the 
patient’s identity to  be able to send a private message to the subject.  
End of Study Participation . While final EUC and intervention patient subject follow -up interviews take place for 
approximately 12 months post -consent, intervention activities with intervention patients are anticipated to conclude 
approximately 6 months after subjects consent into the  trial. The team may need to exercise flexibility in the duration of 
  
12 
 the intervention as specific situations may arise where intervention activities extend during the six to twelve month 
post -injury period (e.g., crisis intervention needed at eight months). The TSOS intervention will attempt to have a final 
intervention con tact with all intervention patients. The objective of the final TSOS intervention contact is to negotiate a 
specific plan for ongoing care beyond the study. The study team will discuss strategies for maintaining treatment gains 
with each intervention patie nt. This means proper handoff of medication prescription management to a subject’s 
preferred primary care or other medical provider, linkage to community resources, and psychotherapy referrals. 
Treatment maintenance may also include ongoing relationships w ith the subject’s social support (e.g., family, friends, 
and other community support groups). EUC activities are expected to conclude at patient discharge from the hospital.  
Once the 12 -month follow -up interview has been completed, the study team will attempt to inform all patients of 
the end of their involvement with the research study. In some cases, the study team may be unable to contact subjects 
who have been lost to follow -up. Regardless of study condition assignment, a copy of the final outcome paper will be 
sent (e.g., mailed, emailed, fax ed) to all study subjects when published.  At the completion of their study participation, 
some subjects from this trial may be invited by the study team to join the team as potential injured peer volunteers.  
CONSORT reporting guidelines (IR-5).110 The study team will use the CONSORT reporting mechanism for the current 
trial. The study team has extensive experience reporting information necessary in manuscripts to assess study  internal 
and external validity using the CONSORT guidelines (see Appendix for the completed prior study team PCORI trial 
CONSORT diagram). The CONSORT reporting mechanism facilitates the assessment of factors related to external validity 
(e.g., generali zability of study sample to target population and external population for sampling111,112) as well as factors 
related to internal validity such as differential follow -up rates across patients assigned to comparator 
conditions.47,67,71,113 The consort diagrams will be evaluated at regular (e.g., monthly) intervals by the data quality core.  
Research assistants will maintain a real time recruitment log that will be used on a weekly basis to update the study 
team on recruitment and follow -up progr ession.  
 
VI. Outcome Measures and Other Study Assessments . (RQ-6 Measure Outcomes that People Representing the 
Population of Interest Notice and Care About, PC-2, Identify, Select, Recruit, and Retain Study Participants 
Representative of the Spectrum of the Population of Interest and Ensure that Data Are Collected Thoroughly and 
Systematically from All Study Participants, IR-4 Document Validated Scales and Tests, IR-6 Masking should be used when 
feasible , SCI-3 Specify How Adaptations to the Form of the Intervention  and Comparator will be Allowed and Recorded, 
SCI-4 Plan and Describe a Process Evaluation, SCI-5 Select Patient Outcomes Informed by the Causal Pathway .) 
Overview. The measures  and timing of administration are described with references provided that document 
established scale psychometric properties (Table  1). All assessments have been previously employed by the study team 
in prior acute care medical investigations . The study also has prior experience translating interviews to Spanish. The plan 
for the translation of the scales in to Spanish will be as follows: as outlined in the Phase I processes, the study team will  
elicit from the study team stakeholders, comment s and approval  of final interviews and measures to be administered; 
this will occur in English. Once these interviews and measures are finalized and IRB approved, the study team will begin 
the translation process, which we anticipate will  occur from September 1, 2018  through November 30, 2018. After the 
translated materials have been vetted and approved, recruitment of Spanish speaking patients would begin on or before 
January 1, 2019.  
 
Table 1. Patient -reported Outcome Measures Delivered during Specified Interview Time Points  
 
 
 
Scale  Complete Interviews  
Baseline  1-month  3-month  6-month  9-month  12-month  
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)  ✓ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ 
Mini -Mental State Examination (MMSE)  ✓ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ 
Injury Event  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Posttraumatic Concerns  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Demographic Characteristics  ✓ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ 
PTSD Checklist (PCL) (DSM -IV) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
  
13 
 PTSD Checklist (PCL) (DSM -5) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Patient Health Questionnaire Depression (PHQ -9) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Medical Outcomes Study 12 -Item Short Form Health Survey 
(MOS SF-12) ✓ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ 
Medical Outcomes Study 36 -Item Short Form Health Survey 
(MOS SF -36) ─ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT -C 3-item)  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Self-Report Health Service Utilization  - pre-injury  ✓ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ 
Self-Report Health Service Utilization - post -injury (since last 
interview)  ─ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Medications  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Single Item Drug and Tobacco  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
NSCOT Cognitive Screen (NSCOT)  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Pain (Single item from SF -36) - pre-injury  ✓ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ 
Pain (Single modified BPI item) - current  ✓ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ 
Patient Satisfaction with Care  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Employment/Work Status  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Willingness for Treatment  ✓ ─ ─ ─ ─ ✓ 
Website and Smartphone Application Acceptability  ✓ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ 
Reactions to Research Participation Questionnaire  (RRPQ 1 
item)  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Trauma History Screen - pre-injury*  ─ ✓ ─ ─ ─ ─ 
Stressful Life Events  ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ✓ 
CBT Items  ─ ─ ─ ✓ ─ ✓ 
Technology Use and Healthcare Utilization  ─ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Intervention Acceptability† ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ✓ 
Client Satisfaction Questionnaire‡ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ✓ 
Note: Potentially sensitive items are in bold.  
*If the subject is unable to complete this measure at the time point listed, it will be asked at the subsequent time point.  
†This measure is for intervention subjects only, but all subjects will be asked to complete item 1. Item 1 is used to ascertai n which arm the subject was 
random ized to; and, for this reason, is only asked of the subject at the conclusion of study participation during the final interview . 
‡This measure is for intervention subjects only.  
 
 The study team has selected outcomes of  great relevance to injured patients, front -line providers and trauma 
care system policy stakeholders  (RQ-6). In 2001 , members of the investigative team randomly sampled hospitalized 
injured patients and allowed patients an unconstrained opportunity to describe their posttraumatic illness 
experiences.47,69,86 One or more posttraumatic concerns were readi ly elicited from 100% of randomly sampled injured 
patients  and concern narratives were easily followed over th e course of the year after injury. The patient-centered 
concerns spanned six domains and a majority of patients endorsed their concerns as being severe. In a PCORI funded 
comparative effectiveness trial , reduction in the severity of any posttraumatic concern was a primary intervention 
target.47 The study team has undertaken extensive psychometric work tha t documents that the severity of patient 
endorsed posttraumatic concerns mirrors the severity of PTSD  symptoms and physical functional impairments over the 
course of the year after injury.69,86 In the current comparative effectiveness trial , patient -centered posttraumatic 
concerns will again be a primary intervention outcome.  
In one nationwide 69 -site trauma center investigation, PTSD and depression made an independent “dose” related 
contribution to the key policy relevant outcome, the inability to return to work after injury hospitalization.14 Other study 
team publications document that early high PTSD and depressive symptom levels after injury are associated with the 
later development of a broad spectrum of functional impairment.24 In prior study team comparative effectiveness trials, 
collaborative care interventions have been shown to significantly diminish patient reported outcome assessments of 
posttraumatic concerns, PTSD symptoms and impairments in physical function.67,71 
The study team has convened two prior policy summits in which published comparative effectiveness trial data was 
presented to an audience that included key trauma surgical policy, front -line provide r, clinical investigator and patient 
  
14 
 stakeholders; the comparative effectiveness trial data judged relevant by this diverse stakeholder audience included  
measures of trauma center and emergency department health service utilization ,83-85 PTSD, depressive and suicide 
related symptoms,67,71,92,114 alcohol use problems ,13,107,115,116 and health related quality of life and physical 
function.25,117,118 These outcomes are included in American College of Surgeons Resource Guide publications that guide 
care for US trauma care systems  and will again be used in the current investigation.89,90 Further descriptions of the 
primary study outcomes and other measures to be used in the study follow below.  
a. Emergency Department Health Service Utilization . Emergency Department health service utilization w ill be 
assessed using the Emergency Department Information Exchange System (EDIE) developed by Collective Medical 
Technologies.83-85 EDIE is a novel clinical informatics tool that aggregates in real time emergency department visits for 
the population of patients presenting to any Emergency Department in Washington , Alaska, California  and Oregon. EDIE 
is currently integrated into the medical record at the University of Washington and Harborview Medical Center. For the 
purposes of the current trial, EDIE allowed population -based 12 -month follow -up of all emergency department visits 
acro ss Washington , Alaska, California  and Oregon for the intent -to-treat sample of intervention and control patients. 
Recent study team investigation s document the reliability and validity of EDIE emergency department assessments . 83-85 
For intervention patients EDIE data on emergency department care plans and Harborview patient alerts will also be 
obtained.  
b. Posttraumatic concern severity and domain.69,86 As in prior study team investigations, the baseline and follow -up 
interviews will begin with the assessment of each patient’s unique conste llation of post -injury concerns; responses to 
the concern items will be audio -recorded.  The concern question asks, “Of everything that has happened to you since you 
were injured, what concerns you the most?” Patients are allowed to express an unlimited number of concerns. 
Following each concern elicitation, patients are asked to rate the sev erity of the concern on a scale from one to five, 
with one being not at all concerning and five being extremely concerning. Based on prior study team investigation, a 
severe concern is defined as a concern rated as a 5 by the patient. Prior psychometric investigation by the study team 
documents that the severity of post -injury concerns mirrors the longitudinal trajectory of PTSD symptoms and functional 
impairments.69,86 Procedures for the coding of posttraumatic concern domains were derived from previously described 
content analytic methods.69,86 A previously developed code book describing concern domains and coding procedures will 
be used.69,86 The initial concern question and its explanation constituted the unit of analysis. Raters will independently 
code each concern into one of the previou sly established concern domains; it is anticipated that for 424 patients across 
5 time points raters will code approximately 5000 individual concerns. The frequency of patients reporting themes from 
one or more domains , along with the concern severity , will be tabulated. In prior investigations , the Kappa statistic was 
used to assess interrater reliability with values ranging from 0.77 -0.78.69,86 
c. PTSD Symptoms (PTSD Checklist).  92 The PTSD Checklist, a 17 -item self -report questionnaire, will be used to 
assess PTSD symptoms.92 The instrument yields both a continuous PTSD symptom score and a dichotomized diagnostic 
cut point for symptoms consistent with a DSM diagnosis of PTSD; the DSM -IV version will be used with 4 additional 
question criteria added so that either DSM -IV or DSM -V diagnostic criteria can be evaluated (see instrument appendix) . 
A series of investigations have demonstrated the reliability and convergent and construct validity of the PTSD Checklist 
across trauma -exposed populations .17 Cronbach’s alpha for the 17 item scale in a prior investigation with injured trauma 
survivors by the study team was 0.92.71 In a study of injured motor vehicle crash survivors, a correlation of 0.93 between 
the PTSD Checklist total score and the gold standard Clinician -Administered PTSD Scale diagnostic scale was 
documented .17 
d. Physical Function and other Functioning and Quality of Life Outcomes (Medical Outcomes Study Short Form 36, 
MOS SF -36).117,119 The investigation will use the SF -36 to assess functioning and quality of life outcomes. Eight domains 
are assessed , including physical function, pain, general health, role physical function, role emotional function, vitality, 
social function, and mental health. The SF -36 has established reliability and validity and the measure has been used 
extensively with traumatical ly injured populations.96,117,118,120 The study team used the Physical Component Summary 
(PCS) sub -scale to assess post -injury physical function  as a primary outcome . Cronbach’s alpha for the MOS SF -36 PCS in 
prior investigations by the study team was 0.90.67,96 
Other patient reported outcome assessments. The investigation will use the PHQ -9 to assess depressive symptoms. 
114,121 The instrument yields both a continuous depressive symptom score and a dichotomized diagnostic cut  point for 
symptoms consistent with a DSM -IV diagnosis of depression. The PHQ -9, item 9 asks specifically about suicidal ideation 
and/or intent. The PHQ -9 has established reliability and convergent and construct validity when used to assess patients 
  
15 
 in general medical settings.114,121 Cronbach’s alpha for the 9 item scale in a prior investigation with injured trauma 
survivors by the study team was 0.97.67,96 The investigation will use the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test three 
item version (AUDIT -C), a 10 -item screening instrument for the early identification of problem drinkers ,115 to assess 
alcohol use problems.  The AUDIT’s reliability and validity are well established in traumatic injury populations and the 
scale has been widely used as a screening instrument in general medical settings.115 Items assessing satisfaction with 
posttraumatic care will be used that are adapted from previous studies of care management interventions for patients in 
primary and acute care medical settings.67,96,122 
Process of care assessments (SCI -4). Outpatient primary care , surgical  and mental health visits, counseling visits and 
medication use will be assessed by patient self -report; these items have been adapted from studies of health service use 
in primary122 and acute care medical settings . Items assessing patient subject satisfaction with posttraumatic physical 
and mental health care elements will be used that are adapted from previous studies of care management interventions 
for patients in primary and acute care medical settings.67,96,122 Items specifically assessing intervention patients 
experience of the peer intervention will be included in the final 12 -month interview. Patients’ reactions to research 
participa tion will be assessed with an item  from the reactions to research participation questionnaire. 123,124 Study team 
intervention logs will document the extent to which peer care managers met injured patients by the bedside and at 
outpatient surgical appointments and contacted patients over the telephone. Total provider time associated with the 
intervention w ill also be captured through study team intervention logging. For intervention patients the study team will 
complete end -of-study final case reviews that document key care processes hypothesized to be associated with study 
outcomes.  
Electronic medical record data . The investigation will determine injury severity at baseline during the index 
admission from the electronic medical record International Classification of Disease (ICD -10) codes using the 
Abbreviated Injury Scale and Injury Severity Score.11,125-127 Similarly , the presence of one or more chronic medical 
conditions will be ascertained using ICD-10 codes . Chronic medical conditions to be assessed include diabetes, obesity, 
epilepsy, HIV/AIDS, hypertension, carcinoma, disorders of blood coagulation and other chronic cardiac, pulmonary, liver, 
neurologic and renal conditions.91 Mental health consultations  across psychiatry consult, rehabilitation psychology, 
trauma social work, addiction intervention and chaplaincy services and other service (SC-5), laboratory toxicology 
results, insurance status, length of hospital and intensive care unit stays, and other clinical characteristics w ill be 
abstracted from the electronic medical record.   
Identification of Study Subgroups (RQ -4). Study subgroups will be identified through combined medical record and 
self-report data. Traumatic brain injury will be prospectively identified in the medical record through ICD-10 
codes.25,125,126 Race, ethnicity and gender will be assessed through patient self -report.103,104 
 
Study Modifications  Made in Response to the COVID -19 Pandemic, March -October 2020 . 
 
A. Spanish speaking protocol summary and closure.   
Given challenges in recruiting a suitable injured Spanish -speaking peer, the team modified the plan for intervention 
delivery to use a translator to deliver the intervention to monolingual Spanish speakers (n=23, of which 11 were in the 
intervention arm an d 12 were in the control arm). At the study COVID -19 recruitment pause in March of 2020, the team 
raised concerns about internal validity after noting significant differences in “peer dose” between the monolingual 
Spanish -speaking group of survivors and th e rest of the study population (which included English speakers and bilingual 
Spanish speakers); peers were substantially less frequently involved in intervention activities for Spanish speaking 
patients when compared to English speaking patients. PCORI pr ogram staff and the DSMB agreed that further accrual of 
non-English speaking Spanish speaking patients should be discontinued. PCORI program also suggested a sub -analysis be 
conducted for the n=23 subgroup, including a dose response analysis and an analysi s of Spanish speaking patients 
concern narratives. This academic product (e.g., manuscript, conference presentation) could highlight differences 
between the non -English speaking Spanish speaking group and the main study population. The academic product cou ld 
also document specific challenges experienced by the monolingual Spanish -speaking group.  
     The overarching goal of this Spanish speaking sub -investigation was to assess the feasibility and acceptability of a 
culturally tailored intervention for monolingual Spanish -speaking injury survivors, delivered using a translator. The 
intervention was a su b-study contained within the larger comparative effectiveness trial. Non -English -speaking, Spanish -
  
16 
 speaking individuals were recruited and are being followed over the course of the year after their injury. At baseline in 
the trauma surgical ward, post -injury concerns were elicited and later transcribed and coded into concern domains. 
One-, 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12 -month follow -up interviews reassess Spanish -speaking patients’ post -injury concerns were 
reassessed. The follow -up assessments also reassess PTSD and depression symptoms, functional impairments, and 
health service utilization as patient reported outc omes. In addition, emergency department health service utilization is 
being followed for all patients, intervention and control, via the Emergency Department Information Exchange (EDIE) 
administrative platform.  
      The feasibility of this investigation with regard to obtaining and following patient -reported outcomes and EDIE data 
for this Spanish -speaking subgroup of patients will be assessed. Qualitative analyses include a content analysis of 
Spanish -speaking patien ts’ concern narratives over time. Rapid assessment procedure informed clinical ethnography 
(RAPICE) analytic approaches will be used to review REDCap -documented intervention cases, as well as assess 
experiences from clinical team members’ interventio n activities with the Spanish -speaking subgroup. In particular, the 
experiences of Spanish -speaking patients with intentional injuries (i.e., domestic violence, stabbing), barriers related to 
US immigration policy, and related lack of funding/health insura nce coverage for medical care related to their injury, and 
challenges in care linkages both pre - and post -COVID -19 will be explored in the case studies, and concern narrative.   
COVID -19 related intervention modifications.  All study peer in -person intervention activities were discontinued in 
March 2020 due to exposure health risks to injured peers as a result of the COVID -19 pandemic. After March 2020, all 
peer intervention activities became virtual. Although this intervention adaptation reduced the risk of severe COVID -19-
related illness for injured peer interventionists, it also required that the study social worker increase their in -person 
intervention activity. Instead of the p eer interventionists engaging patients in -person at the hospital or in outpatient 
clinics, the study social worker now conducts all in -person intervention activities and continues to support virtual peer 
intervention activities, including telephone and oth er virtual (e.g., Zoom and FaceTime) interactions, as well as delivery 
of psychotherapeutic elements.  
 
VII. Data Management . (IR-7 In the Study Protocol , Specify  a Data Management Plan that Addresses , at a Minimum , the 
Following Elements: Collecting Data, Organizing Data, Handling Data, Describing Data, Preserving Data, And Sharing 
Data .) 
 
A. Data Coll ection, organizing, handling , and preservation  
 
1. REDCap and iPad Data Collection  
The University of Washington (UW) Institute of Translational Health Sciences (ITHS) REDCap instance will be utilized for 
collection and storage of patient enrollment data, patient -reported outcomes, intervention and enhanced usual care 
delivery documentati on, and the tracking of patients for follow -up assessments. The ITHS REDCap installation is 
configured to be completely HIPAA compliant. REDCap is safe -guarded and hosted in a physically secure UW data center. 
The installation is housed in the secure UW da ta center underneath the 4545 Building in Seattle, Washington, a location 
used for over a decade to house sensitive systems with extremely high rate of availability and without being 
compromised. The installation currently runs on two virtualized environme nts, one for the webserver and one for the 
database itself. Both environments are run on servers with data encrypted at rest. All web traffic to and from the 
REDCap installation are encrypted with the most current protocols available. All connections to th e server are 
automatically encrypted by a 128 bit Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) encryption and the Operating System of each server is 
consistently patched and firewalled in accordance with UW Medicine Information Security Policy SEC05.04.  
The REDCap support team strives to update the REDCap installation as often as possible with minimal 
interruption to service. Security fixes take priority over normal updates with new functionality. The entire REDCap 
installation is backed up daily to a sec ondary location. REDCap natively tracks any and all user activity and these logs are 
available to project owners and related roles on a project by project basis. IP logging happens on a server and network 
level, but these logs are not made public without a  compelling reason. The UW Medicine IT security office regularly 
scans the REDCap installation for vulnerabilities and audits the REDCap support team on a yearly basis. Additionally, 
REDCap conducts comprehensive auditing to record and track access to the database and any data changes therein.  
  
17 
 Project users must have a valid and current user ID to access the installation. This can be either a UW NetID or 
another associated identity via the InCommon Federation. Study team members will not share their usernames or 
passwords with any other team mem ber or person outside of the study team, in accordance with UW policy. The 
individual REDCap user passwords will be different than the passwords used to log on to study iPads or computers; thus 
making this data entry system double -encrypted. Users can only  gain access to a project in REDCap after they have been 
authenticated, added, and appropriate user rights have been assigned to them by the owner/administrator of the 
project. Project owners, generally, are responsible for who has access as well as the le vel of access to their project 
through the user rights mechanism.  
 
2. University of Washington (UW) Medicine Computers and Servers  
In addition to the use of REDCap to collect data, the study team utilizes UW Medicine secure servers for the storage and 
transmission of electronic or digital files of hard copy patient -reported outcomes, data downloaded from REDCap, other 
study data (e.g., Trauma Registry) and study -related  documents. Access to these servers is available only through 
password -protected UW Medicine computers connected to the UW Medicine secure network in accordance with UW 
Administrative Policy Statement (APS) 2.6 Information Security controls and Operational  Practices, and UW Medicine 
Compliance Policy COMP.102 Safeguarding the Privacy and Security of Protected Health Information (PHI). Data will be 
hosted on a MS SQL Server database, exchanged via a webserver, and stored on a secure UW server in accordance w ith 
UW Information Security Policy SP -01 Electronic Data Policy and SP -02 Computing Device and Systems Security Policy. 
Data transmitted through the server utilizes the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol, a cryptographic protocol that 
provides transmi ssion security, derived from the SSL protocol. TLS and SSL encrypt the segments of network connections 
above the Transport Layer, using asymmetric cryptography for key exchange, symmetric encryption for privacy, and 
message authentication codes for message  integrity. These servers are also in a physically secure data center with 
limited, and audited, access.  
UW security analysts have the ability to drill down into detailed activity logs that are tracked, logged, and stored 
to see what data on the server was accessed by whom and when. These activity log files and audits will be able to track 
any IP traffic that  reaches the UW server. Backups will be captured and stored in redundant copies in separate data 
centers which all share the same security controls of the main database.  
 
3. UW Department of Psychiatry at Harborview Medical Center Research Offices  
The study team has offices at the Patricia Steel Building on the Harborview campus. These offices are on a secure floor, 
requiring badge access. The study team has access to locked offices and file cabinets in this secure space for the storage 
of hard copies of documents and electronic equipment.  
 
B. Data Description  
 
1. Electronic Health Record (EHR)  
The study will utilize a UW Medicine EHR data warehouse (Amalga) query to facilitate automated abstraction of PHI and 
the 10 domain PTSD risk factor screen data from the Harborview EHR for all newly admitted injury patients. The study 
team will be working with the UW Biomedical Informatics (BMI) Consult team to obtain data from the Harborview EHR. 
The BMI Consult team has the utmost regard for patient privacy and corresponding HIPAA laws. The UW data 
warehouse is hosted in a secure computing environment by UW Medicine (see UW Medicine Servers information 
above).  
 
2. Patient Enrollment Log  
The study team will document all patients that screen in or out of the study in an electronic log housed within REDCap or 
equivalent data capture method on a secure UW Medicine server (e.g., Excel). The enrollment log will contain a single 
form with variab les abstracted from the EHR containing PHI such as hospital medical record number (MRN), patient 
name, birthdate, admit date, and gender. At the conclusion of the record retention period (March 1, 2029) the form 
containing identifiers will be deleted from the enrollment log database, thus severing the link between subject 
identifying information and de -identified study data.  In addition to PHI and information from the EHR 10 domain PTSD 
risk factor screen, the enrollment log will also be used to track patient approach date and status (e.g., consented, 
  
18 
 refused, excluded); if the patient was excluded, the reason for exclusion (e.g., active psychosis); overall study status 
(e.g., active, completed, withdrawn); and randomization assignment (for those patients that screen in to the study). This 
data will be obtained from the Harborview EHR, from interviewers’ contact with patients, or from patient self -report and 
entered directly entered in to REDCap via secure login and password by a member of the study team. The team is aware 
that at times, due to technical  issues or lack of Wi -Fi access, the enrollment logging procedures may require the team to 
take alternative measures (e.g., computer/iPad or paper logging) for subsequent entry into REDCap.   
 
3. Patient -Reported Outcomes (PRO)  
The baseline and follow -up study assessments for collecting patient -reported outcomes (PRO) may be completed using 
various methods. PRO data will typically be obtained from the patient during in person or telephone interviews with a 
study team member (e.g. , research coordinator or research assistant) who will enter the patient’s responses directly in 
to REDCap. The study team member will log in via user name and password to the REDCap web -based platform on a 
computer on the secure UW Medicine server or log in via user name and password to the REDCap application on an 
encrypted iPad. Subjects will also have the option of receiving an email link to the survey questions to complete follow -
up interviews on their own directly in to the encrypted REDCap web -based platform. If a subject has received the email 
link from the study team they do not need a REDCap user name or login in order to access and complete the survey.  
Alternatively, an encrypted PDF of the interview could be emailed to the subject to complete on their own. The 
study team could also use a hard copy paper version of the assessment to be completed by an interviewer in the 
hospital or convenient location, o r the hard copy interview could be mailed or faxed directly to subjects for them to fill 
in own their own and return in a pre -paid, self -addressed envelope.  
After receiving the hard copy interview back in the mail or an encrypted PDF sent back to a secure UW Medicine 
sponsored email, a member of the study team would then enter the responses from the hard copy or PDF into REDCap. 
Data collected in a hard format  (e.g., on paper) will be stored in a locked cabinet in study office space. Regardless of the 
data collection method, interview responses will not be labeled with directly identifying information; instead, they will 
be labeled with the subject’s study ID n umber to maintain confidentiality. As mentioned above, all data stored in 
REDCap is encrypted and safe -guarded behind firewalls.  
 
4. TSOS Intervention and Enhanced Usual Care (EUC) Delivery Documentation  
Data collected about the process of care, including TSOS intervention care management notes and EUC documentation 
will be obtained from encounters with the patient or their providers, or from the EHR or EDIE, and entered directly into 
REDCap. Due to the na ture of these encounters, the data related to the intervention may contain identifying information 
or may have identifying information piped in or linked from the patient contact form (e.g., patient name, birthdate, 
address) and the provider contact form ( e.g., provider name, position, phone number) within the project. Intervention 
specific logging will be accessible only to members of the intervention team granted permission by the PI in order to 
maintain the blinding of the follow -up interview team.  
If limited by technological constraints, intervention study team members may need to take hard copy notes from 
encounters for subsequent entry into REDCap. As these hard copy intervention notes may contain identifiable 
information, they would be stored in a locked office or filing cabinet, separate from subject’s de -identified study data.  
 
5. Emergency Department Information Exchange (EDIE)  
Collective Medical Technologies (CMT) owns and manages EDIE, which collects emergency department utilization data 
for patients across WA and OR state. The CMT servers, networks, and databases that house and transmit EDIE data are 
co-located in certified Da ta Centers with fully redundant systems and 24/7/365 security monitoring. CMT Data Centers 
are certified in, or have been audited against the following: SOC I, SOC II Type II and SOC III reporting; ISO/IEC 27000 
Series; NIST 800 -53; ITIL 3.0; HIPAA Privacy  and Security & HITECH Rules; and Gramm -Leach -Bliley Act (GLBA) 
Interagency Guidelines.  
CMT maintains a HITRUST Common Security Framework (CSF) certification to ensure they are compliant with HIPAA 
and all state and federal patient privacy protection laws. HITRUST CSF is a healthcare oriented security framework 
required to safeguard PHI which  harmonizes the requirements of existing standards and regulations including HIPAA, 
HITECH, Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI), and Control Objectives for Information and Related Technologies 
(COBIT). CMT undergoes a HITRUST CSF recertification proces s every two -years to ensure they continually meet 
  
19 
 stringent health care industry standards in protecting PHI and managing risk. These safeguards include: intrusion 
prevention and detection; PHI transmission protection, external breach protection, malware protection, restricted 
physical and logical access;  strong encryption, password and user account controls; and strict change management, 
software code, network security topologies and monitoring system review and approval.  
On an approximately monthly basis, the team will obtain EDIE data for consented study subjects from either the UW 
EHR system (e.g., Amalga data repository) or the EDIE web -based platform. A list of MRN’s for all new patients since the 
time of the previous EDIE data pull will be added to the query. The flat file (e.g., Excel) EDIE data output file will be saved 
directly on to the study team’s shared drive housed on the secure UW Medicine server.   
 
6. Trauma Registry  
Harborview Medical Center collects, manages, and stores diagnostic, clinical care, and clinical outcome data for all 
patients admitted to Harborview with a trauma. This data is managed by the Trauma Registrar and maintained in 
accordance with RCW 70.168.06 0 and RCW 70.168.090. The Trauma Registrar is required by WA state law to protect 
information regarding specific patients and providers. Data elements involving identifying characteristics of individual 
patient's, providers’, and the facility's care outcom es within the Trauma Registry must be kept confidential. The Trauma 
Registrar may release confidential information from the Trauma Registry in accordance with applicable laws and 
regulations (e.g., WAC 246 -976-420). No other person may release confidential  information from the Trauma Registry 
without express written permission from the registrar. Requests for Trauma Registry data reports are only approved on 
an official request form submitted by qualified agencies or individuals, consistent with applicable statutes and rules.  
The study team will use the Trauma Registry to compare the demographic and injury characteristics of patients 
included in the trial with the characteristics of those patients who were admitted during the active recruitment period of 
the trial but were not included as study subjects. Additionally, some clinical variables of interest are only available in the 
Trauma Registry (e.g., injury severity). At the end of the trial, the study team will request a data pull from the Trauma 
Registry for all patients (con sented and non -consented) admitted to Harborview during the active period of recruitment. 
The study team is requesting a waiver of consent and a HIPAA waiver in order to obtain Trauma Registry data for non -
consented patients. This data may include ICD 10 c odes and PHI such as admit date and demographic information that is 
associated with identifiers. The link between identifiers and de -identified data for consented and non -consented patient 
data from the Trauma Registry will be retained for the record reten tion period of six years after completion of the trial.  
 
C. Data Sharing  
An overarching goal of the TSOS Peer investigation with the Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) is to 
produce and disseminate information and resources that will facilitate the widespread implementation screening and 
intervention procedure s for PTSD and related comorbidity throughout trauma care systems nationwide. The resource 
and data sharing plan is in concert with this overarching goal.  
The final shared data set will include patient, and setting level demographic, clinical, EHR, and trauma registry data. 
Along with the data set, we will create a code book documenting all variables (e.g., common names for trauma registry 
variables, names f or single questionnaire items, scoring rules for derived variables).  After acceptance of the main 
manuscript for the study, which is anticipated to be 12 -18 months after study completion, requests for access of data 
files will be considered. We will prior itize access to research groups that have a clearly articulated aim and rationale for 
how secondary data analyses will impact future policy and/or clinical practice for trauma care systems nationwide. 
Researchers requesting data will need to complete a req uest form outlining intended use of the data and agree to use 
the data for this intended purpose. Prior to data release, researchers requesting data will be required to sign a 
confidentiality agreement specifying that they will not identify any individual participant, that they will use secure 
technology to safeguard the data, and that they will destroy or return the data after their analyses are completed. The 
TSOS Peer investigative team will also require documentation of IRB approval from the host instit ution prior to release 
of the data.  
We do not expect to make a public use data file available from the study given the nature of our sample and trauma 
care system context. Study participants may have substance abuse or other diagnoses that may be stigmatizing and may 
prefer that the conditio ns of the traumatic injury event remain entirely confidential. Although the data analytic files will 
not have direct identifiers (only study IDs), the possibility of deductive disclosure of subjects with unusual demographic, 
  
20 
 injury, or clinical characteristics remains. In order to safeguard against the unlikely event of deductive disclosure, we wil l 
make the data files and codebook available to other researchers only on a case -by-case basis.  
 
VIII. Data Analyses. (IR-1 A priori Specific Plans for Data Analyses that Correspond  to the Major Study Aims , IR-2 Assess 
Data Source Adequacy, IR-3 Describe Data Linkage Plans, if applicable, IR-5 Provide Sufficient Information in Reports to 
Allow for Assessments of the Study’s Internal and External Validity, RQ-4 Identify and Assess Participant Subgroups, MD-
1 Describe in Protocol Methods to Prevent and Monitor Missing Data, MD-2 Use Validated Statistical Methods to Deal 
with Missing Data that Properly Account for Statistical Uncertainty Due to Missingness, MD-4 Examine Sensitivity of 
Inferences to Missing Data Methods and Assumptions, and Incorporate into Interpretation, HT-1 Examine Sensitivity of 
Inferences to Missing Data Methods and Assumptions, and Incorporate into Interpretation, HT-2 For all HTE Analyses, 
provide an analysis plan, including the use of appropriate statistical methods. HT-3 Report all Prespecified HTE Analyses 
and, at Minimum, the Number of P ost-hoc HTE Analyses, Including All Subgroups and Outcomes A nalyzed .) 
Overview.  All primary statistical analyses will be conducted with the intent -to-treat sample. The primary purpose of the 
statistical analyses is to examine and compare trends in emergency department health service utilization, posttraumatic 
concern severity, PTSD sy mptoms, and physical function longitudinally between patients in the peer -integrated 
collaborative care intervention and patients in the surgical team notification arms of the study. The major outcome 
variables are the continuous and dichotomous assessment s of EDIE derived emergency department health service 
utilization ,83 patient r eported posttraumatic concerns ,69,86 PTSD symptoms (PTSD Checklist) ,92 and physical function 
(Medical Outcomes Study Short Form 36 (MOS SF -36).117,119 
The primary statistical analyses will test the hypothesis that patients randomized to the peer -integrated 
collaborative care intervention will demonstrate reductions in emergency department health service use when 
compared to patients randomized to the trauma surgery notification condition over the course of the 12 -months after 
injury. Primary analy ses will also assess whether collaborative care intervention patients demonstrate longitudinal 
reductions in posttraumatic concern severity and PTSD symptoms and  improvements in physical function when 
compared to trauma surgery notification patients.  
The study team will use mixed effects regression models to test these hypotheses for both continuous and discrete 
outcomes.128-131 The investigative group has extensive experience with this analytic approach in the analyses of 
longitudinal data after injury.20,24,47,67,68,71 In addition, these models will allow the use of covariates that model potential 
sources of non -response bias and time -dependent covariates. This type of model also allows the specification of random 
or fixed effects and the form of the serial correlation over time (if heterogeneity changes over time).  
The effect of major interest will be the time by treatment group interaction term. For these models , repeated 
measurements of the baseline, 1 -, 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12 -month outcome assessments (i.e., EDIE documented emergency 
department utilization, concern severity, PTSD Checklist and MOS SF -36 Physical Components Summary ( PCS) scale 
scores) will be the dependent variables. For all dependent variables , the study team will first ﬁt models containing only 
time categories, intervention, and intervention by time i nteractions. The form of the dependent variables will determine 
the link function used.  
The impact of including covariates in the model will be examined in planned sensitivity analyses (IR -5). As in prior 
study team investigation , sensitivity analyses will be used to assess the impact of key assumptions. Important injury and 
demographic characteristics , such as Injury Severity Score and age , will be entered into the models as covariates in 
planned sensitivity analyses. Prior to these analyses, the study team will examine baseline treatment group differences, 
using the appropriate statistics fo r the distribution of the variable. Although randomization should ensure balance 
between the two groups, it is essential to control for any known confounders in the design and analysis to prevent a 
biased assessment of the treatment effect. Any baseline in jury, demographic, or clinical variables found to be 
statistically significant in this analysis will also be included as covariates in the regression models.  Care processes will 
also be examined as part of the secondary data analytic plan.  
Standards for preventing and handling missing data (MD -1, MD -2, MD -3, MD -4, MD -5). For the primary study 
outcome of EDIE  emergency department data for the intent -to treat sample, prior investigation documents that the 
study team can attain 100% patient follow -up at all -time points; therefore , for the study primary outcome , no subject 
missing data is anticipated.  For the primary patient -reported outcomes  of posttraumatic concerns, PTSD symptoms and 
limitations in physical function, some attrition is expected in the study sample. Prior PCORI and NIH studies by the 
investigative group have consistently achieved follow -up completion rates ≥ 80% between 6 -12 mon ths post -injury for 
  
21 
 patient reported outcomes.20,24,67,68,71,113 The study team has developed a series of methods for proactively minimizing  
patient attrition in follow -up that often involve patient subject informed consent prior to implementation.  These 
methods include obtaining multiple pieces of contact information at the time of the baseline interview, maintaining 
contact with the patient’s social network, monitoring emergency department and hospital records for evidence of ne w 
patient contact information, conducting ongoing public records searches and conducting social media se arches. Due to 
the nature of self -report data, members of the data quality core will monitor all data entered into REDCap for missing 
values.  Item level missing data may be able to be re -captured if identified in a timely manner.  The pattern of missing 
data will be examined throughout the study to determine if there are patterns of non -response that could be 
investigated in real time.  
Missing data can contribute to biased estimations of treatment effects. Assumptions abou t the nature of missing 
data are crucial to the type of statistical analysis chosen. Full information maximum likelihood estimates from mixed 
effects regression models accommodate missing data that are missing at random (MAR). Missingness with MAR data 
allows dependence on previously observed outcome variables .132-134 We will use logistic regression models to determine 
which, if any, demographic or clinical characteristics, including treatment group membership, are predictive of subject 
attrition. Any factors observed to explain trends in missing data would be used as covariates in  our subsequent analyses. 
In past studies, no sources of consistent variation to explain missing data were found.20,24,67,68,71,113 Based on our 
relatively low attrition rates and our inability to find consistent variation in past investigations, we believe that MAR is a 
reasonable assumption. However, we will perform a sensitivity analysis on our data using multiple imputations.134-138 All 
patient data including data on outcome variables will be used to estimate imputation values in replicate imputed data 
sets. The missing values will be filled using a Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm for multiple imputation 
procedure.134,137,138 
Whenever  patients decline participation  or withdraw from the study , the study research assistant will inquire as to 
why the individu al did not want to participate. The study team will also document when patients miss a follow -up 
interview but do not formally withdraw from the study. The prior study team PCORI funded investigation attained ≥ 80% 
follow -up at each time p oint for patients randomized to both conditions.47 Twenty six percent of the 171 patients were 
missing one or more assessment s at the 1 -, 3- or 6-month time point. Regression analyses that systematically assessed 
patterns of missing data revealed that only gender was associated with missing assessments (61% of men versus 38% of 
women, P < 0.01).  
Heterogeneity of treatment effects and subgroup analyses (HT-1, HT -2, HT -3, HT -4, RQ -4). Secondary analyses will 
also assess whether the intervention is equally effective in subgroups of patients with and without TBI, for male and 
female patients and for ethnoculturally diverse patients ( e.g., White versus non -White and Hispanic patients)  (RQ-4). As 
detailed in the PCORI 2012 Methodology Report  (pgs. 65 -68), the investigation will take  a descriptive  approach to all 
heterogeneity of treatment effect analyses .139 There is some indication from the prior literature that for patient  
symptomatic , functional, and health service uti lization outcomes , traumatic brain injury, gender and ethnic/racial status 
may impact treatment effects; however , this literature can be seen as inconclusive with  regard to specific hypothesis. 
25,103,104,140-145 Additionally, few prior investigations have been adequately powered to formally assess the impact of these 
3 subgroups on hypothes ized treatment effects. T he current investigation is  likely to be underpowered to assess the 
primary impact of  traumatic brain injury, gender and ethnic/racial status subgroups on the primary study outcomes. 
Therefore, the analyses of treatment effect heterogene ity are to be considered descriptive .139 Traumatic brain injury, 
gender, and ethnic/racial status will be tested as main effects and time by treatment by factor interactions  to assess 
heterogenei ty of treatment effects. The study will perform 3  sets of post -hoc heterogeneity of treatment effect analyses. 
These analyses will assess the impact of these 3  major subgroups on emergency department health service utilization, 
posttraumatic concern severity, PTSD symptom and functional limitation outcomes . Exploratory subgroup analyses may 
also incorporate Spanish speaking pa rticipant s. 
Sample Size and Power:  Power analyses were conducted using the RMASS program .146 Parameters used in 
ascertaining power including effect sizes were derived from prior study team investigations.47,67,71  
i. Emergency Department Utilization.  The primary health care system intervention target will be group differences 
in emergency department utilization. In the prior PCORI funded investigation , at 3-6 months post -injury , 30% of nurse 
notification patients versus 17% of care management patients had one or more emergency department visits (13% 
difference across groups), at 6 -9 months post -injury , the differences were 31% nurse notification versus 21% care 
management (10% difference across groups), and at 12 months post -injury , the differences wer e 30% nurse notification 
  
22 
 versus 22% care management (8% difference across groups).47 With the 100% follow -up rate provided by EDIE, the 
probability of a 2 -tailed type I error set at 5%, correlation between observations of 0.7, and a similar pattern of 
emergency department visits as seen in the prior PCORI investigation with 424 total pati ents (n = 212 in each arm ), the 
power is ≥ 0.80.  
ii. Severity of posttraumatic concerns . In the  prior PCORI investigation , at the six month post -injury time point , 74% 
of nurse notification patients endorsed 1 or more severe concerns versus 52% of care management patients at the six 
month post -injury study endpoint, for a 22% absolute difference between the two groups.47 For patient -reported 
outcomes such as the endorsement of one or more severe posttraumatic concern, 20% 12 -month attrition is 
anticipated. With 20% 12 -month attrition, 424 patients, the probability of a 2 -tailed type I error set at 5%, correlation 
between observations of 0.7 and a similar pattern of endpoint posttraumatic concern reduction as seen in the prior 
PCORI investigation (22% reduction in the endorsement of any severe post -injury concern), the power to detect 
differences in posttraumatic concern se verity will be ≥ 0.80.   
iii. PTSD symptoms . In prior comparative effectiveness trials conducted by the study team, at the 12 -month time 
point , collaborative care patients demonstrated a mean PTSD Checklist score of 37.4 (95% Confidence Interval = 34.0 -
40.7) and usual care patients demonstrated a mean PTSD Checklist score of 42.5  (95% Confidence Interval = 39.3 -45.7).67 
Projecting these differences to the current investigation, with 20% 12 -month attrition, 424 patients, the probability of a 
2-tailed type I error set at 5%, correlation between observations of 0.7 and an anticipated effect size = 0.34 , the power 
to detect differences in PTSD symptoms will be ≥ 0.80.  
iv. Physical function . In prior comparative effectiveness trials conducted by the study team, at the 12 -month time 
point , collaborative care patients demonstrated a mean MOS SF -36 PCS scale score of 43.7 (95% Confidence Interval = 
41.0 -46.5) and usual care patients d emonstrated a mean MOS SF -36 score of 41.2 (95% Confidence Interval = 38.5 -
43.9).67 Projecting these differences to the current investigation, with 20% 12 -month attrition, 424 patients, the 
probability of a 2 -tailed type I error set at 5%, correlation between observations of 0.7 and an anticipated effect size = 
0.26 , the power to detect differences in physical function will be will be ≥ 0.67.  
 
Aim 1. Additional COVID -19 Exploratory Analyses  
The first step in the COVID -19 secondary analyses was to compare the baseline demographic and clinical characteristics 
of the pre - and post -COVID19 cohorts. The core aim of this analysis is to assess whether one impact of the pandemic has 
been to change th e demographic, injury and clinical characteristics of study participants over time.  
Next, informed in part by the RAPICE COVID -19 qualitative studies that the team had undertaken during the 
trial, it was decided to dichotomize the cohort into patients that did or did not have any follow -up assessment during 
the COVID -19 pandemic initiation in March 2020. In order to explore differential patterns of treatment response 
introduced by the COVID -19 pandemic, mixed effects regression models that included the 3 -way interaction of 
treatment, by time, by COVID -19 cohort were performed. These regres sion models also incorporated comparisons of 
both intervention and control group effects, as well as isolated comparisons of pre - and post -COVID intervention group 
effects, at each time point.  
 
 
IX. Additional Considerations Related to the Incorporation of Standards for Complex Interventions . (SCI-1 Fully 
Describe the Intervention and C omparator and Define Their Core F unctions, SCI-2 Specify the Hypothesized Causal 
Pathw ays and their Theoretical B asis, SCI-3 Specify How Adaptations to the Form of the Intervention and C omparat or 
will be Allowed and R ecorded, SCI-4 Plan and Describe a Process Evaluation, SCI-5 Select Patient Outcomes Informed by 
the Causal Pathway , CI-1 Specify  the Causal Model Underlying the Research Q uestion .) The peer integrated collaborative 
care intervention constitutes a complex intervention as it has both multiple components and multiple casual pathways; 
additionally the intervention is complex in  its targeting of a heterogeneous  patient population  and in its multifa ceted 
adoption strategy for the  acute care medical context .147-149 Numerous  aspects of th e complexity of the intervention are 
articulated throughout the study protocol including: the conceptual framework underlyi ng intervention effects, t he 
occurrence of adaptations to the interv ention and comparator condition, documentation of how adaptations to the 
intervention and comparator conditions will be recorded, description of process evaluations and outcomes anticipated 
to be impact ed by the complex intervention (see SCI references throughout the study protocol and Figure  2).  The 
intervention and comparator core elements are fully described ac cording to previously articulated recommendations for 
  
23 
 the explication of complex i nterventions in  Table 2 below .150 
 
Table 2. Protocol Elements Received By Patients in the Patient -Centered Care Transition Intervention versus 
Enhanced Usual Care Control Study Arms  
Patient -Centered Care Transition Service Intervention  Enhanced Usual Care Control  
Research assistant (RA) elicitation of post -injury concerns in 
baseline interview  Research assistant (RA) elicitation of post -injury 
concerns in baseline interview  
RA notifies nurse of patient post -injury concerns and levels of 
psychological distress  RA notifies nurse of patient post -injury concerns and 
levels of psychological distress  
Randomization with allocation concealment  Randomization with allocation concealment  
Not Received  Trauma surgery recommendation for mental health 
consultation (e.g., trauma social work, psychiatry 
consult, rehabilitation psychology, spiritual care, 
addiction intervention or other mental health service)  
Peer interventionist and other study team members elicit 
posttraumatic concerns and target for improvement  Not received  
Peer interventionist and other study team members provide care 
management between trauma center to primary care and community 
resources  Not received  
Peer interventionist, Master of Social Work (MSW) interventionist, 
and other study team members (e.g., psychiatrist) provide evidence -
based CBT & MI  Not received  
Peer interventionist, MSW interventionist, and other study team 
members (e.g., research coordinator [RC]) administer symptom 
assessments (e.g., CESD, IES)  Not received  
MD, RN, MSW or other licensed clinical provider team members 
perform suicide risk assessment and safety planning  Not received  
MD, RN, MSW or other licensed clinical provider team members 
deliver pharmacotherapy symptom assessment  Not received  
MD psychiatrist or appropriate trauma surgical providers (e.g., MD, 
PA, ARNP) recommend psychotropic medication prescription  Not received  
MD, RN, MSW or other Harborview providers document intervention 
in EDIE record  Not received  
Peer interventionist, MD, RN, MSW or other providers or study team 
members (e.g., RC) log intervention electronically (e.g., in REDCap)  Not received  
MD, MSW, RN or other study team member (e.g., RC) provides 24/7 
cell phone coverage  Not received  
RA blinded follow -up telephone assessment of post -injury concerns 
and symptomatic and functional outcomes  RA blinded follow -up telephone assessment of post -
injury concerns and symptomatic and functional 
outcomes  
Note. CBT=Cognitive Behavioral Therapy; MI=Motivational Interviewing; CESD=Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression 
Scale;  EDIE=Emergency Department Information Exchange  
 
Also, Figure 2 below further elucidates causal pathways broken out by each of the main study intervention outcome s 
including EDIE documented visits, Concern severity, PTSD symptoms and functional limitations.  
 
  
24 
  
 
The study team has extensive prior experience describing the impact of intervent ion processes on study 
outcomes .67,96,151 The study team will apply these previously developed approaches to understanding the processes by 
which the peer integrated collaborative care intervention impacts key study outcomes in the current comparative 
effectiveness trial.   
  

  
25 
 X. References  
 
1. United States President's Commission on Care for America's Returning Wounded Warriors. Serve, support, 
simplify: Report of the President's Commission on Care for America's Returning Wounded Warriors.  Washington, 
DC: President's Commission on Care for America's Returning Wounded Warriors; 2007.  
2. A National Trauma Care System: Integrating Military and Civilian Trauma Systems to Achieve Zero Preventable 
Deaths After Injury. Washington, DC: National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine;2016. 978 -0-
309-44285 -5. 
3. National Center for Injury Prevention. CDC 2012. In: Office of Statistics and Programming, ed. Atlanta, GA: 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention; 2012.  
4. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Traumatic brain injury: Hope through research. 
Bethesda: National Institute of Health; 2009: http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/tbi/detail_tbi.htm . 
5. Coronado VG, McGuire LC, Sarmiento K, et al. Trends in Traumatic Brain Injury in the U.S. and the public health 
response: 1995 -2009. J Safety Res. 2012;43(4):299 -307.  
6. Faul M, Xu L, Wald MM, Coronado VG. Traumatic brain injury in the United States: Emergency department visits, 
hospitalizations, and deaths 2002 -2006. Center for Disease Control and Prevention, National Centers for Injury 
Prevention and Control. 2010.  
7. Rice DP, MacKenzie EJ, Jones AS, Associates. Cost of injury in the United States: A report to congress. San 
Francisco: Institute for Health and Aging, University of California; Baltimore, Md: Injury Prevention Center, The 
Johns Hopkins University;1989.  
8. Injuries and violence: the facts. World Health Organization. 2014; 
http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/media/news/2015/Injury_violence_facts_2014/en/ . 
9. PCORI. Improving Healthcare Systems - Cycle 1 2017; http://www.pcori.org/funding -opportunities/improving -
healthcare -systems -cycle -1-2017 . 
10. Zatzick D, Russo J, Thomas P, et al. Patient -Centered Care Transitions After Injury Hospitalization: A Comparative 
Effectiveness Trial. Psychiatry. 2018:1 -17. 
11. MacKenzie EJ, Rivara FP, Jurkovich GJ, et al. A national evaluation of the effect of trauma -center care on 
mortality. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(4):366 -378.  
12. Soderstrom CA, Smith GS, Dischinger PC, et al. Psychoactive substance use disorders among seriously injured 
trauma center patients. JAMA. 1997;277(22):1769 -1774.  
13. Zatzick D, Donovan D, Dunn C, et al. Substance use and PTSD in trauma center patients receiving mandated 
alcohol SBI. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2012;43(4):410 -417.  
14. Zatzick D, Jurkovich G, Rivara F, et al. A national US study of posttraumatic stress disorder, depression, and work 
and functional outcomes after injury hospitalization. Ann Surg. 2008;248(3):429 -437.  
15. Shih RA, Schell TL, Hambarsoomian K, Belzberg H, Marshall GN. Prevalence of posttraumatic stress disorder and 
major depression after trauma center hospitalization. J Trauma. 2010;69(6):1560 -1566.  
16. Zatzick D, Rivara FP, Nathens AB, et al. A nationwide US study of post -traumatic stress after hospitalization for 
physical injury. Psychol Med. 2007;37(10):1469 -1480.  
17. Blanchard EB, Hickling EJ, Taylor AE, Loos W. Psychiatric morbidity associated with motor vehicle accidents. J 
Nerv Ment Dis. 1995;183(8):495 -504.  
18. Holbrook TL, Anderson JP, Sieber WJ, Browner D, Hoyt DB. Outcome after major trauma: 12 -month and 18 -
month follow -up results from the trauma recovery project. Journal of Trauma. 1999;46(5):765 -773.  
19. Michaels AJ, Michaels CE, Moon CH, et al. Posttraumatic stress disorder after injury: Impact on general health 
outcome and early risk assessment. Journal of Trauma. 1999;47(3):460 -467.  
20. Zatzick D, Kang SM, Muller HG, et al. Predicting posttraumatic distress in hospitalized trauma survivors with 
acute injuries. Am J Psychiatry. 2002;159(6):941 -946.  
21. Zatzick D, Jurkovich GJ, Gentilello LM, Wisner DH, Rivara FP. Posttraumatic stress, problem drinking, and 
functioning 1 year after injury. Archives of Surgery. 2002;137(2):200 -205.  
22. Zatzick DF, Marmar CR, Weiss DS, et al. Posttraumatic stress disorder and functioning and quality of life 
outcomes in a nationally representative sample of male Vietnam veterans. Am J Psychiatry. 1997;154(12):1690 -
1695.  
  
26 
 23. Zatzick D, Weiss D, Marmar C, et al. Post -traumatic stress disorder and functioning and quality of life outcomes 
in female Vietnam veterans. Military Medicine. 1997;162(10):661 -665.  
24. Zatzick D, Jurkovich G, Fan MY, et al. The association between posttraumatic stress and depressive symptoms, 
and functional outcomes in adolescents followed longitudinally after injury hospitalization. Arch Pediatr Adolesc 
Med. 2008;162(7):642 -648.  
25. Zatzick D, Rivara F, Jurkovich G, et al. Multi -site investigation of traumatic brain injuries, posttraumatic stress 
disorder, and self -reported health and cognitive impairments. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2010;67(12):1291 -
1300.  
26. Hoge C, McGurk D, Thomas J, Cox A, Engel CC, Castro CA. Mild traumatic brain injury in U.S. Soldiers returning 
from Iraq. New England Journal of Medicine. 2008;358(5):453 -463.  
27. Kessler RC. Posttraumatic stress disorder: The burden to the individual and society. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 
2000;61(suppl 5):4 -14. 
28. Greenberg PE, Sisitsky T, Kessler RC, et al. The economic burden of anxiety disorders in the 1990s. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry. 1999;60(7):427 -435.  
29. Greenberg PE, Stiglin LE, Finkelstein SN, Berndt ER. The economic burden of depression in 1990. The Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry. 1993;54(11):405 -418.  
30. Walker E, Unutzer J, Rutter C, et al. Costs of health care use by women HMO members with a history of 
childhood abuse and neglect. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1999;56(7):609 -613.  
31. Walker EA, Katon W, Russo J, Ciechanowski P, Newman E, Wagner AW. Health care costs associated with 
postraumatic stress disorder symptoms in women. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2003;60(4):369 -374.  
32. Worrell SS, Koepsell TD, Sabath DR, Gentilello LM, Mock CN, Nathens AB. The risk of reinjury in relation to time 
since first injury: A retrospective population -based study. J Trauma. 2006;60(2):379 -384.  
33. Gonzalez AA, Abdelsattar ZM, Dimick JB, Dev S, Birkmeyer JD, Ghaferi AA. Time -to-readmission and mortality 
after high -risk surgery. Ann Surg. 2015;262(1):53 -59. 
34. Merkow RP, Ju MH, Chung JW, et al. Underlying reasons associated with hospital readmission following surgery 
in the United States. JAMA. 2015;313(5):483 -495.  
35. Moore L, Stelfox HT, Turgeon AF, et al. Rates, patterns, and determinants of unplanned readmission after 
traumatic injury: A multicenter cohort study. Ann Surg. 2014;259(2):374 -380.  
36. Tabak YP, Sun X, Nunez CM, Gupta V, Johannes RS. Predicting Readmission at Early Hospitalization Using 
Electronic Clinical Data: An Early Readmission Risk Score. Medical care. 2016.  
37. Burke RE, Kripalani S, Vasilevskis EE, Schnipper JL. Moving beyond readmission penalties: creating an ideal 
process to improve transitional care. J Hosp Med. 2013;8(2):102 -109.  
38. Parry C, Kent EE, Forsythe LP, Alfano CM, Rowland JH. Can't see the forest for the care plan: a call to revisit the 
context of care planning. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(21):2651 -2653.  
39. Coleman EA, Parry C, Chalmers S, Min SJ. The care transitions intervention: results of a randomized controlled 
trial. Archives of internal medicine. 2006;166(17):1822 -1828.  
40. Parry C, Min S -J, Chugh A, Chalmers S, Coleman EA. Further Application of the Care Transitions Intervention: 
Results of a Randomized Controlled Trial Conducted in a Fee -For-Service Setting. Home Health Care Services 
Quarterly. 2009;28(2 -3):84 -99. 
41. Parry C, Mahoney E, Chalmers SA, Coleman EA. Assessing the quality of transitional care: further applications of 
the care transitions measure. Med Care. 2008;46(3):317 -322.  
42. Dy SM, Ashok M, Wines RC, Rojas Smith L. A framework to guide implementation research for care transitions 
interventions. Journal for healthcare quality : official publication of the National Association for Healthcare 
Quality. 2015;37(1):41 -54. 
43. Arias SA, Miller I, Camargo CA, Jr., et al. Factors Associated With Suicide Outcomes 12 Months After Screening 
Positive for Suicide Risk in the Emergency Department. Psychiatric services. 2015:appips201400513.  
44. Demiris G, Kneale L. Informatics Systems and Tools to Facilitate Patient -centered Care Coordination. Yearb Med 
Inform. 2015;10(1):15 -21. 
45. Gurwitz JH, Field TS, Ogarek J, et al. An Electronic Health Record -Based Intervention to Increase Follow -up Office 
Visits and Decrease Rehospitalization in Older Adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62(5):865 -871.  
  
27 
 46. Rochester -Eyeguokan CD, Pincus KJ, Patel RS, Reitz SJ. The Current Landscape of Transitions of Care Practice 
Models: A Scoping Review. Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy. 
2016;36(1):117 -133.  
47. Zatzick D, Russo J, Thomas P, et al. A comparative effectiveness trial of patient -centered care transitions after 
injury hospitalization. Submitted for publication.  
48. Zatzick DF, Russo J, Thomas P, et al. PCORI Draft Final Research Report: A Comparative Effectiveness Trial of 
Optimal Patient -Centered Care for US Trauma Care Systems.  
49. Institute of Medicine. Initial national priorities for comparative effectiveness research.  Washington D.C.2009.  
50. Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st 
century.  Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.  
51. Gartlehner G, Forneris CA, Brownley KA, et al. Interventions for the prevention of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
(PTSD) in adults after exposure to psychological trauma. In: Quality AfHRa, ed2013.  
52. Forneris CA, Gartlehner G, Brownley KA, et al. Interventions to prevent post -traumatic stress disorder: a 
systematic review. American journal of preventive medicine. 2013;44(6):635 -650.  
53. Dale J, Caramlau IO, Lindenmeyer A, Williams SM. Peer support telephone calls for improving health. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2008(4):CD006903.  
54. Marcia Valenstein, Paul N. Pfeiffer, Samantha Brandfon, et al. Augmenting Ongoing Depression Care With a 
Mutual Peer Support Intervention Versus Self -Help Materials Alone: A Randomized Trial. Psychiatric Services. 
2016;67(2):236 -239.  
55. Heisler M, Vijan S, Makki F, Piette JD. Diabetes control with reciprocal peer support versus nurse care 
management: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2010;153(8):507 -515.  
56. Johansson T, Keller S, Winkler H, Ostermann T, Weitgasser R, Sonnichsen AC. Effectiveness of a Peer Support 
Programme versus Usual Care in Disease Management of Diabetes Mellitus Type 2 regarding Improvement of 
Metabolic Control: A Cluster -Randomised C ontrolled Trial. J Diabetes Res. 2016;2016:3248547.  
57. Hunkeler EM, Meresman JF, Hargreaves WA, et al. Efficacy of nurse telehealth care and peer support in 
augmenting treatment of depression in primary care. Arch Fam Med. 2000;9(8):700 -708.  
58. Harden PN, Sherston SN. Optimal management of young adult transplant recipients: the role of integrated 
multidisciplinary care and peer support. Ann Saudi Med. 2013;33(5):489 -491.  
59. Paul GM, Smith SM, Whitford DL, O'Shea E, O'Kelly F, O'Dowd T. Peer support in type 2 diabetes: a randomised 
controlled trial in primary care with parallel economic and qualitative analyses: pilot study and protocol. BMC 
Fam Pract. 2007;8:45.  
60. Dale J, Caramlau I, Docherty A, Sturt J, Hearnshaw H. Telecare motivational interviewing for diabetes patient 
education and support: a randomised controlled trial based in primary care comparing nurse and peer supporter 
delivery. Trials. 2007;8:18.  
61. Young AS, Cohen AN, Goldberg R, et al. Improving Weight in People with Serious Mental Illness: The 
Effectiveness of Computerized Services with Peer Coaches. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2017;32(1):48 -
55. 
62. Gassaway J, Jones ML, Sweatman WM, Hong M, Anziano P, DeVault K. Effects of peer mentoring on self -efficacy 
and hospital readmission following inpatient rehabilitation of individuals with spinal cord injury: a randomized 
controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2017.  
63. Hanks RA, Rapport LJ, Wertheimer J, Koviak C. Randomized Controlled Trial of Peer Mentoring for Individuals 
With Traumatic Brain Injury and Their Significant Others. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. 
2012;93(8):1297 -1304.  
64. Jones M, Gassaway J. Peer -supported self -management to facilitate community re -entry after discharge from 
spinal cord injury rehabilitation: Engaging peers as change agents and research partners. Ann Phys Rehabil Med. 
2016;59S:e128 -e129.  
65. Hibbard MRP, Cantor JP, Charatz HBA, et al. Peer Support in the Community: Initial Findings of a Mentoring 
Program for Individuals with Traumatic Brain Injury and Their Families. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation. 
2002;17(2):112 -131.  
66. Katon W. Health reform, research pave way for collaborative care for mental illness. Interview by Bridge M. 
Kuehn. JAMA. 2013;309(23):2425 -2426.  
  
28 
 67. Zatzick D, Jurkovich G, Rivara FP, et al. A randomized stepped care intervention trial targeting posttraumatic 
stress disorder for surgically hospitalized injury survivors. Annals of Surgery. 2013;257(3):390 -399.  
68. Zatzick D, Roy -Byrne P, Russo J, et al. A randomized effectiveness trial of stepped collaborative care for acutely 
injured trauma survivors. Arch Gen Psychiat. 2004;61(5):498 -506.  
69. Zatzick, Kang SM, Hinton WL, et al. Posttraumatic concerns: A patient -centered approach to outcome 
assessment after traumatic physical injury. Medical Care. 2001;39(4):327 -339.  
70. Rollman BL, Belnap BH, LeMenager MS, et al. Telephone -delivered collaborative care for treating post -CABG 
depression: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2009;302(19):2095 -2103.  
71. Zatzick D, O'Connor SS, Russo J, et al. Technology enhanced stepped collaborative care targeting posttraumatic 
stress disorder and comorbidity after injury: A randomized controlled trial. J Trauma Stress. 2015;28(5):391 -400.  
72. Gilbody S, Bower P, Fletcher J, Richards D, Sutton AJ. Collaborative care for depression: a cumulative meta -
analysis and review of longer -term outcomes. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(21):2314 -2321.  
73. Peek CJ. A collaborative care lexicon for asking practice and research development questions. Rockville: Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2011.  
74. Unutzer J, Katon W, Callahan CM, et al. Collaborative care management of late -life depression in the primary 
care setting: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;288(22):2836 -2845.  
75. Wells KB, Sherbourne C, Schoenbaum M, et al. Impact of disseminating quality improvement programs for 
depression in managed primary care: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2000;283(2):212 -220.  
76. Roy-Byrne P, Craske MG, Sullivan G, et al. Delivery of evidence -based treatment for multiple anxiety disorders in 
primary care: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2010;303(19):1921 -1928.  
77. Rollins AF, Dana. Peer Specialists in Collaborative Care for Older Adults With Depression. Psychiatric services. 
2015;66(9):1000 -1001.  
78. Zatzick DF, Russo J, Darnell D, et al. An effectiveness -implementation hybrid trial study protocol targeting 
posttraumatic stress disorder and comorbidity. Implementation science : IS. 2016;11:58.  
79. Coventry PA, Hudson JL, Kontopantelis E, et al. Characteristics of Effective Collaborative Care for Treatment of 
Depression: A Systematic Review and Meta -Regression of 74 Randomised Controlled Trials. PloS one. 
2014;9(9):e108114.  
80. Unutzer J, Chan YF, Hafer E, et al. Quality improvement with pay -for-performance incentives in integrated 
behavioral health care. Am J Public Health. 2012;102(6):e41 -45. 
81. Engel CC, Oxman T, Yamamoto C, et al. RESPECT -Mil: feasibility of a systems -level collaborative care approach to 
depression and post -traumatic stress disorder in military primary care. Military Medicine. 2008;173(10):935 -940.  
82. Moran M. CMS Finalizes Code for Collaborative Care. 2016.  
83. CMT. This is EDIE. 2015; http://collectivemedicaltech.com/what -we-do-2/edie -option -2/. Accessed February 23, 
2017.  
84. Neven DE, Sabel JC, Howell DN, Carlisle RJ. The Development of the Washington State Emergency Department 
Opioid Prescribing Guidelines. Journal of Medical Toxicology. 2012;8(4):353 -359.  
85. Whiteside L, Russo J, Zatzick D. Emergency Department Utilization: Accuracy of Self -Report compared to 
Statewide Health Information Exchange in a High -Risk Population and Correlates of Inaccuracy. Academic 
Emergency Medicine. In preparation.  
86. Zatzick D, Russo J, Rajotte E, et al. Strengthening the patient -provider relationship in the aftermath of physical 
trauma through an understanding of the nature and severity of posttraumatic concerns. Psychiatry. 
2007;70(3):260 -273.  
87. PCORI. Considering Patient Concerns during Trauma Care. 2016; http://www.pcori.org/research -in-
action/considering -patient -concerns -during -trauma -care , Accessed on January 13, 2017.  
88. The 2nd Trauma. In: Society AT, ed2016.  
89. American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma. Resources for optimal care of the injured patient.  
Washington DC 2006.  
90. American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma. Resources for Optimal Care of the Injured Patient.  
Washington, DC 2014.  
91. Russo J, Katon W, Zatzick D. The development of a population -based automated screening procedure for PTSD in 
acutely injured hospitalized trauma survivors. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2013;35(5):485 -491.  
  
29 
 92. Weathers F, Ford J. Psychometric review of PTSD Checklist (PCL -C, PCL -S. PCL -M, PCL -PR). In: Stamm B, ed. 
Measurement of stress, trauma, and adaptation . Lutherville: Sidran Press; 1996:250 -251.  
93. Zatzick D, Johnson FA. Alternative psychotherapeutic practice among middle class Americans: II: Some 
conceptual and practical comparisons. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry. 1997;21:213 -246.  
94. Palinkas LA, Prussing E, Reznik VM, Landsverk JA. The San Diego East County school shootings: A qualitative 
study of community -level post -traumatic stress. Prehospital and Disaster Medicine. 2004;19(1):113 -121.  
95. Palinkas L. Qualitative and mixed methods in mental health services and implementation research. Journal of 
clinical child and adolescent psychology : the official journal for the Society of Clinical Child and Adolescent 
Psychology, American Psychological Association, Division 53. 2014;43(6):851 -861.  
96. Zatzick D, Rivara F, Jurkovich G, et al. Enhancing the population impact of collaborative care interventions: 
Mixed method development and implementation of stepped care targeting posttraumatic stress disorder and 
related comorbidities after acute trau ma. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2011;33(2):123 -134.  
97. Zatzick D, Darnell D, Palinkas L, Whiteside L. Tailoring Implementation Science Methods for Pragmatic Clinical 
Trials in Acute Care Medical Practice Contexts. Submitted for presentation at the 2017 Biannual Meeting of the 
Society for Implementation Research Collaboration (SIRC) . Seattle, WA.  
98. Rojas Smith L, Ashok M, Morss Dy S, Wines RC, Teixeira -Poit S. Contextual Frameworks for Research on the 
Implementation of Complex System Interventions . Rockville (MD)2014.  
99. Taplin SH, Anhang Price R, Edwards HM, et al. Introduction: Understanding and influencing multilevel factors 
across the cancer care continuum. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2012;2012(44):2 -10. 
100.  Methodology Committee of the Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI). PCORI Methodology 
Standards. 2018.  
101.  Love J, Zatzick D. Screening and intervention for comorbid substance disorders, PTSD, depression, and suicide: A 
trauma center survey. Psychiatr Serv. 2014;65(7):918 -923.  
102.  Sise R, Russo J, Zatzick DF. The impact of mental health consultation service type and frequency on PTSD 
symptom reduction among surgically hospitalized injury survivorsin Preparation in Submission.  
103.  Stephens KA, Sue S, Roy -Byrne P, et al. Ethnoracial variations in acute PTSD symptoms among hospitalized 
survivors of traumatic injury. Journal of Traumatic Stress. 2010;23(3):384 -392.  
104.  Santos M, Russo J, Aisenberg G, Uehara E, Ghesquiere A, Zatzick D. Ethnic/racial diversity and posttraumatic 
distress in the acute care medical setting. Psychiatry. 2008;71(3):234 -245.  
105.  Teasdale G, Jennet B. Assessment of coma and impaired consciousness: A practical scale. Lancet. 
1974;2(7872):81 -84. 
106.  Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. "Mini -mental state". A practical method for grading the cognitive state of 
patients for the clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Research. 1975;12(3):189 -198.  
107.  Zatzick D, Donovan D, Jurkovich G, et al. Disseminating alcohol screening and brief intervention at trauma 
centers: A policy -relevant cluster randomized effectiveness trial. Addiction. 2014;109(5):754 -765.  
108.  Rajotte E, Fuchs C, Zatzick D. Engaging and following trauma survivors in real world clinical investigations. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. 2003;191:265 -268.  
109.  Kelly C, Van Eaton E, Russo J, et al. Technology Use, Preferences, and Capacity in Injured Patients at Risk for 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Psychiatry: Interpersonal and Biological Processes.  
110.  Altman DG, Schulz KF, Moher D, et al. The revised CONSORT statement for reporting randomized trials: 
Explanation and elaboration. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134(8):663 -694.  
111.  Zatzick D, Koepsell T, Rivara F. Using target population specification, effect size, and reach to estimate and 
compare the population impact of two PTSD preventive interventions. Psychiatry. 2009;72(4):346 -359.  
112.  Koepsell TD, Zatzick DF, Rivara FP. Estimating the population impact of preventive interventions from 
randomized trials. Am J Prev Med. 2011;40(2):191 -198.  
113.  Zatzick D, Russo J, Lord SP, et al. Collaborative Care Intervention Targeting Violence Risk Behaviors, Substance 
Use, and Posttraumatic Stress and Depressive Symptoms in Injured Adolescents: A Randomized Clinical Trial. 
JAMA Pediatr. 2014;168(6):532 -539.  
114.  Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ -9: Validity of a brief depression severity measure. Journal of General 
Internal Medicine. 2001;16(9):606 -613.  
  
30 
 115.  Babor TF, De La Fuente JR, Saunders J, Grant M. The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test: guidelines for use 
in primary health care. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1989.  
116.  Madras BK, Compton WM, Avula D, Stegbauer T, Stein JB, Clark HW. Screening, Brief Interventions, Referral to 
Treatment (SBIRT) for illicit drug and alcohol use at multiple healthcare sites: Comparison at intake and 6 
months later. Drug Alcohol Depen. 2009;99(1 -3):280 -295.  
117.  Ware JE, Snow KK, Kosinski M. SF-36 health survey: manual and interpretation guide.  Boston, MA: The Health 
Institute, New England Medical Center; 1993.  
118.  MacKenzie EJ, McCarthy ML, Ditunno JF, et al. Using the SF -36 for characterizing outcome after multiple trauma 
involving head injury. J Trauma. 2002;52(3):527 -534.  
119.  Ware JE, Kosinski M, Keller SD. A 12 -item short -form health survey: Construction of scales and preliminary tests 
of reliability and validity. Medical Care. 1996;34(3):220 -223.  
120.  Michaels AJ, Michaels CE, Moon CH, Zimmerman MA, Peterson C, Rodriguez JL. Psychosocial factors limit 
outcomes after trauma. Journal of Trauma. 1998;44:644 -648.  
121.  Kroenke K. Studying symptoms: sampling and measurement issues. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134(9 Pt 2):844 -853.  
122.  Wells KB. The design of Partners in Care: Evaluating the cost -effectiveness of improving care for depression in 
primary care. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology. 1999;34(1):20 -29. 
123.  Newman E, Kaloupek D. Overview of research addressing ethical dimensions of participation in traumatic stress 
studies: Autonomy and beneficence. Journal of Traumatic Stress. 2009;22(6):595 -602.  
124.  Ruzek JI, Zatzick D. Ethical considerations in research participation among acutely injured trauma survivors: An 
empirical investigation. General Hospital Psychiatry. 2000;22:27 -36. 
125.  Johns Hopkins Health Services Research and Development Center. Determining injury severity from hospital 
discharges: A program to map ICD -9-CM diagnoses into AIS and ISS severity scores. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins 
University Press;1989.  
126.  Civil ID, Schwab CW. The Abbreviated Injury Scale: 1985 revision. Morton Grove, IL: Committee on Injury Scaling, 
American Association for the Advancement of Automotive Medicine;1985.  
127.  The Abbreviated Injury Scale 2005: Update 2008. Des Plaines, IL: Association for the Advancement of Automotive 
Medicine;2008.  
128.  Gibbons RD, Hedeker D, DuToit S. Advances in analysis of longitudinal data. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2010;6:79 -
107.  
129.  Gibbons RD, Hedeker D. Application of random -effects probit regression models. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology. 1994;62(2):285 -296.  
130.  Gibbons RD, Hedeker D, Elkin I, et al. Some conceptual and statistical issues in analysis of longitudinal psychiatric 
data. Arch Gen Psychiat. 1993;50:739 -750.  
131.  McCulloch CE, Searle SR. Generalized, linear, and mixed models.  Wiley; 2000.  
132.  King DW, King LA, Bachrach PS, McArdele JJ. Contemporary approaches to missing data: The glass is really half 
full. PTSD Research Quarterly. 2001;12:1 -6. 
133.  Siddique J, Brown CH, Hedeker D, et al. Missing data in longitudinal trials - part B, analytic issues. Psychiatric 
Annals. 2008;38(12):793 -801.  
134.  National Research Council. The Prevention and Treatment of Missing Data in Clinical Trials. In: Panel on Handling 
Missing Data in Clinical Trials. Committee on National Statistics DoBaSSaE, ed. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press; 2010:1 -163.  
135.  Little RJ, Rubin DB. Statistical analysis with missing data.  2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2002.  
136.  Siddique J, Harel O, Crespi C. Addressing missing data mechanism uncertainty using multiple -model imputation: 
Application to a longitudinal clinical trial. The Annals of Applied Statistics. 2012;6(4):1814 -1837.  
137.  Groenwold RHH, Donders ART, Roes KCB, Harrell JFE, Moons KGM. Dealing With Missing Outcome Data in 
Randomized Trials and Observational Studies. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2012;175(3):210 -217.  
138.  Yuan YC. Multiple imputation for missing data: Concepts and new development (Version 9.0). SAS Institute Inc, 
Rockville, MD. 2010;49:1 -11. 
139.  Helfand MB, Alfred;Flum, David;Gabriel, Sherine;Normand, Sharon -Lise. Draft Methodology Report: "Our 
Questions, Our Decisions: Standards for Patient -centered Outcomes Research".  Patient -Centered Outcomes 
Research Institute (PCORI);2012.  
  
31 
 140.  Brewin CR, Andrews B, Valentine JD. Meta -analysis of risk factors for posttraumatic stress disorder in trauma -
exposed adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2000;68(5):748 -766.  
141.  Bombardier CH, Fann JR, Temkin NR, Esselman PC, Barber J, Dikmen SS. Rates of major depressive disorder and 
clinical outcomes following traumatic brain injury. JAMA. 2010;303(19):1938 -1945.  
142.  Stein MB, McAllister TW. Exploring the convergence of posttraumatic stress disorder and mild traumatic brain 
injury. Am J Psychiatry. 2009;166(7):768 -776.  
143.  Fann JR, Hart T, Schomer KG. Treatment for depression after traumatic brain injury: a systematic review. Journal 
of neurotrauma. 2009;26(12):2383 -2402.  
144.  Mackelprang JL, Bombardier CH, Fann JR, Temkin NR, Barber JK, Dikmen SS. Rates and predictors of suicidal 
ideation during the first year after traumatic brain injury. Am J Public Health. 2014;104(7):e100 -107.  
145.  Pole N, Gone J, Kulkarni M. Posttraumatic stress disorder among ethnoracial minorities in the United States. Clin 
Psychol -Sci Pr. 2008;15(1):35 -61. 
146.  Hedeker G, Waternaux. Sample size estimation for longitudinal designs with attrition. Journal of Educational and 
Behavioral Statistics. 1999;24:70 -93. 
147.  Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, Michie S, Nazareth I, Petticrew M. Developing and evaluating complex 
interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance. BMJ. 2008;337.  
148.  Guise J -M, Chang C, Butler M, Viswanathan M, Tugwell P. AHRQ series on complex intervention systematic 
reviews —paper 1: an introduction to a series of articles that provide guidance and tools for reviews of complex 
interventions. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 2017;90:6 -10. 
149.  Campbell M, Fitzpatrick R, Haines A, et al. Framework for design and evaluation of complex interventions to 
improve health. BMJ. 2000;321(7262):694 -696.  
150.  Perera R, Heneghan C, Yudkin P. Graphical method for depicting randomised trials of complex interventions. 
BMJ. 2007;334(7585):127 -129.  
151.  Darnell D, O'Connor S, Wagner A, et al. Enhancing the Reach of Cognitive -Behavioral Therapy Targeting 
Posttraumatic Stress in Acute Care Medical Settings. Psychiatr Serv. 2017;68(3):258 -263.  
 