PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 1 of 42   
 
Title: Comparison of a Novel Weight Bearing Con e Beam Computed 
Tomography (CT) Scan to Gravity Stress X -ray for Determining I nstability 
of Supination -External Rotation Type Ankle Fractures  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
11/11/2015  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 2 of 42  INSTRUCTIONS:  Complete Research Protocol  (HRP -503) 
 Depending on the nature of what you are doing , some sections may 
not be applicable  to your research .  If so, you must provide the 
reason why the section is not applicable  for the response .  For 
example , most behavioral studies would answer all questions in 
section 30 with words to the effect of “drugs and medical devices 
are not used in this study.”  
 When you write a protocol, keep an electronic  copy. You will need 
to modify this  copy when making changes . 
 Do not  remove  the italics  instructions  or headings . 
 If you are pasting information from other documents be sure to use 
the “Merge Formatting” paste option so that the formatting of the 
response boxes is not lost.  If information is presented outside of 
the response boxes , it will not be accepted .  
 If this study involves multiple participant groups who participate 
in different research procedures, consent processes, etc., be 
certain to provide inf ormation in each applicable section for each 
participant group and clearly label each participant group within 
a section or subsection.  
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE : 
Include the full protocol title.  
Response: Comparison of a nov el weight bearing cone beam computed 
tomography (CT) scan to gravity stress X-ray for determining instability 
of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Name  
Department  
Telephone Number  
Email Address  
Response:  
John Marzo, MD  
UBMD Orthopaedics & Sports Medicine  
(716) 829-2982  
jmmarzo@buffalo.edu  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 3 of 42  VERSION NUMBER:   
Include the version number of this protocol.  
Response: 1 
 
DATE:   
Include the date of submission or revision . 
Response :  
 
Grant Applicability:  
Describe whether or not this protocol is funded by a grant or contract and if so, 
what portions of the grant this study covers.  
Response: Carestream Health is providing funding for the research 
procedures involved in the study.  In addition, Carestream is supplying the 
3D CT scanner for this study to be housed in the Department of Radiology 
at the Erie County Medical Center.    
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 4 of 42  Table of Contents  
1.0 Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  5 
2.0 Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  5 
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ..............  7 
4.0 Study -Wide Number of Subjects (Multisite/Multicenter Only)  ..............................  8 
5.0 Study -Wide Recruitment Methods (Multisite/Multicenter Only) ............................  8 
6.0 Multi -Site Research (Multisite/Multicenter Only) ................................ ...................  9 
7.0 Study Timelines  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 9 
8.0 Study Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 10 
9.0 Procedures Involved ................................ ................................ ...............................  10 
10.0  Data and Specimen Banking  ................................ ................................ ..................  12 
11.0  Data Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 13 
12.0  Provisions to Monitor the Data and Ensure the Safety of Subjects  .......................  15 
13.0  Withdrawal of Subjects  ................................ ................................ ..........................  16 
14.0  Risks to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 17 
15.0  Potential Benefits to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................  18 
16.0  Vulnerable Populations  ................................ ................................ ..........................  18 
17.0  Community -Based Participatory Research  ................................ ............................  19 
18.0  Sharing of Results with Subjects  ................................ ................................ ...........  19 
19.0  Setting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  19 
20.0  Resources Available ................................ ................................ ...............................  20 
21.0  Prior Approvals  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 22 
22.0  Recruitment Methods  ................................ ................................ .............................  22 
23.0  Local Number of Subjects  ................................ ................................ .....................  23 
24.0  Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 23 
25.0  Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  ................................ ..........  24 
26.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ................................ ...........................  25 
27.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................  25 
28.0  Consent Process  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 25 
29.0  Process to Document Consent in Writing  ................................ ..............................  30 
30.0  Drugs or Devices ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 30 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 5 of 42  1.0 Objectives  
1.1 Describe the purpose, specific aims, or objectives.  
Response: The primary objective of this study is to compare measures of 
ankle stabil ity from an investigational  weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography ( CT) scanner  to the same measures on gravity 
stress X-ray in patients who have supination -external rotation ankle 
fractures.  
The secondary objective is to assess inter -rater reliability  of ankle stability 
measures from the investigational cone beam CT scanner and gravity 
stress X -ray between 2 independent r adiologists .   
An exploratory objective of this study is to determine if sensitivity of the 
investigational cone beam CT scan can be verified using the gravity stress 
X-ray as the gold standard.  
 
1.2 State the hypotheses to be tested.  
Response: The primary hypothesis is that the mean medial clear space will 
be different for the investigational weight bearing cone beam CT scan 
versus the gravity stress X-ray. 
2.0 Background  
2.1 Describe the relevant prior experience and gaps in current 
knowledge.  
Response: Supination -external rotation (SER) or Weber B type ankle 
fracture s are considered the most common type of ankle fracture1-4.  An 
SER fracture is considered unstable when it is associated wi th deltoid 
ligament rupture.  Clinical findings of m edial tenderness, swelling, and 
ecchymosis were once thought to be reliable for correctly determining the 
stability of SER ankle fractures , but have  since  proven to be poor 
predictors of deltoid ligament disruption3, 5.  Rupture of the deltoid 
ligament allows lateral talar sh ift, and can be identified by widening of the 
medial clear space on standard radiographs as well as stress radiographs6, 
7.  
2.2 Describe any relevant preliminary data.  
Resp onse: Many studies have shown that gravity stress radiographs are 
necessary and are currently considered to be the gold standard for 
diagnosis  of SER fractures5. Of all the methods that have been used to 
diagnose instability and investigate deltoid ligament integrity (clinical 
examination, weight bearing radiographs, stress radiography, magnetic 
resonance imaging ( MRI ), arthroscopy, ultrasound), none have been 
shown to be cost -effective, rapid, reliable, and easy to use4.  Gravity stress 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 6 of 42  radiographs are performed without a uniform method, are known to lack 
sensitivity, and are very user dependent. Therefore, more research is 
needed to determine which method is mos t accurate and efficient for SER 
fracture diagnosis.   
2.3 Provide the scientific or scholarly background  for, rational e for, and 
significance  of the research  based on the existing literature  and how 
will it add to existing knowledge.  
Response: Weight bearing o n the extremity is thought to be more 
representative of the normal use of the ankle joint, and CT scan is known 
to deliver excellent bone detail for interpret ation of images.  The ability of 
weight bearing cone beam CT scanning to measure medial clear spac e 
may present a new opportunity to evaluate instability  of SER ankle 
fractures .  
2.4 Include complete specific citations /references.  
Response:   
1. Gill JB, Risko T, Raducan V, Grimes JS, Schutt RC, Jr. Comparison of 
manual and gravity stress radiographs for the evaluation of supination -
external rotation fibular fractures. The Journal of bone and joint surgery 
American volume. 2007 May;89(5):994 -9. Epub 2007/05/03.  
2. Egol KA, Amirtharajah M, Tejwani NC, Capla EL, Koval KJ. Ankle 
stress test for predicting the  need for surgical fixation of isolated fibular 
fractures. The Journal of bone and joint surgery American volume. 2004 
Nov;86 -a(11):2393 -8. Epub 2004/11/04.  
3. Stufkens SA, van den Bekerom MP, Knupp M, Hintermann B, van Dijk 
CN. The diagnosis and treatment  of deltoid ligament lesions in 
supination –external rotation ankle fractures: a review. Strategies in 
Trauma and Limb Reconstruction. 2012;7(2):73 -85. 
4. Croft S, Furey A, Stone C, Moores C, Wilson R. Radiographic 
evaluation of the ankle syndesmosis. Canad ian journal of surgery Journal 
canadien de chirurgie. 2015 Feb;58(1):58 -62. Epub 2015/01/27.  
5. van den Bekerom MP. Diagnosing syndesmotic instability in ankle 
fractures. World journal of orthopedics. 2011 Jul 18;2(7):51 -6. Epub 
2012/04/05.  
6. Nielson JH, Gardner MJ, Peterson MG, Sallis JG, Potter HG, Helfet 
DL, et al. Radiographic measurements do not predict syndesmotic injury 
in ankle fractures: an MRI study. Clinical orthopaedics and related 
research. 2005 Jul(436):216 -21. Epub 2005/07/05.  
7. Beumer A, v an Hemert WL, Niesing R, Entius CA, Ginai AZ, Mulder 
PG, et al. Radiographic measurement of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 7 of 42  has limited use. Clinical orthopaedics and related research. 2004 Jun  
(423):227 -34. Epub 2004/07/03.  
3.0 Inclusion  and Exclusion Cri teria  
3.1 Describe the criteria that define who will be included or excluded in 
your final study sample.   
Inclusion : Subjects will be recruited from the clinical practices of the 
study investigators and will:  
 have an isolated fibula fracture  
 have medial clear space measuring less than 5 mm with clinical 
suspicion of instability and would normally require a gravity stress 
x-ray 
 be willing and able to provide written informed consent  
 be 18 or more years of age  
Exclusion:  Subjects will be exclude d from study participation if they:  
 are pregnant at the time of screening  
 are prisoners  
 have an open fracture  
 have clinical signs of ankle  deformity  
 have had any type of previous  ankle trauma or  surgery on the  
affected  foot 
 have  significant  osteoarthritis or pre -existing ligamentous 
instability or pain in the affected ankle  
 have an inability to stand in the  weight bearing position during the 
CT scan  
3.2 Describe how individuals will be screen ed for eligibility.  
Response: Patients will be screened (see Eligibility Form  Attachment A 
that will be used for screening purposes) and recruited by the research 
team  in the Emergency Department  or clinical offices of the investigators.  
Patient history  will be obtained  and physical examination  will b e 
performed, and standard X -rays will be obtained. When the medial clear 
space is less than 5 mm with clinical suspicion of ankle instability , 
patients are referred  for a routine gravity stress X-ray.  
3.3 Indicate specifically whether you will include or exclude each of the 
following special populations:  (You may not include members of 
these populations as subjects in your research unless you indicate 
this in your inclusion criteria.)  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 8 of 42   Adults unable to consent  
 Individuals who are not yet adults (infants, ch ildren, teenagers)  
 Pregnant women  
 Prisoners  
Response: Adults unable to consent, individuals who are not yet adults, 
pregnant women, and prisoners will be excluded from this study.  
3.4 Indicate whether you will include non -English speaking individuals .  
Provide  justification if you will exclude non -English speaking 
individuals.  
(In order to meet one of the primary ethical principles of equitable 
selection of subjects, n on-English speaking individuals may not be 
routinely excluded from research.  In cases where the research is of 
therapeutic intent or is designed to investigate areas that would 
necessarily require certain populations who may not speak English, 
the researcher is required to make efforts to recruit and include non -
English speaking individuals.  How ever, there are studies in which it 
would be reasonable to limit subj ects to those who speak English: 
e.g., pilot studies, small unfunded studies with validated instruments 
not available in other languages, numerous que stionnaires, and 
some non -therap eutic  studies which offer no direct benefit.)  
 
Response:  Non-English speaking subjects will be included  in this study.  
Based on previous experience, we expect that most if not all of our 
potential study subjects will be English -speaking.  However, if we 
encounter a non -English speaking subject we will find someone who can 
orally translate (i.e., fluently speaks the same language as the subject , such 
as a family member ) the study  description  and consent form to the subject.   
 
 
4.0 Study -Wide Number of Subjects  (Multisite/Multicenter Only)  
4.1 If this is a multicenter study, indicate the total number of subjects to 
be accrued across all sites.  
Response: This is not a multisite/multicenter trial.   
5.0 Study -Wide Recruitment Methods  (Multisite/Multicent er Only)  
If this is a multicenter study and subjects will be recruited by methods not under 
the control of the local site (e.g., call centers, national advertisements) describe 
those methods.   Local recruitment methods are described later in the protocol.  
5.1 Describe when, where, and how potential subjects will be recruited.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 9 of 42  Response: Not applicable , this is not a multi -site study . 
5.2 Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential subjects.  
Response: Not applicable , this is not a multi -site study . 
5.3 Describe materials that will be used to recruit subjects. (Attach 
copies of these documents with the application. For advertisements, 
attach the final copy of printed advertisements. When advertisements 
are taped for broadcast, attach the final audio/video tape. You may 
submit the wording of the advertisement prior to taping to preclude 
re-taping because of inappropriate wording, provided the IRB 
reviews the final audio/video tape.)  
Response: Not applicable , this is not a multi -site study . 
6.0 Multi -Site Research  (Multisite/Multicenter Only)  
6.1 If this is a multi -site study where you are the lead investigator, 
describe the processes to ensure communication among sites, such 
as: 
 All sites have the most current version of the protocol, consent 
document, and HIP AA authorization.  
 All required approvals have been obtained at each site 
(including approval by the site’s IRB of record).  
 All modifications have been communicated to sites, and 
approved (including approval by the site’s IRB of record) 
before the modification is implemented.  
 All engaged participating sites will safeguard data as required 
by local information security policies.  
 All local site investigators conduct the study appropriately.  
 All non -compliance with the study protocol or applicable 
requirements will reported in accordance with local policy.  
Response: Not applicable, this is not a multi -site study.  
6.2 Describe the method for communicating to engaged participating 
sites:  
 Problems.  
 Interim results.  
 The closure of a study  
Response: Not applicab le, this is not a multi -site study.   
7.0 Study Timelines  
7.1 Describe t he duration of an individual subject’s participation in the 
study.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 10 of 42  Response: The subject will be enrolled in the study once informed consent 
is obtained.  The study wil l conclude once they hav e had a gravity stress 
X-ray as standard of care , and a CBCT scan with the investigational 
weight bearing cone beam scanner.  
7.2 Describe t he duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects.  
Response: It is antic ipated that it will take 8 months to 1 year  (based on 
analysis of the past  frequency of patients with the diagnosis of an unstable 
SER fracture and the difficult nature of enrolling study patients ) to enroll 
all study subjects.  
7.3 Describe t he estimated date for the investigators to complete this 
study ( complete primary analyses)  
Response: The estimated date for the investigators to complete the primary 
analysis is the first quarter of 2017 . 
8.0 Study Endpoints  
8.1 Describe the primary and secondary study endpoints.  
Response: The primary endpoint is after enrollment of 20 subjects 
estimated to provide significance by power analysis.   
8.2 Describe any primary or secondary safety endpoints.  
Response: The primary safety endpoint is the  presence of any adverse 
event.  
9.0 Procedures Involved  
9.1 Describe and explain the study design.  
Response:  This study is a cross -sectional study designed to compare 
measures of stability  from a gravity stress X-ray to the same measures on 
an inves tigational cone beam CT scanner.  
9.2 Provide a description of all research procedures being  performed 
and when they are performed, including procedures being performed 
to monitor subjects for safety or minimize risks.  
Response: Screening/E nrollment  Visit : If a patient  presents with a 
potentially  unstable SER type ankle fracture the subject’s physician will 
screen them, in the emergency room or physician’s office, to determine if 
they are eligible for the study (see attached Eligibility Form , Attachment 
A).   
The determination of a potentially unstable SER type ankle fracture is 
made via a standard X-ray showing medial clear space less than 5 mm 
with clinical suspicion of instability.  This criteria substantiate s the 
potential diagnosis of  an unstable  SER ankle fracture with need for 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 11 of 42  radiographic evaluation by a gravity stress X-ray. To confirm their 
diagnosis and for surgical treatment planning, patients are sent for a 
gravity stress X-ray as part of their standard of care.  
The study will be explained to eligible subjects , and i nformed consent to 
participate in the study will be obt ained at the time the subject is thought 
to have an unstable SER ty pe ankle fracture  (in the emergency room or 
physician’s office) .  For females of childbearing age who consent to be in 
the study, a urine pregnancy test will be done in the emergency 
depart ment or physician’s office to confirm that the patient is not 
pregnant .  Pregnant females will be excluded from the study  (see attached 
Eligibility Form , Attachment A).   
Study Visit: The subject will undergo a weight bearing CBCT scan of 
their affected ankle  with the investigational portable cone beam CT 
scanner.  This will  be done at the same time  or within 7  days as the gravity 
stress X-ray that i s part of the routine clinical work -up for  this injury .  The 
scan with the investigational CBCT scanner  is estimated to last 
approximately 2 5 seconds.  The patient will be weight -bearing during the 
scan and can hold on to the built -in handles of the scanner for stability 
during the scan.  The subject will be shielded from radiation to the thyroid 
and genitals w ith commercially available shields.  The risks involved with 
this study include the risk of additional exposure to radiation delivered by 
the investiga tional  CT scan.  T he investigational CBCT scanner exposes 
the patient to approximately 50% less radiation  per scan than a 
conventional CT scanner . (Carrino et al 2 014)   With the investigational 
CBCT scan , there is the risk of pain caused by the need for weight bearing 
and/or flexion of an injured ankle .   If for any reason the subject 
experiences undue disco mfort the study will be stopped and the patient 
will be excluded from the study if the scan cannot be performed.  
The patient will also fill out a visual analogue pain scale after both the 
investigational CT scan and gravity stress X-ray (Attachment D ). 
Reference: Carrino, J.A., et al., Dedicated cone -beam CT system for 
extremity imaging. Radiology, 2014. 270(3): p. 816 -824. 
 
9.3 Describe p rocedures performed to lessen the probability or 
magnitude of risks.  
Response: The risks involved in inclusion in the study include the risk of 
additional exposure to radiation from the investig ational  CT scan.  T he 
investigational cone beam CT scanner exposes the patient to 
approximately 50% less radiation  per scan than a convention al CT 
scanner. (Carrino et al 2014)  The investigational scanner will be shielded 
per manufacturer specifications (see attachment B).  The subject will be 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 12 of 42  shielded from radiation to the thyroid and genitals with commercially 
available shields.  To address  the risk of pain caused by the need for 
weight bearing on the  injured ankle , the scans will only last about 25  
seconds.  The subject will be provided with assistance entering and exiting 
the scanner, and the  handles attached to the  housing of the scanner c an be 
held by the subject for balance (but not for substantial unloading of weight 
bearing) on the extremity  to prevent falling . 
Reference: Carrino, J.A., et al., Dedicated cone -beam CT system for 
extremity imaging. Radiology, 2014. 270(3): p. 816 -824. 
9.4 Describe a ll drugs and devices used in the research and the purpose 
of their use, and their regulatory approval status.  
Response: This study involves the use of a n investigational  portable 
weight bearing 3D cone beam CT scanner produced by Carestream 
Healt h, Inc.  Supporting evidence contends that the prototype is a non -
significant risk device (see Attach ment C).   
9.5 Describe t he source records that will be used to collect data about 
subjects. (Attach all surveys, scripts, and data collection forms.)  
Response: Data will be collected from the patient’s medical records for 
screening potential research subjects (see attached Eligibility Form , 
Attachment A).  Demographic,  X-ray and CT data, and a visual analogue 
pain scale score will be documented by th e research coordinator, surgeon  
and radiologist (see attached Data Collection Forms , Attachment D ).     
 
9.6 What data will be collected including long -term follow -up. 
Response: Demographic data ( age, gender, race, hei ght, weight), data from 
the gravity stress X-rays and CT scan s (medial clear space distance, 
superior clear space distance, lateral overlap distance, lateral clear space 
distance, and lateral talar shift ) and pain VAS data  will be collected  
(Attachment D ). The measures will be obtained by two independent 
radiologis ts.  Additionally, a visual analogue pain score will be obtained 
from the patient  after both the investigational CT scan and gravity stress 
X-ray.  The actual amount of weight borne by the patient at the time of the 
CT scan will be me asure d by a scale  embedded in the device . 
9.7 For HUD uses provide a description of the device, a summary of 
how you propose to use the device, including a description of any 
screening procedures, the HUD procedure, and any patient follow -
up visits, tests or p rocedures.  
Response: Not applicable, this study does not involve a HUD device.  
10.0 Data and Specimen Banking  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 13 of 42  10.1 If data or specimens will be banked for future use, describe where 
the data/ specimens will be stored, how long they will be stored, how 
the data/ specim ens will be accessed, and who will have access to the 
data/ specimens.  
Response: The images obtained from the investigational cone  beam CT 
scan will be saved for future use.  The images will be de -identified and 
saved in the PACS system at the Erie County M edical Center .  The study 
investigators  and Carestream Health, Inc.  will have access to these files . 
10.2 List the data to be stored or associated with each specimen.  
Response: The images obtained from the investigational cone beam CT 
scans will be saved for future use.   
10.3 Describe the procedures to release data or specimens, including: the 
process to request a release, approvals required for release, who 
can obtain data or specim ens, and the data to be provided with 
specimens.  
Response: Requests for data will be accepted verbally or in writing.  The 
principal investigator will approve all requests for data.  Only the study 
investigators and Carestream Health, Inc. will be granted access to the 
data.  The images will be de -identified befor e they are released.  
Carestream Health, Inc. will be requesting de -identified images , from the 
study -related cone beam CT scans only, for promotion & marketing 
purposes, and to refine the methodology of the scanner.  
11.0 Data Management  
11.1 Describe the data analy sis plan, including any statistical 
procedures.  
Response:  To test for a difference in medial clear space between gravity 
stress X-ray and weight bearing cone beam CT, we will use a paired t -test. 
Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) and corresponding 95% 
confidence intervals will be computed as a measure of inter -rater 
reliability for the two radiologists who will assess the medial clear space.  
Bland -Altman plot s will be used to visually assess agreement.  
We will also conduct receiver operating charac teristic (ROC) curve 
analysis and report the area under the curve (AUC) and corresponding 
95% confidence interval.  Using medial clear space >4mm for the gravity 
stress X-ray as the gold standard, we will determine the optimal cut -point 
for the cone beam C T scan.  
11.2 Provide a power analysis.  
Response: Sample size calculation was based on paired t -test.  Estimates 
from the literature suggest the standard deviation of the difference of 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 14 of 42  medial clear space is around 1.5 mm.  For a sample size of 20 patients and 
at the 0.05 significance level, we can obtain 80% power to detect a 
difference of at least 1mm.  
11.3 Describe the steps that will be taken secure the data (e.g., training, 
authorization of access, password protection, encryption, physical 
controls, certificates o f confidentiality, and separation of identifiers 
and data) during storage, use, and transmission.  
Response: Data collection will be conducted by trained study personnel 
who have completed IRB training.  Data  (i.e., demographics and CT  and 
X-ray measures)  will be entered  into an Excel spreadsheet .  The images 
will be de -identified and saved electronically in the PACS system at Erie 
County Medical Center .  Data will be password protected and subject 
identity will be coded to ensure confidentiality of information.   Patient 
names will not be stored with the images and patient data, instead each 
subject will be assigned an ID number.  A separate password -protected 
spreadsheet will contain subject names and ID numbers to link the two 
together.   The PI wil l assume primary responsibility for the ongoing 
monitoring of the data and safety of the study.  Consent forms and other 
identifiable information will be stored in locked files separately from the 
study data.  All data will be stored in password protected files in the 
research office at UBMD Orthopaedics Location 2 at ECMC.  
11.4 Describe any procedures that will be used for quality control of 
collected data.  
Response: Data will be  entered and verified at 100%.  We will utilize the 
services of the UB Clinical Res earch Office  (CRO)  for routine study 
monitoring activity.  The UB CRO monitor will source verify the data, 
including consent process, following first subject enrollment.  Subsequent 
monitoring activities will be a rranged with the CRO  depending on subject 
enrollment.  T he images from the  gravity stress X-ray and investigational 
CT scan will be provided to the participating radiologist in a blinded and 
random fashion.  When all subjects have been enrolled  and undergone 
their scans , the scans will be presented  randomly without any identifying 
information, on two separate occasions for measurement.  The average of 
the two sets of measurements will be used for primary analysis.  
11.5 Describe how data and specimens will be handled study -wide:  
Response: Screening data w ill be collected  on forms  by the surgeon, 
research coordinator and other trained study staff.  Demographic data will 
be documented on forms by the research coordinator  or assistant . Data 
from the CT scan  and X-ray will be documented on forms by the 
radiolo gist.  The images will be de -identified and saved on the PACS 
system at ECMC .  All data and collections forms  (see Attachments A & 
D) will be collected by the research coordinator and stored securely.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 15 of 42  11.6 What information will be included in that data or associated with the 
specimens?  
Response: The following data will be collected:  medical history, 
demographics , VAS pain score, and X-ray and  investigational cone beam 
CT data (see Attachment D ). 
11.7 Where and how data or specimens will be stored?  
Response: Cons ent forms and source data forms will be stored in locked  
files in the research office at UBMD Orthopaedics Location 2 at ECMC. 
The images will be saved on the PACS system at ECMC .  Electronic data 
will be stored on our department’s secure network drive in password 
protected files.   
11.8 How long the data or specimens will be stored?  
Response: The data will be stored throughout the duration of the study and 
final data analysis.  The data will then be stored for 3 more years after the 
study closing date in accord ance with the IRB  policies . 
11.9 Who will have access to the data or specimens?  
Response: The study investigators,  research coordinator  and research 
assistant  will have access to the data.   Carestream Health, Inc. will also 
have access to the images upon request and under approval of the principal 
investigator.  Images will be de -identified before sharing with Carestream 
Health, Inc.  
11.10 Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the dat a or 
specimens?  
Response: The research coordinator  or assistant  is responsible for 
retrieving and storing the data.  
11.11 How data and specimens will be transported?  
Response: The research coordinator  or assistant  will pick up the study 
forms  directly from the c onsenting and enrolling physicians after 
enrollment on a daily basis . 
12.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data and Ensure the Safety  of Subjects  
12.1 Describe t he plan to periodically evaluate the data collected 
regarding both harms and benefits to determine whether subj ects 
remain safe.    
Response: Adverse events will be reported to the Data Safety Mo nitoring 
Board (DSMB) within 2 days to review safety of the study.  
12.2 Describe w hat data are reviewed, including safety data, untoward 
events, and efficacy data.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 16 of 42  Response: Any adverse events will be reported to the research coordinator 
and reviewed by the DSMB within 2 days of notification of the event.    
12.3 Describe h ow the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case 
report forms, at study visits, by telephone calls with  participants).  
Response: Adverse events will be documented in writing during study 
visits.  
12.4 Describe t he frequency of data collection, including when safety 
data collection starts.  
Response: Safety data collection will begin after signed informed consent 
is obtained and continues  until all data has been collected from 20 
patients .   
12.5 Describe w ho will review the data.  
Response: Data collection will be monitored by the University at Buffalo 
Clinical Research Office for appropriate reporting of all adverse ev ents 
and any serious adverse events that may occur during the course of the 
trial.  The PI will have oversight of all of the subject data.  
12.6 Describe t he frequency or periodicity of review of cumulative data.  
Response: Given the small sample size and relativ e low risk of the study 
and procedures, cumulative data will b e analyzed when 20 subject s have 
been enrolled . 
12.7 Describe t he statistical tests for analyzing the safety data to 
determine whether harm is occurring.  
Response: Adverse events will be reviewed by the DSMB on a case -by-
case basis to determine if harm is occurring.  
12.8 Describe a ny conditions that trigger an immediate suspension of the 
research.  
Response: This study is low risk and we are not aware of a specific 
condition that would suspend the study.  T he DSMB will review all 
adverse events and assist in determining  if the study needs to be 
suspended.   
13.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
13.1 Describe anticipated circumstances under which subjects will be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent.  
Response: If the patient is noncompliant or unable to stand in the weight 
bearing position , they will be withdrawn.   If the subject exhibits any 
discomfort the study will be stopped immediately.   
13.2 Describe any procedures for orderly termination.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 17 of 42  Response: Subjects w ill be wit hdrawn from the study by the principal 
investigator if they do not complete the investigational CBCT scan .  
Subjects can withdraw from the study at any time, for any reason.  
13.3 Describe procedures that will be followed when subjects withdraw 
from th e research, including partial withdrawal from procedures 
with continued data collection.  
Response: If the patient does not complete the investigational cone beam 
CT s can, none of their data will be retained.   
14.0 Risks to Subjects  
14.1 List the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or 
inconveniences to the subjects related the subjects’ participation in 
the research. Include as may be useful for the IRB’s consideration, a 
description of the probability, magnitude, duration,  and reversibility 
of the risks. Consider physical, psychological, social, legal, and 
economic risks.  
Response: The risks involved in inclusion in the study include the risk of 
additional exposure to radiation from the investigational  CBCT scan.  T he 
inves tigational cone beam CT scanner exposes the patient to 
approximately 50% less radiation  per scan than a conventional CT 
scanner , the total dose delivered to study subjects will be half that of a 
single conventional CT scan. ( Carrino et al 2014)  The invest igational 
scanner will be shielded per manufacturer specifications (see Attachment 
B).  The subject will be shielded from radiation to the thyroid and genitals 
with commercially available shields.  To address  the risk of pain caused 
by the need for weight bearing and/or flexion of an injured knee, the scan 
will only last about 25  seconds.  The subject will be provided with 
assistance entering and exiting the scanner, and the  handles attached to the  
housing of the scanner can be held by the subject for bala nce (but not for 
substantial unloading of weight bearing) on the extremity  to prevent 
falling . 
14.2 If applicable, indicate which procedures may have risks to the 
subjects that are currently unforeseeable.  
Response: There are no unforeseeable risks to report.  
14.3 If applicable, indicate which procedures may have risks to an 
embryo or fetus should the subject be or become pregnant.  
Response: The CBCT scan does involve a low dose of radiation, thus 
women who are currently pregnant will not be included in the study . 
14.4 If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 18 of 42  Response: Technicians who are running the CBCT scanner will be 
properly trained in safety and take the necessary precautions to protect 
themselves from radiation exposure.  There are no risks to f amily or those 
in close contact with the subject during their participation in the trial  (see 
Attachment B). 
15.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
15.1 Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects may 
experience from taking part in the research. Include as  may be 
useful for the IRB’s consideration, the probability, magnitude, and 
duration of the potential benefits.  
Response: There may be no potential benefits to subjects who enroll in the 
study.  
15.2 Indicate if there is no direct benefit. Do not include benefit s to 
society or others.  
Response: There are no direct benefits to subjects who enroll in the study.  
16.0 Vulnerable Populations  
16.1 If the research  involves individuals who are vulnerable to coercion 
or undue influence, describe additional safeguards included to 
protect their rights and welfare.  
 If the research involves pregnant women, review 
“CHECKLIST: Pregnant Women (HRP -412)” to ensure that 
you have provided sufficient information.  
 If the research involves neonates of uncertain viability or non -
viable neonates, review “CHECKLIST: Neonates (HRP -413)” 
or “HRP -414 – CHECKLIST: Neonates of Uncertain Viability 
(HRP -414)” to ensure that you have provided sufficient 
information.  
 If the research involves prisoners, review “CHECKLIST: 
Prisoners (HRP -415)” to ensure that y ou have provided 
sufficient information.  
 If the research involves persons who have not attained the 
legal age for consent to treatments or procedures involved in 
the research (“children”), review the “CHECKLIST: Children 
(HRP -416)” to ensure that you have provided sufficient 
information.  
 If the research involves cogniti vely impaired adults, review  
“CHECKLIST: Cognitively Impaired Adults  (HRP -417)” to 
ensure that you have provided sufficient information.  
 Consider  if other specifically targeted populations su ch as 
students , employees of a specific firm  or 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 19 of 42  educationally/economically disadvantaged persons  are 
vulnerable to coercion or undue influence.  The checklists 
listed above for other populations should be used as a guide to 
ensure that you have provided su fficient information.  
Response : This research does not involve any of these vulnerable 
populations.  
17.0 Community -Based Participatory Research  
17.1 Describe involvement of the community in the design and conduct of 
the research.  
Response: NA, this is not a communi ty-based study . 
Note: “Community -based Participatory Research” is a collaborative 
approach to research that equitably involves all partners in the 
research process and recognizes the unique strengths that each 
brings. Community -based Participatory Research  begins with a 
research topic of importance to the community, has the aim of 
combining knowledge with action and achieving social change to 
improve health outcomes and eliminate health disparities.  
18.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
18.1 Describe whether  or not  results (study results or individual subject 
results, such as results of investigational diagnostic tests, genetic 
tests, or incidental findings) will be shared with subjects or others 
(e.g., the subject’s primary care physicians) and if so, describe how 
it will be shared.  
Response: The study results or individual subject results, such as results of 
investigational diagnostic imaging , will be shared with the study subjects 
if requested verbally or in writing.  The study results may become public 
knowledge if included in a manuscript accepted for publication in peer  
reviewed scientific literature. Any and all identifying features of 
individual images will be de -identified before publication.  
19.0 Setting  
19.1 Describe the sites or locations where  your research team will 
conduct  the research .  
Response: Research will be conducted at UBMD Orthopaedics & Sports 
Medicin e.  The investigational CBCT scanner will be located in the 
SkyView Room of the radiology department at ECMC.  
19.2 Identify where your research team will identif y and recruit potential 
subjects . 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 20 of 42  Response: Subjects will be recruited  & consented  after undergoing an 
orthopaedic consultation at the ECMC Emergency Department  or in the 
offices of the physicians of UBMD Orthopedics and Sports Medicine  at 
ECMC or the Northtowns office (4949 Harlem Rd., Amherst, NY 14226).  
19.3 Identify w here research  procedures will be performed.  
Response: Subjects will be recruited & consented at ECMC Emergency 
Department  or in the offices of the physicians of UBMD Orthoped ics and 
Sports Medicine  at ECMC or the Northtowns office (4949 Harlem Rd., 
Amherst, NY 14226).  The investigational CBCT scan will be done in the 
SkyView room of the radiology department at ECMC.  
19.4 Describe the c omposition and involvement of any community 
advisory board.  
Response: NA, there will be no community advisory board involved in 
this study . 
19.5 For research conducted outside of the organization and its affiliates  
describe : 
 Site-specific regulations or customs affecting the research for 
research outside t he organization.  
 Local scientific and ethical review structure  outside the 
organization . 
Response: NA, research will not be conducted outside of the organization . 
20.0 Resources Available  
20.1 Describe the qualifications (e.g., training, experience, oversight) of 
you and your staff as required to perform their  role. When 
applicable describe their knowledge of the local study sites, culture, 
and society. Provide enough information to convince the IRB that 
you have qualified staff for the proposed research.  Note - If you 
specify a person by name, a change to that person will require prior 
approval by the IRB. If you specify people by role (e.g., coordinator, 
research assistant, co -investigator, or pharmacist), a change to that 
person will not usually require prior approval by the IRB, provided 
that person meets the qualifications described to fulfill their roles.  
Response : John Marzo, MD is the principal investigator and Associate 
Professor of Clinical Orthopedics, SUNY University at Buffalo, and has 
extensive  experience in clinical research.  Christopher Ritter, MD, 
Christopher Mutty, MD, and Mark Anders, MD are all faculty members of 
UBMD Orthopaedics & Sports Medicine and very active traumatologists  
experienced in treating SER fractures . They are all active in clinical 
research of orthopaedic trauma. Collaborating investigator s, Michael 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 21 of 42  Manka  currently serves as the Chief of Emergency Medicine at Erie 
County Medical Center , and  Jon Marshall , MD  and Keyur Shah,  MD are 
both Board Certified in Radiology.   Severa l orthopaedic residents at 
UBMD Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine will assist with obtaining 
informed consent and all have extensive experience in patient interaction 
(Matthew Binkley, MD, Matthew Brown, MD, Timothy Bryan, MD, 
Samir Nayyar, MD, Christopher Urband, MD, Richard Ahn, MD, Rishi 
Dave, MD, Paul Phillips, MD, Andrew Baron, MD, Alexander Boiwka, 
MD, Kathleen Boyle, MD, Tyler Miller, MD, and Nicholas Valente, MD).  
Melissa Kluczynski has a MS in Epidemiology and has been a Clinical 
Research Associate  at UBMD Orthopaedics & Sports Medicine for several 
years.  She is productive and experienced in orthopaedic research and 
clinical trials.  Laura Ryan, MPH and Kathleen Lafferty are Research 
Assistants at UBMD Orthopaedics & Sports Medicine and are very 
experienced in assisting with orthopaedic research studies.  All of the 
above investigators have integral knowledge of the local study sites, 
culture, and society. All personnel mentioned have CITI and GCP 
training.  
Describe other  resources available to cond uct the research: For example, 
as appropriate:  
20.2 Justify  the feasibility of  recruiting the required number of suitable 
subjects within the agreed recruitment period.  For example, how 
many potential subjects do you have access to? What percentage of 
those pot ential subjects do you need to recruit?  
Response: In the past year , approximately 50-60 patients with potentially  
unstable  SER type ankle fractures  were treated by the study investigators.  
Based on our sample size calculation, we need to enroll 20 patients.  Thus 
we should have a sufficient pool of subjects to recruit from.  
20.3 Describe the time that you will dev ote to conduct ing and complet ing 
the research . 
Response: We estimate that it will take about  8 months to  1 year to enroll 
all subjects , and about 6 months after that to complete the analysis and a 
manuscript.  
20.4 Describe your facilities.  
Response: Erie County Medical Center is a hospital with 550 licensed 
beds located in Buffalo, New York and is a member of the Great Lakes 
Health System. The  hospital  is affiliated with the University at Buffalo. 
The hospital  is equipped with the latest information technology , including 
an electronic medical record system . 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 22 of 42  20.5 Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that 
subject s might need  as a result of an anticipated consequences  of the 
human research.  
Response: The radiology technician will periodically evaluate acquisition 
of the first CBCT scan to ensure maximum patient comfort and safety. 
Modifications will be made as appropriate and may include cushions, 
padding, external supports, or other changes when they add patient 
comfort or safety.  Subjects will be withdrawn from the study if they 
cannot complete the investigational CBCT scan . Subjects can withdraw 
from the study at any time, f or any reason.   No other medical or 
psychological issues are expected to occur as a result of this study.  
20.6 Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the 
research  are adequately informed about the protocol, the research 
procedures , and their duties and functions.  
Response: Each of the persons assisting with the research has been 
involved in designing the study, and writing of this proposal.  The 
investigative team will meet periodically to discuss the protocol, modify 
the research proced ures as necessary, and review the results.  All study 
personnel will be involved in preparing a manuscript based on the results 
of the study.  
21.0 Prior Approvals  
21.1 Describe any approvals that will be obtained prior to commencing 
the research. (E.g., school, exte rnal site. funding agency, laboratory, 
radiation safety, or biosafety approval.)  
Response: Prior to commencing the research, a basic research agreement 
will be executed between The Research Foundation for the State 
University of New York (“Institution”) on  behalf of the University at 
Buffalo (“University”) with a business address of 402 Crofts Hall, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14260 -7016 and Carestream 
Health, Inc. (funding agency ), a Delaware Corporation with its principal 
office located at 15 0 Verona Street, Rochester, New York 14608.  
Additionally, research approval will be obtained from ECMC’s Clinical 
Research Department.  
22.0 Recruitment Methods  
22.1 Describe when, where, and how potential subject s will be recruited.  
Response: Subjects will be recruited  after presenting to the ECMC 
emergency department or the physician’s office  with a  potentially  unstable 
SER type ankle fracture as clinically diagnosed by a consulting 
orthopaedic physician. The study will be explained to subjects who are 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 23 of 42  deemed to be eligible for this study.  Consent will be obtained from 
subjects who agree to participate .   
22.2 Describe the source of subject s. 
Response: Subjects will be patients who present to the emergency 
department at ECMC or to the physician’s office  with a  potentially 
unstable SER type ankle fracture who are receiving medical care from one 
of the study investigators.  
22.3 Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential subject s. 
Response: Subjects will be screened by one of the consulting ortho pedic  
phys icians (included as study personnel) during their  visit.  Each subject’s 
medical record will be reviewed to determine if the subject is eligible.  
The Eligibility Checklist  (see Attach ment A) will be completed for each 
patient who is screened.  
22.4 Describe mat erials that will be used to recruit subject s. (Attach  
copies of these documents with the application. For advertisements, 
attach  the final copy of printed advertisements. When advertisements 
are taped for broadcast, attach the final audio/video tape. You may 
submit the wording of the advertisement prior to taping to preclude 
re-taping because of inappropriate wording, provided the IRB 
reviews the final audio/video tape.)  
Response: NA, there are no recruitment materials.   
22.5 Describe the amount and timing of any payments to subject s. 
Response: NA, subjects will not be compensated for their participation in 
this study.  
23.0 Local Number of Subjects  
23.1 Indicate the total number of subjects to be accrued locally.  
Response: A total of 20 patients will be enrolled locally.  
23.2 If applicable, distinguish between the number of subjects who are 
expected to be enrolled and screen ed, and the number of subjects 
needed to complete the research procedures (i.e., numbers of 
subjects excluding screen failures.)  
Response: Based on last ye ar’s records, approximately 50-60 patients  were 
diagnosed with SER fractures by the study investigators.  Thus , at most we 
expect to screen 60 patients and exclude 20 -30% due to ineligibility or 
lack of interest in participating.  Our sample size analysis indicated that 
we need to enroll 20 patients  that will complete the study procedures .  
24.0 Confidentiality  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 24 of 42  Describe the local procedures for maintenance of confidentiality.  
24.1 Where and how data or specimens will be stored locally?  
Response: All study participants will be assigned an ID number to protect 
their anonymity and confidentiality.  De -identified data will be stored in 
password protected files in the research office at UBMD Orthopaedics 
Location 2 at ECMC until publication, followed b y storage on disks in 
locked files in the same room.   The consent forms  and source data forms 
will be stored in locked files in the same office mentioned above.   
24.2 How long the data or specimens will be stored locally?  
Response: The data will be stored thro ughout the duration of the study 
(approximately 1.5 years), and for three years after the study closes in 
accordance with IRB regulations.  
24.3 Who will have access to the data or specimens locally?  
Response: The study investigators, research coordinator and as sistant will 
have access to the data.  
24.4 Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the data or 
specimens locally?  
Response: The research coordinator  and assistant are  responsible for 
retrieving and storing the consent forms  and source data forms . 
24.5 How data and specimens will be transported locally?  
Response: The research coordinator or assistant will pick up study forms 
directly from the study physicians and data collectors at ECMC . 
25.0 Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
25.1 Describe the st eps that will be taken to protect subject s’ privacy 
interests. “Privacy interest” refers to a person’s desir e to place 
limits on whom they interact or whom they provide personal 
information . 
Response: The consent form that subjects will sign, includes a HIPAA 
authorization  which all study personnel will uphold.  All subjects will be 
assigned an ID number for the study to protect their privacy and only 
study personnel will have access to the data.  
25.2 Describe what steps you will take to make the subjects feel  at ease 
with the research situation in terms of the questions being asked and 
the procedures being performed. “At ease” does not refer to 
physical discomfort, but the sense of intrusiveness a subject might 
experience in response to questions, examinations , and procedures.  
Response: Subjects are not going to be asked any sensitive questions.  The 
only pro cedure that the subject will undergo for this study is an 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 25 of 42  investigational cone beam  CT scan .  If the patient feels uncomfortable for 
any reason, either emotionally or physically, the study will be stopped.  
The imaging technicians are trained in making the patient feel at ease 
during the procedure.   
25.3 Indicate how the research team is permitted t o access any sources of 
information about the subjects.  
Response: The research team has access to the subjects ’ medical records 
via our electronic medical record system.  The research coordinator will 
manage all study data and the research team will be giv en access to the 
data as necessary.   Carestream Health will not have access to the subject’s 
medical records.  
 
26.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
26.1 If the research involves more than Minimal Risk  to subjects, describe 
the available compensation in the event of research related injury.  
Response: It is unlikely that a patient will become ill or injured from this 
study.   However, if the patient is injured as a direct result of their 
participation the patient will be responsible for paying for their own 
medical care.  
 
26.2 Provide a copy of contract language, if any, relevant to 
compensation for research -related injury.  
Response: The contract stipulates the following: “Carestream will 
reimburse Institution for direct, reasonable and necessary medical 
expenses inc urred by Institution for the treatment of any adverse 
experiences by, illness of, or bodily injury to a Protocol subject that is 
caused by treatment of the Protocol subject in accordance with the 
Protocol.  Carestream will not be responsible for paying med ical expenses 
associated with treatment of the normal progression of the subject’s 
disease, nor  for injuries resulting from interventions that the subject would 
have incurred had they not participated in the Protocol.”  
27.0 Economic Burden to  Subject s 
27.1 Describe any costs that subject s may be responsible for  because of  
participation in the research . 
Response: The patient will be responsible for providing their own 
transportation to and from ECMC for the investigational CT scans.  
 
28.0 Consent Process  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 26 of 42  28.1 Indicate  whether you will be obtaining consent  
Response: Consent will be obtained from all subjects who agree to 
participate in this study.  
28.2 Describe w here  the consent  process  take place  
Response: Subjects will be consented in the ECMC emergency department  
or phys ician’s offices . 
28.3 Describe a ny waiting period available between informing the 
prospective subject and obtaining the consent.  
Response: Subjects will be consented when they are initially diagnosed 
with a potentially unstable SER type ankle fracture  and before they are 
sent for their gravity stress x -ray and investigational cone beam CT scan . 
 
28.4 Describe a ny process to ensure ongoing consent.  
Response: Subjects will be consented once at the beginning of the study.   
There is only one study visit so ongoi ng consent is not necessary.   
 
28.5 Describe w hether you will be following “SOP: Informed Consent 
Process for Research (HRP -090).” If not , describe : 
 The role of the individuals listed in the application as being 
involved in the consent process.  
 The time that w ill be devoted to the consent discussion.  
 Steps that will be taken to minimize the possibility of coercion 
or undue influence.  
 Steps that will be taken to ensure the subjects’ understanding.  
Response: Yes, HRP -090 will be followed when consenting.  
 
Non-English Speaking Subjects   
28.6 Indicate what language(s) other than English are  likely to be 
spoken/understood by your prospective study population  or their 
legally authorized representatives.  
Response: Spanish is the most likely non -English language that we might 
encounter in this study population.  Non-English speakers will be included 
in this study.  Information for non -English speakers will be provided in 
oral form with the use of an interpreter.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 27 of 42  28.7 If subjects who do not speak English will be enrolled, describe the 
process to ensure that the oral and written information provided to 
those subjects will be in that language.  Indicate the language that 
will be used by those obtaining consent.  
Response: Base d on previous experience, we expect that most if not all of 
our potential study s ubjects will speak English .  However, if we encounter 
a non -English speaking subject we will find someone who can orally 
translate (i.e., fluently speaks the same language as the subject, such as a 
family member) the study description and consent form to the subject.  
 
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process  (consent will not be obtained, 
required information will not be disclosed, or the research involves 
deception)  
28.8 Review the “CHECKLIST: Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process  
(HRP -410)” to ensure you have provided sufficient information for 
the IRB to make these determinations . Provide any additional 
information necessary here:  
Response: Not applicable , consent will not be wai ved for this study.  
 
28.9 If the research  involves a waiver the consent process for planned 
emergency research, please review the “CHECKLIST:  Waiver of 
Consent for Emergency Research  (HRP -419)” to ensure you have 
provided sufficient information for the IRB to make these 
determinations.  Provide any additional information necessary here:  
Response: Not applicable , this study does not involve Emergency 
Research . 
 
Subjects  who are not yet adults  (infants, children , teenagers ) 
28.10 Describe the criteria that will be used to determine whether a 
prospective subject has not attained the legal age for consent to 
treatments or procedures involved in the research  under the 
applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research  will be 
conducted. (E.g., individuals under the ag e of 18 years.)  For 
research conducted in NY state, review “ SOP: Legally Authorized 
Representatives, Children, and Guardians (HRP -013)” to be aware 
of which individuals in the state meet the definition of “children.”  
Response: Not applicable, this study do es not include subjects under 18 
years of age.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 28 of 42  28.11 For research conducted outside of NY state, provide information that 
describ es which persons have not attained the legal age for consent 
to trea tments or procedures involved the research , under the 
applicable  law of the jurisdiction in which research  will be 
conducted. One method of obtaining this information is to  have  a 
legal counsel or authority  review your protocol along the definition 
of “children” in “SOP: Legally Authorized Representatives, 
Children, an d Guardians (HRP -013). ” 
Response: Not applicable , this study will not be conducted outside of 
NYS . 
 
28.12 Describe whether parental permission will be obtained from:  
 Both parents unless one parent is deceased, unknown, 
incompetent, or not reasonably available, o r when only one 
parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the 
child.  
 One parent even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, 
reasonably available, and shares legal responsibility for the 
care and custody of the child.  
Response: Not applicable, this study does not include subjects under 18 
years of age.  
 
28.13 Describe whether permission will be obtained from individuals other 
than parents, and if so, who will be allowed to provide permission. 
Describe the process used to determine these individuals’ authority 
to consent to each child’s general medical care.  
Response: Not applicable, this study does not include subjects under 18 
years of age.  
 
28.14 Indicate w hether assent will be obtained from all,  some, or none of 
the children. I f assent will be obtained from some children, indicate 
which children will be required to assent.  
Response: Not applicable, this study does not include subjects under 18 
years of age.  
 
28.15 When assent of children is obtained describe whether and how it will 
be documented.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 29 of 42  Response: Not applicable, this study does not include subjects under 18 
years of age.  
 
Cognitively Impaired Adults  
28.16 Describe the process to determine whether an individual is capable 
of consent.  The IRB  sometimes  allows the person obtaining assent to 
document assent on the consent document and does not 
automatically require assent documents  to be used.  
Response: Not applicable , cognitively impaired adults will not be included 
in this study . 
 
Adults Unable to Conse nt 
When a person is not capable of consent  due to cognitive impairment , a 
legally authorized representative should be used to provide consent and, 
where possible, assent of the individual should also be solicited.  
28.17 List the individuals from whom permission will be obtained in order 
of priority. ( e.g., durable power of attorney for health care, court 
appointed guardian for health care decisions, spouse, and adult 
child.)   For research conducted in NY state, review “ SOP: Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Chi ldren, and Guardians (HRP -013)” 
to be aware of which individuals in the state meet the definition of  
“legally authorized representative.”   The list in the consent template 
signature section corresponds to the priority list for NYS.   
Response: Not applicable , cognitively impaired adults will not be included 
in this study . 
 
28.18 For research conducted outside of NY state, provide information that 
describ es which individuals are authorized under applicable law to 
consent on behalf of a prospective subject to their participation in 
the procedure(s) involved in this research. One method of obtaining 
this information is to  have  a legal counsel or authority  review your 
protocol along the definition of “legally authorized representative” 
in “SOP: Legally Authori zed Representatives, Children, and 
Guardians (HRP -013). ” 
Response: Not applicable , this study does not involve research outside of 
NYS . 
 
28.19 Describe the process for assent of the subject s. Indicate whether:  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 30 of 42   Assent will be required of all, some, or none of the  subject s. If 
some, indicated, which subject s will be required to assent and 
which will not.  
 If assent will not be obtained from some or all subject s, an 
explanation of why not.  
 Describe whether assent of the subject s will be documented 
and the process to document assent.  The IRB allows the person 
obtaining assent to document assent on the consent document 
and does not routinely require assent documents and does not 
routinely require subjects to sign assent documents.  
Response: Consent will be obtained from  all adu lt subjects over 18 years -
old, this study does not include subjects under 18 years of age.  
 
28.20 For HUD uses provide a description of how the patient will be 
informed of the potential risks and benefits of the HUD and any 
procedures associated with its  use. 
Response: Not applicable, this is not a HUD study.  
 
29.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing  
 
If your research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and 
involves no procedures for which written documentation of consent is normally 
required outside of the research context, the IRB will generally waive the 
requirement to obtain written documentation of consent.  
(If you will document consent in writing, attach a consent document. If you will 
obtain consent, but not document consent in writing, attach a consent script. 
Review “CHECKLIST: Waiver of Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -411)” 
to ensure that you have provided sufficient information. You may use 
“TEMPLATE CONSENT DOCUMENT (HRP -502)”to create the consent 
document or script.)  
29.1 Describe whether you will be following “ SOP: Written 
Documentation of Consent (HRP -091).” If not, describe whether and 
how consent of the subject  will be obtained including whether or not 
it will be documented in writing.  
Response: HRP -091 will be followed  when consenting subjects.  
 
30.0 Drugs or Devices  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 31 of 42  30.1 If the research  involves drugs or device, describe your plans to store, 
handle, and administer  those drugs or devices so that they will be 
used only on subject s and be used only by authorized investigators.  
Resp onse: The CBCT scanner will be stored in a locked room  at ECMC  
and only trained study staff will have access to it.  A trained technician 
will operate the CBCT scanner.  The CBCT scanner will only be used for 
study procedures approved by the UB IRB.  
 
If the drug is investigational (has an IND) or the device has an ID E or a 
claim of abbreviated IDE (non -significant risk device) , include the 
following information : 
30.2 Identify the hold er of the IND/IDE/Abbreviated IDE.  
Response: The investigational cone beam CT scanner is being provided by 
Carestream Health, Inc.  This device poses non -significant risk (see 
Attachment B ). 
 
30.3 Explain procedures followed to compl y with FDA sponsor 
requirements for the following : 
 Applicable to:  
FDA Regulation  IND Studies  IDE studies  Abbreviated 
IDE studies  
21 CFR 11  X X  
21 CFR 54  X X  
21 CFR 210  X   
21 CFR 211  X   
21 CFR 312  X   
21 CFR 812   X X 
21 CFR 820   X  
Response: Not applicable , this is not an FDA study . 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 32 of 42   
Attachment A. Eligibility Form  
SER Ankle Fracture Instability  STUDY  
ELIGIBILITY QUESTIONS  
TODAY’S DATE: ____________________________________     
PATIENT’S NAME: _________________________________    
 
Please answer the following questions for ALL patients diagnosed with a suspected 
unstable supination -external rotation type ankle fracture requiring a gravity stress 
X-ray.  Please refer to the Inclusion Criteria column to determine if the patient is 
eligible.  
Question  Answer  Inclusion Criteria  
1.) Does the patient have a 
diagnosis of  a potentially 
unstable SER type (Weber B) 
ankle fracture ?  
YES / NO The pa tient’s X -ray must show  
medial clear space less than 5 mm 
with clinical suspicion of 
instability  
 
2.) Is the patient able to provide 
written informed consent?  
  
YES / NO Patients  must be able to provide 
written informed consent.  
3.) Is the currently imprisoned?  
 YES / NO Patients must not be in prison.  
4.) How old is the patient?  
Age = ___________  Patients must be at least 1 8 
years -old. 
 
5.) Did the patient have  an open 
fracture ?  
YES / NO  Patients must NOT have an open 
fracture.  
 
6.) Does the patient have clinical 
signs of ankle deformity ? 
  
YES / NO  Patient must NOT have clinical 
signs of ankle deformity . 
7.) Did the patient have any type 
of previous ankle trauma or 
surgery on the affected ankle?  
 YES / NO  Patient must NOT have had any 
type of previous ankle trauma or 
surgery on the affected ankle.  
8.) Does the patient have 
significant osteoarthritis or pre -
existing ligamentous instability 
or pain in the af fected ankle ?  
YES / NO  Patient must NOT have  significant 
osteoarthritis or pre -existing 
ligamentous instability or pain in 
the affected ankle.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 33 of 42   
   
10.) Is the patient pregnant?  
 Patient Verbal Response: YES / NO  
 
Urine pregnancy test result ( for 
females who  consent ONLY ): 
Positive / Negative  
 The patient must NOT be 
pregnant.  Females who consent 
to participate MUST have a 
negative urine pregnancy test.  
 
11.) Can the patient stand in the 
weight bearing position?  YES / NO  The patient MUST be able to  
stand in the weight  bear ing 
position  for the cone beam CT 
scan.  
IS PATIENT ELIGIBLE FOR THE STUDY?          YES / NO  
 
DID THE PATIENT CHOOSE TO ENROLL IN THE STUDY?          YES / NO  
 
NOTES:  
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 34 of 42   
Attachment B: Installation instructions  
 
CBCT 3D Extremity Imaging System  
 
 
           
 
                                                       
 
  

PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 35 of 42  WARNING:  
The system should always be located a minimum distance of 7 feet from 
the center of the bore to the closest wall.  
 
Carestream scatter plot results show that at distances of 6 feet or 
greater from the center of the bore, the yearly exposure based on 1,000 
exams would be <50 millirem.  Correspondingly, 6,000 exams per year 
would be <300 millirem.  
 
WARNING:  
Operator should stand at least 6 feet away from the center of the bore 
during the entire exposure duration.  It is recommended that the Main 
Operator Console be positioned in the following orientation to 
accomplish this:  
                            
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WARNING:  
Operator Location  Closest Wall  
Center of Bore  Main Operator Console  
Top View of System  7 Feet  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 36 of 42  The system is designed to attenuate most beam and scattered radiation 
in an effort to reduce shielding requirements for the operator.  Lead 
lined walls generally will not be necessary, however because shielding 
regulatory requirements vary for a variety of factors and by region - A 
room evaluation should be done by a qualified medical physi cist.   
Similar to Dental CBCT systems, small office environments can typically 
be accommodated without significant modification to existing 
structures or workflow.   
 
Allowable annual NYS Operator dose < 500 millirem  
Maximum annual scans = 1,000  
Operator o utside a 6 foot radius from isocenter will be < 50 millirem/year  
Conclusion: System can be operated at the maximum use case  
                      and be < 10% of the NYS allowable worker limit  
                      without requiring additional operator shi elding.  
Allowable annual Public Space dose < 100 millirem  
Maximum annual scans = 1,000  
Dose absorption by double layer drywall = 50%  
Maximum dose/year inside wall is 200 millirem  
Conclusion: System can be installed adjacent to a fully occupied  
                      public space separated by double drywall and  
         stay below the allowable public limit  
                      without requiring additional room shielding  
                      if a 3 foot minimum distance from isocenter is maintained.  
  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 37 of 42  Attachment C: Statement of Non -significant risk  
 
Carestream Health cone beam 3D CT scan  
Justification for assessment of non -significant risk device  
 
This assessment is drawn from FDA guidance documents, and from studies performed at Johns Hopkins University, where the 
prototype cone beam 3D CT scanning device was determine to be non -significant risk device. (IRB No. 00034417)  The device used 
in this study is an upgraded version (3rd generation) of the previous cone beam 3D CT scanner, with improved software f or data 
acquisition and image processing.  There have also been changes to the physical configuration of the device, designed to impr ove 
patient set -up. 
 
Description of device :  The scanner is a diagnostic x -ray system intended to produce cross sectional i mages of the extremities of the 
body by computer reconstruction of x -ray transmission acquired at different angles. The prototype cone beam CT scanner is 
specifically designed for imaging of human extremities such as the shoulders, elbows, wrists, hands, k nees, and ankles.  The scanner 
has the following unique capabilities and characteristics:  
- The unit is portable  
- The ability to acquire images with the joints under weight bearing status  
- The ability to acquire images of joints in various degrees of motion  
- Lower radiation dose exposure  
- No radiation shielding necessary  
- Produces higher quality resolution of 3D images  
- Allows measurement of surface area of contact in the joint  
 
The scanner, because of some of the above capabilities, has potential usefulness in a h ospital department, an office, or operating room 
setting.  The intended use with respect to this document is to perform clinical research that demonstrates effectiveness of t he device 
for diagnostic use in orthopedic surgery and radiology.  
 
Risk to Human S ubjects :  The main risk to the subjects of study is due the use of ionizing radiation during the imaging 
procedure.  The estimated dosage that will be received by the study participants is ~ 0.14 mSv.  This dose is comparable to 
or less than the typical do se delivered during a conventional diagnostic CT scan – 0.16 mSv as reported by Biswas et al. 
(Radiation exposure from musculoskeletal computerized tomographic scans. JBJS A (91): 1882 -1889, 2009)  Radiation 
dose at less than 1 mSv is orders of magnitude l ess than that associated with possible long term health risks, even by the 
most conservative estimates. (Brenner and Hall. Computed tomography – an increasing source of radiation exposure.  
NEJM 375(22): 2277, 2007)  This statement is also consistent with position statement of the American Association of 
Physicists in Medicine(AAPM), which states: “risks of medical imaging at effective doses below 50 mSv for single 
procedures or 100 mSv for multiple procedures over short periods are too low to be detectable  and may be nonexistent.”  
The prototype of the scanner to be used in this study was previously reported by Carrino et al (Dedicated cone -beam CT 
system for extremity imaging. Radiology  270(3): 816 -824, 2014) to deliver absolute dose of 9.0 mGy, compared t o 39.7 
mGy for the same scan on a conventional CT scanner.  As further outlined by Biswas; these levels of radiation dose are 
approximately equal to the dose of two PA chest radiographs, or two transatlantic flights on a commercial airplane, and are 
“essen tially neglible/trivial…” within the context of patient risk associated with radiation exposure.  In most patients, it 
would be expected that the diagnositic information yielded by the CT scan would supersede any concern about excessive 
radiation exposure.    
It is therefore contended that the dose levels associated with the proposed protocol will present negligible risk to the heal th, 
safety, or welfare of the study participants.  
 
Risk Determination :  Guidance for determination of significant(SR) or non -significant risk(NSR) risk can be found in part 
812.3(m) of the CFR Title 21 and in the FDA document Information sheet guidance for IRBs, clinical investigators, and 
sponsors.    
The FDA definition of a significant risk device is that the device:  
• Is intended as an implant and presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject;   Assessment:  The scanner is not intended as an implant  
 
• Is purported or represented to be for use supporting or sustaining human life and presents a potential for serious risk to the health, 
safety, or welfare of a subject;   Assessment:  The scanner is not for use in supporting or sustaining human life…  
 
• Is for a use of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating, or treating disease, or otherwise preventing impairm ent of 
human health and presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject;  
 Assessment:  In thi s study, the scanner is not for use in diagnosing, curing, mitigating, or treating disease.  Enrolled 
subjects will undergo the normal physician encounter and diagnositic testing associated with their clinical condition.  The i maging 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam 
computed tomography (CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining 
instability of supination -external rotation type ankle fractures  
 
 Page 38 of 42  procedure for this stu dy will be taken in addition to the normal diagnostic testing(conventional CT scan).  The scan results will not 
influence patient treatment or clinical management decisions before the diagnosis is established by the medically established  standards 
of histo ry, physical examination, and imaging studies.  
 
• Otherwise presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject.  
 Assessment:  With regard to the use of ionizing radiation, the primary potential risk to be considered is th e induction of 
cancer, which is a function of many factors – most notably the level of radiation dose and the age of the patient at the time of 
exposure.  The study only includes subjects 16 years or older.  As noted above, the radiation dose associated wi th the scanner is ~0.14 
mSv, which is comparable to or less than that of conventional diagnostic CT of the extremities.  As noted by Biswas; these le vels of 
radiation dose are “essentially neglible/trivial…” within the context of patient risk associated wi th radiation exposure.  Radiation dose 
at less than ~1 mSv is orders of magnitude lower than the dose believed to be associated with health risk, even by the most 
conservative of estimates.  Together, these factors suggest an insignificant risk to study pa rticipants associated with radiation 
exposure.  
 
According to the FDA document Information sheet guidance for IRBs, clinical investigators, and sponsors: “ an NSR devise study is 
one that does not meet the definition for an SR device study.” As outlined in t he items above, the proposed study device does not 
meet  the definition of a significant risk device study, and is therefore NSR.  
 
Additional Supporting Information : We note the following examples as precedent support for the use of an xray producing system  
in an NSR device study:  
 The determination of NSR at Johns Hopkins University for study of the prototype scanner to be used in this study (IRB No. 
00034417)  
 The FDA document Information sheet guidance for IRBs, clinical investigators, and sponsors specif ically uses digital 
mammography as an example of an NSR device  
 The University of Pennsylvania Center for Advanced Computed Tomography Imaging Services, under their Human 
Policies and Procedures, allows CT device protocols to be classified as either NSR or  SR.  
(see http:www.uphs.upenn.edu/radiology/research/labs/cactis/policies/human -studies.html)  
 The Form 10 -K/A SEC filing for a cone beam volumetric scanner with intended use in orthopedic imaging and image -
guided procedures identifies the system as a cla ss II NSR device which subsequently gained 510(k) clearance. (O -arm, Imaging 3, 
Burbank, CA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam computed tomography 
(CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining instability of supination -external rotation type 
ankle fractures  
 
 Page 39 of 42  Attachment D: Data Form  
 
SER Ankle Fracture Instability  STUDY : DEMOGRAPHIC DATA COLLECTION FORM  
 
STUDY ID#: ___________________      TODAY’S DATE: __________________________  
 
AGE: _______________  
 
GENDER (check one): ____________ Male  
        ____________ Female  
RACE : ________________  
 
HEIGHT : __________________   WEIGHT : ___________________  
 
PATIENT’S DOCTOR: _______________________ ____   
 
AFFECTED SIDE: ____________ Right  
                                   ____________ Left  
 
COURSE OF TREATMENT : ____________________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam computed tomography 
(CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining instability of supination -external rotation type 
ankle fractures  
 
 Page 40 of 42  SER Ankle Fracture Instability  STUDY : CT DATA COLLECTION FORM  
 
STUDY ID #:  ________________  
 
DATE OF CT SCAN: _____________________  
RADIOLOGIST:  ______________________________  
 
RESULTS OF CT SCAN:  
 Date of Measurement:  ________________________  
Medial Clear Space Distance : ___________________________________  
 Superior Clear Space Distance : _________________________________  
 
 Lateral Overla p Distance:  ________________________________________  
 
 Lateral Clear Space Distance : __________________________  
 
Lateral Talar Shift : _____________________________  
 
Total Weight Bearing : ___________________  
 
Percent Weight Bearing : ___________________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam computed tomography 
(CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining instability of supination -external rotation type 
ankle fractures  
 
 Page 41 of 42   
 
 
 
SER Ankle Fracture Instability  STUDY : X-RAY DATA COLLECTION FORM  
 
STUDY ID #:  ________________  
 
DATE OF X -RAY : _____________________  
RADIOLOGIST : _______________________  
 
RESULTS OF X-RAY : 
 Date of Measurement:  ________________________  
Medial Clear Space Distance : ___________________________________   
 
Superior Clear Space Distance : _________________________________  
 
 Lateral Overla p Distance:  ________________________________________  
 
 Lateral Clear Space Distance : ___________________________  
 
Lateral Talar Shift:  _____________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of a novel weight bearing cone beam computed tomography 
(CT) scan  to gravity stress X -ray for determining instability of supination -external rotation type 
ankle fractures  
 
 Page 42 of 42  Visual Analogue Scale  
 
On a scale of 0 to 10, where 0 equals no pain and 10 equals extreme pain, please circle the number 
that best represents how much ankle pain you experienced during the scan.  
 
| | | | | | | | | | | 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
 
 
 
 