Gait Modification Treatments for Knee Pathology  
NCT: 03116230  
September 7, 2017  
 
 
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Project Title.   Analysis of Pain, Function, and Joint Mechanics in Response to Two Treatments 
for Knee Pathology  
Purpose.   The objective of this project proposal is to complete a longitudinal clinical study  of a 
cutaneous stimulation  device in a target population of subjects with knee pathology. This work 
will determine the longer -term effect of the intervention on pain/function, gait/muscle function, 
and patient comfort.  
Scientific Rationale.   Knee injuries  and pathologies such as anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)/  
meniscus tears and knee osteoarthritis (OA) are prevalent musculoskeletal conditions that 
cause functional limitations , pain and disability affecting patient quality of life and healthcare 
cost. In dividuals with knee injuries who had undergone a meniscectomy or ACL reconstruction 
surgery and knee OA patients exhibit significant alterations in lower extremity muscle patter ns 
involved in gait, including a weakness in the quadriceps muscle. Over the lo ng term, an 
impairment in muscle activity may result in a change in mechanical stress loading of a joint 
and have adverse effects on the knee joint, and research increasingly su ggests that such 
alterations may be significant predictors of onset and progres sion of knee OA.  
Clinical guidelines for management of knee OA and associated joint injuries recommend non -
pharmacological conservative interventions such as physical therapy, u se of braces, elastic 
wraps, electrical stimulation and taping. These intervent ions are commonly used to improve 
muscle strength, joint stability and mitigate pain. However, treatment is often discontinued 
because of time constraints and cost involved, and  hence there are limited long -term 
improvements.   
To address these limitations , we have developed a device which utilizes a novel design to 
activate deficient lower extremity muscles through the somatosensory system and cutaneous 
stimulation. This device exploits the cross modal plasticity of the somatosensory system that 
controls t ouch, pain and proprioception. By applying intermittent cutaneous stimulation to the 
thigh and shank through vibration, it may activate the mechanoreceptors in the leg and there by 
induce improved muscle contraction and a functional response during walking.  This study aims 
to assess the changes in gait patterns and pain/function resulting from the intermittent 
cutaneous stimulation of afferent nerves on the surface of the thigh an d shank.  
Focus . Using a cross -over study design, t his study aims to assess the  influence of the 
cutaneous stimulation device versus a commercially -available knee sleeve on pain, function, 
and knee joint mechanics.  
Anticipated Impact.   Knee injuries and d isease cause substantial pain and disability, and their 
high preval ence necessitate simple interventions. Clinical guidelines for management of knee 
OA and associated joint injuries emphasize the importance of non -pharmacological 
conservative strategies. G ait modification through cutaneous stimulation may offer  a low cost  
alternative to rehabilitation programs and current treatments to address pain, deficient muscle 
activation in knee OA and conditions related to development of the disease.  
Methods . The ob jective of this study is to conduct a cross -over study to assess th e influence of 
the cutaneous s timulation device versus a commercially -available knee sleeve. We will use a 
single -center, single -blind, randomized, crossover study design. Participants will  be told only 
that we are comparing two types of treatment for thei r knee pain.  
Interventions will include: (A) Control treatment consisting of an off -the-shelf neutral knee 
sleeve and (B) Active treatment consisting of the cutaneous stimulation device.  
Individuals  with prior ACL injury/surgery, meniscus injury/s urgery, and/or physician -diagnosed 
medial compartment knee osteoarthritis will be recruited.  The participants will be 18 years or 
older, and both males and females will be recruited.  Individuals b elow the age of 18 years old 
are excluded as they may not have reached skeletal maturity.  Knee pathology subjects may 
be recruited through direct referrals from clinicians in primary care, rheumatology, physical 
medicine and rehabilitation, physical thera py, radiology, and orthopedic surgery. The group 
has succe ssfully used advertising flyers to recruit subjects and we will also employ these 
methods for knee pathology subjects.  
Subjects will be telephone screened for inclusion criteria. If the subject meet s the designated 
criteria, he/she will be scheduled to vis it the gait lab and enrolled in the study. The procedures 
will take approximately 2 -3 hours.  
At baseline testing, eligible subjects will be randomized to receive either treatment A or B for 
the init ial 4 weeks and will receive a gait test. After the 4 week s, the assigned treatment will be 
removed and a second gait test performed, and the participants will receive no treatment for 2 
weeks. Following this 2 -week washout period, the second randomized tr eatment will be 
assigned for a 4 -week period and a gait te st performed. At the end of the 4 -week period, 
another gait test will be performed. For each subject, the trial will last for a total of 10 weeks.  
During each treatment, subjects will maintain a dai ly wear log, pain diary, and medication 
usage. Subjects wi ll record the number of hours of brace wear each day and will be instructed 
to wear the brace during the active part of the day (greatest number of gait cycles).  
During gait testing, each subject m ay be asked to walk at a variety of speeds and perform 
activities of daily living. A motion capture system consisting of infrared cameras and small 
reflective balls  (markers) attached to the subjects using small double sided stickers and force 
platforms em bedded in the floor will be used estimate subjects kinematics and kinetics during 
gait following the point cluster method protocol and standard inverse kinetics cal culations. 
Pressure sensors may also be used to provide a 2 dimensional map of the pressure 
distribution in the stance phase of gait. EMG may be used to provide information on muscle 
activation. Additionally, inertial sensors may be placed on the bodies of  the subjects to 
measure their kinematics. The markers and sensors will be placed on the bod ies so that they 
do not impede the subject's movements in any way. Moreover, these elements do not impart 
excessive force. Ideally, the subject will forget that the y are wearing the system. The walkway 
in the laboratory is well lit and free of obstacles. O utdoor testing may occur in a selected 
outdoor location that is also safe and unobstructed. There is little to no risk to the subjects 
beyond the normal risks assoc iated with walking.  
Subjects will be asked to complete questionnaires regarding pain, functi on, and physical 
activity.   
Statistical Analysis Plan.  Paired two -tailed t -tests  will be used to assess changes in patient -
reported outcomes and joint loading parameters (e.g. peak knee flexion moment ) with each 
treatm ent from pre -treatment control.   
Results. 
• Mean +/ - SD KFM at baseline for all 38 subjects    :3.14 ± 1.31  
• Mean  +/- SD KOOS Pain at baseline for all 38 subjects  66.25 ± 13.4 
• Mean  +/- SD KOOS Function at baseline for all 38 subjects  72.31 ± 15.98 
• Mean  +/- SD KOOS Symptoms  at baseline  for all 38 s ubjects  59.8 ± 15.58 
• Mean  +/- SD change  in KFM  (%Bw*Ht)  separately  for Treatment  A and Treatment  B 
from  control  (and  # of subjects  analyzed  for each) . For slow  walking  
Treatment  A mean  +/- SD  change  in KFM  (%Bw*Ht)  relative to control=  0.19 7 ± 0.374  
Treat ment  B mean  +/- SD  change  in KFM  (%Bw*Ht)  relative to control=  0.018 ± 0.725  
o Statistical  test used  to compare  the KFM  and the p-values  from  it (separate  p-
values for Tx A and Tx B vs. control ) 
o T-test Treatment  A P=0.005  
o T-test Treatment  B P=0.64  
  
• Mean  +/- SD change  in KOOS  Pain  separately  for Treatment  A and Treatment  B from 
control (and # of subjects analyzed for each).  
Treatment  A mean  +/- SD  change  in KOOS  Pain relative to control=  1.476  ± 12.286  
Treatment  B mean  +/- SD  change  in KOOS  Pain relative to control=  -0.391  ± 9.714  
o Statistical  test used  to compare  KOOS  Pain  and the p-values  from  it (separate  p-
values  for Tx A and Tx B vs. control ) 
o T-test Treatment  A P=0.5 
o T-test Treatment  B P=0. 82 
 
• Mean  +/- SD change  in KOOS  Function  separately  for Treatment  A and Treatment  
B from control (and # of subjects analyzed for each).  
o Statist ical test used  to compare  KOOS  Function  and the p-values  from  it 
(separate  p-values  for Tx A and Tx B vs. control ) 
Treatment  A mean  +/- SD  change  in KOOS  Function  relative to control=  4.48  ± 12.56 
Treatment  B mean  +/- SD  change  in KOOS  Function  relative to control=  0.64  ± 7.903 
o T-test Treatment  A P=0.05 
o T-test Treatment  B P=0.65  
 
• Mean  +/- SD change  in KOOS  Symptoms  separately  for Treatment  A and Treatment  
B from control (and # o f subjects analyzed for each).  
• Treatment  A mean  +/- SD  change  in KOOS  Sym ptoms  relative to control=  3.571  ± 9.47  
• Treatment  B mean  +/- SD  change  in KOOS  Sym ptoms  relative to control=  -0.781± 
10.87 6 
o Statistica l test used  to compare  KOOS  Symptoms  and the p-values  from  it 
(separate  p-values  for Tx A and Tx B vs. control ) 
o T-test Treatment  A P=0.04 
o T-test Treatment  B P=0. 68 
 
 