 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Effectiveness of Family -based Weight Loss Treatment 
Implemented in Primary Care: A Randomized Control Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Identifying Number: U01 HL131552  
Principal Investigator: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD  
IND/IDE Sponsor: National Heart, Lung and Blood 
Institutes (NHLBI)  
Funded by: NIH  
Draft or Version Number: v.16 11.17.2020.  
 
Page 1 of 305 
  
 
 
 
 
I. Contents  
II. 6 
III. 8 
IV. 9 
Background Information  9 
Study Summary  9 
Scientific Rationale  10 
V. 10 
Description of Study Design  10 
Outcome and Objectives  11 
Study Organization and Roles and Responsibilities  11 
1. 12 
2. 12 
3. 13 
4. 13 
5. 13 
6. 13 
Additional Committees  14 
1. 14 
2. 14 
3. 14 
4. 14 
5. 15 
6. 15 
Study Timeline  15 
II. 16 
Recruitment  16 
1. 16 
Inclusion Criteria  16 
Exclusion Criteria  17 
2. 18 
Page 2 of 305 
 Screening  20 
Consenting Process  21 
1. 22 
2. 22 
3. 23 
Randomization  23 
Assessments  24 
Participant Timeline  25 
1. 25 
2. 26 
3. 26 
4. 26 
5. 26 
6. 26 
II. 28 
Usual Care (UC)  28 
Family -based Behavioral Weight Loss Treat ment (FBT)  28 
1. 28 
2. 28 
Dietary Goals  28 
Physical Activity Goals  28 
Behavior Change Too ls 29 
Delay of Gratification  29 
Social Facilitation Approaches  29 
Educational Tools  29 
3. 30 
4. 34 
Session Structure  34 
Session Content  35 
5. 35 
III. 36 
General Training in Study Pro cedures  35 
PLAN Coach Training and Fidelity  36 
1. 36 
2. 37 
Page 3 of 305 
 3. 37 
4. 37 
5. 37 
6. 37 
7. 37 
8. 38 
Assessment Training and Fidelity  38 
1. 39 
2. 39 
II. 39 
Practice Retention  39 
1. 39 
2. 39 
Participant Retention  40 
1. 40 
2. 40 
3. 40 
Intervention Participation  41 
Assessment Participation  41 
4. 41 
5. 41 
Risks to Human Subjects  42 
1. 42 
2. 43 
3. 43 
Potential Benefits to Human Subjects and Others  44 
II. 44 
Safety Oversight  44 
1. 45 
Specification of Safety Parameters  47 
1. 48 
2. 48 
3. 48 
Classification of Adverse Events  47 
1. 48 
Page 4 of 305 
 2. 48 
3. 48 
Adverse Event Assessment and Tracking  49 
Adverse Event Reporting Procedures  50 
Study Halting Rules for Participant Safety  52 
II. 54 
REDCap  53 
Testing the Data Management System  53 
Data Security and Confidentiality  54 
Forms and Datasets Manual  54 
Archiving Data  54 
Quality Control  54 
1. 56 
2. 57 
3. 57 
4. 57 
5. 58 
III. 58 
Measures to Minimize Bias  67 
1. 69 
2. 69 
3. 69 
Masking of Assessment Staff  68 
Reducing Bias in Unmasked Groups  69 
II. 71 
Study Website  69 
Conflicts of Interest  70 
Publications and Presentations Policy  70 
Protocol Amendments  70 
Protocol Deviations  70 
III. 73 
IV. 77 
A. 77 
Addendum: Assessment Protocol in Response to Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID -19) 186 
C. 190 
Page 5 of 305 
 Assessment Measures  236 
Remote assessments Protocol  239 
FAMILY NUTRITION & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY (FNPA)  255 
D.     Additional Forms  300 
 
  
Page 6 of 305 
 II. List of Abbreviations  
 
AAP American Academy of Pediatrics  
AE Adverse Event  
ANCOVA  Analysis of Covariance  
BMI Body Mass Index  
BOV  Percent over weight  
CCC Clinical Coordinating Center  
CFR Code of Federal Regulations  
CITI Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative  
COI Conflict of Interest  
CME  Continuing Medical Education  
CMP  Clinical Monitoring Plan  
CRO  Clinical Research Office  
CTSI  Clinical Translational Science Institute  
DCC Data Coordinating Center  
DD Delay Discounting  
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  
DSMP  Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  
UC Usual Care  
EMR  Electronic Medical Records  
FBT Family -Based Treatment  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  
FDAAA  Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007  
FRG Food Reference Guide  
FWA  Federalwide Assurances  
GCP Good Clinical Practice  
GR-PBRN  Greater Rochester Practice Based Research Network  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
MOC  Maintenance of Certification  
MOP  Manual of Procedures  
NCH  Nationwide Children’s Hospital  
NIH National Institutes of Health  
NPP Non -participating parent  
NHLBI  National Heart, Lung and Blood Institutes  
OHRP  Office for Human Research Protections  
PBRN  Practice Based Research Network  
PC Project Coordinator  
PCN Primary Care Network  
PCP Primary Care Provider  
PLAN  Primary Care Pediatrics, Learning, Activity, Nutrition  
PHI Private Health Information  
PI Principal Investigator  
Page 7 of 305 
 REDCap  Research Electronic Data Capture  
RGH  Rochester General Hospital  
QA Quality Assurance  
QC Quality Control  
SAE Serious Adverse Event  
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan  
SEC Study Executive Committee  
SMC  Safety Monitoring Committee  
SMH  Strong Memorial Hospital  
TFC Training and Fidelity Core  
UB University at Buffalo  
UBIRB  University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board  
UP Unanticipated Problem  
URMC  University at Rochester Medical Center  
US  United States  
USPSTF  United States Preventive Services Task Force  
WU Washington University in St. Louis  
 
  
Page 8 of 305 
 III. Statement of Compliance  
 
PLAN with Families  will be conducted according to the study protocol developed to follow the Good 
Clinical Practice guidelines (GCP) set by the United States (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 
regarding clinical trials with the approval of the University at Buffalo Inte rnal Review Board (UBIRB). All 
personnel responsible for conducting this trial will be trained through the Collaborative Institutional 
Training Initiative (CITI). The Principal Investigators agree that no deviation from, or changes to the 
protocol will tak e place without prior agreement from the sponsor and documented approval from the 
UBIRB, except where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to the trial participants  
 
We agree to ensure that all staff members involved in the conduct of this study are informed about their 
obligations in meeting the above requirements.  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator: _______________________________________________________  
   Print/Type Name  
 
Signature: __________________________________ Date: _________________________  
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator: _______________________________________________________  
   Print/Type Name  
 
Signature: __________________________________ Date: _________________________  
  
Page 9 of 305 
 IV. Introduction and Study Rationale  
 
Background Information  
Childhood obesity is associated with a risk for the development of adult obesity, with children with 
obesity at all ages at increased risk of becoming adults with obesity.1,2 In addition to the risk of 
becoming an adult with obesity, obesity during childhood is associated w ith cardio -metabolic 
changes including increases in blood pressure, cholesterol and triglyceride levels, and insulin 
resistance that initiate a trajectory of cardiovascular and metabolic disease as an adult.3 Childhood 
obesity is also associated with psychological and behavioral changes that negatively impact the 
child’s quality of life.4,5 Obesity is a familial disorder. The most reliable risk factor for childhood 
obesity is parental obesity.2 Beginning in in fancy,6 and extending through adolescence,2 parents with 
obesity increase the risk of the child or adolescent experiencing obesity. Parents with obesity may 
also suffer from cardio -metabolic disease, initiating a cycle of both obesity and cardiovascular an d 
metabolic disease that impacts both generations. Parental behaviors, such as modeling and support 
of child unhealthy behaviors, are associated with childhood obesity.7-10 Given the relationship 
between child and parental obesity and that parents arrange family eating and exercise 
environments, model behaviors for their children, and reinforce healthy or unhealthy behavior 
patterns, it is logical that targeting both the parent and child can have a positive impact on 
childhood weight control.  
 
Family -based  childhood obesity treatment (FBT) was developed over 30 years ago and has proven 
effective in decreasing child and parent weight.11 FBT targets changes in eating and physical activity 
through child and parent behavior change. One implication of FBT is tha t it may be more cost -
effective than separate treatments of the child with obesity by his or her pediatrician and the parent 
with obesity by his or her primary care doctor. To test this, we randomized families to FBT or 
separate and simultaneous treatment for the parent and child with obesity. Results at 12 months 
showed FBT was associated with superior child and parent weight loss than separate treatment and 
was significantly more cost -effective per pound of weight loss.12 Family -based weight loss programs  
also convey additional health benefits beyond weight loss, such as improvements in cardio -
metabolic risk factors13 and health related quality of life.14,15 
 
Study Summary  
Family -based treatment (FBT) is a behavioral weight control intervention that target s children with 
overweight/obesity and their parents,16-18 and has the capacity to improve the weight status of non -
targeted family members such as siblings.19 FBT has significant positive effects on body weight in 
children for up to 10 -years of follow -up,20,21 and a robust relationship is observed between child and 
parent outcomes.22,23 FBT’s concurrent care of two generations of obesity in the family is more 
efficacious and cost -effective than if parents and children are treated separately.12 Despite its 
recognized efficacy, FBT is mainly available in specialty clinics13,16,24 and many children fail to receive 
this evidence -based level of treatment,25-28 as recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force. 25-28 Primary care offers an optimal setting  for delivery of FBT by capitalizing on the 
established relationship between primary care providers and families.29 Using behavioral 
interventionists co -located within the primary care setting overcomes barriers posed by 
fragmentation of care, and lack of provider time and training. One of the challenges to integrating 
childhood obesity treatment into primary care is optimizing limited health care resources. In 
behavioral weight loss programs, some individuals learn diet, physical activity, and behavior cha nge 
information quickly, while others learn more slowly. Individuals also differ in their ability to 
implement treatment recommendations due to individual differences, such as problems with 
Page 10 of 305 
 delaying gratification. FBT accommodates these individual differen ces by using a personalized 
system of instruction, or a mastery model, in which the content and dose of treatment is calibrated 
to the needs of the family, ensuring that treatment effort is consistent with need. This multi -site, 
clinical trial aims to eval uate over a two -year period the effectiveness of FBT delivered by a trained 
behavioral interventionist co -located within primary care compared to usual care alone (UC). 
Participants will be a representative sample of 528 families with a 6 -12-year -old child  with 
overweight/obesity and a participating parent with overweight/obesity. Weight changes in 
approximately 228 siblings with overweight/obesity and between 2 -18 years of age will also be 
studied. Additionally, this study provides the opportunity to explo re factors important to successful 
implementation of FBT in a primary care setting. Provider attitudes, such as those related to 
evidence -based practices in general30 as well as their specific perceptions of FBT,31 may predict their 
intended use of co -located FBT,31 as intentions are reliable predictors for future behavior.32,33 
 
Scientific Rationale  
Obesity in youth has tripled in the last 30 years, a trend that is particularly disturbing because the 
majority of youth with obesity remain obese as adults. Because childhood obesity is associated with 
increased risk of adult cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and type 2 
diabetes, improved access to evidence -based treatments is vital. Many organizations are responding 
to the demand f or services by implementing programs for childhood obesity. However, obesity care 
is currently dominated by high -intensity behavioral treatment implemented in specialty clinics or by 
less effective, low - intensity treatments implemented in primary care. Ef fective family -based 
treatment delivered within primary care, matching national recommendations, has never been 
evaluated in a randomized, controlled trial. If we can demonstrate effectiveness in this setting, we 
will be establishing for the first time tha t childhood obesity can be addressed by trained behavioral 
interventionists in a setting that provides routine access to large numbers of children with obesity 
without requiring the intense environment of a specialty clinic. Moreover, by studying 
approxima tely 228 siblings with obesity in our initial secondary aim, we are asking a seminal 
question about whether the “family” component of FBT translates into benefits for family members 
not directly participating in the program. Affirmative evidence regarding this question will suggest 
multiple avenues of future research that have the potential to reorder our thinking about how best 
to implement cost -effective family -based obesity programs. The proposed study continues our 
efforts to translate FBT for widesprea d implementation and dissemination for treatment of children 
with overweight or obesity and families into primary care settings. It aims to shift current research 
and clinical practice paradigms by demonstrating the effectiveness of delivering FBT within p rimary 
care using a behavioral health provider who is co -located in a primary care setting.  
 
V. Study Design  
 
Description of Study Design  
The study is an individually randomized group treatment (IRGT) 34 trial such that the individual, in this 
case the family , is the unit of randomization. It differs from a classic individually randomized trial in that 
the intervention is either a group intervention or conducted by an agent responsible for implementing 
the intervention in a defined set of individuals. The PLAN  study will evaluate the effectiveness of family 
based treatment (FBT) delivered by a coach versus usual care (UC) treatment delivered by primary care 
providers. Both FBT and UC will be delivered in pediatric offices. In PLAN, participants are randomized a t 
the family level and only one eligible child (the index child) is included in the primary outcome analysis. 
The trial will enroll up to 1284 subjects from 528 randomized families at four sites, each having at least 
one overweight/obese participating chil d age 6 -12 and at least one participating parent. Since the study 
Page 11 of 305 
 has four sites with three coaches per site, the analysis plan involves a nesting of the coach within the site. 
Some sites have backup and floating coaches that are involved in delivering FBT  to study participants, 
which will also be accounted for when outcome data is analyzed ( This change was made on 12.4.18 
prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.18.19 ). While this 
nesting suggests a classic cluster ran domized trial, an IRGT trial is different because the nesting applies 
only to the intervention group.   Since the UC group has no nesting factor in this IRGT trial, a proper 
analysis must reflect the fact that the FBT group and the UC group must use differe nt covariance 
structures. In addition to one participating child and parent from each family, the sample will also 
include up to 228 overweight/obese siblings and non -participating parents who will not be direct 
recipients of the intervention. There will b e two years of follow -up with comprehensive assessments at 
baseline, 6, 12, 18 and 24 months. The primary outcome is percent over BMI at 24 months in the child. 
Our primary hypothesis is that the FBT intervention will be superior to UC alone in the partici pating child 
(DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18).  
 
Outcome and Objectives  
This study will test between -group differences in child ( Primary Specific Aim 1 ) weight change, as well as 
weight change in parents ( Secondary Aim 1 ), siblings with overweight/obesity ( Secondary Aim 2 ), 
changes in parent and child delay of gratification and how changes in delay of gratification are related to 
parent and child weight changes ( Secondary Aim 3 ), participant level predictors of treatment success 
(Secondar y Aim 4 ), and how provider attitudes toward evidence -based treatment and perceptions of FBT 
may relate to their intention to use co -located FBT in their practices in the future ( Exploratory Aim 1 ). 
Establishing that FBT can be effectively implemented withi n real world settings is crucial to creating a 
system by which children and their families who suffer from obesity can be treated in a centralized 
primary care setting (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18). To investigate the discussions 
between PLAN F BT coaches and their PLAN FBT families regarding perception of food cost and food 
choices PRE and POST COVID. (Exploratory Aim 2)  (DSMB requested protocol addenda, 9.22.20).  
 
 
Study Organization and Roles and Responsibilities  
This project continues long -standing collaborations between study PIs: Drs. Epstein, Wilfley, and 
Schechtman, and an enhanced partnership from prior professional associations with Drs. Cook and 
Eneli. The organizational structure includes a Clinical Coordinating Center, a Data Coordin ating 
Center, and four clinical sites (see Figure 1  below).  
 
Page 12 of 305 
 FIGURE 1. Study Organization Chart  
 
1. Study Executive Committee (SEC)  
Members of the SEC will include Drs. Epstein, Schechtman, and Wilfley. The three PIs will 
alternate responsibility for the de velopment of SEC meeting agendas and will co -lead regular 
meetings throughout the study. The SEC will be responsible for decision -making related to the 
overall scientific conduct of the study and monitoring the overall progress of the study to ensure 
timel y study completion. In addition, the SEC will be responsible for final approval of the study 
protocol and for any changes to the developed protocol, all of which will be documented in 
writing as part of the SEC minutes. Throughout the study, the PIs will c ommunicate weekly by 
teleconference to make decisions on the scientific direction of the grant (e.g., data collection, 
data analysis) and guidance regarding study procedures. Daily decisions about the project will be 
made by email and phone as needed.  
 
2. Steering Committee  
The PIs and Co -Is will form a Steering Committee (Drs. Epstein, Wilfley, Schechtman, Cook, Eneli, 
and Quattrin) that will manage the oversight and coordination of project management, research 
administration, publications and data sharing, a nd integration of all resources needed for the 
project. The University at Buffalo will subdivide the award funds and each PI will be responsible 
for their own budget. The Steering Committee will oversee decisions on minor changes in 
research direction and have the authority to reallocate funds and resources among PIs. Dr. 
Epstein will be first to serve as Chair of the Steering Committee and be responsible for 
communication among PIs and Co -Is, including meeting schedules and agendas. The position of 
Chair w ill rotate among the PIs on a yearly basis. Dr. Epstein will be designated the contact PI 

Page 13 of 305 
 and be responsible for submitting all necessary documents to NIH, including IRB approvals and 
annual progress reports. The Steering Committee will meet as needed and at least on a 
quarterly basis by phone to discuss study -related decisions and to evaluate the overall scientific 
conduct of the study.  
 
3. Clinical Coordinating Center (CCC)  
Located within the University at Buffalo and directed by Dr. Epstein, PI, with Dr. Te resa Quattrin, 
Co-I, the CCC will be responsible for study oversight, including developing the treatment and 
assessment protocol, study website development, and coordination and monitoring of study 
procedures and progress across sites. Dr. Quattrin is expe rienced in overweight assessment and 
treatment in the primary care setting and will provide general medical guidance to the study as 
well as oversee the evaluation and adjudication of adverse event reports.  
 
4. Training and Fidelity Core (TFC)  
The TFC will be  housed at Washington University in St. Louis. Dr. Wilfley will serve as PI for the 
TFC. Dr. Wilfley will provide leadership to the TFC and will be responsible for the content and 
integrity of behavioral interventionist training activities and implementati on of the intervention 
across all clinical sites. The TFC will conduct the trainings and will supervise the interventionists 
to ensure adherence to the treatment protocol during the training and active treatment phases 
of the study.  
 
5. Data Coordinating Cent er (DCC)  
The DCC will also be housed at Washington University in St. Louis under the direction of Dr. 
Schechtman as PI. The DCC will provide scientific, organizational, statistical, quality control, and 
operational leadership in support of the present stud y. Dr. Schechtman has directed many NIH -
funded DCCs and has served as head of the DCC for a weight loss maintenance study for which 
Dr. Wilfley was PI and Dr. Epstein was Co -I. 
 
6. Clinical Sites  
Dr. Wilfley will serve as PI for the St. Louis, Missouri clinic al site. Dr. Epstein, will serve as the PI 
for the Buffalo, New York clinical site with Dr. Teresa Quattrin serving as Co -I. Dr. Quattrin is 
experienced in overweight assessment and treatment in the primary care setting and will 
provide general medical gui dance to the study team. She will also evaluate adverse event 
reports to determine appropriate disposition. Two additional clinical sites in Rochester, New 
York and Columbus, Ohio will be directed by Drs. Stephen Cook and Ihuoma Eneli, respectively. 
Drs. C ook and Eneli will serve as PIs for their clinical sites and will be primarily responsible for 
recruitment of practices and oversight of study -related processes within these practices (see 
Figure  2 below).  
 
 
 
  
Page 14 of 305 
 FIGURE  2. Clinical Site Organization  
 
Addit ional Committees  
 
1. Safety Monitoring Committee  
The Safety and Monitoring Committee (SMC), chaired by Dr. Teresa Quattrin, will oversee the 
assessment and reporting of adverse events (AE), serious adverse events (SAE), and 
unanticipated problems (UP). The SM C will be responsible for evaluating adverse event reports 
from the DCC and determining appropriate disposition.  Additional members include: Drs. 
Ihuoma Eneli and Rebecca Campo.  
 
2. Interventionist Committee  
The Interventionist Committee, co -chaired by Dr. Leonard Epstein and Colleen Kilanowski, will 
meet on a monthly basis to discuss participant progress in the intervention and to trouble -shoot 
areas of concern (e.g., non -compliance to treatment). Each clinical site will be represented by a 
lead interventio nist who will summarize site progress with the project coordinators and chairs of 
the Interventionist Committee.   Additional members include: Dr. Rebecca Campo, Gracie 
Matychak, Megan Dahlman, Andrea Goard, and Sarah Kruger.  
 
3. Recruitment and Retention Com mittee  
The Recruitment and Retention Committee, chaired by Dr. Ihuoma Eneli, will oversee accrual 
milestones related to the recruitment and retention of families in the study. The Committee will 
monitor and communicate recruitment and retention strategies across sites and will make site -
specific recommendations based on recruitment reports from the DCC.  Additional members 
include: Drs. Charlotte Pratt and R. Robert Welch.  
 
4. Quality Control and Measurement Committee  
The Quality Control Committee, chaired by Dr. Denise Wilfley, will oversee the accuracy and 
completeness of computerized data, the common administration of protocols across sites, 
adherence to protocol requirements, and training and certification of study staff in assessment 
procedures and data co llection.  Additional members include: Nasreen Moursi, and Peter Dore.  
 

Page 15 of 305 
 5. Ancillary Study Committee  
The Ancillary Study Committee, chaired by Dr. Stephen Cook, will oversee the submission 
process for ancillary study proposals and will evaluate the feasibilit y of these proposals in regard 
to their cost, impact on IRB protocols, and burden to participants. The Committee will meet 
monthly to review proposals and will provide recommendations to the Steering Committee.  
Additional members include: Drs. Charlotte P ratt and Rebecca Campo.  
 
6. Publication and Presentations Committee  
The Publication and Presentation Committee, chaired by Dr. Kenneth Schechtman, will be 
responsible for defining publication policies, prioritizing if multiple papers and abstracts challenge 
resources, and encouraging the involvement of junior investigators in the dissemination of study 
results. This Committee will oversee the creation of a publications and presentations database that 
will facilitate the tracking of completed publications and t he notification of abstract due dates and 
pending timelines for preparing material for publications and presentations.  Additional members 
include: Doctors Leonard Epstein, Denise Wilfley, Stephen Cook, Ihuoma Eneli, and Nancy Geller. All 
proposed publicat ions will be disseminated to the Publication and Presentation Committee, and 
forwarded to Colleen Kilanowski and Alexandria Phipps for proper filing of documents.  
 
Study Timeline  
The first 12 months of the study will be devoted to study organization and t raining of staff in their 
research and clinical functions (see Table 1 ). Website development will occur in order to facilitate 
training and initiate recruitment and study implementation. Behavioral interventionists called PLAN 
coaches and study support sta ff will be hired and fully trained in their roles. PLAN coaches will 
attend a live training at WU led by the TFC and will also utilize online and printed materials. 
Recruitment of study participants utilizing the research match design will also begin, as i t entails 
passive collection of information from families interested in participating in studies aimed at weight 
loss. Active recruitment will begin in month 16 and will continue through month 30. It is expected 
that all 528 families across all of the prac tices will be enrolled during this time period. Treatment 
initiation will also begin in month 17, as recruitment allows, and will continue through month 54. 
This will allow all participants recruited by month 31 to finish two years of treatment and final 
assessments. Months 55 -60 will be used for study closeout and data analysis.  
 
TABLE 1. Study Timeline  
 
Study Activity  Study Months  
Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
1-6 7-12 13-18 19-24 25-30 31-36 37-42 43-48 49-54 55-60 
Planning & Data Base 
Development  X          
Web Development  X X         
Interventionist Hiring & Training  X X         
Piloting & Participant 
Recruitment    X X X      
Treatment Delivery    X X X X X X X  
Data Monitoring Reports     X X X X X X X 
Data Analysis          X X 
Study Closeout           X 
 
Page 16 of 305 
 II. Study Procedures and Schedule  
Study procedures will be carried out within primary care practices. The general roles and responsibilities 
of: 1) the PIs at the four clinical sites; 2) the administrators and providers at participating practices; 3) 
the PLAN coaches; and 4) the families r andomized to the two conditions are summarized in the sections 
that follow. An overview of study flow is provided in following sections as well as in Figure 1  in Appendix 
D.  
 
Recruitment  
 
1. Participants  
Families will be recruited from pediatric practices in our Practice -based Research Networks 
(PBRNs) in several ways. Each practice will have children who meet age, height, and weight 
criteria flagged in their charts, and we will use multiple approaches to recruit families. First, we 
will establish a ResearchMatch approach to recruiting in each PBRN. ResearchMatch, an online 
recruitment tool, will accrue families in one of two ways. At intake for a well - or sick -child visit, 
forms designed to acquaint famili es with the study will be introduced by PLAN coaches, and 
families can sign up for additional information about this study. Their information will be 
entered into a database by the PLAN coaches, and they will be contacted if they meet criteria. In 
addition , we will set up a website that they will be directed to in a flyer, and they can sign up to 
participate from the website. Since the pediatrician generally will not have information on 
parental health, this will need to be collected prior to deciding study  eligibility, and the family 
database will assist in this endeavor by including information about all family members after a 
phone screen is conducted by the PLAN coaches with the participating parent. Second, PBRN 
practices post study advertisement at off ices for interested families to visit the study website to 
complete questionnaires to ensure they meet eligibility criteria. If the families meet eligibility 
criteria, a PLAN coach will follow up with the families to schedule their first appointment at the ir 
earliest convenience. At this appointment, the PLAN coach will confirm the families’ interest to 
participate and eligibility prior to participation. Third, Plan coaches will meet with families 
during well -child visits to introduce the study, assess thei r interest, and explain next steps. Each 
of these methods in collecting their information regarding interest and eligibility will be 
preceded by getting their verbal consent over the phone or a check box indicated on the web 
pages.  
 
During recruitment, PLA N coaches will explain that there is a 50/50 possibility of getting one 
treatment over the other treatment. This will be like a flip of the coin and no one can just pick 
one treatment or the other. This study is testing if the FBT is as good as the care pr ovided by 
their doctors normally given or better. Randomization will occur after the first appointment.  
 
 
Inclusion Criteria  
The PLAN study inclusion criteria and methods for assessing these criteria are summarized in 
Table 2 . The screening surveys and mea sures may be found in Appendix B . 
 
TABLE 2. PARTICIPANT INCLUSION CRITERIA  
Participant  Inclusion Criteria  Measurement  
Targeted Child  Between the ages of 6 and 12 years1 Initial Eligibility Survey2 
BMI above the 85th percentile for age and sex  Initial Eligibility Survey3 
Page 17 of 305 
 At least one parent with overweight or obesity (BMI>25) 
who is willing to participate  Initial Eligibility Survey  
Able to speak and comprehend English at a first grade 
level  Eligibility Phone Screen (This 
change was made on 11.9.17 
prior to review and approval 
by the DSMB, DSMB approved 
protocol addenda on 11.2.18)  
Resides with targeted parent at least 50% of the time4 Eligibility Phone Screen  
Supplemental evaluation of eligibility as needed  PCP Medical Clearance Form  
Targeted Parent  (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18)  Initial Eligibility Survey5 (DSMB 
approved protocol addenda, 
11.2.18)  
Agrees to attend all treatment meetings  Eligibility Phone Screen  
Able to speak and comprehend English at a first grade 
level  Eligibility Phone Screen , WRAT 
(This change was made on 
11.9.17 prior to review and 
approval by the DSMB, DSMB 
approved protocol addenda on 
11.2.18)  
Must be targeted child’s biological or adoptive parent or 
legal guardian  Eligibility Phone Screen  
Supplemental evaluation of eligibility as needed  PCP Medical Clearance Form  
Sibling (if 
applicable)  Between the ages of 2 and 18 years6 Eligibility Phone Screen 2 
BMI above the 85th percentile for age and sex  Eligibility Phone Screen 3 
Must reside with targeted child and parent  Eligibility Phone Screen  
(This change was made on 11.9.17 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol 
addenda on 11.2.18 ) 1If family has two children between the ages of 6 and 12 years, it will be encour aged that 
the older sibling be the primary participant, as it is more likely the older sibling will serve as a role -model for the 
younger sibling; 2Calculate age using screen date and birth date; 3BMI Percentile Calculator: 
https://nccd.cdc.gov/dnpabmi/calculator.aspx ; 4If 50/50 split, it will be encouraged that non -targeted parent sign 
an agreement to be supportive of study goals and to allow contact from study team; 5BMI: 
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/assessing/bmi/adult_bmi/english_bmi_calculator/bmi_calculator.html ; 6In 
families where more than one eligible sibling is a vailable, we will enroll the sibling whose age is closest to that of 
the study child.  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
The PLAN study exclusion criteria and methods for assessing these criteria are summarized 
in Table 3 . The screening surveys and measures, including a table of exclusionary 
medications, may be found in Appendix B . 
 
TABLE 3. PARTICIPANT EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Participant  Exclusion Criteria  Measurement  
Targeted Child 
and/or Parent  Concussion in the last 3 months1 Initial Eligibility Survey  
 
Planning to move away from the area within the next 2 
years  Initial Eligibility Survey  
Page 18 of 305 
 Pregnant or is planning on becoming pregnant during the 
two-year study period  Eligibility Phone Screen  
Participation to any degree in weight -
management/weight -loss program2 Eligibility Phone Screen  
Weight -related surgeries (e.g., gastric bypass) within the 
last two years. (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 
11.2.18)  Eligibility Phone Screen  
Weight -affecting medications known to cause weight gain 
or loss if at current dose for < 6 months  Eligibility Phone Screen  
Medications affecting growth (e.g., systemic 
corticosteroids 2+ weeks in the past year, insulin, oral 
hypoglycemics, thyroid hormone, growth hormone)  Eligibility Phone Screen  
Medical condition altering nutritional status or intestinal 
absorption (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, diabetes 
and taking insulin)  Eligibility Phone Screen  
Medical condition that affects growth (i.e., genetic or 
metabolic disease/syndrome associated with obesity)  Eligibility Phone Screen  
Chronic medical conditions, including: Type 1 diabetes, 
heart disease or heart failure, HIV or AIDS, muscular 
dystrophy, renal diseases, hypothyroidism (if untreated or 
if treated with medication for <6 months)  Eligibility Phone  Screen  
Severe restriction of diet that would inhibit family from 
reasonably following the Traffic Light Eating Plan  Eligibility Phone Screen  
Significant developmental delays, intellectual disabilities, 
or Autism Spectrum Disorder  Eligibility Phone Screen  
Unmanaged/active psychiatric conditions (e.g., binge 
eating disorder or schizophrenia) meeting full DSM -5 
criteria or impairing clinical symptoms (e.g., suicidality)  Child: PSC, QEWP -5 (Child 
Self-Report & Parent Report 
of Child ), KSADS if warranted  
Parent: PHQ, SCID if 
warranted  
Disability that prevents performance of physical activity at 
the level of a brisk walk  PCP Medical Clearance Form  
PSC=Pediatric Symptom Checklist; QEWP -5=Questionnaire on Eating and Weight Patterns; KSADS=Kiddie Schedule 
for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia; PHQ=Patient Health Questionnaire; SCID=Structured Clinical Interview 
for DSM Disorders; 1Eligible once 3 m onths since concussion passes; 2Eligible if willing to stop program.  
 
2. Primary Care Pediatric Practices  
Practice recruitment will begin during the planning stage of the study (see Table 4. PLAN with families 
Study Gantt Chart). Each clinical site is responsible for recruiting appropriate numbers of practices to 
ensure participant recruitment goals can be met . Given differing practice and caseload sizes across sites, 
the number of practices recruited may vary across each site. As a minimum benchmark, by July 1 2017, 
all sites must have identified sufficient pediatric practices to give them access to a minimum of 3303 
children with overweight or obesity, or a minimum of 9714 total children study -wide (assuming a 34% 
prevalence rate of overweight/obesity). This number was identified assuming 57.1% of children with 
overweight/obesity will have a parent with overwe ight/obesity based upon 1286 families with an age -
eligible overweight/obese child in a screening database maintained by Dr. Epstein in Buffalo, in which 
734 (57.1%) had at least one obese parent. It is estimated that 10% of these families will express 
Page 19 of 305 
 willingness to participate in the study. This estimate is based on previous experience of the former study 
Co-I Dr. Jane Garbutt as she ran a recent trial assessing an asthma intervention for families recruited 
from a primary care setting. Dr. Garbutt’s study was low intensity and she described a 20% uptake rate. 
Given the intensity of our intervention, a more conservative 10% is estimated. Additionally, after 
agreeing to be screened, it is estimated that only 70% of willing families will meet eligibility crite ria 
and/or will decide they are interested in participating. This estimate is based on the recent COMPASS 
trial conducted by Dr. Wilfley, which found that approximately 66% of families that attended a study 
orientation meeting entered the study. It is beli eved our rate will be slightly higher, as participation in 
the study will begin soon after study orientation, whereas families in the COMPASS trial generally did 
not initiate treatment right away due to the cohort nature of the study.  
Gantt Chart Updated , (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18).  
 
Additionally, given the recruitment goal for minority families, all sites must have access to a minimum of 
826 (30%) minority children with overweight or obesity, or 2,429 total minority children must be 
availa ble study -wide. (Table 5. DCVS Accrual Milestones below).  
 
 
 
 1 11 21 31 41 51 61 71Study Website development
DCC designs and finalizes data forms
DCC develops and tests database
DCC trains and certifies personnel on data collection
Recruitment of Pediatric Practices
TFC trains & certifies interventionists
Planning & Data Base Development
DCC creates forms/dataset manual
Families are recruited and randomized
Treatment delivery/data/collection/quality control
DCC prepares regular study reports
DCC conducts data audits
Data Monitoring Reports
DCC conducts data audits
Data analysis
Study closeout
Time  from begininng of study(in months)Study ActivityPLAN with Families Study Gantt Chart
Page 20 of 305 
  
MAP Updated, (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18).  
 
Screening  
At the initiation of the screening process, the participating parent will complete the Initial Eligibility 
Survey in person, over the phone, or online via REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) with the 
assistance of the PLAN coach or Research Support Specialist. The survey will gather preliminary 
eligibility criteria including height, weight, and age. If eligible bas ed on this survey, a PLAN coach will 
contact the parent to discuss the study in further detail and to answer any questions the parent may 
have. The PLAN coach will obtain the parent’s verbal consent to continue with the screening process 
and will then comp lete the Eligibility Phone Screen, which gathers additional information on medical 
and psychiatric history for both parent and child. For families found to meet eligibility criteria on 
both the Initial Eligibility Survey and the Eligibility Phone Screen, a n orientation appointment will be 
scheduled following the Phone Screen, to complete the process of determining eligibility to 
participate in the study.  
 

Page 21 of 305 
 Prior to the orientation appointment, the parent and child will complete survey questionnaires via 
REDC ap, including the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ), Pediatric Symptom Checklist (PSC), and 
Questionnaire on Eating and Weight Patterns Parent Report of Child (QEWP -5). These 
questionnaires assess for symptoms of eating disorders and other psychiatric dis orders (e.g., 
depression, anxiety, and substance abuse). If the respondent’s scores are above clinical cut -offs on 
these questionnaires, they will be flagged in REDCap and a PLAN coach will follow -up with the 
parent over the phone prior to the orientation appointment to further assess for the presence of 
eating disorders or other psychopathology by administering the relevant modules of the Structured 
Clinical Interview for DSM Disorders (SCID) and Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and 
Schizophrenia (K SADS). A score of “Yes, present” for any of the psychiatric conditions assessed by 
these semi -structured clinical interviews will prompt the PLAN coach to inquire about any current or 
past treatment to gauge impairment level. This information will be enter ed into the Eligibility 
Tracking Form.  
 
Each week, the clinical site PI, with guidance from the doctoral -level psychologists on the study 
team as needed, will review participants flagged in this way and will make all final decisions 
regarding eligibility. If the parent or child only exhibits subthreshold symptoms of a disorder, the 
family will be eligible to participate assuming there are no impairing symptoms present (e.g., 
suicidality). If the parent or child meets full DSM -5 criteria for any psychiatric disorder, the family is 
ineligible to participate, and the PLAN coach will provide a referral for treatment to the family. Once 
the parent or child has been symptom -free for six months, the family is eligible to re -screen for 
enrollment into the study. The  Eligibility Tracking Form (see Appendix B ) will be completed to 
document the process by which each participant’s eligibility or ineligibility is determined  
 
 (This change was made on 11.9.17 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved 
protoco l addenda on 11.2.18). The pediatrician or parent’s physician will be contacted if information 
about the family meeting inclusion or exclusion criteria is needed. Families will be asked to provide a 
standard form requesting information about the patient’s current specified medical condition, and 
to forward or have the PCP send the form to site clinical PI.  
 
Consenting Process  
 
All participants will meet with a trained study staff member and will be consented following the Manual 
of Procedures of the Univers ity at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB), the IRB of Record for the 
study.  Coaches will file the paper consent forms in the following order:  
1. Child Assent  
2. Parental Permission for Child  
3. Parent Consent  
4. Sibling Assent 7 -13 
5. Sibling Assent 14 -17 
6. Adult Sibling Consent  
7. Parental Permission for Sibling  
8. Non-Participating Parent Consent  
9. Targeted Child – 7-13 Re -assent  
10. Targeted Child – 14-17 Re -assent  
11. Sibling – 7-13 Re -assent  
12. Sibling – 14-17 Re -assent  
13. Sibling – Adult – Re-consent  
Page 22 of 305 
 14. Coronavirus Addendum  
 
a. Example consent/assent templates for all study participants are included in Appendix A.  
 
1. Family Consent  
Families who are eligible for the study will meet with a trained study staff member and will be 
given written and verbal information about the study. Fu ll disclosure of the purpose of the 
study, the benefits and risks to individuals who participate, and the confidential nature of 
information obtained during the study will be explained to participants. Families will be aware 
from the outset that they will be randomly assigned to an active treatment condition (FBT) or a 
usual care control condition (UC) following baseline assessment completion. They will also be 
aware that their expected participation will be 2 years and may require anywhere from 26 to 96 
sessions of FBT. Families will be informed of alternative lifestyle change resources available to 
them, such as physical activity programs or sports teams for youth at the YMCA or other 
organizations, other commercially available child fitness or weight loss  programs, or pediatric 
dieticians or fitness trainers, and if so desired, referrals will be made. Potential participants will 
also be informed that they may drop out at any time during the study and that their withdrawal 
from the study will in no way impa ct their ability to receive medical care through their primary 
care practice. The staff member will answer any questions the family has about the study, and 
then participants will be consented according to the policies and procedures of the UBIRB  
 
Each cap able parent 18 -years or older will sign the consent form for himself/herself and will also 
sign the parent permission form, which provides consent for his/her child age 6 -12 to 
participate. In addition, the parent will sign a separate permission form that provides consent 
for participating siblings (i.e., a sibling who is overweight/obese) age 2 -17 to participate. Older 
siblings will sign assent forms, which will be written and explained at a reading level appropriate 
for the child population. Non -participa ting parents and siblings who are 18 years of age will sign 
their own consent form. A copy of the signed consent, permission, and assent forms and study 
staff contact information will be given to the potential participants, and all original forms will be 
kept in the participant’s confidential research record. Participants will also be asked to give 
written consent for the PLAN coach to audio record their treatment sessions so the study team 
can assess adherence to the treatment protocol; however, participan ts will not be excluded 
from the study if they refuse audio recording. In our experience, less than 1% of participants 
refuse audio recording.  
 
Since the children involved directly (as targeted children) and indirectly (as siblings) will mature 
throughout the course of their time in the PLAN program, a PLAN Coach or Measurement Coach 
will re -assent and re -consent impacted children using assent and consent forms that explain 
their participation using age appropriate language. The re -assenting and consenting processes 
will take place at the next assessment appointment after they age into a new category. Example 
consent/re -assent templates for impacted children are included in Appendix A (This change was 
made on 7.25.19 prior to review and approval by the DSMB,  DSMB approved protocol addenda, 
10.25.19 ). 
  
 
2. Primary Care Provider Consent  
Since we are interested in  primary care  providers’ knowledge of evidence -based treatments as 
well as their attitudes toward and their satisfaction with the treatment conditions im plemented 
Page 23 of 305 
 within their practices, we plan to collect basic demographic data (e.g., age, years in practice, 
highest degree obtained) and responses to self -report questionnaires from the physicians 
providing UC to the participating families. Primary care  providers willing to participate in this 
research will sign a consent form that outlines the purpose of their participation in providing 
research data, the benefits and risks to individuals who participate, and the confidential nature 
of information obtained.  Participation in the research portion is completely optional and a 
decision not to participate will in no way affect their role as a care provider on the study nor 
their current job status, which will be clearly outlined in the consent form. A trained stu dy staff 
member will answer any questions the primary care provider has about his or her participation 
in the study (This change was made on 2.27.18 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB 
approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18).  
 
3. PLAN Coach Consent  
PLAN coaches will also be asked to participate in research designed to assess the delivery and 
implementation of FBT in the primary care setting through reporting of demographic data and 
responses to self -report questionnaires. As with the primary care prov iders, if they are willing 
participants, they will be asked to sign a consent form that outlines the purpose of their 
participation in providing research data, the benefits and risks to individuals who participate, 
and the confidential nature of informatio n obtained. Additionally, a separate section of the 
consent form will allow researchers access to FBT session recordings for analysis and reporting 
in future publications. While the monitoring of audio -recordings for training and quality control 
purposes w ill be part of the expected duties of the PLAN coaches, participation in the research 
portion (e.g., providing demographic information, and the use of audio recordings for data 
analysis and scientific publication purposes) is completely optional, and a dec ision not to 
participate will in no way affect their role as a PLAN coach on the study, which will be clearly 
outlined in the consent form. This consent form will be administered by a trained study staff 
member who will answer any questions the PLAN coach has about his or her participation in the 
study prior to the on -site training seminar.  
Additionally, PLAN coaches will be asked to participate in an audio -recorded semi -structured 
interview; interested coaches will provide consent over the phone and will b e asked a series of 
questions by a trained post -doctoral researcher on the study.  The questions are based on the 
coaches’ discussions with FBT families pre -COVID and amid -COVID regarding food cost, 
perception, and behaviors. The telephone interviews are v oluntary and will be completed based 
on the coaches’ availability. ( This change was made 7.13.20, DSMB approval  12.16.2020 ) 
  
 
 
Randomization  
The DCC will use the REDCap randomization module to create an online password protected 
randomization system that will facilitate the random assignment of families. When the website is 
entered, the user will provide information that establishes the eligibility of the family. Group 
assignments will be revealed only if all eligibility criteria are satisfied. To avoid te mporal bias, 
randomization will be blocked within clinic using random block sizes in order to preclude the 
possibility that investigators might know in advance the assignment of the last family in a particular 
block.  
Page 24 of 305 
  
Families who enroll in the study will be scheduled for a baseline assessment to gather preliminary 
study data. Following this visit, the family will be randomized and then informed of the treatment 
condition to which they have been assigned . A PLAN coach will follow up with families randomized  
to FBT to schedule the first FBT visit  (Session 0; This change was made on 9.18.17 prior to review and 
approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18). Ideally, all treatment sessions 
will take place in the pediatric practices. If there a re issues with space at the pediatric practices, FBT 
families can be seen at alternate locations (i.e., satellite office, university setting, etc.) for their 
weekly and assessment sessions. Usual care assessments can also be conducted at an alternate 
setti ng. (This change was made on 10.17.18 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB 
approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18)  
 
Participant randomization will begin November 2017 (This change was made on 11.9.2017 prior to 
review and approval by the DSMB,  DSMB  approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18)  and will go through 
August 15th, 2019 (This change was made on 6.6.19 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, 
DSMB approved protocol addenda on 9.29.19).  
 
36 families will be randomized each month of this period (9 fa milies per site) with the last three 
months (Sept. 2018 -Nov. 2018) decreasing to 32 families each month (8 families per site) in order to 
reach 528 families (132 families per site). It is estimated that 43.2% of randomized families will have 
an age - and we ight-eligible sibling; however, sibling recruitment goals will not be included in 
randomization benchmarks. This estimate is based upon unpublished data in which 163 of the 377 
screened families for a similar weight control program (43.2%) had at least one  age and weight -
eligible sibling.  
 
Randomization benchmarks will be overseen by the Recruitment and Retention Committee. The DCC 
will prepare a recruitment report for review by the Recruitment and Retention Committee each 
month indicating the number of ra ndomized total families and randomized minority families. If a 
clinical site is not meeting randomization benchmarks, the committee will make recommendations 
on how to improve their recruitment strategies such as identification of alternative sources of 
participants at the sites, the possible need for increased recruitment resources, more efficient use of 
existing resources, or the addition of new clinics at one or more site. An official review of 
randomization benchmarks will be conducted by the Study Exec utive Committee (SEC) and will occur 
quarterly at 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 100% of the accrual period. At these time points, if sites are 
not at 100% or more of their randomization targets, despite remediation efforts, recommendations 
to redistribute funds across sites may be made at the discretion of the Study Executive Committee 
to ensure study recruitment milestones are met.  
 
Assessments  
 
Participating parent and child weight will be measured at each major assessment (at baseline and every 
6 months), and weight will be assessed throughout FBT as part of a goal setting and reinforcement 
system by the blind assessors. Child height will also b e measured at each major assessment or as needed 
to determine progress (This change was made on 11.9.17 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, 
DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18).   Weight will be measured using a wireless, portable scale 
(SR Scal es, Tonawanda NY), calibration certified. Two weights for each participant will be taken 
according to a uniform protocol and will be written on hard copy measurement sheets. The handwritten 
weights will be manually entered into the REDCap database by a bli nded measurement coach, which will 
Page 25 of 305 
 eliminate potential measurement bias and minimize errors in data entry ( DSMB approved change, 
11.18.19 ). Height will be measured using the portable stadiometer HM200P PortStad by the Charder 
manufacturing company within t he pediatric practices (This change was made on 4.6.17 prior to review 
and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18).  Hard copy height and weight 
measurement forms will be uploaded to the secure REDCap database to allow the CCC, DCC  and TFC to 
check for transcription and/or unit of measurement errors. All assessors will be provided with the height 
and weight protocol (see Height and Weight Measurement in Appendix C ) in order to ensure that 
participants are being measured accurately a nd consistently and we will retain the written record of 
participant height and weight, as well. On the basis of height and weight, BMI is calculated according to 
the following formula: BMI = kg/m2. Children will be considered overweight at or above the 85 th BMI 
percentile for their age and sex.35 Parents will be considered overweight if their BMI is greater than or 
equal to 25 kg/m2, and obese if their BMI is greater than or equal to 30.36 
 
In line with Secondary Aim 1, overweight sibling height and weight  will also be assessed at each 
major assessment time point in the same manner described above. Alternatively, parents also have 
the option to give consent for assessors to review the non -participating sibling(s)’s medical records 
to access height and weigh t data (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18).   Additionally, non -
participating parent and other sibling heights and weights will be assessed at each major assessment 
time point if feasible.  
 
Delay discounting will be assessed at baseline and again at 1 2 and 24 months through use of a brief 
computer task administered via REDCap on a laptop. Additionally, baseline predictors of treatment 
outcome will be assessed, specifically, parental inconsistency in rewards and environmental 
enrichment of the home. Dat a will be collected using self -report questionnaires designed to assess 
these constructs administered on -line via REDCap (see Appendix C ). Finally, for the FBT group, 
treatment adherence will be measured throughout the study by treatment session attendance  and 
completion of diet and physical activity self -monitoring in habit books or specialized mobile 
applications.  
 
Participant Timeline  
 
1. Enrollment/Baseline  
Families who are eligible for the study will meet with a trained study staff member and will be 
given written and verbal information about the study. Full disclosure of the purpose of the 
study, the benefits and risks to individuals who participate, and the confidential nature of 
information obtained during the study will be explained to participants . Families will be aware 
from the onset that they will be randomly assigned to an active treatment condition (FBT) or a 
Usual Care (UC) control condition following baseline questionnaire completion. They will also be 
aware that their expected participation  will be 2 years and may require anywhere from 26 
sessions to 96 sessions of FBT if randomized to that condition. The study staff member will 
answer any questions the family has about the study, and then participants will be consented 
according to the poli cies and procedures of the University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board 
(IRB), the IRB of Record for the study. Study staff will follow -up with families by phone to inform 
them of their randomization status and will schedule the first FBT visit for tho se families 
randomized to FBT. PLAN coaches will also send reminders for FBT visits to their families 
throughout the study to decrease missed appointments.  
 
Page 26 of 305 
 2. Follow -up 
Following baseline, families will be assessed at months 6, 12, 18, and 24. Links to brief  self-
report questionnaires via REDCap will be sent by study staff to all randomized families to 
complete prior to their assessment time point and families will be scheduled for assessment 
visits to collect height and weight measures and to complete the de lay discounting task (DD; at 
12 and 24 months only). Families will be greeted by the blinded PLAN coach or assessor at the 
practices to complete the DD computer task and collect heights and weights according to the 
protocols. Families will also have the op portunity to complete the REDCap questionnaires if they 
were unable to do so prior to the in -person assessment. Blinded PLAN coaches and assessors 
will complete all necessary forms and submit them into REDCap following this appointment. 
Families will be re minded of their next assessment in the series until it is the final visit.  Home 
visits can be arranged for assessment appointments if necessary, and will be attended by two 
PLAN staff members.   
 
3. Final Study Visit  
The final study visit will be conducted s imilarly to the previous measurement appointments, 
although families will not be scheduled for any additional appointments.  
 
4. Early Termination Visit  
Families that are terminated early will be notified by phone or an in -person meeting to relay the 
reason(s ) for the termination and provide any resources that would be available and 
appropriate. The families’ access to the website and data links will be eliminated.  
 
5. Unscheduled Visit  
PLAN coaches will be available to meet with families at the practices for sch eduled 
appointments. Should a family arrive at the practice without an appointment, the office staff 
will be instructed to encourage the family to notify their PLAN coach or assessor. The PLAN 
coach or assessor will follow up with the family by phone, emai l or text to confirm their next 
appointment or to schedule an alternate visit time and will then record the contact in the 
participant tracking form in REDCap.  
 
6. Schedule of Events  
See Table 4  below for an outline of events for study participants.  
 
 7.  Rem ote Assessments  
Due to the serious nature of Covid -19 and instructed social distancing, in person assessments 
and sessions are halted. Assessments and sessions will be held through University and Hospital 
approved platforms such as Zoom, Webex, and Skype for business. An instructional video will be 
sent to all PLAN participating families to show how to correctly measure height and weight at 
home with supplies sent from PLAN. Supplies will include a foldable yard stick, a scale and 
carpenters edge if the fa milies do not have access to one.  Remote assessment protocol and 
scripts have been included in Appendices on page 239.   
 
Table 4. Measurement Timeline  
Measures  Method  Time 
(min)  Examinee  Time point  
0 6 12 18 24 
Primary and Secondary Aim 1 Outcomes  
Page 27 of 305 
 Weight1 & Height  Scale and 
stadiometer  5 P,C,S, NPP  X X X X X 
Delay Discounting (Secondary Aim 2)  
Delay of Gratification  Computer Task  20 P,C X  X  X 
Participant Level Predictors (Secondary Aim 3)  
Parental Survey  Questionnaire  2 C X     
Environmental  Enrichment  Questionnaire  10 P X     
SAE/AE Survey  Questionnaire  5 P,C  X X X X 
Provider Level Predictors (Exploratory Aim)  
Attitudes towards Evidence -
Based Treatments  Questionnaire  5 PCP X     
Attributes of FBT2 Survey Questions  5 PCP   X   
Intended Adoption3 Questionnaire  1 PCP     X 
Participant and Provider Level Descriptors  
Family Demographics  Questionnaire  10 P, P c X     
Family Nutrition and 
Physical Activity ( DSMB 
approved protocol addenda, 
9.29.19 ). Questionnaire  
10 P X  X  X  
Participant Adherence to 
FBT Session Attendance1 NA P,C X X X X X 
Participant Acceptability  Client Satisfaction 
Questionnaire  5 P,C     X 
24 Month Survey  (DSMB 
approved protocol addenda, 
9.29.19 ). Questionnaire  
15 P,C     X 
Provider Demographics  Questionnaire  10 PCP X     
Provider Usual Care Survey  Questionnaire  10 PCP X    X 
Chart review  Questionnaire  -- Plan Coach      X 
Coach Demographics (This 
change was made on 
7.25.19 prior to review and 
approval by the DSMB, 
DSMB approved protocol 
addenda on 9.29.19).  Questionnaire  
5 PLAN 
Coach      X 
Coach Treatment 
Knowledge (This change 
was made on 7.25.19 prior 
to review and approval by 
the DSMB, DSMB approved 
protocol addenda on 
9.29.19).  Questionnaire  
10 PLAN 
Coach      X 
Coach Attitudes Toward 
Evidence Based Treatment 
(This change was made on Questionnaire  
10 PLAN 
Coach      X 
Page 28 of 305 
 7.25.19 prior to review and 
approval by the DSMB, 
DSMB approved protocol 
addenda on 9.29.19).  
Coach Attributes of FBT 
(This change was made on 
7.25.19 prior to review and 
approval by the DSMB, 
DSMB approved protocol 
addenda on 9.29.19).  Questionnaire  
5 PLAN 
Coach      X 
Total Time for Each Group  
Child  12 5 10 5 10 
Parent  55 5 10 5 15 
Provider  25 0 5 0 11 
PLAN Coach (This change was made on 7.25.19 prior to review and approval 
by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 9.29.19).  0 0 0 0 30 
 
II. Treatments  
 
Usual Care (UC)  
The usual care control group will consist of the care typically delivered by the family’s pediatrician 
for children with overweight or obesity. (This change was made on 11.9.17 prior to review and 
approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11. 2.18).  The implementation of UC 
may vary between physicians but typically include an assessment of the child’s weight, help 
removing barriers to weight loss, and introduction of goals for better weight management.  
 
Family -based Behavioral Weight Loss Treat ment (FBT)  
 
1. Introduction  
Each PLAN coach will provide FBT to families randomized to FBT. FBT utilizes behavior change 
techniques to target family -wide changes in diet and physical activity habits with the goal of 
promoting weight loss and subsequently heal thy weight maintenance in both the participating 
child and his or her parent. Preliminary evidence demonstrates effects may even extend to 
other family members not enrolled in the program. Due to social distancing as a result of Covid -
19, all participating  families will be shown an instructional video intended to aid in gathering 
reliable height measurements.  
 
2. Conceptual Components  
Dietary Goals  
Consume 1200 -1800 kcal/day  (This change was made on 4.6.17 prior to review and 
approval by the DSMB, DSMB approv ed protocol addenda on 11.2.18) . Increase fruit and 
vegetable consumption and decrease consumption of high energy dense and/or low 
nutrition density foods and beverages to help shape food preferences. Calories will be 
adjusted according to weight change wi thout reducing calories below 1000 to ensure 
essential calories are being met for a healthy diet 
(http://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/appendix -2/).  
 
Page 29 of 305 
 Physical Activity Goals  
90 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity each day for children and 60 
minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity 5 days per week for adults. Decrease 
time spent engaging in sedentary activities such as watching TV  and playing computer 
games to two hours or less per day (This change was made on 4.7.2017 prior to review 
and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18) . Information 
on achieving a healthy number of sleep hours each night will also b e given. Moderate to 
vigorous physical activity goals will be shaped and mastered at different increments.  
 
Behavior Change Tools  
Self-monitoring, goal setting, problem solving, stimulus control, positive parenting 
techniques such as the provision of incen tives for behavior change, assistance in 
reducing the need for immediate gratification using episodic future thinking (EFT) – a 
method for improving impulse control, and finding behavioral substitutes for highly 
reinforcing food. Families will have access to traditional paper and pencil self -
monitoring, and after self -monitoring skill is acquired, families can choose to use 
traditional or technology -based self -monitoring systems such as use of a FitBit or 
MyFitnessPal.  
 
Delay of Gratification  
The ability to  delay gratification can be quantified by delay discounting (DD), or the 
tendency to discount large future rewards for smaller, immediate rewards.37 Research 
suggests that children with obesity are more likely to choose a small immediate food 
reward over a  larger delayed food reward.38-40 Inconsistent parenting and less enriched 
environments also have a negative impact on ability to delay gratification. Thus, we use 
FBT to improve parental consistency to reduce DD, alter the shared family environment 
to red uce DD, and provide individual skills in parents and children to reduce DD.  
 
Social Facilitation Approaches  
Social facilitation approaches are designed to help families engage in social events and 
activities as alternate reinforcers to unhealthy eating and  activity behaviors. Participants 
are taught assertion and communication skills to improve their social interactions within 
their existing social networks and participants are encouraged to form new relationships 
that serve to support and reinforce healthy  behaviors. Additionally, children are 
coached on their abilities to deal with teasing to reduce negative social interactions.  
 
Educational Tools  
The Traffic Light Eating Plan and Food Reference Guide, which utilizes GREEN, YELLOW, 
and RED labels for food to guide families toward the goal of consuming low energy -
dense, high nutrient -dense foods will be used. Foods are assigned a traffic light color 
based on the average calories to obtain basic nutrients for each food group in the Food 
Guide Pyramid. For exa mple, if a serving of a vegetable is less than 60 kcals/serving it is 
a GREEN food, if it is between 60 -80 kcals/serving it is a YELLOW food, and if the 
vegetable is greater than 80 kcals/serving it is a RED food. Foods in the other food group 
categories a re designated YELLOW or RED based on how many calories it takes to 
provide nutrients for foods in that food group (vegetables are the only food group with 
GREEN food designations)  
 
Page 30 of 305 
 The Traffic Light Activity Program and Activity Reference Guide also utiliz e GREEN, 
YELLOW, and RED labels for different levels of caloric expenditure to guide families 
toward increasing physical activity and reducing sedentary behaviors. Sedentary 
activities, those that are 1.9 3 METS (Metabolic Equivalents) or less, are conside red RED 
activities, and the goal is to reduce them, particularly, screen time. YELLOW activities 
are 2.0 to 2.9 METS, equivalent to the lower end of MVPA (moderate to vigorous 
physical activity). Activities that are 3.0 METS or greater are considered GREEN  
activities. The goal is for child participants to obtain 90 minutes of MVPA per day and for 
parents to obtain 60 minutes of MVPA at least 5 days per week. Activities can include 
lifestyle behaviors (e.g., walking to school, biking with friends), or partic ipating in 
organized sports, but must be engaged in for bouts of at least 10 minutes.  
 
3. Mastery -Based FBT Level System41,42 
FBT will be implemented on an individual basis to adapt the dose of treatment to the individual 
participant needs. While adaptable, F BT “dose” will be consistent with the USPSTF 
recommendation of 26 or more hours of individualized, intensive intervention.13,43 The minimal 
FBT dose includes 8 weekly visits, 8 two times per month visits, and 6 monthly visits for the first 
year, and 4 quar terly visits for the second year of intervention. A mastery system will be used to 
ensure parent and child are reading and understanding the program materials. Families are 
encouraged to initiate behavior change at their pace, and are rewarded for incremen tal 
changes. The goal for all families is for children to show a reduction of percent over BMI of at 
least 10 percent.  
 
Mastery of program information recognizes that not everyone learns at the same rate. Master 
of program content includes five areas: 1) changes in individual diet and activity; 2) changes in 
the family; 3) changes in peer networks; 4) changes in community; and 5) relapse prevention. 
Instruction on parenting will be given throughout each section. Progression through treatment 
topics will be  based on mastery of treatment knowledge as demonstrated by scores of at least 
80% on quizzes related to the content of each unit. If scores of 80% are not achieved at the end 
of each unit, areas for remediation will be targeted and corrective feedback wil l be given until 
scores of 80% are obtained (multiple versions of unit quizzes will exist for this purpose).  
 
Changes in eating, activity and parenting are rewarded using a point system. Children and 
parents work independently toward their goals at their o wn pace.  They will focus on the 
behavioral goals in the areas in diet, physical activity and parent/child interactions as part of the 
reinforcement system.  The other supporting behaviors skills are encouraged through program 
materials, interactions with coaches, and parental praise.  Participants move toward the 
ultimate behavioral goals of FBT independently of each of the specific goals or other participant 
in the family (children and parents move at their own independent pace). The behavioral skills 
we are emphasizing have demonstrated success over traditional FBT through 1 -year follow -up.42 
These behavioral skills have demonstrated associations with weight loss and weight loss 
maintenance (e.g., changes in diet, monitoring, sleep44; episodic future thin king45-48; skills related 
to the family/home and social environment49; relapse prevention skills50,51).  Table 5 , displays the 
behavioral goals, and the frequency of sessions based on the families weight loss success. The 
bolded behaviors will be reinforce d with points, all others will be reinforced by praise.  
 
 
Page 31 of 305 
 MASTERY -BASED FBT BEHAVIORAL SKILLS LEVEL SYSTEM  
Session Frequency  
Session frequency will be determined solely by weight change1, as measured in each treatment session. In order to reduce 
session frequency, both parent and child must meet weight loss goals for 2 consecutive weeks. Any subsequent weight 
gain will result in an increase in session frequency until pattern of loss has been restored.  
Weight   Weekly  Bi-Weekly  Monthly  Quarterly  
Reduction in Percent Over 
BMI (C)  15%  Weight loss 
≥20%  Maintain weight 
loss ≥20%  Maintain weight 
loss ≥20%  
 
 Reduction in Percent of Total 
Body Weight (P)  10%  Maintain weight 
loss ≥10%  Maintain weight 
loss ≥10%  Maintain weight 
loss ≥10%  
Mastery Behaviors  
Mastery behaviors to be assigned by PLAN coach according to treatment protocol; families must demonstrate mastery 
(meeting goal 5 of 7 days) for 2 consecutive sessions in order to progress to next mastery level. Behaviors will be tracked 
via P & C Habit Books.  
Nutrition  Calorie Range  
total per day  1200 -18002 (This change was made 
on 4.6.17 prior to review and 
approval by the DSMB, DSMB 
approved protocol addenda on 
11.2.18 ). Adjusted3 
 GREEN Foods/Drinks  
total per day  2 3 4 ≥5 
 RED Foods/Drinks  
total per day  ≤10 ≤7 ≤4 ≤2 
Physical 
Activity 
(PA)  GREEN PA (C)  
minutes X days per week 
(DSMB approved protocol 
addenda, 11.2.18).  30x3  45x4  60x5  90x5  
 GREEN PA (P)  
minutes X days per week 
(DSMB approved protocol 
addenda, 11.2.18).  20x3  30x4  45x4  60x5  
Driving Behaviors  
Driving behaviors to be assigned by PLAN coach according to treatment protocol and individual needs. Targets listed reflect 
overall PLAN goals to be achieved through shaping; session goals will be assigned to progress from baseline to target.  
Parenting  
(This 
change was 
made on 
10.17.18 
prior to Praise  
times per day  1 2 3 4 
Stimulus Control  
times per week  1 2 3 4 
Daily Check In  
days per week  4 5 6 7 
Page 32 of 305 
 review and 
approval by 
the DSMB, 
DSMB 
approved 
protocol 
addenda on 
11.2.18)  Meal Planning  
days per week  2 3 4 5 
Weight 
Graph*  Graphing Weight (C)  2 days per week  
Graphing Weight (P)  7 days per week  
Nutrition  Dinner Prepared at Home  ≥3 days per week  
Routines  EFT Practice (P)  ≥5 times per week  
Recreational Screen Time  ≤2 hours per day or ≤15 hours per week (This change was made on 4.7.2017 
prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol 
addenda on 11.2.18)  
 
 Healthy Sleep Routines (C)  9-11 hours per night  
 Healthy Sleep Routines (P)  7-9 hours per night  
Social  Engaging in PA with Family  ≥3 times per week  
Engaging in Healthy Eating & 
PA with Friends  ≥3 times per week  
Accessing Healthful 
Community Eating & PA 
Resources  ≥3 times per week  
 
NOTES ON MASTERY -BASED FBT BEHAVIORAL SKILLS LEVEL SYSTEM:  
● C = child; P = parent; PA = physical activity; EFT = episodic future thinking  
● Weight percentages are a guide  
o Weight loss will be individualized based on initial participant weight and subsequent weight loss  
o 1Weight change will be assessed in reference to lowest measured weight (e.g., if loss in week 3 and gain in 
week 4, loss can only occur in week 5 if weight is below week 3 measurement)  
● Bolded behaviors will be reinforced by the point system  
● Calorie ranges individually assigned based on weight loss  
● 2Calo ries for weight loss will range from 1200 -1800 to promote 0.5 lb. loss for children and 1 lb. loss for parents 
each week  
● 3Adjusted  refers to adjustment of caloric intake (as monitored by coach) designed to maintain body weight in a 
healthier weight range  
● *Completing the weight graph involves having families weigh at home. If families do not have access to a home 
scale, the coach will lend them a commercial -grade scale for the duration of the study (This change was made on 
10.17.18 prior to review and appro val by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18) .  
● Specific and timely praise statements  
o Verbal praise statements  
o Physical gestures such as hugs  
Page 33 of 305 
 ● Stimulus control  
o Arranging the environment so triggers are less impactful (i.e., reducing cues for less healthy behaviors and 
increasing cues for healthy behaviors)  
o Number of stimulus control changes in the environment that were operating that week  
● Episodic future thinking practice  
o Practicing simulating future events when making decisions about small immediate rewards vs. larger 
delayed rewards  
 
Meeting behavioral goals is assessed by the FBT PLAN coach during sessions by reviewing parent 
and child daily habit books and a self - report FBT monitoring checklist completed by the parent 
that tracks behavi oral goal progress over the previous week. Weight loss is conjointly required, 
in addition to self -reported habit changes, to increase assurance in the accuracy of self -reported 
behavior changes. Since weight loss is related to these self -reported behavior al changes, we do 
not want to reinforce participants who report making the changes but who are not losing 
weight. In this way, participants who report behavioral changes are not moved to the next 
phase of session frequency unless they show expected weight loss. Likewise, participants who 
show weight loss but who do not report behavioral change will remain at the same session 
frequency until behavioral change meets mastery criteria. This is to ensure that behavioral skills 
that are known to promote weight lo ss and weight maintenance are acquired and maintained 
over time. Weight loss goals were selected based on literature demonstrating a 5 -10% loss in 
body weight yields clinically significant changes52,53; however, they may be individualized based 
on initial participant weight and subsequent weight loss. Participants will be moved from weekly 
sessions to biweekly sessions to monthly sessions to quarterly sessions when they have met the 
specified behavioral goals for at least 2 weeks and when they have met the weight loss criterion. 
Weight loss criteria for weekly, biweekly, and monthly sessions were designed for weight loss, 
and quarterly sessions for weight maintenance.  
 
Dosage will be based on mastery of program material, progress in behavior change, and weig ht 
change. Sessions will be weekly for at least 8 weeks and until at least a decrease of 10% percent 
over BMI is observed. Sessions will go to 2 times per month and will continue for at least 8 
weeks or until a new weight loss goal is attained. Treatment w ill transition to maintenance goals 
and less frequent meetings. If a family is able to reach the weight maintenance after 6 months, 
they will switch to quarterly meetings until the end of the study. If participants are unable to 
maintain behavioral goals o r weight loss/maintenance goals of any level at any point, they will 
be returned to intensive weekly sessions to prevent relapse. This will occur until participants are 
able to maintain their weight loss for 2 weeks at the given level at which point they w ill continue 
to progress through the dosing schedule. See Table 6  for examples of different “dosing” based 
on rates of progress through the program.  
 
Page 34 of 305 
 TABLE 6. FBT Sessions Over 24 Months Based on Differential Rates of Mastery of FBT  
 Maximum Dose  Moderate Dose  Minimum Dose  
Number of Weekly Sessions  48 24 8 
Number of Biweekly Sessions  24 12 8 
Number of Monthly Session   12 6 
Number of Quarterly Sessions    4 
 
Total Number of Contacts Over 24 Months  72* 48 26 
Note: *With the mastery model, it is possible  that a family could be seen weekly for the duration of the 
study  
a. (approximately 96 visits over the course of the entire study). However, we have chosen to 
illustrate a more typical visit frequency for families slow to master behavioral skills of 72 
sessio ns over the course of the study. If a family is showing signs of becoming a retention risk, 
then we will adjust the frequency of FBT sessions to a treatment schedule that is acceptable to 
the family ( This change was made on 3.18.19 prior to review and appr oval by the DSMB, DSMB 
approved protocol addenda on 9.29.19 ).  
 
4. Family Sessions  
 
Session Structure  
Each treatment session will be structured as follows: parents and children are first weighed 
and then have a 30 -60-minute individual family meeting with their PLAN coach, during 
which time the family: 1) reviews habit books and self -report checklists with their PLAN 
coach; 2) receives feedback on behavioral skill acquisition, weight goals, and progression 
through the levels of FBT; 3) receives education on diet and physical activity (See Table 7  for 
a list of education topics); 4) is taught behavior change techniques; 5) sets behavioral goals 
for the week; and 6) reviews and addresses any barriers to goal attainment or to adherence 
with the weight loss behaviors.  
 
Table 7. Overview of FBT Education Topics  
Unit  Chapter  Topics  
1 1 Introduction to PLAN; Pediatric Care Practice, Learning, Activity and Nutrition  
2 2 Traffic Light Eating Plan  
3 3 Monitoring Food; Recording Daily Intake  
4 Monitoring Red Foods  
4 5 Measuring Foods; Portions  
5 6 Recognizing Hunger and Satiety Cues  
6 7 Reading and Understanding Food Labels  
7 8 Pre-Planning  
8 9 Positive Parenting and Praise  
10 Being a Good Model for Your Child  
11 Encouragement; Daily Meetings  
9 12 Goal Setting; Cutting Calories  
10 13 Traffic Light Activity Program  
11 14 Energy  Balance  
Page 35 of 305 
 12 15 Stimulus Control  
13 16 Healthy Shopping and Budgeting  
14 17 Healthy Routines: Behavior Chains; Meal Regulations  
18 Healthy Routines: Sleep; Self -Weighing  
15 19 Reviewing Traffic Light Eating Plan Concepts  
16 20 Reinforcement and Rewards  
17 21 Prospection  
18 22 Problem Solving Skills  
19 23 High Risk Situations: Restaurants, Parties, Holidays and Vacations  
20 24 Recipes and Healthy Cooking  
21 25 Decreasing Red Activity  
22 26 Social Support and Making Social Networks Even Healthier  
27 Planning Physically Active Social Gatherings  
23 28 Taking on Teasing  
29 Stigma and Body  
24 30 Emotional Eating  
25 31 Focusing on Health at School, Work and Neighborhood  
26 32 Consolidating Healthy Living Skills  
33 Maintaining Motivation and Relapse Prevention  
34 Long -Term Maintenance   
 
Session Content  
FBT focuses on parents as the gatekeepers of health -related behaviors by improving 
parenting skills for the modification of child eating and activity behaviors as well as general 
child -parent interactions. Parents will be trained in general parenting methods to foster 
positive behavior change, such as learning to praise their child and implementing a parent -
delivered reinforcement system. Reinforcers, such as additional tim e spent with a parent 
engaging in a favorite activity or a sleepover with a friend can be earned for meeting dietary 
and activity goals.  Parents will be provided with strategies to modify the shared home 
environment in order to facilitate the behaviors th at are targeted. Children and their 
parents will be taught problem solving and preplanning to deal with challenging situations, 
as well as techniques for coping with teasing. A unique aspect of FBT is the emphasis on 
creating an ecology that supports long -term change, which includes modifying the family 
environment, reshaping peer group networks, and ensuring that there are community 
resources available to the family to maintain behavior change. In this way, barriers to weight 
loss and maintenance of the lo ss are addressed across contexts, reinforcing healthy lifestyle 
changes and making them more readily sustainable.  
 
5. Technological Support  
A study website will provide information to families about FBT, provide downloadable versions 
of the Traffic Light Eati ng Plan and Food Reference Guide and the Traffic Light Activity Program 
and Activity Reference Guide, and provide links to handouts with information on healthy 
cooking and recipes, getting more physical activity, and positive parenting tips. All quizzes to  
assess mastery of educational materials will also be accessible via the study website, with 
multiple versions of quizzes on each topic available, recognizing that some participants will 
acquire mastery of the required behavior change information more slow ly than others.  
Page 36 of 305 
  
III. Training and Fidelity Monitoring  
 
General Training in Study Procedures  
The DCC will work closely with clinic investigators to ensure the training and certification of all staff 
that perform study procedures. These efforts will focus on ens uring that (1) investigators, 
coordinators, and designated backups have appropriate familiarity with the details of the protocol; 
(2) all evaluations are carried out by individuals certified as being knowledgeable about and 
experienced with relevant study procedures; and (3) relevant staff are comfortable with data entry 
and management procedures. To accomplish these goals, the following procedures will be carried 
out. 
a. During the multisite FBT training at WU, the DCC will facilitate a meeting to discuss the  
details of the protocol and the standardization of data collection and to provide hands 
on experience with data collection procedures. During that meeting, staff will be 
certified to perform the task to which they are assigned by demonstrating the 
appropr iate competencies and knowledge.  
b. Certification of data entry personnel will require that they establish familiarity with the 
system by entering data on at least four test subjects.  
c. At least two individuals will be certified to perform every task to ensure that backup is 
always available.  
d. ID numbers of individuals performing assessments will be included on data forms and 
will be computerized. Using a DCC maintained list of certified personnel, it will be 
routinely confirmed that assessments have been perform ed by certified individuals.  
e. Modified data on forms will be initialed and dated by the person making the change.  
f. When new personnel are hired during the study, individual clinics will be empowered to 
certify the new person as an alternative to less efficie nt centralized efforts.  
 
PLAN Coach Training and Fidelity  
FBT PLAN coaches will be hired by the clinical site PI. Clinical site PIs will be encouraged to hire 
individuals with at least a bachelor’s degree, and who possess, or are pursuing, an advanced degr ee 
in a related field of study such as dietetics, social work, or clinical psychology. Basic demographic 
information will be gathered regarding PLAN coach age, gender, educational background, 
race/ethnicity, prior experience with families or behavioral hea lth interventions, etc. to help tailor 
training to their level of experience and to identify any PLAN coach level descriptors associated with 
ease of acquiring fidelity and competency in intervention delivery. These PLAN coaches will be 
trained using a com bination of education, interactive role -playing, simulations, and treatment 
practice with pilot patients.  
 
https://buffalo.zoom.us/j/2320132211?pwd=VUJHMGRVSlU1NzYwUHZVMjh3MUYrdz09  
 
1. Multisite FBT Training  
PLAN coaches will attend a multisite FBT training a t Washington University in St. Louis during 
the week of April 24 -28, 2017 and at the University at Buffalo on July 11 -12, 2017. All PLAN 
coaches will complete the on -site training workshops and must earn an 80% or above on the 
post -training assessment at t he end of these trainings in order to be certified to initiate 
recruitment. If any coaches do not achieve this score, remedial instruction will occur and they 
may repeat the quiz.  
 
Page 37 of 305 
 2. Educational Materials  
The study website will include articles on FBT for th e PLAN coaches to read, and it will also 
provide a thorough training manual to teach behavioral, diet, and exercise principles used in the 
study, as well as other relevant readings. The website will also include web -based pre - and post -
assessments of FBT k nowledge. PLAN coaches will need to demonstrate mastery of the material 
prior to working with families.  
 
3. Interactive Role Playing and Simulation  
Live and Skype training sessions will provide the opportunity to role play important behavioral 
skills. Trainin g will conclude with a treatment session simulation, during which PLAN coaches 
will be rated on their utilization of FBT components to ensure competency. If the written and 
simulated assessments demonstrate lack of knowledge and skills, FBT concepts will b e retaught 
until mastery is achieved.  
 
4. Pilot Patients  
PLAN coaches will practice delivering FBT to two families (at least 12 sessions each) not 
randomized to the study. They must demonstrate competency on at least four consecutive FBT 
sessions for each family, as determined by ratings of their audio - recorded treatment sessions, 
before they may begin treatment with a randomized family.  
 
5. Post -Training  
Training acceptability will be assessed using a 6 -item self -report questionnaire adapted from 
Lyons and c olleagues. PLAN coaches will receive supervision throughout their delivery of FBT. 
Manuals and checklists will be used during FBT treatment sessions, and each FBT session will be 
audio recorded. Supervision will be provided for all PLAN coaches by study st aff experienced in 
FBT from the Training and Fidelity Core (TFC). Treatment fidelity will be evaluated by random 
audits of audio recordings using integrity checklists. Audits will be conducted by trained TFC 
raters who were not involved in training the PLA N coaches. The text below provides a summary 
of the PLAN coach training and quality control process for the present study.  
 
6. Alternate Training  
As some turnover in PLAN coach staffing is inevitable following the initial training workshop and 
piloting of families, an alternative method for training and certifying PLAN coaches has been 
developed. Within the first two weeks of hiring, new PLAN coaches must complete HIPAA and 
CITI training, watch the video recordings of the first training and pass the post -training quiz with 
a score of 80%. They will then role play four mock sessions with their fellow PLAN coaches, 
which will be audio recorded. FBT supervisors will review these sessions and provide feedback. 
The coaches will then schedule four simulations with  the Training and Fidelity Core. After 
completing these simulations, the coach will begin seeing families randomized to FBT. All 
sessions will be audio recorded, reviewed by supervisors and feedback will be provided in 
writing and over the phone until 8 co nsecutive sessions have been rated 'competent'.  Once the 
replacement coach receives satisfactory ratings on at least eight consecutive sessions, they will 
be certified to work with randomized families  (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 3.18.19).  
 
7. Summary of  FBT Training Process:  
a. Complete HIPAA/CITI training as required by IRB of Record and/or participating clinical 
sites  
b. Read and become familiar with:  
Page 38 of 305 
 i. Study Protocol  
ii. General Articles Describing FBT  
iii. Treatment Manuals  
iv. Traffic Light Eating Plan and Food Referenc e Guide  
v. Traffic Light Activity Program and Activity Reference Guide  
c. Participate in on -site training workshops to be held prior to the randomization of the 
first participant  
d. Earn a score of 80% or greater on post -training assessment  
e. Engage in role plays  and simulations  with a TFC FBT expert to practice key behavioral 
intervention strategies  (This change was made on 11.9.17 prior to review and approval 
by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18).  
f. Conduct at least 12 treatment sessions with two  pilot families  
g. Participate in regularly scheduled teleconference Clinical Case Review Groups for 
supervision with a TFC FBT expert and other PLAN coaches  
h. Provide audio recordings of the first four sessions with each pilot family and then two 
audio recordi ngs from randomly selected visits with pilot patients for rating by the TFC 
FBT expert; if audits of any of these recordings result in competency ratings by the TFC 
FBT expert of less than “competent,” the PLAN coach will receive written and verbal 
correct ive feedback and must submit audio recordings of all subsequent pilot sessions 
until two consecutive sessions (for each family) are rated as “competent” before 
working with families randomized to FBT  
i. “Certification of Interventionist” form signed by TFC FB T expert and returned to DCC 
prior to starting intervention with participants which confirms that:  
i. Appropriate human subjects training has been completed  
ii. Readings have been done and understood  
iii. Pilot training has been successfully completed  
iv. The PLAN coach agrees to uphold the highest ethical and professional standards 
while working with participants in the study  
 
8. Booster Training  
a. Booster training workshops will occur every 6 months; PLAN coaches must score 80% or 
greater on quizzes given after workshops.  
b. Two intervention session recordings will be randomly selected by the TFC FBT expert 
every 6 months to ensure PLAN coach adherence to the treatment protocol  
c. Recordings must receive a competency rating of “competent.” If rated “not competent,” 
corrective fee dback is provided to the PLAN coach and session audio recording reviews 
will be repeated until two randomly selected recordings are rated as competent.  
 
Assessment Training and Fidelity  
Assessments will be performed only by trained and certified staff memb ers. Details of the 
assessment protocol and the standardization of data collection procedures will be presented at the 
FBT training. Additionally, assessment staff will gain hands on experience with the relevant data 
collection procedures and will be certi fied to perform these tasks during the training. At least two 
individuals at each site will be certified to perform each task to ensure that backup is always 
available. The DCC will maintain lists of certified personnel. Individual clinics will be empowere d to 
certify new personnel as an alternative to the initial centralized training session. Video -recordings of 
skilled assessors conducting the assessment procedures will be available following the training 
workshop to aid in standardization of training acr oss sites.  
Page 39 of 305 
  
1. Initial Training  
All PLAN coaches and assessors will complete assessment training at the WU FBT training during 
the week of April 24 -28, 2017 and the UB FBT training on July 11 -12, 2017. During these 
trainings, staff will learn standardized pro cedures for collecting height and weight, (This change 
was made on 11.9.17  prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol 
addenda on 11.2.18),  and collecting data via REDCap (including family surveys). Staff will have 
the opportunity to p ilot these procedures on volunteer staff and study team members 
throughout the training. Additionally, all sites will be provided with the necessary educational 
materials to ensure adherence to assessment procedures following the training.  
 
Study tasks wil l be performed only by staff that are trained and certified to perform their 
assigned task. At the in -person trainings or video -taped instructional trainings, the 
standardization of data collection procedures will be discussed.  Additionally, staff will ga in 
hands on experience with the relevant data collection procedures and will be certified to 
perform these tasks. The DCC will maintain lists of certified personnel, and individual sites will 
be empowered to certify new personnel as an alternative to the i nitial centralized training 
session. During the initial session, staff will be rigorously trained to certify new personnel that 
may be added during the implementation of the study via procedures detailed by the DCC. The 
DCC assessor training will be record ed, and video -recordings of skilled assessors conducting the 
assessment procedures will be available following the training workshop to aid in 
standardization of training across sites.  
 
2. Certification  
All PLAN coaches and assessors will be required to reac h reliability  for height and weight 
measurements (3mm for height, .25 lbs for weight,  this change was made on 11.9.17 prior to 
review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18).   Coaches will 
complete 10 different measurements acc ording to the height procedures. If the reliable staff 
member and new staff member do not meet acceptable reliability criteria, additional 
participants should be measured by both staff members until adequate reliability is established. 
Additionally, they m ust prove competent in administering REDCap surveys as assessed by the 
clinical site project coordinator ( This change was made on 11.9.17  prior to review and approval 
by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18). When PLAN coaches and assessors 
reach reliability or competency for each of these measures, they will receive a “Certification of 
Assessment.”  
 
II. Research Procedures and Approach  
 
Practice Retention  
 
1. Expectations  
a. Create realistic expectations prior  to recruitment.  
b. Provide practice with information regarding the study (e.g., recruitment, treatment, space 
considerations).  
c. Explain to practices how this study may impact their workflow.  
d. Keep clear and timely communication with the practices.  
2. Ongoing Stra tegies  
a. Prepare and post/distribute recruitment materials for practices.  
Page 40 of 305 
 b. Remain friendly and open to answer any questions or concerns.  
c. Lend solutions to any issues that may arise in the practice concerning the study.  
d. Pay out incentive money  
e. Update progress  of study and recruitment goals (This change was made on 3.23.18 prior to 
review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18).  
 
Participant Retention  
Each of the sites has experience in subject retention, and both the University at Buffalo and 
Washington University have experience in retention in FBT. We will use a 3 -step evidence -based 
approach to retention.54-56 First, we will gather names, addresses and phone numbers of at least two 
family members or friends who have regular conta ct with the participating families. Second, we will 
send greeting cards for birthdays and holidays to the participant over the course of the study. Third, 
we will provide personal and telephone contacts with the same staff over time whenever possible to 
facilitate familiarity and rapport. We will also provide continued emphasis on the importance of 
their contribution to their community and the legitimacy of the project.  
 
1. Expectations  
a. Emphasize up front the common challenges families face.  
i. Big time commitment  
ii. Family emergencies  
iii. Changes in routine  
iv. Resistance from family members  
v. Some difficulty reaching goals  
b. Discuss how the study is a big commitment.  
c. Discuss why participation in the study is worth it.  
i. State -of-the-art program that teaches the child an d parent how to lose weight and 
maintain the loss  
ii. Decreased risk for health problems for the child and parent now and in the future  
iii. Prevention of heart disease and type 2 diabetes  
iv. Increased energy, better sleep, and better overall fitness from regular exer cise 
v. Improvement in mood and sense of accomplishment from completing the program  
vi. Mastering skills earlier in life to reduce the social stigma of obesity  
d. Discuss commonality of resistance from child and how to handle it.  
e. Emphasize the expertise of the staf f and their ability to help with this problem.  
 
2. Ongoing Strategies  
a. Always have a positive attitude and treat all participants in a caring, person -centered 
manner.  
b. Thank the families for coming and praise efforts from week to week.  
c. Treat each participant as  an individual and demonstrate respect for cultural practices.  
d. Emphasize the potential importance of the study in conversations.  
e. Respect the family’s and school’s schedule and demonstrate appreciation for their efforts to 
attend.  
f. Show consideration for the  family’s schedule by starting and ending on time.  
 
3. Participation and Retention Benchmarks  
 
Page 41 of 305 
 Intervention Participation  
Participants are expected to attend at least 70% or more of their prescribed FBT meetings, 
as indicated by their level of mastery of prog ram knowledge and skills. The study staff will 
use a “case management approach” to ensure that each participant’s active involvement is 
cultivated and tracked, which will include opportunities for make -up sessions, telephone 
sessions, and home visits to ma intain participation.  
 
Families randomized into the UC group will attend medical appointments at the discretion 
of the physician according to their usual practices and availability, as well as the preferences 
of the participating family. As such, no benchm arks for usual care visits are specified.  
 
Assessment Participation  
Retention guidelines indicate that at least 80% of participants who are randomized will be 
retained at the 24 -month assessment. It is estimated that drop -out rates will be higher in 
the first six months, as a steeper dropout rate was observed in the first four months of the 
recently completed, NIH funded COMPASS trial, than in the following 20 months. In order to 
maintain participation in assessment time points, we will offer flexible scheduling, make -up 
audio sessions, and home visits.  
 
4. Participant Tracki ng 
Participants will be tracked in REDCap in order to maximize retention in the study and, as 
necessary, to capture any drop -outs or withdrawals that occur during the study period. PLAN 
coaches can verify the status of their FBT families by accessing the R EDCap Record Status 
Dashboard, which will list all existing records/responses and their status (i.e., incomplete or 
complete) for every data collection instrument in the study. PLAN coaches can verify that FBT 
families and UC families at their site have co mpleted assessment time points as well as the 
family members that participated in these assessments. Additionally, PLAN coaches can utilize 
the REDCap calendar to manage participants and appointments, and they will complete Tracking 
Forms each week to docu ment session attendance or absence of their FBT families. In order to 
ensure that families in both arms are captured at all necessary time points, the DCC will send 
regular reports to indicate participant status and subsequent required actions on behalf of  the 
study team.  
 
5. Participant Withdrawal or Termination  
Children and parents can withdraw from the research at any time, and siblings and non -
participating parents can withdraw or be withdrawn without any consequences to the other 
family members’ status i n the study. If participants withdraw, they will be debriefed about the 
nature of the study, asked permission to obtain data collection through medical records or brief 
appointments, and, if terminated, provided with the reason for their removal as well as  a 
referral if deemed appropriate. Any information that had been provided may be retained by the 
researcher and analyzed. This includes permission to collect body composition information from 
their physicians at determined measurement time points (if not r evoked upon their withdrawal).  
 
Participants who exhibit unhealthy weight loss, clinically concerning symptoms of disordered 
eating, or develop an illness or condition that would bias the data may be withdrawn from 
research analyses, as determined by the S EC, SMC, and the Data Safety and Monitoring board 
(see section  IX) and referred to an appropriate professional (This change was made on 3.23.18 
prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18).  
Page 42 of 305 
  
Lost to Follow -Up for FBT  Families (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 9.29.19 ): A designation of 
Lost to Follow -Up (LTF) is applied to intervention families that we have not had contact with for 
3 months ( 90 Days).  
  
a. During the 3 months after last contact the Coach should:  
i. Attempt all retention strategies outlined by the retention algorithm (Appendix Z 
of Manual of Procedures.  
1. For instance, handwritten note, text, call (day, evening, and weekend), 
email, etc.  
ii. Note: Families going on a scheduled hiatus are NOT LTF.  
b. Once the family is  labeled lost to follow up, Coaches will attempt contact them monthly  
c. A family can come back to the study after being marked LTF.  
i. When an LTF family comes back, re -engagement will include:  
1. Review of contact info, alt. contacts, and best methods of contact and 
time of day.  
2. Review of initial motivation for study and link it to why they want to 
continue.  
3. Problem solving barriers to attendance and make plan for future  
a. Attempt to rebuild momentum.  
4. Review weight change during break.  
Risks to Human Subjects  
 
1. Potential Risks  
Safety of human participants is of utmost concern especially in a trial involving children. Efforts 
will be made to limit the use and disclosure of participants’ personal information, including 
research study and medical or education record s, to people who have a need to review this 
information. We will collect information on changes in height and weight from medical records 
as needed if a family discontinues study participation or is unable to provide data at the 24 -
month time point. The as sessment process may carry potential risks. For example, some of the 
questions may be upsetting to participants, and some participants might feel uncomfortable 
having their height and weight measured. Other risks associated with participation in the 
interv ention include possibly feeling hungry when dieting or sore after exercising. In addition, in 
select children, excessive attention paid to dieting may lead to an eating disorder or to growth 
problems. There are also several potential risks to family member s in the course of therapy. 
First, there is a degree of inconvenience for family members who may miss work, school 
activities, meetings, etc. Second, there is the risk, as there is in any therapy, of a stress reaction 
occurring. Third, there may be some fa mily disagreements during the implementation of the 
intervention as issues of family functioning, communication, and discipline may be discussed. 
Page 43 of 305 
 Finally, there is the risk of a breach of confidentiality. Coach interviews are expected to be no or 
minimal r isk of asking the interview questions.  
 
2. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
All key personnel involved in the design or conduct of research involving human subjects will 
receive the required education on the protection of human research participants prior  to the 
start of the study. The PLAN coaches will collect and manage data collected from these 
participants and will not engage the pediatricians in the research. If required by a site’s 
individual IRB, PLAN coaches will complete Business Associate Agreeme nts prior to their work 
within the practices.  
 
Individuals administering assessments will be made aware of the possibility of a participant’s 
discomfort about answering questions or having height and weight measured. Participants will 
be informed that they  do not have to answer any questions that make them uncomfortable, and 
height and weight will be measured in private to minimize embarrassment. Participants will be 
advised of the possibility of hunger with dieting or soreness after exercise. In order to r educe 
the risk of exercise -related injury, all participants will be encouraged to follow their primary care 
physician’s instructions regarding exercise.  
 
On an ongoing basis, the family meetings will serve as the primary venue to detect and address 
any ea ting disturbance, and study PLAN coaches will be trained to monitor, recognize, and 
intervene if symptoms of disordered eating behaviors or attitudes emerge. If a PLAN coach 
notices that a participant is consuming a nutritionally inappropriate quantity or quality of foods, 
he or she will assist the participant in achieving appropriate intake. Should a participant show 
symptoms consistent with an eating disorder during treatment, the PLAN coach, in consultation 
with the treatment supervisor at the Training a nd Fidelity Core, will decide whether to 
recommend that the family be withdrawn from treatment and/or refer them for treatment 
elsewhere. This will be stated in the consent form.  
 
To the extent possible, flexibility in scheduling treatment sessions and as sessments will help 
minimize the inconvenience of missing work, school activities, or meetings due to treatment 
obligations. Having expert and well -supervised PLAN coaches conduct treatments will mitigate 
the risk of a stress reaction occurring. The PLAN c oaches will be aware of how to recognize such 
stress responses in their early form, and will conduct sessions in such a way as to reduce such 
responses. PLAN coaches will also be trained to deal with potential family disagreements. If any 
participant appea rs to be in crisis, appropriate action will be taken based on established suicide 
and crisis assessment protocols, and any adverse event will be reported promptly to NIMH and 
to the IRB of Record.  
 
3. Confidentiality  
Patient confidentiality will be maintained in compliance with HIPAA regulations. Any identifying 
information will be kept confidential, and patient records will be kept in locked files protected 
by two locks and accessible only by those directly involved w ith the implementation of the 
study. The locked files will be housed in the clinical site PI’s office at each site, and no data, files, 
or any other study participant information will leave these offices. Treatment session audio 
recordings will be securely  stored at each center, and will be labeled by study ID, date and 
session number, without further identifiers. These recordings will be stored in locked cabinets 
with restricted access and will be destroyed three years after the end of the study, depending  
Page 44 of 305 
 on the policy set by the Study Executive Committee and the IRB of record. Copies of selected 
session audio recordings, labeled as above, will be sent to the Training and Fidelity Center at WU 
for auditing.  
All coach interview audio files will be stored in  a double password protected computer and a de -
identified file name. The audio files will be transcribed using Amazon Transcribe, once this is 
completed the audio files will be destroyed. The transcription file will be de -identified and also 
stored in a do uble password protected computer.  
 
All materials, discussions, and proceedings of the Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) are 
completely confidential, and members and other participants in DSMB meetings are expected to 
maintain confidentiality. All emp loyees of the study with access to protected health information 
are required to complete HIPAA and CITI training and comply with the privacy procedures in 
place at their institutions.  
 
Potential Benefits to Human Subjects and Others  
The prevalence of overw eight in both children and adults has been increasing at an alarming rate. 
Effective treatments for childhood obesity have the potential to provide substantial health benefits 
and to decrease the number of children tracking obesity into adulthood. Although  we do not 
guarantee any benefits from this study, the intervention, if successful and if it replicates our 
previously completed studies, has several potential benefits. Potential benefits to participants 
include improved physical health, improvements in t he quality of nutritional intake, increases in 
physical activity, reduction in body weight, and long -term maintenance of this reduced body weight. 
The treatment may also reduce the stress on the family posed by the burden of obesity. In addition, 
it is pos sible that skills to solve ongoing problems that perpetuate obesity may improve. The 
growing prevalence of obesity and its health -related consequences highlight the need to examine 
potential treatments that may help children to lose weight and sustain weig ht loss over time, and to 
investigate the effectiveness of providing these treatments within primary care settings. Therefore, 
the potential risks that are associated with this study are reasonable when considering the many 
health -related benefits that the  participants and their families may gain. Coach interviews has no 
benefits to the coaches. Potential benefits to researchers include: detailed accounts of discussions 
of food cost and perception between PLAN FBT coaches and families, direct discussions wi th 
coaches (implementers of the treatment intervention), and a deeper understanding of 
when/how/why coaches tailor pieces of the treatment.   
 
 
II. Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  
 
Safety Oversight  
 
An independent panel of experts with experience in clinical t rials, health services research, 
biostatistics, and pediatric and adult obesity, consisting of at least three members who are not 
affiliated with the study – including a clinician with expertise in childhood obesity, an 
epidemiologist, and a patient advoca te – will be appointed to constitute a DSMB. Members 
named include study staff and a representative of NIH. In addition, the study PIs, Drs. Leonard 
Epstein and Denise Wilfley, the director of the DCC, Dr. Ken Schechtman, and designated staff 
will attend t he DSMB meetings (as non -voting participants) and will be responsible for preparing 
Page 45 of 305 
 and presenting data reports from the study. The DSMB will provide oversight and ongoing 
monitoring of participant safety, recruitment and retention rates, quality of data c ollection, and 
integrity of the study and will convene during the first 3 months of the study to allow for a full 
review of the study protocol. The study data will be reviewed by the DSMB every 6 months via 
teleconference or more frequently if preferred by  the DSMB. The DSMB will receive a report 
from the study DCC approximately 4 weeks before each review date. These reports will include 
the major variables necessary for monitoring safety and quality of data collection and integrity 
of the study and will in clude otherwise blinded outcome data. Because study protocol and 
consent forms are relevant to the safety and quality of data, the DSMB will also review these 
documents before the onset of the study. Based on this review, the DSMB will possess the 
authorit y to prevent the study from starting or to recommend that the study be stopped after it 
has begun. The DSMB will prepare a report based on the material received from the DCC, which 
will be forwarded to the PIs to review at study executive committee meeting s and also to be 
forwarded to the IRB of Record, as well as project officer, by Dr. Epstein.  
 
1. Safety Monitoring Committee  
First, we have established an internal Safety and Monitoring Committee (SMC) to oversee the 
assessment and reporting of adverse events  (AE), serious adverse events (SAE), and 
unanticipated problems (UP). This committee, which will be chaired by Dr. Teresa Quattrin, will 
regularly review reports of AEs, SAEs, and unanticipated problems in collaboration with the 
DSMB.  Additional members i nclude Rebecca Campo, PhD.  
 
Should a member of the study staff become aware of a possible AE, SAE, or UP (see section IX.D 
in the study protocol), s/he will notify the clinical site PI, local site PI, and PC with a detailed 
email summarizing the event (Thi s change was made on 3.23.18 prior to review and approval by 
the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18),  complete an Adverse Event Form or 
Serious Adverse Event Form, and as recommended by the site PI and PC contacts the SMC.  The 
local site PI w ill sign off on the AE/SAE and will forward this and a recommendation for action to 
the Safety Monitoring Committee (SMC). Each site PI will make sure that the AE/SAE is reported 
to the IRB within the allotted time frame (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 3. 18.19). The SMC 
will then evaluate the severity of the event and determine the necessity for immediate action on 
behalf of the study group. If immediate action is necessary, the SMC will consult with the 
Steering Committee to recommend a course of action. If immediate action is not necessary, the 
event will be documented in the study database and discussed at the next scheduled DSMB 
meeting. The PC will review any recommendations from the SMC and/or local -site PI and 
forward them to the coach. The Coach wil l implement the recommendations with the family and 
report the outcome back to their site PC. The PC then informs the PI and SMC of the AE 
resolution. After the AE/SAE and event resolution is reviewed, the chair of the SMC will sign off 
on all AEs/SAEs (se e Figure 1; DSMB approved protocol addenda, 9.29.19 ). Additionally, the DCC 
will prepare monthly reports that summarize adverse events and assess whether there is 
evidence of a between group difference in AE and SAE rates.  
 
All serious adverse events will follow an expedited reporting timeline, which includes 
immediately notifying all participating IRBs through the designated PIs in accordance with OHRP 
guidance.  
 
Lastly, all AEs, SAEs, UPs, and study withdrawals will be forwarded to the DSMB accompanied by  
a detailed explanation according to the timeline in Table 10 of the study protocol. The DSMB will 
Page 46 of 305 
 ensure that all corrective and/or preventative action plans have been appropriately 
implemented.  
 
  
Page 47 of 305 
 Figure 1. Internal AE/SAE Reporting Procedures (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 9.29.19 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coach completes AE/SAE form  
 
 
Coach updates PC/Clinical 
Supervisor about AE/SAE  
 
 
Local -site PI and SMC are given 
the AE/SAE form to review  
 
 
PI signs off on the AE/SAE form 
and makes recommendations  
 
 
SMC makes recommendations  
 
 
PC reviews recommendations 
and forwards them to the coach  
 
 
Coach implements the 
recommendations with the 
family and reports back to the PC  
 
 
PC informs the PI and SMC of 
the AE/SAE resolution  
 
 
SMC evaluates the resolution 
and the SMC chair signs off on 
the AE/SAE  
Page 48 of 305 
  
Specification of Safety Parameters  
 
1. Adverse Events  
For the purpose of this study, an adverse event (AE) will be defined as any untoward or 
unfavorable occurrence (e.g., symptom, sign, or disease) that is temporally associated with a 
subject’s participation in the study, whether or not it is related to participation.  
 
2. Serious Adverse Events  
For the purpose of this study, a serious adverse even t (SAE) will be defined as any untoward 
occurrence that results in death, is life threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongs existing 
hospitalization, or creates persistent and significant disability.  
 
3. Unanticipated Problems  
For the purpose of this study, an unanticipated problem (UP) will be defined as any event that is 
unexpected, is related or possibly related to participation in the research study, and suggests 
the research places participants or others at a greater risk of harm than was previous ly known 
or recognized.  
 
Classification of Adverse Events  
 
1. Severity  
AEs will be assessed for severity and can thereby be classified as mild, moderate, or severe in 
nature. Mild AEs require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere with the participant’s  
daily activities. Moderate AEs result in a low level of inconvenience or concern with the 
therapeutic measures and may cause some interference with functioning. Severe AEs interrupt a 
participant’s usual daily activity and may require systemic drug therap y or other treatment. 
Severe events are usually potentially life -threatening or incapacitating.  
 
2. Relatedness  
AEs will be assessed for their relatedness to the procedures involved in the research study and 
can thereby be classified as: (1) definitely related, (2) possibly related, or (3) not related (see 
Table 8 and 9; DSMB approved protocol addenda, 9.29.19 ). 
 
3. Expectedness  
Expectedness will be assessed in terms of the event’s nature, severity, and frequency. Events are 
considered unexpected when they are not listed in the protocol and consent forms or are not 
listed at the specificity or severity that has been o bserved (see Table 8 and 9; DSMB approved 
protocol addenda, 9.29.19 ). 
 
  
Page 49 of 305 
 TABLE 8. Adverse Events Determination Table (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 9.29.19 ). 
 
Classification  Adverse Events  Expected  Relatedness*  
Physical Activity  Broken Bones/Fractures  X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Bruising  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Concussion  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Cuts  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Joint Swelling/Pain/Sprain  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Muscle Pulls  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Tendonitis  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Shin Splints  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Sprains  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Strains  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Soreness  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
 Asthma Exacerbated during PA  
X (Possibly) 
Related  
Mental Health  Eating Disorders: Nor present 
before study enrollment  X (Possibly 
Related)  
 Loss of Control: Due to 
external causes   Not Related  
 Loss of Control: No external 
causes mentioned  X (Possibly 
Related)  
 Emotional outbursts during 
sessions  X (Possibly 
Related)  
 General anxiety or depression 
due to external causes   Not Related  
 Anxiety or Depression with any 
mention of the study  X (Possibly 
Related)  
 Extreme depression or suicidal 
idealization   (Possibly 
Related)  
 
  
Page 50 of 305 
 TABLE 9. Very Common Pediatric Events Table (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 9.29.19 ). 
 
Very Common Pediatric Events  Expected  Relatedness  
Abdominal pain and/or vomiting and/or 
diarrhea for <48 hours  X Not Related  
Allergic/seasonal rhinitis  X Not Related  
Cold or URI  X Not Related  
Ear infection  X Not Related  
Influenza and flu -like symptoms  X Not Related  
Pharyngitis/tonsillitis  X Not Related  
Worsening of asthma symptoms not related 
to physical activity in patient with known 
asthma or reactive airway Disease (RAD) and 
NOT requiring pediatrician or ED visit  X Not Related  
Note: The SMC created a list of very 
common pediatric events to account for AEs 
that typically occur within the target 
population regardless of study participation.  
    
 
 
 
Adverse Event Assessment and Tracking  
The occurrence of an adverse event (AE), serious adverse event (SAE), or unanticipated problem 
(UP) may come to the attention of research staff during treatment sessions, assessment visits, or 
other participant contact (e.g., scheduling phone call or e -mail). PLAN coaches and assessors will be 
made aware of possible expected ev ents, including: adverse emotional experiences (e.g., 
discomfort, embarrassment), or stress, hunger with dieting, soreness after exercise, and emergence 
of potential eating disordered attitudes or behaviors. As outlined in Adequacy of Protection Against 
Risks ( VIII.C.2 ), measures will be in place to reduce the likelihood of these events occurring.  
 
To account for differences in the frequency of participant contact between the two study groups, 
blinded measurement staff will systematically assess for AEs in  both the intervention and control 
groups through use of a standardized questionnaire (see MOP) that is administered at each major 
assessment time point.  If any items are endorsed on the questionnaire, the blinded measurement 
staff will gather additional information and, if necessary, follow the steps for recording and 
reporting adverse events outlined below and in section IX.E. AEs uncovered in the course of 
treatment will also be subject to the procedures below. Combining between visit and at visit AEs 
will result in an alternative count that the DSMB requested. This alternative count will be comprised 
of all AEs, whether reported at or between visits. Blinded coaches will be unaware if an AE was 
reported between visits, and any duplicates will be removed  by an unblinded reviewer ( DSMB 
Approval ,12.16.2020 ) 
 
All AEs, including those not meeting the criteria for SAEs, will be captured on an Adverse Event Form 
or Serious Adverse Event Form (see Appendix D ), which must be approved of and signed by the 
clinical  site PI. Information to be collected includes event description, time of onset (and offset if 
applicable), assessment of severity, relationship to study treatment, expectedness, actions taken, 
Page 51 of 305 
 and outcome of the event. Additionally, all SAEs will require categorization (e.g., death, 
hospitalization, permanent impairment, etc.) and documentation of any interventions implemented 
in response to the event.  
 
All AEs occurring during a participant’s study participation must be documented appropriately 
regardless of relationship. All AEs will be followed by the DSMB to adequate resolution and will be 
recorded in the data collection system. Any medical condition that is present at the time that the 
participant is screened will be considered as baseline and not reported as an AE. However, if the 
study participant’s condition deteriorates at any time during the study, it will be recorded as an AE. 
Changes in the sev erity of an AE will be documented to allow for an assessment of the duration of 
the event at each level of severity. AEs characterized as intermittent require documentation of 
onset and duration of each episode.  
 
The clinical site PIs will record all reportable events with start dates occurring any time after 
informed consent is obtained until 7 (for non -serious AEs) or 30 days (for SAEs) after the last day of 
study participation. Events will be followed by the DSMB for outcome information until resolu tion or 
stabilization.  
 
It is important to note that in previous similar clinical trials in the PIs’ respective laboratories, the 
procedures outlined above have been used to protect against and minimize potential risks to 
participants, and they have proved  effective in preventing emotional and physical complaints as well 
as adverse events.  
 
Due to the fluid situation of COVID -19, 3 additional questions have been added to the AE 
questionnaire.  Asking these questions could give us data on the effects of the pandemic and could 
help explain changes in FBT attendance and assessment retention.  
 
i.  Do you have a positive COVID -19 test?  
ii.  Did you have exposure to someone with a known positive COVID -19 test?  
iii.  Did you need to get tested for COVID -19?  
 
(eme rgency status implemented 3.16.2020, DSMB approval , 5.7.2020 )  
 
 
Adverse Event Reporting Procedures  
Upon initial receipt of information, all fatal or life -threatening suspected serious adverse events will 
be immediately reported to the IRB of Record, inter nal IRBs, NHLBI, SMC, and DCC via Dr. Epstein 
and the clinical site PIs. All non -fatal, non -life-threatening suspected SAEs will be reported within 15 
calendar days to the IRB of Record, internal IRBs, NHLBI, SMC, and DCC via Dr. Epstein and the 
clinical s ite PIs. Any unanticipated problems that do not classify as SAEs will be reported within 14 
days of the investigator becoming aware of the problem to the IRB of Record, internal IRBs, NHLBI, 
SMC, and DCC via Dr. Epstein and the clinical site PIs. All UPs w ill also be reported within 30 days of 
the IRB’s receipt of information to the Office for Human Research Protection via the IRB. Non -
serious adverse events will be documented in the study database following their occurrence and will 
be reported annually to  the IRB of Record and internal IRBs via Dr. Epstein and the clinical site PIs. 
See Table 6 for a detailed outline of reporting timelines.  
 
Page 52 of 305 
 Adverse event questionnaires and reporting forms are included in Appendix D of the study protocol. 
Once a site’s re search staff becomes aware of an adverse event’s occurrence, that staff (i.e., PLAN 
coach or assessor) will consult with the clinical site PI or project coordinator to complete the 
appropriate event form and notify the SMC . Adverse event questionnaires wil l only be administered 
after assessment measurement by blinded measurement staff, who will correspondingly complete 
an adverse event log (10.12.20; DSMB approval ,12.16.2020 ). The SMC will then evaluate the severity 
of the event and determine the necessity for immediate action on behalf of the study group. If 
immediate action is necessary, the SMC will consult with the Steering Committee to recommend a 
course of action (e.g., discontinuation of treatment, referral to higher level care). If immediate 
action i s not necessary, the event will be documented in the study database and discussed at the 
next scheduled DSMB meeting. Additionally, the DCC will prepare monthly reports that summarize 
adverse events and assess whether there is evidence of a between group d ifference in AE and SAE 
rates.  
 
All adverse events and study withdrawals, together with a detailed explanation of the event and 
withdrawal, will be forwarded to the DCC and the DSMB. In addition, at its regular meeting, the 
DSMB will summarize all adverse events of any severity, to be forwarded to the IRB via the 
designated PI. All serious adverse events will be immediately recorded by the clinical site PI and 
reported to the IRB and DCC , via the designated PI; information (i.e., event, actions, and implica tions 
for study) will then be distributed to the other clinical sites. Any SAEs and AEs that are judged to be 
possibly or probably related  to participation in the study and/or  change their assessment of risk  of 
participation will be immediately reported to  the DSMB. The remaining SAE/AEs will be sent to the 
DSMB with the 6 month reports ( DSMB approved protocol addenda, 3.18.19 ). If any participant 
appears to be in crisis but the event is not classified as an SAE, appropriate action will be taken 
based on es tablished suicide and crisis protocols, and any adverse event will be reported promptly 
to the DSMB and IRB.  
 
In addition to the existing procedures referenced above, the SMC recommends that as soon as child 
mental health SAEs are reported, to a coach or a  PLAN staff designee verbally informs the 
participants’ primary care provider and/or pediatric office staff designee with the description of the 
SAE, date, and referral so that they may follow -up according to their office procedure. Specifically, i f 
a chil d enrolled in the study reports self -injury, a suicide attempt, or harm to others, then this will be 
addressed as a SAE and reported verbally to the pediatrician. The event will be reported by the 
individual with the most amount of information within 24 bu siness hours of learning about the 
event. If a medical, behavioral, or mental health intervention is deemed necessary to address this 
event, it is the pediatrician’s responsibility to follow up with their patient to ensure appropriate care 
is provided. Before this procedure goes into effect, the PLAN coach will communicate this plan with 
each pediatric practice to develop a practice -specific protocol with who to contact and how.  In the 
event that a coach is unsure about the severity of the child mental heal th AE, they will collaborate 
with the local -site PI to determine the severity of the event and whether or not it should be 
reported to the pediatric office. All other mental health AEs will not be reported to the pediatrician, 
but will be reported to the I RB and DSMB as part of normal reporting procedures ( DSMB approved 
protocol addenda, 11.18.19 ). 
 
If a parent becomes pregnant, the PLAN coach will notify the clinical site PI and all weight loss 
treatments will be stopped. The family’s continuation in the s tudy will be limited to the child, 
siblings and non -participating parent if enrolled. The DCC, DSMB, and IRBs will be notified through 
Page 53 of 305 
 AE reports and a standard form for excluding participants from further data collection and 
treatment. Please see Table 10  below for further details regarding AE reporting.  
 
TABLE 10. Adverse Event Reporting Guidelines  
 
What Event is Reported  When is Event Reported  By Whom  To Whom  
Fatal or life -threatening 
unexpected, suspected 
serious adverse event  Immediately  upon initial receipt 
of information  Contact PI  • IRB of Record  
• NHLBI  
• SMC  
• DCC 
• All PIs and Co -Is 
Clinical Site PIs  • Internal IRBs  
Non -fatal, non -life-
threatening unexpected, 
suspected serious adverse 
event  Within  15 calendar days  of initial 
receipt of information  Contact PI  • IRB of Record  
• NHLBI  
• SMC  
• DCC 
• All PIs and Co -Is 
Clinical Site PIs  • Internal IRBs  
Unanticipated problem that is 
not an SAE  Within  14 days  of the 
investigator becoming aware of 
the problem  Contact PI  • IRB of Record  
• NHLBI  
• SMC  
• DCC 
• All PIs and Co -Is 
Clinical Site PIs  • Internal IRBs  
All unanticipated problems  Within  30 days  of the IRB’s 
receipt of the report of the UP 
from the investigator.  IRB • OHRP  
Contact PI  • IRB of Record  
Clinical Site PIs  • Internal IRBs  
All non -serious AEs that are 
not UPs  Documented in study database 
and reported annually  Contact PI  • IRB of Record  
Clinical Site PIs  • Internal IRBs  
Study Halting Rules for Participant Safety  
 
There are few risks to family -based behavioral interventions. The intervention focuses on improving 
child and parent health behaviors through behavioral strategies and improved parenting and 
parent/child relations. The main risks are development of disorde red eating or psychopathology and 
risks due to a sedentary person beginning to exercise. We will be carefully monitoring participants 
for excess weight loss, psychopathology, and activity -induced injuries. Although we expect that 
there will be very few ser ious adverse events, we will employ the following stopping guideline based 
on the number of SAEs in the intervention group. The guideline is summarized in Table 11 , which 
provides data for maximum acceptable SAE rates of 2%, 4%, 6%, 8%, and 10% and for obs erved 
numbers of SAEs of 2, 3, 4, and 5. Table 11  is calculated using 1 -sided 95% binomial confidence 
intervals and can be interpreted as presenting the maximum total sample size N that is required in 
order to conclude that the toxicity level of the interv ention may be excessive for a given number of 
Page 54 of 305 
 observed SAEs and a given defined acceptable SAE rate. For example, suppose we define 2% as the 
maximum acceptable SAE rate. Then Table 11  indicates that if the third SAE occurs in fewer than 41 
intervention gr oup subjects, then the guideline will have been exceeded because the SAE rate is 
greater than the acceptable 2% value with 95% certainty.  
 
TABLE 11. MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE SAE RATES  
 
Number of 
Observed SAEs  Maximum Acceptable SAE Rate  
2% 4% 6% 8% 10%  
2 18 9 6 4 3 
3 41 21 14 10 8 
4 69 34 23 17 14 
5 99 50 33 25 20 
 
Several points about the above discussion are worth mentioning. First, we have used the term 
“guideline” instead of “rule” because we view the decision making  process as one in which the 
guideline triggers a multifaceted discussion with the DSMB of whether the study should be stopped 
or modified because of the observed SAE rate. We do not view reaching the stopping boundary as a 
rule that should automatically l ead to the termination of the study. Second, the rule will be applied 
both to parents and children separately. Third, we propose setting 2% as the maximum acceptable 
SAE rate because of the low anticipated SAE rate in this study.  
 
At each DSMB meeting, re cruitment and retention data will be presented to the DSMB.  If 
recruitment is less than 90% of the target or if retention is less than 80% among randomized 
subjects, study investigators will present proposals for improvements in each of these two domains.   
Note that we use an 80% figure for retention because the original power computations had 
assumed a 20% dropout rate.  Thus, an 80% retention rate is not an indication of reduced statistical 
power.  If under performance by these definitions in either of t hese domains is present, the DCC will 
perform conditional power computations based on various scenarios regarding the degree of 
improvement that can be anticipated in recruitment and/or retention.  As was the case in our 
original power computations, we wil l adopt the conservative approach of assuming that study 
dropouts provide no data.  We propose that early termination be considered if the conditional 
power under the recruitment/retention scenarios the DSMB views as most realistic is less than 50%.  
Any f inal decision about recommending early termination will consider factors such as the impact of 
early stopping on information about secondary endpoints and covariate effects.  It will also consider 
the adequacy of the measures that are proposed to increase recruitment and retention.  
 
II. Data Processing and Management  
 
A central focus of the DCC will be on the development and testing of a secure web based  data entry and 
management system. In the sections that follow, we discuss the REDCap system that will serve our 
needs in this domain.  
 
REDCap  
Data management will be accomplished using REDCap, a secure password protected and HIPAA 
compliant web -based syst em developed at Vanderbilt University that has become a workhorse for 
Clinical and Translational Science Awards around the country, has served as the data entry system of 
Page 55 of 305 
 choice for more than 1400 research projects at Washington University, and has become a standard 
data entry and management tool for the Division of Biostatistics. REDCap facilitates a variety of quality 
control procedures such as drop down menus for categorical variables, range checks, and skip logic. 
It also facilitates automated transfer to SAS where further quality control procedures will be 
implemented and through which queries will be generated when errors or inappropriately missing 
data are identified.  
 
Testing the Data Management System  
After REDCap data entry screens have been create d and before data entry personnel have entered 
any test forms, the first step in testing the system will be internal to the DCC where at least three 
sets of draft forms will be completed and entered into REDCap. The data will then be transferred to 
SAS dat asets and item by item comparisons between forms and SAS printouts will be performed. 
The preliminary test forms will intentionally contain outlying and missing observations to confirm 
that range checks and requirements for completing certain fields are fu nctioning properly. A second 
level of testing which will precede the enrollment of subjects will occur when data entry personnel 
are asked, as part of their training and certification, to enter data from all data forms on at least 
three individuals. In add ition to confirming the convenience and completeness of the data entry 
screens, these procedures will evaluate all components of the data management process ranging 
from edit checking, to skip logic in REDCap, to the automated transfer of REDCap data to SA S, to the 
correctness of the programs we write to create and store the SAS datasets. These procedures will be 
closely integrated with searches for ambiguous wording, the training of data entry personnel, and 
the modification of an original set of draft for ms into a final version.  
 
Data Security and Confidentiality  
Standard features of REDCap and automated procedures of the Division of Biostatistics provide a 
high degree of certainty that subject confidentiality will be maintained and that data will never be  
lost. In accordance with the two key HIPAA requirements, password protection will be required for 
access to study computers and REDCap. Only authorized personnel will have access to the data 
entry system and access will be restricted to data from one’s ow n clinic. Data entered into REDCap 
are encrypted when transferred to SAS. Standard security and confidentiality measures at the DCC 
include requiring that employees sign confidentiality agreements, that personal identifiers are 
included in electronic datab ases only under strong necessity, and that encryption is used when 
identifiers are present in SAS datasets. Access to our Division computers is restricted to our faculty, 
staff, and collaborators. Access to accounts that store data from this study will be restricted to DCC 
personnel and the division’s network manager. All file transfers to outside computers use secure 
transfer methods which ensure that all such traffic is encrypted. The entire network wiring plant 
within the Division is behind a firewall an d is contained within space physically controlled by us. 
Access to all computers and to REDCap is automatically logged.  
 
Forms and Datasets Manual  
All data entered into REDCap will be transferred to SAS using automated procedures for use in 
future data ana lyses and reports. Each dataset in the database will contain labels and formats. To 
facilitate use of this database, the DCC will prepare and maintain a detailed “Forms and Datasets 
Manual”, an easy -to-use roadmap for finding the dataset where a particular  data item is stored. The 
key component of the manual will be a codebook which contains an alphabetical list of all variable 
names in the entire database, with associated labels and formats for each variable. The codebook 
will also contain the name of the dataset in which each variable is stored. In addition to the 
codebook, the Forms and Datasets Manual will include detailed contents of each dataset, a 
Page 56 of 305 
 comprehensive set of data forms with variable names next to each entry, and a format library. We 
routinel y use such manuals in large studies for a variety of reasons, the most important being that 
they greatly facilitate data management and analysis by making it very easy to find where in a large 
database an item on a particular form is stored.  
 
Archiving Dat a 
All data will be archived for long -term storage when the study is completed and datasets are 
cleaned and closed. Decisions regarding the timing and procedures that determine eventual public 
access to datasets will be made in accordance with institute gui delines. All publically accessible 
datasets will first be de -identified using the confidentially principles mandated by HIPAA.  
 
Quality Control  
We have a broad view of quality control in clinical research as a multifaceted process that addresses 
concerns s uch as the accuracy and completeness of computerized data, the common administration 
of protocols across sites, monitoring adherence to protocol requirements, and the training and 
certification of personnel. Other quality control measures we will implement  include:  
 
1. Data Accuracy and Completeness  
REDCap has a number of built -in quality control features that help ensure accurate and 
complete data and that are accomplished at the clinics when the data are entered. Other quality 
control measures involve actio ns taken at the DCC, features of the data forms that help facilitate 
high quality data, and steps taken at the clinic as data forms are completed. We already noted 
that the system keeps a log of who entered or changed all data, a feature which permits us t o 
discuss with the data enterer any concerns we have about a particular data item. Other quality 
control measures that will help ensure accurate and complete data include:  
 
a. Double data entry of selected forms where complete accuracy is judged to be most 
critical to the study.  
b. Range checks will flag values that are outside a predefined acceptable range.  
c. Accept only a predefined set of values for categorical measures.  
d. All data forms will contain the identification number of the person who completed the 
form , facilitating easy access to the source if there are legibility or other problems with a 
form.  
e. Forms will frequently have a “not done” option so the associated missing data will be 
understood as appropriate.  
f. Investigators and study coordinators will be ex pected to do visual checks of all 
completed forms to confirm legibility, completeness, and reasonableness as each form 
is filled out.  
 
Our strategy in the first item above of using double data entry for only those forms that contain 
the most critical data is based both on our own experience and a literature that supports this 
approach. Studies suggest that the number of errors that are detected by double data entry in a 
well conducted study is 4 -10 per 10,000 key strokes, with range checks detecting about h alf of 
randomly introduced errors.57,58  Moreover, analytic results are extremely robust to small 
random error rates.59 Based on these considerations and out of concern for the resource 
expenditure that is required of double data entry, our longstanding ap proach has been to 
employ this approach only for those variables and data forms that are most critical to the study.  
 
Page 57 of 305 
 2. Data Audits  
The DCC will conduct an annual item by item random audit of 10% of data. Logistical 
considerations will determine whether the audit will be performed during site visits or by the 
Project Manager at the DCC using requested copies of forms. Every item on the forms will be 
compared with computerized data and clinic specific error rates will be recorded. We will 
confirm that changes on forms have been initialed and documented, and all identified problems 
will be discussed with clinic personnel and, if necessary, with the Steering Committee. Following 
each audit, a detailed report will be distributed to all clinics. Audits will be time d as feasible to 
precede meetings of the DSMB so we can respond to questions about data quality.  
 
3. Quality Control of Forms and Data Entry System  
Section B above discussed the procedures for testing the data management system at the DCC 
itself. Closely inte grated with those efforts will be approaches to field testing the data entry 
system, training data entry personnel, and ensuring that the wording of forms is unambiguous. 
To these ends, the following activities will precede enrollment of the first subject.  
a. Staff at each clinic will enter data from one set of draft forms in a formal search for 
ambiguous wording.  
b. Data collection personnel will collect data on two “practice” subjects (who may be 
friends or colleagues) with a view towards getting the outsiders view of ambiguity 
so we can subsequently modify the forms as needed. Outlying data values will be 
encouraged so they can be used in familiarizing data enterers with the quality 
control components of the data management system.  
c. Data collection personnel wil l test the relevant forms on two “real” subjects. These 
subjects will not become part of the study even though they may be technically 
eligible.  
d. The forms collected from the “practice” and the “real” subjects will be entered into 
REDCap to confirm the fami liarity of data entry personnel with the system, as a test 
of the system itself, and as part of the certification process discussed.  
e. After these procedures yield potential modifications of the draft forms, the DCC will 
modify the REDCap screens and will pe rform a final set of internal tests focused on 
ensuring that any needed modifications have been correctly incorporated into the 
revised system.  
f. To facilitate the above series of sequential steps, the DCC and Steering Committee 
will develop a timeline for c ompleting tasks, and the DCC will send reminders to 
relevant personnel as deadlines approach.  
 
4. Summary Reports  
The DCC will prepare summary reports of study progress in response to requests by the Steering 
Committee and the DSMB. It will also prepare regul ar reports which, using automated features 
to be built into our SAS database, will consider such issues as (1) recruitment rates, (2) the 
proportion of recruited subjects who are eligible, (3) missing form and data rates, (4) the time 
interval between comp leting a form and entering it on the computer, (5) compliance rates, and 
(6) adverse event rates. These reports will, with the exception of adverse events, be updated 
monthly and made available online through the study website. Because they will be site -specific 
as well as aggregate in their presentation, the reports will contribute significantly to our quality 
control efforts as they will help identify areas of inadequate performance at clinics. Although 
experience suggests that adverse events will be rela tively uncommon in a behavioral study such 
as this, the adverse event report will differ from other reports in that severe events that may be 
Page 58 of 305 
 study related will be reported within 72 hours to the IRB of Record and to the chair of the 
DSMB.  
 
5. Site Visits  
The DCC will organize annual site visits to all clinics that will focus on a detailed review of study 
procedures. Special additional site visits may occur if routine quality control measures 
determine that a clinic is having difficulty with some aspect of the  protocol. Site visitors will 
prepare an agenda that will include observations of the performance of study procedures and of 
the filing system that is used to store completed data forms. They will confirm that data forms 
are correctly filed, that IRB appro vals are available, and that changes on forms are appropriately 
initialed and dated by the person who made the changes. In addition, site visitors may do 
random data audits in accordance with section X.F.2 . Site visits will generally be conducted by a 
DCC staff person and by an investigator from another clinic.  
 
III. Statistical Considerations  
 
A. Statistical Analysis Plan  
Data will be analyzed with SAS using the intention -to-treat principle.  P -values less than 0.05 will be 
considered significant and all tests are  two-sided.  Details of how the intention -to-treat principle will be 
implemented are contained in a later section.  
 
B. Primary Analysis  
The primary goal of this study is to determine whether the change in weight status among children who 
have overweight/obes ity (Primary Specific Aim 1 , DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18 ) is superior 
among those who are randomized to family -based treatment (FBT) as compared to those who are 
randomized to usual care (UC) when treated in a primary care setting.  The primary  outcome measure in 
children is the percent over the age - and sex -specific 50th BMI percentile.  The specific question of 
interest in the primary analysis is whether the change from baseline to 24 months in the intervention 
group is greater in the FBT grou p than in the UC group.  
 
The primary analytic strategy reflects the fact that this is an individually randomized group treatment 
(IRGT) trial.34 An IRGT trial is one in which the individual, in this case the family, is the unit of 
randomization.  It differ s from a classic individually randomized trial in that the intervention is either a 
group intervention or, alternatively, is conducted by an agent who is responsible for implementing the 
intervention in a defined set of individuals.  In PLAN, participants are randomized at the family level and 
only one randomly chosen eligible child (the index child) is included in the primary analysis.  The 
intervention is conducted by a coach who assumes responsibility for a set of families that receive 
individualized int erventions.  Since the study has four sites with three coaches per site, the analysis plan 
involves a nesting of the coach within the site.  Some sites have backup and floating coaches that are 
involved in delivering FBT to study participants, which will a lso be accounted for when outcome data is 
analyzed ( This change was made on 12.4.18 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB 
approved protocol addenda on 11.18.19 ). While this nesting suggests a classic cluster randomized trial, 
an IRGT trial is diff erent because the nesting applies only to the intervention group.  Since the control 
group, in this case the UC group, has no nesting factor in an IRGT trial, a proper analysis must reflect the 
fact that in an IRGT trial, the intervention group and the con trol group must use different covariance 
structures.  
 
Page 59 of 305 
 With the above comments in mind and with the focus of the study being on a between -group 
comparison of the change from baseline to 24 months, the primary analysis will be an analysis of 
covariance with the 24 -month value as the dependent variable and with the baseline value as a 
predictor variable.  The statistical model we employ reflects the parametrization described by Baldwin 
and Colleagues.60 It takes the initial form Y24 ij = β 0j + β 1jXij + Y0 ij + e ij.  In this model, Y24 ij is the 24 -month 
value of the percent over the age and sex matched 50th BMI percentile (the primary outcome) for 
subject i and cluster j, with the “clusters” being defined by the coach in the intervention group and by 
individual ch ildren in the control group; β 0j and β 1jXij are the intercept and intervention effect for cluster 
j; Y0 ij is the baseline value of the outcome measure; and e ij is the normally distributed error term. In 
these models, the intercept and baseline are fixed effects while the intervention effect is random  (DSMB 
approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18) .  To reflect the partial clustering structure of the IRGT design, the 
above expression is modified by using the cluster -level equations β 0j = λ 00 and β 1j = λ 10 + µ 1j to describe 
how the coefficients β 0j and β 1j vary across clusters.  The reparametrization of β 1j yields two random 
effects (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18)  and t he term µ 1j permits between -cluster variability 
in the outcome measure only within the  intervention group (coded as 1).  Substituting in the initial 
equation above yields the final model:  
Y24 ij = λ 00 + λ 10Xij + µ 1j Xij + Y0 ij + e ij 
 
Using PROC MIXED in SAS, separate covariance structures will be fit to the FBT group and the UC group 
to acc ount for the fact that the coach is nested within the site in the FBT group while there is no such 
nesting in the UC group.  All analyses other than the above are secondary or exploratory analyses.  One 
of those secondary analyses will supplement the prima ry analysis by adjusting for the sex and race of 
the participating child, family income, the educational level of the participating parent, and whether 
there are one or two parents in the household.  These secondary analyses will provide insight regarding 
the impact the covariates may have on the primary outcome.  
 
1. Sample Size and Statistical Power  
Power computations for PLAN employ simulations and two -sided tests at the 0.05 level of 
significance.  The simulations reflect the planned primary analysis of cov ariance and the fact 
that this is an individually randomized group treatment trial with the coach (N=3 per site) nested 
within the site (N=4 sites) in the FBT group but with no such nesting in the UC group.  The 
analysis of covariance that is simulated in the power computations treats the 24 -month value of 
the outcome measure as the dependent variable and the baseline value as a covariate.  The use 
of this approach reflects the primary study goal of comparing 24 -month values across groups, 
with the outcome being compared being percent over normalized BMI in the participating child.  
Each result is based on 1000 simulations.  
 
Tabulated power values employ sample sizes of 528 and that are between 65% and 95% of that 
total.  Effect size estimates are generated using considerations and preliminary data discussed 
below.  Usual care data involving an intervention and subjects most similar to our UC group is 
provided by Kalarchian61 who randomized 81 8 -12-year -old children with obesity to a usual care 
control condit ion and found an average percent overweight change of -0.17 + 10.08 at 1 year.  
We expect some deterioration in this group at 2 years but will assume conservatively for the 
purpose of power computations that the two -year change will be 0 + 10.08 in the UC group in 
the proposed research. Our estimated change in the FBT group begins with a review of seven 
studies20,62 -67 authored by Dr. Epstein.  There were 314 overweight/obese children in those 
studies who received FBT interventions similar to the one we wil l employ. When we combined 
Page 60 of 305 
 the data for those 314 children, we found an overall average decrease in percent over BMI of 
10.6 + 15.3 at 24 months.  
 
In translating the above decrease of 10.6 + 15.3 in percent over BMI at 24 months into the 
setting of the proposed research, we emphasize that the seven referenced studies implemented 
FBT in controlled academic settings where we anticipate better performance than is likely in the 
family practices w e will employ in this study.  To estimate the degree to which the effect is likely 
to be attenuated when we switch from highly controlled to more “real life” settings, we 
considered the following.  The child weight management intervention MEND (Mind, Exerc ise, 
Nutrition, Do it) focused on children age 7 -13 who exceeded the 91st weight percentile. MEND 
employed both (1) a community -based mass -implementation intervention68 involving many 
programs and 9563 subjects who provided complete data and (2) a rigorous  randomized trial69 
(N=116) analogous to the seven Epstein studies referenced in the preceding paragraph. The 12 -
month results were reductions in BMI of 0.79 kg/m2 in the community study as compared to 
1.04 kg/m2 in the intervention arm of the randomized t rial.  Thus, the reduction in the 
community -based MEND intervention was 76.0% of the magnitude that was observed in the 
family -based arm of the randomized trial.   
 
Based on this 76.0%, our computations conservatively assume changes in the intervention gro up 
that are 50%, 60%, and 70% of the previously observed change of 10.6 + 15.3 that was observed 
in the rigorous academic environment of Dr. Epstein’s studies.20,62 -67  Thus, we base our power 
on a comparison of projected reductions of 5.3 + 15.3 (50% of 1 0.6 + 15.3), 6.4 + 15.3 (60% of 
10.6), and 7.4 + 15.3 (70% of 10.6) in the FBT group as compared to 0 + 10.08 in the UC group.  
In addition, given projected standard deviations of 15.3 and 10.08 in the two groups, we use the 
maximum and the mean of those t wo values and thereby compute power assuming standard 
deviations of both 15.3 and 12.7.  In performing the calculations summarized below, we 
emphasize that we will have actual or imputed 24 -month data on all subjects.  To see details of 
how we will impute the 24 month values when necessary, please see the section below titled 
“Implementation of the Intention -to-Treat Principle.”  
 
Table 1 contains the results of the power computations using the parameters discussed above, 
assuming the compound symmetry covar iance structure in both study arms and assuming an 
intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) in the UC group of 0.01 and ICCs in the FBT group of 0.04, 
0.06, 0.10, and 0.15.  We assume a small ICC in the UC group of 0.01 because there is no 
clustering withi n that group meaning that the ICC should be essentially zero.  While we do not 
have data with which to estimate the ICC in the FBT group, we note that many cluster trials that 
involve group interventions have reported ICCs in the 0.01 to 0.05 range.  Since  the PLAN 
intervention is individualized and since we expect PLAN children to have no contact with one 
another, we do not face the impact on the ICC that is present in many cluster trials.  This argues 
for a very small ICC in the FBT group.  By contrast, t he fact that the same coach will be 
responsible for multiple children will inevitably increase the ICC above where it might otherwise 
be.  Based on these considerations, we tabulate power for ICCs in the FBT group that range from 
0.04 to 0.15.  However, th e many other studies that have used group interventions while 
yielding ICCs below 0.05 suggests that the ICC ultimately observed in PLAN will be substantially 
less than 0.1.  
 
Results in Table 1 indicate that if we recruit 100% of our original target of 52 8 families, power 
will be excellent for all tabulated scenarios with an ICC in the FBT group of 0.1 or less.  For an ICC 
Page 61 of 305 
 no bigger than 0.1, power remains adequate for most scenarios if we recruit at least 80% of the 
target (N = 432).  If recruitment is be low the 80% figure, an adequate power of at least 0.8 
requires either the smaller of the two tabulated standard deviations or a mean difference that is 
at least 60% of the value observed in Dr. Epstein’s studies (difference at least 6.4).  
 
Table 1:  Statis tical power for two sided tests at the 0.05 level of significance.    
Computations are for the primary outcome which is the percent over the 50th percentile of BMI in 
children.  Results are generated using 1000 simulations of the primary analytic model:  an analysis of 
covariance with the 24 -month value as the dependent variable and the baseline value as a covariate.  
The analysis reflects the fact  that this is an individually randomized group treatment trial in which the 
coach is nested within the site within the FBT group but which is different from a classic cluster 
randomized trial in that there is no such nesting within the control (UC) group.  The total number of 
randomized families is assumed to range from 65% to 100% of the target of 528.  Tabulations assume an 
ICC of 0.01 in the UC group and of 0.04, 0.06, 0.10, and 0.15 in the FBT group, mean differences of 5.3, 
6.4 and 7.4 (which represent  50%, 60%, and 70% of observed results in previous studies), and standard 
deviations of 12.7 and 15.3.  
(N’s Adjusted Below, DSMB approved protocol addenda, 9.29.19 ). 
ICC SD Mean 
diff Statistical power associated with sample sizes ranging from 65% to 100% of original 
target of 528  
FBT 
grp UC 
grp N=528  
(100%)  N=502  
(95%)  N=476  
(90%)  N=449  
(85%)  N=422  
(80%)  N=396  
(75%)  N=370  
(70%)  N=344  
(65%)  
 
 
0.04   
 
0.01   
12.
7 5.3 0.95  0.95  0.94  0.92  0.93  0.92  0.89  0.89  
6.4 0.99  0.98  0.99  0.98  0.99  0.98  0.98  0.97  
7.4 1.00  1.00  1.00  1.00  1.00  1.00  0.99  1.00  
 
15.
3 5.3 0.84  0.83  0.83  0.81  0.80  0.76  0.76  0.74  
6.4 0.96  0.94  0.95  0.92  0.91  0.91  0.88  0.87  
7.4 0.99  0.99  0.99  0.98  0.97  0.97  0.97  0.96  
            
 
 
0.06   
 
0.01   
12.
7 5.3 0.92  0.91  0.90  0.90  0.88  0.87  0.85  0.84  
6.4 0.98  0.98  0.98  0.98  0.97  0.96  0.95  0.95  
7.4 1.00  1.00  1.00  1.00  0.99  0.99  0.99  0.99  
 
15.
3 5.3 0.80  0.79  0.77  0.78  0.74  0.73  0.70  0.68  
6.4 0.92  0.91  0.92  0.91  0.88  0.87  0.85  0.84  
7.4 0.97  0.97  0.96  0.97  0.96  0.95  0.93  0.94  
            
 
 
0.10   
 
0.01   
12.
7 5.3 0.85  0.83  0.81  0.83  0.80  0.80  0.76  0.76  
6.4 0.95  0.94  0.94  0.93  0.91  0.92  0.91  0.88  
7.4 0.98  0.98  0.98  0.98  0.98  0.97  0.97  0.97  
 
15.
3 5.3 0.69  0.68  0.69  0.63  0.67  0.65  0.62  0.60  
6.4 0.84  0.82  0.84  0.81  0.81  0.77  0.76  0.78  
7.4 0.94  0.94  0.92  0.92  0.91  0.89  0.89  0.87  
            
 
 
0.15   
 
0.01   
12.
7 5.3 0.73  0.75  0.71  0.72  0.69  0.70  0.70  0.68  
6.4 0.86  0.85  0.83  0.85  0.85  0.84  0.83  0.81  
7.4 0.95  0.95  0.95  0.94  0.94  0.93  0.93  0.92  
 5.3 0.57  0.59  0.55  0.56  0.53  0.53  0.52  0.52  
Page 62 of 305 
 15.
3 6.4 0.73  0.74  0.70  0.73  0.71  0.67  0.68  0.65  
7.4 0.86  0.82  0.86  0.83  0.82  0.81  0.80  0.79  
2. Rationale for Percent Over BMI as the Primary Dependent Variable for Child 
Weight Change  
We will use the percent over the 50th percentile BMI for our primary dependent measure for the 
children.61 This is commonly labeled as percent over BMI. This measure compares the child BMI 
to children who are at the average BMI for same age and sex. Twenty percent over th e average 
value is approximately equivalent to the 85th BMI percentile. Using this metric, based on our 
previous research,20 we expect a reduction in percent over BMI at 2 years of at least 5.3 due to 
the impact of the intervention. One of the strengths of  this measure is the large database of 
studies that have used this measure.  
 
There are other approaches to assessing child relative weight change, which include percent 
over the 95th BMI percentile and zBMI.  Percent over the 85th or 95th BMI percentile is  a recently 
developed measure that has an advantage of comparing children to children with overweight or 
obesity, rather than to the average weight child.  In other words, when using the percent over 
the 85th BMI percentile, a positive number means the child is overweight, and a negative 
number means they are below the 85th BMI percentile.  We have assessed the relationship 
between values obtained using the percent over 50 versus percent over 85 or percent ove r 95 in 
a sample of 987 children, and to no surprise, they are correlated greater than 0.98. However, 
this does not mean they are equivalent. Using our database of children for whom we have 10 -
year follow -up,62,63 we have also calculated the effect sizes f or a sample of 193 children who we 
have studied for 10 years, which provides the largest and only dataset of truly long -term 
changes in the behavioral childhood obesity literature. The effect sizes for the different 
measures are similar at the end of treat ment, being about 0.80, but they diverge as the length 
of the follow -up increases. As shown in Figure 1 below, the effect size gets smaller as length of 
follow -up increases, up to approximately the five -year follow -up, when the effect size increases 
for th e percent over 85 and percent over 95, but not for the percent over 50. Thus, the percent 
over 50 that we have been using is the most conservative approach to assessing change in child 
relative weight among the percent overweight measures.  
 
Figure 1. Effec t size for zBMI at follow -up. 
 
We have also included changes in zBMI over time for 
comparison. As can be seen in Figure 1, zBMI has the 
greatest effect sizes at all -time points. zBMI  also compares 
BMI values to population values based on the child’s age 
and sex and attempts to standardize the values using z -
scores. Reductions in zBMI scores are obtained when child 
weight decreases in relationship to their growth. The z -
scores that are  used to calculate zBMI are also the basis 
for calculating the 85th and 95th BMI percentiles. While 
zBMI has been used in studies, it has been criticized in part 
since baseline zBMI correlates negatively with change, 
while all other measures of child relat ive weight discussed 
show a positive relationship. In other words, using zBMI 
children with the lowest zBMI values show larger changes, 

Page 63 of 305 
 while children with higher zBMI values show smaller changes.  
  
It is also possible to use BMI values, which do not take into account the child’s age or sex. There 
are two major disadvantages of this approach. First, a child may show a reduction in relative 
weight to height for the other dependent measures, but an increase in BMI. This makes 
determination of success challeng ing, as you would not expect a child who is showing an 
increase in BMI to be successful. This is due to the fact that population based child BMI curves 
show an increase throughout development until about age 18, so that an increase in absolute 
BMI may be a  reduction in BMI relative to normal growth for children that age and sex. 
Secondly, since boys and girls differ in their rates of maturation in terms of height and weight 
trajectories and height and weight velocity, an absolute change in BMI may have very  different 
meanings for boys and girls as they develop.  
 
3. Longitudinal Analyses of Child Outcome Data    
Secondary analyses involving the child will look more comprehensively at the pattern of change 
over time.  While there is no specific literature on the u se of mixed model repeated measures 
analyses in IRGT trials, these analyses are known to inflate the type I error in cluster trials70 and 
it is likely that this also occurs in IRGT trials.  The general recommendation is therefore that 
random coefficient mo dels that may use different covariance structures in the two study arms 
should be employed in the longitudinal analysis of IRGT trials.70 With that in mind our secondary 
analysis of child outcome data will apply these models to all data collected at baseli ne and at 6, 
12, 18 and 24 months.  In light of the fact that weight changes in intervention studies sometimes 
occur more quickly at the beginning with a subsequent leveling off at later time points, these 
analyses will explore non -linear possibilities suc h as quadratic models.  They will also adjust for 
the same covariates that were listed in the secondary analysis of the primary outcome to 
understand the impact of the covariates on longitudinal change.  
 
4. Covariance Structures and Missing Data  
There are two  key considerations that will guide us as we pursue these secondary random 
coefficient models: (1) the selection of appropriate covariance structures and (2) the handling of 
missing data.  
 
5. Selection of a Covariance Structure  
PROC MIXED in SAS contains many  covariance structure options, including the ability to identify 
covariance structures that are specific to the UC group and the FBT group separately.  Our 
model -selection process for choosing the appropriate covariance structures will reflect several 
cons iderations including information criteria; the pattern of change in the correlation between 
observations as the time between measurements increases; and the a priori  preference for 
structures that, all other things being equal, minimize the number of param eters that must be 
estimated; and whether data collection is equally spaced.  While confirmation will have to await 
the availability of the final dataset, we anticipate using an unstructured covariance structure in 
the primary analysis (DSMB approved protoc ol addenda, 11.2.18).  
 
6. Missing Data  
Our handling of missing data begins with consideration of the pattern of missingness. If missing 
data in longitudinal analyses are missing completely at random or at random, they do not 
produce bias. In this setting, we will apply our random coefficient models to all data that are 
available. However, because this approach can yield a meaningful decrease in statistical power if 
Page 64 of 305 
 large amounts of data are missing, we will use multiple imputation71-73(using PROC MI in SAS) to  
impute missing values when missingness is excessive and will treat this imputation approach as 
a sensitivity analysis. When data are not missing at random, ignoring the pattern of missingness 
can yield biased analyses.  
  
We will begin our consideration of  missing data while the trial is being implemented so we can 
minimize the amount and best understand the pattern of missingness. First, we will do 
everything we can to determine why subjects drop out of the study early and we will ask non -
dropouts the reas on for missing a particular visit. If data are missing, for example, because of 
bad weather, it may be likely that they are randomly missing whereas a family that drops out 
because the child is not losing weight will suggest non -ignorable missingness. Info rmation such 
as this will help guide our analytic strategy. Second, we will encourage subjects who wish to 
drop out early to continue to provide key follow -up data, at 24 months in particular. Our 
experience is that many dropouts appreciate the scientific value of their contributions and are 
willing to cooperate in this way. Third and most importantly, we will do all we can do avoid 
dropout and missing data in the first place. In the recently completed 24 -month multicenter 
COMPASS study, we collected 24 -mon th data on 165 of 172 children in randomized families 
(95.9%) and 18 -month data on five of the 7 who were missing at 24 months. Because the 
COMPASS intervention was performed at our own facilities with us having complete control, the 
dropout rate is likely  to be higher in the proposed research where we rely on family practices. 
Nevertheless, if we can come close to the low missing data rate in COMPASS, the potential 
problem posed by missingness will be very limited.  
  
The section that follows on the impleme ntation of the intention -to-treat principle provides 
further insight into the handling of missing data (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18).  
 
7. Implementation of the Intention -to-Treat Principle  
 
The primary analysis will be an intention -to-treat analysis of the child that includes all subjects .  
Recalling that the primary analysis involves an analysis of covariance with the 24 -month value of 
percent over BMI (the primary outcome measure) as the dependent variable, the inclusion of all 
subjects wil l reflect the following three considerations.  
1. If the 24 -month value of the primary outcome is available, the child will be included in the 
primary analysis without the need for further considerations.  
2. If the 24 -month value of height and/or weight (the defi ning components of the primary 
outcome) is missing and the child had height and weight data collected by his or her 
pediatrician at a clinic visit that occurred within 30 days of the targeted 24 -month PLAN 
assessment, the following considerations will be u sed in imputing the 24 -month value to be 
used in the primary analysis.  Those considerations are designed to account for the 
anticipated imprecision of values measured at the pediatrician’s office.  
a. Within each clinic, a regression model that will allow us to impute 24 -month values 
will be generated.  Using all PLAN children who attend a particular clinic and who 
have both precisely measured PLAN height and weight data and less precise height 
and weight data measured at the clinic within 30 days of the PLAN measurement, 
clinic -specific regression models will separately predict the true height and weight 
using the age and sex of the subject as well as the height and weight value 
measured at the clinic.  The goal will be to perform these calculations on a clini c-
specific basis because the causes and magnitude of measurement error may differ 
Page 65 of 305 
 from clinic to clinic.  However, if the number of subjects at a clinic who have the 
requisite height and weight data is less than 15 (less than 5 times the number of 
predicto rs), we will use all data from all clinics at the relevant study site to perform 
the desired imputation.  
b. Recalling that the children of interest in this scenario have clinic data collected 
within 30 days of the targeted 24 -month PLAN assessment, the clinic -specific height 
and weight value calculated above will be used to impute the PLAN 24 month values 
from the contemporaneous value measured at the clinic.  This imputed value will be 
used in the primary analysis.  
c. If there is no clinic visit within 30 days o f the 24 -month target but there are visits 
both before and after the 24 -month time point, we will interpolate linearly between 
predicted height and weight values at those time points to determine the predicted 
24-month value. Because we will only employ th is option if height and weight data 
are available no more than three months before and three months after the target 
date for the 24 -month visit, we anticipate that this interpolation approach will be 
performed infrequently in practice (DSMB approved proto col addenda, 11.2.18).  
3. If the 24 -month value of height and/or weight is missing and the child did not have height 
and weight data collected by his or her pediatrician at a clinic visit that took place within 30 
days of the planned 24 -month assessment and did not have height and weight data 
measured at the clinic within three months  both before and after the targeted 24 -month 
visit, the 24 -month value will be imputed using multiple imputation (DSMB approved 
protocol addenda, 11.2.18) .  Variables that will be used to facilitate the  imputation process 
will be baseline height and weight, age, sex, and race.  Any height and weight data collected 
using PLAN assessments at 6, 12, or 18 months will also be included in the multiple 
imputation.  
 
Two points about the methods discussed in thi s section are in order.  First, the rational for 
using multiple imputation only after it has been determined that clinic visit data are not 
available as a vehicle for imputing values is as follows.  We anticipate that while values 
measured at the clinic wi ll not employ the same rigor that will be employed in our protocol 
governed visits every six months, it is likely that the magnitude of the error will be relatively 
small and probably systematic rather than random within clinics.  We therefore anticipate 
that this use of real measured data will yield more accurate results than multiple imputation.  
This is especially so for individuals who provide no data beyond their baseline measurement.  
 
The second point concerns the definition of a missed visit.  The go al for all clinics is that PLAN 
participants should attend their six -month visits within + 30 days of the target date.  
However, we will not declare a given visit as having been missed until 3 months after the 
target date.  For example, if the six -month vi sit has not occurred by nine months, the six -
month visit will be declared to be missing and will therefore need to be imputed for analyses 
that include these intermediate time points.  With the six -month visit having been declared 
missing, the next visit w ill be defined to be the twelve -month visit and the target date for it 
to occur will be twelve months after the randomization date.  We recognize that a three -
month difference between a scheduled visit and the actual visit is substantial, especially for 
growing children.  But the use of this three -month difference before a visit will be declared 
missing will minimize the number of missed visits.  Moreover, using the methods discussed in 
the last section of this analysis plan, we will account for any between -group differences in 
Page 66 of 305 
 time to the final study visit when we perform the primary analysis (DSMB approved protocol 
addenda, 11.2.18).  
 
8. Assessing the Appropriateness of Analytic Strategies  
In addition to the above concerns about covariance structures and miss ing data, we will 
routinely give careful attention to the appropriateness of the analyses we perform. For example, 
t-tests comparing baseline values across groups will be performed only after assessing equal 
variance and normality assumptions, with data tr ansformations being pursued if assumptions 
are violated and Wilcoxon’s test being a nonparametric alternative if an appropriate 
transformation cannot be found. Similar attention will be given to the appropriateness of 
random coefficient models where the di stributional properties of variables will be evaluated and 
residual plots will be examined. To ensure that our conclusions are robust in the face of outlying 
values, sensitivity analyses that may exclude or attenuate outlying values will be pursued. The 
latter considerations will ensure that we are appropriately cautious about any conclusion that 
might have been altered if 1 or 2 subjects with outlying values had not been in the study or had 
had less extreme data points.  
 
C.Analysis of Secondary Aim 1 (DSMB  approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18).  
The goal of secondary aim 1 is to compare the effectiveness of the FBT group with that of the UC 
group in the participating parent .  The primary outcome variable in the parent is BMI.  Since BMI is a 
continuous variabl e measured at the same time points as was the case with the participating child, the 
data analytic strategy for this secondary analysis is identical to what was described for the child.  
 
C. Analysis of Secondary Aim 2  (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18) . 
The goal of this aim is to determine if the weight loss impacts of FBT extend beyond the participating 
child by assessing the intervention in overweight/obese siblings . We hypothesize that FBT will be 
superior to UC for weight -eligible siblings. Analytic  strategies will be similar to those used in the primary 
aim, the key difference being that while prior data74 support our hypothesis of FBT benefits for siblings, 
power for this aim may be limited. The most important reason for this is that we have chosen  not to 
require that participating children have a weight -eligible sibling because of the recruitment challenge 
such a requirement would pose. Prior data from the NHLBI -funded COMPASS study we coordinated at 
Washington University indicate that among 377 sc reened families with a participating child, 163 (43.2%) 
had at least one age (age 2 -18) and weight -eligible sibling. Based on these numbers, we expect that 
there will be about 228 (= 43.2% of 528) participating families with at least one eligible sibling, with the 
actual number recruited being somewhat smaller because some siblings will choose not to participate.  
 
While the above sample size may not provide the robust statistical power that would be ideal, we 
emphasize that this is a secondary aim that will  study by far the largest number of overweight/obese 
siblings ever evaluated in this setting. Thus, this aim will provide a unique set of data that will yield 
valuable insights into whether FBT may benefit non -participating siblings while generating prelim inary 
effect size data to guide future studies. A positive finding would provide a compelling incentive for the 
future dissemination of FBT to family practices. In cases where more than one eligible sibling is available, 
we will enroll the sibling whose ag e is closest to that of the study child. Data analyses will reflect the 
wide age eligibility range for siblings and current uncertainty regarding the impact of sibling age on 
outcome. We will address this uncertainty by adjusting for sibling age and whethe r the sibling is older or 
younger than the participating child, with particular concern for the possibility that sibling age may have 
a non -linear relationship with FBT effectiveness. The wide age eligibility range for siblings reflects our 
desire to maxim ize information generated about this population and the limited resource expenditure 
Page 67 of 305 
 that is required to study these non -participants. We will also adjust for whether the sex of the sibling is 
the same as that of the targeted child since prior data suggest  that same sex siblings respond better 
than opposite sex siblings.19 
 
E.Analysis of Secondary Aim 3  (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18).  
The goal of this aim is to assess changes in delay discounting for children and parents assigned to FBT 
versus UC  and to assess the relationship between those changes and weight control . We hypothesize 
that FBT will be associated with reductions in delay discounting for children and parents compared with 
UC, and that the degree of change in delay discounting will be related to success in weight control.  All 
analyses in this aim will be performed separately for the index child and the index parent (DSMB 
approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18). Delay discounting will be measured using the k -value detailed by 
Johnson and Bic kel.75 These parameters will be measured at baseline, 12, and 24 months. One set of 
analyses in this aim will involve random coefficient models that compare the pattern of change in the k 
value in the UC group with corresponding changes in the FBT group. W e will also use bivariate linear 
mixed models implemented by PROC MIXED in SAS76 to evaluate the association between changing k -
values and changes in weight.  
 
D.Analysis of Secondary Aim 4  (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18).  
The goal of this aim is to examine participant level baseline predictors of outcomes, with the 
measures of interest being parental inconsistency and environmental enrichment . We hypothesize 
that FBT, as compared to UC, will benefit families with higher parental inconsistency and less enriched 
environments. Parental inconsistency will be measured using a validated parenting style inventory77 
while environmental enrichment will be evaluated using questions from the HOME78 scale developed by 
Rosenberg et al79 and the Land Use Mix -Diversity subscale from the Neighborhood Environment 
Walkability Scale (NEWS)80 that we have employed previously81 in a pediatric weight loss study involving 
FBT. The same random coefficient models with two covariance structures that we described earlier with  
the same IRGT design will be applied here with the modification that we will focus on the two baseline 
measures of current interest (parental inconsistency and environmental enrichment) as covariates. 
Because we anticipate that the efficacy of the interve ntion may be influenced by these measures, we 
will also evaluate interaction terms between group assignment and both our parental inconsistency and 
environmental enrichment measures. The analyses will be performed separately in both participating 
children and parents.  
 
D. Analysis of Exploratory Aim 1  
The goal of this exploratory aim is to examine provider attitudes towards evidence -based treatment 
at baseline and perceptions of FBT at mid study (after experience with the intervention has been 
gained) as predi ctors of providers’ future intention to use co -located FBT in their practices at the end 
of the study.  We hypothesize that positive provider attitudes toward evidence -based treatment and 
perceptions of FBT will predict their intention to incorporate FBT in to their practice settings. Appendix C 
provides details of the measures we will use in this aim. Because a provider’s intention to incorporate 
FBT into their practice settings is measured on a broad scale ranging from 0% to 100%, we will treat the 
variable  as a continuous variable and expect that random coefficient models will again be appropriate. 
Specifically, we plan to implement these models using PROC MIXED in SAS, with the provider nested 
within sites in those analyses. A strength of the planned analy sis is that the anticipated 185 providers at 
the four sites will provide a rich opportunity to understand predictors of future intentions regarding the 
use of FBT. An uncertainty is that we currently have little data with which to predict the distribution of 
the of the 0% to 100% response variable. It is possible, therefore, that analyses in this exploratory aim 
will require data transformations, breaking the outcome measure into categories, or the use of 
Page 68 of 305 
 generalized estimating equations instead of mixed mo dels.  It should be noted that in contrast to earlier 
analyses, analyses of this aim do not involve group assignment and do not therefore reflect the overall 
IRGT trial design.  Thus, only one covariance structure will be required.  
 
 
E. Sensitivity Analyses  
Sensitivity analyses to be performed in PLAN are as follows.   
 
1. A modified intention -to-treat analysis of the primary outcome in which subjects who provided 
no follow -up data are excluded.  These analyses will include imputed 24 -month data using 
subjects wh o did provide data beyond baseline but who did not provide 24 -month data.  
2. To further facilitate an understanding of the impact of missing data on the primary result, the 
primary analysis will be repeated without imputation and using only subjects who provide both 
baseline and 24 -month primary outcome data.  
3. A per protocol dataset will be defined as including all subjects who attend at least 80% of the 
prescribed sessions.  Sensitivity analyses will assess whether applying the primary analysis to the 
per protocol dataset yields the same result as the primary ITT analysis. All control group subjects 
who do not drop out of the study will be considered to be part of the per protocol dataset.  We 
recognize that this implies a somewhat different definition in the two study arms.  But we do not 
consider this to be a problem since this is a sensitivity analysis whose goal is to repeat the 
primary analysis in a different setting (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18).  
4. Random coefficient models that potentially use different covariance structures in the two study 
arms will include all primary outcome data collected at baseline, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months.  Since 
weight change often occurs at a more rapid rate early in a weight loss study, these sensitivity 
analyses  will include an exploration of non -linear possibilities such as quadratic models.  They 
will also assess contrasts that compare changes from baseline to 24 months across groups in 
order to use an alternative model for testing the central hypothesis of the  primary analysis.  
5. Repeat the primary analysis after adjusting for baseline covariates.  The covariates to be used 
are the race and sex of the participating child, family income, the educational level of the 
participating parent, and whether there are one or two parents in the household.  
 
F. The Time Between Randomization and the Measurement of the Primary Outcome  
The time between randomization and the measurement of the primary outcome will vary among 
participants and will potentially differ between groups.  Our approach to addressing the potential 
impact of this reality is described below.  
Our first step in addressing this issue will involve an assessment of whether the time to the outcome 
measure differs across groups.  To address this question, we will comp are Kaplan Meier survival curves 
measuring time to assessment using a generalized Wilcoxon test.  The Wilcoxon test will be used instead 
of a logrank test because dropouts in weight loss studies tend to occur early and because the Wilcoxon 
test is more sen sitive to early dropout than the logrank test.  In performing these analyses, subjects who 
provide no data beyond baseline will be assumed to be on study for one month.  To ensure consistency 
across all participants, one month will also be added to the fol low-up time of children who do provide 
data beyond baseline.  If the Wilcoxon test yields non -significant results, we will not modify our 
covariate -adjusted secondary analyses.  If the Wilcoxon test suggests that there is a between -group 
difference in time  to the final assessment, we will adjust for the time to the final assessment in the 
covariate -adjusted analyses   Similar considerations will determine whether the time to the 24 month 
assessment will serve as a covariate in the sensitivity analyses discu ssed above that involve random 
coefficient models, that include data collected at all intermediate time points, and that employ 
Page 69 of 305 
 statistical contrasts to compare the change from baseline to the final assessment across groups.  In all of 
these analyses, the median time to the final follow -up along with 95% confidence bounds will be 
calculated.  
 
G.  Analysis of Exploratory Aim 2  
Twelve  PLAN coaches will be asked to participate in an audio -recorded semi -structured interview; 
interested coaches will provide con sent over the phone and will be asked a series of questions by a 
trained post -doctoral researcher on the study.  The questions are based on the coaches’ discussions with 
FBT families pre -COVID and amid -COVID regarding food cost, perception, and behaviors. The telephone 
interviews are voluntary and will be completed based on the coaches’ availability. All responses will be 
de-identified and aggregated with the other coaches’ responses. The data will be transcribed, and 
summary data will be compiled. The audi o file will be destroyed once the data has been transcribed and 
aggregated. (DSMB approval ,5.7.2020 )  
 
Measures to Minimize Bias  
 
1. Enrollment and Randomization Procedures  
The DCC will use the REDCap randomization module to create an online password protecte d 
randomization system that will facilitate the random assignment of families. When the website 
is entered, the user will provide information that establishes the eligibility of the family. Group 
assignments will be revealed only if all eligibility criteri a are satisfied. To avoid temporal bias, 
randomization will be blocked within clinic using random block sizes in order to preclude the 
possibility that investigators might know in advance the assignment of the last family in a 
particular block.  
 
2. Standardiz ation of Height and Weight Measurements  
Verifications for collecting and entering the data for the height and weights will be followed to 
decrease bias. All stadiometers and scales used will be calibrated and consistent between all 
sites. PLAN coaches and assessors will be trained and tested on protocols for obtaining these 
measures.  All weight measurements will be taken according to a uniform protocol and written 
on hard copy measurement sheets. The handwritten weights will be manually entered into the 
REDCap database by a blinded measurement coach, which will eliminate potential measurement 
bias and minimize errors in data entry ( DSMB approved change, 11.18.19 ). Both the written 
record and the measure in REDCap will be verified. Hard copy height and weigh t measurement 
forms will be uploaded to the secure REDCap database to allow the CCC, DCC and TFC to check 
for transcription and/or unit of measurement errors. Any malfunctions of equipment will be 
reported to the study staff to resolve immediately. Any mea surements outside of the range of 
normal will be flagged in REDCap and staff notified to retake measurements.  
 
3. Masking Procedures  
Masking refers to no knowledge regarding treatment assignment. It is not the same as 
concealment, which refers to random assig nment to groups. Treatment masking represents an 
extension of concealment, to minimize bias in how participants assigned to different groups are 
treated. In the current study, the research assistants and coaches who are doing the 
measurements will be blind ed, or masked as to treatment assignment, and the PIs for the 
Clinical Coordinating Center and Training and Fidelity Cores (Drs. Epstein and Wilfley) and the 
DSMB will be masked as to treatment assignment. However, it is impossible to mask families, 
the fa mily’s PLAN coach, or pediatricians to group assignment. Families and PLAN coaches will 
Page 70 of 305 
 know the intervention arm by the very nature of implementing a behavioral intervention. 
Pediatricians will not be told group assignment, but that is possible to discern  since they may 
see FBT families coming to their clinic more than the UC families.  
 
Masking of Assessment Staff  
We recognize the importance of blinding research personnel who are collecting data to 
study arms. The primary height and weight data will be collected coaches conduct 
assessments for each other’s families at the different pediatric sites (for which they will be 
blinded to those families). Families will be explained that they are to not discuss anything 
regarding their group assignment, how ofte n they come to the pediatric office or their 
coaches and the measurement assessor has to remain blinded to their treatment arm.  
 
Coaches will be blinded to the families’ randomization.  They will conduct assessments, 
home visits, remote assessments, and AE data collection.  
 
There are three coaches at each site, with  some sites having backup and floating coaches 
that are involved in delivering FBT to study participants . A backup coach delivers treatment 
for another coach’s caseload  in the event that a coach goes on vacation, leaves the position, 
or is otherwise unable to complete treatment with their families. Backup coaches are 
assigned based on coach letter assignment (i.e., coach B is the backup for coach A, coach A is 
the backup  for coach C, coach C is the backup for coach B). This ensures that there is always 
a blinded measurement coach to complete assessments. A floating coach delivers treatment 
to families at multiple pediatric practices regardless of coach assignment. Floatin g coaches 
remain blinded to other caseloads, but see families at different practices when a practice’s 
coach does not have space in their caseload for more families ( This change was made on 
12.4.18 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved pr otocol addenda on 
11.18.19 ). The plan is for Coach 1 to collect height and weight for families assigned to Coach 
2, Coach 2 will collect height and weight for families assigned to Coach 3, and Coach 3 will 
collect height and weight for families assigned to  Coach 1. Thus, coaches will not collect 
height and weight measures from families from their caseload. We will use block scheduling 
to reduce travel time (e.g., Coach 1 can do assessments at Coach 2’s site one Friday per 
month).  
 
In order to mask assessme nt of outcome measures,  all sites have implemented blinded 
measurement coaches that complete assessments and AE data collection , so that the PLAN 
coaches can focus on treatment. Coaches will remain blinded to group assignment outside of 
their caseload (This change was made on 2.28.18 prior to review and approval by the 
DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18 ). To further ensure blinding, families 
will be notified that the assessor is unaware of their group assignment and will be asked not 
to discuss  the frequency of them coming in to the practice, their group assignment, or the 
coach they normally see ( DSMB approved protocol addenda, 3.18.19 ). 
 
Although not possible to guarantee that coaches are blind to condition for families that are 
not in their c aseload due to the families not being blinded, use of a standard protocol (see 
Appendix C ) ensures objective and reliable measurement of the primary outcome. Assessors 
will be blind to prior heights/weights, further protecting against assessment bias.  
 
Page 71 of 305 
 Reducing Bias in Unmasked Groups  
We recognize that there are numerous ways that the PLAN coaches or pediatricians can 
treat FBT UC families differently. We have several approaches to reduce bias. We are able to 
standardize interactions with PLAN coaches throu gh extensive training, supervision and 
fidelity checks, which can help reduce bias from the PLAN coaches. Part of the training will 
include instructions not to state or imply that FBT may be better than usual care. We will not 
be directly training or asses sing fidelity for usual care, as that would deviate from the reason 
for using UC as the control condition. However, we will be collecting information on usual 
care practices from participating providers at baseline and 24 months via REDCap surveys. 
Group a ssignment will not be in the families’ charts, and unless a family directly says 
something to the pediatrician, the pediatrician may be unaware of group assignment.  
 
II. Study Administration  
 
Study Website  
A study website will be used to: 1) provide informatio n to families about FBT; 2) provide 
downloadable manuals for the Traffic Light Eating Plan and Activity Program; 3) manage the EFT 
component of the intervention; and 4) provide tools for cooking, getting more physical activity, and 
parenting skills. Quizze s to assess mastery of educational materials will be implemented on the 
study website, with multiple versions of quizzes on each module available with the recognition that 
some people will acquire the information more slowly than others. Families will have  access to 
traditional paper and pencil self -monitoring, and consistent with current implementation of FBT, 
after self -monitoring skill is acquired, families can choose to use traditional or technology -based 
recording. Information on learning the modules, and eating, exercise, and parenting change will be 
coordinated in an online family dashboard. Families will have access to the family dashboard for 
feedback, and PLAN coaches will have access to the dashboard to assess patient progress, assist 
with problem  solving, and communicate with families to structure solutions.  
 
The website will also contain password -protected sections that are for internal use by study 
personnel and will serve as a repository for study documents as well as a communications hub for 
the study. The study website will be created and maintained by the CCC. The DCC will be responsible 
for uploading to the website documents under its purview such as regular reports prepared for 
DSMB and Steering Committee meetings, the forms and datasets m anual, lists of certified 
personnel, and instructions on the use of the data entry system. The website will not contain 
protected health information.  
 
Conflicts of Interest  
Dr. Schechtman has a long history of collaboration with Dr. Wilfley, the PI for the TFC and of the WU 
clinical site for the proposed research, and because both reside at WU, there is at least the 
appearance of a potential for conflict of interest. We will take two steps in addressing this issue. 
First, the reports we regularly generate regarding the progress of the study will be separated by 
clinic and shared with the SEC and/or DSMB whenever potential problems with clinical sites, 
including the WU clinical  site, are identified. Second, we have asked a colleague, Dr. Mae Gordon 
(Professor of Ophthalmology and Biostatistics at WU), to address any concerns about the 
performance of the WU clinical site should Dr. Schechtman feel conflicted. Dr. Gordon has not 
worked previously with Dr. Wilfley and has years of experience as Director of the DCC for several 
NIH-funded clinical trials, including at least one where a participating clinic was at WU. 
Page 72 of 305 
 Disagreements regarding any of the study functions will be resolved by discussion and vote of the 
SEC.  
 
Publications and Presentations Policy  
The Steering Committee will manage the oversight and coordination of publication and presentation 
materials. The DCC director, along with members of the Steering Committee, will part icipate in a 
subcommittee defining publication policies, prioritizing when multiple papers and abstracts 
challenge resources, and encouraging the involvement of junior investigators in the dissemination of 
study results. The DCC director will oversee the c reation of a publications and presentations 
database that will facilitate the tracking of completed publications. He will also facilitate the 
development of an automated reminder system for study investigators of abstract due dates and 
pending timelines fo r preparing material for publications and presentations. The publications 
database will be stored on the study website.  
 
Protocol Amendments  
All protocol amendments will be submitted to the UB IRB and DSMB for approval, and any 
consequent changes will be d ocumented in the study database. Amendments will not be 
implemented until both the UB IRB and DSMB have given their approval.  
 
Protocol Deviations  
A protocol deviation is any noncompliance with the approved protocol, Good Clinical Practice (GCP), 
or Manual  of Procedures (MOP) requirements. The noncompliance may be either on the part of the 
participant, the investigator, or the study site staff. As a result of deviations, corrective actions are 
to be developed by the site and implemented promptly. These prac tices are consistent with ICH E6: 
4.5 Compliance with Protocol (sections 4.5.1, 4.5.2, and 4.5.3), 5.1 Quality Assurance and Quality 
Control (section 5.1.1), and 5.20 Noncompliance (sections 5.20.1, and 5.20.2). It is the responsibility 
of the site to use continuous vigilance to identify and report deviations within working days of 
identification of the protocol deviation, or within working days of the scheduled protocol -required 
activity. All deviations must be addressed in study source documents, reported  to Program Official. 
Protocol deviations must be sent to the IRB of Record per their guidelines. The site PI/study staff is 
responsible for knowing and adhering to their IRB requirements. Further details about the handling 
of protocol deviations will be i ncluded in the MOP.  
 
 
Page 73 of 305 
 III. References  
 
1. Whitaker RC, Pepe MS, Wright JA, Seidel KD, Dietz WH. Early adiposity rebound and the risk of 
adult obesity. Pediatrics. 1998;101(3):E5.  
2. Whitaker RC, Wright JA, Pepe MS, Seidel KD, Dietz WH. Predicting obesity in young adulthood 
from childhood and parental obesity.  N Engl J Med. 1997;337(13):869 -873.  
3. Morrison JA, Glueck CJ, Wang P. Childhood risk factors p redict cardiovascular disease, impaired 
fasting glucose plus type 2 diabetes mellitus, and high blood pressure 26 years later at a mean 
age of 38 years: the Princeton -lipid research clinics follow -up study. Metabolism. 
2012;61(4):531 -541.  
4. Fallon EM, Tan ofsky -Kraff M, Norman AC, et al. Health -related quality of life in overweight and 
nonoverweight black and white adolescents. J Pediatr. 2005;147(4):443 -450.  
5. Schwimmer JB, Burwinkle TM, Varni JW. Health -related quality of life of severely obese children 
and adolescents. JAMA. 2003;289(14):1813 -1819.  
6. Charney E, Goodman HC, McBride M, Lyon B, Pratt R. Childhood antecedents of adult obesity. 
do chubby infants become obese adults? N Engl J Med. 1976;295(1):6 -9. 
7. Oliveria SA, Ellison RC, Moore LL, Gillman  MW, Garrahie EJ, Singer MR. Parent -child relationships 
in nutrient intake: the Framingham Children's Study. Am J Clin Nutr. 1992;56(3):593 -598.  
8. Contento IR, Basch C, Shea S, et al. Relationship of mothers' food choice criteria to food intake 
of prescho ol children: identification of family subgroups. Health Educ Q. 1993;20(2):243 -259.  
9. Brown R, Ogden J. Children's eating attitudes and behaviour: a study of the modelling and 
control theories of parental influence. Health Educ Res. 2004;19(3):261 -271.  
10. Wardle J. Parental influences on children's diets. The Proceedings of the Nutrition Society. 
1995;54(3):747 -758.  
11. Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Roemmich JN, Beecher MD. Family -based obesity treatment, then and 
now: twenty -five years of pediatric obesity trea tment. Health Psychol. 2007;26(4):381 -391.  
12. Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Wrotniak BH, et al. Cost -effectiveness of family -based group treatment 
for child and parental obesity. Child Obes. 2014;10(2):114 -121.  
13. Barton M. Screening for obesity in children and  adolescents: US preventive services task force 
recommendation statement. Pediatrics. 2010;125(2):361 -367.  
14. Bock DE, Robinson T, Seabrook JA, et al. The Health Initiative Program for Kids (HIP Kids): effects 
of a 1 -year multidisciplinary lifestyle inter vention on adiposity and quality of life in obese 
children and adolescents --a longitudinal pilot intervention study. BMC Pediatr. 2014;14:296.  
15. Steele RG, Aylward BS, Jensen CD, Cushing CC, Davis AM, Bovaird JA. Comparison of a family -
based group intervention for youths with obesity to a brief individual family intervention: a 
practical clinical trial of positively fit. J Pediatr Psychol. 2012;37( 1):53 -63. 
16. Wilfley DE, Tibbs TL, Van Buren DJ, Reach KP, Walker MS, Epstein LH. Lifestyle interventions in 
the treatment of childhood overweight: a meta -analytic review of randomized controlled trials. 
Health Psychol. 2007;26(5):521 -532.  
17. Epstein LH,  Myers MD, Raynor HA, Saelens BE. Treatment of pediatric obesity. Pediatrics. 
1998;101(3 Pt 2):554 -570.  
18. Jelalian E, Saelens BE. Empirically supported treatments in pediatric psychology: pediatric 
obesity. J Pediatr Psychol. 1999;24(3):223 -248.  
19. Epst ein LH, Paluch RA, Raynor HA. Sex differences in obese children and siblings in family -based 
obesity treatment. Obes Res. 2001;9(12):746 -753.  
20. Epstein LH, Valoski A, Wing RR, McCurley J. Ten -year follow -up of behavioral, family -based 
treatment for obese  children. JAMA. 1990;264(19):2519 -2523.  
Page 74 of 305 
 21. Epstein LH, Valoski A, Wing RR, McCurley J. Ten -year outcomes of behavioral family -based 
treatment for childhood obesity. Health Psychol. 1994;13(5):373 -383.  
22. Wrotniak BH, Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Roemmich JN. Parent weight change as a predictor of child 
weight change in family -based behavioral obesity treatment. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2004;158(4):342 -347.  
23. Wrotniak BH, Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Roemmich JN. The relationship between parent and child 
self-repo rted adherence and weight loss. Obes Res. 2005;13(6):1089 -1096.  
24. Barlow SE. Expert committee recommendations regarding the prevention, assessment, and 
treatment of child and adolescent overweight and obesity: summary report. Pediatrics. 
2007;120 Suppl 4:S164 -192.  
25. van Gerwen M, Franc C, Rosman S, Le Vaillant M, Pelletier -Fleury N. Primary care physicians' 
knowledge, attitudes, beliefs and practices regarding childhood obesity: a systematic review. 
Obes Rev. 2009;10(2):227 -236.  
26. Caprio S. Treating child obesity and associated medical conditions. Future Child. 2006;16(1):209 -
224.  
27. Klein JD, Sesselberg TS, Johnson MS, et al. Adoption of body mass index guidelines for screening 
and counseling in pediatric practice. Pediatrics. 2010;125(2):265 -272.  
28. Sesselberg TS, Klein JD, O'Connor KG, Johnson MS. Screening and counseling for childhood 
obesity: results from a national survey. J Am Board Fam Med. 2010;23(3):334 -342.  
29. Harwood MD, O'Brien KA, Carter CG, Eyberg SM. Mental health services for presch ool children 
in primary care: a survey of maternal attitudes and beliefs. J Pediatr Psychol. 2009;34(7):760 -
768.  
30. Aarons GA. Mental health provider attitudes toward adoption of evidence -based practice: the 
Evidence -Based Practice Attitude Scale (EBPAS).  Ment Health Serv Res. 2004;6(2):61 -74. 
31. Scott SD, Plotnikoff RC, Karunamuni N, Bize R, Rodgers W. Factors influencing the adoption of an 
innovation: an examination of the uptake of the Canadian Heart Health Kit (HHK). Implement Sci. 
2008;3:41.  
32. Godi n G, Kok G. The theory of planned behavior: a review of its applications to health -related 
behaviors. Am J Health Prom. 1996;11(2):87 -98. 
33. Sheeran P. Intention —behavior relations: A conceptual and empirical review. Eur Rev Soc 
Psychol. 2002;12(1):1 -36. 
34.  Pals SL, Murray DM, Alfano CM, Shadish WR, Hannan PJ, Baker WL. Individually randomized 
group treatment trials: a critical appraisal of frequently used design and analytic approaches. 
Am J Public Health. 2008;98(8):1418 -24. 
35. Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL , Guo SS, et al. 2000 CDC growth charts for the united states: methods 
and development. Vital and health statistics Series 11, Data from the national health survey. 
2002(246):1 -190.  
36. Panel NOEIE. Clinical guidelines on the identification, evaluation, an d treatment of overweight 
and obesity in adults --The evidence report. National Institutes of Health. Obes Res. 1998;6 Suppl 
2:51s -209s.  
37. Bickel WK, Marsch LA. Toward a behavioral economic understanding of drug dependence: delay 
discounting processes. Addiction. 2001;96(1):73 -86. 
38. Bonato DP, Boland FJ. Delay of gratification in obese children. Addict Behav. 1983;8(1):71 -74. 
39. Johnson WG, Parry W, Drabman RS. The performance of obese and normal size children on a 
delay of gratification task. Addict Behav. 1978;3(3 -4):205 -208.  
40. Bourget V, White DR. Performance of overweight and normal‐weight girls on delay of 
gratification tasks. Int J Eat Disord. 1984;3(3):63 -71. 
41. Bloom BS. Human characteristics and school learning.  McGraw -Hill; 1976.  
Page 75 of 305 
 42. Epstein LH, McKenzie SJ, Valoski A, Klein KR, Wing RR. Effects of mastery criteria and contingent 
reinforcement for family -based child weight control. Addict Behav. 1994;19(2):135 -145.  
43. Whitlock EP, O'Connor EA, Williams SB, Beil TL, Lutz KW. Effectiv eness of weight management 
interventions in children: a targeted systematic review for the USPSTF. Pediatrics. 
2010;125(2):e396 -418.  
44. Chen X, Beydoun MA, Wang Y. Is sleep duration associated with childhood obesity? A systematic 
review and meta -analysis.  Obesity. 2008;16(2):265 -274.  
45. Daniel TO, Stanton CM, Epstein LH. The future is now: comparing the effect of episodic future 
thinking on impulsivity in lean and obese individuals. Appetite. 2013;71:120 -125.  
46. Daniel TO, Stanton CM, Epstein LH. The fut ure is now: reducing impulsivity and energy intake 
using episodic future thinking. Psychol Sci. 2013;24(11):2339 -2342.  
47. Daniel TO, Said M, Stanton CM, Epstein LH. Episodic future thinking reduces delay discounting 
and energy intake in children. Eat Behav. 2015;18:20 -24. 
48. Lin H, Epstein LH. Living in the moment: effects of time perspective and emotional valence of 
episodic thinking on delay discounting. Behav Neurosci. 2014;128(1):12 -19. 
49. Wilfley DE, Stein RI, Saelens BE, et al. Efficacy of maintenance treatment approaches for 
childhood overweight: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2007;298(14):1661 -1673.  
50. Wilfley DE, Van Buren DJ, Theim KR, et al. The use of biosimulation in the design of a novel 
multilevel weight loss maintenance prog ram for overweight children. Obesity. 2010;18 Suppl 
1:S91 -98. 
51. MacLean PS, Wing RR, Davidson T, et al. NIH working group report: Innovative research to 
improve maintenance of weight loss. Obesity. 2015;23(1):7 -15. 
52. Wing RR, Lang W, Wadden TA, et al. Benefits of modest weight loss in improving cardiovascular 
risk factors in overweight and obese individuals with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 
2011;34(7):1481 -1486.  
53. Van Gaal LF, Mertens IL, Ballaux D. What is the relationship between risk factor redu ction and 
degree of weight loss? Eur Heart J Suppl. 2005;7(suppl L):L21 -L26. 
54. Chesla CA, Fisher L, Skaff MM, Mullan JT, Gilliss CL, Kanter R. Family predictors of disease 
management over one year in Latino and European American patients with type 2 diab etes. Fam 
Process. 2003;42(3):375 -390.  
55. Fisher L, Chesla CA, Chun KM, et al. Patient -appraised couple emotion management and disease 
management among Chinese American patients with type 2 diabetes. J Fam Psychol. 
2004;18(2):302 -310.  
56. Fisher L, Skaff MM, Chesla CA, et al. Disease management advice provided to African -American 
and Chinese -American patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2004;27(9):2249 -2250.  
57. Neaton JD, Duchene AG, Svendsen KH, Wentworth D. An examination of the efficiency of s ome 
quality assurance methods commonly employed in clinical trials. Stat Med. 1990;9(1 -2):115 -123; 
discussion 124.  
58. Hosking JD, Newhouse MM, Bagniewska A, Hawkins BS. Data collection and transcription. 
Control Clin Trials. 1995;16(2 Suppl):66s -103s.  
59. Day S, Fayers P, Harvey D. Double data entry: what value, what price? Controlled clinical trials. 
1998;19(1):15 -24.  
60. Baldwin, S. A., Bauer, D. J., Stice, E., & Rohde, P. Evaluating models for partially clustered 
designs. Psychol Methods . 2011; 16(2), 149.  
61. Kalarchian MA, Levine MD, Arslanian SA, et al. Family -based treatment of severe pediatric 
obesity: randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2009;124(4):1060 -1068.  
62. Epstein LH, Wing RR, Koeske R, Andrasik F, Ossip DJ. Child and parent weight lo ss in family -based 
behavior modification programs. J Consul Clin Psychol. 1981;49(5):674 -685.  
Page 76 of 305 
 63. Epstein LH, Wing RR, Koeske R, Valoski A. A comparison of lifestyle exercise, aerobic exercise, 
and calisthenics on weight loss in obese children. Behav Ther.  1985;16(4):345 -356.  
64. Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Gordy CC, Saelens BE, Ernst MM. Problem solving in the treatment of 
childhood obesity. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2000;68(4):717 -721.  
65. Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Gordy CC, Dorn J. Decreasing sedentary behaviors i n treating pediatric 
obesity. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2000;154(3):220 -226.  
66. Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Kilanowski CK, Raynor HA. The effect of reinforcement or stimulus control 
to reduce sedentary behavior in the treatment of pediatric obesity. Health Psy chol. 
2004;23(4):371 -380.  
67. Epstein LH, Roemmich JN, Stein RI, Paluch RA, Kilanowski CK. The challenge of identifying 
behavioral alternatives to food: clinic and field studies. Ann Behav Med. 2005;30(3):201 -209.  
68. Fagg J, Chadwick PM, Cole TJ, et al. F rom trial to population: a study of a family -based 
community intervention for childhood overweight implemented at scale. Int J Obes (2005). 
2014;38(10):1343 -1349.  
69. Sacher PM, Kolotourou  M, Chadwick PM, et al. Randomized controlled trial of the MEND 
program: a family -based community intervention for childhood obesity. Obesity. 2010;18 Suppl 
1:S62 -68. 
70.  Murray DM, Hannan PJ, Wolfinger RD, Baker WL, Dwyer JH. Analysis of data from group -
randomized trials with repeat observations on the same groups. Stat Med 1998;17(14):1581 -
600.  
71.  Rubin D. Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys.  New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1987.  
72. Rubin D. Multiple Imputation after 18+ years. J Am Stat Assoc . 1996;91:473 -489.  
73. Schafer J. Analysis of incomplete multivariate data.  New York: Chapman & Hall; 1997.  
74. Epstein LH, Nudelman S, Wing RR. Long -term effects of family -based treatment for obesity on 
nontreated family members. Behav Ther. 1987;18(2):14 7-152.  
75. Johnson MW, Bickel WK. Within -subject comparison of real and hypothetical money rewards in 
delay discounting. J Exp Anal Behav. 2002;77(2):129 -146.  
76. Thiebaut R, Jacqmin -Gadda H, Chene G, Leport C, Commenges D. Bivariate linear mixed models 
using SAS proc MIXED. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2002;69(3):249 -256.  
77. Krohne H, Pulsack A. Das Erziehungsstil -Inventar (ESI): Manual.  2nd ed. Germany: Beltz Test 
Weinheim; 1995.  
78. Strauss RS, Knight J. Influence of the home environment on the development of obesity in 
children. Pediatrics. 1999;103(6):e85.  
79. Rosenberg DE, Sallis JF, Kerr J, et al. Brief scales to assess physical activity and sedentary 
equipment in the home. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Activ. 2010;7:10.  
80. Cerin E, Saelens BE, Sallis JF, Frank LD. Neighborhood environment walkability scale: validity and 
development of a short form. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2006;38(9):1682 -1691.  
81. Best JR, Theim KR, Gredysa DM, et al. Beha vioral economic predictors of overweight children's 
weight loss. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2012;80(6):1086 -1096.  
 
 
Page 77 of 305 
 IV.  Appendices  
 
A. Consent Form Samples: (Adjusted Primary Aim and added that there is an increased risk 
posed to participants by using third -party platforms, this change was made on 5.23.18 prior to 
review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 11.2.18 ). 
B. Coronavirus Addendum : Added to address the changes in assessments due to social 
distancing as a result of the se rious nature of Covid -19 (UB IRB approved 5.19.20; DSMB 
approved protocol addenda on 5.7.20)
 
  
Page 78 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St.  | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Sibling Adult Consent to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD  
 
Why am I being invited to take part in a research study?  
You are being invited to take part in a research study because:  
● You are an adult sibling of a child participating in a study through your doctor’s office.   
● You are able to read the English language.  
● You fall into the overweight or obese weight category (defined as at or above the 85th 
percentile for age and sex).  
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart Blood and Lung Institute (NHBLI). 
Research studies only include individuals who choose to take part in them. Your decision to take part in 
this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully. Ask questions about anything you 
do not understand before deciding w hether or not to participate. You may also take home an unsigned 
copy of this consent form to think about participating or if you wish to discuss this matter with your 
family or your personal doctor. Please take your time to make your decision. Do not sign  this form 
unless you have had the chance to ask questions and have received satisfactory answers.  
 
What should I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you.  
● Whether or not you take part is up to you.  
● You can choose not to  take part.  
● You can agree to take part and later change your mind.  
● Your decision will not be held against you.  
● You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
 
Who can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein. You may also contact the PLAN coach at 
your child’s doctor’s office. You can also contact th e research participant advocate at 716 -888-4845 or 
researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  

Page 79 of 305 
 This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 88 8-4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu   if:  
● You have questions about your rights as a participant in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot rea ch the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss t reatment called family -
based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be included in the 
primary care setting. Extensive information has been gathered by our research team about the 
treatment of childhood overweight and obesi ty. But there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings. Such as primary care and how it effects siblings 
living with participating parents and children.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that you will be in this treatment and research study for 24 months.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 132 families will be in this research study in your geographical location. Out of 528 
families in the entire study nationally.  
 
What happ ens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?  
To determine if your family is eligible to participate, you and your family will be asked to complete an 
eligibility assessment at an orientation session about this study. Your height and weight will be 
meas ured.  
 
If your family is eligible for this research study and agrees to participate, you will attend the baseline 
assessment with your sibling. You will complete a baseline assessment and an initial appointment with 
your doctor. Your family will be randomized to one of two treatment conditions described below.  
 
 
  
Page 80 of 305 
 Groups  
At the start of the study, your family will be assigned to one of two groups. Participants in one group will 
receive the current standard of care offered by their physician for the treatment of childhood weight 
management.  Participants in the second group  will receive family -based behavioral treatment for 
weight management (FBT).  
FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention that aims to make weight changes in both a child and 
their participating parent. FBT is a well -tested treatment that targets diet,  activity, behavioral 
techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in children and their parents. The treatment includes: 1) 
The Traffic Light Eating Plan uses RED, YELLOW, and GREEN labels for food to guide families toward the 
goal of eating nutritious foods. 2) The Traffic Light Activity Program also uses RED, YELLOW and GREEN 
labels for different levels of exercise to increase physical activity and reducing inactive behaviors. 3) A 
variety of behavioral techniques including changing and controlling you r environment. tracking eating 
and physical activity; setting goals; problem solving; setting up a reward system; incentives for behavior 
change and weight loss; finding substitutes for unhealthy foods; and improving positive parenting. FBT 
also involves m aking changes in the home. So that weight loss or prevention of weight gain may extend 
to members of the family who are not regularly attending treatment sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
The group that your family will be in/the treatment you get will  be chosen by chance. Like flipping a 
coin. Neither you nor your sibling’s doctor will choose what treatment your family will receive. Your 
family will have an equal chance of being assigned to each group. You will be informed of the group your 
family is i n following an initial physician visit.  
 
Treatment Schedule  
Every family will follow their pediatrician recommended schedule of appointments for weight 
management. Families in the group receiving FBT will additionally complete at least 26 sessions with the  
FBT PLAN Coach during the 24 months of the study. The amount of sessions completed within this range 
will be based on progress through the program. The amount will vary for each family.  You will not 
attend the sessions with the PLAN Coach.  
Assessments, I nterviews, Questionnaires  
You will attend five major assessments throughout the entire 2 years of the study:  
● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 3 Measurement assessments during the study (6, 12, and 18 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at en d of study (24 months)  
Each major assessment will take approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your child’s pediatric 
office, or a home visit can be arranged.  
  
Page 81 of 305 
 What are my responsibilities if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this rese arch, you will be responsible to attend the baseline assessment, all 
measurement assessments, and the follow -up assessment.  Your participation in any other meetings 
with your family are voluntary. Weight measurements at these times are also voluntary and can be used 
as data.  
 
What happens if I do not want to be in this research?  
Your participation in this research study is voluntary. You may choose not to enroll in this study.  There 
are no other research alternatives other than to participate in this study.  
 
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at any time. It will not be held against you, or affect your family’s 
participation in the study. You do not have to answer every question. You may refuse to answer a ny 
questions that you do not want to answer.  
If you decide to leave the research, you may not receive full compensation for your participation. If you 
decide to leave the research, contact the investigator at the contact information included below. If you 
stop being in the research, already collected data may not be removed from the study database. You will 
be asked whether the investigator can collect data from your routine medical care.   
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?  
There are  certain risks and discomforts that may be associated with this research. They include:  
 
Likely  
● You may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss work, school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments.  
Less Likely  
● You may find having your height  and weight measured uncomfortable.  
Rare  
● Although this treatment usually prevents the development of eating disorder problems, in rare 
cases it may increase them.  
● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breaches of confidentiality. W e 
implement many layers of security to limit these risks as much as possible within our website 
and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are subject to their own security 
measures and carry their own risks if your family chooses to use t hem to supplement your 
participation in this study.  
 
Will being in this study help me in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. This study may 
provide information that will help you to lose weight and keep it off. However, we cannot guarantee 
that you will receive any benefits from this study.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Page 82 of 305 
 Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including research 
study and medical or education records, to people who have a need to review this information.  We 
cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include 
the IRB and other representatives of this organization. Information related to you will be treated in strict 
confidence to the extent provided by law. You r identity will be coded and will not be associated with any 
published results. Your code number and identity will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator. The only connection between your participation in this study and the study itself wil l be 
this signed consent form. If you withdraw from the study, no further data will be collected.  Any 
information that has been provided may be retained by the researchers and analyzed. In order to 
monitor this research study, representatives from the Ins titutional Review Board (IRB) and other federal 
agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) and OHRP (Office of Human Research Protection) 
may inspect the research records which may reveal your identity. A description of this clinical trial will 
be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This web site will not include 
information that can identify you. At most, the web site will include a summary of the results. You can 
search this web site at any time. Federal law prov ides additional protections of your medical records and 
related health information. These are described in the HIPAA section of this document.  
 
Can I be removed from the research without my OK?  
The principal investigator of the study can remove you from th e research study without your approval. 
Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for physical or psychological reasons.  
 
What else do I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI).   
If you need medical care because of taking part in this research study, contact the investigator and/or 
speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. Generally, this care will be billed to you, 
your insurance or other third party. The University at Buffalo has no program to pay for medical care for 
research -related injury.  
 
 
 
HIPAA:  Authorization for the Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health 
Information for Research Purposes  
This s ection describes information about you and about your health that will be obtained by the 
researchers when you participate in the research study. Health information is considered "protected 
health information" when it may directly identify you as an indivi dual. By signing this form you are 
agreeing to permit the researchers and/or other parties (described in detail below) to have access to 
this information. If there are any parts of this form that you do not understand, please be sure to ask us 
for further clarification.  
A. What protected health information will be collected about you as part of this research 
study?  
__√__  Information from your full medical records (height, weight, dietary restrictions and 
physical activity restrictions.  
__√__  New Health Infor mation created from study related tests, procedures, visits, and/or                                                              
questionnaires as described in this consent form.  
Page 83 of 305 
 B.    Who is authorized to provide or collect this information?  
__√_      Principal Investigator or designee  
C.   With whom may your protected health information be shared?  
Your health information may be shared with others outside of the research group for purposes 
directly related to the conduct of this research study or as required by law, including but not 
limited to:  
__√__  Clinical staff not involved in this research study who may become involved in your 
care if it is potentially relevant to your treatment.  
__√__  The sponsor of this research study (National Heart, Lun g and Blood Institutes 
(NHLBI)  cooperative group, etc., or its agents.  
__√__  The organization(s) responsible for administering this research (e.g., Research 
Foundation of SUNY, University at Buffalo, Washington University, Nationwide 
Children’s Hospital, University of Rochester).  
__√__  Other medical investigators/centers/institutions participating in this research study.  
Your information may also be shared with individuals or entities responsible for general 
administration, oversight and compliance of res earch activities. Examples of this include the 
institution's Privacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, Safety Monitoring 
Boards, an Institutional Review Board, The Research Foundation of the State University of New 
York, University a t Buffalo Foundation Services, and accrediting bodies, or with certain 
government oversight agencies that have authority over the research including the Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP). Your 
information may also be shared with other entities as permitted or required by law.  All 
reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your individually i dentifiable 
health information that may be shared with others as described above.  
All reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your protected health 
information. There is the potential for individually identifiable information and the associated 
health information obtained with this authorization to be re -disclosed by the recipient(s). After 
such a disclosure, the information may no longer be protected by the terms of this authorization 
against further re -disclosure.  
D.  How long wi ll this information be kept by the Principal Investigator?  
__√__    This authorization has no expiration date. The researchers may continue to rely on this 
authorization to obtain and use protected health information about you unless you 
revoke this author ization in writing.  
__√__  Your protected health information will go into a database that will be maintained 
indefinitely. Any future study using this information that falls outside the scope of this 
current study will be required to follow guidelines desi gned to govern access to that 
information and to protect the privacy of that information.  
E.  What are your rights after signing this authorization?  
You have the right to revoke this authorization at any time. If you withdraw your authorization, 
no additio nal efforts to collect individually identifiable health information about you will be 
made. You should know, however, that protected health information acquired using this 
Page 84 of 305 
 authorization prior to its withdrawal may continue to be used to the extent that the  
investigator(s) have already relied on your permission to conduct the research. If you chose to 
withdraw this authorization, you must do so in writing to the following individual(s):  
 
Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
University at Buffalo Department of Pediatrics  
Division of Behavioral Medicine  
3435 Main Street  
G56 Farber Hall  
Buffalo, NY 14214  
Phone: 716 -829-3400  
 
If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that request to the 
institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individually identifiable health 
information.  
 
F.  What will happen if you decide not to sign this authorization?  
 
Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future care you receive at this 
institution and will not cau se any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. 
If you decide not to sign this authorization, you will not be able to participate in the research 
study.   
 
Signature Block for Capable Adult  
Your signature documents your permission t o take part in this research. By signing this form you are not 
waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to negligence or 
misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
   
   
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 

Page 85 of 305 
 University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
 
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS TREATMENT 
IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Sibling Assent to be in a Research Study - (for Children 7 -13 years of age)  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD  
 
Who are we?  
My name is Dr. Leonard H. Epstein and I am a researcher at the UB. I work in the Department of 
Pediatrics.  
 
Why are we meeting with you?  
We want to tell you about a study that involves children like yours elf. We want to see if you would like 
to be in this study too.  
 
Why are we doing this study?  
We want to look at siblings of kids participating in a study through your doctor’s office.  
 
What will happen to you if you are in the study?  
You, your sibling, an d a parent will first come to the doctor’s office. We will tell you about this study. It 
teaches kids about healthy eating and activities. We will ask you if you want to be a part of the study. If 
you want to, we will ask to you come back for more visits.  
 
You will be asked to come in 5 times over 2 years so we can measure your height and weight. This will 
be done in private. Only your parent, your sibling, and the study member will be with you. You do not 
have to answer any questions if you don’t want to. You do not have to do any activities you do not want 
to do.  
 
What are the good things and bad things that may happen to you if you are in the study?  
Most Likely:  
Good:  You can learn how you are growing.   
Maybe:  
Good: You could learn what is like to be in  a research study. You might lose weight.  
Bad:  You might not like getting your height and weight taken.  
 
Do you have to be in the study?  
No you don’t. No one will get angry or upset with you if you don’t want to do this. If you do not want to 
be in the study at any time, it will not affect your family being in the study. Just tell us if you don’t want 
Page 86 of 305 
 to be in the study. And remember, you can  change your mind later if you decide you don’t want to be in 
the study anymore.  
 
Do you have any questions?  
You can ask questions at any time. You can ask now. You can ask later. You can talk to me or you can talk 
to someone else at any time during the study. You can call:  
 
Name of contact person on the study: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
Phone Number: (716) 829 -3400 
  
 
Signature Block for Sibling Assent of Child  
Your signature documents your permission to take part in this 
research.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed Name of Subject  
 
 
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated with 
participation in this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions 
about this information have been answered. A copy of this document will be given to the subject.  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
  
Page 87 of 305 
 University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PR IMARY CARE  
 
Sibling Assent of a 14 -17-year -old to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD  
 
Why am I being invited to take part in a research study?  
You are being invited to take part in a research study because:  
● You are a sibling between the ages of 14 -17 able to read the English language and you fall into 
the overweight or obese weight category (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for age and 
sex) 
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart Blood and Lung Institutes 
(NHBLI).  Research studies only include individuals who choose to take part in them. Your decision to 
take part in this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully and ask questio ns 
about anything you do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate. You may also take 
home an unsigned copy of this consent form to think about participating or if you wish to discuss this 
matter with your family or your personal doctor.  Please take your time to make your decision. Do not 
sign this form unless you have had the chance to ask questions and have received satisfactory answers.  
 
What should I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you.  
● Whether  or not you take part is up to you.  
● You can choose not to take part.  
● You can agree to take part and later change your mind.  
● Your decision will not be held against you.  
● You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
Who can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein . You may also contact the  PLAN coach  at 
your doctor’s office, or you can contact the research  participant advocate at 716 -888-4845 or 
researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu   if:  
● You have questions about your rights as a participa nt in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  
Page 88 of 305 
 ● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this rese arch.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss treatment called family -
based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be included in the 
primary care sett ing. Extensive information has been gathered by our research team about the 
treatment of childhood overweight and obesity, but there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings, such as primary care a nd how it effects siblings 
living with participating parents and children.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that you will be in this treatment and research study for 24 months.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 132 families will be in this research study in your geographical location, out of 528 
families in the entire study nationally.  
 
What happens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?  
To determine if your family is eligible to participate, you and your family will be aske d to complete an 
eligibility assessment at an orientation session about this study. Your height and weight will be 
measured.  
If your family is eligible for this research study and agrees to participate, you will attend the baseline 
assessment with your si bling. After the baseline assessment and an initial appointment with your 
sibling’s doctor, your family will be randomized to one of two treatment conditions described below. 
Additionally, approximately every 6 months, you will get your height and weight m easurements taken.  
Groups  
At the start of the study, your family will be assigned to one of two groups. Participants in one group will 
receive the current standard of care offered by their physician for the treatment of childhood weight 
management.  Partic ipants in the second group will receive family -based behavioral treatment for 
weight management (FBT).  FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention that aims to make weight 
changes in both a child and their participating parent. FBT is a well -tested tr eatment that targets diet, 
activity, behavioral techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in children and their parents. The 
treatment includes: 1) The Traffic Light Eating Plan, which uses RED, YELLOW, GREEN labels for food to 
guide families toward t he goal of eating nutritious foods; 2) the Traffic Light Activity Program, which also 
uses RED, YELLOW and GREEN labels for different levels of exercise to increase physical activity and 
reducing inactive behaviors; and 3) a variety of behavioral technique s including changing and controlling 
your environment, tracking eating and physical activity, setting goals, problem solving, setting up a 
reward system, incentives for behavior change and weight loss, finding substitutes for unhealthy foods, 
and improving  positive parenting. FBT also involves making changes in the home, so weight loss or 
prevention of weight gain may extend to members of the family who are not regularly attending 
treatment sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
The group that your family wi ll be in, will be chosen by chance, like flipping a coin. Neither you nor your 
sibling’s doctor will choose what treatment your family will receive. Your family will have an equal 
chance of being assigned to each group. You will be informed of the group yo ur family is in following an 
initial physician visit.  
Page 89 of 305 
 Treatment Schedule  
Every family will follow their pediatricians recommended schedule of appointments for weight 
management. Families in the group receiving FBT will additionally complete at least 26 ses sions with the 
FBT interventionist during the 24 months of the study. The amount of sessions completed within this 
range will be based on progress through the program and will vary for each family. You will not attend 
the sessions with the PLAN coach.  
Asse ssments, Interviews, Questionnaires  
You will attend five major assessments throughout the entire 2 years of the study:  
● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 3 Measurement assessments during the study (6, 12, and 18 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assess ment at end of study (24 months)  
Each major assessment will take approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your sibling’s pediatric 
office, or a home visit can be arranged. Your height and weight will be taken at each major assessment.   
 
What are my resp onsibilities if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this research, you will be responsible to attend the baseline assessment, all 
measurement assessments, and the follow -up assessment.  Your participation in any other meetings 
with your famil y are voluntary. Weight measurements at these times are also voluntary and can be used 
as data.  
 
What happens if I do not want to be in this research?  
Your participation in this research study is voluntary. You may choose not to enroll in this study, it will 
not affect your family being in the study.  There are no other research alternatives other than to 
participate in this study.  
 
What happens if I say  yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at any time, it will not be held against you. You do not have to answer every 
question and may refuse to answer any questions that you do not want to answer.  
If you decide to leave the research, you may not receive full compensation for your participation. If you 
decide to leave the research, contact the investigator at the contact information included below. If you 
stop being in the research, already collected data may not be removed from the stu dy database. You will 
be asked whether the investigator can collect data from your routine medical care.   
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?  
There are certain risks and discomforts that may be associated with this research. They inc lude:  
Likely  
● You may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss work, school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments.  
Less Likely  
● You may find having your height and weight measured uncomfortable.  
Rare  
Page 90 of 305 
 ● Although this treatment usually prevents t he development of eating disorder problems, in rare 
cases it may increase them.  
● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breaches of confidentiality. We 
implement many layers of security to limit these risks as much as possible within  our website 
and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are subject to their own security 
measures and carry their own risks if your family chooses to use them to supplement your 
participation in this study.  
Will being in this study help m e in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. This study may 
provide information that will help you to lose weight and keep it off. However, we cannot guarantee 
that you will receive any benefits from this study.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including research 
study and medical or education records, to people who have a need to review this information.  We 
cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include 
the IRB and other representatives of this organization. Information related to you will be treated in strict 
confidence to the extent provided by law. You r identity will be coded and will not be associated with any 
published results. Your code number and identity will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator. The only connection between your participation in this study and the study itself wil l be 
this signed consent form. If you withdraw from the study, no further data will be collected, but any 
information that has been provided may be retained by the researchers and analyzed. In order to 
monitor this research study, representatives from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and other federal 
agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) and OHRP (Office of Human Research Protection) 
may inspect the research records which may reveal your identity. A description of this clinical trial wil l 
be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This web site will not include 
information that can identify you. At most, the web site will include a summary of the results. You can 
search this web site at any time.  
 
Can I be rem oved from the research without my OK?  
The principal investigator of the study can remove you from the research study without your approval. 
Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for physical or psychological reasons.  
 
What else do I  need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI).   
If you need medical care because of taking part in this research study, contact the investigator and/or 
speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. Generally, this care will be billed to you, 
your insurance, or other third party. The University at Buffalo has no program to pay for medical care for 
research -related injury.  
 
Signature Bloc k for Assent of Child  
Your signature documents your permission to take part in this research. By signing this form you are not 
waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to negligence or 
misconduct of thos e involved in the research.  
 
Page 91 of 305 
    
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated with participation 
in this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions about this 
information have been answered. A copy of this document will be given to the subject.  
  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
  
Page 92 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
 
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS TREATMENT 
IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Participating Child Assent to be in a Research Study (for Children 7 -13 yrs. of 
age)  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
 
Who are we?  
My name is Dr. Leonard H. Epstein and I am a researcher at the University at  Buffalo. I work in the 
Department of Pediatrics.  
 
Why are we meeting with you?  
We want to tell you about a study that involves children like yourself. We want to see if you would like 
to be in this study too.  
 
Why are we doing this study?  
We want to look at a certain kind of weight loss program for kids. We want to know if it will work at a 
doctor’s office.  
 
What will happen to you if you are in the study?  
You and a parent will first come to the doctor’s office. We will tell you about this study that teach es kids 
about healthy eating and activities. We will ask you if you want to be a part of the study. If you do, we 
will measure your height and weight. We will ask you to answer some questions about yourself and your 
parents. You will do a task that asks yo u to make choices between different amounts of money. If you 
want to, we will ask to you come back for more visits.  
 
After this, you and your parent will be put in one of two groups:  
● If you are in one group, you will follow the recommendations of your doct or. 
● If you are in the other group, you could come to your doctor’s office once a week. You would do 
this for 2 years. This would be at least 26 visits. At the visits you would meet with someone from 
the study. Your weight will be taken. You will learn abou t healthy food. We will teach you fun 
ways to exercise.  
 
Every 6 months we will ask you some questions about yourself. We will measure your height and weight. 
At your baseline, 12 -month and Follow -up appointments, we will ask you to do a computer task that  
asks you to make choices between different amounts of money.  
 

Page 93 of 305 
 You do not have to answer any questions that you do not want to answer. You do not have to do any 
activities that you do not want to do.  
 
What are the good things and bad things that may happen  to you if you are in the study?  
Most Likely:  You can have fun learning about healthy food and exercise. You could become healthy.  
 
Maybe: You could become hungry when trying to eat healthy. Your muscles could feel sore from 
exercise. That will go away onc e you are used to exercising.  
 
Do you have to be in the study?  
No you don’t. No one will get angry or upset with you if you don’t want to do this. Just tell us if you 
don’t want to be in the study. Also, you can change your mind later if you decide you do n’t want to be in 
the study anymore.  
 
Do you have any questions?  
You can ask questions at any time. You can ask now. You can ask later. You can talk to me or you can talk 
to someone else at any time during the study. You can call:  
 
Name of contact person o n the study: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  Phone Number: (716) 829 -3400  
  
 
Signature Block for Assent of Child  
 
Your signature documents your permission to take part in this research.  
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
 
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated with participation 
in this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions about this 
information have been answered. A copy of this documen t will be given to the subject.  
  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
Page 94 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Adult Consent (Non -Participating Parent)  to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
 
Why am I being invited to take part in a research study?  
You are being invited to take part in a research study because:  
● You are a parent of a child pa rticipating in a study through your child’s doctor’s office.   
● You are able to read the English.  
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institutes 
(NHLBI).  Research studies only include individuals who choos e to take part in them. Your decision to 
take part in this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully. Ask questions about 
anything you do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate. You may also take home 
an unsi gned copy of this consent form to think about participating or if you wish to discuss this matter 
with your family or your personal doctor. Please take your time to make your decision. Do not sign this 
form unless you have had the chance to ask questions a nd have received satisfactory answers.  
 
What should I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you.  
● Whether or not you take part is up to you.  
● You can choose not to take part.  
● You can agree to take part and later change your  mind.  
● Your decision will not be held against you.  
● You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
Who can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team by telephone at 7 16-829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein . You may also contact the PLAN coach at 
your child’s doctor’s office, or you can contact the research participant advocate at 716 -888-4845 or 
researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu    if:  
● You have questions about your rights as a participant in this research  

Page 95 of 305 
 ● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss treatment called family -
based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be i ncluded in the 
primary care setting. Extensive information has been gathered by our research team about the 
treatment of childhood overweight and obesity. But there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings. Such as primary care and how it effects siblings 
living with participating parents and children.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that you will be in this treatment and research study for 24 months.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 132 families will be in this research study in your geographical location. Out of 528 
families in the entire study nationally.  
 
What happens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?  
To determine if you are eligible to participate, you wil l be asked to complete an eligibility assessment at 
an orientation session about this study. Your height and weight will be measured.  
If you are eligible for this research study and agree to participate, you will attend the baseline 
assessment with your p articipating child(ren), and the participating parent. After the baseline 
assessment your participating family members will attend an initial appointment with your child’s 
doctor. Your family will be randomized to one of two treatment conditions described below. 
Additionally, you will get your height and weight measurements taken at 24 months.  
Groups  
At the start of the study, your family will be assigned to one of two groups. Participants in one group will 
receive the current standard of care offered by th eir physician for the treatment of childhood weight 
management.  Participants in the second group will receive family -based behavioral treatment for 
weight management (FBT).  
FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention that aims to make weight changes i n both a child and 
their participating parent. FBT is a well -tested treatment that targets diet, activity, behavioral 
techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in children and their parents. The treatment includes: 1) 
The Traffic Light Eating Plan, wh ich uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN labels for food to guide families 
toward the goal of eating nutritious foods. 2) The Traffic Light Activity Program, which also uses RED; 
YELLOW; and GREEN labels for different levels of exercise to increase physical activit y and reducing 
inactive behaviors. 3) a variety of behavioral techniques including changing and controlling your 
environment; tracking eating and physical activity; setting goals; problem solving; setting up a reward 
system; incentives for behavior change and weight loss; finding substitutes for unhealthy foods; and 
improving positive parenting. FBT also involves making changes in the home. So weight loss or 
prevention of weight gain may extend to members of the family who are not regularly attending 
treatm ent sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
Page 96 of 305 
 The group that your family will be in/the treatment they get will be chosen by chance, like flipping a 
coin. Neither parent nor your child’s doctor will choose what treatment they get. Your participating 
family mem bers will have an equal chance of being assigned to each group. Your family will be informed 
of the group they are in following an initial physician visit.  
Treatment Schedule  
Every family will follow their pediatricians recommended schedule of appointments  for weight 
management. Families in the group receiving FBT will additionally complete at least 26 sessions with the 
FBT interventionist during the 24 months of the study. The amount of sessions completed within this 
range will be based on progress through  the program. The amount will vary for each family.  You will not 
attend the sessions with the PLAN coach.  
Assessments, Interviews, Questionnaires  
You will attend two major assessments throughout the entire 2 years of the study:  
● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at end of study (24 months)  
Each major assessment will take approximately 15 minutes to complete at your child’s pediatric office, 
or a home visit can be arranged. Your height and weight will be taken at eac h major assessment.  
 
What are my responsibilities if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this research, you will be responsible to get your height taken at baseline and weight 
taken at baseline and final assessment sessions.  Your participati on in any other meetings with your 
family are voluntary. Weight measurements at these times are also voluntary and can be used as data.  
 
What happens if I do not want to be in this research?  
Your participation in this research study is voluntary. You may choose not to enroll in this study it will 
not affect your family being in the study.  There are no other research alternatives other than to 
participate in this study.  
 
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at an y time. It will not be held against you, or affect your family’s 
participation in the study. You do not have to answer every question. You may refuse to answer any 
questions that you do not want to answer.  
If you decide to leave the research, you may not r eceive full compensation for your participation. If you 
decide to leave the research, contact the investigator at the contact information included below. If you 
stop being in the research, already collected data may not be removed from the study database. You will 
be asked whether the investigator can collect data from your routine medical care.   
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?  
There are certain risks and discomforts that may be associated with this research. They include:  
Likely  
● You may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss work, school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments.  
Less Likely  
● You may find having your height and weight measured uncomfortable.  
Page 97 of 305 
 Rare  
● Although this treatment usually prevents the developmen t of eating disorder problems, in rare 
cases it may increase them.  
● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breaches of confidentiality. We 
implement many layers of security to limit these risks as much as possible within our website 
and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are subject to their own security 
measures and carry their own risks if your family chooses to use them to supplement your 
participation in this study.  
Will being in this study help me in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your family taking part in this research. This 
study may provide information that will help you to lose weight and keep it off. However, we cannot 
guarantee that you will receive any benefits from this study.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including research 
study and medical or education records, to people who have a need to review this information. We 
cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include 
the IRB and other representatives of this organization. Information related to you will be treated in strict 
confidence to the extent provided  by law. Your identity will be coded and will not be associated with any 
published results. Your code number and identity will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator. The only connection between your participation in this study and the stud y itself will be 
this signed consent form. If you withdraw from the study, no further data will be collected. Any 
information that has been provided may be retained by the researchers and analyzed. In order to 
monitor this research study, representatives f rom the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and other federal 
agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) and OHRP (Office of Human Research Protection) 
may inspect the research records which may reveal your identity. A description of this clinical t rial will 
be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This web site will not include 
information that can identify you. At most, the web site will include a summary of the results. You can 
search this web site at any time. Feder al law provides additional protections of your medical records and 
related health information. These are described in the HIPAA section of this document.  
Can I be removed from the research without my OK?  
The principal investigator of the study can remove y ou from the research study without your approval. 
Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for physical or psychological reasons.  
 
What else do I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifi cally the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI).   
If you need medical care because of taking part in this research study, contact the investigator and/or 
speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. Generally, this care will be billed to you, 
your insurance, or other third party. The University at Buffalo has no program to pay for medical care for 
research -related injury.  
 
HIPAA:  Authorization for the Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health 
Information for Research Purpose s  
Page 98 of 305 
 This section describes information about you and about your health that will be obtained by the 
researchers when you participate in the research study. Health information is considered "protected 
health information" when it may directly identify you as an individual. By signing this form you are 
agreeing to permit the researchers and/or other parties (described in detail below) to have access to 
this information. If there are any parts of this form that you do not understand, please be sure to ask us 
for further clarification.  
A. What protected health information will be collected about you as part of this research 
study?  
__√__   Specific information from your medical records related to height and weight.  
__√__ New Health Information created from study related tests, procedures, visits, and/or                                                              
questionnaires as described in this consent form.  
 
B.    Who is authorized to provide or collect this information?  
__√_      Principal Investigator or de signee  
 
C.   With whom may your protected health information be shared?  
Your health information may be shared with others outside of the research group for purposes 
directly related to the conduct of this research study or as required by law, including but not 
limited to:  
_√__  Clinical staff not involved in this research study who may become involved in you and 
your child’s care if it is potentially relevant to your treatment.  
__√__  The sponsor of this research study (National Heart, Lung and Blood Ins titutes (NHLBI) 
cooperative group, etc., or its agents.  
__√__  The organization(s) responsible for administering this research (e.g., Research 
Foundation of SUNY, University at Buffalo, Washington University, Nationwide 
Children’s Hospital, University of R ochester).  
__√__  Other medical investigators/centers/institutions participating in this research study.  
Your information may also be shared with individuals or entities responsible for general 
administration, oversight and compliance of research activitie s. Examples of this include the 
institution's Privacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, Safety Monitoring 
Boards, an Institutional Review Board, The Research Foundation of the State University of New 
York, University at Buffalo Found ation Services, and accrediting bodies, or with certain 
government oversight agencies that have authority over the research including the Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the National 
Institutes of Heal th (NIH), and the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP). Your 
information may also be shared with other entities as permitted or required by law.  All 
reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your individually identifiable 
health information that may be shared with others as described above.  
All reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your protected health 
information. There is the potential for individually identifiable information and the associated 
health information obtained with this authorization to be re -disclosed by the recipient(s). After 
Page 99 of 305 
 such a disclosure, the information may no longer be protected by the terms of this authorization 
against further re -disclosure.  
 
 
D.  How long will this infor mation be kept by the Principal Investigator?  
__√__    This authorization has no expiration date. The researchers may continue to rely on this 
authorization to obtain and use protected health information about you unless you 
revoke this authorization in wr iting.  
__√__ Your protected health information will go into a database that will be maintained 
indefinitely. Any future study using this information that falls outside the scope of this 
current study will be required to follow guidelines designed to govern  access to that 
information and to protect the privacy of that information.  
E.  What are your rights after signing this authorization?  
You have the right to revoke this authorization at any time. If you withdraw your authorization, 
no additional efforts to  collect individually identifiable health information about you will be 
made. You should know, however, that protected health information acquired using this 
authorization prior to its withdrawal may continue to be used to the extent that the 
investigator( s) have already relied on your permission to conduct the research. If you chose to 
withdraw this authorization, you must do so in writing to the following individual(s):  
 
Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
University at Buffalo Department of Pediatrics  
Division of Behavioral Medicine  
3435 Main Street  
G56 Farber Hall  
Buffalo, NY 14214  
Phone: 716 -829-3400  
 
If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that request to the 
institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individual ly identifiable health 
information.  
 
F.  What will happen if you decide not to sign this authorization?  
 
Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future care you receive at this 
institution and will not cause any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. 
If you decide not to sign this authorization, you will not be able to participate in the research 
study.   
 
Signature Block for Capable Adult  
Page 100 of 305 
 Your signature documents your permission to take part in this res earch. By signing this form you are not 
waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to negligence or 
misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
   
   
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
  
Page 101 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Parental Permission for Targeted Child to Participate in  a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
 
Why is my child being invited to take part in a research study?  
Your child is being invited to take part in a research study because:  
● You are an adult able to read the E nglish language.  You have reported no current learning 
disabilities, medical problems, or psychiatric problems.  
● Your child is between the ages of 6 and 12 years old, falls into the overweight or obese weight 
category (defined as at or above the 85th perc entile for age and sex), and your child has at least 
one parent that is willing to participate in the study.  
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart Lung Blood Institutes (NHLBI). 
Research studies only include individuals who  choose to take part in them. Your decision for your child 
to take part in this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully.  Ask questions 
about anything you do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate. You may also take 
home an unsigned copy of this consent form to think about participating or if you wish to discuss this 
matter with your family or your personal doctor. Please take your time to make your decision. Do not 
sign this form unless you have had the cha nce to ask questions and have received satisfactory answers.  
 
What should my child and I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you and your child.  
● Whether or not your child takes part is up to you and your child.  
● You and your child can choose for your child not to take part.  
● You and your child can agree to take part and later change your mind.  
● You and your child’s decision will not be held against you.  
● You and your child can ask all the questions you want before you decide . 
Who can my child and I talk to?  
If you or your child has questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt your child, talk 
to the research team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein . You may also contact the 
PLAN coach at  your child’s doctor’s office.  You can also contact the research participant advocate at 
716-888-4845 or researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional  Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu   if:  

Page 102 of 305 
 ● You have questions about your child’s rights as a participant in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss treatment called family -
based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be included in the 
primary care setting.  Extensive information has been gathered by our research team about the 
treatment of childhood overweight and obesity. But there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings. Such as primary care.  
 
Your child has been asked to participate becaus e he/she is between the ages of 6 and 12 years old, falls 
into the overweight or obese weight category (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for age and 
sex), and your child has at least one parent that is willing to participate in the study.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that your child will be in this treatment and research study for 24 months.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 132 families will be in this research study in your geographical location, out of 528 
famil ies in the entire study nationally.  
 
What happens if I say yes, my child wants to be in this research?  
To determine if your child is eligible to participate, you and your child will be asked to complete an 
eligibility assessment at an orientation session a bout this study. You and your child’s height and weight 
will be measured, and standard questions regarding medical and psychological history will be asked by a 
trained interviewer to determine eligibility.  
If your family is eligible for this research stud y and agrees to participate, you and your child will be asked 
to come to your pediatric office to complete a baseline assessment (detailed below). Additionally, we 
hope to collect information about how participation in FBT may affect others in your home. T herefore, if 
you have another child who meets eligibility criteria (between the ages of 2 -18 who is at or above the 
85th percentile for age and sex), we ask that this child also attend the baseline assessment. After the 
baseline assessment and an initial a ppointment with your child’s doctor, your family will be randomized 
to one of two treatment conditions described below.   
 
Groups  
At the start of the study, your family will be assigned to one of two groups .  Participants in one group 
will receive the curr ent standard of care offered by their physician for the treatment of childhood 
weight management. Participants in the second group will receive family -based behavioral treatment 
for weight management (FBT).  
FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention t hat aims to make weight changes in both a child and 
their participating parent. FBT is a well -tested treatment that targets diet, activity, behavioral 
techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in children and their parents. The treatment includes: 1) 
The Traffic Light Eating Plan uses RED; YELLOW; GREEN labels for food to guide families toward the goal 
Page 103 of 305 
 of eating nutritious foods. 2) The Traffic Light Activity Program also uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN 
labels for different levels of exercise to increase p hysical activity and reducing inactive behaviors. 3) a 
variety of behavioral techniques including changing and controlling your environment; tracking eating 
and physical activity; setting goals; problem solving; setting up a reward system; incentives for b ehavior 
change and weight loss; finding substitutes for unhealthy foods; and improving positive parenting. FBT 
also involves making changes in the home. So that weight loss or prevention of weight gain may extend 
to members of the family who are not regula rly attending treatment sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
The group that your family will be in/the treatment you get will be chosen by chance. Like flipping a 
coin. Neither you nor your doctor will choose what treatment your family will receive. Your family will 
have an equal chance of being assigned to each group. You will be informed of the group your family is 
in and your treatment following an initial physician visit.  
Treatment Schedule  
Every family will follow their pediatricians recommended sched ule of appointment for weight 
management. Families in the group receiving FBT will additionally complete at least 26 sessions with the 
FBT PLAN coach during the 24 months of the study. The amount of session completed within this range 
will be based on prog ress through the program. The amount will vary for each family.  
Assessments, Interviews, Questionnaires  
Attendance will be taken and both you and your child will be weighed at every session. In addition, there 
will be five major assessments throughout the entire 2 years of the study:  
● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 3 Measurement assessments during the study (6, 12, and 18 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at end of study (24 months)  
Each major assessment will take approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your child’s pediatric 
office, or a home visit can be arranged. Height and weight will be taken on you and your child as well as 
the identified other family members (if applicable). Your height will be taken at the beginning of the 
study, and your child(ren)’s height will be taken at each major assessment. You and your participating 
child will also complete short questionnaires. At your baseline, 12 -month, and follow -up appointment, 
you will be asked to complete a computer task.  You both will be asked questions about parenting 
behaviors and the home food and activity environment. Throughout the study, you will have access to a 
website that contains study materials and interactive tools.   At the very end of the study, the PLAN 
coach w ill review your child’s chart to collect data on Usual Care.  
Audio Recording  
Your interviews and individual family and will be audiotaped or digitally recorded for research purposes, 
but you will not be identified on the recording and the recordings will n ot be labeled with your name. 
Recording the sessions is the best way to make sure we collect accurate information. It also helps us 
make sure that all our staff delivers the study to participants in the same way. The recordings will be 
stored on password -protected computers with restricted access within the University at Buffalo, and 
then transferred to Washington University School of Medicine. The recordings will be labeled only with 
your study ID, date, and session number. The Principal Investigator and r esearch staff may use these 
recordings for purposes of evaluation, treatment, research, and training related to this study. 
Recordings may also be used to train staff implementing these or similar interventions at other sites. 
The recordings will be destro yed at the end of the study when all data analysis is complete. You do not 
have to agree to be audio recorded in order to participate in this study.  
Please check and initial below if you agree for you and your child to be audio recorded during your 
session s with the PLAN coach:  
Page 104 of 305 
 __________YES, PARENT INITIAL______________ , I give my permission to be audio recorded 
during sessions with a PLAN Coach. Date: ________________  
 
__________NO, PARENT INITIAL______________ , I do not give  my permission to be audio recorded 
during sessions with a PLAN Coach. Date: ________________  
 
What are my child’s responsibilities if he/she takes part in this research?  
If your child takes part in this research, he/she will be responsible to: attend the baseline assessment, 
attend all measurement assessments, attend at least 26 treatment sessions if your family is in the group 
receiving FBT, and attend the follow -up assessment.  
What happens if my child does not want to be in this research?  
Your child’s pa rticipation in this research study is voluntary. You or your child may choose not to enroll 
in this study. There are no other research alternatives other than to participate in this study.  
What happens if my child and I say yes, but change our mind later?  
Your child can leave the research at any time. It will not be held against him/her. Your child does not 
have to answer every question. He/she may refuse to answer any questions that he/she does not want 
to answer.  
If your child decides to leave the researc h, you may not be able to find this kind of family treatment in 
your area outside of this research study. Other types of treatment may be available in your community. 
In which case we will provide a list of these and how to find them if you prefer this opt ion. However you 
and/or your insurance company would be responsible for any costs associated with these options. You 
also may not receive full compensation for your participation. If your child decides to leave the research, 
contact the investigator at the  contact information included below. If your child stops being in the 
research, already collected data may not be removed from the study database. You will be asked 
whether the investigator can collect data from your child’s routine medical care.   
 
Is ther e any way being in this study could be bad for my child?  
There are certain risks and discomforts that may be associated with this research. They include:  
Likely  
● Your child might feel hungry when dieting or sore after exercising.  
Less Likely  
● Your child may find some of the questions embarrassing or be uncomfortable having his/her 
height and weight measured.  
● There may be some family disagreements as issues of family functioning; communication; and 
discipline are discussed.  
● Your child may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments and family sessions.  
Rare  
● There is a risk of audio recordings being lost. All recordings will be immediately stored in a 
locked drawer or saved to a password -protected compute r in the research office after the 
individual family and group weight loss and maintenance sessions. Your family name will not be 
on these recordings, which will be identified only by a study ID number.  
Page 105 of 305 
 ● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breaches of confidentiality. We 
implement many layers of security to limit these risks as much as possible within our website 
and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are subject to their own security 
measures and carry their o wn risks if your family chooses to use them to supplement your 
participation in this study.  
● In addition, although this treatment usually prevents the development of eating disorder 
problems, in rare cases it may increase them.  
Other Risks  
● In this study you r child will be given a physical activity goal. Given that some people may have 
medical risks associated with increasing their physical activity, these recommendations for your 
child will be given in consultation with his/her doctor.  
● Randomization - As me ntioned before, this study has two groups. Because chance decides 
which group your child will be in, the treatment your child receives as part of this study may not 
be what your own doctor would choose for your child.  
 
Will being in this study help my chil d in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you, your child, or others from your taking part in this research. 
However, possible benefits could include your child losing weight, becoming more physically active, and 
eating more healthfully as a result o f participation. In addition, maintaining weight loss may lead to 
better relationships and better mood. However, we cannot guarantee your child will receive any 
benefits from this study. This study may provide information that will help other children insi de and 
outside your household to lose weight and keep it off.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your child’s personal information, including 
research study and medical or ed ucation records, to people who have a need to review this information. 
We cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your child’s information 
include the IRB and other representatives of this organization. Information related to your child will be 
treated in strict confidence to the extent provided by law. Your child’s identity will be coded and will not 
be associated with any published results. Your child’s code number and identity will be kept in a locked 
file of the Principa l Investigator. The only connection between your child’s participation in this study and 
the study itself will be this signed consent form. All recordings of the sessions will be kept in a locked file 
of the Principal Investigator until the end of the stud y. At which point they will be destroyed. If your 
child withdraws from the study, no further data will be collected. Any information that has been 
provided may be retained by the researchers and analyzed. In order to monitor this research study, 
representa tives from the Social and Behavioral Sciences Institutional Review Board (SBSIRB) and other 
federal agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) and OHRP (Office of Human Research 
Protection) may inspect the research records which may reveal your c hild’s identity. A description of this 
clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This web site will 
not include information that can identify your child. At most, the web site will include a summary of the 
results. You can search this web site at any time. Federal law provides additional protections of your 
child’s medical records and related health information. These are described in the HIPAA section of this 
document.  
 
 
 
Page 106 of 305 
 Can my child be removed from the re search without our OK?  
The principal investigator of the study can remove your child from the research study without your or 
your child’s approval. Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for physical or 
psychological reasons. We will  tell you about any new information that may affect your child’s health, 
welfare, or choice to stay in the research.  
 
What else do my child and I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI).  
If your child needs medical care because of taking part in this research study, contact the investigator 
and/or speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. Generally, this care will be billed 
to you, your insurance or other third party. The University at Buffalo has no program to pay for medical 
care for research -related injury. If your child agrees to take part in this research study, we will pay your 
family up to $175 for your time and effort. T he amount you are paid depends upon your attendance to 
visits in the study.  
 
HIPAA:  Authorization for the Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health Information for Research 
Purposes  
This section describes information about your child and about your child ’s health that will be obtained 
by the researchers when your child participates in the research study. Health information is considered 
"protected health information" when it may directly identify your child as an individual. By signing this 
form you are a greeing to permit the researchers and/or other parties (described in detail below) to have 
access to this information. If there are any parts of this form that you do not understand, please be sure 
to ask us for further clarification.  
A. What protected health  information will be collected about your child as part of this 
research study?  
__√__  Information from your child’s full medical records.  
__√__  New Health Information created from study related tests, procedures, visits, and/or                                                              
questionnaires as described in this consent form.  
B.    Who is authorized to provide or collect this information?  
__√_      Principal Investigator or designee  
C.   With whom may your child’s protected health information be shared?  
Your child’s health information may be shared with others outside of the research group for 
purposes directly related to the conduct of this research study or as required by law, including 
but not limited to:  
__√__  Clinical staff not involved in this research study who may become involved in your 
child’s care if it is potentially relevant to your treatment.  
__√__  The sponsor of this research study (National Heart, Lung and Blood Institutes 
(NHLBI)  cooperative group, etc., or its agents.  
__√__  The organization(s) responsible for administering this research (e.g., Research 
Foundation of SUNY, University at Buffalo, Washington University, Nationwide 
Children’s Hospital, University of Rochester).  
Page 107 of 305 
 __√__  Other medical investigators/centers/institutions participating in this research study.  
Your child’s information may also be shared with individuals or entities responsible for general 
administration, oversight and compliance of research activities. Exampl es of this include the 
institution's Privacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, Safety Monitoring 
Boards, an Institutional Review Board, The Research Foundation of the State University of New 
York, University at Buffalo Foundation Ser vices, and accrediting bodies, or with certain 
government oversight agencies that have authority over the research including the Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the National Institutes 
of Health (NIH),  and the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP). Your child’s information 
may also be shared with other entities as permitted or required by law.  All reasonable efforts will 
be used to protect the confidentiality of your child’s individually identifia ble health information 
that may be shared with others as described above.  
All reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your child’s protected health 
information. There is the potential for individually identifiable information and the associated 
health information obtained with this authorization to be re -disclosed by the recipient(s). After 
such a disclosure, the information may no longer be protected by the terms of this authorization 
against further re -disclosure.  
 
D.  How long w ill this information be kept by the Principal Investigator?  
__√__    This authorization has no expiration date. The researchers may continue to rely on this 
authorization to obtain and use protected health information about your child unless 
you revoke thi s authorization in writing.  
__√__  Your child’s protected health information will go into a database that will be maintained 
indefinitely. Any future study using this information that falls outside the scope of this 
current study will be required to follow  guidelines designed to govern access to that 
information and to protect the privacy of that information.  
E.  What are your rights after signing this authorization?  
You have the right to revoke this authorization at any time. If you withdraw your authoriza tion, 
no additional efforts to collect individually identifiable health information about your child will 
be made. You should know, however, that protected health information acquired using this 
authorization prior to its withdrawal may continue to be used  to the extent that the 
investigator(s) have already relied on your permission to conduct the research. If you chose to 
withdraw this authorization, you must do so in writing to the following individual(s):  
 
Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
University at Buffalo Department of Pediatrics  
Division of Behavioral Medicine  
3435 Main Street  
G56 Farber Hall  
Buffalo, NY 14214  
Phone: 716 -829-3400  
 
Page 108 of 305 
 If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that request to the 
institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individually identifiable health 
information.  
 
F.  What will happen if you decide not to sign this au thorization?  
 
Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future care your child receives at 
this institution and will not cause any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise 
entitled. If you decide not to sign this auth orization, you and your child will not be able to 
participate in the research study.   
  
Page 109 of 305 
 Signature Block for Parental Permission  
 
Your signature documents your permission for the named child to take part in this research. By signing this form you are 
not w aiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to negligence or 
misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
 Printed name of child  
   
Signature of parent or individual legally authorized to consent to the child’s 
general medical care   Date  
 ❑ Parent  
❑ Individual legally authorized to 
consent to the child’s general 
medical care  (See note below)  Printed name of parent or individual legally authorized to consent to the child’s 
general medical care  
Note:  Investigators are to ensure that individuals who are not parents can demonstrate their legal authority to consent to the 
child’s general medical care. Contact legal counsel if any questions arise.  
   
Assent Process  
 
❑ Child is birth -6 yrs. old - Assent is not required  
❑ Child is 7 -17 yrs. old – A separate Assent Document is to be signed by the child  
❑ Assent will be obtained Verbally  
❑ Assent has been waived by the IRB  
 
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated  with participation in 
this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions about this information 
have been answered. A copy of this document will be given to the subject.  
  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
  
Page 110 of 305 
  
 
 
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS TREATMENT 
IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Parental Permission of Sibling to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD  
 
Why is my child being invited to take part in a research study?  
Your child is being invited to take part in a research study because:  
● You are an adult able to read the English language. You have reported no current learning 
disabilities, medi cal problems, or psychiatric problems.  
● You have a child between the ages of 2 -18 years old that falls into the overweight or obese 
weight category (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for age and sex) and is willing to 
participate by getting his/he r height and weight taken every 6 months over the two -year study.  
● You have another child between the ages of 6 and 12 years old that falls into the overweight or 
obese weight category (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for age and sex), and your 
child has at least one parent that is willing to participate in the study.  
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart Lung Blood Institutes (NHLBI). 
Research studies only include individuals who choose to take part in them. Your decision for your child 
to take part in this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully. Ask questions about 
anything you do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate. You may also take home 
an unsigned copy of t his consent form to think about participating or if you wish to discuss this matter 
with your family or your personal doctor. Please take your time to make your decision. Do not sign this 
form unless you have had the chance to ask questions and have receiv ed satisfactory answers.  
 
What should my child and I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you and your child.  
● Whether or not your child takes part is up to you and your child.  
● You and your child can choose for your child  not to take part.  
● You and your child can agree to take part and later change your mind.  
● You and your child’s decision will not be held against you.  
● You and your child can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
  

Page 111 of 305 
 Who can my child and I talk to?  
If you or your child has questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt your child, talk 
to the research team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein. You may also contact the 
PLAN coach at your child’s doctor’s office. Yo u can also contact the research participant advocate at 
716-888-4845 or researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu  if:  
● You have questions about your child’s rights as a pa rticipant in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about th is research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss treatment called family -
based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be included in the 
primary ca re setting.  Extensive information has been gathered by our research team about the 
treatment of childhood overweight and obesity. But there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings, such as primar y care.  
 
Your child has been asked to participate because he/she is between the ages of 2 and 18 years old, falls 
into the overweight or obese weight category (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for age and 
sex), has one sibling who is also considered overw eight or obese (BMI greater than 25), and has at least 
one parent that is willing to participate in the study.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that your child will be in this research study for 24 months.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We e xpect about 132 families will be in this research study in your geographical location, out of 528 
families in the entire study nationally.  
 
What happens if I say yes, my child wants to be in this research?  
To determine if your child is eligible to particip ate you, your participating (target) child, and this 
participating sibling will be asked to complete an eligibility assessment at an orientation session about 
this study. You and your children’s height and weight will be measured.  
If your family is eligib le for this research study and agrees to participate, the participating sibling 
(between the ages of 2 -18 who is at or above the 85th percentile for age and sex) will attend the 
baseline assessment with you and your target child. After the baseline assessm ent and an initial 
appointment with your child’s doctor, your family will be randomized to one of two treatment 
conditions described below.   
Groups  
At the start of the study, your family will be assigned to one of two groups. Participants in one group wil l 
receive the current standard of care offered by their physician for the treatment of childhood weight 
management.  FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention that aims to make weight changes in both 
a child and their participating parent. FBT is a w ell-tested treatment that targets diet, activity, behavioral 
Page 112 of 305 
 techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in children and their parents. The treatment includes: 1) 
The Traffic Light Eating Plan uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN labels for food to guide familie s toward the 
goal of eating nutritious foods. 2) The Traffic Light Activity Program also uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN 
labels for different levels of exercise to increase physical activity and reducing inactive behaviors. 3) a 
variety of behavioral technique s including changing and controlling your environment; tracking eating 
and physical activity; setting goals; problem solving; setting up a reward system; incentives for behavior 
change and weight loss; finding substitutes for unhealthy foods; and improving  positive parenting. FBT 
also involves making changes in the home. So weight loss or prevention of weight gain may extend to 
members of the family who are not regularly attending treatment sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
The group that your family wi ll be in/the treatment you get will be chosen by chance. Like flipping a 
coin. Neither you nor your doctor will choose what treatment your family will receive. Your family will 
have an equal chance of being assigned to each group. You will be informed of t he group your family is 
in and your treatment following an initial physician visit.  
 
Treatment Schedule  
Every family will follow their pediatrician recommended schedule of appointments for weight 
management to have at least 4 visits with their child’s doct or over the course of the 24 months of the 
study. Families in the group receiving FBT will additionally complete at least 26 sessions with the FBT 
PLAN coach during the 24 months of the study. The amount of session completed within this range will 
be based  on progress through the program. The amount will vary for each family.  The participating 
sibling will not attend the sessions with the PLAN coach.  
 
Assessments, Interviews, Questionnaires  
The participating sibling will attend five major assessments throu ghout the entire 2 years of the study:  
● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 3 Measurement assessments during the study (6, 12, and 18 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at end of study (24 months)  
Each major assessment will take approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your child’s pediatric 
office, or a home visit can be arranged. Height and weight will be taken on you, your participating child, 
as well as the participating sibling and identified  other family members (if applicable).   
What are my child’s responsibilities if he/she takes part in this research?  
If your child (participating sibling) takes part in this research, he/she will be responsible to attend the 
baseline assessment, the three measurement assessments, and the follow -up assessment to obtain 
height and weight information.  Your child’s (participating sibling) participation in any other meetings 
with your family are voluntary. Weight measurements at these times are also voluntary a nd can be used 
as data.  
 
  
Page 113 of 305 
 What happens if my child does not want to be in this research?  
Your child’s participation in this research study is voluntary. You or your child may choose not to enroll 
in this study.  There are no other research alternatives other than to participate in this study.  
 
What happens if my child and I say yes, but change our mind later?  
Your child can leave the research at any time. It will not be held against him/her. Your child does not 
have to answer every question. He/she may r efuse to answer any questions that he/she does not want 
to answer. If your participating sibling child leaves the research, this will not affect the status of you or 
your participating (target) child in the study.  
If you or your child decides to leave the research, you may not be able to find this kind of family 
treatment in your area outside of this research study. Other types of treatment may be available in your 
community. In which case we will provide a list of these and how to find them if you prefer t his option. 
However you and/or your insurance company would be responsible for any costs associated with these 
options. You also may not receive full compensation for your participation. If your child decides to leave 
the research, contact the investigator  at the contact information included below. If your child stops 
being in the research, already collected data may not be removed from the study database. You will be 
asked whether the investigator can collect data from your child’s routine medical care.   
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for my child?  
There are certain risks and discomforts that may be associated with this research. They include:  
Likely  
● You may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss work, school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments.  
Less Likely  
● Your child may be uncomfortable having his/her height and weight measured.  
Rare  
● In addition, although this treatment usually prevents the development of eating disorder 
problems, in rare cases it may increase them.  
● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breaches of confidentiality. We 
implement many layers of security to limit these risks as much as possible within our website 
and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are sub ject to their own security 
measures and carry their own risks if your family chooses to use them to supplement your 
participation in this study.  
Will being in this study help my child in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you, your child, or others  from your taking part in this research. This 
study may provide information that will help your child to lose weight and keep it off. However, we 
cannot guarantee your child will receive any benefits from this study.  
 
What happens to the information colle cted for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your child’s personal information, including 
research study and medical or education records, to people who have a need to review this information. 
We cannot promise complete se crecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your child’s information 
include the IRB and other representatives of this organization. Information related to your child will be 
treated in strict confidence to the extent provided by law. Your child’s ident ity will be coded and will not 
Page 114 of 305 
 be associated with any published results. Your child’s code number and identity will be kept in a locked 
file of the Principal Investigator. The only connection between your child’s participation in this study and 
the study i tself will be this signed consent form. All recordings of the sessions will be kept in a locked file 
of the Principal Investigator until the end of the study. At which point they will be destroyed. If your 
child withdraws from the study, no further data wi ll be collected. Any information that has been 
provided may be retained by the researchers and analyzed. In order to monitor this research study, 
representatives from the Social and Behavioral Sciences Institutional Review Board (SBSIRB) and other 
federal agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) and OHRP (Office of Human Research 
Protection) may inspect the research records which may reveal your child’s identity. A description of this 
clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials .gov, as required by U.S. Law. This web site will 
not include information that can identify your child. At most, the web site will include a summary of the 
results. You can search this web site at any time. Federal law provides additional protections of yo ur 
child’s medical records and related health information. These are described in the HIPAA section of this 
document.  
 
Can my child be removed from the research without our OK?  
The principal investigator of the study can remove your child from the research  study without your or 
your child’s approval. Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for physical or 
psychological reasons. We will tell you about any new information that may affect your child’s health, 
welfare, or choice to stay in  the research.  
 
What else do my child and I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI).  
If your child needs medical care because of taking part in this  research study, contact the investigator 
and/or speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. Generally, this care will be billed 
to you, your insurance or other third party. The University at Buffalo has no program to pay for medical 
care for research -related injury. If your child agrees to take part in this research study, we will pay your 
family up to $175 for your time and effort. The amount you are paid depends upon your attendance to 
visits in the study.  
 
HIPAA:  Authorization for t he Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health 
Information for Research Purposes  
This section describes information about your child and about your child’s health that will be obtained 
by the researchers when your child participates in the research study. Health information is considered 
"protected health information" when it may direc tly identify your child as an individual. By signing this 
form you are agreeing to permit the researchers and/or other parties (described in detail below) to have 
access to this information. If there are any parts of this form that you do not understand, p lease be sure 
to ask us for further clarification.  
 
A. What protected health information will be collected about your child as part of this 
research study?  
__√__  Information from your child’s full medical records.  
__√__  New Health Information created from study related tests, procedures, visits, and/or                                                              
questionnaires as described in this consent form.  
Page 115 of 305 
 B.    Who is authorized to provide or collect this information?  
__√_      Principal Investigator or designee  
C.   With whom may your child’s protected health information be shared?  
Your child’s health information may be shared with others outside of the research group for 
purposes directly related to the conduct of this research study or as required by law, including 
but not limited to:  
__√__  Clinical staff not involved in this research study who may become involved in your 
child’s care if it is potentially relevant to your treatment.  
__√__  The sponsor of this research study (National Heart, Lung an d Blood Institutes 
(NHLBI)  cooperative group, etc., or its agents.  
__√__  The organization(s) responsible for administering this research (e.g., Research 
Foundation of SUNY, University at Buffalo, Washington University, Nationwide 
Children’s Hospital, Univ ersity of Rochester).  
__√__  Other medical investigators/centers/institutions participating in this research study.  
Your child’s information may also be shared with individuals or entities responsible for general 
administration, oversight and compliance o f research activities. Examples of this include the 
institution's Privacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, Safety Monitoring 
Boards, an Institutional Review Board, The Research Foundation of the State University of New 
York, Univers ity at Buffalo Foundation Services, and accrediting bodies, or with certain 
government oversight agencies that have authority over the research including the Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Nationa l 
Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP). Your child’s 
information may also be shared with other entities as permitted or required by law.  All 
reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your c hild’s individually 
identifiable health information that may be shared with others as described above.  
All reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your child’s protected health 
information. There is the potential for individually identifiable information and the associated 
health information obtained with this authorization to be re -disclosed by the recipient(s). After 
such a disclosure, the information may no longer be protected by the terms of this authorization 
against further r e-disclosure.  
D.  How long will this information be kept by the Principal Investigator?  
__√__    This authorization has no expiration date. The researchers may continue to rely on this 
authorization to obtain and use protected health information about you unless you 
revoke this authorization in writing.  
__√__   Your child’s protected health information will go into a database that will be maintained 
indefinitely. Any future study using this information that falls outside the scope of this 
current study will  be required to follow guidelines designed to govern access to that 
information and to protect the privacy of that information.  
E.  What are your rights after signing this authorization?  
You have the right to revoke this authorization at any time. If you w ithdraw your authorization, 
no additional efforts to collect individually identifiable health information about your child will 
be made. You should know, however, that protected health information acquired using this 
Page 116 of 305 
 authorization prior to its withdrawal m ay continue to be used to the extent that the 
investigator(s) have already relied on your permission to conduct the research. If you chose to 
withdraw this authorization, you must do so in writing to the following individual(s):  
 
Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
University at Buffalo Department of Pediatrics  
Division of Behavioral Medicine  
3435 Main Street  
G56 Farber Hall  
Buffalo, NY 14214  
Phone: 716 -829-3400  
 
If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that request to the 
institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individually identifiable health 
information.  
 
F.  What will happen if you decide not to sign this au thorization?  
 
Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future care your child receives at 
this institution and will not cause any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise 
entitled. If you decide not to sign this auth orization, you and your child will not be able to  
 
  
Page 117 of 305 
 Signature Block for Parental Permission  
 
Your signature documents your permission for the named child to take part in this research. By signing this form 
you are not waiving any of your legal rights, in cluding the right to seek compensation for injury related to 
negligence or misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
 Printed name of child  
   
Signature of parent or individual legally authorized to consent to 
the child’s general medical care           Date   
 ❑ Parent  
❑ Individual legally authorized to consent 
to the child’s general medical care  (See 
note below)  Printed name of parent or individual legally authorized to consent 
to the child’s general medical care  
Note:  Investigators are to ensure that individuals who are not parents can demonstrate their legal authority to consent to 
the child’s general medical care. Contact legal counsel if any questions arise.  
   
Assent Process    
  
❑ Child is birth -6 yrs. old - Assent is not required  
❑ Child is 7 -17 yrs. old – A separate Assent Document is to be signed by 
the child  
❑ Assent will be obtained Verbally  
❑ Assent has been waived by the IRB  
  
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated with participation in 
this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions about this information 
have been answered. A copy of this document will be given to the subject.  
  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
 
  
Page 118 of 305 
  
 
 
 
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Parental Permission of Sibling to Participate in a Research Study – Chart Review  
 
Version Date: 1.2.19  
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD  
 
Why is my child being invited to take part in a research study?  
Your child is being invited to take part in a research study because:  
● You are an adult able to read the English language. You have reported no current l earning 
disabilities, medical problems, or psychiatric problems.  
● You have a child between the ages of 6 and 12 years old that falls into the overweight or 
obese weight category (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for age and sex), and 
your child h as at least one parent who also is considered overweight or obese (BMI 
greater than 25).  
● You have another child between the ages of 2 -18 years old that is willing to grant access 
to his/her Medical Records for height, weight, age, and sex data and/or parti cipate by 
getting his/her height and weight taken every 6 months over the two year study.  
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart Lung Blood Institute 
(NHLBI). Research studies only include individuals who choose to take part  in them. Your 
decision for your child to take part in this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information 
carefully. Ask questions about anything you do not understand before deciding whether or not to 
participate. You may also take home an uns igned copy of this consent form to think about 
participating or if you wish to discuss this matter with your family or your personal doctor. 
Please take your time to make your decision. Do not sign this form unless you have had the 
chance to ask questions and have received satisfactory answers.  
 
What should my child and I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you and your child.  
● Whether or not your child takes part is up to you and your child.  
● You and your child can choose  for your child not to take part.  
● You and your child can agree to take part and later change your mind.  
● You and your child’s decision will not be held against you.  
● You and your child can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 

Page 119 of 305 
 Who can my child and I talk to?  
If you or your child has questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt your 
child, talk to the research team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein. You may 
also contact the PLAN coach at your child’s doctor’s office. You  can also contact the research 
participant advocate at 716 -888-4845 or researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You 
may talk  to them at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu  if:  
● You have questions about your child’s rights as a participant in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the re search team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss treatment called 
family -based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be 
included in the primary care setting.  Extensive information has been gathered by our research 
team about the treatment of  childhood overweight and obesity. But there is still much to learn 
about how the treatment should be incorporated into various medical settings, such as primary 
care.  
 
Your child has been asked to participate because he/she is between the ages of 2 and 18  years old 
and may fall into the overweight or obese weight category (defined as at or above the 85th 
percentile for age and sex) and has at least one parent and one sibling who are also considered 
overweight or obese (BMI greater than 25) that are partici pating in this study.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that your child will be in this research study for 24 months.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 132 families will be in this research study in your geographical location, out  of 
528 families in the entire study nationally.  
 
What happens if I say yes, my child wants to be in this research?  
If your family is eligible for this research study and agrees to participate, the participating sibling 
(between the ages of 2 -18) will grant access to his/her Medical Records at specified time points 
(i.e., 0, 6, 12, 18, & 24 months) and/or attend the bas eline assessment with you and your target 
child to get his/her height and weight taken. After the baseline assessment and an initial 
appointment with your child’s doctor, your family will be randomized to one of two treatment 
conditions described below.   
Groups  
At the start of the study, your family will be assigned to one of two groups. Participants in one 
group will receive the current standard of care offered by their physician for the treatment of 
childhood weight management.  FBT is a behavioral weigh t-control intervention that aims to 
make weight changes in both a child and their participating parent. FBT is a well -tested 
Page 120 of 305 
 treatment that targets diet, activity, behavioral techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in 
children and their parents. The  treatment includes: 1) The Traffic Light Eating Plan uses RED; 
YELLOW; and GREEN labels for food to guide families toward the goal of eating nutritious 
foods. 2) The Traffic Light Activity Program also uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN labels for 
different leve ls of exercise to increase physical activity and reducing inactive behaviors. 3) a 
variety of behavioral techniques including changing and controlling your environment; tracking 
eating and physical activity; setting goals; problem solving; setting up a rew ard system; 
incentives for behavior change and weight loss; finding substitutes for unhealthy foods; and 
improving positive parenting. FBT also involves making changes in the home. So weight loss or 
prevention of weight gain may extend to members of the fa mily who are not regularly attending 
treatment sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
The group that your family will be in/the treatment you get will be chosen by chance. Like 
flipping a coin. Neither you nor your doctor will choose what treatment your fam ily will receive. 
Your family will have an equal chance of being assigned to each group. You will be informed of 
the group your family is in and your treatment following an initial physician visit.  
 
Treatment & Assessment Schedule  
Every family will follow their pediatrician recommended schedule of appointments for weight 
management to have at least 4 visits with their child’s doctor over the course of the 24 months of 
the study.  
The participating sibling will grant access to Medical Records and/or attend f ive major 
assessments throughout the entire 2 years of the study:  
● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 3 Measurement assessments during the study (6, 12, and 18 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at end of study (24 months)  
Each major assessment will take approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your child’s 
pediatric office, or a home visit can be arranged. Height and weight will be taken on you, your 
participating child, as well as the participating sibling and identified  other family members (if 
applicable).   
What are my child’s responsibilities if he/she takes part in this research?  
If your child (participating sibling) takes part in this research, he/she will be responsible to attend 
the baseline assessment, the three measurement assessments, and the follow -up assessment to 
obtain height and weight information.  Your child’s (participating sibling) participation in any 
other meetings with your family are voluntary. Weight measurements at these times are also 
voluntary a nd can be used as data.  
What happens if my child does not want to be in this research?  
Your child’s participation in this research study is voluntary. You or your child may choose not 
to enroll in this study.  There are no other research alternatives other than to participate in this 
study.  
 
What happens if my child and I say yes, but change our mind later?  
Your child can leave the research at any time. It will not be held against him/her. Your child does 
not have to answer every question. He/she may refuse to answer any questions that he/she does 
Page 121 of 305 
 not want to answer. If your participating sibling child leaves  the research, this will not affect the 
status of you or your participating (target) child in the study.  
If you or your child decides to leave the research, you may not be able to find this kind of family 
treatment in your area outside of this research stu dy. Other types of treatment may be available 
in your community. In which case we will provide a list of these and how to find them if you 
prefer this option. However, you and/or your insurance company would be responsible for any 
costs associated with the se options. You also may not receive full compensation for your 
participation. If your child decides to leave the research, contact the investigator at the contact 
information included below. If your child stops being in the research, already collected dat a may 
not be removed from the study database. You will be asked whether the investigator can collect 
data from your child’s routine medical care.   
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for my child?  
There are certain risks and discomforts that  may be associated with this research. They include:  
 
 
Likely  
● You may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss work, school activities, meetings, 
etc., to attend assessments.  
● Your child might feel hungry when dieting, sore after exercising, or experien ce common exercise 
injuries (i.e., sprains, shin splints, tendonitis, muscle pulls, strains, etc).  
Less Likely  
● Your child may be uncomfortable having his/her height and weight measured.  
Rare  
● In addition, although this treatment usually prevents the development of eating disorder 
problems, in rare cases it may increase them.  
● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breaches of confidentiality. 
We implement many layers of security to limit these risks as much as possible within ou r 
website and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are subject to their 
own security measures and carry their own risks if your family chooses to use them to 
supplement your participation in this study.  
Will being in this study help my c hild in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you, your child, or others from your taking part in this 
research. This study may provide information that will help your child to lose weight and keep it 
off. However, we cannot guarantee your child will receive any benef its from this study.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your child’s personal information, 
including research study and medical or education records, to people who have a ne ed to review 
this information. We cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy 
your child’s information include the IRB and other representatives of this organization. 
Page 122 of 305 
 Information related to your child will be treated in strict confidence to the extent provided by 
law. Your child’s identity will be coded and will not be associated with any published results. 
Your child’s code number and identity will be kept in a locked file of the Principal Investigator. 
The only connection betw een your child’s participation in this study and the study itself will be 
this signed consent form. All recordings of the sessions will be kept in a locked file of the 
Principal Investigator until the end of the study. At which point they will be destroyed . If your 
child withdraws from the study, no further data will be collected. Any information that has been 
provided may be retained by the researchers and analyzed. In order to monitor this research 
study, representatives from the Social and Behavioral Sci ences Institutional Review Board 
(SBSIRB) and other federal agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) and OHRP 
(Office of Human Research Protection) may inspect the research records which may reveal your 
child’s identity. A description of this c linical trial will be available on 
http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This web site will not include 
information that can identify your child. At most, the web site will include a summary of the 
results. You can search this web site at  any time. Federal law provides additional protections of 
your child’s medical records and related health information. These are described in the HIPAA 
section of this document.  
 
Can my child be removed from the research without our OK?  
The principal inves tigator of the study can remove your child from the research study without 
your or your child’s approval. Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for 
physical or psychological reasons. We will tell you about any new information that m ay affect 
your child’s health, welfare, or choice to stay in the research.  
 
What else do my child and I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National 
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI).  
If your child needs medical care because of taking part in this research study, contact the 
investigator and/or speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. Generally, 
this care will be billed to you, your insurance or other third party. Th e University at Buffalo has 
no program to pay for medical care for research -related injury. If your child agrees to take part in 
this research study, we will pay your family up to $175 for your time and effort. The amount you 
are paid depends upon your att endance to visits in the study.  
 
HIPAA:  Authorization for the Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health 
Information for Research Purposes  
This section describes information about your child and about your child’s health that will be 
obtained by the researchers when your child participates in the research study. Health 
information is considered "protected health information" when it may directly identify your child 
as an individual. By signing this form, you are agreeing to permit the researchers and/ or other 
parties (described in detail below) to have access to this information. If there are any parts of this 
form that you do not understand, please be sure to ask us for further clarification.  
A. What protected health information will be collected about y our child as part of 
this research study?  
__√__  Information from your child’s full medical records.  
Page 123 of 305 
 __√__  New Health Information created from study related tests, procedures, visits, and/or                                                              
questionnaires as described in this consent form.  
B.    Who is authorized to provide or collect this information?  
__√_      Principal Investigator or designee  
C.   With whom may your child’s protected health information be shared?  
Your child’s health information may be shared with others outside of the research group 
for purposes directly related to the conduct of this research study or as required by law, 
including but not limited to:  
__√__  Clinical staff not involved in this research study who may become involved in 
your child’s care if it is potentially relevant to your treatment.  
__√__  The sponsor of this research study (National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute 
(NHLBI)  cooperative group, etc., or its agents.  
__√__  The organization(s) responsible  for administering this research (e.g., Research 
Foundation of SUNY, University at Buffalo, Washington University, 
Nationwide Children’s Hospital, University of Rochester).  
__√__  Other medical investigators/centers/institutions participating in this resea rch 
study.  
Your child’s information may also be shared with individuals or entities responsible for 
general administration, oversight and compliance of research activities. Examples of this 
include the institution's Privacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, 
Safety Monitoring Boards, an Institutional Review Board, The Research Foundation of 
the State University of New York, University at Buffalo Foundation Services, and 
accrediting bodies, or with certain government oversight agencies  that have authority 
over the research including the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and the 
Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP). Your child’s informati on may also be 
shared with other entities as permitted or required by law.  All reasonable efforts will be 
used to protect the confidentiality of your child’s individually identifiable health 
information that may be shared with others as described above.  
All reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your child’s protected 
health information. There is the potential for individually identifiable information and the 
associated health information obtained with this authorization to be re -disclosed by the 
recipient(s). After such a disclosure, the information may no longer be protected by the 
terms of this authorization against further re -disclosure.  
D.  How long will this information be kept by the Principal Investigator?  
__√__    This authorization has no expiration date. The researchers may continue to rely 
on this authorization to obtain and use protected health information about you 
unless you revoke this authorization in writing.  
__√__   Your child’s protected health information wil l go into a database that will be 
maintained indefinitely. Any future study using this information that falls outside 
Page 124 of 305 
 the scope of this current study will be required to follow guidelines designed to 
govern access to that information and to protect the pri vacy of that information.  
E.  What are your rights after signing this authorization?  
You have the right to revoke this authorization at any time. If you withdraw your 
authorization, no additional efforts to collect individually identifiable health information 
about your child will be made. You should know, however, that protected health 
information acquired using this authorization prior to its withdrawal may continue to be 
used to the extent that the investigator(s) have already relied on your perm ission to 
conduct the research. If you chose to withdraw this authorization, you must do so in 
writing to the following individual(s):  
Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
University at Buffalo Department of Pediatrics  
Division of Behavioral Medicine  
3435 Main Street  
G56 Farber Hall  
Buffalo, NY 14214  
Phone: 716 -829-3400  
If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that request to 
the institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individually identifiable 
health information.  
 
F.  What will happen if you decide not to sign this authorization?  
Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future care your child 
receives at this institution and will not cause any penalty or loss of benefits to which you 
are o therwise entitled. If you decide not to sign this authorization, you and your child will 
not be able to participate.   
Page 125 of 305 
           Signature Block for Parental Permission  
 
Your signature documents your permission for the named child to take part in this research. By signing this form you are not 
waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to negligence or misconduct of 
those involved in the research.  
 
 Printed name of child  
   
Signature of parent or individual legally authorized to consent to the child’s 
general medical care           Date  
 ❑ Parent  
❑ Individual legally authorized to consent to 
the child’s general medical care (See note 
below)  Printed name of parent or individual legally authorized to consent to the 
child’s general medical care  
Note:  Investigators are to ensure that individuals who are not parents can demonstrate their legal authority to consent to the 
child’s general medical care. Contact legal counsel if any questions arise.  
   
Assent Process  
❑ Child is birth -6 yrs. old - Assent is not required  
❑ Child is 7 -17 yrs. old – A separate Assent Document is to be signed by the child  
❑ Assent will be obtained verbally  
❑ Assent has been waived by the IRB    
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated  with participation in this research 
study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions about this information have been answered. A copy 
of this document will be given to the subject.  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date 
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 126 of 305 
   
 
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
PLAN Coach Adult Consent to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
 
Why am I being invited to take part in a research study?  
You are being invited to take part in a research study because you are a PLAN coach delivering family -
based treatment (FBT) into a practice -based research network associated with Univ ersity at Buffalo, 
Washington University, University of Rochester, or Nationwide Children’s Hospital.  
 
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHBLI). 
Research studies only include individuals who ch oose to take part in them. Your decision to take part in 
this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully and ask questions about anything 
you do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate. You may also take home a n 
unsigned copy of this consent form to think about the study. Please take your time to make your 
decision. Do not sign this form unless you have had the chance to ask questions and have received 
satisfactory answers.  
 
What should I know about a research s tudy?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you.  
● Whether or not you take part is up to you.  
● You can choose not to take part.  
● You can agree to take part and later change your mind.  
● Your decision will not be held against you.  
● You can ask all the questi ons you want before you decide.  
 
Who can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein. You may also contact the research participant advocat e 
at 716 -888-4845 or researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu  if:  
● You have questions about your rights as a participant in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  

Page 127 of 305 
 ● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
There is currently a gap between the use of evidence -based treatment for children with obesity and its 
use wit hin the community. The rationale behind this study is to understand how best to implement 
these interventions in primary care settings. We chose to test these implementation methods using FBT 
because it has been established as an effective, short - and long  term treatment for weight loss 
psychotherapy that focuses on linking healthy dietary and physical activity behaviors to a child’s overall 
environment (e.g., parents, peers, school) and overcoming barriers by using problem solving techniques. 
FBT is an evi dence -based treatment for overweight and obesity as well as for eating disorders.  
 
The goal of this study is to determine whether FBT for children who are overweight can be included in 
the primary care setting by using a co -located PLAN coach. Extensive in formation has been gathered by 
our research team about the treatment of childhood obesity, but there is still much to learn about how 
the treatment should be incorporated into various medical settings, such as primary care. Families at 
your assigned practi ces have been asked to participate because they have a child between the ages of 6 
and 12 years old who is overweight (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for body mass index), 
and have at least one parent who is willing to participate in the study.   
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that you will be in this research study for 5 years.  
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 3 PLAN coaches will be in this research study in your geographical location out of 
approximately 12 PLAN coaches in the entire study nationally at 4 different clinical sites.  
 
What happens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?  
By reading and signing this form, you agree to answer questions about yourself and your thoughts and 
opinions regarding your jo b, childhood obesity, and childhood obesity treatments, including FBT.  
 
Additionally, you allow audio recordings collected for the purpose of quality control of treatment to be 
used for research purposes. After reading and signing this form, the following procedures will occur:  
 
● You will complete a demographics form and take a baseline assessment to measure your 
knowledge in the area of obesity and evidence -based intervention prior to completing training.  
 
● Following training, you will complete the same assessment to assess your growth of knowledge 
and opinions of obesity and the evidence -based intervention.  
 
● At multiple time points during the study you will be asked to submit audio recordings of sessions 
you have with families to ensure the quality of ca re being delivered and for assessing your 
fidelity to the training protocol. These audio recordings may be transcribed and no identifying 
information will be presented to the public.  
 
● At multiple time points during the study, you will be asked to complete a short assessment on 
your thoughts regarding the study and evidence -based interventions.  
 
Page 128 of 305 
 o The assessments taken during this study will only be reported in aggregate form to the 
public and will exclude any identifying information.  
 
What are my responsibili ties if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this research, you will be responsible to: answer several questionnaires and have your 
FBT sessions recorded.  
 
What happens if I do not want to be in this research?  
If you have agreed to treat fami lies for the study, treatment related tasks will be considered part of your 
job responsibilities, not as part of the research. You are not required to participate in the PLAN coach 
research portion of the study. You may choose not to fill out questionnaire s regarding the 
implementation of FBT into the primary care practice; however, there are certain questions we will ask 
you to answer in your role as a care provider on the study. You may also choose not to have your audio 
recordings be used for research pu rposes (separate section at the end); however, you will still be asked 
to record and submit treatment sessions in your role as a care provider on the study for quality control 
purposes.  
 
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at any time; it will not be held against you and will not impact your current 
job status.  
 
If you decide to leave the research, contact the investigator. You will be asked to withdraw your 
participation in writing. There will be no penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.  
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?  
A risk of participating in this study is that confidential information about you may be accidentally 
disclosed. We will use our best efforts to  keep the information about you secure, and we think the risk 
of accidental disclosure is very small.  
 
In addition to these risks, this research may hurt you in ways that are unknown. These may be a minor 
inconvenience.  
 
Will being in this study help me in  any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. However, 
possible benefits include:  
 
● Learning how evidence -based treatments for childhood obesity may function in primary care 
and gaining insight into how it  may be effective for treatment of childhood obesity.  
 
● Other people might benefit from this study due to identification of the best way to train PLAN 
coaches in FBT best practices. This may lead to more widespread adoption of evidence -based 
childhood obesi ty treatments into primary care.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including research 
study and medical or education records, to people who have a  need to review this information. We 
cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include 
the IRB and other representatives of this organization.  
Page 129 of 305 
 The information you provide in this study will be strictly confi dential and will not be provided to your 
employer and will not impact your current job status in the workplace.  
 
Information related to you will be treated in strict confidence to the extent provided by law. Your 
identity will be coded and will not be asso ciated with any published results. Your code number and 
identity will be kept in a locked file of the Principal Investigator. The only connection between your 
participation in this study and the study itself will be this signed consent form. If you withdra w from the 
study, no further data will be collected, but any information that has been provided may be retained by 
the researchers and analyzed. In order to monitor this research study, representatives from the 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) and other fe deral agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) 
and OHRP (Office of Human Research Protection) may inspect the research records which may reveal 
your identity. A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.g ov, as 
required by U.S. Law. This web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the web 
site will include a summary of the results. You can search this website at any time.  
 
Can I be removed from the research without my OK?  
The prin cipal investigator of the study can remove you from the research study without your approval. 
Possible reasons from removal include: lack of adherence to study protocol.  
 
What else do I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes  of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI).  
You will not be paid for participating in this study.  
 
Audio Recording Permission:  
Your initial below documents your permission to use audio recorded sessions for research purpo ses: 
_______ Yes, I give my permission to use my audio recorded sessions for research purposes.  
_______ No, I do not  give my permission to use my audio recorded sessions for research purposes.  
Signature Block for Capable Adult  
Your signature documents your  permission to take part in this research. By signing this form, you are not 
waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to negligence or 
misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Page 130 of 305 
 Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
 
 
My signature below documents that the information in the consent document and any other written information was  
accurately explained to, and apparently understood by, the subject, and that consent was freely given by the subject.  
   
Signature of witness to consent process   Date  
  
Printed name of person witnessing consent process  
 
  
Page 131 of 305 
 University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Adult Primary Care Provider Consent to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018   
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
 
Why am I being invited to take part in a research study?  
You are being invited to take part in a research study because you are a provider who is part of a 
practice -based research network with University at Buffalo, Washington University, University of 
Rochester, or Nationwide Children’s Hospital.  
 
You ar e being invited to take part in a research study supported by a grant through the National  
Heart Blood Lung Institutes(NHBLI). Research studies only include individuals who choose to take part in 
them.  
Your decision to take part in this study is entirely v oluntary. Please read this information carefully and 
ask questions about anything you do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate.  
You may also take home an unsigned copy of this consent form to think about or if you wish to discuss 
this matter with your family. Please take your time to make your decision. Do not sign this form unless 
you have had the chance to ask questions and have received satisfactory answers.  
 
What should I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this rese arch study to you.  
● Whether or not you take part is up to you.  
● You can choose not to take part.  
● You can agree to take part and later change your mind.  
● Your decision will not be held against you.  
● You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
Who  can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein. You may also contact the research participant advocate 
at 716 -888-4845 or researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu  if:  
● You have questions about your rights as a participant in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
Page 132 of 305 
 ● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
This is a research study. We invite you to participate in this research study by the University at Buffalo 
because you are a provider at a pr imary care practice that has indicated interest in participating in this 
study.  
 
There is currently a gap between the use of evidence -based treatment for children with obesity and its 
use within the community. The rationale behind this study is to test th e effectiveness of FBT in primary 
care settings, and to understand how best to implement these interventions in primary care settings. 
We chose to test FBT because it has been established as an effective treatment for weight loss in 
children in the short - and long term and may have a positive impact on others in the household. FBT is a 
manual -based psychotherapy that focuses on linking healthy dietary and physical activity behaviors to a 
child’s overall environment (e.g., parents, peers, school) and overcom ing barriers by using problem 
solving techniques.  
 
The goal of this study is to determine whether family -based weight loss treatment (FBT) for children 
who are overweight/obese can be included in the primary care setting by using a co -located PLAN 
Coach. E xtensive information has been gathered by our research team about the treatment of childhood 
obesity, but there is still much to learn about how the treatment should be incorporated into various 
medical settings, such as primary care. Families at your prac tice have been asked to participate because 
they have a child who is between the ages of 6 and 12 years old, is overweight/obese (defined as at or 
above the 85th percentile for body mass index), and have at least one parent who is willing to 
participate in  the study.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that you will be in this research study for 4 years.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 3 primary care providers will be in this research study in your geographical location, 
and simil ar numbers of primary care providers at three other sites nationally.   
Page 133 of 305 
 What happens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?  
Currently, the practice you work in has agreed to participate in this research study. By reading and 
signing this form, you agr ee to answer questions about yourself and your thoughts and opinions 
regarding your job, childhood obesity, and childhood obesity treatments, including FBT. After reading 
and signing this form, the following procedures will occur:  
 
● You will be asked about your demographics, job, attitudes, and prior knowledge of FBT and 
obesity care delivery. The assessments will take about 20 minutes to complete. You are free to 
skip any questions you don’t want to answer.  
● You will be asked to give permission for PLAN coaches to review participant charts at the end of 
the study to gather data on Usual Care.  
 
The treatment that participants will get will be chosen by chance, like flipping a coin. You will not choose 
which treatment participants will get. You will not kno w which treatment participants will get, however, 
some participants will inevitably inform you of their group assignment in the normal course of events.  
 
What are my responsibilities if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this research, you will be responsible to: answer several questionnaires about the 
study.  
 
What happens if I do not want to be in this research?  
If you have agreed to treat families with Usual Care for the study, you are not required to participate in 
the provider research portion of the study. You may choose not to fill out questionnaires regarding the 
implementation of FBT into the primary care practice; however, there are certain questions we will ask 
you to answer in your role as a care provider on the study.  
 
What happe ns if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at any time. It will not be held against you and will not impact your current 
job status.  
 
If you decide to leave the research, contact the investigator. You will be asked to withdraw your 
participation in writing. There will be no penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.  
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?  
A risk of participating in this study is that confidential information about you may  be accidentally 
disclosed. We will use our best efforts to keep the information about you secure, and we think the risk 
of accidental disclosure is very small.  
 
In addition to these risks, this research may hurt you in ways that are unknown. These may be a minor 
inconvenience.  
 
  
Page 134 of 305 
 Will being in this study help me in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. However, 
possible benefits include:  
 
● Learning how evidence -based treatments for childhood obesity  may function in primary care 
and gaining insight into how it may be effective for treatment of childhood obesity.  
 
● Other people might benefit from this study due to identification of the best way to train 
providers in expert recommendations. This may lead  to more widespread adoption of evidence -
based treatments into primary care.  
 
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including research 
study and medic al or education records, to people who have a need to review this information. We 
cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include 
the IRB and other representatives of this organization.  
The information you  provide in this study will be strictly confidential and will not be provided to your 
employer and will not impact your current job status in the workplace.  
 
Information related to you will be treated in strict confidence to the extent provided by law. You r 
identity will be coded and will not be associated with any published results. Your code number and 
identity will be kept in a locked file of the Principal Investigator. The only connection between your 
participation in this study and the study itself wil l be this signed consent form. If you withdraw from the 
study, no further data will be collected, but any information that has been provided may be retained by 
the researchers and analyzed. In order to monitor this research study, representatives from the 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) and other federal agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) 
and OHRP (Office of Human Research Protection) may inspect the research records which may reveal 
your identity. A description of this clinical trial wil l be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as 
required by U.S. Law. This web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the web 
site will include a summary of the results. You can search this website at any time.  
 
Can I be remo ved from the research without my OK?  
The principal investigator of the study can remove you from the research study without your approval. 
Possible reasons from removal include: lack of adherence to study protocol.  
 
What else do I need to know?  
This resear ch is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI).  
You will not be paid for participating in this study.  
  
Page 135 of 305 
 Signature Block for Capable Adult  
This consent form is not a contract. It is  a written explanation of what will happen during the study if you 
decide to participate. Your signature documents your permission to take part in this research. By signing this 
form, you are not waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to see k compensation for injury related 
to negligence or misconduct of those involved in the research.  
Do you agree to allow us to send your protected heath information via email?   
We will only send you PLAN related emails and we will not share your email with  anyone.  
□ Yes 
□ No 
 
If yes, please provide your preferred email address below.  
_______________________________________________  
Please verify your preferred email.  
_______________________________________________  
If yes, please provide your preferred phone numbe r below.  
_______________________________________________  
Please verify your preferred phone number.  
_______________________________________________  
 
My signature below documents that the information in the consent document and any other written 
information  was accurately explained to, and apparently understood by, the subject, and that consent was 
freely given by the subject.  
 
Type your name below:  
 
 
 
   
Typed Signature of Primary Care Provider   Date  
 
  
Page 136 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATM ENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Parent Adult Consent to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
 
Why am I being invited to take part in a research study?  
You and your child are being invited to take part in a research study because:  
● You are an adult able to read the English language. You have reported no current learning 
disabilities, medical problems, or psychiatric problems.  
● You have a child between the ages of 6 and 12 years old. Falls into t he overweight or obese 
weight category (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for age and sex). You are interested 
in weight loss and are willing to participate in the study.  
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI). 
Research studies only include individuals who choose to take part in them. Your decision to take part in 
this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully. Ask questions about anything you 
do not understa nd before deciding whether or not to participate. You may also take home an unsigned 
copy of this consent form to think about participating or if you wish to discuss this matter with your 
family or your personal doctor. Please take your time to make your d ecision. Do not sign this form 
unless you have had the chance to ask questions and have received satisfactory answers.  
 
What should I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you.  
● Whether or not you take part is up to you.  
● You can choose not to take part.  
● You can agree to take part and later change your mind.0  
● Your decision will not be held against you.  
● You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
  

Page 137 of 305 
 Who can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein. You may also contact the PLAN coach at 
your child’s doctor’s office. You can also contact th e research participant advocate at 716 -888-4845 or 
researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 88 8-4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu    
 if:  
● You have questions about your rights as a participant in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot r each the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss  treatment called family -
based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be included in the 
primary care setting.  Extensive information has been gathered by our research team about the 
treatment of childhood overweight and ob esity. But there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings, such as primary care.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that you will be in this treatment and research study for 24 months.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 132 families will be in this research study in your geographical location. Out of 528 
families in the entire study nationally.  
 
What happens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?  
To determine if your family is eligible to participate, you and your child will be asked to complete an 
eligibility assessment at an orientation session about this study. You and your child’s height and weight 
will be measured. Standard questions regarding medical and psycholo gical history will be asked by a 
trained interviewer to determine eligibility.  
If your family is eligible for this research study and agrees to participate, you and your child will be asked 
to come to your pediatric office to complete a baseline assessmen t (detailed below). Additionally, we 
hope to collect information about how participation in FBT may affect others in your home. Therefore, if 
you have another child who meets eligibility criteria (between the ages of 2 -18 who is at or above the 
85th percen tile for age and sex), we ask that this child also attend the baseline assessment. After the 
baseline assessment and an initial appointment with your child’s doctor, your family will be randomized 
to one of two treatment conditions described below.  
Groups  
At the start of the study, your family will be assigned to one of two groups.  Participants in one group will 
receive the current standard of care offered by their physician for the treatment of childhood weight 
management.  Participants in the second grou p will receive family -based behavioral treatment for 
weight management (FBT). FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention that aims to make weight 
Page 138 of 305 
 changes in both a child and their participating parent. FBT is a well -tested treatment that targets diet,  
activity, behavioral techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in children and their parents. The 
treatment includes: 1) The Traffic Light Eating Plan uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN labels for food to 
guide families toward the goal of eating nutritious foods. 2) The Traffic Light Activity Program, also uses 
RED; YELLOW; and GREEN labels for different levels of exercise to increase physical activity and reducing 
inactive behaviors. 3) a variety of behavioral techniques including changing and controlling y our 
environment; tracking eating and physical activity; setting goals; problem solving; setting up a reward 
system; incentives for behavior change and weight loss; finding substitutes for unhealthy foods; and 
improving positive parenting. FBT also involves  making changes in the home. So weight loss or 
prevention of weight gain may extend to members of the family who are not regularly attending 
treatment sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
The group that your family will be in/the treatment you get will be  chosen by chance. Like flipping a 
coin. Neither you nor your doctor will choose what treatment your family will receive. Your family will 
have an equal chance of being assigned to each group. You will be informed of the group your family is 
in and your tr eatment following an initial physician visit.  
 
Treatment Schedule  
Every family will follow their pediatrician’s recommended schedule of appointments for weight 
management to have at least 4 visits with their child’s doctor over the course of the 24 months of the 
study. Families in the group receiving FBT will additionally complete at least 26 sessions with the FBT 
PLAN Coach during the 24 months of the study. The amount of sessions completed within this range will 
be based on progress through the program an d will vary for each family.  
Assessments, Interviews, Questionnaires  
Attendance will be taken and both you and your child will be weighed at every session. In addition, there 
will be five major assessments throughout the entire 2 years of the study:  
● 1 Base line assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 3 Treatment assessments during the study (6, 12, and 18 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at end of study (24 months)  
Each major assessment will take approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your child’s pediatric 
office, or a home visit can be arranged. Height and weight will be taken on you and your child as well as 
the identified other family members (if applicable). Your height will be taken at the beginning of the 
study, and your child(ren)’s height w ill be taken at each major assessment. You and your participating 
child will also complete short questionnaires. You both will be asked questions about parenting 
behaviors and the home food and activity environment. At your baseline, 12 -month, and follow -up 
appointments, you will be asked to complete a computer task. Throughout the study, you will have 
access to a website that contains study materials and interactive tools.  
 
Audio Recording  
Your interviews and individual family will be audiotaped or digital ly recorded for research purposes, but 
you will not be identified on the recording and the recordings will not be labeled with your name. 
Recording the sessions is the best way to make sure we collect accurate information. It also helps us 
make sure that a ll our staff delivers the study to participants in the same way. The recordings will be 
stored on password -protected computers with restricted access within the University at Buffalo, and 
Page 139 of 305 
 then transferred to Washington University School of Medicine. The re cordings will be labeled only with 
your study ID, date, and session number. The Principal Investigator and research staff may use these 
recordings for purposes of evaluation, treatment, research, and training related to this study. 
Recordings may also be u sed to train staff implementing these or similar interventions at other sites. 
The recordings will be destroyed at the end of the study when all data analysis is complete. You do not 
have to agree to be audio recorded in order to participate in this study.  
Please check and initial below if you agree or do not agree to give permission for you and your child to 
be audio recorded during your sessions with the PLAN coach.  
 
YES __________  NO___________   Parent INITIAL______________ Date: ________________  
 
What are my responsibilities if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this research, you will be responsible to attend the baseline assessment, all treatment 
assessments, at least 26 treatment sessions if your family is in the group receiving FBT, a nd the follow -
up assessment.  
 
What happens if I do not want to be in this research?  
Your participation in this research study is voluntary. You may choose not to enroll in this study. There 
are no other research alternatives other than to participate in th is study.  
 
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at any time. It will not be held against you. You do not have to answer every 
question and may refuse to answer any questions that you do not want to answer.  
If yo u decide to leave the research, you may not be able to find this kind of family treatment in your 
area outside of this research study. Other types of treatment may be available in your community. In 
which case we will provide a list of these and how to fin d them if you prefer this option. However, you 
and/or your insurance company would be responsible for any costs associated with these options. You 
also may not receive full compensation for your participation. If you decide to leave the research, 
contact t he investigator at the contact information included below. If you stop being in the research, 
already collected data may not be removed from the study database. You will be asked whether the 
investigator can collect data from your routine medical care.   
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?  
There are certain risks and discomforts that may be associated with this research. They include:  
Likely  
● You might feel hungry when dieting or sore after exercising.  
Less Likely  
● You may find some of the questions embarrassing or be uncomfortable having your height and 
weight measured.  
● There may be some family disagreements as issues of family functioning; communication; and 
discipline are discussed.  
Page 140 of 305 
 ● You may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss  work, school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments and family sessions.  
Rare  
● There is a risk of audio recordings being lost. All recordings will be immediately stored in a 
locked drawer or saved to a password -protected computer in the research  office after the 
individual family and group weight loss and maintenance sessions. Your family name will not be 
on these recordings, which will be identified only by a study ID number.  
● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breache s of confidentiality. We 
implement many layers of security to limit these risks as much as possible within our website 
and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are subject to their own security 
measures and carry their own risks if your family chooses to use them to supplement your 
participation in this study.  
● In addition, although this treatment usually prevents the development of eating disorder 
problems, in rare cases it may increase them.  
Other Risks  
● In this study you will be given a physical activity goal. Given that some people may have medical 
risks associated with increasing their physical activity, these recommendations for your child will 
be given in consultation with his/her doctor. As an adult, you may consider getting approval  
from your doctor for setting physical activity goals. Adult participants will be responsible for 
consulting their doctor for approval.  
● Randomization - As mentioned before, this study has two groups. Because chance decides 
which group you will be in, the t reatment you receive as part of this study may not be what your 
own doctor would choose for you.  
Will being in this study help me in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. However, 
possible benefits  could include you and your child losing weight, becoming more physically active, and 
eating more healthfully as a result of participation. In addition, maintaining weight loss may lead to 
better relationships and better mood. However, we cannot guarantee that you or your child will receive 
any benefits from this study. This study may also provide information that will help other children inside 
and outside your household to lose weight and keep it off.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the res earch?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including research 
study and medical or education records, to people who have a need to review this information. We 
cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations tha t may inspect and copy your information include 
the IRB and other representatives of this organization. Information related to you will be treated in strict 
confidence to the extent provided by law. Your identity will be coded and will not be associated wi th any 
published results. Your code number and identity will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator. The only connection between your participation in this study and the study itself will be 
this signed consent form. All recordings of the s essions will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator until the end of the study. At which point they will be destroyed. If you withdraw from the 
study, no further data will be collected. Any information that has been provided may be retained  by the 
researchers and analyzed. In order to monitor this research study, representatives from the Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) and other federal agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) and OHRP 
Page 141 of 305 
 (Office of Human Research Protection) may i nspect the research records which may reveal your identity. 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. 
Law. This web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the web  site will include a 
summary of the results. You can search this web site at any time. Federal law provides additional 
protections of your medical records and related health information. These are described in the HIPAA 
section of this document.  
 
Can I be removed from the research without my OK?  
The principal investigator of the study can remove you from the research study without your approval. 
Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for physical or psychological reasons.  
 
What else d o I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institutes (NHLBI). If you need medical care because of taking part in this research study, 
contact the investigator and/or speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. 
Generally, this care will be billed to you, your insurance or other third party. The University at Buffalo 
has no program to pay for medical care for research -related injury. If you agr ee to take part in this 
research study, we will pay you up to $175 for your time and effort. The amount you are paid depends 
upon your attendance to visits in the study.  
 
HIPAA:  Authorization for the Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health 
Information f or Research Purposes  
This section describes information about you and about your health that will be obtained by the 
researchers when you participate in the research study. Health information is considered "protected 
health information" when it may direct ly identify you as an individual. By signing this form you are 
agreeing to permit the researchers and/or other parties (described in detail below) to have access to 
this information. If there are any parts of this form that you do not understand, please be  sure to ask us 
for further clarification.  
A. What protected health information will be collected about you as part of this research 
study?  
__√__   Specific information from your medical records related to height, weight, dietary 
restrictions, and physical ac tivity restrictions.  
__√__  New Health Information created from study related tests, procedures, visits, and/or                                                              
questionnaires as described in this consent form.  
B.    Who is authorized to provid e or collect this information?  
__√_      Principal Investigator or designee  
 
C.   With whom may your protected health information be shared?  
Your health information may be shared with others outside of the research group for purposes 
directly related to t he conduct of this research study or as required by law, including but not 
limited to:  
__√__  Clinical staff not involved in this research study who may become involved in you and 
your child’s care if it is potentially relevant to your treatment.  
Page 142 of 305 
 __√__  The sponsor of this research study (National Heart, Lung and Blood Institutes 
(NHLBI)  cooperative group, etc., or its agents.  
__√__  The organization(s) responsible for administering this research (e.g., Research 
Foundation of SUNY, University at Buffalo, Washington University, Nationwide 
Children’s Hospital, University of Rochester).  
__√__  Other medical investigators/centers/institutions participating in this research study.  
Your information may also be shared with individuals or entities responsible for general 
administration, oversight and compliance of research activities. Examples of this include the 
institution's Privacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, Safety Monitoring 
Boards, an Institutional Review Board, The Research Found ation of the State University of New 
York, University at Buffalo Foundation Services, and accrediting bodies, or with certain 
government oversight agencies that have authority over the research including the Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS), t he Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP). Your 
information may also be shared with other entities as permitted or required by law.  All 
reasonable efforts will be use d to protect the confidentiality of your individually identifiable 
health information that may be shared with others as described above.  
All reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your protected health 
information. There is the p otential for individually identifiable information and the associated 
health information obtained with this authorization to be re -disclosed by the recipient(s). After 
such a disclosure, the information may no longer be protected by the terms of this autho rization 
against further re -disclosure.  
D.  How long will this information be kept by the Principal Investigator?  
__√__    This authorization has no expiration date. The researchers may continue to rely on this 
authorization to obtain and use protected hea lth information about you unless you 
revoke this authorization in writing.  
__√__  Your protected health information will go into a database that will be maintained 
indefinitely. Any future study using this information that falls outside the scope of this 
current study will be required to follow guidelines designed to govern access to that 
information and to protect the privacy of that information.  
E.  What are your rights after signing this authorization?  
You have the right to revoke this authorization at a ny time. If you withdraw your authorization, 
no additional efforts to collect individually identifiable health information about you will be 
made. You should know, however, that protected health information acquired using this 
authorization prior to its wi thdrawal may continue to be used to the extent that the 
investigator(s) have already relied on your permission to conduct the research. If you chose to 
withdraw this authorization, you must do so in writing to the following individual(s):  
 
Leonard H. Epste in, Ph.D.  
University at Buffalo Department of Pediatrics  
Division of Behavioral Medicine  
3435 Main Street  
 G56 Farber Hall  
Page 143 of 305 
 Buffalo, NY 14214  
Phone: 716 -829-3400  
 
If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that request to the 
institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individually identifiable health 
information.  
 
 
F.  What will happen if you decide not to sign this authorization?  
 
Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future care you receive at this 
institution and will not cause any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. 
If you decide not to sign this authorization, you will not be able to participate in the research 
study.  
Signature Block for Capable Adu lt 
 
Your signature documents your permission to take part in this research. By signing this form you are not 
waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to negligence or 
misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
   
   
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
 
  
Page 144 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
 
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS TREATMENT 
IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
PILOT Participating Child Assent to be in a Research Study   
(for Children 7 -13 years of age)  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD  
 
Who are we?  
My name is Dr. Leonard H. Epstein and I am a researcher at the University at Buffal o. I work in the 
Department of Pediatrics.  
 
Why are we meeting with you?  
We want to tell you about a study that involves children like yourself. We want to see if you would like 
to be in this study too.  
 
Why are we doing this study?  
We want to look at a ce rtain kind of weight loss program for kids. We want to know if it will work at a 
doctor’s office.  
 
What will happen to you if you are in the study?  
You and a parent will first come to the doctor’s office. We will tell you about this study that teaches kids  
about healthy eating and activities. We will ask you if you want to be a part of the study. If you do, we 
will measure your height and weight. We will ask you to answer some questions about yourself and your 
parents. You will do a task that asks you to ma ke choices between different amounts of money. If you 
want to, we will ask to you come back for more visits.  
 
After this, you and your parent will visit the doctor’s office once a week for 3 months. At the visits you 
would meet with someone from the study.  This would be at least 12 visits. Your height and weight will 
be taken. You will learn about healthy food. We will teach you fun ways to exercise.  
 
At your first visit and at your last visit, we will ask you some questions about yourself. We will measure 
your height and weight.  At your baseline and Follow -up appointment, we will ask you to do a computer 
task that asks you to make choices between different amounts of money.  
 
You do not have to answer any questions that you do not want to answer. You do not  have to do any 
activities that you do not want to do.  
 

Page 145 of 305 
 What are the good things and bad things that may happen to you if you are in the study?  
Most Likely:  You can have fun learning about healthy food and exercise. You could become healthy.  
 
Maybe: You co uld become hungry when trying to eat healthy. Your muscles could feel sore from 
exercise. That will go away once you are used to exercising.  
 
Do you have to be in the study?  
No you do not. No one will get angry or upset with you if you don’t want to do this. Just tell us if you do 
not want to be in the study. And remember, you can change your mind later if you decide you do not 
want to be in the study anymore.  
 
Do you have any q uestions?  
You can ask questions at any time. You can ask now. You can ask later. You can talk to me or you can talk 
to someone else at any time during the study. You can call:  
 
Name of contact person on the study: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  Phone Number: (716) 829 -3400  
 
Signature Block for Assent of Child  
 
Your signature documents your permission to take part in this research.  
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
 
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated with participation 
in this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions about this 
information have been answered. A copy of this document will be given to the subject.  
  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
  
Page 146 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
PILOT Parental Permission for Targeted Child to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date:  07-18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
 
Why is my child being invited to take part in a research study?  
Your child is being invited to take part in a pilot research study because:  
● You are an adult able to read the English language. You have reported no current learning 
disabilities, medical problems, or psychiatric problems.  
● Your child is between the ages of 7 and 12 years old. Your child falls into the overweight or 
obese weight category (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for age a nd sex).  Your child 
has at least one parent who is interested in participating in the study.  
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institutes 
(NHLBI). Research studies only include individuals who choose to  take part in them. Your decision for 
your child to take part in this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully.  Ask 
questions about anything you do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate. You may 
also take home an unsigned copy of this consent form to think about participating.  You may wish to 
discuss this matter with your family or your personal doctor. Please take your time to make your 
decision. Do not sign this form unless you have had the chance to ask  questions and have received 
satisfactory answers.  
 
What should my child and I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you and your child.  
● Whether or not your child takes part is up to you and your child.  
● You and your child  can choose for your child not to take part.  
● You and your child can agree to take part and later change your mind.  
● You and your child’s decision will not be held against you.  
● You and your child can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
  

Page 147 of 305 
 Who c an my child and I talk to?  
If you or your child has questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt your child, talk 
to the research team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein . You may also contact the 
PLAN coach at your c hild’s doctor’s office; or you can contact the research participant advocate at 716 -
888-4845 or researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Bo ard (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu   if:  
● You have questions about your child’s rights as a participant in this research.  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are n ot being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this pilot st udy is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss treatment called 
family -based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be included in the 
primary care setting.  Extensive information has been gathered by our resear ch team about the 
treatment of childhood overweight and obesity, but there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings, such as primary care.  
 
Your child has been asked to participate because he/she is between the ages of 7 and 12 years old, falls 
into the overweight or obese weight category (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for age and 
sex), and has at least one parent who is interested in participating in the study.  
 
How long will the rese arch last?  
We expect that your child will be in this treatment and research study for 3 months.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 6 families will be in pilot phase of this research study in your geographical location.  
 
What happens if I say  yes, my child wants to be in this research?  
To determine if your child is eligible to participate: you and your child will be asked to complete an 
eligibility assessment at an orientation session about this study. You and your child’s height and weight 
will be measured.  Standard questions regarding medical and psychological history will be asked by a 
trained interviewer to determine eligibility.  
If your family is eligible for this research study and agrees to participate: you and your child will be asked  
to come to your pediatric office to complete a baseline assessment (detailed below). After the baseline 
assessment, your family will be enrolled. You will meet with a PLAN coach weekly.  
 
  
Page 148 of 305 
 Group  
At the start of the study, your family will be assigned to receive family -based behavioral treatment for 
weight management (FBT).  FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention that aims to make weight 
changes in both a child and their participating parent. FBT is a well -tested treatment that targets diet, 
activ ity, behavioral techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in children and their parents. The 
treatment includes: 1) The Traffic Light Eating Plan, which uses RED, YELLOW, GREEN labels for food to 
guide families toward the goal of eating nutritious foo ds; 2) the Traffic Light Activity Program, which also 
uses RED, YELLOW and GREEN labels for different levels of exercise to increase physical activity and 
reducing inactive behaviors; and 3) a variety of behavioral techniques including changing and control ling 
your environment, tracking eating and physical activity, setting goals, problem solving, setting up a 
reward system, incentives for behavior change and weight loss, finding substitutes for unhealthy foods, 
and improving positive parenting. FBT also in volves making changes in the home.  Weight loss or 
prevention of weight gain may extend to members of the family who are not regularly attending 
treatment sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
Treatment Schedule  
Every family will receive FBT and will compl ete at least 12 sessions with the FBT PLAN Coach during the 3 
months of the study.  
Assessments, Interviews, Questionnaires  
Attendance will be taken and both you and your child will be weighed at every session. In addition, there 
will be two major assessme nts throughout the entire 3 months of the pilot study:  
● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at end of study (3 months)  
Each major assessment will take approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your child’s pediatric 
office, or a home visit can be arranged. Height and weight will be taken on you and your child. Your 
height will be taken at the beginning of the study.  Your child’s height will be taken at each major 
assessment. At your baseline and Follow -up appointment , we will ask you to do a computer task that 
asks you to make choices between different amounts of money.  
Audio Recording  
Your interviews and individual family will be audiotaped or digitally recorded for research purposes.  You 
will not be identified on t he recording and the recordings will not be labeled with your name. Recording 
the sessions is the best way to make sure we collect accurate information. It also helps us make sure 
that all our staff delivers the study to participants in the same way. The r ecordings will be stored on 
password -protected computers with restricted access within the University at Buffalo; then transferred 
to Washington University School of Medicine. The recordings will be labeled only with your study ID, 
date, and session number . The Principal Investigator and research staff may use these recordings for 
purposes of evaluation, treatment, research, and training related to this study. Recordings may also be 
used to train staff implementing these or similar interventions at other si tes. The recordings will be 
destroyed at the end of the study when all data analysis is complete. You do not have to agree to be 
audio recorded in order to participate in this study.  
 
Please check and initial below if you agree for you and your child to be  audio recorded during your 
sessions with the PLAN coach:  
 
Page 149 of 305 
 __________YES, PARENT INITIAL______________, I give my permission to be audio recorded during 
sessions with a PLAN Coach. Date: ________________  
 
__________NO, PARENT INITIAL______________, I do not give  my permission to be audio recorded 
during sessions with a PLAN Coach. Date: ________________  
What are my child’s responsibilities if he/she takes part in this research?  
If your child takes part in this pilot research, he/she will be responsible to: attend the baseline 
assessment, follow -up assessment, and attend at least 12 treatment sessions if your family is in the 
group receiving FBT.  
 
What happens if my child does not want to be in this research?  
Your child’s participation in this pilot research  study is voluntary. You or your child may choose not to 
enroll in this study.  There are no other research alternatives other than to participate in this study.  
 
What happens if my child and I say yes, but change our mind later?  
Your child can leave the pi lot research at any time.  It will not be held against him/her. Your child does 
not have to answer every question and may refuse to answer any questions that he/she does not want 
to answer.  
If your child decides to leave the pilot research, you may not be able to find this kind of family treatment 
in your area outside of this research study. Other types of treatment may be available in your 
community, in which case we will provide a list of these and how to find them if you prefer this option.  
You and/or y our insurance company would be responsible for any costs associated with these options. 
You also may not receive full compensation for your participation if your child decides to leave the 
research.  Contact the investigator at the contact information incl uded below if your child decides to 
leave the study. If your child stops being in the research, already collected data may not be removed 
from the study database. You will be asked whether the investigator can collect data from your child’s 
routine medical  care.   
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for my child?  
There are certain risks and discomforts that may be associated with this research.  
They include:  
 
Likely  
● Your child might feel hungry when dieting or sore after exercising.  
Less Likely  
● Your child may find some of the questions embarrassing or be uncomfortable having his/her 
height and weight measured.  
● There may be some family disagreements as issues of family functioning, communication, and 
discipline are discussed.  
● Your child may  be inconvenienced at times by having to miss school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments and family sessions.  
Rare  

Page 150 of 305 
 ● There is a risk of audio recordings being lost. All recordings will be immediately stored in a 
locked drawer or saved to a pass word -protected computer in the research office after the 
individual family and group weight loss and maintenance sessions. Your family name will not be 
on these recordings, which will be identified only by a study ID number.  
● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breaches of confidentiality. We 
implement many layers of security to limit these risks as much as possible within our website 
and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are subject to their own security 
meas ures and carry their own risks if your family chooses to use them to supplement your 
participation in this study.  
● In addition, although this treatment usually prevents the development of eating disorder 
problems, in rare cases it may increase them.  
Other R isks 
● In this study your child will be given a physical activity goal. Given that some people may have 
medical risks associated with increasing their physical activity, these recommendations for your 
child will be given in consultation with his/her doctor.  
 
Will being in this study help my child in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you, your child, or others from your taking part in this research. 
However, possible benefits could include your child losing weight, becoming more physically active, an d 
eating more healthfully as a result of participation. In addition, maintaining weight loss may lead to 
better relationships and better mood. However, we cannot guarantee your child will receive any 
benefits from this study. This study may provide informa tion that will help other children inside and 
outside your household to lose weight and keep it off.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your child’s personal information, inc luding 
research study and medical or education records, to people who have a need to review this information. 
We cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your child’s information 
include the IRB and other representatives of this organization. Information related to your child will be 
treated in strict confidence to the extent provided by law. Your child’s identity will be coded and will not 
be associated with any published results. Your child’s code number and identity will b e kept in a locked 
file of the Principal Investigator. The only connection between your child’s participation in this study and 
the study itself will be this signed consent form. All recordings of the sessions will be kept in a locked file 
of the Principal  Investigator until the end of the study, at which point they will be destroyed. If your 
child withdraws from the study, no further data will be collected, but any information that has been 
provided may be retained by the researchers and analyzed. In order  to monitor this research study, 
representatives from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and other federal agencies such as NIH 
(National Institutes of Health) and OHRP (Office of Human Research Protection) may inspect the 
research records which may reve al your child’s identity. A description of this clinical trial will be available 
on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This web site will not include information that 
can identify your child. At most, the web site will include a summar y of the results. You can search this 
web site at any time. Federal law provides additional protections of your child’s medical records and 
related health information. These are described in the HIPAA section of this document.  
 
Can my child be removed from  the research without our OK?  
Page 151 of 305 
 The principal investigator of the study can remove your child from the research study without you or 
your child’s approval. Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for physical or 
psychological reasons. W e will tell you about any new information that may affect your child’s health, 
welfare, or choice to stay in the research.  
 
What else do my child and I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI).  
If your child needs medical care because of taking part in this research study, contact the investigator 
and/or speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. Generally, this care will be b illed 
to you, your insurance or other third party. The University at Buffalo has no program to pay for medical 
care for research -related injury. If your child agrees to take part in this research study, we will pay your 
family up to $30 for your time and e ffort. The amount you are paid depends upon your attendance to 
visits in the study.  
 
HIPAA:  Authorization for the Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health 
Information for Research Purposes  
This section describes information about your child and about yo ur child’s health that will be obtained 
by the researchers when your child participates in the research study. Health information is considered 
"protected health information" when it may directly identify your child as an individual. By signing this 
form, you are agreeing to permit the researchers and/or other parties (described in detail below) to 
have access to this information. If there are any parts of this form that you do not understand, please be 
sure to ask us for further clarification.  
A. What protect ed health information will be collected about your child as part of this 
research study?  
__√__ Information from your child’s full medical records.  
__√__ New Health Information created from study related tests, procedures, visits, and/or                                                              
questionnaires as described in this consent form.  
B.    Who is authorized to provide or collect this information?  
__√_      Principal Investigator or designee  
C.   With whom may your child’s protected health inform ation be shared?  
Your child’s health information may be shared with others outside of the research group for 
purposes directly related to the conduct of this research study or as required by law, including 
but not limited to:  
__√__  Clinical staff not inv olved in this research study who may become involved in your 
child’s care if it is potentially relevant to your treatment.  
__√__  The sponsor of this research study (National Heart, Lung and Blood Institutes 
(NHLBI)  cooperative group, etc., or its agents.  
__√__  The organization(s) responsible for administering this research (e.g., Research 
Foundation of SUNY, University at Buffalo, Washington University, Nationwide 
Children’s Hospital, University of Rochester).  
__√__  Other medical investigators/centers/in stitutions participating in this research study.  
Page 152 of 305 
 Your child’s information may also be shared with individuals or entities responsible for general 
administration, oversight and compliance of research activities. Examples of this include the 
institution's P rivacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, Safety Monitoring 
Boards, an Institutional Review Board, The Research Foundation of the State University of New 
York, University at Buffalo Foundation Services, and accrediting bodies, or with  certain 
government oversight agencies that have authority over the research including the Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Office of Human Research Prot ections (OHRP). Your child’s 
information may also be shared with other entities as permitted or required by law.  All 
reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your child’s individually 
identifiable health information that may be sha red with others as described above.  
All reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your child’s protected health 
information. There is the potential for individually identifiable information and the associated 
health information obta ined with this authorization to be re -disclosed by the recipient(s). After 
such a disclosure, the information may no longer be protected by the terms of this authorization 
against further re -disclosure.  
D.  How long will this information be kept by the Pri ncipal Investigator?  
__√__    This authorization has no expiration date. The researchers may continue to rely on this 
authorization to obtain and use protected health information about your child unless 
you revoke this authorization in writing.  
__√__ Your child’s protected health information will go into a database that will be maintained 
indefinitely. Any future study using this information that falls outside the scope of this 
current study will be required to follow guidelines designed to govern access to  that 
information and to protect the privacy of that information.  
 
E.  What are your rights after signing this authorization?  
You have the right to revoke this authorization at any time. If you withdraw your authorization, 
no additional efforts to collect individually identifiable health information about your child will 
be made. You should know, however, that protected health information acquired using this 
authorization prior to its withdrawal may continue to be used to the extent that the 
investigator(s)  have already relied on your permission to conduct the research. If you chose to 
withdraw this authorization, you must do so in writing to the following individual(s):  
 
Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
University at Buffalo Department of Pediatrics  
Division of Be havioral Medicine  
3435 Main Street  
G56 Farber Hall  
Buffalo, NY 14214  
Phone: 716 -829-3400  
 
Page 153 of 305 
 If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that request to the 
institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individually identifiable health 
information.  
 
F.  What will happen if you decide not to sign this au thorization?  
 
Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future care your child receives at 
this institution and will not cause any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise 
entitled. If you decide not to sign this auth orization, you and your child will not be able to 
participate in the research study.   
  
Page 154 of 305 
 Signature Block for Parental Permission  
 
Signature documents your permission for the named child to take part in this research. By signing this form, 
you are not waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to 
negligence or misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
 
 Printed name of child  
   
Signature of parent or individual legally authorized to consent to  the 
child’s general medical care   Date  
 ❑ Parent  
❑ Individual legally authorized 
to consent to the child’s 
general medical care  (See 
note below)  Printed name of parent or individual legally authorized to consent to the 
child’s general medical care  
Note:  Investigators are to ensure that individuals who are not parents can demonstrate their legal authority to consent 
to the child’s general medical care. Contact legal counsel if any questions arise.  
   
Assent Process  
 
❑ Child is birth -6 yrs. old - Assent is  not required  
❑ Child is 7 -17 yrs. old – A separate Assent Document is to be signed by the 
child  
❑ Assent will be obtained Verbally  
❑ Assent has been waived by the IRB  
  
 
 
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated with participation 
in this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions about this 
information have been answered. A copy of this document will be given to the subject.  
  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
  
Page 155 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
PILOT Parent Adult Consent to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 07 -18-2018  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
 
Why am I being invited to take part in a research study?  
You and your child are being invited to take part in a pilot research study because:  
● You are an adult able to read the English language. You have reported no current learni ng 
disabilities, medical problems, or psychiatric problems.  
● You have a child between the ages of 7 and 12 years old that falls into the overweight or obese 
weight category (defined as at or above the 85th percentile for age and sex), and you are 
intereste d in weight loss and participating in the study.  
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHBLI). 
Research studies only include individuals who choose to take part in them. Your decision to take part in 
this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully. Ask questions about anything you 
do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate. You may also take home an unsigned 
copy of this consent form to think about parti cipating or if you wish to discuss this matter with your 
family or your personal doctor. Please take your time to make your decision. Do not sign this form 
unless you have had the chance to ask questions and have received satisfactory answers.  
 
What should  I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you.  
● Whether or not you take part is up to you.  
● You can choose not to take part.  
● You can agree to take part and later change your mind.  
● Your decision will not be held against you.  
● You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
  

Page 156 of 305 
 Who can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein . You may also  contact the PLAN coach at 
your child’s doctor’s office. You can also contact the research participant advocate at 716 -888-4845 or 
researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and app roved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu    
 If:  
● You have questions about your rights as a participant in this research  
● Your questions, c oncerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this pilot study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss treatment called 
family -based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be included in the 
primary care setting. Extensive information h as been gathered by our research team about the 
treatment of childhood overweight and obesity. But there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings, such as primary care.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that you will be in this treatment and research study for 3 months.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 6 families will be in the pilot phase of this research study.  
 
What happens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?  
To determine if your family is eligible to participate, you and your child will be asked to complete an 
eligibility assessment at an orientation session about this study. You and your child’s height and weight 
will be measured, and standard questions regard ing medical and psychological history will be asked by a 
trained interviewer to determine eligibility.  
If your family is eligible for this research study and agrees to participate, you and your child will be asked 
to come to your pediatric office to compl ete a baseline assessment (detailed below). After the baseline 
assessment, your family will be enrolled. You will meet with a PLAN coach weekly.  
 
Group  
At the start of the study, your family will be assigned to receive family -based behavioral treatment fo r 
weight management (FBT). FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention that aims to make weight 
changes in both a child and their participating parent. FBT is a well -tested treatment that targets diet, 
activity, behavioral techniques, parenting, and so cial facilitation in children and their parents. The 
treatment includes: 1) The Traffic Light Eating Plan uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN labels for food to 
guide families toward the goal of eating nutritious foods. 2) The Traffic Light Activity Program also u ses 
RED; YELLOW; and GREEN labels for different levels of exercise to increase physical activity and reducing 
inactive behaviors. 3) a variety of behavioral techniques including changing and controlling your 
environment, tracking eating and physical activi ty, setting goals, problem solving, setting up a reward 
Page 157 of 305 
 system, incentives for behavior change and weight loss, finding substitutes for unhealthy foods, and 
improving positive parenting. FBT also involves making changes in the home. So that weight loss or 
prevention of weight gain may extend to members of the family who are not regularly attending 
treatment sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
 
Treatment Schedule  
Every family will receive FBT and will complete at least 12 sessions with the FBT PLAN coach d uring the 3 
months of the study.  
 
Assessments, Interviews, Questionnaires  
Attendance will be taken and both you and your child will be weighed at every session. In addition, there 
will be two major assessments throughout the entire 3 months of the pilot s tudy:  
● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at end of study (3 months)  
Both major assessments will take approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your child’s pediatric 
office, or a home visit can be arranged. Height and weight will be taken on you and your child. Your 
height will be taken at the beginning of the study, and your child’s height will be taken at each major 
assessment. At your baseline and follow -up appointment, we will ask you to do a computer task that 
asks you to make choices between different amounts of money.  
 
Audio Recording  
Your interviews and individual  family will be audiotaped or digitally recorded for research purposes, but 
you will not be identified on the recording and the recordings will not be labeled with your name. 
Recording the sessions is the best way to make sure we collect accurate informati on. It also helps us 
make sure that all our staff delivers the study to participants in the same way. The recordings will be 
stored on password -protected computers with restricted access within the University at Buffalo, and 
then transferred to Washington University School of Medicine. The recordings will be labeled only with 
your study ID, date, and session number. The Principal Investigator and research staff may use these 
recordings for purposes of evaluation, treatment, research, and training related to  this study. 
Recordings may also be used to train staff implementing these or similar interventions at other sites. 
The recordings will be destroyed at the end of the study when all data analysis is complete. You do not 
have to agree to be audio recorded i n order to participate in this study.  
 
  
Page 158 of 305 
 Please check and initial below if you agree or do not agree to give permission for you and your child to 
be audio recorded during your sessions with the PLAN coach.  
     YES __________, Yes, I give my permission to be audio recorded during sessions with a PLAN coach  
      NO___________, No, I do not  give my permission to be audio recorded during sessions with a PLAN 
coach  
Parent INITIAL______________ Date: ________________  
What are my responsibilities if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this pilot research, you will be responsible to attend the baseline assessment, 3 month 
follow -up assessment, and attend at least 12 treatment sessions.  
 
What happens if I do not want to be in this research?  
Your parti cipation in this pilot research study is voluntary. You may choose not to enroll in this study.  
There are no other research alternatives other than to participate in this study.  
 
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the pilot research at any time. It will not be held against you. You do not have to answer 
every question. You may refuse to answer any questions that you do not want to answer.  
If you decide to leave the research, you may not be able to find this kind of fami ly treatment in your 
area outside of this research study. Other types of treatment may be available in your community. In 
which case we will provide a list of these and how to find them if you prefer this option. However, you 
and/or your insurance company would be responsible for any costs associated with these options. You 
also may not receive full compensation for your participation. If you decide to leave the research, 
contact the investigator at the contact information included below. If you stop being in the research, 
already collected data may not be removed from the study database. You will be asked whether the 
investigator can collect data from your routine medical care.   
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?  
There are certain ri sks and discomforts that may be associated with this research. They include:  
Likely  
● You might feel hungry when dieting or sore after exercising.  
Less Likely  
● You may find some of the questions embarrassing or be uncomfortable having your height and 
weight measured.  
● There may be some family disagreements as issues of family functioning, communication, and 
discipline are discussed.  
● You may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss work, school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments and family se ssions.  
Rare  
● There is a risk of audio recordings being lost. All recordings will be immediately stored in a 
locked drawer or saved to a password -protected computer in the research office after the 
individual family and group weight loss and maintenance ses sions. Your family name will not be 
on these recordings, which will be identified only by a study ID number.  
Page 159 of 305 
 ● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breaches of confidentiality. We 
implement many layers of security to limit these ris ks as much as possible within our website 
and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are subject to their own security 
measures and carry their own risks if your family chooses to use them to supplement your 
participation in this study.  
● In addition, although this treatment usually prevents the development of eating disorder 
problems, in rare cases it may increase them.  
Other Risks  
● In this study you will be given a physical activity goal. Given that some people may have medical 
risks associa ted with increasing their physical activity, these recommendations for your child will 
be given in consultation with his/her doctor. As an adult, you may consider getting approval 
from your doctor for setting physical activity goals. Adult participants wil l be responsible for 
consulting their doctor for approval.  
Will being in this study help me in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. However, 
possible benefits could include you and your child losi ng weight, becoming more physically active, and 
eating more healthfully as a result of participation. In addition, maintaining weight loss may lead to 
better relationships and better mood. However, we cannot guarantee that you or your child will receive 
any benefits from this study. This study may also provide information that will help other children inside 
and outside your household to lose weight and keep it off.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit t he use and disclosure of your personal information, including research 
study and medical or education records, to people who have a need to review this information. We 
cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your informatio n include 
the IRB and other representatives of this organization. Information related to you will be treated in strict 
confidence to the extent provided by law. Your identity will be coded and will not be associated with any 
published results. Your code nu mber and identity will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator. The only connection between your participation in this study and the study itself will be 
this signed consent form. All recordings of the sessions will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator until the end of the study. At which point they will be destroyed. If you withdraw from the 
study, no further data will be collected. Any information that has been provided may be retained by the 
researchers and analyzed. In o rder to monitor this research study, representatives from the Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) and other federal agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) and OHRP 
(Office of Human Research Protection) may inspect the research records which may reveal your identity. 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. 
Law. This web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the web site will include a 
summary of the re sults. You can search this web site at any time. Federal law provides additional 
protections of your medical records and related health information. These are described in the HIPAA 
section of this document.  
 
Can I be removed from the research without my O K? 
The principal investigator of the study can remove you from the research study without your approval. 
Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for physical or psychological reasons.  
 
What else do I need to know?  
Page 160 of 305 
 This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institutes (NHLBI). If you need medical care because of taking part in this research study, 
contact the investigator and/or speak with your doctor and medica l care will be made available. 
Generally, this care will be billed to you, your insurance or other third party. The University at Buffalo 
has no program to pay for medical care for research -related injury. If you agree to take part in this 
research study, we will pay you up to $30 for your time and effort. The amount you are paid depends 
upon your attendance to visits in the study.  
 
HIPAA:  Authorization for the Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health Information for Research 
Purposes  
This section descri bes information about you and about your health that will be obtained by the 
researchers when you participate in the research study. Health information is considered "protected 
health information" when it may directly identify you as an individual. By sign ing this form, you are 
agreeing to permit the researchers and/or other parties (described in detail below) to have access to 
this information. If there are any parts of this form that you do not understand, please be sure to ask us 
for further clarificatio n. 
A. What protected health information will be collected about you as part of this research 
study?  
 __√__ Specific information from your full medical records related to your height, weight, dietary 
restrictions, and physical activity restrictions.  
 
__√__ New  Health Information created from study related tests, procedures, visits, and/or                                                              
questionnaires as described in this consent form.  
B.    Who is authorized to provide or collect this information?  
__√_      Principal Investigator or designee  
 
C.   With whom may your protected health information be shared?  
Your health information may be shared with others outside of the research group for purposes 
directly related to the conduct of this research stu dy or as required by law, including but not 
limited to:  
__√__  Clinical staff not involved in this research study who may become involved in you and 
your child’s care if it is potentially relevant to your treatment.  
__√__  The sponsor of this research stud y (National Heart, Lung and Blood Institutes 
(NHLBI)  cooperative group, etc., or its agents.  
__√__  The organization(s) responsible for administering this research (e.g., Research 
Foundation of SUNY, University at Buffalo, Washington University, Nationwide  
Children’s Hospital, University of Rochester).  
___√_  Other medical investigators/centers/institutions participating in this research study.  
Your information may also be shared with individuals or entities responsible for general 
administration, oversight  and compliance of research activities. Examples of this include the 
institution's Privacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, Safety Monitoring 
Page 161 of 305 
 Boards, an Institutional Review Board, The Research Foundation of the State University of New 
York, University at Buffalo Foundation Services, and accrediting bodies, or with certain 
government oversight agencies that have authority over the research including the Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA), the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP). Your 
information may also be shared with other entities as permitted or required by law.  All 
reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your individually identifiable 
health information that may be shared with others as described above.  
All reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your protected health 
information. There is the potential for individually identif iable information and the associated 
health information obtained with this authorization to be re -disclosed by the recipient(s). After 
such a disclosure, the information may no longer be protected by the terms of this authorization 
against further re -discl osure.  
D.  How long will this information be kept by the Principal Investigator?  
__√__    This authorization has no expiration date. The researchers may continue to rely on this 
authorization to obtain and use protected health information about you unless you 
revoke this authorization in writing.  
__√__ Your protected health information will go into a database that will be maintained 
indefinitely. Any future study using this information that falls outside the scope of this 
current study will be required to f ollow guidelines designed to govern access to that 
information and to protect the privacy of that information.  
E.  What are your rights after signing this authorization?  
You have the right to revoke this authorization at any time. If you withdraw your auth orization, 
no additional efforts to collect individually identifiable health information about you will be 
made. You should know, however, that protected health information acquired using this 
authorization prior to its withdrawal may continue to be used t o the extent that the 
investigator(s) have already relied on your permission to conduct the research. If you chose to 
withdraw this authorization, you must do so in writing to the following individual(s):  
Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
University at Buffalo Dep artment of Pediatrics  
Division of Behavioral Medicine  
3435 Main Street  
 G56 Farber Hall  
Buffalo, NY 14214  
Phone: 716 -829-3400  
 
If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that request to the 
institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individually identifiable health 
information.  
 
F.  What will happen if you decide not to sign this authorization?  
 
Page 162 of 305 
 Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future care you receive at this institution 
and will not cause any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. If you decide not 
to sign this authorization, you will no t be able to participate in the research study.    
Page 163 of 305 
 Signature Block for Capable Adult  
 
Your signature documents your permission to take part in this research. By signing this form, you are not 
waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek co mpensation for injury related to negligence or 
misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
   
   
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 164 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
 
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS TREATMENT 
IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Participating Child Assent to be in a Research Study (for Children 7 -13 yrs. of 
age) 
 
Version Date: 6.25.19  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD.  
 
Who are we?  
My name is Dr. Leonard H. Epstein and I am a researcher at the University at Buffalo. I work in the 
Department of Pediatrics.  
 
Why are we meeting with you?  
You have aged into a different age group of 7 -13 year olds. We need you to assent to continue 
participating in this weight loss program for kid s.  
 
Why are we doing this study?  
We want to look at a certain kind of weight loss program for kids. We want to know if it will work at a 
doctor’s office.  
 
What will happen to you if you continue to participate in the study?  
You will continue to come to th e doctor’s office like before, nothing has changed. You will keep coming 
in to get your height and weight measured and fill out surveys.   
You and your parent will continue to be a part of one of two groups:  
● If you are in one group, you follow the recommen dations of your doctor.  
● If you are in the other group, you come to your doctor’s office once a week for 2 years. This 
happens for at least 26 visits. At the visits you meet with someone from the study. Your weight 
is taken and you learn about healthy food.  We teach you fun ways to exercise.  
 
Every 6 months we ask you some questions about yourself. We continue to measure your height and 
weight. At your 12 -month and follow -up appointments, we ask you to do a computer task that asks you 
to make choices between  different amounts of money.  
 
You do not have to answer any questions that you do not want to answer. You do not have to do any 
activities that you do not want to do.  
 
What are the good things and bad things that may happen to you if you continue to be a p art of the 
study?  

Page 165 of 305 
 Most Likely:  You can have fun learning about healthy food and exercise. You could become healthy.  
 
Maybe: You could become hungry when trying to eat healthy. Your muscles could feel sore from 
exercise. That will go away once you are used to exercising. You might experience common exercise 
injuries (i.e., sprains, shin splints, tendonitis, muscle pulls, strains, etc).  
 
Do you have to continue to be in the study?  
No you don’t. No one will get angry or upset with you if you don’t want to do t his. Just tell us if you 
don’t want to continue to be in the study. Also, you can change your mind later if you decide you don’t 
want to be in the study anymore.  
 
Do you have any questions?  
You can ask questions at any time. You can ask now. You can ask la ter. You can talk to me or you can talk 
to someone else at any time during the study. You can call:  
 
Name of contact person on the study: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  Phone Number: (716) 829 -3400  
  
 
Signature Block for Assent of Child  
 
Your signature document s your permission to continue to take part in this research.  
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
 
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated with continued 
participation in this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions 
about this information have been answered. A copy of this document will be given to the subject.  
  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
(This change was made on 7.25.19 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol 
addenda, 10.25.19 ). 
 
  
Page 166 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Targeted Child Ages 14 -17 Assent to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 7.8.19  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD.  
 
Why am I being asked to continue in this research study?  
You are being asked to assent to continue in this research study because:  
● You have aged into a different age group of 14 -17 years.  
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI). 
Research studies only include individuals who choose to take part in them. Your decision to continue in 
this stud y is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully. Ask questions about anything you 
do not understand before deciding whether or not to continue to participate. You may also take home 
an unsigned copy of this consent form to think about conti nuing to participate or if you wish to discuss 
this matter with your family or your personal doctor. Please take your time to make your decision. Do 
not sign this form unless you have had the chance to ask questions and have received satisfactory 
answers.  
 
What should I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you.  
● Whether or not you continue is up to you.  
● You can choose not to continue.  
● You can agree to continue and later change your mind.  
● Your decision will not be held agai nst you.  
● You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
  

Page 167 of 305 
 Who can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein. You  may also contact the PLAN coach at 
your child’s doctor’s office. You can also contact the research participant advocate at 716 -888-4845 or 
researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu  if:  
● You have questions about your rights as a participant in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss treatment called family -
based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be included in the 
primary care setting.  Extensive information has been gathered by our research team about the 
treatment of childhood overweight and obesity. But there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings, such as prim ary care.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that you will be in this treatment and research study for 24 months from your original start 
of the study.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 132 families will be in this research study i n your geographical location. Out of 528 
families in the entire study nationally.  
What happens if I say yes, I want to continue to be in this research?  
You will continue your participation as before and no components of the research study have changed. 
As a reminder, you will continue to be asked to come to your pediatric office to complete assessment 
appointments (detailed below).  
Groups  
Your family has been assigned to one of two groups.  Participants in one group receive the current 
standard of care offe red by their physician for the treatment of childhood weight management.  
Participants in the second group receive family -based behavioral treatment for weight management 
(FBT). FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention that aims to make weight chang es in both a child 
and their participating parent. FBT is a well -tested treatment that targets diet, activity, behavioral 
techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in children and their parents. The treatment includes: 1) 
The Traffic Light Eating Plan  uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN labels for food to guide families toward the 
goal of eating nutritious foods. 2) The Traffic Light Activity Program, also uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN 
labels for different levels of exercise to increase physical activity and red ucing inactive behaviors. 3) a 
variety of behavioral techniques including changing and controlling your environment; tracking eating 
and physical activity; setting goals; problem solving; setting up a reward system; incentives for behavior 
change and weigh t loss; finding substitutes for unhealthy foods; and improving positive parenting. FBT 
also involves making changes in the home. So weight loss or prevention of weight gain may extend to 
members of the family who are not regularly attending treatment sessi ons (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
Page 168 of 305 
 The group that your family is in/the treatment you receive was chosen by chance. Like flipping a coin. 
Neither you nor your doctor chose what treatment your family is receiving.  
Treatment Schedule  
Every family will follow their pediatrician’s recommended schedule of appointments for weight 
management to have at least 4 visits with their child’s doctor over the course of the 24 months of the 
study. Families in the group receiving FBT will additionally complete at least 26 se ssions with the FBT 
PLAN Coach during the 24 months of the study. The amount of sessions completed within this range will 
be based on progress through the program and will vary for each family.  
Assessments, Interviews, Questionnaires  
Attendance will be tak en and you will continue to be weighed at every session. In addition, there are 
five major assessments throughout the entire 2 years of the study:  
● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 3 Treatment assessments during the study (6, 12, and 18 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at end of the study (24 months)  
Each major assessment takes approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your pediatric office, or a 
home visit can be arranged. Height and weight is taken on you as well as the identified other family 
members (if applicable). Your height was taken at the beginning of the study and will be taken at each 
major assessment. You will also complete short questionnaires. You as well as the identified other family 
members will be asked questions about pa renting behaviors and the home food and activity 
environment. At your baseline, 12 -month, and follow -up appointments, you will be asked to complete a 
computer task. Throughout the study, you will have access to a website that contains study materials 
and i nteractive tools.  
Audio Recording  
Your interviews and individual family will be audiotaped or digitally recorded for research purposes, but 
you will not be identified on the recording and the recordings will not be labeled with your name. 
Recording the ses sions is the best way to make sure we collect accurate information. It also helps us 
make sure that all our staff delivers the study to participants in the same way. The recordings will be 
stored on password -protected computers with restricted access withi n the University at Buffalo, and 
then transferred to Washington University School of Medicine. The recordings will be labeled only with 
your study ID, date, and session number. The Principal Investigator and research staff may use these 
recordings for purp oses of evaluation, treatment, research, and training related to this study. 
Recordings may also be used to train staff implementing these or similar interventions at other sites. 
The recordings will be destroyed at the end of the study when all data analy sis is complete.  
What are my responsibilities if I continue to take part in this research?  
If you continue to take part in this research, you will be responsible to attend all treatment assessments, 
at least 26 treatment sessions if your family is in the group receiving FBT, and the follow -up assessment.  
 
What happens if I do not want to continue to be in this research?  
Your participation in this research study is voluntary. You may choose not to continue in this study.  
There are no other research alternatives other than to participate in this study.  
 
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at any time. It will not be held against you. You do not have to answer every 
question and may refuse to answer any que stions that you do not want to answer.  
Page 169 of 305 
 If you decide to leave the research, you may not be able to find this kind of family treatment in your 
area outside of this research study. Other types of treatment may be available in your community. In 
which case we  will provide a list of these and how to find them if you prefer this option. However, you 
and/or your insurance company would be responsible for any costs associated with these options. You 
also may not receive full compensation for your participation. If  you decide to leave the research, 
contact the investigator at the contact information included above. If you stop being in the research, 
already collected data may not be removed from the study database. You will be asked whether the 
investigator can coll ect data from your routine medical care.   
 
Is there any way continuing to be in this study could be bad for me?  
There are certain risks and discomforts that may be associated with this research. They include:  
Likely  
● You might feel hungry when dieting, sore  after exercising, or experience common exercise 
injuries (i.e., sprains, shin splints, tendonitis, muscle pulls, strains, etc).  
Less Likely  
● You may find some of the questions embarrassing or be uncomfortable having your height and 
weight measured.  
● There m ay be some family disagreements as issues of family functioning; communication; and 
discipline are discussed.  
● You may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss work, school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments and family sessions.  
 
 
Rare  
● There is a risk of audio recordings being lost. All recordings will be immediately stored in a 
locked drawer or saved to a password -protected computer in the research office after the 
individual family and group weight loss and maintenance sessions. Your fam ily name will not be 
on these recordings, which will be identified only by a study ID number.  
● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breaches of confidentiality. We 
implement many layers of security to limit these risks as much as p ossible within our website 
and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are subject to their own security 
measures and carry their own risks if your family chooses to use them to supplement your 
participation in this study.  
● In addition, alth ough this treatment usually prevents the development of eating disorder 
problems, in rare cases it may increase them.  
Other Risks  
● In this study you will be given a physical activity goal. Given that some people may have medical 
risks associated with increa sing their physical activity, these recommendations will be given in 
consultation with your doctor. Participants will be responsible for consulting their doctor for 
approval.  
Will continuing to be in this study help me in any way?  
Page 170 of 305 
 We cannot promise any ben efits to you or others from your continuing to take part in this research. 
However, possible benefits could include you losing weight, becoming more physically active, and eating 
more healthfully as a result of participation. In addition, maintaining weigh t loss may lead to better 
relationships and better mood. However, we cannot guarantee that you will receive any benefits from 
this study. This study may also provide information that will help other children inside and outside your 
household to lose weight  and keep it off.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including research 
study and medical or education records, to people who have a need to review  this information. We 
cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include 
the IRB and other representatives of this organization. Information related to you will be treated in strict 
confidence to the extent pr ovided by law. Your identity will be coded and will not be associated with any 
published results. Your code number and identity will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator. The only connection between your participation in this study and th e study itself will be 
this signed consent form. All recordings of the sessions will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator until the end of the study. At which point they will be destroyed. If you withdraw from the 
study, no further data w ill be collected. Any information that has been provided may be retained by the 
researchers and analyzed. In order to monitor this research study, representatives from the Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) and other federal agencies such as NIH (National In stitutes of Health) and OHRP 
(Office of Human Research Protection) may inspect the research records which may reveal your identity. 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. 
Law. This web s ite will not include information that can identify you. At most, the web site will include a 
summary of the results. You can search this web site at any time. Federal law provides additional 
protections of your medical records and related health informatio n.  
 
Can I be removed from the research without my OK?  
The principal investigator of the study can remove you from the research study without your 
approval. Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for physical or 
psychological reasons.  
 
What else do I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institutes (NHLBI). If you need medical care because of taking part in this research study, 
contact t he investigator and/or speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. 
Generally, this care will be billed to you, your insurance or other third party. The University at Buffalo 
has no program to pay for medical care for research -related in jury. If you agree to continue to take part 
in this research study, we will pay your parents up to $175 for your family’s time and effort. The amount 
your parents are paid depends upon your attendance to visits in the study.  
 
Signature Block for 14 -17 year -old 
 
Your signature documents your permission to continue to take part in this research. By signing this form, 
you are not waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to 
negligence or misconduct of tho se involved in the research.  
 
Page 171 of 305 
    
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
   
   
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
(This change was made on 7.25.19 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol 
addenda, 10.25.19 ). 
  
Page 172 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
 
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS TREATMENT 
IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Sibling Assent to be in a Research Study - (for Children 7 -13 years of age)  
 
Version Date: 6.25.19  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD.  
 
Who are we?  
My name is Dr. Leonard  H. Epstein and I am a researcher at the UB. I work in the Department of 
Pediatrics.  
 
Why are we meeting with you?  
You have aged into a different age group of 7 -13 year  olds. We need you to assent to continue 
participating in this weight loss program for kids.  
 
Why are we doing this study?  
We want to look at siblings of kids participating in a study through your doctor’s office.  
 
What will happen to you if you continue  to participate in the study?  
You will continue to come to the doctor’s office like before, nothing has changed. You will keep coming 
in for a total of 5 times over 2 years so we can measure your height and weight. This will be done in 
private. Only your p arent, your sibling, and the study member will be with you. You do not have to 
answer any questions if you don’t want to. You do not have to do any activities you do not want to do.  
 
What are the good things and bad things that may happen to you if you con tinue to be a part of the 
study?  
Most Likely:  
Good:  You can learn how you are growing.   
Maybe:  
Good: You could learn what is like to be in a research study. You might lose weight.  
Bad:  You might not like getting your height and weight taken. You might feel hungry when 
dieting, sore after exercising, or experience common exercise injuries (i.e., sprains, shin splints, 
tendonitis, muscle pulls, strains, etc).  
 
Do you have to continue to b e in the study?  
No you don’t. No one will get angry or upset with you if you don’t want to do this. If you do not want to 
be in the study at any time, it will not affect your family being in the study. Just tell us if you don’t want 

Page 173 of 305 
 to be in the study. And  remember, you can change your mind later if you decide you don’t want to be in 
the study anymore.  
 
Do you have any questions?  
You can ask questions at any time. You can ask now. You can ask later. You can talk to me or you can talk 
to someone else at any time during the study. You can call:  
 
Name of contact person on the study: Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
Phone Number: (716) 829 -3400 
  
 
Signature Block for Sibling Assent of Child  
Your signature documents your permission to continue to take part 
in this rese arch.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed Name of Subject  
 
 
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated with continued 
participation in this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions 
about this information have been answered. A copy of this document will be given to the subject.  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
(This change was made on 7.25.19 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol 
addenda, 10.25.19 ). 
  
Page 174 of 305 
 University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Sibling Assent of a 14 -17-year -old to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 7.8.19  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD.  
 
Why am I being invited to take part in a research study?  
You are being asked to assent to continue in this research study because:  
● You have aged into a different age group of 14 -17 years.  
This research study  is supported by a grant through the National Heart Blood and Lung Institutes 
(NHBLI).  Research studies only include individuals who choose to take part in them. Your decision to 
take part in this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully and ask questions 
about anything you do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate. You may also take 
home an unsigned copy of this consent form to think about participating or if you wish to discuss this 
matter with your family  or your personal doctor. Please take your time to make your decision. Do not 
sign this form unless you have had the chance to ask questions and have received satisfactory answers.  
 
What should I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this resea rch study to you.  
● Whether or not you continue is up to you.  
● You can choose not to continue.  
● You can agree to continue and later change your mind.  
● Your decision will not be held against you.  
● You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
Who can  I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein. You may also contact the PLAN coach at 
your child’s doctor’s office. You can als o contact the research participant advocate at 716 -888-4845 or 
researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them  at (716) 888 -4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu  if:  
● You have questions about your rights as a participant in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  
● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
Page 175 of 305 
  
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight loss treatment called family -
based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be included in the 
primary care setting. Extensive information has been gathered by our research team about the 
treatment of childhood overwei ght and obesity, but there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings, such as primary care and how it effects siblings 
living with participating parents and children.  
 
How long will the research las t? 
We expect that you will be in this treatment and research study for 24 months from your original start 
of the study.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 132 families will be in this research study in your geographical location, out of 528 
families in the entire study nationally.  
 
What happens if I say yes, I want to continue to be in this research?  
You will continue your participation as before and no components of the research study have changed. 
As a reminder, you will continue to be aske d to come to your pediatric office to complete assessment 
appointments (detailed below).  
Groups  
Your family has been assigned to one of two groups.  Participants in one group receive the current 
standard of care offered by their physician for the treatment  of childhood weight management.  
Participants in the second group receive family -based behavioral treatment for weight management 
(FBT). FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention that aims to make weight changes in both a child 
and their participati ng parent. FBT is a well -tested treatment that targets diet, activity, behavioral 
techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in children and their parents. The treatment includes: 1) 
The Traffic Light Eating Plan uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN labels for food to guide families toward the 
goal of eating nutritious foods. 2) The Traffic Light Activity Program, also uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN 
labels for different levels of exercise to increase physical activity and reducing inactive behaviors. 3) a 
variety o f behavioral techniques including changing and controlling your environment; tracking eating 
and physical activity; setting goals; problem solving; setting up a reward system; incentives for behavior 
change and weight loss; finding substitutes for unhealth y foods; and improving positive parenting. FBT 
also involves making changes in the home. So weight loss or prevention of weight gain may extend to 
members of the family who are not regularly attending treatment sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
The gro up that your family is in/the treatment you receive was chosen by chance. Like flipping a coin. 
Neither you nor your doctor chose what treatment your family is receiving.  
Treatment Schedule  
Every family will follow their pediatricians recommended schedule  of appointments for weight 
management. Families in the group receiving FBT will additionally complete at least 26 sessions with the 
FBT interventionist during the 24 months of the study. The amount of session completed within this 
range will be based on p rogress through the program and will vary for each family. You will not attend 
the sessions with the PLAN coach.  
Assessments, Interviews, Questionnaires  
You will continue to attend five major assessments throughout the entire 2 years of the study:  
Page 176 of 305 
 ● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 3 Measurement assessments during the study (6, 12, and 18 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at end of study (24 months)  
Each major assessment takes approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your sibling’s pe diatric office, 
or a home visit can be arranged. Your height and weight will continue to be taken at each major 
assessment.   
 
What are my responsibilities if I continue to take part in this research?  
If you continue to take part in this research, you will  be responsible to attend all measurement 
assessments and the follow -up assessment. Your continued participation in any other meetings with 
your family are voluntary. Weight measurements at these times are also voluntary and can be used as 
data.  
 
What happ ens if I do not want to continue to be in this research?  
Your continued participation in this research study is voluntary. You may choose not to continue in this 
study, it will not affect your family being in the study. There are no other research alternat ives 
other than to participate in this study.  
 
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at any time, it will not be held against you. You do not have to answer every 
question and may refuse to answer any questions t hat you do not want to answer.  
If you decide to leave the research, you may not receive full compensation for your participation. If you 
decide to leave the research, contact the investigator at the contact information included below. If you 
stop being in the research, already collected data may not be removed from the study database. You will 
be asked whether the investigator can collect data from your routine medical care.   
 
Is there any way continuing to be in this study could be bad for me?  
There are certain risks and discomforts that may be associated with this research. They include:  
 
Likely  
● You may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss work, school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments.  
● You might feel hungry when dieting, sore aft er exercising, or experience common exercise 
injuries (i.e., sprains, shin splints, tendonitis, muscle pulls, strains, etc).  
Less Likely  
● You may find having your height and weight measured uncomfortable.  
Rare  
● Although this treatment usually prevents the development of eating disorder problems, in rare 
cases it may increase them.  
● The use of online platforms is associated with risks involving breaches of confidentiality. We 
implement many layers of security to limit these risks as much as possible within ou r website 
and REDCap database. Outside platforms (i.e., MyFitnessPal) are subject to their own security 
Page 177 of 305 
 measures and carry their own risks if your family chooses to use them to supplement your 
participation in this study.  
Will continuing to participate in this study help me in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your continuing to take part in this research. This 
study may provide information that will help you to lose weight and keep it off. However, we cannot 
guarantee that you w ill receive any benefits from this study.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including research 
study and medical or education records, to people who have a need to review this information. We 
cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include 
the IRB and other representatives of this organization. Information related to you will be treated in strict 
confidence to the extent provided by law. Your identity will be coded and will not be associated with any 
published results. Your code number and identity will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator. The only connection between your participa tion in this study and the study itself will be 
this signed consent form. If you withdraw from the study, no further data will be collected, but any 
information that has been provided may be retained by the researchers and analyzed. In order to 
monitor thi s research study, representatives from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and other federal 
agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) and OHRP (Office of Human Research Protection) 
may inspect the research records which may reveal your identit y. A description of this clinical trial will 
be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This web site will not include 
information that can identify you. At most, the web site will include a summary of the results. You can 
sear ch this web site at any time.  
 
 
 
Can I be removed from the research without my OK?  
The principal investigator of the study can remove you from the research study without your approval. 
Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for physi cal or psychological reasons.  
 
What else do I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI).   
If you need medical care because of taking part in this res earch study, contact the investigator and/or 
speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. Generally, this care will be billed to you, 
your insurance, or other third party. The University at Buffalo has no program to pay for medical care for 
research -related injury.  
 
Signature Block for Assent of Child  
Your signature documents your permission to continue to take part in this research. By signing this form, 
you are not waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to 
negligence or misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
Page 178 of 305 
  
 Printed name of subject  
 
I certify that the nature and purpose, the potential benefits and possible risks associated with continued 
participation in this research study have been explained to the above individual and that any questions 
about this information have been answered. A copy of this document will be given to the subject.  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
(This change was made on 7.25.19 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol 
addenda, 10.25.19 ). 
  
Page 179 of 305 
  
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federal wide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Sibling Adult Consent to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 6.25.19  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD.  
 
Why am I being invited to continue in this research study?  
You are being asked to assent to continue in this research study because:  
● You have aged into a different age group of 14 -17 years.  
This research study is supported by a grant through the National Heart Blood and Lung Institute (NHBLI). 
Research studies only include individuals who choose to take part in them. Your decision to ta ke part in 
this study is entirely voluntary. Please read this information carefully. Ask questions about anything you 
do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate. You may also take home an unsigned 
copy of this consent form to think abo ut participating or if you wish to discuss this matter with your 
family or your personal doctor. Please take your time to make your decision. Do not sign this form 
unless you have had the chance to ask questions and have received satisfactory answers.  
 
Wha t should I know about a research study?  
● Someone will explain this research study to you.  
● Whether or not you continue is up to you.  
● You can choose not to continue.  
● You can agree to continue and later change your mind.  
● Your decision will not be held against you.  
● You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
Who can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team by telephone at 716 -829-3400 for Dr. Leonard Epstein. You may also contact the PLAN coach at 
your child’s doctor’s office. You can also contact th e research participant advocate at 716 -888-4845 or 
researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (716) 88 8-4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu  if:  
● You have questions about your rights as a participant in this research  
● Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
● You cannot reach the research team.  

Page 180 of 305 
 ● You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
● You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The goal of this study is to determine whether a specific kind of weight los s treatment called family -
based behavioral treatment (FBT) for children, delivered by a PLAN coach, can be included in the 
primary care setting. Extensive information has been gathered by our research team about the 
treatment of childhood overweight and ob esity. But there is still much to learn about how the treatment 
should be incorporated into various medical settings. Such as primary care and how it effects siblings 
living with participating parents and children.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expe ct that you will be in this treatment and research study for 24 months from your original start 
of the study.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 132 families will be in this research study in your geographical location. Out of 528 
families i n the entire study nationally.  
 
What happens if I say yes, I want to continue to be in this research?  
You will continue your participation as before and no components of the research study have changed. 
As a reminder, you will continue to be asked to come to your pediatric office to complete assessment 
appointments (detailed below).  
Groups  
Your family has been assigned to one of two groups.  Participants in one group receive the current 
standard of care offered by their physician for the treatment of childh ood weight management.  
Participants in the second group receive family -based behavioral treatment for weight management 
(FBT).  
FBT is a behavioral weight -control intervention that aims to make weight changes in both a child and 
their participating parent . FBT is a well -tested treatment that targets diet, activity, behavioral 
techniques, parenting, and social facilitation in children and their parents. The treatment includes: 1) 
The Traffic Light Eating Plan uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN labels for food to g uide families toward the 
goal of eating nutritious foods. 2) The Traffic Light Activity Program, also uses RED; YELLOW; and GREEN 
labels for different levels of exercise to increase physical activity and reducing inactive behaviors. 3) a 
variety of behavio ral techniques including changing and controlling your environment; tracking eating 
and physical activity; setting goals; problem solving; setting up a reward system; incentives for behavior 
change and weight loss; finding substitutes for unhealthy foods; and improving positive parenting. FBT 
also involves making changes in the home. So weight loss or prevention of weight gain may extend to 
members of the family who are not regularly attending treatment sessions (e.g., siblings and spouse).  
The group that y our family is in/the treatment you receive was chosen by chance. Like flipping a coin. 
Neither you nor your doctor chose what treatment your family is receiving.  
Treatment Schedule  
Every family will follow their pediatrician recommended schedule of appoin tments for weight 
management. Families in the group receiving FBT will additionally complete at least 26 sessions with the 
FBT PLAN Coach during the 24 months of the study. The amount of sessions completed within this range 
Page 181 of 305 
 will be based on progress throug h the program. The amount will vary for each family.  You will not 
attend the sessions with the PLAN Coach.  
Assessments, Interviews, Questionnaires  
You will attend five major assessments throughout the entire 2 years of the study:  
● 1 Baseline assessment upon starting study (0 months)  
● 3 Measurement assessments during the study (6, 12, and 18 months)  
● 1 Follow -up assessment at end of study (24 months)  
Each major assessment will take approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your pediatric office, or a 
home visit can be arranged. Height and weight measurements will be taken at each major assessment.  
What are my responsibilities if I continue to take pa rt in this research?  
If you take part in this research, you will be responsible to attend all measurement assessments and the 
follow -up assessment.  Your participation in any other meetings with your family are voluntary. Weight 
measurements at these times  are also voluntary and can be used as data.  
 
What happens if I do not want to continue to be in this research?  
Your participation in this research study is voluntary. You may choose not to continue in this study.  
There are no other research alternatives o ther than to participate in this study.  
 
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at any time. It will not be held against you, or affect your family’s 
participation in the study. You do not have to answer every que stion. You may refuse to answer any 
questions that you do not want to answer.  
If you decide to leave the research, you may not receive full compensation for your participation. If you 
decide to leave the research, contact the investigator at the contact in formation included below. If you 
stop being in the research, already collected data may not be removed from the study database. You will 
be asked whether the investigator can collect data from your routine medical care.   
 
Is there any way continuing to be in this study could be bad for me?  
There are certain risks and discomforts that may be associated with this research. They include:  
Likely  
● You may be inconvenienced at times by having to miss work, school activities, meetings, etc., to 
attend assessments.  
Less Likely  
● You may find having your height and weight measured uncomfortable.  
 
Will continuing to be in this study help me in any way?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your continued participation in this research. This 
study may provi de information that will help you to lose weight and keep it off. However, we cannot 
guarantee that you will receive any benefits from this study.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and discl osure of your personal information, including research 
study and medical or education records, to people who have a need to review this information. We 
Page 182 of 305 
 cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include 
the IR B and other representatives of this organization. Information related to you will be treated in strict 
confidence to the extent provided by law. Your identity will be coded and will not be associated with any 
published results. Your code number and identit y will be kept in a locked file of the Principal 
Investigator. The only connection between your participation in this study and the study itself will be 
this signed consent form. If you withdraw from the study, no further data will be collected.  Any 
infor mation that has been provided may be retained by the researchers and analyzed. In order to 
monitor this research study, representatives from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and other federal 
agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health) and OHR P (Office of Human Research Protection) 
may inspect the research records which may reveal your identity. A description of this clinical trial will 
be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This web site will not include 
inform ation that can identify you. At most, the web site will include a summary of the results. You can 
search this web site at any time. Federal law provides additional protections of your medical records and 
related health information. These are described in t he HIPAA section of this document.  
 
Can I be removed from the research without my OK?  
The principal investigator of the study can remove you from the research study without your approval. 
Possible reasons for removal include need for hospitalization for ph ysical or psychological reasons.  
What else do I need to know?  
This research is being funded by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI).   
If you need medical care because of taking part in this r esearch study, contact the investigator and/or 
speak with your doctor and medical care will be made available. Generally, this care will be billed to you, 
your insurance or other third party. The University at Buffalo has no program to pay for medical care  for 
research -related injury.  
 
HIPAA:  Authorization for the Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health 
Information for Research Purposes  
This section describes information about you and about your health that will be obtained by the 
researchers when you participate in the research study. Health information is considered "protected 
health information" when it may directly identify you as an individual. By signing this form you are 
agreeing to permit the researchers and/or other parties (described in detail below) to have access to 
this information. If there are any parts of this form that you do not understand, please be sure to ask us 
for fu rther clarification.  
A. What protected health information will be collected about you as part of this research 
study?  
__√__  Information from your full medical records (height, weight, dietary restrictions and 
physical activity restrictions.  
__√__  New Health  Information created from study related tests, procedures, visits, and/or                                                              
questionnaires as described in this consent form.  
B.    Who is authorized to provide or collect this information?  
__√_      Principal Investigator or designee  
C.   With whom may your protected health information be shared?  
Page 183 of 305 
 Your health information may be shared with others outside of the research group for purposes 
directly related to the conduct of this research study or as  required by law, including but not 
limited to:  
__√__  Clinical staff not involved in this research study who may become involved in your 
care if it is potentially relevant to your treatment.  
__√__  The sponsor of this research study (National Heart, Lung and Blood Institutes 
(NHLBI)  cooperative group, etc., or its agents.  
__√__  The organization(s) responsible for administering this research (e.g., Research 
Foundation of SUNY, University at Buffalo, Washington University, Nationwide 
Children’s Hospital, Un iversity of Rochester).  
__√__  Other medical investigators/centers/institutions participating in this research study.  
Your information may also be shared with individuals or entities responsible for general 
administration, oversight and compliance of resea rch activities. Examples of this include the 
institution's Privacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, Safety Monitoring 
Boards, an Institutional Review Board, The Research Foundation of the State University of New 
York, University at Buffalo Foundation Services, and accrediting bodies, or with certain 
government oversight agencies that have authority over the research including the Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the National 
Insti tutes of Health (NIH), and the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP). Your 
information may also be shared with other entities as permitted or required by law.  All 
reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your individually ide ntifiable 
health information that may be shared with others as described above.  
All reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your protected health 
information. There is the potential for individually identifiable information and th e associated 
health information obtained with this authorization to be re -disclosed by the recipient(s). After 
such a disclosure, the information may no longer be protected by the terms of this authorization 
against further re -disclosure.  
D.  How long will  this information be kept by the Principal Investigator?  
__√__    This authorization has no expiration date. The researchers may continue to rely on this 
authorization to obtain and use protected health information about you unless you 
revoke this authoriz ation in writing.  
__√__  Your protected health information will go into a database that will be maintained 
indefinitely. Any future study using this information that falls outside the scope of this 
current study will be required to follow guidelines design ed to govern access to that 
information and to protect the privacy of that information.  
E.  What are your rights after signing this authorization?  
You have the right to revoke this authorization at any time. If you withdraw your authorization, 
no additiona l efforts to collect individually identifiable health information about you will be 
made. You should know, however, that protected health information acquired using this 
authorization prior to its withdrawal may continue to be used to the extent that the 
investigator(s) have already relied on your permission to conduct the research. If you chose to 
withdraw this authorization, you must do so in writing to the following individual(s):  
Page 184 of 305 
  
Leonard H. Epstein, Ph.D.  
University at Buffalo Department of Pediatrics  
Division of Behavioral Medicine  
3435 Main Street  
G56 Farber Hall  
Buffalo, NY 14214  
Phone: 716 -829-3400  
 
If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that request to the 
institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individually identifiable health 
information.  
 
F.  What will happen if you decide not to sign this au thorization?  
 
Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future care you receive at this 
institution and will not cause any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. 
If you decide not to sign this authorizatio n, you will not be able to continue to participate in the 
research study.   
 
  
Page 185 of 305 
 Signature Block for Capable Adult  
Your signature documents your permission to continue to take part in this research. By signing this form you 
are not waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to 
negligence or misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
   
   
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
(This change was made on 7.25.19 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol 
addenda, 10.25.19 ). 
  
Page 186 of 305 
 University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | C linical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federalwide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS TREATMENT 
IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Addendum: Parental Permission for Targeted Child to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Version Date: 9.6.19  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD , Denise Wilfley, PhD , Stephen Cook, MD, MPH, Ihuoma 
Eneli, MD, MS, FAAP  
 
Change of Assessment Compensation:  
In the initi al consent form that you signed, we indicated that  ‘If your child agrees to take part in this 
research study, we will pay your family up to $175 for your time and effort. The amount you are paid 
depends upon your attendance to visits in the study’. However , the compensation for the 24 -month 
assessment has increased from $50 to $100. This brings total potential compensation to $225. The 
amount you are paid depends upon your attendance to visits in the study.  
In addition, each participating site will give pa rticipants tickets when they attend an assessment. Each 
participant will have a chance of accumulating up to 4 tickets depending on the number of assessments 
they attend (i.e., 6, 12, 18, & 24 month appointments). The number of winning tickets will be 
prop ortional to the number of families randomized at each site. Each winning ticket is worth $50.00. 
Please let the PLAN staff member know if you have any questions.  
To ensure that each family is aware of this change to the consent form, please sign where ind icated 
below:  
  
Page 187 of 305 
  
Signature Block for Capable Adult  
 
Your signature documents your permission to continue to take part in this research. By signing this form  you 
are not waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to 
negligence or misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed name of subject  
 
   
   
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
(DSMB approved protocol addenda, 10.25.19).  
 
  
Page 188 of 305 
  
Title of research study: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FAMILY -BASED WEIGHT LOSS 
TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED IN PRIMARY CARE  
 
Addendum: Assessment Protocol in Response to Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID -19) 
 
Date: 4.14.2020  
 
Investigators: Leonard H. Epstein, PhD, Denise Wilfley, PhD, Stephen Cook, MD, MPH, 
Ihuoma Eneli, MD, MS, FAAP  
 
Change of Assessment Protocol:  
Due to the recent Coronavirus Disease (COVID -19) pandemic, we have modified our assessment 
protocols to adhere to public health guidelines as recommended by the Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention. In the initial consent form that you signed, we indi cated “Each major 
assessment takes approximately 30 -90 minutes to complete at your pediatric office, or a home 
visit can be arranged.”  Assessments will now take place at your home using scales, measuring 
tapes, and household objects to gather height and w eight measurements that you will complete. 
Any materials that you may need as described in our protocol, but you do not currently possess, 
will be sent to your home by a PLAN With Families vendor (ie. Amazon) via postal mail at no 
cost to you. A subset of 10 families from each site, will be asked to complete a second height 
measurement one to two weeks after completing a remote assessment for quality control for an 
additional payment of $10.00.   
 
During the assessment, a PLAN staff member will call or vide o conference with you to guide 
you through the measurement protocol to assist you through the process, and record your height 
and weight data. Additionally, you will be sent online questionnaires to complete using your 
personal computer, tablet, or smartph one, including a new questionnaire to assess your family’s 
well-being during the current pandemic.  
 
Upon the lifting of social distancing recommendations, we will meet with your family at your 
pediatric practice to gather your height and weight measurement s based on our usual 
standardized lab protocol. You will be compensated 50% of the normal assessment payment for 
your self -conducted home measurement, and paid the remaining 50% at the in -person portion of 
the assessment.  
 
 

Page 189 of 305 
  
 
Signature Block for Capable Ad ult 
Your signature documents your permission to continue to take part in this research. By 
signing this form you are not waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek 
compensation for injury related to negligence or misconduct of those invo lved in the 
research.  
      
Signature of subject    Date  
   
Printed name of subject  
 
 
 
      
Signature of person obtaining consent    Date  
 
      
Printed name of person obtaining consent      
(DSMB approved protocol addenda, 5.7.20).  
 
  
Page 190 of 305 
  
 
C. Screening Measures  
 
INITIAL ELIGIBILITY SURVEY SCRIPT  
Introduce yourself and the PLAN program:  
 
“Hello, my name is (name), this research is being conducted by the National Institutes of 
Health to encourage healthy eating habits and promote healthy lifestyles  changes for families. 
Our study is for families with a 6 -12-year-old child and a parent, both of whom are overweight 
or obese. Additionally, overweight siblings and non -participating parents that are interested in 
the program will have the opportunity to participate as well.   
Would you be interested in learning more about the study?  
IF NO →  Thank you for your time and consideration. END SCREEN.  
IF YES → Do you have a few minutes right now for me to tell you more about the program and 
ask you a few qu estions to see if this program would be a good fit for your family?”  
 
If NO:  
Schedule a follow -up call, verify phone number. Document contact in the tracking database:   
 
“Would there be a day/time that works better for you to talk more about the program? I  can 
give you a call at a time that works best for you. What is your phone number? Or I could send 
you an email with a link to more information about the program. What is your email 
address?”  
 
If YES:  
Describe the study:  
 
“Great! I want to let you know tha t specific personal questions will be asked during this phone 
screen and recorded into a private database maintained by Washington University in St. Louis, 
MO.  This database will include your contact information and your answers to any specific 
eligibilit y criteria discussed during this phone screen.”  
 
“Just to review, our program is called PLAN with Families. That stands for Primary care 
pediatrics, Learning, Activity, and Nutrition. The goal of the program is for you and your 
child to learn ways to becom e healthier and stay healthy.”  
 
“In this study, we require that one child and one parent participate. The study will last about 2 
years. To help us and you see what progress you make during your participation, you will 
complete some questionnaires, a short  computer task, and have your height and weight taken 
5 times over the 2 years. Since we think learning to be healthier is important for the whole 
family, you can include any other children you may have and your child’s other parent in the 
study, too, but you don’t have to. If one of your child’s siblings is involved in the study, he or 
Page 191 of 305 
 she will only be asked to attend appointments every 6 months for height and weight 
measurements.”  
 
“All of the program meetings will be held here at your child’s doctor’s of fice. Your family will 
have an opportunity to participate in one of two groups.  The first group is a Family Based 
Treatment (FBT) group where your family would meet regularly with a trained PLAN coach 
to learn new information and skills related to health topics, such as calorie intake and 
physical activity. The second group is called a Usual Care (UC) group where your family 
would continue to receive the most up to date health information from working closely with 
your child’s pediatrician.”  
 
“If your fami ly is interested and you decide this study would be a good fit for you, you and 
your child will be asked to come here to [practice name] to complete an orientation session. 
After the orientation meeting, if you join the program, you will learn which group you and 
your child will participate in.  
 
“Does this sound like a study you might be interested in for you and your family?”  
 
If NO : 
Thank them for their time, share your contact information:  
 
“Thank you for your time. Here’s my contact information in case  you change your mind or 
have any questions.”  
 
“Here is a postcard from the program. On this card is our website,   
http://planwithfamilies.com  , where you can learn more about our program”  
 
If MAYBE : 
If the f amily would rather think about if the study is the right fit for them or if they seem 
hesitant:  
 
“If you would like to take some time to think about if the PLAN program is the right fit for 
you and your family, that’s okay. I can follow -up with you in a few days. Would that be ok?”  
 
“Here is a postcard from the program. Please provide a contact number and a preferred time 
to be reached. You can also check out the website  http://planwithfamilies.com   that is l isted on 
the card.”  
 
If YES : 
Begin Initial Eligibility Survey  
 
“Great! In order to get started I need to ask you some questions first. Do you have a few 
minutes to answer some questions?”  
 
INITIAL ELIGIBILITY SURVEY INTRODUCTION  
 
Page 192 of 305 
 This survey is the first step in determining if the PLAN program is right for your family.  This 
survey is brief and should only take approximately 10 minutes.  
 
Your participation in this survey is voluntary and you may stop the survey at any time.  Any 
information related to you and your household will be kept confidential and will be stored in a 
secure database that is only accessible to the PLAN team.   
If you have questions at any time, please stop me and I will answer them for you.  If you have 
questions in the future, feel fr ee to contact me at (PLAN coach’s cell phone number). I will be 
happy to answer any questions or concerns that you or your family may have about our 
program! Do you have any questions at this time?”   
PARENT INFORMATION  
The following questions must be answe red by the parent or adult interested in enrolling in the 
PLAN program.  If there are any questions that you do not wish to answer, please let me know 
and will move onto the next question.  
Q: What is your first name? (*Ask for spelling if necessary*) _____ _____________  
 
Q: What is your last name? (*Ask for spelling if necessary*) __________________  
 
Q: What is your address?  
 Street Address: ______________________  
 Street Address, continued: _________________  
 City: _________________  
 State: ______________  
 Zip Code: ______________  
 
Q: What is the best number at which to contact you?   ____________________  
 
Q:  What is the best email address to use to contact you?   ___________________  
 
Q: Is your family planning to move from the area in the next two years?  
● No 
● Yes 
● Refuse to answer  
Q: What is your date of birth?  (select from Calendar MM/DD/YYYY)  
Q: What is your sex? Choose from dropdown menu:  
● Male  
● Female  
● Other  
● Refuse  
 
Q: What is your race?  
● American Indian or Alaskan Native  
● Asian  
● Native Hawaiian or Other  Pacific Islander  
● Black or African American, not of Hispanic Origin  
● White or Caucasian, not of Hispanic Origin  
Page 193 of 305 
 ● Hispanic or Latina/o  
● Other, please specify:  
○ Other, please describe: _________  
Q: What is your height, in inches?  ____________  
 
Q: What is your we ight?  ___________  
 
BMI Parent:  ______________  
 
Q: When was your weight last taken? (Estimated if necessary MM/YYYY or YYYY)  
_________________  
 
Q: Are you able to complete, at minimum, a brisk 5 -10-minute walk?  
● Yes 
● No 
● Refuse to answer  
 
Q: Have you had a concussion in the last 3 months?  
● No  
● Yes,  
○ Date of concussion:  ________________  
○ Please describe: (description, effects)  _____________________  
 
Q: How many children do you have?  ____________  
 
Q: Do you have a child between the ages of 6 -12 that you would like to enroll in this study?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
If family is ineligible:  
“Thank you for your interest and answering these questions.  A requirement of this program 
is that the adult is joined by one of their children between the ages of 6 -12 years old.  Because 
you do not have a child between these ages that you would like to enroll, the PLAN program is 
not a good fit for your family.  However, may we keep your information and contact you with 
future projects for which you or your family may be a good match?”  
● No 
● Yes  
 
If family is eligible:  
“Thank you for answering the survey questions about yourself.  Next we will ask you to 
answer some general information questions about your child.”   
 
CHILD INFORMATION  
 
“The following questions pertain to the child between the ages of 6 -12 who you would like to 
enroll in the PLAN program.”  
Page 194 of 305 
  
If family has two or more children between the ages of 6 -12 years old:  
“It is great that your children are interested in participating!  Unfortunately, we can only 
enroll once child as the pa rticipating child.  We typically encourage the enrollment of the 
oldest sibling because s/he will serve as a role model for the younger sibling.  However, we 
leave it up to our parents to decide which child would best fit our program.”  
 
“If there are any q uestions that you do not wish to answer, please let me know.”  
 
Q: What is the first name of the child you wish to enroll in the study? (*Ask for spelling if 
necessary*) ________________  
 
Q: What is the last name of the child you wish to enroll in the study ? (*Ask for spelling if 
necessary*) ________________  
 
Q: Is this child:  
● Biological child  
● Adopted child  
● Step child  
● Foster child  
● Other relative  
○ If other relative, please describe: ______________________  
 
Q: What is the name of your child’s primary care physician?   _______________________  
 
Q: What is this __________’s date of birth?  (select from Calendar MM/DD/YYYY)  
 
Q: Child’s age:  (will automatically populate) __________  
 
Q: What is ____________’s sex?  Choose from dropdown menu:  
● Male  
● Female  
● Other  
● Refu se 
 
Q: What is your child’s race?  
● American Indian or Alaskan Native  
● Asian  
● Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  
● Black or African American, not of Hispanic Origin  
● White or Caucasian, not of Hispanic Origin  
● Hispanic or Latina/o  
● Other, please specify:  
○ Other, please describe: _________  
 
Q: How much does this child weigh?   ____________  
Page 195 of 305 
  
Q: When was his/her weight last measured? (Estimated if necessary MM/YYYY or YYYY) 
___________  
 
Q: What is _________’s height in inches?  _______________  
 
Participating chi ld’s BMI:  ___________________  
 
Q: Has this child had a concussion in the last 3 months?  
● Yes 
○ If yes, date of concussion:  (M-D-Y) ___________  
○ Please explain (description, effects):  ________________________  
● No 
● Refused  
Q: Is ___________ able to complete, at minimum, a brisk 5 -10-minute walk?  
● Yes 
● No 
● Refused  
 
If family is ineligible because there are no children between the ages of 6 -12 in the household:  
Thank you for your interest and your willingness to answer these questions.  A requirement of 
this program i s that the adult is joined by one of their children between the ages of 6 -12 years’ 
old who meets certain criteria.  Because you do not have a child between these ages that meets 
our criteria, the PLAN program is not a good fit for your family.  However, m ay we keep your 
information and contact you with future projects for which you or your family may be a good 
match?   
● No 
● Yes 
 
If child has had a concussion in the last three months:  
“One of our requirements is that the participating child has not had a concussion in the last 
three months.  This is because your child’s performance on one of our program tasks may be 
affected by concussion symptoms.  Therefore, I would like to wait until ____ more months have 
passed before continuing the screening process.  Would that be okay with you?”  
 If YES: Coach will schedule a call back date/time.  
 If NO: Thank them for their time.  
 
If family is eligible: The coach will proceed to asking questions regarding additional siblings.  
 
ADDITIONAL SIBLING INFORMATION  
“We want  the entire family to benefit from the program.  Therefore, we offer an opportunity for 
your child’s siblings to participate, as well. The sibling(s) would have their height and weight 
taken with you and your child at the 5 time points, as well as have acc ess to the information on 
healthy lifestyle that we provide.”  
 
Page 196 of 305 
 Do you have another child, who also meets the criteria for overweight/obesity, in your family 
between the ages of 2 -18 that you would like to enroll in this program as well?  
 
If YES : “How many additional children would you like to enroll?  You may  
enroll up to four additional children in the program.”  
 
If YES : Move on INCLUDING all parts about participating sibling and collect the  
following information.  
 
If NO : Move onto the “Wrapping Up” section below.  
 
The coach will ask the following questions for all non -participating siblings.  
Q: What is the first name of the second/third/fourth child you would like to enroll in the 
study? (*Ask for spelling if necessary*) ________________  
 
Q: What is the last name of the second/third/fourth child you wish to enroll in the study? 
(*Ask for spelling if necessary*) ________________  
 
Q: Is ________ your:  
● Biological child  
● Adopted child  
● Step child  
● Foster child  
● Other relative  
○ If other relative, please describe: _____________________  
 
Q: What is the name of _________’s primary care physician?   _______________________  
 
Q: What is this __________’s date of birth?  (select from Calendar MM/DD/YYYY)  
 
Q: Age:  (will automatically populate) __________  
 
Q: What is this child’s sex?  Choose from dropdown menu:  
● Male  
● Female  
● Other  
● Refuse  
 
Q: How much does ________ weigh?   ____________  
 
Q: When was his/her weight last measured? (Estimated if necessary MM/YYYY or YYYY) 
___________  
 
Q: What is _________’s height in inc hes?  _______________  
 
Q: Non Participating Child’s BMI: (Automatically calculated)  _____________  
Page 197 of 305 
  
Q: Has _________ had a concussion in the last 3 months?  
● Yes 
○ If yes, date of concussion:  (M-D-Y) ___________  
○ Please explain (description, effects):  ________________________  
● No 
● Refused  
Q: Is ___________ able to complete, at minimum, a brisk 5 -10-minute walk?  
● Yes 
● No 
● Refused  
 
READING LEVEL INFORMATION  
The coach will ask this question about the participating child and any non -participating 
siblings:  
Q: Can ___________ read and comprehend at a first grade level?  
● Yes 
● No 
WRAPPING UP  
 
The coach will then wrap up the Initial Eligibility Survey:  
“Thank you for answering the questions on the Initial Eligibility Survey.  Next we will ask you 
to answer additio nal questions about you and your child’s medical and psychiatric histories on 
the Eligibility Survey.  This survey usually takes between 15 -20 minutes to complete.  Do you 
have time for us to complete this survey right now?”  
 
If NO:  
Schedule a follow -up call, verify phone number. Document contact in the tracking database:  
 “Would there be a day/time that works better for you to talk more about the program?  
I can give you a call at a time that works best for you, or we could schedule another  
time to meet  here at the office.”  
If YES :  Schedule a call (verify phone number) or in person meeting at the practice.  
    Document contact in the database.  
If NO :  Thank them for their time.  
  
If YES : 
Begin Eligibility Phone Screen.  
 
ELIGIBILITY PHONE SCREEN SCRIPT  
 
“Just to review, our program is called Primary care pediatrics, Learning, Activity, and Nutrition, 
or PLAN for short. The goal of our program is for you and your child to learn ways to become 
healthier and stay healthy.  In this program, we require that o ne child and one parent 
participate. The study will last about 2 years. During your participation in the program, we will 
look at your progress by asking you to complete some questionnaires, a short computer task, 
and have your height and weight taken 5 ti mes over the 2 years.   
Page 198 of 305 
 All of the meetings will be held here at your child’s doctor’s office. If interested, you and your 
family, including the participating child and parent, non -participating parent, and participating 
sibling/s will be asked to come to your child’s physician’s office to meet with the PLAN coach 
to complete an orientation, height and weight measurements, and an assessment,  
 
Your family will have an opportunity to participate in one of two groups: A Family Based 
Treatment group (FBT) where  your family meets regularly with a trained health coach at the 
practice, or the usual care group where your child will continue to receive standard care from 
their doctor.   
 
Families are randomly selected into each group.  Those in the group receiving Family Based 
Treatment, or FBT, will additionally complete at least 26 sessions with the health coach 
during the 24 months of the study. The amount of sessions completed within this range will be 
based on progress through the program and will vary for each  family.  Participating siblings, 
as well as the non -participating parent, will be asked to attend appointments every 6 months 
for height and weight measurements.  
  
“Does this sound like a program you might be interested in for your family?”  
  
If NO: Thank  them for their time  
If YES : Continue to Eligibility Phone Screen.  
 
ELIGIBILITY PHONE SCREEN  
 
“Next, there are a few more questions to answer in order to determine your full eligibility for 
this study.  Some of these questions are a little repetitive from  the questions that I asked you 
during the Initial Eligibility Survey because I want to make sure all of the information that I 
gather about your family is correct.  Do you have any questions?”    
 
Q: We ask that one overweight parent attends and participa tes with the child in the program.  
What is the first name of the parent interested in participating?   ___________________  
 
Q: What is the participating parent’s last name?   _____________  
 
Q: Is [parent’s first name] willing to attend all treatment sessions and assessments with the child 
over the next two years?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Parent BMI is _________  (answer is automatically generated)  
 
Q: Is the parent able to continue with the screen based on BMI?  
● Yes 
○ If yes, continue with screening.  
Page 199 of 305 
 ● No 
○ If no, follow the procedure listed below.  
 
If the preferred participating parent is not overweight based on the reported height and weight from 
the Initial Eligibility Survey:  
We require that the participating parent meets specific weight criteria.  Unfortunately, your 
answers indicate that you do not meet these criteria.  Is there another parent who meets the 
overweight criteria that would be interested in participating?  
 
 If NO : Thank them for their time  
If YES : Continue on with Eligibility Phone Screen by gathering in formation about the  
 parent who is eligible.  
 
Q: What is the name of your/_______’s current physician?   _______________  
 
Q: What is the physician’s practice name?   _________________  
 
Q: What is the practice address?    
Practice address: __________________________  
Practice address continued, if necessary: _____________________  
City, State, Zip: ____________________  
 
Q: Practice phone number:   ____________________  
 
Q: We want the entire family to benefit from the program.  Therefore, we off er an opportunity 
for your child’s siblings to participate as well.  The sibling would have his/her height and weight 
taken with you and your child at the 5 time points, as well as have access to the information on 
healthy lifestyles that we provide.   
Do you have another child (a sibling of the child participating) that would be interested in 
participating?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: What are the ages of the children who would like to participate?  
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
Page 200 of 305 
 ● 14 
● 15 
● 16 
● 17 
● 18 
● Over 18  
 
If age is < 2 or > 18:  
“Unfortunately your child (participating sibling) does not meet the age criteria to participate in 
this study; however, this does not affect you and your other child’s ability to participate.”  
● Move on with script EXCLUDING all parts about participating sib ling. 
● This is not an exclusionary criterion for the primary participating child and parent.  
 
If age is 2 -18: 
“Would he/she be interested in participating in this study?”  
● If yes, move on to INCLUDING all parts about participating sibling.  
o If family has two children ages 6 -12 years old, we will be encouraging that the 
older sibling be the primary participant, as it is more likely the older sibling will 
serve as a role -model for the younger sibling.  
o In families where more than one eligible sibling is available , we will enroll the 
sibling whose age is closest to that of the study child.  
● If no, move on EXCLUDING all parts about participating sibling.  
 
“Next, there are a few more questions related to your family’s medical and psychiatric histories.  
I will ask you  specific personal questions. Your participation in this survey is voluntary and you 
may stop the survey at any time.  Any information related to you and your household will be 
kept confidential and will be stored in a secure database that is only accessib le to the PLAN 
team.  Do you have any questions?”  
 
“I will start by asking you questions about the child that would like to participate in the 
program.”  
 
Q: What is your child’s first name?   ________________  
 
Q: Does ___________ have any medical conditions  or is s/he undergoing any medical 
treatment?”  
● Yes 
○ If yes, can you describe the treatment?  _______________________  
● No 
 
Q: Does ______________ take any medications?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: How many medications?  
● 1 
Page 201 of 305 
 ● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
 
Q: Name of first medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: Dose:  ________________________  
 
Q: How often does your child take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: Years taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
● 14 
● 15 
● 16 
● 17 
● 18 
 
Q: Number of months [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
Page 202 of 305 
 ● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Name of second medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: Dose:  ________________________  
 
Q: How often does your child take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: Years taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
● 14 
● 15 
● 16 
● 17 
● 18 
Page 203 of 305 
  
Q: Number of months [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Name of third medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: Dose:  ________________________  
 
Q: How often does your child take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: Years taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
Page 204 of 305 
 ● 14 
● 15 
● 16 
● 17 
● 18 
 
Q: Number of months [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Name of fourth medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: Dose:  ________________________  
 
Q: How often does your child take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: Years taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
Page 205 of 305 
 ● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
● 14 
● 15 
● 16 
● 17 
● 18 
 
Q: Number of months [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Name of fifth medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: Dose:  ________________________  
 
Q: How often does your child take  [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: Years taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
Page 206 of 305 
 ● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
● 14 
● 15 
● 16 
● 17 
● 18 
 
Q: Number of months [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
 
Q: Does your child have any condition that would make him/her unable to exercise or limit the 
amount  of exercise?”  
● Yes 
 
● No 
 
Q: Has ______________ever had weight -related surgery such as gastric bypass?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Is your child currently participating in a weight loss or weight management program?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Does ______________ have any food allergies or dietary restrictions?  
Page 207 of 305 
 ● Yes 
○ If yes, please list restrictions and/or allergies:  _______________________  
● No 
 
Q: Has this child undergone any psychological treatment and/or counseling?”    
● Yes 
○ If yes, please describe condition: ____________________  
● No 
 
Q: Has ____________ ever been diagnosed with a psychiatric condition like depression or 
anxiety?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Has your child ever been diagnosed with a developmental delay, intellectual disability, or 
Autism Spectrum Disorder?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Is ____________ able to speak and comprehend English at the first grade level?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
PARENT QUESTIONS  
 
“Now I am going to ask you some questions about yourself.”  
 
Q: Are you ___________’s biological, adoptive parent, or legal guardian?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Do you and your child live together full time?  
● Yes 
● No 
○ If no, how often does ____________ live with you? (closest percentage)  
■ 0 
■ 10 
■ 20 
■ 30 
■ 40 
■ 50 
■ 60 
Page 208 of 305 
 ■ 70 
■ 80 
■ 90 
■ 100 
 
Q: Please obtain detailed notes on family situation:  _______________________________  
 
Q: Who does ___________ live with?  List all in home, and their relationship to the participating 
child:   ____________________________________________  
 
Q: Do you have another child or children [sibling(s) of the child participating] that would be 
interested in participating?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: If yes, how many children who are between the ages of 2 -18 would like to participate?  
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
 
PARTICIPATING PARENT HEALTH  
 
Q: Do you have any medical conditions or are you undergoing any medical treatment?  
● Yes 
○ Notes: _____________________________________  
● No 
 
Q: Do you take any medications?  
● Yes 
○ Q: How many medications do you currently take? (Select answer from dropdown)  
■ 1 
■ 2 
■ 3 
■ 4 
■ 5 
■ 6 
■ 7 
● No 
 
Page 209 of 305 
 Q: Name of first medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: What is your dose of [medication ]? ________________________  
 
Q: How often do you take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: How many years have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
● 14 
● 15 
● 16 ● 17 
● 18 
● 19 
● 20 
● 21 
● 22 
● 23 
● 24 
● 25 
● 26 
● 27 
● 28 
● 29 
● 30 
● 31 
● 32 
● 33 ● 34 
● 35 
● 36 
● 37 
● 38 
● 39 
● 40 
● 41 
● 42 
● 43 
● 44 
● 45 
● 46 
● 47 
● 48 
● 49 
● 50 
 
Q: How many months have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
Page 210 of 305 
 ● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Name of second medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: What is your dose of [medication ]? ________________________  
 
Q: How often do you take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: How many years have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
● 14 
● 15 
● 16 ● 17 
● 18 
● 19 
● 20 
● 21 
● 22 
● 23 
● 24 
● 25 
● 26 
● 27 
● 28 
● 29 
● 30 
● 31 
● 32 
● 33 ● 34 
● 35 
● 36 
● 37 
● 38 
● 39 
● 40 
● 41 
● 42 
● 43 
● 44 
● 45 
● 46 
● 47 
● 48 
● 49 
● 50 
 
Q: How many months have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
Page 211 of 305 
 ● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Name of third medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: What is your dose of [medication ]? ________________________  
 
Q: How often do you take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: How many years have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
● 14 
● 15 
● 16 ● 17 
● 18 
● 19 
● 20 
● 21 
● 22 
● 23 
● 24 
● 25 
● 26 
● 27 
● 28 
● 29 
● 30 
● 31 
● 32 
● 33 ● 34 
● 35 
● 36 
● 37 
● 38 
● 39 
● 40 
● 41 
● 42 
● 43 
● 44 
● 45 
● 46 
● 47 
● 48 
● 49 
● 50 
 
Q: How many months have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
Page 212 of 305 
 ● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Name of fourth medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: What is your dose of [medication ]? ________________________  
 
Q: How often do you take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: How many years have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
● 14 
● 15 
● 16 ● 17 
● 18 
● 19 
● 20 
● 21 
● 22 
● 23 
● 24 
● 25 
● 26 
● 27 
● 28 
● 29 
● 30 
● 31 
● 32 
● 33 ● 34 
● 35 
● 36 
● 37 
● 38 
● 39 
● 40 
● 41 
● 42 
● 43 
● 44 
● 45 
● 46 
● 47 
● 48 
● 49 
● 50 
 
Q: How many months have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
Page 213 of 305 
 ● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Name of fifth medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: What is your dose of [medication ]? ________________________  
 
Q: How often do you take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: How many years have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
● 14 
● 15 
● 16 ● 17 
● 18 
● 19 
● 20 
● 21 
● 22 
● 23 
● 24 
● 25 
● 26 
● 27 
● 28 
● 29 
● 30 
● 31 
● 32 
● 33 ● 34 
● 35 
● 36 
● 37 
● 38 
● 39 
● 40 
● 41 
● 42 
● 43 
● 44 
● 45 
● 46 
● 47 
● 48 
● 49 
● 50 
Page 214 of 305 
  
Q: How many months have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Name of sixth medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: What is your dose of [medication ]? ________________________  
 
Q: How often do you take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: How many years have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
● 12 
● 13 ● 14 
● 15 
● 16 
● 17 
● 18 
● 19 
● 20 
● 21 
● 22 
● 23 
● 24 
● 25 
● 26 
● 27 ● 28 
● 29 
● 30 
● 31 
● 32 
● 33 
● 34 
● 35 
● 36 
● 37 
● 38 
● 39 
● 40 
● 41 
Page 215 of 305 
 ● 42 
● 43 
● 44 ● 45 
● 46 
● 47 ● 48 
● 49 
● 50 
 
Q: How many months have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Name of seventh medication:  _____________________  
 
Q: What is your dose of [medication ]? ________________________  
 
Q: How often do you take [medication]?  
● Once per day  
● Twice per day  
● Three times per day  
● Four times per day  
● As needed  
● Every other day  
● Weekly  
● Bi-weekly  
● Monthly  
● Only during the school week  
 
Q: How many years have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 ● 11 
● 12 
● 13 
● 14 
● 15 
● 16 
● 17 
● 18 
● 19 
● 20 
● 21 ● 22 
● 23 
● 24 
● 25 
● 26 
● 27 
● 28 
● 29 
● 30 
● 31 
● 32 
Page 216 of 305 
 ● 33 
● 34 
● 35 
● 36 
● 37 
● 38 ● 39 
● 40 
● 41 
● 42 
● 43 
● 44 ● 45 
● 46 
● 47 
● 48 
● 49 
● 50 
 
Q: How many months have you been taking [medication]?  
● 0 
● 1 
● 2 
● 3 
● 4 
● 5 
● 6 
● 7 
● 8 
● 9 
● 10 
● 11 
 
Q: Do you have a condition that would make you unable to exercise or limit the amount of 
exercise?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Have you ever had weight -related surgery  such as gastric bypass?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Are you or any other immediate family members currently participating in a weight loss or 
weight management program?  
● Yes 
o Please describe:  ________________________  
● No 
 
Q: Would you or your family member be willing to stop their program if accepted into our 
program? (This is necessary to participate in the study.)  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Do you have any food allergies or food restrictions?  
● Yes 
o Please list food allergies and/or restrictions:  ____________________________  
● No 
 
Page 217 of 305 
 Q: Have you ever participated in any psychological treatment and/or counseling?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Have you ever been diagnosed with a psychiatric condition such as depression or anxiety?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: Are you currently pregnant or plan to become pregnant in the next 2 years?  
● Yes 
● No 
 
 
“Thank you for your willingness to answer all of these questions.  We want to make sure your 
family has a great experience in our program.   Let’s look at your eligibility status.”  
  
PLAN EXCLUSIONARY CRITERIA  
● The participating parent is pregnant or planning on becoming pregnant during the 2 -year 
study period.  
● Participation to any degree in a weight management or weight loss program.  
● Weight -related surgeries (e.g., gastric bypass) if within the last 2 years.  
○ Please note that the patient must be weight stable or gaining weight (cannot be 
losing weight) (DSMB approved protocol addenda, 11.2.18).  
● Medical condition altering the nutritional  status or intestinal absorption (e.g., 
inflammatory bowel disease, diabetes).  
● Medical condition that affects growth (e.g., genetic or metabolic disease/syndrome that is 
associated with obesity).  
● Chronic medical condition, including: Type 1 diabetes, heart  disease/failure, HIV/AIDS, 
muscular dystrophy, renal diseases, hypothyroidism (if untreated or treated with 
medication for less than 6 months).  
● Severe restriction of that would inhibit family from reasonably following the Traffic 
Light Eating Plan.  
● Signif icant developmental delays, intellectual disabilities, or Autism Spectrum Disorder.  
● Unmanaged/active psychiatric conditions (e.g., binge eating disorder, schizophrenia) with 
impairing clinical symptoms (e.g., suicidality).  
○ Further assessed in Pre -Orientati on Surveys and follow -up clinical interviews  
● Disability that prevents performance of physical activity at the level of a brisk walk.  
○ Further assessed via PCP Medical Clearance Form  
● Exclusionary medications:  
○ Orlistat (Xenical), Phentermine, Sibutramine ( Meridia), and Topirimate (Topama) 
are exclusionary at all doses and durations  
○ All other weight/growth -affecting medications should be noted (name, dose, 
Page 218 of 305 
 frequency, and duration) and brought to the attention of onsite physician  
 
 
Q: Does exclusionary criter ia exist?  
● Yes 
○ The following script can be used for these exclusionary issues: Unfortunately, it 
does not look like your family is eligible to participate in the study at this time. 
Because we are a research -based program, we must adhere to certain criteria  and 
are not able to accept families where the parent or child (insert exclusionary 
criteria). However, I would like to continue to gather information from you so 
that we can keep your family in our database. This way, when we run another 
study that you or  your child does qualify for, we can contact you to see if you are 
interested in participating. Would you like to proceed with the screening so that 
you will be in our database to contact for other studies your child may be eligible 
for?”   
■ Yes 
● Continue to collect household information according to site 
specific rules.  
■ No 
● Thank them for their time. END CALL.  
● No 
 
Q: Is the family eligible to participate?  
● Yes 
○ Family creates website profile and coach collects household information.  
● No 
○ Thank them for their time.  
● Unsure (see below) : If coach is unsure about whether or not the family is 
eligible/eligible, s/he should follow -up with their project coordinator for clarification and 
use the following script: Thank you for taking the time to answer all of these question s.  
At the moment, I have all of the information that I need.  The next step is for me to 
review your responses in order to determine your eligibility status.  I will follow -up with 
you within the next few days.  
 
If YES/ELIGIBLE:  
“It appears your family is  initially eligible for our study so the next step is for you and your 
child to complete a few online questionnaires.  I will send you an e -mail link to these 
questionnaires after our phone call.  The first three questionnaires will be for you to complete 
about you and your child.  The final questionnaire should be completed by your child.  Please 
be sure to complete these questionnaires at your earliest convenience.  Also, there is the 
Page 219 of 305 
 possibility that you may need to complete a brief interview following t hese questionnaires.  If 
so, I will call you to schedule that interview, which can be done over the phone.”  
 
Q: Is your email address [automatically generated]?  
● Yes 
● No 
o What is your email?  _____________________  
 
“In the meantime, I would like to schedule you and your family for an orientation 
appointment here at the office, which will last for approximately two hours.  During the 
orientation, you will be given a presentation on the study goals and procedures.  You will have 
an opportunity to ask questions and then decide if the study is right for you and your child.  If 
you decide you are not interested, your appointment will end.  If you decide that you are 
interested in participating after the orientation, you will complete several assessments and 
schedul e upcoming study appointments.  
 
Both the participating parent and participating child need to attend in order to enroll in the 
program.  We will also need to collect measurements from any non -participating siblings and 
non-participating parents. We do offe r the option to have them attend the orientation session 
as well.  However, we recommend that they schedule an appointment separate from the 
orientation session due to the length of the session.  If these individuals do attend the session, 
we recommend tha t they have a mode of transportation that is separate from the participating 
child’s and participating parent’s.”  
 
Q: Is the participant able to schedule at this time?  
● Yes 
o If yes, when is the orientation appointment?  ________________  
● No 
 
“We will call you and send you an e -mail reminder two days prior to the orientation session, 
scheduled on (MM/DD/YYY) at (HH:MM) at (pediatric office name).  Do you have any 
questions?”  
 
If non -participating parent cannot come in with family:  
If the non -participating parent  is not able to come in at the same time as the rest of the family, 
they are able to come in at any time (based on health coach hours) to have their height and 
weight taken and ask questions/get information from the health coach about the program.  
 
Q: Woul d the non -participating parent like to be contacted about the program and times when 
they can come in?  
Page 220 of 305 
 ● Yes 
● No 
 
Q: What is the best phone number to reach them?  ______________________  
 
Q: What is the best email address to reach them?  _______________________  
 
“Thank you for your time, and we look forward to seeing you soon!”  END CALL.  
  
Page 221 of 305 
 Table 1. Exclusionary Medications  
Criteria  Medication  
Exclusionary at all doses and 
durations  Orlistat (Xenical)  
Phentermine  
Sibutramine (Meridia)  
Topirimate (Topamax)  
Exclusionary if at current dose 
for <6 months  Adderall (ADHD)   
Amourthyroid (hypothyroid)  
Carbamazepine (Tegretol)  
Celexa  
Clonidine (ADHD)  
Clozapine (Clozaril)  
Cyproheptadine (Periactin)  
Diethylproprion (Tenuate)  
Elavil  
Gabapentin  
Haloperidol  
Insulin  
Lithium  
Metformin  
Mirtazapine  
Neurotin  
Nortriptyline  Olanzapine (Zyprexa)  
Paroxetine  
Perphenazine  
Prozac  
Quetiapine (Seroquel)  
Risperidone (Risperdal)  
Sertraline  
Steroids (non -inhalant)  
Trazadone  
Tofranil  
Tricyclics  
Trileptal  
Valproate  
Valproic acid 
(Depa kote/Depakene/Depacon)  
Ziprasidone (Geodon)  
Zyprexa  
Exclusionary if started within 
past 6 months  Synthroid (hypothyroid)  
 
 
Page 222 of 305 
 Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ)  
 
This questionnaire is an important part of providing you with the best health care possible. Your answers 
will help in understanding problems that you may have. Please answer every question to the best of 
your ability unless you are requested to skip over a question.  
 
 
1. During the last 4 weeks, how much have you been 
bothered by any of the following problems?  Not bothered  Bothered a little  Bothered a lot  
a. Stomach pain     
b. Back pain     
c. Pain in your arms, legs, or joins (knees, hips, 
etc.)     
d. Menstrual cramps or other problems with 
your periods     
e. Pain or problems during sexual intercourse     
f. Headaches     
g. Chest pain     
h. Dizziness     
i. Fainting spells     
j. Feeling your heart pound or race     
k. Shortness of breath     
l. Constipation, loose bowels, or diarrhea     
m. Nausea, gas, or indigestion     
2. Over the last 2 weeks, how often have you been 
bothered by any of the following problems?  Not at all  Several days  More than half 
the days  Nearly every day  
a. Little interest or pleasure in doing things      
b. Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless      
c. Trouble falling or staying asleep, or sleeping 
too much      
d. Feeling tired or having little energy      
e. Poor appetite or overeating      
f. Feeling bad about yourself – or that you are 
a failure or have let yourself or your family 
down      
g. Trouble concentration on things, such as 
reading the newspaper or  watching 
television      
h. Moving or speaking so slowly that other 
people could have noticed? Or the opposite 
– being so fidgety or restless that you have 
been moving around a lot more than usual      
i. Thoughts that you would be better off dead 
or of hurting  yourself in some way      
3. Questions about anxiety.  No Yes 
Page 223 of 305 
 a. In the last 4 weeks, have you had an anxiety 
attack – suddenly feeling fear or panic?    
If “No”, go to question 5.  
b. Has this ever happened before?    
c. Do some of these attacks come suddenly 
out of  the blue - that is, in situations where 
you don’t expect to be nervous or 
uncomfortable?    
d. Do these attacks bother you a lot or are you 
worried about having another attack?    
4. Think about your last bad anxiety attack.  
a. Were you short of breath?    
b. Did your heart race, pound, or skip?    
c. Did you have chest pain or pressure?    
d. Did you sweat?    
e. Did you feel as if you were choking?    
f. Did you have hot flashes or chills?    
g. Did you have nausea or an upset stomach, 
or the feeling that you were going to have  
diarrhea?    
h. Did you feel dizzy, unsteady, or faint?    
i. Did you have tingling or numbness in parts 
of your body?    
j. Did you tremble or shake?    
k. Were you afraid you were dying?    
5. Over the last 4 weeks, how often have you been 
bothered by any of the following problems?  Not at all  Several days  More than half the 
days  
a. Feeling nervous, anxious, on edge, or 
worrying about a lot of different things.     
If “Not at all”, go to questions 6.  
b. Feeling restless so that it is hard to sit still.     
c. Getting very  tired easily.     
d. Muscle tension, aches, or soreness.     
e. Trouble falling asleep or staying asleep.     
f. Trouble concentrating on things, such as 
reading a book or watching TV.     
g. Becoming easily annoyed or irritable.     
6. Questions about eating.  No Yes 
a. Do you often feel that you can’t control 
what or how much you eat?    
b. Do you often eat, within any 2 -hour period, 
what most people would regard as an 
unusually large amount of food?    
Page 224 of 305 
 If “No” to either a. or b., go to questions 9.  
c. Has this been as often,  on average, as twice 
a week for the last 3 months?    
7. In the last 3 months, have you often done any of the following in order to avoid gaining weight?  
a. Made yourself vomit?    
b. Took more than twice the recommended 
dose of laxatives?    
c. Fasted – not eaten anything at all for at least 
24 hours?    
d. Exercised for more than an hour specifically 
to avoid gaining weight after binge eating?    
8. If you checked “Yes” to any of these ways to avoid 
gaining weight, were any as often, on average, as 
twice a week?    
9. Do you ever drink alcohol (including beer or 
wine)?    
If “No”, go to question 11.  
10. Have any of the following happened to you more than once in the last 6 months?  
a. You drank alcohol even though a doctor 
suggested that you stop drinking because of 
a problem with your health.    
b. You drank alcohol, were high from alcohol, 
or hung over while you were working, going 
to school, or taking care of children or other 
responsibilities.    
c. You missed or were late for work, school, or 
other activities because you were drinking 
or hung over.    
d. You had a problem getting along with other 
people while you were drinking.    
e. You drove a car after having several drinks 
or after drinking too much?    
11. If you checked off any problems on this 
questionnaire, how difficult have these problems 
made it for you to do your work, take care of 
things at home, or get along with other people?  Not difficult at all  Somewhat 
difficult  Very difficult  Extremely 
difficult  
    
 
 
 
Page 225 of 305 
 Pediatric Symptom Checklist   
©1988, M.S. Jellinek  and J.M. Murphy, Massachusetts General Hospital  
 
Emotional and physical health go together in children. Because parents are often the first to notice a 
problem with their child’s behavior, emotions or learning, you may help your child get the best care 
possible by answering these questions. Please mark under the heading that best fits your child.  
 Never (0)  Sometimes (1)  Often (2)  
1. Complains of aches/pains      
2. Spends more time alone     
3. Tires easily, has little energy     
4. Fidgety, unable to sit still     
5. Has trouble with a teacher     
6. Less interested in school     
7. Acts as if driven by a motor     
8. Daydreams too much     
9. Distracted easily     
10. Is afraid of new situations     
11. Feels sad, unhappy     
12. Is irritable, angry     
13. Feels hopeless     
14. Has trouble concentrating     
15. Less interest in friends     
16. Fights with others     
17. Absent from school     
18. School grades dropping     
19. Is down on him or herself     
20. Visits doctor with doctor finding nothing wrong     
21. Has trouble sleeping     
22. Worries a lot     
23. Wants to be  with you more than before     
24. Feels he or she is bad     
25. Takes unnecessary risks     
26. Gets hurt frequently     
27. Seems to be having less fun     
28. Acts younger than children his or her age     
29. Does not listen to rules     
30. Does not show feelings     
31. Does not understand other people’s feelings     
32. Teases others     
33. Blames others for his or her troubles     
34. Takes things that do not belong to him or her     
35. Refuses to share     
Total Score   
 No Yes 
Page 226 of 305 
 Does your child have any emotional or behavioral problems 
for which she/he needs help?       
Are there any services that you would like your child to 
receive for these problems?          
If yes, what services?   
 
 
Page 227 of 305 
 QUESTIONNAIRE ON EATING AND WEIGHT PATTERNS -5 - Parent  
(QEWP -5-Parent)  
Marian Tanofsky -Kraff, Susan Z. Yanovski, and Jack A. Yanovski  
 
1. During the past three months, did your child ever eat what most people, like their friends, would 
think was a REALLY BIG amount of food?  
YES                         NO                              IF NO, SKIP TO QUESTION 18  
 
2. When your child ate a REALLY BIG amount of food, was it ever within a short time (2 hours or less)?  
YES                         NO                              IF NO, SKIP  TO QUESTION 18  
 
3. When your child ate a REALLY BIG amount of food, did you ever feel your child could not stop 
eating or control what or how much they were eating?  
YES                         NO                              IF NO, SKIP TO QUESTION 18  
 
4. During the past three months, how often did your child eat like this --ate a REALLY BIG amount of 
food along with the feeling that their eating was out of control? There may have been some weeks 
where this did not happen —just give your best guess.  
____ Less  than 1 time a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 or 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 to 13 times a week  
____ 14 or more times a week  
 
5. When your child ate a REALLY BIG amount of food and felt like they could not control their eating, 
did they usually:  
YES NO  Eat very fast?  
YES NO  Eat until their stomach hurt or they felt sick to their stomach?  
YES NO  Eat REALLY BIG amounts of food even when they were not hungry?  
YES NO  Eat by themselves because they did not want anyone to see how 
much they ate?  
YES NO  Feel REALLY BAD about themselves because of what or how much 
they were eating?  
 
6. Think about a usual time when your child ate a REALLY BIG amount of food and felt they could not 
control their eating:  
 
a. During that time, when did they start eating?  
____ (8 AM to 12 Noon)  
____ (12 Noon to 4 PM)  
____ (4 PM to 8 PM)  
____ (8 PM to 12 Midnight)  
____ (12 Midnight to 8 AM)  
 
b. For how long did they eat during this time?  
         hours  
         minutes  
Page 228 of 305 
  
c. As best as you can remember, please list everything your child ate or drank during 
this time. Be specific - include brand names where possible, and amounts as best 
you can guess.  
__________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________ _______________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
________________________________ __________________________  
 
d. At the time they started eating, how long had it been since your child had last eaten a 
meal or snack?  
         hours  
         minutes  
 
7. During the past three months, how bad did your child feel when they ate a REALLY BIG amount of 
food and felt their eating was out of control?  
____ Not bad at all  
____ Just a little bad  
____ Pretty bad  
____ Very bad  
____ Very, very bad  
 
8. During the past three months, did your child ever make themselves vomit, throw up, or get sick in 
order to keep     from gaining weight after eating like you described (when your child ate a REALLY 
BIG amount of food and felt their eating was out of control)?  
YES                         NO  
 
IF YES: How often, in general , did your child do that?  
____ Less than 1 time  a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 to 13 times a week  
____ 14 or more times a week  
 
9. During the past three months, did your child ever take medicine to make them poop or have a 
bowel movement (laxatives) in o rder to keep from gaining weight after eating like you described 
(when your child ate a REALLY BIG amount of food and felt their eating was out of control)?  
YES                         NO  IF NO, SKIP TO QUESTION 11  
 
10. Did your child take more medicine than the directions on the box or bottle say to take?  
YES                         NO  
 
IF YES: How often, in general , was that?  
____ Less than 1 time a week  
____ 1 time a week  
Page 229 of 305 
 ____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 5 times a week  
____ 6 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 or m ore times a week  
 
11. During the past three months, has your child ever taken medicine to make them pee or urinate 
(diuretics or water pills) in order to keep from gaining weight after eating like you described (when 
your child ate a REALLY BIG amount of food and felt their eating was out of control)?  
YES                         NO  IF NO, SKIP TO QUESTION 13  
 
12. Did your child take more medicine than the directions on the box or bottle say to take?  
YES                         NO  
 
IF YES: How often, in general , was  that?  
____ Less than 1 time a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 5 times a week  
____ 6 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 or more times a week  
 
13. During the past three months, did your child ever eat nothing at all for at least 24 hours (a ful l day) 
in order to keep from gaining weight after eating like you described (when your child ate a REALLY 
BIG amount of food and felt their eating was out of control)?  
YES                         NO  
 
IF YES: How often, in general , was that?  
____ Less than 1 day a week  
____ 1 day a week  
____ 2 days a week  
____ 3 days a week  
____ 4 to 5 days a week  
____ More than 5 days a week  
 
14. During the past three months, did your child ever exercise too much (for example, even though they 
were hurt or sick or it kept them from doing important things) MAINLY in order to keep from gaining 
weight after eating like you described (when your child ate a REALLY BIG amount of food and felt 
their eating was out of control)?  
YES                         NO  
 
IF YES: How often in genera l, was that?  
____ Less than 1 time a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 to 13 times a week  
____ 14 or more times a week  
 
Page 230 of 305 
 15. During the past three months, did your child ever take diet pills in order to keep from gaining 
weight after eating like you described (when your child ate a REALLY BIG amount of food and felt 
their eating was out of control)?  
YES                         NO  IF NO, SKIP TO QUESTION 17  
 
16. Did your child take more medicine than the directions on t he box or bottle say to take?  
YES                         NO  
 
IF YES: How often, in general , was that?  
____ Less than 1 time a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 5 times a week  
____ 6 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 or more times a week  
 
17. During the past three months, how important has your child’s weight or shape been in how they 
feel about themselves as a person – as compared to other things in their life, such as their 
schoolwork, friends, sports, or getting along with their family?  
 
____ Weight and shape were not very important  
____ Weight and shape were played a part in how they felt about themselves  
____ Weight and shape were among the main things that affected how they felt about 
themselves  
____ Weight and shape were the most important things that affected how 
they felt about themselves  
 
Continue here after completing question 17 OR if you skipped to question 18 from Question 1, 2, or 3  
 
18. During the past three months, did your child ever have times when they felt that they could not stop 
eating or control what or how much they were eating, but when they did not eat a REALLY BIG 
amount of food?  
YES                         NO                              IF NO, SK IP TO QUESTION 32  
 
19. During the past three months, how often did your child eat like this —felt that their eating was out 
of control, but they did not eat a REALLY BIG amount of food. There may have been some weeks 
where this did not happen —just give your bes t guess.  
____ Less than 1 time a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 to 13 times a week  
____ 14 or more times a week  
 
20. When your child felt their eating was out of control but they did not eat a REALLY BIG amount  of 
food, did they usually:  
YES NO  Eat very fast?  
YES NO  Eat until their stomach hurt or they felt sick to their stomach?  
Page 231 of 305 
 YES NO  Eat REALLY BIG amounts of food even when they were not hungry?  
YES NO  Eat by themselves because they did not want anyone to  see how much they 
ate?  
YES NO  Feel REALLY BAD about themselves because of what or how much they were 
eating?  
 
21. Think about a usual time when your child felt they could not stop eating or control what or 
how much they were eating, but they did not eat a RE ALLY BIG amount of food:  
 
a. During that time, when did they start eating?  
____ (8 AM to 12 Noon)  
____ (12 Noon to 4 PM)  
____ (4 PM to 8 PM)  
____ (8 PM to 12 Midnight)  
____ (12 Midnight to 8 AM)  
 
b. For how long did they eat during this time?  
         hours  
         minutes  
 
c. As best as you can remember, please list everything your child ate or drank during 
this time. Be specific - include brand names where possible, and amounts as best 
you can guess.  
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________ ____________
___________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________  
 
d. At the time they started eating, how long had it been since your child had last eaten a 
meal or snack?  
         hours  
         minutes  
 
22. During the past three months, how bad did your child feel that they could not stop eating or control 
what or how much they were eating even when they did not eat a REALLY BIG amount of food?  
____ Not bad at all  
____ Just a little bad 
____ Pretty bad  
____ Very bad  
____ Very, very bad  
 
23. During the past three months, did your child ever make themselves vomit, throw up, or get sick in 
order to keep from gaining weight after eating like you described (when your child felt their eating 
was out of control but they did not eat a REALLY BIG amount of food)?  
YES                  
NO 
Page 232 of 305 
  
IF YES: How often, in general , did your child do that?  
____ Less than 1 time a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 to 13 times a week  
____ 14 or more times a week  
 
24. During the past three months, did your child ever take medicine to make them poop or have a 
bowel movement (laxatives) in order to keep from gaining weight after eating like you described 
(when your child felt their eating was out of control, but they did not eat a REALLY BIG amount of 
food)?  
YES                         NO  IF NO, SKIP TO QUESTION 26  
 
25. Did your child take more medicine than the directions on the box or bottle say to take?  
YES                         NO 
 
IF YES: How often, in general , was that?  
____ Less than 1 time a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 5 times a week  
____ 6 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 or more times a week  
 
26. During the past three months, has your child ever taken medicine to make them pee or urinate 
(diuretics or water pills) in order to keep from gaining weight after eating like you described (when 
your child felt their eating was out of control, but they did not eat a REALLY BIG amount of food)?  
YES                         NO  IF NO, SKIP TO QUESTION 28  
 
27. Did your child take more medicine than the directions on the box or bottle say to take?  
YES                         NO  
 
IF YES: How often, in general , was that?  
____ Less than 1 ti me a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 5 times a week  
____ 6 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 or more times a week  
 
28. During the past three months, did your child ever eat nothing at all for at least 24 hours (a full day) 
in order to keep from gaining weight after eating like you described (when your child felt their 
eating was out of control, but they did not eat a REALLY BIG amount of food)?  
YES                         NO  
 
IF YES: How often, in general , was that?  
Page 233 of 305 
 ____ Less than 1 day a week  
____ 1 day a week  
____ 2 days a week  
____ 3 days a week  
____ 4 to 5 days a week  
____ More than 5 days a week  
 
29. During the past three months, did your child  ever exercise too much (for example, even though 
they were hurt or sick or it kept them from doing important things) MAINLY in order to keep from 
gaining weight after eating like you described (when your child felt their eating was out of control, 
but the y did not eat a REALLY BIG amount of food)?  
YES                   NO  
 
IF YES: How often in general , was that?  
____ Less than 1 time a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 to 13 times a week  
____ 14 or more times a week  
 
30. During the past 3 months, did your child ever take diet pills in order to keep from gaining weight 
after eating like you described (when your child felt their eating was out of control, but they did 
not eat a REALLY BIG amount of food)?  
YES                         NO IF NO, SKIP TO QUESTION 32  
 
31. Did your child take more medicine than the directions on the box or bottle say to take?  
YES                   NO  
 
IF YES: How often, in general , was that?  
____ Less than 1 time a week  
____ 1 time a week  
____ 2 to 3 times a week  
____ 4 to 5 times a week  
____ 6 to 7 times a week  
____ 8 or more times a week  
 
Continue here after completing question 31 OR if you skipped to question 32 from Question 18  
 
32. Please look at these drawings of people. Pick the person that m atches your child’s biological (birth) 
father’s and mother’s sizes. If you don’t know their biological (birth) father or mother, don’t pick 
anything for that parent.  
Page 234 of 305 
  
 
The QEWP -5-P is an adaptation of the QEWP -5.  Yanovski SZ, Marcus MD, Wadden  TA, Walsh BT.  The 
Questionnaire on Eating and Weight Patterns -5: an updated screening instrument for binge eating 
disorder. Int J Eat Disord. 2015 Apr;48(3):259 -61. doi: 10.1002/eat.22372. Epub 2014 Dec 26. Adapted 
with permission.  
 
 
 
 

Page 235 of 305 
   
PLAN ELIGIBILIT Y TRACKING FORM  
 
Initial Eligibility Survey           Date 
___/___/___  
YES NO Child is between 6 and 12 years of age.     
YES NO  Child’s BMI is above the 85th percentile for sex and age.  
YES NO  Parent’s BMI is above 25kg/m2. 
YES NO  Child and parent have not had a concussion in past 3 months.  
YES NO  Child and parent are able to complete a brisk 5 -10 minute walk.  
YES NO  Family is not planning to move away within next 2 years.  
Notes: 
_________________________________________________________________________ ____________
_______  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
 
Eligibility Phone Screen           Date  
___/___/___  
YES NO Parent agrees to attend all treatment meetings.  
YES NO  Child resides with targeted parent at leas t 50% of the time.  
YES NO Parent is child’s biological or adoptive parent or legal guardian.  
YES NO  Child and parent do not have any exclusionary medical conditions.  
YES NO  Child and parent are not taking any exclusionary medications.  
YES NO  Child and p arent have not had any weight -related surgeries.  
YES NO  Child and parent are not in a weight management/weight -loss program.  
YES NO  Child and parent do not have severe restriction of diet.  
YES NO  Child and parent do not have any significant intellectual  delays, disabilities, or ASD.  
YES NO  Child and parent do not have any unmanaged or active psychiatric conditions/symptoms 
(self -report).  
YES NO  Child and parent have no history of an eating disorder (self -report).  
YES NO  Child and parent are able to sp eak/comprehend English at a 1st grade level (self -report).  
Page 236 of 305 
 YES NO  Parent is not pregnant or planning on becoming pregnant during study period.  
Notes: 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_______  
____________ _________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
______________________________________________________________________ _______________
_____________  
 
Pre-Orientation Surveys (PHQ, PSC, QEWP -5 Parent and Child Report)     Date  
___/___/___  
YES NO  Child and parent do not have any unmanaged or active psychiatric 
conditions/symptoms.  
YES NO  Child and parent have no history of a n eating disorder.  
Notes: 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_______  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
______________________________________ _______________________________________________
_____________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
 
Follow -Up Interview (KSADS, SCID)         Date  
___/___/___  
YES NO Did a PLAN Coach administer the KSADS for the child?  
  Modules: 
_____________________________________________________________________________  
________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
YES NO Did a PLAN coach administer the SCID for the pare nt? 
Modules: 
________________________________________________________________________
_____  
________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
Page 237 of 305 
 YES NO  Child and parent do not have any unmanaged or active psychiatric 
conditions/symptoms.  
YES NO  Child and parent have no history of an eating disorder.  
Notes: 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_______  
_______________________________________________________________________ ______________
_____________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
 
Orientation  
YES NO Child’s BM I is above the 85th percentile for sex and age.  
YES NO Parent’s BMI is above 25kg/m2. 
YES NO Child and parent are able to speak/comprehend English at a 1st grade level (per the 
WRAT).  
Notes: 
_________________________________________________________________ ____________________
_______  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
______________________________ _______________________________________________________
_____________  
 
Pre-Randomization  
YES NO Child and parent received medical clearance from their PCPs.  
YES NO Family is eligible for randomization.  
Notes: 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_______  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________  
________________________________________________________________ _____________________
_____________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________  
 
Page 238 of 305 
 Assessment Measures  
Height and Weight Measurement Checklist. (Primary Aim 1a & b and Secondary Aim 1)  
 
General Information for Mea surements:  
HEIGHT RELIABILITY CRITERIA  
Height measurements are to be within 0.3cm (3mm) of a reliable staff member. The above requirements 
are to be met for 10 different height measurements (i.e., 10 participants measured by a reliable staff 
member and the  staff in training).   If the reliable staff member and new staff member do not meet 
acceptable reliability criteria, additional participants should be measured by both staff members until 
adequate reliability is established.  
● Reliability should be checked p eriodically throughout the study to assure that there is no 
measurement drift between height assessors.  
● Height and weight will be monitored and rechecked randomly to ensure accuracy of the data.  
● Calibration of the stadiometer and scale will occur every so often to ensure the accuracy of the 
equipment.  
 
HEIGHT PROCEDURES FOR CHILDREN AGES ≥ 4 YEARS AND ADULTS  
1. The participant should be barefoot or in thin socks.  
2. The PLAN coach will instruct the participant to stand up straight with his/her back against 
stadiometer board.  The coach should make sure that the participant is not standing on his/her 
pants if long.  
3. Ask the participant to stand with his/her heels together and toes pointing out to form a “V”.  
4. The participant should be looking straight ahead with his/her arms at his/her sides.  
5. The PLAN coach should lightly rest headboard on top of the participant’s head to be sure that it 
sits at the highest point of the head and then lift the head board out of the way.  
6. The coach should instruct the participan t to take a deep breath in and stretch upwards while 
s/he places both hands under the mastoid process of skull. The coach should then gently lift the 
participant’s head, which will elongate the spine to ensure an accurate height reading.  
a. The mastoid proces s of the skull is the bony projection of the temporal bone and is 
located behind the ears.  
7. The coach should make sure there is an imaginary line between the participant’s eyes and ears 
that runs parallel with the floor while the participant's eyes gaze for ward.  
8. The coach should ensure that the participant's feet are firmly planted on the ground and that 
s/he is not standing on his/her toes.  
9. The coach should take the height measurement.  
a. The headboard should rest on highest point of the participant’s head an d, if applicable, 
should compress the participant’s hair.  
10. The coach should then ask the participant to step away from the height board.  
11. The coach will record the height on a hard copy of the “Height and Weight” REDCap form that 
s/he will print off prior to  the appointment.   
12. The coach will measure the height in millimeters.  Then, the coach will read what this 
measurement is in centimeters to the nearest decimal place (i.e., 65.7).  If the height falls in 
between two decimal places, the coach will record to  the lower decimal place.  
13. The coach should repeat the process two times to check validity.  
a. If the two height measurements are not within 0.3 centimeters of each other, the coach 
will take two additional measurements.  
b. The coach will repeat this process until s/he has two measurements that are within 0.3 
centimeters of each other.  
Page 239 of 305 
 c. REDCap will take the mean of the last pair of measurements to determine the 
participant’s BMI.  
i. All measurements will remain in REDCap so that the total measurements taken 
and th e values of the measurements can be reviewed.  
14. The coach will enter the two height measurements into the participant’s file in REDCap on the 
“Height Tracking Form”.  
15. Coaches will use their REDCap username and password to log on to the PLAN study in REDCap 
via https://redcap.wustl.edu/redcap/srvrs/ .  They will then complete the following steps:  
a. Open the “Add/Edit Records” tab that is located on the left side of the screen.  
b. Select the appropriate Screeni ng ID from the “Choose an existing Screening ID” 
dropdown menu, which will take the coach to the “Record Home Page” for the family.  
c. Double click on the appropriate “Height and Weight Tracking Form”.  
d. Complete the height portion of the Height and Weight Trac king Form.  
e. The coach will select the appropriate form status based on whether or not s/he has to 
input more measurement data.  
f. The coach will click “Save & Exit Form”.  
16. The coach should wipe down the scale pre and post measurement with a Lysol wipe if the 
participant is bare footed.  
 
MANUAL CALIBRATION OF THE HEAD SLIDE  
1. All PLAN coaches will use 72 centimeter PVC pipes to calibrate their stadiometers.  
a. SR scales will cut 72 (+/ - 0.3) centimeter PVC pipe sections with a laser cutter.  
b. The exact length of each pipe will be written on the pipe.  
c. A staff member from the University at Buffalo will retrieve the pipes and mail out them 
out to each site.  
2. All PLAN coaches will take height measurements with their PVC pipes each time their 
stadiometer is used.  
a. The stadiom eter should always measure the known height of the PVC pipe that was 
documented on the pipe.  
b. If the stadiometer measures the height of the PVC pipe as something different than the 
known height, the coach will document the discrepancy.  The coach will then make 
arrangements to procure a new stadiometer  
 
HEIGHT MEASUREMENT REPORT  
1. The height measurements will be manually entered into REDCap for analysis of outcome 
measures as well as written on hard copy of height and weight form (pdf form from REDCap).  
2. The reported height measurements will be exactly the same as the reading on the stadiometer, 
which will provide an unbiased report of the height measurements (This change was made on 
9.18.17 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol adde nda on 
11.2.18).  
 
WEIGHT PROCEDURES   
1. To begin, the PLAN coach should plug the SR Scale into a wall outlet.  The coach should then 
press the “Zero/Weigh” button that is located on the right side of the scale.  The scale will be 
operational when the display reads 0.00.  The coach should ensure that the scale is recording 
weight in pounds.  If the scale is set to measure weight in kilograms, the coach will press the 
toggle button next to the “Zero/Weigh” button to switch the unit measurement from kilograms 
to pounds.  
Page 240 of 305 
 2. In order to ensure accurate measurement, the coach should instruct the participant to do the 
following:  
a. The participant should empty out his/her pockets, and remove shoes and any heavy 
clothing or accessories.  
b. The participant should always be weigh ed around the same time of the day.  
c. The participant should always use the bathroom prior to being weighed.  
d. The participant should follow similar eating and activity schedules.  
3. The coach will ask the participant to stand in the middle of the scale and inst ruct the participant 
to do the following:  
a. The coach will ask the participant to remain still, have relaxed shoulders, and to have 
his/her hands at his/her sides.  
b. The coach will ask the participant to look straight ahead.  
c. The coach will tell the participant  to stand with the same posture as on a balance beam 
scale.  
4. The coach will wait for weight measurement to stabilize.  
a. While standing to the left of the scale, the coach will monitor the digital readout.  
5. Once the measurement has stopped fluctuating, the coac h will record the weight on a hard copy 
of the “Height and Weight” REDCap form that s/he will print off prior to the appointment.   
6. The coach will repeat this procedure a second time.  
7. The coach will instruct the participant to step off the scale.   
8. The coa ch should wipe down the scale pre and post measurement with a Lysol wipe if the 
participant is bare footed.  
 
MANUAL CALIBRATION OF THE SCALE   
1. All PLAN coaches will use Pro -Form 15 -pound kettle bells to calibrate their scales.  
a. A staff member from the University at Buffalo will perform weight measurements with 
all Pro -Form kettle bells on a calibrated scale.  
b. The staff member will document the exact weight of each kettle bell.  
c. The staff member will write the exact weight on a pie ce of painter’s tape and tape it to 
the kettle bell.   
d. The staff member will mail out the kettle bells each site.  
2. All PLAN coaches will take weight measurements with their kettle bells each time their scale is 
used.  
a. The scale should always measure the know n weight of the kettle bell that was 
documented by the University at Buffalo on the painter’s tape.  
b. If the scale measures the weight of the kettle bell as something different than the known 
weight, the coach will document the discrepancy.  The coach will t hen make 
arrangements to send the scale to SR Scales for re -calibration.  
 
WEIGHT MEASUREMENT REPORT  
1.  For analysis of outcome measures (see 11 in Weight Procedures above; (This change was made 
on 9.18.17 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB appro ved protocol addenda on 
11.2.18).  
Use of Weight App was discontinued (DSMB approved change, 11.18.19 ).Hard copy height and weight 
measurement forms will be uploaded to the secure REDCap database to allow the CCC, DCC and TFC to 
check for transcription and/ or unit of measurement errors.  
 
 
Page 241 of 305 
  
Remote assessments Protocol   
Step 1: Coach Instructions for CONTACTING FAMILY  
1. Schedule phone call with family to introduce the remote assessment, check for materials, 
review instructions, describe changes in payment, complete the AE survey, and to schedule an 
assessment date with a blinded measurement coach.  A random subset of families from each site 
will be asked to complete the height protocol for a second quality control measure of this remote 
height measurement.  
a. See email script if they do not answer the phone:  
“Hello [Parent],  
Thank you for participating in the PLAN with Families Program! It is time for your 
family's [X] month assessment.  
Because of the current unexpected circumstances, we will be conducting your 
assessment virtually. This means we will supply you with measurement equipment 
and call you to walk you through measuring yourself and your children.  
You will receive payment for this assessment. Please call, text, or email me so we 
discuss the details and  schedule a date.  
Thank you,  
[Name]  
[phone number]  
b. Introduction of remote assessment:  
i. “Due to unforeseen circumstances, our assessments for the measurement 
procedures have changed for the time being. At this time, we are asking families 
to complete height and weight measurements at home using equipment that 
you have or can be sent to you. With your permission, we will call you during the 
assessment to walk you through the procedures.”  
c. Describe payment procedure:  
i. “You will get the usual payment for this remo te measurement.”  
1. Remote payment will be sent by each site’s PC  
a. Within 2 -3 days of completing the remote measurement  
b. UB checks, UR gift cards  
i. Certified mail serves as receipt of payment  
c. WU e -gift cards and NCH ClinCard will be instantaneous  
2. In-person payment will be directly given to the family as normal 
protocol procedures.  
Page 242 of 305 
 d. Discuss consenting procedures: Electronic signature procedure through downloads or 
directly in REDCap)  
i. “I will email you an addendum document for the remote assessment and 
instruct ions for opening and signing the document. Can you please confirm your 
correct and working email address where I can send this form? [Confirm email 
address in REDCap]”  
ii. “To complete the consent form, you will need to open the email, download the 
document an d open the form in your “downloads folder” on your computer. 
Open this file using the Adobe application, there will be blue squares and 
rectangles which are interactive. You can select a box to either consent, or do 
not consent. You will input the date, an d then click the blue box below signature 
to sign the document. A window will appear asking about a digital ID, if you 
have a preset one with your correct name you may use it. If not, you can 
configure a new one according to the instructions that will be i ncluded in my 
email to you. Please contact me should you have any troubles or questions with 
any step of this consenting process.”  
iii. “Please send me a confirmation email when you receive the instructions and 
consent form to your email.”  
1. Follow -up with family  1 day after sending the email if you do not receive 
confirmation.  
iv. REDCap consent procedure:  
1. “You will receive an email from me in a few minutes. In it, there will be a 
link to the electronic consent form. Let me know when you have it open 
so I can go over  it with you. [wait]”  
2. “This consent form is telling you about some updates to the study and is 
asking you to sign to agree to these changes.”  
a. Addendum: “First, as you know we will be doing your 
assessment remotely, meaning you will take heights and 
weights  for all the PLAN participants in the study. Second, we 
will be paying your regular payment for the remote assessment 
Third, we have changed the total payment for the 24 month 
assessment from $50 to $100. Last, we have started a lottery 
where you earn 1 ch ance to win an extra $50 for every in 
person assessment you attend.”  
b. Reconsent: “I have sent a second email with another consent 
form for [child] to sign. Now that [child] has turned [age], they 
are old enough to sign a consent form for an older age group.  
This consent is just asking [child] to sign so we can keep doing 
the study just as we have in the past. There is nothing new in 
this consent form.”  
3. “Please take your time and read over the form(s). If you have any 
questions, I can answer them. Whenever yo u are ready, you may scroll 
Page 243 of 305 
 to the bottom and “sign” your name with today’s date. (For reconsent: 
Please make sure your child is the one to sign and not you.) I will stay on 
the line with you until you are ready.”  
e. Ask if they have:  
i. “In order to complete th e measurement you will need the following pieces of 
equipment. Please let me know if any of the following are not available to you:  
1. PLAN Provided Weight Scale  
a. Is their mailing address correct?  
2. Carpenter’s Square  
3. Metal Measuring Tape  
4. Computer or phone acc ess to internet and web camera  
a. If they don’t have these, ask if they have some form of camera 
to take a picture of the measurements. Pictures can be emailed 
to the measurement coach.  
ii. If these items are available:  
a. “Great. Please have these items ready at the time of your 
measurement, we will provide you with a PLAN weight scale 
through the mail. Please confirm your mailing address and any 
special delivery instructions for your residence.”  
iii. If an item(s) is not available:  
a. “We will mail a standardized scale a nd [item(s)] to your address 
for the assessment. Please confirm your mailing address and 
any special delivery instructions for your residence.”  
2. Contact PC to coordinate delivery of materials  
f. Schedule the family’s remote measurement  
i. “To allow time for mater ials to arrive for the measurement, we will schedule 2 
weeks out from this call.”  
ii. Give 2 -3 possible days/times to schedule appointment.  
g. Complete AE survey according to protocol  
i. “At this time I have a 5 -10 minute survey to go through with you. Is now a goo d 
time to complete this?”  
1. If yes, complete AE survey.  
2. If no, “is there a convenient day/time where I can contact you to 
complete this survey?” or email it to the family  
h. Notify family that necessary questionnaires will be emailed and should be completed 
before the measurement appointment through REDCap.  
i. If family does not have computer/phone access with internet:  
1. Surveys can be done over the phone BEFORE the appointment  
a. AEQ, DDs, FNPA, 24M Parent/Child  
2. Measurement instructions will be mailed to their addre ss  
ii. Send reminder email 1 day before assessment if questionnaires are not 
complete  
Page 244 of 305 
 i. Check when family’s next well child visit is to coordinate in person follow -up 
measurement at a convenient date and time  
i. “In addition to the remote measurement, we will also  schedule a follow -up 
measurement at the pediatric office. Does your child have an existing well -visit 
appointment that would be convenient for you to schedule this follow -up?”  
ii. If not, schedule a follow -up appointment that will take place in the summer  
j. Ending the phone call  
i. “Thank you so much for your time today, I will send you a 1 week and 1 day 
reminder prior to your assessment. Please contact me with any changes or 
questions in the meantime.”  
2. Record all assessment information into your site’s specific t racking spreadsheet.  
a. Add date and time, and all other necessary information, (UB Assessments - Tracking, 
WU, NCH, UR)  
b. Include family’s consent for audio/video recording  
3. Contact a blinded measurement coach to run the assessment via video conference or phone.  
a. For 24 month assessments, both the blinded assessor and the PLAN Coach should be 
present  
4. Send video conference email link to family and assessor using https://zoom.us/home?zcid=2478  
or Webex  
a. Set the duration as 30 min, or 60 min for a 24 month assessment.  
b. Set a password.  
c. Attach Family Instructions for measurements  
5. Email all the surveys to the family through REDCap (see next section)  
6. Confirm assessment dates with family one week before and the day of  the assessment  
a. Include the call -in information and instruction sheet again.  
 
Step 2: PLAN Coach Instructions for  FORMS AND PAPERWORK COMPLETION  
NOTE:  For 6, 12, and 18 month assessments, all surveys should be completed by families BEFORE the 
assessment.  
For 24 month assessments, surveys should be completed by families BEFORE the assessment, AND the 
PLAN Coach should attend the assessment to give FBT materials and finish payment AFTER the blinded 
assessor leaves the call.  
1. For families doing 12 - and 24 -mont h assessments, have them complete the online 
questionnaires.  
a. At 12 month assessments: Child DD Validation, Child DD, Parent DD.  
b. At 24 month assessments: Child DD Validation, Child DD, Parent DD, FN & PA, and 24 
Month for both Child and Parent.  
c. For familie s with internet access, use REDCap to send the online surveys.  
Page 245 of 305 
 i. In the family’s REDCap record, click the circle that corresponds to the 
questionnaire that needs to be sent  
ii. Under the “Survey Options” drop down menu, select “Compose Survey 
Invitation”  
iii. Fill ou t the invitation form  
1. Send out immediately  
2. Check the box to enable reminders and choose to resend every 3 days 
with recurrence up to 5 times  
3. Make sure it is your email address the email will be from, and choose 
the participant’s email address to where it will be sent  
4. Type in subject line: “PLAN with Families 12/24 month survey”  
5. Compose a message in the text box.  
a.  For example, “Hi [Name], Please click the link and complete the 
questionnaire, following the directions provided. If you have 
any questions, cont act your PLAN coach at [phone number 
here].”  
b. Be sure to clarify if that specific questionnaire needs to be filled 
out by the parent or the child  
iv. Repeat for each questionnaire that needs to be completed  
d. For families who don’t have access to internet  
i. DD task s, FNPA, and 24 Month Surveys can be done over the phone BEFORE the 
assessment  
ii. Contact PC about mailing paper forms if necessary  
2. If the family needs a re -assent, re -consent, or an addendum:  
a. These will become forms in REDCap  
b. You will send them just like you  send the surveys BEFORE the assessment  
c. In the subject line, use: “PLAN with Families Consent form for [Name of participant]”  
d. If they do not complete, the blinded assessor will have to go over them with the family 
during the assessment  
i. They will have to se nd the REDCap form at beginning of assessment and check 
to see if it is finished before they end the call.  
3. Payment  
a. Site specific payment procedures  
i. UB: PC will send a check via certified mail within 2 -3 days of the assessment.  
1. There will be a receipt maile d with the check, please have the family 
sign this receipt and text the PLAN or measurement coach a picture of 
their signature.  
2. Follow -up with the family 1 week from the mailing date if a receipt 
picture has not been submitted.  
ii. WU: PC will mail a VISA gift  card or email an Amazon e -gift card within 2 -3 days 
of the assessment  
iii. UR: PC will mail gift cards or other site determined method.  
Page 246 of 305 
 iv. NCH: PP will be credited the money to the ClinCard within 2 -3 days of the 
assessment.  
b. 6 month measurements:  
i. At the end of the measurement, assure the participating parent that they 
earned $      25 
ii. Inform family that they have earned the chance to be entered for a $50 raffle at 
the end of the study.  
c.      12 and 18 month measurements:  
i. At the end of the measurement assure the participating parent that they earned      
$50 
ii. Inform family that they have earned the chance to be entered for a $50 raffle at 
the end of the study.  
d.      24 month measurements:  
i. At the end of the measurement  assure the participating parent that they earned      
$100 
ii. There will be a receipt mailed with the check, please have the family sign this 
receipt and text the PLAN or measurement coach a picture of their signature.  
1. Follow -up with the family 1 week fr om the mailing date if a receipt 
picture has not been submitted.  
iii. Measurement coach will need to contact site PC immediately following session 
to notify them if family has won lottery or not so that check can be prepared if 
needed  
e.      Height quality co ntrol measurement:  
i. Families that participate in the second measurement      will receive $10.00 
payment as specified above.  
4. 24 Month -specific procedures  
a. Inform family that they have earned the chance to be entered for a $50 raffle.  
i. The blinded assessor wi ll pull from the ticket bag via video conference for the 
family.  
ii. If the family wins the raffle, notify the Coach and the PC so they can adjust the 
payment.  
b. PLAN Coach sends the family the link to 24 -month video to describe PLAN website and 
handouts.  
i. Sent d uring the assessment, but after the blinded assessor leaves the call  
ii. Sent via email  
iii. Include the PC’s contact information  
Thank the family for their participation .      
Step 3: Measurement Coach Instructions for HEIGHT MEASUREMENTS  
1. Confirm with family and/or coach that measurement is set for the scheduled date  
Page 247 of 305 
 2. Contact family at the day and time of assessment  
a. If the family has a Webcam and Internet Access: use WebEx and/or Zoom  
b. If they do not have a WebCam and Internet access: use phone to call th e family and 
ensure they have a camera  
3. Guide family through height and weight procedure, giving them feedback, answering any 
questions, making notes, and voicing corrections if they are needed  
a. Assume the family has NOT read the instruction sheet and will n eed to be walked 
through the steps  
b. Have them e -sign consent forms if they need to (see previous section)  
c. Remind the family about which members need to be measured  
d. Reference “Measurement Coach Checklist” with all the necessary information  
4. Have family report  their measurements aloud, and write them on a blank paper  
5. Measurement coach will confirm accurate values and write them down on “Height and Weight 
form”  
6. After the assessment, enter these values into REDCap as per normal protocol  
Family Instructions for HEIGHT MEASUREMENTS  
NOTE: Only children who enrolled in PLAN as participants need to have their heights measured. Parents 
or legal guardians enrolled in PLAN should measure the children’s heights.  
Location: On a level, non -carpeted, flat surface (e.g. wood , concrete floor, tile) against a door  
Materials Needed:  
1. Carpenter’s square  https://www.homedepot.com/p/Empire -7-in-Polycast -Rafter -Square -
296/100154430  
2.       Metal measuring tape  
3. Tape  
4. Object of known height (ie participating parent, adult, yardstick)  
5. Pencil or Pen  
6. Piece of paper  
7. Stool (especially if your child is taller than you)  
8. Computer or phone with a web cam and internet access  
1. If you do not have a web cam and/or internet access, have a camera present  
Procedure:  
1. First, you will practice taking a height measurement with the carpenter’s square and foldable 
yardstick.  
a. Tape the foldable yardstick against a door with the bottom on  a level, flat floor and it 
standing straight.   
b. Place an object of known height against the foldable yardstick  
c. Place the carpenter’s square on top of the person’s head or object,  
i. Make sure one of the square’s flat edges is directly touching the doorl  
Page 248 of 305 
 ii. Make sure the object is standing straight up and not leaning, compare to edge 
of door.  
d. Check the height of the object with the bottom edge of the carpenter square  
e. Remove the person or objec t 
f. Tell your measurement coach the height of the object  
g. Did your measurement match the known height of the object? if it did not to make 
some adjustments and recheck.  
2. Now, you will measure your child. Make sure:  
a. Your child’s hair is let down (if possible)  
b. Your child is not wearing shoes  
3. Have your child stand with their back against the door.  
4. Tape a piece of paper on the door behind the foldable yardstick,  around the center of the top of 
their head.  
5. Have them put their heels as close to the door as possible  
6. Have them touch their heels together so they are standing 
in a V -shape  
7. Have your child look straight ahead at you  
8. Find your child’s mastoid process  (a bony knob behind 
their ears – see picture)  
9. Place your pointer and middle fingers of both hands on 
your child’s mastoid processes  
10. Tell them, “On the count of three, take a deep breath, and 
I will lift your head up”  
11. Count to three, and as they breath in, gently lift their head 
slightly upwards.  
12. While they are holding their breath:  
a. Make sure they are NOT on th eir tiptoes  
b. Make sure their head is NOT tilted up or down  
c. Place the carpenter’s speed square on top of your child’s head with the right angle 
facing the wall and one flat side directly touching the wall  
d. Make a mark of their height on the paper  
13. Tell your ch ild they can let go of their breath and step away from the wall  
14. Write the number “1” and your child’s initials next to the mark  
15. Report the height to the measurement coach  
16. Repeat steps 2 -15 to complete a second measurement  
a. Mark the line on the piece of pape r with a “2” and the child’s initials to differentiate 
from the first mark  
b. If measurements 1 and 2 differ by more than 0.3 centimeters, the measurement coach 
will ask you to take two more measurements.  
17. Repeat steps 2 -16 for additional siblings enrolled usi ng a new piece of paper.  
Family Instructions for WEIGHT MEASUREMENTS  

Page 249 of 305 
 NOTE: All participants who are enrolled in PLAN —parents and children —should measure their weight.  
Location: On a level, non -carpeted, flat surface (e.g. wood, concrete floor)  
Materials Needed:  
1.      PLAN weight scale  
                              Procedure:  
1.                          Before stepping on the scale, make sure:  
a. You remove shoes, any items in your pockets, and 
any heavy pieces of clothing or jewelry, such as 
belts, hoodies, etc.  
b. You use the restroom beforehand  
2. Step on the scale  
a. Stand straight, in the middle of the scale, with feet shoulder -width apart, looking 
straight ahead  
b. Make sure your child does not move on the scale, as that can affect the accuracy of the 
measurement  
3. Once the weight has stabilized, step off the scale and write down the weight.  
4. Report the measurement to the measurement coach  . 
5. Repeat steps 2 -5 to get a second weight  
6. If measurements 1 and 2 differ by more than 0 .25 pounds, your measurement coach will tell you 
to take two more weights.  
7. Repeat steps 2 -7 for every PLAN participant  
  
Step 4: Wrapping up Assessment  
1. PLAN Coach:  
a. Thank the family and praise their efforts.  
b. Identify families that will participate in the qu ality measurement of height to take a 
second measurement at a later date, confirm date and time. Follow protocol for remote 
height.  
c. Instruct family to make confirm they received payment  
d. Contact PC with payment amount and family address  
e. Update site -specific  tracking forms  
2. Measurement Coach:  
a. Enter data into REDCap  
i. Check email to see if you received the pictures of the measurements  
b. Contact PLAN Coach to notify that assessment was completed (or not completed)  

Page 250 of 305 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participant Instructions on Opening and Signing Consent Form  
Steps:  
1. Coach and participant will discuss how the consent form will be sent.  
a. I.e. Email  
i. Confirm email is correct and working  
2. Coach will send the consent form to the participant and confirm that the participant has indeed 
received it.  
3. Participant will open the email and download the document.  
a. Once the form is downloaded, participant will open the form  
b. The document will open up as a tab  
c. This tab CANNOT be used to sign the form  
i. Steps on how to sign the form will be below  
4. Participant will close the tab and instead open the consent form manually from the ‘Downloads’ 
folder on the computer  
5. To access the ‘Downloads’ folder:  
a. Open up ‘Start’ menu option  
b. Search for ‘File Explorer’  
i. This icon looks like a vanilla folder  
c. Open the ‘File Explorer’  
d. On the left hand side should be a tab labeled as ‘Quick access’  
i. A drop down menu should be below ‘Quick access’  
e. Select the ‘Downloads’ option  
f. You are now in the ‘Downloads’ folder  
6. Once in the ‘Downloads’ folder  
a. Find the name of the consent form, labeled as  ‘(INSERT CONSENT FORM NAME HERE)’  
b. Open the consent form, it should automatically open up with ‘Adobe’  
Page 251 of 305 
 7. To complete the consent form:  
a. There will be blue squares and rectangles which are interactive  
b. Participant will click on the blue rectangle below ‘Partici pant Name’ and type their name  
c. Participant will then select a box on whether they consent or do not consent  
i. These boxes will pop -up a check mark when clicked on  
d. Participant will then ‘Date’ the form before signing it  
i. Just like the ‘Name’ section of the for m, click the box and write the date in  
ii. Format the date in as MM/DD/YYYY  
1. Click the ‘Enter’ key on your keyboard  
2. The program will then change the format of the date, this is fine  
e. Participant will then sign the document by clicking on the blue box below ‘Sign ature’  
8. To sign the document is a little complicated to be sure to follow the steps below:  
a. Click on the blue box below ‘Signature’  
b. Another window will appear on the form asking about a Digital ID  
i. If you already have one preset with your correct name, you may use it and and 
click the ‘Continue’ button  
1. Then click ‘Sign’ and move on to step 9  
ii. If you need to create a Digital ID, the steps are:  
1. There may be a button which says ‘Configure New Digital ID’  at the 
bottom of the window Click this button to go to a screen which asks you 
to ‘Select the type of Digital ID’  
a. If there is no ‘Configure New Digital ID’ button, but instead asks 
you to ‘Select the type of Digital ID’ then this is the screen which 
you n eed to be on  
2. ‘Select the type of Digital ID’ window is what you want to see  
a. There should be a list of options  
b. Select the option which says ‘Create a new Digital ID’  
c. Then click ‘Continue’  
3. A new window will appear labeled ‘Select the Destination of the New 
Digital ID’  
a. Two options will be there  
i. First option will be to save your Digital ID to your 
computer  
ii. Second option will be to save your Digital ID to the 
Windows Certificate Store  
b. Either option is fine, which ever the participant prefers  
i. PLAN Recommends to s ave the Digital ID to a file on 
your computer  
ii. However, it is up to the participant to decide which 
option is best for them  
c. Once the destination is selected, click ‘Continue’  
d. ‘Create a self -signed Digital ID’ window will appear  
Page 252 of 305 
 i. This window will ask for your  name  
1. First and Last is preferred  
ii. The window will also ask for your email address  
1. Preferably the email address you have 
registered with PLAN  
iii. These two pieces of information are the only ones that 
you need to provide, all else can be ignored  
iv. Click ‘Continue’ once you have filled this window out  
e. ‘Save the self -signed Digital ID to a file’ window will appear   
i. Here is where you would select a file on your computer 
where the Digital ID should be stored  
ii. Select the ‘Browse Button’  
iii. And select a file  
iv. PLAN Recommends that you should select the 
‘Documents’ file as for convenience purposes  
1. However, it is up to the participant to decide 
where the Digital ID should be stored  
v. Once you have selected the location of the file, you will 
have to give a password for se curity purposes of your 
Digital ID  
1. The participant is responsible for choosing the 
password and remembering this password  
2. PLAN recommends you choose a password that 
only the participant knows and keeps the 
password a secret  
vi. Once the password is written and  rewritten on the 
second box, click ‘Save’  
4. You have now created your Digital ID and should see your Name on the 
window that pops up  
c. Select the option which has your name on it  
d. Then click ‘Continue’  
e. A new window will appear asking you for your password that  you have previously made  
i. First review that all the information is correct on this screen  
ii. Then type the password in  
iii. Click ‘Sign’  
f. Once you have clicked the ‘Sign’ button a new window will appear asking you where the 
Consent Form should be saved to  
i. PLAN Reco mmends for the document to be saved in the ‘Documents’ tab which 
can be located on the left hand side of the window that pops up, for easy access  
ii. However, the participant is responsible to decide where the best location to 
save this document is  
g. Once you have decide the location, click the ‘Enter’ key on your keyboard  
Page 253 of 305 
 h. Once you have done this, your signature should appear on the document and the 
document is complete  
9. The participant will now review the consent form to make sure everything is correct  
10. The participant will then save the entire file once more by:  
a. Click the ‘File’ tab in the top left of the window  
b. A drop menu will appear  
c. Select the ‘Save’ option  
d. Your document is not saved once again  
11. The participant will now email the consent form to their  coach  
If any problems arise during this process that the participant cannot solve, please contact your coach, 
who will then proceed to help and fix the issue. The coach can also reach out to the tech specialist if 
more assistance is needed. This process can be done through email or a phone call.  
 
NEED TO ASSESS COSTS AND BUDGET  
EQUIPMENT  Equipment Cost  Shipping Cost  
Scale  25.00  TBD 
Carpenters 90 degree Angle  8.00  TBD 
Tape measure  5.00  TBD 
Yard stick  10.00  TBD 
Total  48.00  TBD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 254 of 305 
 Delay of Gratification. (Delay Discounting: Secondary Aim 2)  
 
The following items are representative of the type of questions a participant may be asked to 
answer in the delay of gratification computer task. The task is adaptive and adjusts the questions 
based on participant responses, thus each participant will receive different questions.  
 
Instructions: For each of the following choices, please choose which reward you would prefer: the 
smaller reward at the time point listed, or the larger reward in the specified number of days. Please 
carefully consider each of the choices.  
 
 
1. Would you 
prefer  $49 today  o
r $60 in 89 
days ? 
 
2. Would you 
prefer   
$47 today   
o
r  
$50 in 160 
days ? 
 
3. Would you 
prefer   
$54 today   
o
r  
$80 in 30 
days ? 
 
4. Would you 
prefer   
$27 today   
o
r  
$50 in 21 
days ? 
 
5. Would you 
prefer   
$41 today   
o
r  
$75 in 20 
days ? 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 255 of 305 
 Parental Survey – Child Report. (Secondary Aim 3)   
 
Instructions: Please circle the best answer for the questions below.  
 
1. It happens that my parent/caregiver promises me a reward and then forgets about it.  
 
Never or Very Rarely   Sometimes   Often   Always or Almost Always  
 
 
2. My parent/caregiver promises to get something for me, but then [s]he doesn’t do it.  
 
Never or Very Rarely   Sometimes   Often   Always or Almost  Always  
 
 
3. It happens that my parent/caregiver announces something (e.g., a family excursion, a visit at the 
zoo), and then it falls through.  
 
Never or Very Rarely   Sometimes   Often   Always or Almost Always  
 
 
 
 
Scoring : Items are scored from 1 (never or very rarely) to 4 (always or almost always) and summed to 
create a total score.  
 
 
Page 256 of 305 
      FAMILY NUTRITION & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY (FNPA)  
 
Administered at Baseline, 12 month, and 24 month assessments ( DSMB approved protocol addenda, 
9.29.19 ). 
 
For Each Questi on, please select the answer that best represents your child/family  
Question  Almost 
Never  Sometimes  Usually  Almost 
Always  
1.      My child eats breakfast….           
2.      Our family eats meals together…..          
3.      Our family eats while watching 
TV…          
4.      Our family eats fast food…          
5.      Our family uses microwave or ready 
to eat foods…          
6.      My child eats fruits and vegetables at 
meals or snacks…          
7.      My child drinks soda pop or sugary 
drinks…          
8.      My child drinks low fat milk at meals 
or snacks…          
9.      Our family limits eating of chips, 
cookies, and candy…          
10.  Our family uses candy as reward for 
good behavior…          
11.  My child spends 2 hours on 
TV/games/computer per day or less…          
Page 257 of 305 
 12.  Our family limits the amount of TV 
our child watches…          
13.  Our family allows our child to watch 
TV in their bedroom…          
14.  Our family provides opportunities for 
physical activity…          
15.  Our family encourages our child to be 
active every day…          
16.  Our family finds ways to be physically 
active together…          
17.  My child does physical activity during 
his/her free time…          
18.  My child is enrolled in sports or 
activities with a coach or leader…          
19.  Our family has a daily routine for our 
child’s bedtime…          
20.  My child gets 9 hours of sleep a 
night…          
              
Scoring: Add up scores for each scale (items should be scored 1, 2, 3, 4 from left to right except 
for items that are reverse coded (3, 4, 5, 7, 10, and 13), These should be scored 4, 3, 2, 1 from 
left to right. See back for Feedback.  
Family Meal Patterns                    Item 1 _________   +  Item 2    _________  =  ________ __ 
Family Eating Habits                    Item 3 _________   +  Item 4    _________  =  __________  
Food Choices                                Item 5 _________   +  Item 6    _________  =  __________  
Beverage Choices                         Item 7 _______ __   +  Item 8    _________  =  __________  
Restriction / Reward                      Item 9 _________   +  Item 10  _________  =  __________  
Screen time behavior and monitoring Item 11 _________ +  Item 12  _________  =  __________  
Healthy Environment                         Item 13 _________ +  Item 14  _________  =  __________  
Family Activity Involvement          Item 15 _________ +  Item 16  _________  =  __________  
Child Activity Involvement           Item 17 _________ +  Item 18  _________  =  ________ __ 
Family Routine                                   Item 19 _________ +  Item 20  _________  =  __________  
Page 258 of 305 
 Total Score: ________________  
  
 The FNPA Tool was developed at Iowa State University by Michelle Ihmels  
(mihmels@iastate.edu) and Greg Welk (gwelk@iastate.edu) in partnership with the American 
Dietetic Association.  
 
  
Page 259 of 305 
 Environmental Enrichment – Parent Report. (Secondary Aim 3)  
 
Instructions:  The following questions ask you about your home environment and the surrounding areas. 
Please read the instructions for each section and answer the corresponding questions.  
 
About how long would it take to get from your home to the nearest  businesses or f acilities listed below if 
you walked  to them? Please put only one check mark (√) for each business or facility.  
 
 1–5 min  6-10 min  11-20 min  20-30 min  30+ min  Don’t Know  
Example:  gas station             √    
Environment        
1.  convenience/small grocery store        
2.  supermarket        
3.  hardware store        
4.  fruit/vegetable market        
5.  laundry/dry cleaners        
6.  clothing store        
7.  post office        
8.  library        
9.  elementary school        
10.  other schools        
11.  book store        
12.  fast food restaurant        
13.  coffee place        
14.  bank/credit union        
15.  non-fast food restaurant        
16.  video store        
17.  pharmacy/drug store        
18.  salon/barber shop        
19.  your job or school  
               [check here  _____   if not applicable]        
20. bus or train stop        
21. park       
22. recreation center        
23. gym or fitness facility        
 
 
For each of the following food types, please tell us whether they are RIGHT NOW in your home, 
immediately eatable, and about how much is there. (Answer yes if any of the items listed for each 
question is in your home.)   
 
● In home  = the food can be in the kitchen, pantry, bedrooms, basement, garage, or other rooms  
Page 260 of 305 
 ● Child can immediately eat  = Is the food in a package/container that the child is able to open, 
and/or does it require preparation that the child can do on her/his own? (Regardless of whether 
or what rules may be about your child accessing food by himself/herself)  
● How much  = A little  (enough  for up to 2 people to eat at a snack/meal), Some  (enough for 3 -8 
people to eat at a snack/meal), A lot (more than a little or some)  
 
FOOD  In home?  Child can immediately eat?  
24. fresh bananas, oranges, pineapple, melons  Yes   No  Yes   No 
25. fresh apples, grapes, celery, lettuce  Yes   No  Yes  No  
26. potatoes, corn on the cob, whole tomato, frozen vegetables  Yes   No  Yes   No  
27. "100 % fruit juice"  Yes   No  Yes   No  
 
For the following electronic devices, please write down the total number  in each room that work, regardless of whether the child uses it.  
If an electronic device has multiple functions, please list each function in the appropriate spot UNLESS it is a DVD/CD player. For DVD/CD players, just include 
under DVD. However, if you have a stereo that plays CDs, tapes, and the radio, count all three of these functions.  
 
General room categories are listed at the end for you to add rooms that are specific to your home that may have the below devices (study, rec/play room, 
additional bedrooms, dining room, etc.).  BR stands for Bedroom.  
 
Electronics  Kitchen  Living 
Room  Parent's 
BR Child 's 
BR  BR #3:   BR 
#4: Other 
Room:  
_______  
28. TVs                
29. VCR (not portable)                
30. DVD player (not portable)                
31. Digital TV recorders (e.g., TiVo, ReplayTV)                
32. Radio (not portable) can include alarm clock                
33. CD player (not portable)                
34. Tape Player (not portable)                
35. Desktop computer with  internet access                
36. Desktop computer without  internet access                
37. Video game player (e.g., Playstation, xbox)                
38. Telephone (non -cell phone)                
39. Portable CD player                
40. Portable Tape Player                
41. Portable Radio Player                
42. Portable MP3 player (ex: iPod)                
43. Portable DVD player                
44. Hand held videogame player (e.g., Game 
boy, Sony PSP etc.)                
              
45. Laptop or portable computer         
Total number of electronics in each room:                
Page 261 of 305 
         
Which of the following things are available and in useable condition  in your 
home or yard/common area? Do not include things that are buried in boxes 
(except toy boxes), buried in a closet, or in storage. Please circle either “Not 
Available” or “Available,” and then indicate whether your child commo nly 
uses the item(s)  If any of the items listed for each question is available, circle 
available . 
 
Activities  Not 
Availabl
e Availabl
e If 
available, 
does your 
child 
commonl
y use this 
item?  
46. bike  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
47. basketball hoop (includes child size or adult 
size)  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
48. jump rope  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
49. sports equipment (e.g., balls, racquets, bats, 
sticks)  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
50. swimming pool (including kiddie pool)  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
51. roller skates, skateboard, scooter  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
52. fixed play equipment (e.g., swing set, play 
house, jungle gym)  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
53. home aerobic equipment (e.g., treadmill, 
cycle, cross trainer, stepper, rower, 
workout video or audiotapes)  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
54. weight lifting equipment, toning devices 
(e.g., free weights, pull up bars, exercise 
balls, ankle weights, etc.)  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
55. water or snow equipment (e.g.,  skis, skates, 
canoe, row boat, surf board, boogie board, 
windsurf board, slip -n-slide, etc.)  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
56. yoga/exercise mats  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
57. exercise, play, or recreation room  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
Page 262 of 305 
 58. trampoline  0 1 Yes        
No        
N/A 
  
Page 263 of 305 
 59. How many books are in the home that are approximately at your child's reading level and that he/she has access to? (pleas e check the best option):       
                                ___ 0 books        ___ 1 - 10 books          ___  11 - 20 books         ___ 21 - 30 books          ___ 31 - 40 books           ___ 41 or more books  
Books  Never  Rarely  Sometimes  
60. How often does a parent or caregiver in the home read to your child?     
61. How often does your child read for pleasure?     
62. How often does your family receive magazines and/or newspapers?     
63. How often does a parent or caregiver take your child to a museum?     
64. How often does a parent or caregiver take your child to a show or   
performance?     
65. Are there any musical instruments in the home that your child has access to?  Yes No 
66. Does your child receive lessons for singing or playing a musical instrument?  Yes No 
67. Does your child engage in any other regular hobbies or activities?  
       If YES, please specify: _____________________________________________  Yes No 
 
 
 
Scoring for Environmental Enrichment : 
 
1-23: Land -Use Mix Diversity  
Responses (item scoring):  
1-5 min (5)  6-10 min (4)  11-20 min (3)  20-30 min (2)  30+ min (1)  don’t know (1)  
Additional scoring : Tally the number of items ≤20 -minute walk (either a ‘3’, ‘4’ or ‘5’ response) and call this ‘tally of 
close facilities’)  
 
24-27: Fruit and Vegetable  
Each food item can be given a total of up to 5 points (range: 0 -5). Points are given – then summed to get the total 
points for that food item – based on (a) presence in the home, (b) the child being able to immediately eat the food, 
and (c) amount present:  
 
“In home?” – Yes=1, No=0  
“Child can immediately eat?” – Yes=1, No=0  
“How much is there?” – A little=1, Some=2, A lot=3  
 
28-45: Electronic Equipment  
OVERALL TOTAL = The total number of electronics in the household:  Sum the “total” row  for all rooms (i.e., 
kitchen, living room, etc.), including the total for “in house (not always in 1 room).” If “total” for a given room is 
blank, code that room as 0.  
 
46-58: Physical Activity  
Page 264 of 305 
 Each physical activity item can be given a total of 0, 1, or 2 points. Points are given – then summed to get the total 
points for that physical activity equipment item – based on availability and whether the child uses the item:  
 
“Which of the following things are available and in usable condition in your home or ya rd/common area?”  
 Not available = 0, Available = 1  
 
“If available, does your child commonly use this item?”  
Yes = 1  
No = 0  
N/A = 0  
Total score  = sum of physical activity item points (items 41 -53)  
 
59-67: Cognitive Stimulation  
A total of 0 -28 points may be  awarded based on the presence of cognitively -stimulating items in the child’s home. 
These questions are scored on different scales, as follows:  
 
Item 59 (“How many books…”)  
0 books = 0  
1-10 books = 1  
11-20 books = 2  
21-30 books = 3  
31-40 books = 4  
41 or more books = 5  
 
Items 60 – 64 (“How often does a parent…”)  
Never = 0  
Rarely = 1  
Sometimes = 2  
Often = 3  
Very Often = 4  
 
Items 65 – 67 
Yes = 1  
No = 0  
Total score  = sum of points awarded for items 59 -67 
 
Summary Score for Environmental Enrichment Questionnai re: Sum all subscales to create a global score of non -
snack food reinforcers available to the child.   
 
 
Page 265 of 305 
 Attitudes toward Evidence -Based Treatment. (Exploratory Aim)  
 
The following questions ask about your feelings about using new types of therapy, inte rventions, or 
treatments. Manualized therapy, treatment, or intervention refers to any intervention that has specific 
guidelines and/or components that are outlined in a manual and/or that are to be followed in a 
structured or predetermined way. Indicate t he extent to which you agree with each item using the 
scale shown below.  
 
 0 
Not at all  1 
To a slight 
extent  3 
To a moderate 
extent  4 
To a great 
extent  5 
To a very 
great extent  
1. I like to use new types of therapy/interventions 
to help my clients.       
2. I am willing to try new types of 
therapy/interventions, even if I have to follow a 
treatment manual.       
3. I know better than academic researchers how 
to care for my clients.       
4. I am willing to use new and different types of 
therapy/interventions developed by researchers.       
5. Research -based treatments/interventions are 
not clinically useful.       
6. Clinical experience is more important than 
using manualized therapy/interventions.       
7. I would not use manualized 
therapy/interventions.       
8. I would try a new therapy/intervention, even if 
it were very different from what I am used to 
doing.       
 
 
For the following questions if you received training in a new therapy or intervention how likely would you be to adopt 
it if: 
 0 
Not at all  1 
To a slight 
extent  3 
To a moderate 
extent  4 
To a great 
extent  5 
To a very 
great extent  
9. It was intuitively appealing?       
10. It made sense to you?       
11. It was required by your supervisor?       
12. It was required by the counseling center 
director?       
13. It was a state requirement?       
14. It was being used by colleagues who were 
happy with it?       
15. You felt you had enough training to use it 
correctly?       
 
 
 
Page 266 of 305 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scoring guide for Attitudes Towards Evidence -Based Treatment  
 
Scoring the Subscales  
The score for each subscale is created by computing a total or mean score for the items that load on a 
given subscale. For example, Items 11, 12, and 13 constitute subscale 1.  
 
Subscales  
Requirements  
Items : 11, 12, 13  
 
Appeal  
Items : 9, 10, 14, 15  
 
Openness  
Items : 1, 2, 4, 7  
 
Divergence  
Items : 3, 5, 6, 7  
 
Computing the Total Scale Score  
For the total score, all items from the Divergence subscale (Sub -scale 4) must be reverse scored before 
being used in computing the EBPAS total score.  
 
 
 
Page 267 of 305 
 Attributes of FBT. (Exploratory Aim)  
 
Given your knowledge and understanding of FBT, please respond to the following questions.  
 
1. Using FBT in the clinic was more effective than the clinic’s existing treatment method.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
2. The content of FBT is compatible with my personal beliefs and values.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
3. FBT is useful.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
4. FBT is credible.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
5. FBT is easy to administer in the practice setting.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
6. The content of FBT is clear.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
7. The content of FBT is relevant to my work as a medical treatment provider.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
8. FBT can be experimented without requiring an extensive involvement.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
9. FBT can be adapted or modified to suit the needs of the interventionist.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
Page 268 of 305 
  
 
10. The benefits of using FBT with my patients are obvious/visible.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
11. The eviden ce regarding the impact of FBT is available.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
 
Scoring for Attributes of FBT : 
The scale is composed of five subscales: Relative advantage (1), compatibility (2 -4), complexity (5 -7), 
trialability (e.g., the potential to experiment with an innovation before implementing; 8 -9), and 
observability (10 -11). If the subscale has more than o ne item, the subscale score is created by 
computing a total or mean score for the items that load on a given subscale . 
 
 
 
Page 269 of 305 
 Intended Adoption. (Exploratory Aim)  
 
How likely is it that you will use this model of having a co -located interventionist to treat children who 
are overweight/obese as a result of your experiences with an FBT interventionist within your practice?  
 
0%_____________________________________________________________100%  
 
 
Scoring : Physicians will place an X on the electronic line to s ignal their percentage likelihood.  
 
 
 
Page 270 of 305 
 Family Demographics. (Descriptor)  
 
Please put an X in the appropriate box for your mother’s, your father’s, your spouse / partner’s, and 
your level of school completed and occupation. If the exact occupation is no t listed, please put an X by 
the category that most closely matches the individual’s occupation, and if a parent is retired, please 
indicate their most recent occupation. If you grew up in a single parent home, mark only your one 
parent, and mark “N/A” for  the other parent. If you are neither married nor partnered, mark “N/A” for 
Spouse/Partner.  
 
A. Level of School completed  Mother  Father  Spouse/Partner  You 
(N/A)      
Less than 7th grade      
Junior high / Middle school (up to 9th grade)      
Partial high school (10th or 11th grade)      
High school graduate      
Partial college (at least one year)      
College education      
Graduate degree      
 
B. Occupation  Mother  Father  Spouse/Partner  You 
(N/A or stay -at-home parent)      
Day laborer, janitor, house cleaner, farm worker, food counter 
sales, food preparation worker, busboy.      
Garbage collector, short -order cook, cab driver, shoe sales, 
assembly line workers, masons, baggage porter.      
Painter, skilled construction trade, sales clerk, truck driver,  cook, 
sales counter, or general office clerk.      
Automobile mechanic, typist, locksmith, farmer, carpenter, 
receptionist, construction laborer, hairdresser.      
Machinist, musician, bookkeeper, secretary, insurance sales, 
cabinet maker, personnel specialist, welder.      
Supervisor, librarian, aircraft mechanic, artist or artisan, 
electrician, administrator, military enlisted personnel, buyer.      
Nurse, skilled technician, medical technician, counselor, 
manager, police or fire personnel, financia l manager, 
physical/occupational/speech therapist.      
Mechanical/nuclear/electrical engineer, educational 
administrator, veterinarian, military officer, elementary/high 
school/special education teacher.      
Physician, attorney, professor, chemical/aerospace engineer, 
judge, CEO, senior manager, public official, psychologist, 
pharmacist, accountant.      
 
C. Please indicate whether your current household income is derived from: (circle all that apply)  
 
1. One income  
2. Two incomes  
3. Unemployment  
4. Public assistance  
5. Child support / alimony  
6. Other: _______________________  
Page 271 of 305 
  
D. Please circle your current annual household income:  
1. Under $9,999                      9. $80,000 - $89,999    17. $170,000 - $179,999  
2. $10,000 - $19,999               10. $90,000 - $99,999    18. $180,000 - $189,999  
3. $20,000 - $29,999               11. $100,000 - $119,999   19. $190,000 - $199,000  
4. $30,000 - $39,999              12. $120,000 - $129,999   20. Over $200,000  
5. $40,000 - $49,999              13. $130,000 - $139,999    
6. $50,000 - $59,999   14. $140,000 - $149,999  
7. $60,000 - $69,999   15. $150,000 - $159,999  
8. $70,000 - $79,999   16. $160,000 - $169,999  
 
 
E. Please circle the ethnic group(s) that YOU identify with (please circle all that apply):  
 
1. American Indian or Alaskan Native  
2. Asian  
3. Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  
4. Black or African American, not of Hispanic origin  
5. White or Caucasian, not of Hispanic origin  
6. Hispanic or Latino  
7. Other (please specify): ________ ___________________  
 
F. Please circle the ethnic group(s) that your CHILD most identifies with (please circle all that apply):  
 
1. American Indian or Alaskan Native  
2. Asian  
3. Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  
4. Black or African American, not of  Hispanic origin  
5. White or Caucasian, not of Hispanic origin  
6. Hispanic or Latino  
7. Other (please specify): ___________________________  
 
G. Think of this ladder as representing where people stand in the United States.  
 
At the top of the ladder are the people who are the best off —those who have the most money, the most 
education, and the most respected jobs. At the bottom  are the people who are the worst off —who have the least 
money, least education, and the least respected jobs or  no job. The higher up you are on this ladder, the closer you 
are to the people at the very top; the lower you are, the closer you are to the people at the very bottom.  
 
Where would you place yourself on this ladder?  
Page 272 of 305 
 Please place a large “X” on the rung where you think you stand at this time in your life, relative to other people in 
the United States.   
  

Page 273 of 305 
 Scoring guide for Participant Demographics:  
 
Parts A and B:  
The parent indicates level of school completed by their Mother , their Father , their Spouse /  Partner , and 
themselves . If the parent grew up in a single -parent home, they only provide information for their one parent. If 
the parent is not married and does not have a partner, they do not provide information on a spouse. If they are a 
full-time stud ent, they only circle scores for their parents. Point values are assigned depending on the level of 
school completed for each person:  
 
Level of School Completed  Mother  Father  Spouse  You 
Less than 7th grade  3  3  3  3  
Junior high / Middle school (9th grade)  6  6  6  6  
Partial high school (10th or 11th grade)  9  9  9  9  
High school graduate  12  12  12  12  
Partial college (at least one year)  15  15  15  15  
College education  18  18  18  18  
Graduate degree  21  21  21  21  
 
The parent indicates the occupation for their Mother , their Father , their Spouse / Partner , and themselves. If the 
parent grew up in a single -parent home, they only provide information for their one parent. If the parent is not 
married and does not have a partner, they do not provide information on a spouse. If they were a full -time 
student, they only circle scores for their parents. If a parent is retired, they use their most recent occupation. Point 
values are assigned depending on the occupation for each  person:  
 
Occupation  Mother  Father  Spouse  You 
Day laborer, janitor, house cleaner, farm worker, food counter 
sales, food preparation worker, busboy.  5  5  5  5  
Garbage collector, short -order cook , cab driver, shoe sales, 
assembly line workers, masons, baggage porter.  10  10  10  10  
Painter, skilled construction trade, sales clerk, truck driver, cook, 
sales counter or general office clerk.  15  15  15  15  
Automobile mechanic, typist, locksmith, farmer, carpenter, 
receptionist, construction laborer, hairdresser.  20  20  20  20  
Machinist, musician, bookkeeper, secretary, insurance sales, 
cabinet maker, personnel specialist, welder.   25  25  25  25  
Supervisor, librarian, aircraft mechanic, artist and artisan, 
electrician, administrator, military enlisted personnel, buyer.  30  30  30  30  
Nurse, skilled technician, medical technician, counselor, manager, 
police and fire personnel, financial manager, physical, 
occupational, speech therapist.  35  35  35  35  
Mechanical, nuclear, and electrical engineer, educational 
administrator, veterinari an, military officer, elementary, high 
school and special education teacher.  40  40  40  40  
Physician, attorney, professor, chemical and aerospace engineer, 
judge, CEO, senior manager, public official, psychologist, 
pharmacist, accountant.  45  45  45  45  
Page 274 of 305 
  
Level of School Completed  
1  Parents’ score: If they grew up with both parents, add “Mother” + “Father” and divide by 2. If 
they grew up with one parent, enter that score to the right.   
2  If they are married or partnered, add “Spouse” + “You” and divide by 2. If they live alone/are not 
married/do not have a partner, enter the “You” score to the right. If they are a full -time student, 
leave this blank.   
3  Double the score from line 2. If they are a full -time student, leave this blank.   
4  If they are a full -time student, enter only their parents’ score. Otherwise, add line 1 and line 3, 
then divide by 3 (three) for a TOTAL EDUCATION.  
Note: Score should be between 3 and 21   
 
Occupation Scoring  
1  If they grew up with both parents, add “Mother” + “Father” and divide by 2. If they grew up with 
one parent, enter that score to the right.   
2  If they are married or partnered, add “Spouse” + “You” and divide by 2. If they live alone/are not 
married/do not have a partner, enter the “You” score to the right. If they are a full -time student, 
leave this blank.   
3  Double the score from line 2. If they are a full -time student, leave this blank.   
4  If they are a full -time student, enter only their parents’ score. Otherwise, add line 1 and line 3, 
then divide by 3 (three) for TOTAL OCCUPATION.  
Note: Score should be between 5 and 45   
 
TOTAL SES Score (A & B)  
Add TOTAL EDUCATION  + TOTAL OCCUPATION.  Note:  Score should be between 8 and 66  
 
Parts C -F: 
Individual stand -alone items  
 
Part G:  
The ladder contains 10 rungs and responses will be scored based on location of the “X.” The bottom rung is given 
the score of 1 and each subsequent rung progresses in numerical order until the top rung, which is given the score 
of 10.  
 
 
 
Page 275 of 305 
 Participant Acceptability: Parent. (Descriptor)  
 
We are interested in your honest opinions regarding the services you have received through the study, 
whether they are positive or negative. Please answer all questions.  
 
 
1. How would you rate the quality of s ervice you received?  
4   3   2   1 
                      Excellent                        Good                Fair                          Poor  
 
 
2. Did you get the kind of service you wanted?  
1   2   3   4 
No, definitely not      No, not really        Yes, generally   Yes, definitely  
 
 
3. To what extent has our program met your needs?  
4   3   2   1 
 Almost all of my  Most of my needs  Only a few of my       None of my needs  
   needs have been met     have been met           needs have been me                have be en met  
 
 
4. If a friend were in need of similar help, would you recommend the treatment to him/her?  
1   2   3   4 
No, definitely not      No, not really              Yes, generally   Yes, definitely  
 
 
5. How satisfied are you with the amount of help you received?  
1   2   3   4 
 Quite dissatisfied                Indifferent or                    Mostly satisfied             Very satisfied              
Mildly dissatisfied  
 
 
6. Have the services you received helped you deal more effectively with your problems?  
4   3   2   1 
    Yes, they helped       Yes, they helped     No, they really  No, they seemed to  
                    a great deal           somewhat                       didn’t help                  make things worse  
 
 
7. In an overall, general sense, how satisfied are you  with the service you received?  
1   2   3   4 
Very satisfied   Mostly satisfied                    Indifferent or               Quite dissatisfied  
      Mildly dissatisfied  
 
8. If you were to seek help again, would you use the treatment you received again?  
1   2   3   4 
No, definitely not      No, not really                  Yes, generally                   Yes, definitely  
 
Page 276 of 305 
  
9. I would follow through if my child was referred outside this clinic for childhood obesity 
treatment.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongl y Disagree  
 
 
10. I am comfortable having my child receive obesity treatment at the clinic.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
11. My child was treated the same as other people who get care at the clinic.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
12. I prefer my child to receive obesity treatment services at the location where he/she receives 
medical care.  
1  2  3  4  5 
Strongly Agree        Strongly Disagree  
 
 
Page 277 of 305 
 Participant Acceptability: Child.  (Descriptor)  
 
What do you think about the care we gave you? Was it good or bad? Tell us by answering all of the 
questions below. Please be honest!  
 
1. Did you like the care we gave you?  
 
4   3   2   1 
                      Very Good                      Good               Bad                       Very Bad  
 
2. Did you get the kind of care you wanted?  
 
1   2   3   4 
   No, not at all       No, not really            Yes, sort of    Yes, I really did  
 
3. Did we help with all the things you wanted?  
 
4   3   2   1 
All of the things  Most of the things  Some of the things  None of the things  
     I wanted        I wanted        I wanted        I wanted  
 
4. If a friend needed care like you did, would you tell them to see us?  
 
1   2   3   4 
No, not at all   No, not really      Yes, sort of      Yes, I would  
 
5. Were y ou happy with all of the kinds of help we gave you?  
 
1   2   3   4 
      Very Happy                  Happy         Kind of happy                Kind of unhappy  
 
6. Has the care we gave you helped with your problems?  
 
4   3   2   1 
Yes, it helped a lot   Yes, it  helped a little     No, it didn’t help  No, it made it worse  
 
7. How happy are you with the care we gave you?  
 
1   2   3   4 
Very Happy          Happy   Kind of happy   Kind of unhappy  
 
8. Would you want us to help you again if you needed it?  
 
1   2   3   4 
No, not at all   No, not really   Yes, sort of   Yes, I would  
 
Page 278 of 305 
 Provider Demographics. (Descriptor)  
 
Please respond to the following questions. For the questions with space to mark your answer (e.g., place 
an “X”), please mark all that apply. For any responses that you mark as “Other,” please write in your 
response.  
 
1. What is your age? _____ years  
 
2. What is your race? (Check all that apply.)  
__ American Indian or Alaskan  
__ Asian or Asian American   
__ African American or Black   
__ Caucasian or Whit e   
__ Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander  
__ Other: ________________________  
 
3. What is your ethnicity?  
__ Hispanic  
__ Non -Hispanic  
 
4. What is your gender?  
__ Male  
__ Female  
__ Other: ________________________  
 
5. What is your highest degree?  
__ MD  
__ NP  
__ PA  
__ DO  
__ Other: ________________________  
 
6. What is your job title? ___________________________________________  
 
7. How many years have you worked at the clinic? ______________________  
 
8. How many years have you been in practice? _________________ ________  
 
9. What is your specialty? __________________________________________  
 
10. Before your enrollment in this study:  
 
a) Were you aware of the American Academy of Pediatrics Guidelines for Assessing Obesity?  
Yes  No 
 
If yes, how did you learn about these guidelines?  
 
b) Were you aware of Family -based Behavioral Weight Loss Treatment for Children with Obesity?  
Page 279 of 305 
 Yes  No 
 
If yes, how did you learn about this treatment?  
 
11. Have you had experience(s) with weight -related counseling for obesity or behavioral intervention 
for obesity (including weight control/weight management) ? If yes, what type of experience(s)? 
(Check all that apply.)  
 
__ I have not had any experience with weight -related counseling or behavioral interventions for      
obesity  
 
__Yes, I have  observed weight -related counseling or behavioral interventions for obesity  
 
__Yes, I have delivered weight -related counseling or behavioral interventions for obesity  
 
__Yes, I have received weight -related counseling or behavioral interventions for obesity  
 
__Yes, other: _____________________________________________________________  
 
________________________________________________________________________  
 
12. Have you had experience(s) with other counseling or behavioral interventions (i.e., not related to 
weight or obesity) ? If yes, what type of experience(s)? (Check all that apply.)  
 
  __ I have not had any experience with counseling interventions or behavioral interventions  
 
__Yes, I have observed counseling interventions or behavioral interventions for:  ________  
 
               _________________________________________________________________________  
 
__Yes, I have delivered counseling interventions or behavioral interventions for: ________  
 
               _________________________________________________________________________  
 
__Yes, I have received counseling interventions or behavioral interventions for: _________  
 
               ___________________________________________________________ ______________  
 
__Yes, other: ______________________________________________________________  
 
               _________________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 280 of 305 
 Provider Usual Care Survey. (Descriptor)  
 
 At well child visits, I  (check all that apply) : 
 Accurately measure height and weight of child  
 o Calculate BMI  
o Plot BMI on BMI growth chart  
o Make a weight category diagnosis using BMI percentile   
 
 Define BMI and explain consequences of high BMI to families  
 Perform a thorough physical examination  
 o Measure blood pressure  
o Order lab tests   
 Take a family history, including:  
 o Obesity  
o Type 2 diabetes  
o Cardiovascular disease  
o Early deaths from heart disease or stroke   
 
 
 Assess diet and physical activity behaviors  
 o Sugar -sweetened beverages  
o Servings of fruits and vegetables per day  
o Daily eating patterns (e.g., consumption of breakfast, portion sizes, family meals)  
o Frequency of fast food or restaurant eating  
o Amount of moderate to vigorous physical activity per day  
o Screen time   
 
 
 
 
 Provide positive feedback for behavior(s) in optimal range  
 o Elicit response to feedback  
o Reflect/probe   
 Provide neutral feedback for behavior(s) not in optimal range  
 o Elicit response to feedback  
o Reflect/probe   
 Query which, if any, of the behaviors the family may be interested in changing or which might be 
easiest to change  
 Agree on a target behavior  
 Assess readiness to change  
 Assess self -efficacy to change  
 Collaborate possible next steps to change  
 Develop and write a plan for change  
 Summarize change plan and provide positive feedback  
 
 
  
Page 281 of 305 
  Offer referral to a more intensive behavioral weight management intervention if necessary  
 Agree to follow up within a certain amount of time (e.g., 6 months from today)  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 282 of 305 
 24 Month Survey – Parent ( DSMB approved protocol addenda, 9.29.19 ).     
 Date:______________  
 
1. Which site are you at ? *this is required for branching logic for the next question*  
a. Buffalo  
b. Rochester  
c. Columbus  
d. St. Louis  
2. Who was your most recent Coach? * list  of each site’s Coaches will appear with a “Don’t Know” option *  
3. Were you ever assigned another Coach?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
4. Who else was your Coach? * list of each site’s Coaches will appear with a “Don’t Know” option *  
 
For the following questions, please CIRCLE the nu mber that matches how much you agree with each statement.  
 Strongly 
Disagree  Disagree  Neither 
Agree Nor 
Disagree  Agree  Strongly 
Agree  
5. This program changed the healthy 
habits of my family members who 
were not enrolled.  1 2 3 4 5 
6. If a friend were in need of similar 
help, I would recommend this 
program to him/her.  1 2 3 4 5 
7. This program has met my needs.  1 2 3 4 5 
 
Some people have made the following statements about their food situation. Please answer whether the statements 
were OFTEN, SOMETIMES, or NEVER true for you and your household in the last 12 months . 
 
8. Within the past 12 months, you worried that your food wo uld run out before you got money to buy more.  
• Often true  
• Sometimes true  
• Never true  
• Don’t know, Refuse  
 
9. Within the past 12 months, the food you bought just didn't last and you didn't have money to get more.  
• Often true  
• Sometimes true  
• Never true  
• Don’t know, Refuse  
 
The following are behaviors that people may or may not use to support their healthy lifestyle. For each of the following beha viors:  
 
Please choose how often  YOU  use them on a scale from Never to Daily:  
 
Never   Yearly   Monthly   Weekly   Daily  
0  1  2  3  4 
Please choose how helpful  YOU  find them on a scale from Slightly Helpful to Very Helpful:  
 
 
  
Page 283 of 305 
  
N/A  Slightly Helpful   Somewhat Helpful   Moderately Helpful   Very Helpful  
0  1    2    3   4 
 
If you do not use the behavior, you may write “0” for N/A in the  helpfulness column.  
 How Often?  How Helpful?  
10. Using a food journal or food diary (Habit Book)    
11. Tracking the number of Calories you eat    
12. Increasing the number of low -calorie, green, leafy foods you eat, like spinach or kale (GREEN 
foods)    
13. Decreasing the number of high -calorie, low -nutrient foods you eat, like candy or pizza (RED 
foods)    
14. Decreasing the number of high -calorie, low -nutrient drinks you drink, like soda (RED drinks)    
15. Increasing your moderate to intense physical activity, like walking or biking (GREEN physical 
activity)    
16. Weighing yourself    
17. Praising your child    
18. Planning meals ahead of time    
19. Having a Daily Check -In with your child about what they are eating    
20. Decreasing recreational screen time    
21. Sleeping for 7 -9 hours a night    
22. Using a rewards or points system to encourage healthy behaviors (Reinforcement System)    
23. Engaging in physical activity with your family    
24. Engaging in healthy eating with your friends    
25. Engaging in physical activity with your friends    
26. Accessing community healthy eating resources, like a farmer’s market    
27. Accessing community physical activity resources, like a fun run or walk    
28. How helpful were the PLAN sessions for you?    
29. How helpful was the entire PLAN program for you?    
 
For each of the following questions, please circle the best answer.  
 
30. Avocados, marshmallows, and black olives are a part of which food group?  
a. Proteins  
b. Fats, Oils, Sweets & Others  
a. Condiments, Dressings, & Other Ingredients   
31. Which of the following are examples of the lowest calorie foods with the most nutrition (GREEN foods)?  
a. Green (non -starchy) vegetables  
b. Fruit  
c. Dairy  
d. Beans/legumes  
32. Why is a food journal (Habit Book) important for weight loss and making healthy food choices?  
a. It helps you to be more aware  about what you are eating  
b. It helps you to be more accountable about what you are eating  
c. It is not really that important for weight loss or healthy food choices  
d. A and B  
 
 
  
Page 284 of 305 
 33. The benefits of planning meals ahead of time include:  
a. Allowing time for food preparation and cooking  
b. Budgeting for groceries  
c. Knowing the number of calories in meals  
d. All of the above  
34. Aerobic exercises (moderate to intense physical activity) does not burn a lot of calories and is not good for weight 
loss.  
a. True  
b. False  
35. Once your child h as learned a new behavior, you can slowly decrease the amount of praise for that behavior.  
a. True  
b. False  
36. Which of the following methods can be used to remove distractions when eating?  
a. Eat when sitting down  
b. Eat in the same place  
c. Turn the television and laptop off 
d. All of the above  
37. When you give children a choice about an activity, they are more likely to enjoy that activity.  
a. True  
b. False  
38. Which of the following is a way to shop healthy on a budget?  
a. Meal planning  
b. Making a grocery list  
c. Using leftovers  
d. All of the abov e 
39. Which of the following are examples of activities that only burn limited calories (RED activities)?  
a. Sending text messages  
b. Watching a movie on your tablet  
c. Sitting and playing a video game  
d. All of the above  
40. A good sleeping area includes all of the following EXCEPT:  
a. Comfort  
b. Low noise level  
c. Bright room lights  
d. No distractions  
41. The portion sizes in many restaurants will make up two or more meals.  
a. True  
b. False  
42. How can you decrease the chance of relatives giving your child high -calorie, low -nutrient foods li ke candy (RED 
foods)?  
a. Give your child high -calorie, low -nutrient foods before they go over to a relative’s house  
b. Threaten to ground your child if they accept any high -calorie, low -nutrient foods  
c. Give your relatives examples of non -food items that they can give your child  
d. Tell your child it’s okay for them to eat high -calorie, low -nutrient foods because it is like they’re on 
vacation  
43. Which of the following will increase the chance of a person stay ing committed to a physical activity?  
a. Paying for an exercise class  
b. Buying new exercise clothes  
 
 
  
Page 285 of 305 
 c. Buying new workout music  
d. Doing it with a buddy  
44. Parents can increase  their child’s concern about body shape by doing which of the following?  
a. Talking about their own concerns about their body shape in front of their children.  
b. Ignoring any concerns about their body shape they might have in front of their children.  
c. Downplaying their own concerns about their body shape in front of their children.  
d. All of the above.  
 
Is there anything about the program that you really liked or you thought worked really well for your family?  
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ _______________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
_ 
___________ _______________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________  
Is there anything about the program that you would change or would recommend for future programs that would make 
it work better for you r family?  
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ ________________________________________________
 
 
  
Page 286 of 305 
 __________________________________________________________________________________________________
_ 
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________ _______________________  
  
 
 
  
Page 287 of 305 
 24 Month Survey – Child ( DSMB approved protocol addenda, 9.29.19 ).     
 Date:______________  
 
For these questions, please CIRCLE how much you agree with the sentence:  
 
 Strongly 
Disagree  Disagree  Neither 
Agree Nor 
Disagree  Agree  Strongly 
Agree  
45. This program helped my family members (like 
your other parent or your brother or sister) 
who were not a part of the program.  1 2 3 4 5 
46. If a friend needed the same help as me, I 
would tell them to try the PLAN program.  1 2 3 4 5 
47. This program  helped me.  1 2 3 4 5 
  
For each of the following questions, please circle the best answer.  
 
48. Avocados, marshmallows, and black olives are a 
part of which food group?  
a. Proteins.  
b. Fats, Oils, and Sweets.  
c. Condiments and Dressings.   
49. Which of the following are examples of the lowest 
calorie foods with the most nutrition (GREEN 
foods)?  
a. Green (non -starchy) vegetables.  
b. Fruit.  
c. Dairy.  
d. Beans/legumes.  
50. Why is a food journal (Habit Book) important for 
weight loss and making healthy food choices?  
a. It help s you really think about what you 
are eating.  
b. It helps you to track the foods you are 
having throughout the day.  
c. It is not really that important for weight 
loss or healthy food choices.  
d. A and B.  
51. A good thing about planning ahead for meals is:  
a. Allowing time  for you and your parent 
to prepare food.  
b. Having healthy meals already chosen.  
c. Knowing the calorie content of meals.  d. All of the above.  
52. Aerobic exercises (medium to intense activity) do 
not burn a lot of calories and are not good for 
weight loss.  
a. True  
b. False  
53. The best rewards or reinforcers are:  
a. Something you want.  
b. Not food, money, or sitting activities.  
c. Special.  
54. All of the above. When you are eating, you should:  
a. Watch television.  
b. Play on your tablet.  
c. Just eat.  
d. None of the above.  
e. All of the above.  
55. You want to  eat foods that are low in:  
a. Fat. 
b. Fiber.  
c. Protein.  
d. Color.  
56. Instead of drinking soda, a healthier option is:  
a. Diet soda.  
b. Water with fruit.  
c. Juice.  
d. Iced tea.  
 
 
  
Page 288 of 305 
 57. Which of the following are examples of activities 
that only burn limited calories (RED activities)?  
a. Watc hing television.  
b. Watching a movie on your tablet.  
c. Playing a video game while sitting.  
d. All of the above  
58. Why might fast food restaurants be unhealthy?  
a. Fast food is high in calories.  
b. Fast food is high in fat.  
c. Fast food restaurants usually do not 
offer a lot o f healthy options.  
d. All of the above.  
 
 
59. A bedtime routine could include which of the 
following?  
a. A bath.  
b. Reading a book.  
c. Brushing teeth.  
d. All of the above.  
60. How could you tell your friends about your healthy 
habits?  
a. Give your friends examples of medium 
to intense activity (GREEN physical 
activity) that they can do with you.  b. Give your friends examples of low -
calorie foods (GREEN foods) that they 
can eat every day.  
c. Tell them that you can only eat high -
calorie foods (RED foods) when you are 
playing at their ho uses.  
d. Both A and B.  
61. Which of the following is a benefit of planning 
physical activities to do with your friends during 
get-togethers?  
a. You can strengthen friendships with 
your healthy friends.  
b. It helps you and your friend to feel 
good.  
c. It makes it easier to  make healthy 
activity choices.  
d. All of the above.  
62. If you have a positive body image, you think which 
of the following?  
a. That your body is good.  
b. That your body is valuable.  
c. That you feel proud of what your body 
can do.  
d. All of the above.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following are behaviors that people may or may not use to support their healthy lifestyle. For each of the following 
behaviors:  
 
Please choose how often  YOU use them on a scale from Never to Daily:  
 
Never   Yearly   Monthly  Weekly   Daily  
0  1  2  3  4 
 
Please choose how helpful  YOU  find them on a scale from Slightly Helpful to Very Helpful:  
 
N/A   Slightly Helpful   Somewhat Helpful   Moderately Helpful   Very Helpful  
0  1    2    3   4 
 
If you do not use the behavior, you may write “0” for N/A in the helpfulness column.  
 
 
  
Page 289 of 305 
  
 How Often?  How Helpful?  
63. Using a food journal where you write down what you ate every day (Habit Book)    
64. Writing down the number of Calories you eat    
65. Increasing the number of low-calorie, green, leafy foods you eat like spinach or kale (GREEN 
foods)    
66. Decreasing the number of high -calorie, low -nutrient foods you eat like candy or pizza (RED 
foods)    
67. Decreasing the number of high -calorie, low -nutrient drinks you drink like soda (RED drinks)    
68. Increasing your medium to intense physical activity like walking or biking (GREEN physical 
activite)    
69. Weighing yourself    
70. Getting praise from your parent    
71. Having a Daily Check -In with your parent about what you are eating    
72. Decreasing screen time    
73. Sleeping for 9 -11 hours a night    
74. Getting rewards or points (reinforcers) for doing healthy behaviors    
75. Doing physical activity with your family    
76. Eating healthy with your friends    
77. Doing physical activity with your friends    
78. How helpful were the PLAN sessions for you?    
79. How helpful was the PLAN program for you?    
 
Is there anything about the program that you really liked or you thought worked really well for your 
family?  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________  
 
 
  
Page 290 of 305 
 _____________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________ _____________  
 
Is there anything about the program that you would change, or would recommend for future programs 
that would make it work better for your family?  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
__________ ___________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________  
  
 
 
  
Page 291 of 305 
 Coach Demographics Survey (This change was made on 7.25.19 prior to review and approval by th e 
DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 9.29.19).  
 
Please complete the survey below. Thank you!  
 
Which Site are you from?  
● Buffalo  
● Columbus  
● Rochester  
● St Louis  
 
Which Coach are you, A,B,C?  
● A 
● B 
● C 
 
What is your age? __________________________________  
 
How would you describe your race?  
● Native American Indian or Alaskan  
● Asian or Asian American  
● African American or Black  
● Caucasian or White  
● Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander  
● Other or Multi -racial:  
● Refused  
Please describe: __________________________________  
 
What is your ethnicity?  
● Hispanic or Latina/o  
● Non -Hispanic or Latina/o  
 
What is your sex:  
● Female  
● Male  
● Other  
● Refused  
 
What is your job title? __________________________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 292 of 305 
 BEFORE YOUR ENROLLMENT AND PARTICIPATION IN THIS STUDY:  
 
Were you aware of the American Academy of Pediatrics Guidelines for Assessing Obesity?  
A. Yes 
B. No 
 
If yes, how did you learn about these guidelines? __________________________________  
 
Were you aware of Family -Based Behavioral Weight Loss Treatment for Children with Obesity?  
• Yes 
• No 
 
If yes, how did you learn about this treatment? __________________________________  
 
Have you had experience(s) with weight -related counseling or behavioral intervention for 
obesity (including weight control or weight management)?  
• Yes  
• No 
 
If yes, what type of experience(s)? Check all that apply.  
• Yes, I have observed weight -related counseling or behavioral interventions for obesity.  
• Yes, I have delivered weight -related counseling or behavioral interventions for obesity.  
• Yes, I have received weight -related counseling or behavioral interventions for obesity.  
• Yes, other, please describe:  
Other, please describe:  
__________________________________________  
Have you had experience(s)with other counseling or behavioral interventions (i.e., not related 
to weight gain or obesity)?  
• Yes  
• No 
 
What type of experience(s) have you had with other counseling or behavioral interventions 
(i.e., not related to weight gain or obesity)? Check all that apply:  
• Yes, I have observed counseling interventions or behavioral interventions.  
• Yes, I have delivered counseling interventions or behavioral interventions.  
• Yes, I have received counseling interventions or behavioral interventions . 
• Yes, Other, please describe.  
 
Please describe the type of experience you have:  
_________________________________________  
 
  
 
 
  
Page 293 of 305 
 Coach Treatment Knowledge (This change was made on 7.25.19 prior to review and approval by the 
DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 9.29.19).  
 
Please complete the survey below. Thank you!  
 
For a child, overweight is defined as ____ for age and sex.  
A. Weight -for-height ratio >85th percentile  
B. Weight -for-height ratio >99th percentile  
C. Body mass index (BMI) percentile of 8 5th to 94th  
D. BMI > 90th percentile  
 
For a child, obesity is defined as _______ for age and sex.  
A. Weight -for-height ratio >95th percentile  
B. Weight -for-height ratio >99th percentile  
C. BMI >99th percentile  
D. BMI> 95th percentile  
 
At what age should BMI begin being calculated, and how often should BMI be calculated?  
A. At age 2, every year  
B. At age 2, every well -child visit  
C. Overweight or obese children, every other year  
D. All children every other year  
 
What are the maximum rec ommended weight loss targets for obese children and adolescents?  
A. Weight loss should not exceed 1 lb. per month in children 2 -11 years or 3 lbs. per 
week in older children and adolescents.  
B. Weight loss not to exceed .5 lb. per month in children 2 -11 years or 1 lb. per week in 
older children and adolescents  
C. Weight loss not to exceed 1 lb. per month in children 2 -11 years or 2 lbs. per week in 
older children and adolescents.  
D. Weight loss not to exceed .5 lb. per month in children 2 -11 or 2 lbs. per  month in 
older children and adolescents.  
 
23) There are several recommendations for assessing obesity. Calculating and plotting BMI is 
one of them. Which of the following are the other recommendations for assessing obesity?  
I. Assess medical risk, includ ing patient history, parental obesity, family history, and 
physical exam and review of systems.  
II. Assess psychological risk, including depression, anxiety, and eating disorders  
III. Assess behavior risk, including sedentary time, eating, physical activit y, and home 
environment  
IV. Assess attitudes, including family and patient concern, and motivation.  
A. I, III, and IV  
B. All four  
 
 
  
Page 294 of 305 
 C. I and III  
D. I, II, and III  
 
24) For children 2 and older, which of the following are appropriate recommendations for what 
children should be eating, drinking, and doing each day?  
A. 5 or more fruits and vegetables, 1 hour or less or recreational screen time, 30 
minutes or more of ph ysical activity  
B. 6 or more fruits and vegetables, 2 hours or less of recreational screen time, 90 
minutes or more of physical activity, 0 sugary drinks  
C. 5 or more fruits and vegetables, 2 hours or less of recreational screen time, 60 
minutes or more of  physical activity, 1 sugary drink or less  
D. 6 or more fruits and vegetables, 1 hour or less of recreational screen time, 60 
minutes or more of physical activity, 1 sugary drink or less.  
 
25) Imagine you that you are working with a family of an overweight  child and have 
recommended that the child lose a small amount of weight in the next few months (e.g., 4 
pounds). If you only have time to set one goal, which of the following is the most likely to help 
the child to lose weight and establish healthy habits ? 
A. Identify healthy options the child can choose for lunch at school by discussing the 
menu (i.e., reviewing what is posted online by the child's school).  
B. Determine which healthy foods the parents(s) will have available at home so that the 
home is a " healthy zone" and increase the amount of foods consumed from home.  
C. Discuss physical activity options and increase walking to and from school or the bus 
stop.  
D. Reduce the child's time spent watching movies or playing video games by 
determining an appropriate amount of time and having the parent(s) set a timer.  
 
26) If you are setting a goal with the parent(s) and child about increasing exercise to 3 times in 
the next week, but they seem resistant to the goal (i.e., they are not "getting it"), what would 
you do?  
A. Patiently describe the exercise goal and its importance in their larger goals for health, 
focusing on the goal you have defined (3 times in the next week).  
B. Ask them what they are interested in setting as a goal for exercise, then encour age 
them to follow through with their identified goal.  
C. Discuss their perceived barriers and collaboratively identify an appropriate goal that 
will address their exercise behaviors.  
D. If they seem more willing to focus on a goal related to the child's e ating patterns 
instead, identify a goal for the family that will address eating behaviors rather than 
activity behaviors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 295 of 305 
  
Coach Attributes of Evidence Based Treatment (This change was made on 7.25.19 prior to review 
and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 9.29.19).  
 
Please complete the survey below. Thank you!  
The following questions ask about your feelings about using new types of therapy, 
interventions or treatments. Manualized therapy, treatment, or intervention refers to any  
intervention that has specific guidelines and/or components that are outlined in a manual 
and/or that are to be followed in a structured or predetermined way.  
 
Indicate to the extent to which you agree with each item using the scale shown below.  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
I like to use new types of therapy or interventions to help my clients.  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
I am willing to try new types of therapy or interventions, even if I have to follow a treatment 
manual.  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
I know better than academic researchers how to care for my clients.  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
I am willing to use new and different types of therapy or interventions developed by 
researchers.  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
 
 
  
Page 296 of 305 
 3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
Research -based treatments/interventions are not clinically useful.  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
Clinical experience is more  important than using manualized interventions.  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
I would not use manualized therapy/interventions.  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
I would try a new therapy or intervention, even if it were very different from what I am used to 
doing.  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
For the following questions if you received training in a new therapy or intervention how 
likely would you be to adopt it if:  
 
It was intuitively appealing?  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
 
 
  
Page 297 of 305 
 It made sense to you?  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
It was required by your supervisor?  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
It was a state requirement?  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
It was being used by colleagues who were happy with it?  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
You felt you had enough training to use it correctly?  
1. Not at all  
2. To a slight extent  
3. To a moderate extent  
4. To a great extent  
5. To a very great extent  
 
  
 
 
  
Page 298 of 305 
 Coach Attributes Family Based Treatment (FBT) (This change was made on 7.25.19 prior to review 
and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved protocol addenda on 9.29.19).  
 
Please complete the survey below. Thank you!  
 
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
The content of FBT is compatible with my personal beliefs and values.  
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
FBT is useful.  
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
FBT is credible.  
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
FBT is easy to administer in the practice setting.  
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
The content of FBT is clear.  
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
 
 
  
Page 299 of 305 
 4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
FBT can be implemented without requiring an extensive training.  
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
FBT can be adapted or modified to suit the needs of the interventionist.  
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
The benefits of using FBT with my clients are obvious/visible.  
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
The evidence regarding the impact of FBT is available.  
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
The content of FBT is relevant to my work as a clinical treatment provider.  
1. Strongly Agree  
2. Agree  
3. Neither Agree or Disagree  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly Disagree  
 
Coach consent  
Please upload the .pdf file of the signed Coach consent.  
 
Indicate yes or no that Coach consent is uploaded.  
• No 
 
 
  
Page 300 of 305 
 • Yes 
 
Why is the coach consent not uploaded? __________________________________  
   
 
 
  
Page 301 of 305 
 D.     Additional Forms  
 
Figure 1. Study Flow Chart  
 
 
 
 
 
UC: Families attend follow -up visits at their 
provider’s discretion across 2 years. UC consists of 
the care typically delivered by the pediatrician.  
FBT: Families attend 26 or more sessions across 2 
years with FBT interventionist for support in diet, 
physical activity, and behavioral changes.  
Participants complete an eligibility phone screen with a 
PLAN coach over the phone.  
Participants recruited via research match, study 
advertisements, website, or well -child visit.  
 
Participants attend an orientation session with a PLAN 
coach, during which study overview is provided, consent is 
obtained, and baseline assessments are administered.  
Participants Randomized  
FBT Group  
Participants complete an initial eligibility survey in person, 
via REDCap, or over the phone.  
 
Participants complete pre -orientation surveys via REDCap 
and, if necessary, follow -up clinical interviews with a PLAN 
coach.  
UC Group  
 
 
  
Page 302 of 305 
 PLAN Adverse Event Questionnaire  
 
During the time since your last visit on (insert date of last major assessment) , have you or your child:  
 
1. Been hospitalized overnight?  
YES   NO 
 
2. Been to the emergency room or an urgent care clinic?  
YES   NO 
 
3. Been treated by a medical provider for illness or injury?  
YES   NO 
 
4. Had any injuries (e.g., sprained ankle or broken bone)?  
YES   NO 
 
5. Started any new medications or receive a change in dosage of a current medication?  
YES   NO 
 
6. Experience increased symptoms of a current illness or injury (If applicable)?  
YES   NO 
 
7. Seen a new counselor, psychologist, or psychiatris t? 
YES   NO 
 
8. Gone long periods (8 waking hours or more) without eating to control your weight?  
YES   NO 
 
9. Felt like you have lost control over your eating?  
YES   NO 
 
10. Thrown up after eating?  
YES   NO 
 
11. Taken laxatives or diet pills?  
YES   NO 
 
12. Felt particularly nervous, worried, or anxious?  
YES   NO 
 
13. Felt very sad or down? Or lost interest in things that you normally enjoy doing?  
YES   NO 
 
 (This change was made on 5.23.18 prior to review and approval by the DSMB, DSMB approved 
protocol addenda on 11.2.18 ) 
 
 
 
  
Page 303 of 305 
 ADVERSE EVENT FORM  
 
 
The Effectiveness of Family -based Weight Loss Treatment Implemented in Primary Care  
 
 
Site: __________________________________________________  
 
Participant ID: __________________________________________  
  
Has the participant had any adverse events during this study?  
□ Yes (Please list all AEs below)  
□ No 
 
Severity  Relationship to Study 
Intervention  Action Taken Regarding 
Study Intervention  Outcome of AE  
1. Mild  
2. Moderate  
3. Severe  1. Definitely related  
2. Possibly related  
3. Not related  1. None  
2. Discontinued  1. Resolved  
2. AE still present – no treatment  
3. AE still present – being treated  
4. Residual effects present – not treated  
5. Residual effects present – treated  
6. Death (complete SAE form)  
7. Unknown  2. No SAE form)  
2. No 
Adverse Event  Start Date  
 Stop Date  Severity  Relationship to 
Study Intervention  Action 
Taken  Outcome 
of AE  
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
       
Signature of Clinical Site PI:       Date:  
SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT FORM  
 
 
The Effectiveness of Family -based Weight Loss Treatment Implemented in Primary Care  
 
 
Site: __________________________________________________  
 
Participant ID: __________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 304 of 305 
 1. SAE Onset Date: ____/____/________  
 
2. SAE Stop Date: ____/____/________  
 
3. Location of SAE:  
 
4. Was this an unexpected adverse event?   □ Yes   □ No 
 
5. Brief description of participant with no personal identifiers:  □ Male  □ Female 
 Age________  
 
6. Brief description of SAE (attach description if more space needed): 
_____________________________________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
____________________ __________________________________________________________
________________________________  
 
□Death      □ Congenital anomaly/birth defect  
□ Life-threatening     □ Required intervention to prevent permanent 
impairment  
□ Hospitalization – initial or prolonged    □ Other: 
____________________________________________  
□ Disability/incapacity      
 
7. Intervention type:  
□ Medication or nutritional supplement  
□ Behavioral/lifestyle  
□ Device  
□ Surgery  
 
8. Relationship of SAE to intervention:  
□ Unrelated (clearly not related to intervention)  
□ Possible (may be related to intervention)  
□ Definite (clearly related to intervention)  
 
9. Was study intervention discontinued due to event?  □ Yes   □ No 
 
10. What other steps were taken to treat SAE? 
___________________________________ _____________________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________ _______
________________________________  
 
Signature of Clinical Site PI:       Date:  