Protocol  
 
Title:  Safety and efficacy of a topical scalp treatment for dry scalp conditions in 
children and adults 
 
 
Principal  Investigator Lucy Bilaver , PhD  
Northwestern  University  
750 N Lake Shore Drive,  Suite  680 
Chicago,  Illinois  60611 
 
Email: l-bilaver@northwestern.edu 
 
 
Co-Investigators Peter  Lio, MD 
Northwestern  University  
Medical  Dermatology Associates  of Chicago  
363 W Erie Street,  Suite  350 
Chicago,  IL 60654 
 
p-lio@northwestern.edu  
 
  
Statistician  Christopher Warren, PhD 
 
Version  Date:  March 10th, 2023 
1   
STUDY TITLE  Table  of Contents  
1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
2. STUDY DESIGN  
3. STUDY  OBJECTIVES  
4. STUDY POPULATION  
4.1. Inclusion criteria  
4.2. Exclusion  criteria  
5. STUDY PROCEDURES  
6. DATA COLLECTION  AND REPORTING  
6.1. Primary  Outcome Measures  
6.2. Secondary  Outcome Measures  
7. DATA DISCLOSURE  AND SUBJECT  CONFIDENTIALITY  
8. EFFICACY ASSESSMENT  
9. SAFETY ASSESSMENT  
10. STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  
11. POTENTIAL  PITFALLS  
12. STUDY SITE 
13. ETHICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  
13.1. Human  Subjects  Protection  
13.2. Consent Forms  
13.3. Protocol  Amendments  
13.4. Retention  of Records  
13.5. Use of  Information  and Publication 
14. APPENDIX  
15. REFERENCES  
2  STUDY TITLE  
  Safety and efficacy of a topical scalp treatment for dry scalp conditions in children and adults  
1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE:  
Dry scalp conditions (dandruff, seborrheic dermatitis, atopic dermatitis) impacts  half of  the human  
population and  is characterized  by dry scalp and  fine,  loosely adherent,  white  flakes  (Borda 2015). 
Patients  report  pruritus, irritation,  and a tight-feeling  scalp.  Dry scalp  may  be caused  by an imbalance 
of bacteria,  colonization  of fungi, or abnormal  sebum  production. Current  treatment  is limited  in 
efficacy  and involves  moisturizing  or prescription creams  or shampoos, along  with avoiding triggers  or 
behaviors that  exacerbate the  condition. A study in 2003 reported the prevalence of seborrheic 
dermatitis in children and found that seborrheic dermatitis is very prevalent in children younger than 5 
months. Of the children in the study, nearly 72% of children younger than 3 months old had seborrheic 
dermatitis and 50% of children ages 3- 5 mont hs had seborrheic dermatitis (Foley 2003) . 
 
Recent  studies  have highlighted the  potential  role of changes  in the  skin bacterial  and fungal  
community —the skin microbiome —in exacerbating  inflammation  of atopic skin. The changes  show  
differing  dominating  bacterial  and fungal strains  in healthy  and diseased  skin (Park  2017). Lesional  skin  
has been  shown to be  dominated by Staphylococcus bacteria and  contain  a lower microbial  diversity  than 
adjacent  non-lesional  skin (Kong 2012, Seite 2014). It is hypothesized that Staphylococcus  aureus  plays  a 
critical  role in the  pathogenesis of  eczema:  the density of S. aureus in eczema patients  can be staggering  
at 107 colonies  per square  centimeter of  atopic skin, representing  a far greater burden than those  observed 
in other  forms of skin inflammation  (Lin  2007, Cho 2001). Staphylococcus  is also  a major  bacteria found 
on atopic  scalps  (Park  2017). Though  the precise link between dysbiosis, eczema,  and dry scalp in 
humans remains  unclear,  these results  warrant  further investigation into the  role of antimicrobial therapy  
in reversing dysbiosis  and its’ potential  exacerbation  of disease severity.  
 
The use  of hydrating  emollients is effective on atopic  skin, in which  dry cracks  allow  irritants  to pass  and 
exacerbate the  condition (Hanifin  et al 2004).  Emollients  have been found to change skin communities  
from  a disease to healthy state (Seite  2014).  Of especial  relevance,  a 2014 study showed that topically  
allied  emollients containing  Lactobacillus sakei  were  effective in a  split body trial at  reducing  common  
symptoms of  eczema (Park  2014). As  topical therapy, honey has been  shown to work synergistically  
with antibiotics to treat  methicillin -resistant  S. aureus  (Liban  2013) . Honey possesses the antibacterial  
potency needed to stop the  growth of  S. aureus.  and histologic  studies  show  early  decreases  in 
inflammation,  better infection  control,  and faster healing  times  (Lusby 2002). In addition, curcumin,  the 
3  active ingredient  in turmeric,  has also shown to be  beneficial  in skin disease.  Although  research  on 
curcumin  is not extensive,  it has  demonstrated  antioxidant and  anti-inflammatory  properties  in preclinical  
trials.  Its lack of  toxicity,  even  at high  doses,  makes it an  attractive,  natural  treatment  option 
(Thangapazham  et al 2007). 
 
We aim to characterize the safety and efficacy  of a topical  preparation  of Lactobacillus  sp., honey, and 
turmeric in an emollient  base in restoring  the scalps of those with dry scalp to more closely  resemble the 
healthy  scalps .  
 
2. STUDY DESIGN AND SYNOPSIS:  
This pilot study  consists  of participants  diagnosed  with  dry scalp. Participants  will receive the  required 
topical vehicle with  the treatment condition (containing  dead bacteria) on their  scalp.   This study will 
consist  of 15-40 participants’  ages 1 years old to 17 years old  and 20- 40 participants 18 and older with a 
clinical diagnosis of dry scalp . Participants  will be recruited  either while visiting  a dermatologist for a 
standard office visit, while  visiting a pediatrician for a standard office visit , or by coming into Children’s 
Healthcare Associates, Medical Dermatology, or our Northwestern research office to be assessed by a 
physician. Each study visit will take approximately 15- 20 minutes. 
 
No randomization  will occur, as  all participants  will receive the  active treatment. Each  adult participant   
will apply the active treatment  once daily for  a study  period of  14 days  and discontinue using  all other 
scalp  management  therapies . Each child participant (with the help of a caregiver , if needed ) will apply 
the active treatment once every 2 to 3 days for a study period of 14 days  and discontinue using all other 
scalp management therapies.  
 
The primary  goal of this study is to determine the  safety and effectiveness  of Lactobacillus sp., honey,  and 
turmeric  in reducing  dry scalp symptomology.  
 
 There are three goals  in the  comparison  of these conditions:   
• The first is to  find the effectiveness  of the active treatment  in improving  clinical  disease  severity.  
To accomplish  this, an  investigator will  assess the  severity  of dry scalp before and  after the  
treatment  period using the 11-point  flaking scale (Neumann 1996), respectively.   
• The second  goal is to determine whether the  active treatment  is safe. This will be accomplished by 
contacting the patient via over the phone  and through daily emails  designed to document adverse 
events and Overall Safety Score. The Overall Safety Score is a 4 -point assessment ranging from 
“no signs of irritation” (0) to “patient discontinued due to irritation” (3). Participants will be asked 
about the Overall Safety score at the halfway point and the end point of the study.  
• The third exploratory go al is to determine whether the microbiome can be changed.   This will be 
4  accomplished by obtaining swab samples from the participants’ scalps, before and after the 
treatment period. The samples will be analyzed using 16s RNA sequencing and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequencing. Additionally, the change in colony count of  bacterial and fungal colonies 
on the scalp before and after the treatment will be assessed using the Replicate Organism Detection and Counting (RODAC) method. We aim  to characterize the effects  of Lactobacillus sp., honey, 
and turmeric on dry  scalps .  
• Finally, this study will determine the quality of life of participants  before and after the treatment 
period. Quality of life will be calculated using the ScalpDex tool, a validated 23- item instrument 
that explains the way that patients with scalp dermatitis are affected by symptoms, functioning, and emotions.  
 
3. STUDY OBJECTIVES:  
The first  goal of this study  is to determine the  effectiveness  of introducing Lactobacillus  sp., honey,  and 
turmeric,  in reducing dry scalp symptomology. 
 
Hypothesis  1a: Participants’  scalps  treated  with vehicle plus  Lactobacillus  sp., honey, and  
turmeric preparation  will exhibit decreased  dry scalp severity  on assessment  by an 
investigator when compared  to the  scalps  before treatment,  as measured by an 11-point  
flaking  scale.  
 
The next objective is to determine the safety of introducing Lactobacillus  sp., honey,  and turmeric,  in 
reducing dry scalp  symptomology  
 
 
Hypothesis  2a: The product containing Lactobacillus sp., honey, and turmeric will be safe for 
participant’s scalps as measured by the Overall Safety Score and patient logs.  
 
The final  objective of  this study is to compare the  determine if  an active Lactobacillus , honey, and  
turmeric topical preparation changes the microbiome after use for a dry scalp condition to more closely 
resemble healthy scalp  
 
Hypothesis  3a: Participants’  scalps  treated  with the active Lactobacillus , honey,  and turmeric  
preparation will  have a microbiome similar to those with healthy scalps.  
 
4. STUDY POPULATION:  
We aim to recruit  participants  with diagnosed dry scalp  and with clinical  signs  on the scalp.  Recruitment  
will consist  of male  and female participants.  This will include  15-40 children between  the ages of 1 year to 
17 years old , and 20- 40 adu lts over the age of 18.  
5   
4.1.1. Inclusion criteria  
a. Age 1 year  (or corrected age of 1 year, for those born prematurely) to 1 7 years for children, and 
adults 18 and older  
b. Patients with dry scalp and dandruff symptoms as determined by a board- certified 
Dermatologist, Allergist, or Pediatrician   
c. Good general health  
d. Participant and/or their parent s are able to read, write, and understand study materials in English  
6  4.1.2. Exclusion  criteria  
e. Infants younger than 1 year old  
f. Patients diagnosed with other scalp diseases such as psoriasis, tinea capitis, and pediculosis 
capitis  
g. Systemic steroid or oral antibiotic use during the past two months  
h. Allergy  to any of the preparation components  
 
 
5. STUDY PROCEDURES:  
For this study, 20-40 subjects over the age of 18 and 15- 40 subjects aged 1 year  to 17 years , all with a 
clinical di agnosis of dry scalp , will be enrolled.  5-10 adults participants will be enrolled and complete 
the study prior to enrolling children. All  participants  who  fit the inclusion  criteria and are currently 
being seen at  either a Lurie Children’s location, Children’s Health Associates, t he Medical 
Dermatology Associates of Chicago, or other outside locations , will  be verbally  invited  to participate in 
the study , immediately following their regularly scheduled appointment, by a study coordinator  will be 
administered  informed consent.  Additionally, those not able to attend a standard office visit, will come 
into our Northwestern office to be assessed by a board- certified physician. Study staff will identify 
potentially eligible study patients from clinic databases or those who have previously shown interest 
and mail  or email  these patients a letter with information on the study protocol, eligibility criteria and 
participant compensation, as well as instructions to contact study staff if interested in participation. W e 
will also wait a w eek after mailing the potentially eligible study patients and call and/or e -mail them to 
see if they are interested in participation.  
A research coordinator  will obtain bilateral culture swabs of the scalp, in order to assess the 
composition of the local bacterial community.  A research coordinator  will also obtain bilateral cultures 
of each participant’s scalp via the RODAC plate method in order to assess the burden of S. aureus on the skin. Swab and culture samples will be sent to the lab of Dr. Patrick Seed at Lurie Children’s or to 
Dr. M ahboobeh M ahdavinia ’s lab at Rush University to be processed via 16s rRNA sequencing and 
colony count, respectively. Lastly, a  board- certified physician  will assess  the clinical  severity  of the 
participant’s  dry scalp  via the 11-point  flaking  scale. Photographs  will be  taken as  record  for both adult 
and child studies.  
 
Each  participant  will then  fill out a  baseline survey  including demographics  in REDCap.   
 
7  Participants  will be supplied with  the scalp treatment and  relevant  instructions. Participants  will be 
instructed  to apply the preparation to their scalp . Adults will apply the scalp treatment on the site of active 
dry scalp once per day at home at a consistent time, every day for 14 days. Children will apply the hair 
care regiment at home at a consistent time  two to three times a week over a 14-day period. -. Participants  
will be instructed  to discontinue their  regular scalp -care therapies.  Adult participants will be contacted 
daily via email or telephone regarding scalp care regimen, usage of treatment, and any adverse events. 
Child participants  will be contacted weekly via email or text regarding scalp care regiment, usage of 
treatment, and any adverse events. One week  from  the baseline visit  (7 days) , the participant  will be 
contacted  via phone , text  or email to  complete surveys regarding treatment experience and to confirm 
correct usage of treatment . Fourteen  days following  the baseline visit, ad ult participants  will be seen,  
where repeat scalp cultures will be obtained via the swab and RODAC methods, and a  repeat  scalp  flaking 
survey (IGA) (with  photographs) will  be assessed  by a physician .  Final  experience surveys  will be 
administered  via REDCap.  Fourteen days following the baseline visit, child participants will attend a 
secondary visit, where a physician will assess the participants'  scalp and re -evaluate the IGA placement.  
8   
Study  Schema  
 
VISIT 1: (baseline)  
- Recruitment and electronic informed consent of participants via REDCap.  
- Obtain baseline scalp culture skin swabs from participant for microbiome diversity analysis.  
- Obtain baseline scalp cultures from participant via RODAC method to obtain initial bacterial burden level. The RODAC (Replicate Organism Detection and Counting) method is used to measure the number of 
colony forming units (CFU) per skin surface area. The primary purpose of the RODAC method is to monitor 
presence and number of microorganisms as determined by the appearance of colonies on the surface of an agar medium.  
- Local scalp flaking survey performed to the participant by investigator. Photographs will be taken. - 
Administer baseline demographics survey via REDCap.  
- Demonstrate/teach patients the treatment regimen. The treatment for adults will be applied daily  for 14 
days for 5 minutes.  The treatment for children will be applied 2 to 3 times a week over the course of 14 
days for 5 minutes. 
- Instruct adult participants to respond to the daily scalp care emails or phone calls . Instruct child 
participants to weekly scalp care emails, text messages, or phone calls. - Provide participants with all study 
materials, including instruction handout.  
-Instructions for adults will be given stating: Wash your hands and make sure scalp/hair is dry, and then 
apply the treatment to your entire scalp. Massage the treatment in, wait around seven minutes, and then 
rinse it from your scalp. Please be sure to apply the treatment daily.  Instructions for children will be given 
stating: Wash your hands and make sure scalp/hair is dry, and then apply the treatment to your entire scalp. Massage the treatment in, wait  approximately five minutes, and then rinse it from your scalp. Please be 
sure to apply the treatment 2 to 3 times a week.  
FOLLOW -UP:  
- Study coordinator will contact participant or caregiver via phone or email daily to ensure safety of 
treatment regimen. Dr. Bilaver will follow -up with patients if adverse events are reported.  
-Quality of life and overall safety score surveys will be sent to participants at the 7 day mark. 
VISIT 2 at Lurie Children's , Northwestern University, or  Medical Dermatology Associates of 
Chicago: (14 days after baseline)  
- Obtain scalp culture skin swabs from patient for microbiome diversity analysis.  
- Obtain scalp cultures from patient via RODAC method to obtain final bacterial burden level.  
9  - Local scalp flaking survey performed to patient by investigator. Additional photographs will be taken.  
- Ask participants to fill out the follow -up questionnaire via REDCap during the visit on a study iPad.  
 
 
 Events performed outside of patient visits:  -Skin swabs and RODAC plates will be transported from the collection site to the laboratory of Dr. Patrick Seed  or to Dr. Mahboobeh Mahdavinia’s lab at Rush University. The team will use an insulated carrier to 
transport the samples directly following each visit. 
 
  
 
For visit 1 and 2, the study visit will take place at either Lurie Children's, Northwestern University, 
Children’s Healthcare Associates, or Medical Dermatology Associates of Chicago. A board certified 
Dermatologist, Allergist, or Physician/pediatrician will conduct a scalp assessment to determine whether 
the participant is eligible for the study. Dr. Lucy Bilaver, the PI, will be the primary contact in the event of 
an adverse event, but will not be involved directly with any items in visit 1, the follow up, or visit 2. A 
research coordinator will consent the participant, explain the procedures of the study, swab the scalp,  and 
administer the surveys. Either a research coordinator or physician will take pictures of the patient's scalp. 
The same responsibilities for the physician and research coordinator will take place at visit 2. For the adult 
follow ups, a research coordinator will either email or call the participant daily (based off their preference) 
regarding treatment use and adverse effects.  Storage will occur at Dr. Patrick Seed's Lab (Lurie 
Children's) and  Dr. Mahboobeh Mahdavinia’s lab at Rush Univer sity, and analysis will be done by Dr. 
Seed’s lab  and Dr. Mahdavinia’s lab at Rush University. 
 Parents will be asked to perform the treatment on children ages 1-11, but children ages 12 years- 17 years 
will be asked to perform the treatment themselves. Parents will complete surveys for all children 
regardless of age.  
-  
 
6. DATA COLLECTION  AND REPORTING:  
 
 
At baseline,  culture swabs will be obtained from all patients’ scalp via both the swab and RODAC 
method. P atients  will fill out an intake survey including demographics via REDCap.  The physician  will 
complete a scalp  flaking survey to evaluate initial disease severity.  
 
At the 7- day mark,  adult patients will  be emailed  or texted surveys to ensure the treatment regimen  and 
daily  instructions are being completed  correctly  as well as to assess the safety and efficacy of the 
treatment .  At the 7 -day mark, child patients  will be emailed or texted surveys to ensure the treatment 
regimen and weekly instructions are being completed correctly as well as to assess the safety and 
10  efficacy of the treatment.  All questions will be answered and noted on a secure Northwestern server.  
 
At the 14-day follow -up visit,  cultures will again be obtained from the patients’ scalp via the swab and 
RODAC methods. T he investigator  will complete the  scalp  flaking survey to evaluate endpoint  disease 
severity.  Patients  will then fill out a  follow -up questionnaire via  REDCap.  
At the 14- day follow -up visit for child participants, the investigator will complete the scalp flaking 
survey to evaluate endpoint disease severity. Patients will then fill out a follow -up questionnaire via 
REDCap.  
 
Participants  will only be identified  via their coded  numeric subject  ID. The document  linking  the code  to 
the participant  will be stored  on a  secure  Northwestern  server and  all study team members  will have  
access  to the  server.  
 
Informed  consent and  all surveys  will be programmed  into REDCap  NUBIC  by a member  of the study 
team.  All other data will  be stored  in an  electronic  database and  stored  on a  secure Northwestern  server.  
Only  those  outlined  in the  IRB will have  access  to the information.  
11  6.1. Primary  Outcome Measures  
The primary  objective  is to determine the safety and efficacy of YoBee in improving dry scalp 
conditions. Efficacy will be determined using the Investigator’s Global Assessment (IGA) scale (Table 
1), a 5- point assessment ranging from clear (0) to severe disease (4) and the Tota l Severity Scale (TSS) 
(Table 2), an assessment that averages erythema, scaling, and pruritus severity scores of scalp lesions. The TSS uses a 4 -point scale ranging from none (0) to severe (3). Lastly, photographs of the scalp will 
be col lected before and after treatment. Safety will be determined by contacting the patient via over  the 
phone  or through email to document adverse events and Overall Safety Score. The Overall Safety 
Score (Table 4) and the reporting of adverse events throughout the study will measure the safety of 
YoBee. The Overall Safety Score is a 4 -point assessment ranging from “no signs of ir ritation” (0) to 
“patient discontinued due to irritation” (3). Participants will include the Overall Safety Score assessment in thei r daily journal.  
An exploratory aim of this study is to find whether YoBee changes the microbiome after use for a dry scalp condition to more closely resemble healthy scalps.  This will be accomplished by obtaining swab 
samples from the participants’ scalps, before and after the treatment period. The samples will be analyzed using 16s RNA sequencing and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequencing. Additionally, 
the change in co lony count of bacterial and fungal colonies on the scalp before and after the treatment 
will be as sessed using the Replicate Organism Detection and Counting (RODAC) method. Finally, 
ScalpDex, a validated instrument, will assess the change in quality of life of participants. ScalpDex is a 
23 question survey that will be administered electronically via RedCap to participants.  
7. DATA DISCLOSURE  AND SUBJECT  CONFIDENTIALITY:  
Subject  medical  information obtained as  a result of  this study is considered  confidential,  and disclosure  to 
third  parties  other than  the principal  investigator and the  co-investigators  is prohibited.  Data may  only be 
disclosed  in relation  to compliance with  mandatory  state and federal  disclosure laws,  and will not be  
disclosed  in any other  circumstance.  All reports  and communications  relating  to subjects  in this study  
will identify  each subject  only by their initials  and study identification  number. Medical  information 
resulting  from the  subject’s  participation  in this study  may be given to the  subject’s  personal  physician  or 
the appropriate medical  personnel  responsible  for the  subject’s  welfare.  Data gathered  as a result  of this 
study are available to inspection  on request  by the Lurie Children’s  Hospital  Institutional  Review  Board  
(LCHIRB).  
 
8. EFFICACY ASSESSMENT  
12  The efficacy  of our trial will be measured  by an 11-point scalp  flaking scale (IGA) . Second, we will employ 
16S rRNA gene sequencing to analyze the composition of the scalp microbiome before and after treatment. 
Finally, efficacy toward reducing Staph colonization will be quantified via colony count of S. aureus scalp  
13  cultures  from   patients  plated  on  RODAC  plates,  and  compared  against  each  patient’s  baseline 
measurements.  
 
9. SAFETY ASSESSMENT  
All of the ingredients contained  in our topical  formulation are either  foods or  commonly used in 
cosmetics  and skin care products. As  such, we have minimal  reason  to believe that  participants  will 
experience major  adverse  events  from  treatment.  There  may  be a risk  of mild irritation,  given  the nature 
of already  inflamed  skin, but this should be minimal  as compared  to current  accepted  topical  treatments  
for dry  scalp . This study utilizes dead  Lactobacillus species  to eliminate the  risk of growth and thus, 
the risk  of new  disease or symptomatology. Furthermore, dead bacteria are easier to store  and offer a 
longer shelf  life, eliminating  the risk  of application of an  unknown size  or species  of bacteria.   
 
10. STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  
Responses for the scalp flaking  survey are measured  on an  11-point scale.  The identification and relative 
quantities of scalp bacteria will be measured via 16S -tag count and expressed as a percentage of the total 
number of 16S- tags per sample, while the total quantity of bacteria in the sample will be measured by 
real-time quantitative PCR and expressed in picograms of bacterial DNA. Colony count measurements 
will be recorded in colony-forming units (CFU) per skin surface area, to the nearest whole number. 
 
10. 1 Power analysis  
The study is powered. An important goal of this study is to determine the changes in severity score pre/post 
treatment based on a 5 point severity scale. As we expect a decrease in severity score based off IgA scale 
post-treatment, we powered the study based on the ability to detect at least a one point difference in change 
of severity score with 80% power and an alpha level of 0.05. 
 
11. POTENTIAL  PITFALLS  
Potential  pitfalls  include participant  bias and lack of diversity, as this pilot study is recruiting  from one  
dermatology  clinic.  
 
12. STUDY SITE 
Medical  Dermatology Associates  of Chicago  
363 W Erie Street,  Suite  350 
Chicago,  IL 60654 
 
Lincoln Park Outpatient Center  2515 N. Clark Street 8th Floor, Suite 801  Chicago, IL 60614-3393 
14   
Lurie Children’s Hospital  
225 E. Chicago Chicago, IL, 60611  
 
Northwestern University  
750 N. Lake Shore Dr, Suite 680 
Chicago, IL 60611  
 Children’s Healthcare Associates  
2900 N Ashland Ave.  
Chicago, IL 60657  
 
13. ETHICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  
13.1. Human  Subjects  Protection  
15  A periodic  review  must  be submitted  to the IRB at least once  a year.  The IRB must  be 
noticed of completion  of the study.  After  study  completion  or termination,  a final report  must  
be provided to  close  the study. The  investigator  must  maintain  an accurate and  complete  record  
of all submissions  made  to the IRB, including a list of all reports  and documents  submitted.  
Adverse  events  will be submitted promptly  to the  IRB  per IRB guidelines.  
At least once  per year,  the IRB must  review  and give written  approval  in order  to continue  
the study. This trial will be conducted in accordance with Good  Clinical  Practices  and the 
Declaration  of Helsinki.  
 
13.2. Consent Forms  
Prior to study  entry,  a written  informed  consent  and/or  assent  must  be obtained  from  the 
subject  or the subject’s  guardian. A  copy of the subject’s  signed consent  or assent  form  must  be 
retained  in the  study file. 
 
13.3. Protocol  Amendments  
All changes  must  be submitted  to the IRB. Protocol  modifications  that impact  subject  safety  
or the validity  of the study  must be  approved  by the IRB before initiation.  
 
13.4. Retention  of Records  
We will retain  subject  identification  codes,  subject  files,  and source  data for the maximum  
period of time permitted  by the hospital, institution,  or private  practice,  but not less than 2 years  
after the completion  or discontinuation  of the trial. 
 
13.5. Use of  Information  and Publication 
The Principal  Investigator and sub-investigators  may  publish the  results of  this study in 
conjunction will appropriate scientific and  medical  personnel.  
14. APPENDIX  
 All the ingredients used in this study were ordered from manufacturers who have current 
good manufacturing practices. Additionally, all of the ingredients used in the treatment have been 
approved by the FDA. The bacteria is heat -killed in Dr. Seed’s lab and Dr. Mahdavinia ’s lab at 
121°C (249 °F) for 15 minutes and be stored at room temperature away from other organisms to ensure sterility. Afterwards, the heat -killed bacteria will be added to the base, honey and turmeric 
16  mixture in a sterile biosafety cabinet, separate from contaminants. To ensure batch safety, the 
mixture will be plated and observed to verify that nothing grows and all of the bacteria are dead.  
 
17  REFERENCES  
 
1. Borda,  L. J., & Wikramanayake, T. C. (2015).  Seborrheic  dermatitis  and dandruff:  a comprehensive  
review. Journal  of clinical  and investigative  dermatology , 3(2). 
2. Foley P, Zuo Y, Plunkett A, Merlin K, Marks R. The Frequency of Common Skin Conditions in 
Preschool -aged Children in Australia Seborrheic Dermatitis and Pityriasis Capitis (Cradle Cap). Arch 
Dermatol.2003;139(3):318 –322.  
3. Cho,  S. H., Strickland,  I., Tomkinson,  A., Fehringer, A.  P., Gelfand,  E. W., &  Leung, D.  Y. (2001). 
Preferential  binding  of Staphylococcus  aureus  to skin sites of Th2-mediated  inflammation  in a murine  
model. J Invest  Dermatol,  116(5),  658-663. doi: 10.1046/j.0022 -202x.2001.01331.x 
4. Hanifin,  J. M.,  Thurston, M., Omoto,  M., Cherill,  R., Tofte,  S. J., &  Graeber,  M. (2001).  The eczema  
area and severity  index  (EASI):  assessment  of reliability  in atopic  dermatitis.  EASI  Evaluator  Group. 
Exp Dermatol,  10(1), 11-18. 
5. Hanifin  JM, Cooper  KD, Ho  VC,  Kang  S, Krafchik  BR, Margolis  DJ, et al. Guidelines  of care for 
atopic  dermatitis,  developed  in accordance with  the American  Academy  of Dermatology  
(AAD)/American  Academy  of Dermatology Association  "Administrative  Regulations  for Evidence - 
Based  Clinical  Practice  Guidelines".  J Am Acad  Dermatol  2004;50:  391-404. 
6. Kong,  H. H., Oh, J., Deming,  C., Conlan, S.,  Grice,  E. A., Beatson,  M. A., Nomicos  E., Polley  E.C.,  
Komarow H.D.,  NISC  Comparative  Sequence  Program, Murray  P.R.,  Turner,  M. L., Segre  J.A.  
(2012).  Temporal  shifts  in the skin microbiome  associated  with disease  flares  and treatment  in children  
with atopic  dermatitis.  Genome  Res,  22(5), 850-859. doi: 10.1101/gr.131029.111 
7. Liban,  Kyle.  "The  Efficacy  of Topical  Manuka  Honey  and Combination  Antibiotic  Therapy  in the 
Treatment  of MRSA Skin  Infections."  (2013). 
8. Lin, Y.  T., Wang,  C. T., & Chiang,  B. L. (2007).  Role  of bacterial  pathogens  in atopic  dermatitis.  Clin  
Rev Allergy  Immunol,  33(3),  167-177. doi: 10.1007/s12016 -007-0044 -5 
9. Lusby  PE, Coombes  AL, Wilkinson  JM. Honey:  A Potent  Agent  for Wound  Healing.?  J Wound 
Ostomy Continence Nurs.  2002;29:295 –300. 
10. Marks,  R., A. D. Pearse,  and A. P. Walker.  "The  effects  of a shampoo  containing  zinc pyrithione  on 
the control  of dandruff."  British  Journal  of Dermatology  112, no. 4 (1985):  415-422. 
11. Neumann,  P. B., T. W. Coffindaffer,  P. E. Cothran,  J. F. Jones, J. A. McCoy,  G. Y. Rains,  and B. R. 
Reed.  "Clinical  investigation  comparing  1% selenium  sulfide  and 2%  ketoconazole shampoos  for 
dandruff  control."  COSMETIC DERMATOLOGY- CEDAR KNOLLS - 9, no. 12  (1996):  20-26. 
12. Park,  S., Lee,  J., Park,  Y. H., & Seo, Y. (2014).  Effect  of emollients  containing  vegetable - 
derivedlactobacillusin  the treatment  of atopic  dermatitis  symptoms:  split-body  clinical  trial. British  
Journal  of Dermatology , 170 (6), e38.  
13. Park,  T., Kim,  H. J., Myeong,  N. R., Lee, H. G., Kwack,  I., Lee,  J., Kim B.J., Sul W.J.,  An, S. (2017). 
Collapse  of human  scalp  microbiome  network in dandruff  and seborrhoeic  dermatitis.  Experimental  
dermatology . 
14. Seite  S., Flores  G.E.,  Henley  J.B., Martin  R.M.,  Zelenkova  H., Aguilar  L., Fierer  N. (2014).  
Microbiome  of affected  and unaffected  skin of patients  with atopic  dermatitis  before  and after 
emollient  treatment. Journal  of Drugs  in Dermatology , 13(11).  
15. Seité,  S., Zelenkova,  H., & Martin,  R. (2017).  Clinical  efficacy  of emollients  in atopic  dermatitis  
patients –relationship  with  the skin microbiota  modification.  Clinical,  cosmetic  and investigational  
dermatology , 10, 25. 
16. Thangapazham,  Rajesh  L., Anuj  Sharma,  and Radha  K. Maheshwari.  "Beneficial  role of curcumin in  
skin diseases."  The Molecular  Targets  and Therapeutic Uses  of Curcumin  in Health  and Disease . 
Springer  US, 2007. 343 -357. 