IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  1 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
  
PROTOCOL  TITLE:  
Phase 2 development of a spoken language biomarker of cognitive impairment in  
Parkinson’s  disease.  
 
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR:  
Angela  Roberts,  Ph.D.  
Assistant  Professor  
Communication  Sciences  and Disorders  
 
CO-INVESTIGATOR:  
Dr. Tanya  Simuni,  Northwestern  University  
Dr. Leora  Cherney,  Northwestern  University  and Shirley  Ryan  AbilityLab  
 
STUDENT  INVESTIGATOR:  
N/A 
 
VERSION  DATE:  
November  17, 2021  
 
1.0 Purpose  of the study:  
 
Aim 1 will characterize PD -MCI (Parkinson’s disease mild cognitive impairment),  
PDN (Parkinson’s disease without cognitive impairment), and HA (healthy adult)  
spoken  discourse,  cognitive,  and motor  speech  profiles.  Phase  2 biomarker  
development  requires  robustly  characterized  cohorts  in which  to test candidate  
biomarkers. Using a standardized battery of cognitive, language, and motor speech tests  
PD participants will be assigned to PD -MCI (single/multi -domain) or PDN groups. We  
propose  collecting  spoken  discourse  samples  using  standardized  elicitation  protocols.  The 
same tasks will be extracted from the extant HA database. Researchers will transcribe,  
code, and analyze discourse samples. Group differences (including sub -analyses for  
single and mult i-domain MCI subtypes), elicitation stimuli effects, and group x stimuli  
interactions  will be examined  using  multivariate  and mixed -design  ANOVA  procedures.  
 
Aim 2 will develop  and evaluate  the classification  accuracy  of an optimally  weighted  
discourse  classification  function  for PD-MCI and PDN.  We propose  using  discriminant  
function analysis to identify an optimized composite variable that best predicts PD -MCI,  
PDN,  and HA group  membership.  Sensitivity/specificity  analyses,  positive/negative  
predictive  values,  and receiver  operating  characteristic  curves  will be used  to evaluate  the 
discourse  classification  function properties.  
 
The primary endpoint is an optimally weighted discourse function that can classify PD - 
MCI with > 80% sensitivity/specificity.  
 
2.0 Background  / Literature  Review  / Rationale  for the study:  
 
Individuals with Parkinson’s disease (PD) have a 6 -fold increased risk of dementia.1 PD 
mild cognitive  impairment  (PD-MCI)  is thought  to be a transitional  state  to dementia  for 
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  2 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 many of those affected.1-2 Difficulties monitoring early cognitive impairments, and  
concomitant  delays  in treatment  initiation,  are major  barriers  to the accurate  
diagnosis of and the development of interventions for cognitive impairments in PD.3-5 A 
biomarker  is any characteristic  that can be objectively  measured  and indicates  
normal/pathogenic processes or responses to therapeutic interventions.6 Biomarkers can  
be genetic markers, neural markers, and observable behaviors.6 In the absence of  
neuropsychological findings, early dementia can still be detected in spoken discourse.7-10 
Thus,  a spoken  discourse  biomarker  can be a valuable  supplement  to extant  
neuropsychological evaluation for monitoring cognitive -linguistic changes in real  
world environments . The long -term objective of this research is to improve the early  
and accurate  diagnosis of  PD cognitive  impairment with a reliable  spoken  discourse  
biomarker . Research  shows  that discourse  features  including  grammar  errors,  information  
content/efficiency, coherence, and verbal disfluencies hold promise for detecting PD  
cognitive impairments.14-28 Additionally, our pilot suggests that an optimally weighted  
composite variable, and no one single variable, is best able to discriminate PD spo ken 
discourse.  A major  barrier  is the absence  of a spoken  discourse  biomarker  that has been  
rigorously developed and tested on a meticulously -characterized cohort of PD -MCI, PD  
without cognitive impairment (PDN), and healthy adults (HA). Using the Fit -for-Purpose  
framework, the goal of the proposed research is to complete a Phase 2 spoken  
discour se biomarker study .29 The overarching hypothesis is that PD -MCI and PDN  
will have unique profiles of spoken discourse impairments that are distinguishable from  
each  other and from HA.  
 
3.0 Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria:  
 
Only individuals with PD will be new ly recruited and enrolled as part of the study . 
Healthy  adult  data will be extracted  from extant  databases  (publicly  available)  from NIH- 
funded  studies.  
 
Inclusion  Criteria  Person  with Parkinson’s  disease  without  cognitive  impairment  
• Age 50-90 years  
• Diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (UK Brain Bank criteria) made by a  
movement  disorders specialist  
• Under the care of a movement disorders specialist for a minimum of 1 -year 
duration  
• Native  monolingual  English  speaker  
• Hoehn  & Yahr  score  between  1.5 and 4 
• Grade  10 education,  or higher  
• Sufficient  vision  and hearing  (aided  or unaided)  for all experiment  tasks  
• Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  (or MoCA -converted  MMSE  score)  greater  than 
or equal to 25  
• No subjective  complaints  of cognitive  difficulty  or word  finding  issues  
 
Inclusion  Criteria  Person  with Parkinson’s  disease  mild cognitive  impairment  
• Age 50-90 years  
• Diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (UK Brain Bank criteria) made by a  
movement  disorders specialist  
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  3 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 • Under the care of a movement disorders specialist for a minimum of 1 -year 
duration  
• Native  monolingual  English  speaker  
• Hoehn  & Yahr  score  between  1.5 and 4 
• Grade  10 education,  or higher  
• Sufficient  vision  and hearing  (aided  or unaided)  for all experiment  tasks 
• Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  (or MoCA -converted  MMSE  score)  greater  than 
or equal to 17  
• Subjective complaints of cognitive difficulty or word finding issues, without  
significant  impact on  activities of  daily living  
 
Inclusion  Healthy  Adults  (from  extant  data base  – no new recruiting ) 
• Age 50-90 years  
• Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  (or MoCA -converted  MMSE  score)  greater  than 
or equal to 26  
• Native  monolingual  English  speaker  
• Grade  10 education,  or higher  
• Sufficient  vision  and hearing  (aided  or unaided)  for all experiment  tasks  
 
Exclusion  Criteria  Neurological  injury  or disease  (other  than PD for the PD cohort)  
• History  of unmanaged  or untreated  depression  or major  psychiatric  illness  
• History  of deep  brain  stimulation  surgery  (DBS)  
• Diagnosis  of Dementia  with Lewy  Bodies  
 
Hearing  and Vision  Screening . PD participants  will complete  the protocol  using  their 
typical vision and hearing devices. PD participants with pure tone averages > 41 dB  
(either ear), who do not have their own assiste d listening device, will be fitted with a  
personal  amplifier  only during  test/task  instructions  and test item presentation.  
Participants  will complete  vision  acuity  and field screening  tasks  to confirm  sufficient  
visual  acuity  (aided  or unaided)  and in-tact visual  fields  for the discourse  tasks.  
 
4.0 Sample  Size:  
 
We will enroll 86 PD participants (43 individuals with PD and normal cognition and 43  
individuals with PD mild cognitive impairment).  Data from 43 age/education/sex  
matched  HA will be sample d from an extant repository.  
 
Sample  sizes  for ANOVA  and DFA were  calculated  using  G*Power.  For Aim 1, a sample  
of 129 participants for MANOVA procedures with 3 IVs (PD -MCI, PDN, HA), 15  
dependent variables  (6 canonical variables),  and up to 3 covariates  will detect a  
minimum of2 of 0.16 (medium -sized effects) with power of 0.90, and α=0.05. The  
available  effect  size estimates  for the 8 candidate  discourse  variables  range  from f2 of 
0.33 to 0.50 (medium to large effects). With the smallest anticipated effect size based on  
our pilot data ( f2 =.33) 129 participants in a mixed ANOVA with 2 IVs (Group [3 levels])  
and Task [2 levels])  with up to 2 covariates  will yield power  of 0.86,  α=0.05.  At the 
highest estimated effect size ( f2 =.50), the same sample size will yield power of 0.99,  
α=0.05.  For Aim 2, DFA procedures  with 3 groups  and 8 discourse  variables  with 129 
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  4 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 participants will detect f2 of .10 (small -medium effects) with power of 0.90, α=0.05 and  
power of 0.85, if α=0.025. For the sensitivity and specificity analyses a sample of 129  
participants will detect sensitivity and specificity values of 0.83 or higher with a 90%  
confidence  interval  precision  of 0.10,  given  an expected  disease  (PD-MCI)  preva lence  of 
30%, a conservative prevalence estimate. This precision level is consistent with  
guidelines  for Phase 2  studies.  
 
5.0 Research  Locations:  
 
New Data  Collection  
All data collection will take place at Northwestern University, Evanston campus, the  
Northwestern University Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders flexible  
laboratory  research  space  located  in Abbott  Hall on the Chicago  campus,  or alternativel y 
in participant homes through in -person or virtual visits if individuals are not able to  
physically  travel to our  locations.  
 
Data will be collected in a dedicated research space (or participant home). Data will be  
collected in a low distraction, accessib le environment specifically designed for the  
collection of discourse and neuropsychology testing data.  If data are collected in a  
participant’s home, efforts will be made to create a low -distraction quiet environment  
consistent  with the research  spaces  located on the Evanston  and Chicago  campuses.  
 
Data will also be collected virtually through Zoom videoconferencing. Similar efforts to in - 
person data collection in participants’ homes will be made to replicate low -distraction  
environments consistent with the research spaces on the Evanston and Chicago  
campuses. A HIPAA -compliant, end -to-end encrypted version of Zoom will be used for  
study vi sits to comply with strict personal health information protection guidelines. If  
participants do not have access to a  personal computer capable of running the  
necessary videoconferencing software, a microphone for audio recording, or a webcam  
for videoreco rding  we mail or drop off necessary  hardware  to their homes.  
 
Extant  Data  Collection  (Healthy  Adult  data)  
Demographic data and neuropsychology testing measures for the healthy control sample  
will be secured from an extant dataset in a secure repository ICP SR 3664 (Harris Wright,  
Heather, and Capilouto, Gilson J. Discourse Processing in Healthy Aging in the United  
States. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter -university Consortium for Political and Social Research  
[distributor], 2017 -03-02. https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR36634.v1 ). Audio and video files  
of spoken discourse samples for the same study (study of normal aging and discourse)  
are curated with the Carolina Conversations Collection and are available for use in  
research  with an approved  IRB (http://carolinaconversations.musc.edu/about/ ). 
 
6.0 Multiple  sites:  
 
Shirley Ryan AbilityLab  – Dr. Leora Cherney who has faculty appointments at both NU  
Evanston (Communication Sciences and Disorders) and the Shirley Ryan AbilityLab is a  
co-investigator.  Dr. Cherney’s involvement is limited to providing mentorship to the PI  
on grant administratio n, serving in a consultative role for resolving discourse coding  
ambiguities, and supporting the PI in interpreting the study results. While Dr. Cherney  
may have  a limited  role in recruiting  participants  with Parkinson’s  disease,  no data will 
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  5 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 be collected from, nor will any health records be required from, the Shirley Ryan  
AbilityLab.  
 
Feinberg  – Dr. Tanya Simuni is on faculty at Feinberg. Dr. Simuni will be involved with  
recruiting (not enrolling) participants. She will also be involved with the design of the  
study and the interpretation of the results. Dr. Simuni will also provide medical guid ance  
and PD expertise as required during the study. The study does not require access to  
patient  records at NMH.  
 
7.0 Reliance  Agreements/Single  IRB:  
 
NU is the IRB of record for both the Shirley Ryan AbilityLab and Feinberg.  To the PIs  
knowledge  no additional  IRB permissions  or reliance  agreements  are required.  
 
8.0 Procedures  Involved:  
 
The proposed  study  is not a clinical  trial and was not deemed  as such by the NIH. 
 
C. APPROACH  
 
Observational, cross -sectional study with three cohorts: healthy older adults, individuals  
with Parkinson’s disease without cognitive impairment, and individuals with Parkinson’s  
disease  with mild cognitive impairment.  
 
Data  Sources  
Measures collected on all PD participants . Only PD participants will be recruited  
locally.  All healthy  control  data will be extracted  from extant  databases  available  through  
data sharing agreements or publicly accessible datasets. All measures will be audio and  
video recorded in order to facilitate off -line data analysis for standardized measures and  
orthographic tran scription of discourse samples. If the participant has completed any of  
the neuropsychological testing measures in our lab within the last 6 -months, and a  
suitable alternate version of that test is not available, we will use their previous data in  
order to  reduce participant burden and data contamination (e.g., learning effects from  
previous  test administrations).  
 
In the PD group measures will be collected over 1 or 2 visits (conducted within a 4 -week  
window), depending on participant fatigue levels/schedu ling. Each participant’s total  
involvement is anticipated at 3 to 3.5 hours in duration. The typical participant is  
anticipated  to complete the  protocol in one  visit. 
 
All tests will be administered by trained research staff. All measures will be administered  
and scored  in accordance  with their published  manuals/scoring  instructions.  
 
Participants  may complete  the protocol  in our Evanston  lab, satellite  lab in Abbott  Hall, 
or their home  through  in-person  or remote  visits.  Participants  will be able to select  a time 
of day of their  choosing for completing  the protocol.  
 
The total duration  of the research  project  is estimated  at 36 months.  
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  6 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 The study visit will be conducted in two stages: a screening portion and the experiment  
portion. With the exception of the cognitive testing, hearing testing, and vision testing all  
other inclusion criteria will be evaluated during the initial phone, email , or in -person  
contact  with the participant  when  interest  in the study  is expressed.  
 
Participants  will receive  reminder  calls regarding  upcoming  appointments.  These  will 
typically  occur  within  72 hours  of the scheduled  appointment.  During  the telephone  
 
Descriptive  Variables  
Geriatric Depression Scale – brief depression screening tool. Depression can interact with  
language  production abilities.  
MDS -Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale – measure of PD motor symptoms. Completed  
through physical  exam by  a certified  research assistant  or the PI.  
Hoehn  and Yahr  scale  – PD staging  tool completed  as part of the motor  exam  
Communication Participation  Item Bank measure – pen and paper tool measuring communication  
quality  of life  
reminder call, staff members will complete the Participant/Visitor health screener for  
(attached to protocol). If participants answer ‘yes’ to any item, staff members will request  
that their study visit be rescheduled at a time that is convenient for the participant. If the  
participant answers ‘yes’ to any of the questions under the ‘Travel’  heading then they will  
be provided with the COVID -19 contact information handout (attached). This information  
will be emailed to the participant if required.  Information will also be provided over the  
telephone  including  the email  and telephone  contacts  for the Illinois  Department  of Public  
Health.  
 
If the participant  cannot  be contacted  by telephone,  the screening  form can be completed  
in person at the time of the study visit (but prior to initiating any substantial participant  
contact).  Visitor s who accompany the participant will also be asked to complete a health  
screener,  if they intend  to wait in the research  lab lobby  space.  Health  screening  tools  will 
be stored in a locked filing cabinet in the PIs lab for a period of 60 days following the  
participant’s visit. Following this period, forms will be shredded using secure shredding  
boxes  located  in the NUCASLL  clinic/PIs  home department  (CSD).  
 
During the screening portion  of the visit, participants will complete the Montreal  
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), an audiometric hearing assessment, and a vision  
screening using a Snellen eye chart.  Participants meeting the inclusion criteria for the  
study will advance immediately to the experiment tasks. Those not meeting the inclusion  
criteria will be provided summary results, including the criteria that they did not meet  
(i.e., cognition, hearing, vision) and will be advised to discuss these results with their  
healthc are team.  
 
During  the experiment  portion  of the visit participants  will complete  the following  tasks:  
 
Descriptive  and Neuropsychological  Testing  Measures  – The measures  in the table  below  
are standard  descriptive  measures  for the population  and the research  aims  under  study.  
These are all standard clinical measures in PD clinical practice. Standardized language  
and cognitive neuropsychological measures will be used to stratify participants into PD - 
MCI and PD normal cognition groups using the Movemen t Disorders Society Task Force  
published  guidelines.  
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  7 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
  
Sentence  Intelligibility  Test (SIT-5). Set of 11-sentences  generated  for each  participant.  Sentences  
are phonetically  balanced  and are read aloud  by the participant.  Measure  of speech  intelligibility  
Standardized  oral reading  passage  (speech  rate and intelligibility)  
Brief motor  speech  exam  
Demographic  form (attached)  
National  Adult  Reading  Test 
Neuropsychological  Measures  Used  in Primary  Analyses  and to Classify  Participants  into 
MCI-PD from PDN  (no cognitive impairment) groups  
Trail Making  Test-A (In-person  testing)  
Trail Making  Test-B (In person  testing)  
10-points  Clock  Drawing  Test + Clock  copying  
Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test from the Arizona Battery of Communication Disorders of  
Dementia  (In-person testing)  
Brief Visuospatial  Memory  Test-Revised  
Semantic  Fluency -animals  
Digit span  forward  and backward  
Stroop  Color -word  Interference  
Boston  Naming  Test (30-item version)  
Verb  Naming  Subtest  – Northwestern  Assessment  of Verbs  and Sentences  
Sentence  Production  Priming  subtest  of the Northwestern  Assessment  of Verbs  and Sentences  
Pyramids  and Palm  Trees  Test - object  semantics  
CERAD  10-Word  List (Remote  testing)  
Discourse  Sampling  (main  study  outcome  measure)  
Using standardized spoken discourse elicitation stimuli and instructions, participants will  
be asked  to generate  a story  about  a series of  events  occurring  in: 1)  a series  of six  
black  and white  line drawings  and 2) a wordless  picture  book.  Participants  will generate  
a maximum of four spoken discourse samples. Each discourse sample is estimated at 2  
to 4 minutes in length. Audio files will be transc ribed using a HIPAA compliant  
transcription  service/software.  Once  transcribed,  files will be coded  in Dr. Roberts’  lab for 
a number of discourse (e.g., story structure, information content), speech (e.g., pauses,  
number  of words),  and language  variables  (e.g., grammar/syntax).  
 
Proposed  Data  Analysis  
Aim 1 
Multivariate ANOVA statistical procedures will be used to examine group differences on  
neuropsychological test measures and spoken discourse measures. Follow -up 
univariate ANOVAs and Tukey’s post -hoc tests will be used to further examine  
significant individual variables from the multivariate testing and to examine group  
contrasts (healthy co ntrols, PD without cognitive impairment, and PD -MCI).  If required  
based on group differences in descriptive variables age, sex, depression measure  
scores,  and education will  be entered as  covariates.  
Aim 2 
The spoken discourse measure data will be used in a canonical discriminant function  
analysis (DFA) to identify the optimal discourse classification functions that separate  
groups.  DFA is a multivariate  procedure  that is used  to predict  group  membership.  In our 
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  8 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 case, where there are > 2 diagn ostic groups, Wilks’ lambda values, in a stepwise  
approach,  will be used  to identify  the final set of variables  that account  for the maximal  
variance for group differences. This step will eliminate variables that do not contribute  
significantly to group variance. Redundant variables will also be deleted.  The DFA  
approach will yield multiple potential models that will be evaluated for classifica tion 
accuracy using sensitivity and specificity analyses. Receiver operating characteristic  
curves will be used to evaluate discriminant function accuracies as discrimination  
thresholds vary.  
 
Vulnerable  Populations  
All consent procedures for individuals w ith cognitive impairment will be conducted by  
individuals who are experienced in facilitating communication with individuals who have  
communication and cognitive difficulties. Family members of those with cognitive  
impairment may be present during the cons ent process if requested. The study will  
recruit  individuals  with normal  cognition  and those  with mild cognitive  impairment.  While  
it is possible that we will need to use alternate consent procedures, the mild severity of  
cognitive issues in this populatio n, leads us to anticipate that participants will be able to  
provide their own consent (with supported communication).  We anticipate only rare  
cases  where this will not be  true. 
 
9.0 Incomplete  Disclosure  or Deception:  
 
N/A 
 
10.0 Recruitment  Methods:  
Participants will be recruited through their primary care provider (or associated clinic),  
through movement disorders specialists (or associated clinic), through community -based  
support groups/wellness programs that serve individuals with Parkinso n’s disease,  
through formal research participation registries, through community outreach activities  
(e.g., health fairs, education events), through social media/community postings, and  
through  senior  community  living  facilities.  A variety  of methods  including direct  referral  
by a health care professional, flyers, on -line advertising (PI’s website and approved  
social media), and recruiting events held at local support groups/wellness centers will be  
used to optimize recruitment. Participants recruited throu gh support/wellness groups or  
other community resources will contact the PI or study coordinator/team member directly  
to confirm their interest in the study and will be invited to participate if they meet the  
eligibility criteria. Only materials approved b y the IRB at Northwestern University will be  
used.  
 
11.0 Consent  Process:  
Written consent will be obtained from all participants completing in -person assessments,  
or their surrogate decision makers (when  appropriate). Participants  completing the  
virtual assessment may provide either written or verbal consent, based on their  
preference and ease of using the REDCap interface.  Consent will be obtained by a  
research study team member and will be secured in one of the three potential stu dy 
locations: PI’s lab on the Evanston campus, satellite lab in Abbott Hall, or the  
participant’s home.  When requested, consent documents may be sent to the participant  
ahead of their scheduled screening appointment for advanced review. If enrolled in the  
remote  protocol,  participants  will be scheduled  for two videoconferencing  sessions.  The 
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  9 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 first session will be held prior to their study visit to acquire consent from the participant. If 
completing the protocol remotely, and written consent is the chosen mode of providing  
consent,  consent forms will be sent to participants through email and e -consent will be  
received through a REDCap survey during their first study visit before any tests are  
administered. Otherwise, if choosing verbal consent, consent will be obtained, noted on  
the consent  form, and  captured in  the recording  of the video  conference session.  
 
The consent process indicates that participation is voluntary and that he/she has the  
right to withdraw from the study at any time or to refuse any procedure within the study.  
Risks and benefits of the study are conveyed in a  written consent document and also  
described  orally during  the consent process.  
 
Multi -modality communication supports are used by trained personnel (speech -language  
pathologists or experienced research staff) who are experienced with facilitating  
communic ation in individuals with cognitive and language impairments in order to  
facilitate  a participant’s  ability  to understand  the consent  documents.  
 
After explaining the study protocol, participants will be interviewed to assess their  
understanding of the stu dy aims, the requirements of the study protocol, potential risks,  
potential benefits, that participation is voluntary, and that they are able to withdraw at  
any time using a lab -developed questionnaire for obtaining informed consent from  
individuals with c ognitive impairments (see uploaded documents).  If potential  
participants are not able to answer these questions, the research team will provide  
further education to raise their understanding to sufficient levels for making an informed  
consent about study p articipation. Procedures may include repeating information,  
simplification of language form/content, segmenting content into small units of  
information, and multi -modal communication support (e.g., pictures, gestures). The  
estimated duration of the consent  process is between 20 and 30 minutes, but this is  
highly  variable  across individuals.  
 
It is likely that participants will be able to provide their own consent. However, if not able  
to do so, participants may choose to have another party sign/ provide cons ent on their  
behalf.  This individual would be the authorized decision maker for the affected person  
(e.g.,  spouse, child, or SDM  if appropriate).  
 
HIPAA  consent  is not applicable.  
 
12.0 Financial  Compensation:  
Participants will have no direct cost associated with the study. Participant parking will be  
covered  if they are required  to travel  to the downtown  or Evanston  lab spaces.  
Participants will be compensated in the form of a $25.00 Stored Value Card (purchase d 
through NU Research Services) to account for time and travel costs. Stored Value Cards  
will be provided  at the conclusion  of the study  protocol  (typically  one study  visit).  
Compensation  will not be prorated.  
 
13.0 Audio/Video  Recording/Photography  
Neuropsychological  testing  will be audio  and video  recorded.  This is essential  because:  
a) Some items in these tests require off -line assessment to verify participant  
responses  and to ensure  rigorous  scoring  of the test measures  used  to stratify  
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  10 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 participants. Audio and video recordings allow us to disambiguate any  
questionable  responses.  
b) As part of our research  protocols,  we double -score  a percentage  of the test 
measures  to increase the  rigor of the  data set.  
c) Audio and Video recordings are reviewed regularly, as part of the study protocol,  
to assess  test administration  fidelity  throughout  the duration  of the study.  
d) Consenting  to the use of audio  and video  recordings  of the neuropsychological  
testing for  the pur poses  of data analysis  is mandatory.  
 
Spoken  discourse  samples  will be audio  and video  recorded.  This is essential  because:  
a) The primary  analyses  conducted  on these  data require  off-line orthographic  
transcription and  fine-grain  coding  of linguistic  and speech  errors.  
b) Audio  and video  recording  of discourse  samples  is a standard  procedure  for 
discourse analysis research and considered an essential step in rigorous  
research.  
c) Consenting  to the use of audio  and video  recordings  of the discourse  data for the 
purpose  of data analysis is  mandatory.  
 
Presentations  (optional)  
a) Audio recordings only (no video) of the discourse samples only may be used for  
presentations where research generated from these recordings is being  
presented. There are elements of these analyses (e.g., pausing, verbal  
disfluencies, speech errors) that are best exemplified through the original source  
records  (i.e., audio  recordings)  vs. the orthographic  transcription.  
b) When  used  for illustrating  study  results/findings,  audio  recordings  will not be 
distributed to the audience broadly. They will be played as part of the  
presentation, but the audio file will not be embedded into the slide deck or  
distributed  in any  way to  the attendees.  
c) Participants  will be allowed  to opt out of the use of audio  record ings for 
presentations.  This is not a mandatory  element  of the study.  
 
Audio and video recordings will be stored on the LCAN (Dr. Roberts’) research server.  
Only approved study personnel (listed on the IRB application) will have access to the  
audio and vid eo recordings. Recordings will be stored for a duration of at least 7 -years  
(and potentially longer) following the end of the NIH grant funding period.  When  
destroyed,  audio  and video  recordings  will be destroyed  using  the most  up-to-date and 
secure procedures for doing so at the time of their destruction and will be completed in  
consultation  with local University IT  services.  
 
14.0 Potential  Benefits  to Participants:  
 
Although there is no direct benefit to participants, they and their families  often consider  
us an unbiased source of disease -related education on communication impairments in  
Parkinson’s disease. When requested, our team is able to provide contacts to  
participants for foundations and agencies that focus on Parkinson’s disease educ ation  
(e.g., local support groups, printed education materials, national/local education events  
and materials).  
15.0 Risks  to Participants:  
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  11 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 The risks involved with this study are not substantially different from those associated  
with typical clinic visits. Participants may experience fatigue owing to the duration of the  
protocol. If enrolled in the remote protocol, participants may experience fatigue  
commonly associated with using videoconferencing software for extended periods of  
time. In our  experience administering a similar duration neuropsychological assessment  
protocol  within  the Ontario  Neurodegeneration  Diseases  Initiative,  fewer  than 5% of 160 
PD participants required two  data collection  visits.  
 
Some participants may experience a sense of emotional discomfort from being  
video/audio recorded during these sessions. Video and audio recording are routine  
during  Parkinson’s -disease  related  clinical sessions.  
 
We anticipate that all participants with cognitive impairments will be aware that they  
have cognitive issues. However, it is possible that our testing may reveal deficits of  
which the participant was previously unaware and thus may present a potential risk  of 
distress  associated with this  concern.  
 
Some participants may perceive a sense of nervousness when completing mood and  
cognitive testing, particularly the depression measure. Participants will be able to refuse  
any task that makes  them uncomfortable.  
 
There  are no anticipated  physical  risks associated  with this study.  
 
While efforts will be taken to protect participant confidentiality, there is always a risk that  
confidentiality may be breached. The primary risk of breaching confidentiality in the  
curre nt study  arises  from the need  to audio/video  record  data collection  sessions.  
 
There  are no anticipated  social  or legal  risks.  
 
There are no costs associated with the study. Participants’ parking will be covered for all  
visits. We will also provide a nominal study participation fee to help accommodate for  
travel  and time -related  expenses.  
 
Risk level . The overall risk level is low and impact to participants is anticipated to be  
minimal. This assessment is based on a number of projects in the PI’s lab that employ  
similar  procedures, research designs,  and methods.  
 
Minimizing  Risks . 
Fatigue . To minimize fatigue, participants will be o ffered rest breaks every 60 minutes.  
However,  participants  may request  and be granted  a rest break  at any time.  If the testing  
session is too long for some participants, we will break testing into two data collection  
visits. Participants will be allowed to select their ‘best’ time of day for their data collection  
session. This step will allow participants to complete the protocol at their typical peak  
performance time of day. The protocol will be conducted with PD participants in their ‘on’  
medication state. Doing so will promote participant comfort and minimize mobility/pain  
risks associated with ‘off’ medication states. When requ ired, participants will be provided  
with a break for  taking medications  during  the data  collection  session.  
 
Emotional discomfort audio/video recording . Some participants may experience a  
sense  of emotional  discomfort  from being  video/audio  recorded  during  these  sessions.  
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  12 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 To minimize any sense of emotional discomfort, the audio/video recording equipment will  
be positioned  discretely  in the  lab (or home)  environment.  
 
Unmasking of previously unknown deficits or emotional distress associated with  
completing measures of cognition/depression . In cases where the participant  
demonstrates (or voices) emotional distress over the challenges of living with  
communication, mood, o r cognitive difficulties or where specific tests trigger unpleasant  
feelings over concerns with these issues, appropriate counseling will be provided by the  
PI (a SLP or the medical consultant Dr. Simuni). Issues falling outside of the PI’s scope  
of practi ce (e.g., indicators of significant depression) will be discussed with Dr. Simuni  
and further follow -up planned. In cases where a participant fails the cognition, vision,  
and/or hearing screenings they will be provided with a summary of these findings that  
they can share with their healthcare team to facilitate appropriate follow -up. In cases,  
where  risk of self-harm  (including  suicidal  ideations)  or a Geriatric  Depression  Screening  
score is > 10 participants will be provided with a Mental Health recommenda tion form  
based on the NIH standard (see attached). Participants at elevated risk for self -harm  
(frank voicing of suicidal ideations or plans to self -harm) will be referred to the nearest  
emergency  room  (Northshore  Evanston  Hospital),  in addition  to the other procedures.  
 
Potential  Confidentiality  Breaches . See below  
 
Withdrawing from the Study.  Consent is voluntary. A participant is free to withdraw from  
the study  at any point  in time.  If a participant  withdraws  from the study,  a summary  of their 
treatment progress (up to the point of withdrawal) will remain in the research record and  
may be included in the analysis. However, no further data will be collected. The data  
collected  from the participants  up and until the point  of withdrawal  will remain  in the study.  
 
 
16.0 Provisions to Protect the Privacy and Confidentiality of  
Participants  and the Research  Data:  
 
All study  procedures  will be conducted  in private  research/clinical  facilities  with no 
general  public access.  
 
To ensure that participants f eel comfortable during the administration of study tasks,  
individuals collecting data will be experienced study team members from the PI’s lab.  
They have experience interacting with older adults and those with communication  
difficulties. Task instructions will be provided both verbally and in writing to elevate  
participant understanding, and to minimize any perceived or real intrusion into privacy.  
Questions posed as part of the study are limited in intrusiveness. All interviews will be  
conducted in a relax ed environment without time pressure for responding. Participants  
may refuse to provide a response to a question and or to complete any task asked of  
them.  
 
Only research team members directly involved with the project will have access to  
participant data.  Data (specifically any audio files) will be accessed from a secure  
research server or from the project -specific REDCap database using a secure  
Northwestern  University network  access.  
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  13 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 At times, participants may request, or we may have need to, share information with the  
participant’s medical team (e.g., indication of severe depression).  In these unusual  
circumstances,  we will obtain  explicit  permission  from the participant  to do so. 
 
Protection  of source  materials  
Pen and paper test forms, questionnaires, demographic history forms . These  
source materials will be labelled using unique participant numbers that do not contain  
any personal health information. All information will be entere d into, stored, and  
accessed  via a study -specific  REDCap  database.  Only study  personnel  will have  access  
to the database. Data will be entered into fillable fields, and original .pdf forms of all  
measures  uploaded  to the  secure REDCap  database for  storage.  
 
If enrolled in the remote protocol, participants will be mailed paper test forms for  
demographic measures through a local mail courier to be filled out after they have been  
consented  and before  their study  visit. Participants  will then mail these  forms  back to the 
main lab location on Northwestern’s Evanston campus in a prepaid envelope. As soon  
as the paper measures arrive at the Evanston campus, research personnel will handle  
the forms  in the same  manner  as paper  measures  from the in-person  protocol.  
 
Audio/Video files . These source materials will be labelled using unique participant  
numbers that do not contain any personal health information. This will facilitate linking  
the audio/video data to the other source materials collected from participants. All  study  
related audio/video recordings will be archived on the PI’s secure research server (see  
Facilities document).  
 
Orthographic transcription will be completed using a combination of automated and post - 
automated manual correction procedures. Only the a udio files (no video) will be used in  
any of the automated applications. The automated analysis application selected for this  
project is a HIPAA compliant service. Specific mechanisms will be used to ensure data  
safety during this process including secure physical access, authenticated access  
privileges and secure file transfer, audit trails, and data encryption through upload and  
download processes (on both ends of the data management chain) using 128 -bit 
encryption and 128 -bit SSL encryption. Once transcribed orthographic representations of  
the audio files will be  realigned with the video  files (stored only on  PI Roberts’ server)  
and then used in the linguistic coding and analysis procedures. All secondary  file editing  
(post automatic transcription) and coding of the orthographic transcriptions will be  
handled  in Dr. Roberts’  lab by trained, qualified  research  personnel.  
 
For all audio/video recordings taking place in participant homes (if participant is un able 
to come into the lab), care will be taken in the recording setup to scan and remove from  
the recording environment any materials that may reveal personal health information  
(e.g., mail with an address label, medical visit reminder), pictures of other individuals not  
consented into the study (e.g., pictures of children), and any other similar potential  
identifying  materials.  
 
Audio and video recording for the virtual protocol will be done through a HIPAA  
compliant, encrypted videoconferencing software u sing a lab supplied microphone and  
webcam.  Recording  equipment  will be dropped  off at participants’  homes  if they are local 
to the area or mailed to participants with a prepaid return label through a courier service.  
Audio  and video  recordings  will be stored  on the research  administrator’s  security - 
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  14 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 compliant,  Northwestern  University  provided  computer  and then transferred  to the 
secure  lab server after each session.  
 
Orthographic transcriptions.  The discourse elicitation tasks used in the protocol have  
been used previously in the PI’s lab. These stimuli elicit stories about the characters  
portrayed in the picture stimuli. In our experience, it is very rare that individuals add or  
augment these sto ries with personal information. However, if this does occur, we will  
redact  all personally  identifying  comments  from the orthographically  transcribed  files. 
 
Data handling. Data from paper forms of tests/tasks will be entered into REDCap within  
72 hours of  data collection. Once the data are entered into REDCap, verified, and all  
reliability testing completed the original paper versions of the forms will be stored in a  
locked filing cabinet in the PI’s lab located at Northwestern University.  Paper copies of  
REDCap stored data will be stored for 7 years following the conclusion of the funding  
period and then destroyed using HIPAA compliant receptacles and procedures located  
in the Northwestern  University  Center  for Audiology  Speech  Language  and Learning.  
 
Audio/video  files will be stored  on Dr. Roberts’  secure  lab research  server  maintained  by 
Northwestern University and accessible only by those with access through the study. All  
audio and video recordings will be made using equipment that has re dundant recording  
channels  (two copies  of all data  files) to minimize  data loss.  
 
To further minimize confidentiality breaches, audio/video files collected in the lab space  
in Abbott Hall will be uploaded to the LCAN (Dr. Roberts) secure research server pr ior to  
the study team returning to the Evanston campus. SD drives used to collect the  
audio/video data will be erased prior to transporting to the Evanston campus. Paper test  
forms (de -identified) and consent forms will be transported in a locked case that  will 
remain in the possession of the study team member until the information can be secured  
in the PI’s main lab located on the Evanston campus.  The same procedures will be  
followed when data are collected in the participant’s home with the exception of t he 
audio/video files. Uploading data from the participant’s home is not feasible based on a)  
the lack of access to a secure server and b) the time required to upload data files.  In 
these cases, we will encrypt the audio/video data prior to leaving the participant’s home  
and transport it in an encrypted format to the Evanston campus using the same locked  
case  for transporting  paper  forms.  
 
Basic personal information (e.g., first name,  contact information) will be collected for the  
purposes of scheduling study visits. This information will be stored electronically on the  
LCAN server, accessed only by lab personnel, and will not be linked to the unique  
participant  identifiers.  
 
Given the  possibility that individuals may need to complete data collection in their homes  
(e.g., weather, mobility issues), we may need to retain information such as address and  
phone numbers to facilitate study logistics. These data will be stored on the secure l ab 
server. Research staff in the ‘field’ will have access to this information but only when  
logging into the server using a secure Northwestern University VPN.  Study personnel  
may enter the address into a GPS based device for direction -finding purposes but  will be  
prohibited from storing the address or contact information in any identifiable manner on  
any portable  device  (e.g.,  cell phone).  Phone  devices  will be supplied  by the study.  
Following  the completion  of the study,  these  devices  will be ‘wiped’  and reset  to delete  
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  15 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 any cached files. Staff personnel will be prohibited from storing any identifiable  
information  on these  portable devices.  
17.0 Data  Monitoring  Plan  to Ensure  the Safety  of Participants:  
We will provide  training  to all personnel  who handle  data that includes  HIPAA  training,  
Good  Clinical  Practice  (GCP)  training  and Social  and Behavioral  Science  IRB training.  
 
Overall framework for safety monitoring . Adverse events (AE), serious adverse events  
(SAE),  unanticipated  problems,  unusual  participant  behavior,  and protocol  exceptions  will 
be documented in an online database (REDCap) after every session. Adverse events  
include: (a) participant psychological st ress (crying that last more than 5 minutes), (b) an  
episode of physical or verbal aggression and/or resistance by the participant or their  
accompanying  partner,  and (c) minor  injury  to the participant  or the research  staff member  
that does not require medi cal treatment. In this trial, serious adverse events include: (a)  
more  than minor  injury  to the participant  or the intervention  provider  that requires  any form 
of medical  treatment  and (b) hospitalization,  institutional  care,  or death  of a participant  due 
to natural  progression  of underlying  health  conditions  or accidental  injury  unrelated  to the 
study  protocol (e.g., automobile  accident).  
 
Frequency of monitoring . The PI (or her proxy designate) will receive an automatic email  
notification  each  time an AE or SAE report  is completed  in the study’s  electronic  
documentation system (REDCap). Additionally, aggregate safety and protocol exception  
monitoring  reports  will be gathered  weekly,  placed  into a central  document,  and reviewed  
by the PI during  weekly  research  meetings.  In consultation  with Dr. Simuni,  documentable  
action  plans  will be generated  from these  meetings  to minimize  future  safety  issues.  
 
Process for managing and reporting adverse events/protocol exceptions . After each visit,  
research staff will complete an on -line session log in which they are prompted to report if  
an adverse event or protocol exception occurred. AEs and SAEs are predefine d before  
the start of the study (as described above). Protocol exceptions are predefined as any  
variation  from the documented  study  procedures/IRB  approved  protocol.  Session  logs will 
be monitored weekly by the project coordinator and the PI (as noted abov e). After  
documenting the AE/SAE/protocol exception on the session log, staff members will be  
required  to complete  an AE/SAE/protocol  exception  survey  using  the study’s  REDCap  on- 
line documentation tool. The survey tool will prompt for all required report ing information.  
The PI (or her designate) will follow up on all AEs/SAEs by calling or emailing the  
participant within 24 hours. The PI (or her designate) will follow up with staff members  
regarding all protocol exception reports within 48 hours. Follow -up steps will also be  
documented in REDCap. Compliance to these steps will be monitored as part of weekly  
monitoring  procedures.  
 
The PI (or her designated  proxy)  will generate  reports  on the following  schedule:  
 
• Anticipated SAE reported within 48 hours of study’s knowledge to the IRB, with  
the exception that all deaths will be reported within 24 hours of study’s  
knowledge.  
• Unanticipated  SAE reported  within  48 hours  of study’s  knowledge  to the IRB. 
• All protocol exc eptions will be reported to Northwestern University’s IRB (using  
IRB approved processes)  within 7  days.  
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  16 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 Summary report of all other AEs/SAEs/protocol exceptions annually to the NIH Program  
Officer unless requested  at a higher  frequency.  
 
Cond itions  where  the research  team  may intervene.  Referrals  made  to outside  resources  
as a result of information discovered during the study (e.g., hearing loss, elevated  
depression screening scores) will be documented. Each case will be reviewed by the  
Participants  will be provided  written  documentation  of the concern  and will be encouraged  
to follow  up with their health  care practitioner  for further referrals.  
 
If a study  team  member  determines  that the study  protocol  (neuropsychological  testing  or 
discourse sampling) is too distressing for the participant (e.g., excessive crying, fatigue  
that is not recoverable  following  a break/rest)  then the protocol  will be terminated.  
 
Suicidal Ideation Plan.  Items on measures of depression (GDS) will be reviewed by  
research staff at the time of data collection for any indicators of suicidal ideations. If the  
participant screens positive for depression and/or self -identifies suicidal ideations during  
these meas ures (or at any time during the protocol), the PI (or her designate) and the  
study medical doctor (Collaborator: Simuni) will be notified immediately to determine  
appropriate follow -up (> 10 on the GDS). Before leaving the study visit, all participants  
failing the depression  screen  will be encouraged  to contact  their family  physician  and will 
be provided  with a  list of mental  health resources  (see attached).  
 
18.0 Data,  and if applicable,  Specimen  Banking:  
All raw datasets will be archived for a minimum duration of seven years after the  
completion  of this project  but will likely  be archived  for public  access  indefinitely  through  
the Inter -University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) at the  
University of Michigan. Data location and access procedures will be made available in  
any publications and presentations that are authored or co -authored by key  
investigators. Most data (video/audio data are exceptions) are collected and stored in  
de-identified formats. That is, no information regarding participant's identity is stored  
along with datasets. Each participant is assigned a participation code and demographic  
information is linked to the code, but the code is not linked to any personally identi fying  
information.  
 
For the audio/video recordings of the neuropsychological testing and spoken discourse  
samples, de -identification through masking the identity of participants’ voices would  
impact negatively on data analyses. For this reason, these data will not be shared  or 
archived in a public database. They will remain stored on the PI’s server for a minimum  
of 7-years.  
 
Analyzed orthographic transcripts and summary data from the spoken discourse  
samples  will be made  available  through  the NIH-funded  data repository.  
 
Summary data and individual item responses for the neuropsychological measures will  
be archived for researc her access. However, actual copies (i.e., pdfs or images) of the  
test forms  cannot  be made  available  due to publishers’  copyright  restrictions.  
 
We will document all data files using standardized, high -fidelity methods to increase  
efficiencies  in accessing  archived  data and in data sharing.  We will use the ICPSR  
IRB #: STU00209602 -MOD0016 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 12/10/2021  
Page  17 of 17 HRP -583 / v362020   
 Guide to Archiving, which defines industry standards for data archiving documentation  
(http://www.icpsr.u mich.edu/icpsrweb/content/deposit/guide/ ), to thoroughly  document  all 
data files and meet  data archiving standards.  
 
19.0 Data  Sharing:  
Data associated with the proposed research project will be shared by depositing these  
data at the Inter -University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) at the  
University of Michigan, which is an NIH -funded repository. Data documentation and  de- 
identified  data will be deposited  for sharing,  along  with participant  demographics,  
consistent  with applicable  laws and regulations.  Summary  data suitable  for meta -analysis  
and associated secondary analysis of data (if any), along with data content, f ormat, and  
organization,  will be available  at ICPSR.  Submitted  data will conform  to relevant  data and 
terminology standards. Data will be deposited into the ICPSR repository as soon as  
possible after the end of the 3 -year project period, but no later than 24 months following  
the completion  of the funded  project  period  or upon  acceptance  of the data for publication,  
whichever  is earlier.  
 
Requests for accessing these data will require approval by the PI (or her designate)  
through  the ICPSR.  Requests  will only be granted  to individuals  with IRB or similar  agency  
approval indicating that the requesting research has met all ethical requirements.  Only 
de-identified data will be made available to others. Audio/video recordings will not be  
shared.  
 
20.0 Qualifications  of Research  Team  to Conduct  the Research:  
The PI ha s a full -time tenure appointment with 40% dedicated research time. The PI is a  
trained speech -language pathologist with extensive experience working with the  
populations under study. Additionally, a part time research coordinator who is also a  
speech -langu age pathologist will be hired as part of the project budget. The graduate  
students who will be working with the project also has extensive experience with this  
population by virtue of lab training. The PI and Collaborator Cherney are both well  
versed in th e procedures used in the protocol (akin to typical clinical procedures),  
recording methods, and also facilitating communication with adults who have cognitive  
impairment. The procedures for facilitating consent (described earlier in the document)  
are well within Dr. Roberts’ clinical skill set. The analyses proposed are clinical  
measures used commonly in Dr. Roberts’ and Dr. Cherney’s research. Collaborator  
Simuni is a medical physician with expertise in Parkinson’s disease and will provide  
clinical  support  to the study protocol.  