tDCS for Increasing Exercise Adherence in Individuals with Elevated Depressive Symptoms  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  February 21, 2018   
Background  Depressive symptoms predict poor exercise adherence. (1, 2) (3),(4) (5-7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) and depression-specific characteristics (e.g., affect) are related to physical activity (PA) levels.  A cardinal symptom of depression is dysregulated affect – i.e., lower levels of positive affect and higher levels of negative affect (13, 14).  Positive affect has been consistently identified as a significant correlate of PA levels across a myriad of populations including: Parkinson’s (15), arthritis (16), ovarian cancer survivors (17), dementia (18), cardiovascular disease (1, 19), osteoporosis (20), knee patients (21), and college students (22, 23).  On the other hand, negative affect is inversely related to PA (1, 17, 21, 22, 24).  The dysregulation in affect seen in depression is particularly concerning when it comes to PA level. Those with elevated depressive symptoms are placed at a disadvantage for maintaining regular physical activity in the long-term.    Affective responses to exercise can influence exercise adherence.  While individuals almost universally “feel good” after engaging in PA(25), there is a fair amount of affective variability DURING exercise – some individuals increase in positive affect and others in negative affect (26-28).  In particular, increases in positive affect predict both intentions to engage in exercise(29) and actual exercise behavior (28, 30-33). While research on the affective experiences of exercise in those with depression has been limited, recent work suggests that those with a history of depression experience less of an increase in positive affect following PA(34).  Higher levels of depressive symptoms has also been associated with greater perceived physical exertion with exercise (35) and, in our own work, reduced PA enjoyment.  Therefore, if those with depression experience exercise as more challenging and less rewarding than nondepressed individuals, it can impact their likelihood of maintaining PA in the long-term.   While physiological cues overwhelm the affective experience at higher exercise intensities, cognitive factors (e.g., self-regulation, attentional bias) influence affect at lower intensities (dual mode theory; (36)). For  example, negative mood also appears to be interfere with obese, sedentary individuals’ ability to self-regulate physical activity resulting in lower levels of exercise participation (37).  Further the inability to direct attention away from unpleasant stimuli (i.e., attentional bias; (38, 39)) is a hallmark of depression (40) resulting in negative affect.  Individuals with affective disturbances experience difficulty with attentional bias toward unpleasant emotions during exercise(41).  Additionally, a growing body of electroencephalogram (EEG) studies support the notion that exercise is an emotion-eliciting event (42).  A recent review of 11 EEG studies examining the relation between affect and PA (43) concluded that a single session of exercise results in an asymmetric pattern of activity in the prefrontal cortex: greater left frontal activity before exercise is associated with greater positive affect during exercise, whereas, greater right frontal activity results in increases in negative affect during exercise.  This is particularly relevant for individuals with depression who, in both EEG and fMRI studies, have been found to show greater relative activity in right vs. left DLPFC (44), (45).  Given the inherent difficulties in regulating affect experienced by depressed individuals, they may be “handicapped” in their ability to positively experience exercise, which may contribute toward their lower levels of physical activity.  Yet, regular physical activity is critical for decreasing health risks (e.g., obesity, diabetes, heart disease) in this population and interventions to improve the affective experience of PA could have a high public health impact.  Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) as a novel approach toward regulating affective processes. tDCS is a form of noninvasive brain stimulation which has been investigated in a broad range of populations (46, 47), and has shown promise in impacting a wide variety of cognitive and affective processes, such as working memory (e.g., (48, 49)), motor learning (e.g. (50, 51)) and emotion regulation (e.g., (52-54)). tDCS uses low current electricity (typically 1-2mA) to modulate neuronal excitability in targeted brain areas via two electrodes placed on the head. tDCS acts via slight alterations to membrane potentials in areas underlying electrodes, with typical settings (e.g., two electrodes, 1mA current) resulting in increased likelihood of neuronal firing under the anode and decreased likelihood of neuronal firing under the cathode. As tDCS modulates the likelihood of neuronal firing, but does not directly induce an action potential (like transcranial magnetic stimulation; TMS), it may be particularly promising in combination with behavioral interventions to enhance activity in neural circuits already in use. tDCS has been used in a large number of individuals and has been found to be relatively safe, with the vast majority of reported side effects being mild and transient (e.g., headache, fatigue; (55)). Moreover, tDCS has practical benefits over other forms of neuromodulation (e.g., TMS, deep brain stimulation) as it is significantly less costly and more 
portable, making it more practical for widespread implementation (see Image).  While tDCS of DLPFC has been investigated as an intervention for depression with some (though not universal) support for efficacy (46, 56-58), studies have suggested tDCS of DLPFC may improve cognitive control over emotional information (52-54, 59, 60) and corresponding reductions in the emotional valence of negative stimuli. Interestingly, these changes do not appear to be explained by a change in mood, further supporting the notion that differences observed are likely due to improved cognitive control over emotional material (53, 60). Consistent with these findings, in depressed patients reduced attentional bias to emotional stimuli has been found following anodal tDCS to DLPFC(54). Given the central role of the affective experience of exercise to long-term PA and given experimental findings relating tDCS of DLPFC to improved emotion regulation, the combination of tDCS (of DLPFC) with an exercise program may be a promising approach to improve exercise adherence.    Experimental Method  Brief Description of Subjects Eligible participants will: (a) be between 18 and 65 years of age, (b) be low active (i.e., less than 90 min of moderate-intensity exercise/wk for the past 6 mos.), (c) have elevated levels of depressive symptoms (i.e., Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale score ³10), (d) be interested in starting an exercise program in the next month, and (e) able to walk one mile on a treadmill. Exclusion criteria include: (a) history of mania or hypomania, (b), history of psychotic disorder, (c) current DSM-5 diagnosis of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, or other eating disorder for which an exercise intervention would be contraindicated, (d) DSM-5 moderate and severe substance use disorder (e) current suicidality or homicidality, (f) current DSM-5 diagnosis of major depressive disorder (MDD) that is not currently being treated with pharmacotherapy or psychotherapy (g) physical disabilities or medical problems that would prevent participation in moderate intensity exercise (i.e., physician denied medical clearance), may be contraindicated for tDCS (e.g., seizure disorder), or other study procedures (e.g., contagious skin disease), (h) current pregnancy or intent to become pregnant during the next 8 weeks, (i) pacemaker or metal implanted in the cranial cavity, (j) psychiatric medication changes within 6 weeks prior to study entry.  Study Design The goal of the proposed study is to test the preliminary efficacy of tDCS combined with an 8-week aerobic exercise intervention for increasing adherence to exercise in individuals with elevated depressive symptoms. Participants will be randomized to receive the 8-week exercise intervention plus anodal tDCS of DLPFC (AE+tDCS) or sham tDCS of DLPFC (AE+sham). Outcomes will be assessed at end-of-treatment (EOT) as well as at 3-and 6-month follow-up.   Specific Procedures or Treatments Initial Screening and Medical Clearance Procedures. Interested individuals will contact our research staff and we will conduct a screening of participants’ current level of physical activity and depressive symptoms. Participants appearing to meet study criteria will be scheduled for a more comprehensive baseline assessment. Research staff will obtain informed consent and then participants will be evaluated using the diagnostic and screening measures detailed below to confirm eligibility. Participants will also complete a brief computer task at the initial appointment and at the end of the 12-week program that is designed to test working memory. The task involves matching letters to those on screen and lasts approximately 10 minutes.  At this interview, we will obtain a release of information to contact their primary care physician (PCP) to request medical clearance for engaging in moderate-intensity exercise AND for engaging in tDCS.  In addition to the PCP’s own clinical judgment, the PCP will be provided with a list of medical issues that would exclude the participant from exercise and/tDCS. We have successfully used this approach in previous exercise intervention studies. Upon receiving medical clearance, participants will undergo a standardized 1-mile Rockport treadmill walk test, administered by an exercise physiologist, in order to obtain a baseline measure of cardiorespiratory fitness.   Study Assessments. All participants will complete a baseline assessment, as described above, as well as follow-up interviews at EOT and 3- and 6-months after baseline. Assessments will include 
evaluator-administered interviews and self-report questionnaires, as well as measures of physical health and activity level (e.g., body composition, blood pressure, accelerometry). Additionally, the SAFTEE-SI will be administered weekly to assess for side effects of the intervention (see Human Subjects section for additional detail). Specific assessments to be used and the timepoints at which they will be administered are presented in Table 1 (below). Participants will be completing questionnaires on a laptop computer or tablet device, using REDCap (see Data Analysis Overview), for ease of data collection. From our prior experience conducting exercise interventions in psychiatric populations, we expect to be able to contact 80-90% of participants at follow-ups.   Randomization and Intervention Conditions. After the medical clearance, participants will be randomized to AE+tDCS or AE+sham. These conditions will differ only in whether active or sham tDCS is being delivered. Participants, evaluators, and those delivering the tDCS will all be blinded to condition. Each intervention session will begin with 20 minutes of either active or sham tDCS, followed by supervised aerobic exercise.   tDCS. tDCS is a form of noninvasive brain stimulation which uses low amplitude current (typically 1-2 mA) to modulate excitability of underlying cortex (61). The stimulation is delivered via two electrodes placed on the scalp.  Current passes between them resulting in altered cortical excitability. If tDCS is delivered for a sufficient duration (e.g., >10 min,) these excitability changes have been found to persist for up to 1 hour (62, 63). The device is battery-powered and is adjustable in intensity and duration of stimulation delivered. A review of clinical research with tDCS noted that “tDCS has been tested in thousands of subjects worldwide with no evidence of toxic effects to date” (46). The most common side effects include mild local sensations at the electrode sites, including tingling or itching, (55, 64) moderate fatigue, and headache (64).   In the present study, each participant will undergo a 20-minute session of either active or sham tDCS of DLPFC during each intervention session in a between-subjects design. Each session of tDCS will be immediately followed by the supervised AE (see “Aerobic Exercise Component” section below). Active tDCS intensity will be 1 mA. The anode and cathode are each contained in a 5x5cm rectangular sponge (25 cm2). The anode will be placed over left DLPFC (F3 on the EEG 10-20 system) and the cathode over the contralateral supraorbital region (just above the right eyebrow). Stimulation will be delivered via two saline-soaked surface sponge electrodes and a battery-driven, constant current stimulator (NeuroConn DC Stimulator Plus). This device includes a study mode, in which subject-specific codes are entered to deliver active or sham stimulation, keeping the administrator blinded.  Sham stimulation will use a “ramp up/ramp down” method in which stimulation will be ramped up and back down over a 30-second period. This approach has been found to be an effective sham condition in previous studies using tDCS at 1-2mA (49, 56, 65). Immediately following the 20-minute tDCS period participants will engage in a supervised moderate-intensity aerobic exercise session.  These procedures will occur 3x/week for 8 weeks.  Aerobic Exercise Component. After having received either tDCS or sham, participants will engage in an AE session at Butler Hospital’s Fitness Facility. Exercise sessions will be 20-30 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise on a treadmill.  These sessions will be supervised by an exercise physiologist who will monitor their heart rate and blood pressure to ensure safety and that activity is occurring at a moderate-intensity (i.e., 64-76% of age predicted maximal heart rate).  Participants will be asked to rate their affect and RPE (see C.9.b) during exercise sessions.  Sessions will include a 5-min warm-up and a 5-min cool-down to ensure safe exercise procedures. Participants will be asked to answer questions about affect before, during, and after exercise. An additional working memory task that involves remembering numbers will be completed three times during the AE intervention (detailed above). In the later weeks of the study, participants will be instructed to gradually increase physical activity outside these supervised sessions toward a goal of 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise per week.  Participants will be provided with resources for increasing their physical activity at home.    Fitbit Alta activity tracker. Participants will be asked to wear the Fitbit Alta activity tracker daily. A g-mail account will be created for each participant in order to register the trackers on Fitbit.com.  In doing so, the investigators will have access to the participant’s activity data throughout the course of the study. No identifying information will be entered into this account.  The participant will not be given 
access to this account, in order to allow tracking of activity while reducing effect of the Fitbit on behavior. Participants will be able to see the display on the Fitbit Alta tracker, which provides data for the day it is being worn. We will sync the participant’s Fitbit at each session using a study computer.  Data Analysis  Sample Size Considerations. We aim to have a total of 60 participants complete the study (approximately 30 per group). Based on our previous work, we expect approximately 10-20% attrition. Therefore, we will aim to enroll a total of 72 participants to obtain our desired sample size of 60. Primary Hypotheses: We will first examine patterns of missing data to determine possible mechanisms of missingness and will explore different techniques to impute missing data values145,146. To test our first primary hypothesis, we plan to use a mixed modeling approach to test for differences in MVPA between conditions across time-points (EOT, 3- and 6-month follow-up). To test our second aim 1 hypothesis, we will conduct a between-groups t-test to examine whether session attendance differs between groups during the 8-week intervention.     1. Hunt-Shanks T, Blanchard C, Reid RD. Gender differences in cardiac patients: a longitudinal investigation of exercise, autonomic anxiety, negative affect and depression. Psychology, health & medicine. 2009;14(3):375-85. 2. Allan JL, Johnston DW, Johnston M, Mant D. Depression and perceived behavioral control are independent predictors of future activity and fitness after coronary syndrome events. J Psychosom Res. 2007;63(5):501-8. 3. Katon WJ, Russo JE, Heckbert SR, Lin EH, Ciechanowski P, Ludman E, et al. The relationship between changes in depression symptoms and changes in health risk behaviors in patients with diabetes. International journal of geriatric psychiatry. 2010;25(5):466-75. 4. Aikens JE. Prospective associations between emotional distress and poor outcomes in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes care. 2012;35(12):2472-8. 5. Stineman MG, Strumpf N, Kurichi JE, Charles J, Grisso JA, Jayadevappa R. Attempts to reach the oldest and frailest: recruitment, adherence, and retention of urban elderly persons to a falls reduction exercise program. The Gerontologist. 2011;51 Suppl 1:S59-72. 6. Garmendia ML, Dangour AD, Albala C, Eguiguren P, Allen E, Uauy R. Adherence to a physical activity intervention among older adults in a post-transitional middle income country: a quantitative and qualitative analysis. The journal of nutrition, health & aging. 2013;17(5):466-71. 7. Porter KN, Fischer JG, Johnson MA. Improved physical function and physical activity in older adults following a community-based intervention: Relationships with a history of depression. Maturitas. 2011;70(3):290-4. 8. Arikawa AY, O'Dougherty M, Kaufman BC, Schmitz KH, Kurzer MS. Attrition and adherence of young women to aerobic exercise: lessons from the WISER study. Contemporary clinical trials. 2012;33(2):298-301. 9. Aggarwal B, Liao M, Mosca L. Predictors of physical activity at 1 year in a randomized controlled trial of family members of patients with cardiovascular disease. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2010;25(6):444-9. 10. Durrani S, Irvine J, Nolan RP. Psychosocial determinants of health behaviour change in an e-counseling intervention for hypertension. International journal of hypertension. 2012;2012:191789. 11. Mazzeschi C, Pazzagli C, Buratta L, Reboldi GP, Battistini D, Piana N, et al. Mutual interactions between depression/quality of life and adherence to a multidisciplinary lifestyle intervention in obesity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(12):E2261-5. 12. Courneya KS, Segal RJ, Gelmon K, Reid RD, Mackey JR, Friedenreich CM, et al. Predictors of supervised exercise adherence during breast cancer chemotherapy. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 2008;40(6):1180-7. 13. Mata J, Thompson RJ, Jaeggi SM, Buschkuehl M, Jonides J, Gotlib IH. Walk on the bright side: physical activity and affect in major depressive disorder. J Abnorm Psychol. 2012;121(2):297-308. 
14. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition: American Psychiatric Association; 2013. 15. Abrantes AM, Friedman JH, Brown RA, Strong DR, Desaulniers J, Ing E, et al. Physical activity and neuropsychiatric symptoms of Parkinson disease. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2012;25(3):138-45. 16. Ananian CD, Wilcox S, Watkins K, Saunders RP, Evans AE. Factors associated with exercise participation in adults with arthritis. Journal of Aging and Physical Activity. 2008;16:125-43. 17. Stevinson C, Steed H, Faught W, Tonkin K, Vallance JK, Ladha AB, et al. Physical activity in ovarian cancer survivors: associations with fatigue, sleep, and psychosocial functioning. International journal of gynecological cancer : official journal of the International Gynecological Cancer Society. 2009;19(1):73-8. 18. Edwards N, Gardiner M, Ritchie DM, Baldwin K, Sands L. Effect of exercise on negative affect in residents in special care units with moderate to severe dementia. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2008;22(4):362-8. 19. Glazebrook KE, Brawley LR. Thinking about maintaining exercise therapy: does being positive or negative make a difference? J Health Psychol. 2011;16(6):905-16. 20. Pasco JA, Jacka FN, Williams LJ, Brennan SL, Leslie E, Berk M. Don't worry, be active: positive affect and habitual physical activity. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2011;45(12):1047-52. 21. White DK, Keysor JJ, Neogi T, Felson DT, LaValley M, Gross KD, et al. When it hurts, a positive attitude may help: association of positive affect with daily walking in knee osteoarthritis. Results from a multicenter longitudinal cohort study. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2012;64(9):1312-9. 22. Joseph RP, Royse KE, Benitez TJ, Pekmezi DW. Physical activity and quality of life among university students: exploring self-efficacy, self-esteem, and affect as potential mediators. Qual Life Res. 2014;23(2):659-67. 23. Hyde AL, Conroy DE, PIncus AL, Ram N. Unpacking the feel good effect of free-time physical activity between: Between- and within-person asociations with pleasant-activated feeling states J Sport Exerc Psychol. 2011;33:884-902. 24. Palomo T, Beninger RJ, Kostrzewa RM, Archer T. Affective status in relation to impulsive, motor and motivational symptoms: personality, development and physical exercise. Neurotox Res. 2008;14(2-3):151-68. 25. Reed J, Ones DS. The effect of acute aerobic exercise on positive activated affect: A meta-analysis. Psychology of Sport and Exercise. 2006;7:477-514. 26. Ekkekakis P, Hall EE, Petruzzello SJ. Variation and homogeneity in affective responses to physical activity of varying intensities: an alternative perspective on dose-response based on evolutionary considerations. Journal of sports sciences. 2005;23(5):477-500. 27. Van Landuyt LM, Ekkekakis P, Hall EE, Petruzello SJ. Throwing the mountains inot the lakes: on the perils of nomothetic conceptions of the exercise-affect relationship. J Sport Exerc Psychol. 2000;22:208-34. 28. Williams DM, Dunsiger S, Ciccolo JT, Lewis BA, Albrecht AE, Marcus BH. Acute Affective Response to a Moderate-intensity Exercise Stimulus Predicts Physical Activity Participation 6 and 12 Months Later. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2008;9(3):231-45. 29. Kwan BM, Bryan AD. Affective response to exercise as a component of exercise motivation: Attitudes, norms, self-efficacy, and temporal stability of intentions. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2010;11(1):71-9. 30. Annesi J. Relations of self-motivation, perceived physical condition, and exercise-induced changes in revitalization and exhaustion with attendance in women initiating a moderate cardiovascular exercise regimen. Women & health. 2005;42(3):77-93. 31. Carels RA, Berger B, Darby L. The association between mood states and physical activity in postmenopausal, obese, sedentary women. J Aging Phys Act. 2006;14(1):12-28. 32. Kwan BM, Bryan A. In-task and post-task affective response to exercise: translating exercise intentions into behaviour. British journal of health psychology. 2010;15(Pt 1):115-31. 33. McAuley E, Morris KS, Motl RW, Hu L, Konopack JF, Elavsky S. Long-term follow-up of physical activity behavior in older adults. Health psychology : official journal of the Division of Health Psychology, American Psychological Association. 2007;26(3):375-80. 
34. Wichers M, Peeters F, Rutten BP, Jacobs N, Derom C, Thiery E, et al. A time-lagged momentary assessment study on daily life physical activity and affect. Health psychology : official journal of the Division of Health Psychology, American Psychological Association. 2012;31(2):135-44. 35. Bettinardi O, Bertolotti G, Baiardi P, Calsamiglia G, D'Cruz S, Giacani M, et al. Can anxiety and depression influence the six-minute walking test performance in post-surgical heart valve patients? A pilot study. Monaldi Archives of Chest Disease. 2004;62:154-61. 36. Ekkekakis P, Hall EE, Petruzzello SJ. The relationship between exercise intensity and affective responses demystified: to crack the 40-year-old nut, replace the 40-year-old nutcracker! Ann Behav Med. 2008;35(2):136-49. 37. Annesi JJ. Relationships between self-regulation skills and physical activity and fruit and vegetable consumption in obese adults: mediation of mood and self-efficacy. Psychol Rep. 2011;108(1):95-103. 38. Eysenck MW, Derakshan N, Santos R, Calvo MG. Anxiety and cognitive performance: attentional control theory. Emotion (Washington, DC). 2007;7(2):336-53. 39. Mogg K, Bradley BP, Williams R. Attentional bias in anxiety and depression: the role of awareness. The British journal of clinical psychology / the British Psychological Society. 1995;34 ( Pt 1):17-36. 40. Mogg K, Bradley BP. Attentional bias in generalized anxiety disorder versus depressive disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research. 2005;29:29-45. 41. Barnes RT, Coombes SA, Armstrong NB, Higgins TJ, Janelle CM. Evaluating attentional and affective changes following an acute exercise bout using a modified dot-probe protocol. Journal of sports sciences. 2010;28(10):1065-76. 42. Petruzzello SJ, Tate AK. Brain activation, affect, and aerobic exercise: an examination of both state-independent and state-dependent relationships. Psychophysiology. 1997;34(5):527-33. 43. Lattari E, Portugal E, Moraes H, Machado S, Santos TM, Deslandes AC. Acute effects of exercise on mood and EEG activity in healthy young subjects: a systematic review. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2014;13(6):972-80. 44. Herrington JD, Heller W, Mohanty A, Engels AS, Banich MT, Webb AG, et al. Localization of asymmetric brain function in emotion and depression. Psychophysiology. 2010;47(3):442-54. 45. Grimm S, Beck J, Schuepbach D, Hell D, Boesiger P, Bermpohl F, et al. Imbalance between left and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in major depression is linked to negative emotional judgment: an fMRI study in severe major depressive disorder. Biological psychiatry. 2008;63(4):369-76. 46. Brunoni AR, Ferrucci R, Fregni F, Boggio PS, Priori A. Transcranial direct current stimulation for the treatment of major depressive disorder: a summary of preclinical, clinical and translational findings. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2012;39(1):9-16. 47. Nitsche MA, Boggio PS, Fregni F, Pascual-Leone A. Treatment of depression with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS): a review. Exp Neurol. 2009;219(1):14-9. 48. Andrews SC, Hoy KE, Enticott PG, Daskalakis ZJ, Fitzgerald PB. Improving working memory: the effect of combining cognitive activity and anodal transcranial direct current stimulation to the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Brain stimulation. 2011;4(2):84-9. 49. Fregni F, Boggio PS, Nitsche M, Bermpohl F, Antal A, Feredoes E, et al. Anodal transcranial direct current stimulation of prefrontal cortex enhances working memory. Experimental brain research. 2005;166(1):23-30. 50. Nitsche MA, Schauenburg A, Lang N, Liebetanz D, Exner C, Paulus W, et al. Facilitation of implicit motor learning by weak transcranial direct current stimulation of the primary motor cortex in the human. Journal of cognitive neuroscience. 2003;15(4):619-26. 51. Reis J, Robertson E, Krakauer JW, Rothwell J, Marshall L, Gerloff C, et al. Consensus: "Can tDCS and TMS enhance motor learning and memory formation?". Brain stimulation. 2008;1(4):363-9. 52. Plewnia C, Schroeder PA, Kunze R, Faehling F, Wolkenstein L. Keep calm and carry on: improved frustration tolerance and processing speed by transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). PloS one. 2015;10(4):e0122578. 53. Vanderhasselt MA, De Raedt R, Brunoni AR, Campanha C, Baeken C, Remue J, et al. tDCS over the left prefrontal cortex enhances cognitive control for positive affective stimuli. PloS one. 2013;8(5):e62219. 
54. Wolkenstein L, Zeiller M, Kanske P, Plewnia C. Induction of a depression-like negativity bias by cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation. Cortex; a journal devoted to the study of the nervous system and behavior. 2014;59:103-12. 55. Brunoni AR, Amadera J, Berbel B, Volz MS, Rizzerio BG, Fregni F. A systematic review on reporting and assessment of adverse effects associated with transcranial direct current stimulation. The international journal of neuropsychopharmacology / official scientific journal of the Collegium Internationale Neuropsychopharmacologicum (CINP). 2011;14(8):1133-45. 56. Berlim MT, Van den Eynde F, Daskalakis ZJ. Clinical utility of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for treating major depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind and sham-controlled trials. J Psychiatr Res. 2013;47(1):1-7. 57. Kalu UG, Sexton CE, Loo CK, Ebmeier KP. Transcranial direct current stimulation in the treatment of major depression: a meta-analysis. Psychological medicine. 2012;42(9):1791-800. 58. Shiozawa P, Fregni F, Bensenor IM, Lotufo PA, Berlim MT, Daskalakis JZ, et al. Transcranial direct current stimulation for major depression: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. The international journal of neuropsychopharmacology / official scientific journal of the Collegium Internationale Neuropsychopharmacologicum (CINP). 2014;17(9):1443-52. 59. Feeser M, Prehn K, Kazzer P, Mungee A, Bajbouj M. Transcranial direct current stimulation enhances cognitive control during emotion regulation. Brain stimulation. 2014;7(1):105-12. 60. Pena-Gomez C, Vidal-Pineiro D, Clemente IC, Pascual-Leone A, Bartres-Faz D. Down-regulation of negative emotional processing by transcranial direct current stimulation: effects of personality characteristics. PloS one. 2011;6(7):e22812. 61. Nitsche MA, Cohen LG, Wassermann EM, Priori A, Lang N, Antal A, et al. Transcranial direct current stimulation: State of the art 2008. Brain stimulation. 2008;1(3):206-23. 62. Nitsche MA, Fricke K, Henschke U, Schlitterlau A, Liebetanz D, Lang N, et al. Pharmacological modulation of cortical excitability shifts induced by transcranial direct current stimulation in humans. The Journal of physiology. 2003;553(Pt 1):293-301. 63. Nitsche MA, Paulus W. Sustained excitability elevations induced by transcranial DC motor cortex stimulation in humans. Neurology. 2001;57(10):1899-901. 64. Poreisz C, Boros K, Antal A, Paulus W. Safety aspects of transcranial direct current stimulation concerning healthy subjects and patients. Brain research bulletin. 2007;72(4-6):208-14. 65. Gandiga PC, Hummel FC, Cohen LG. Transcranial DC stimulation (tDCS): a tool for double-blind sham-controlled clinical studies in brain stimulation. Clinical neurophysiology : official journal of the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. 2006;117(4):845-50.    
CONSENT	FOR	PARTICIPATION	IN	A	RESEARCH	PROJECT	–	BUTLER	HOSPITAL			tDCS	for	Increasing	Exercise	Adherence	in	Individuals	with	Elevated	Depressive	Symptoms		Sponsorship This	study	is	being	paid	for	by	a	grant	from	the	National	Cancer	Institute. 	 Research	Project	Summary You	are	invited	to	participate	in	a	research	study	designed	to	test	the	effects	of	transcranial	direct	current	stimulation	or	tDCS	–	a	type	of	noninvasive	brain	stimulation	–	on	people’s	exercise	habits.	You	have	been	invited	to	participate	because	you	have	said	you	are	interested	in	starting	an	exercise	program	and	are	experiencing	some	depressive	symptoms.	Your	participation	in	the	study	will	last	for	approximately	six	months,	including	initial	assessments,	an	eight	week	exercise	program,	and	three	follow-up	assessments.		The	eight-week	exercise	program	will	require	three	visits	to	our	research	lab	each	week	over	the	eight	weeks.	Assessments	will	last	about	two	hours	each.	You	will	complete	two	days	of	assessments	before	starting	the	exercise	program,	and	three	separate	assessments	after	completing	the	exercise	program	-	one	at	the	end	of	the	program,	as	well	as	three	and	six	months	after	your	baseline	assessment.	  In	order	to	decide	whether	or	not	you	wish	to	be	a	part	of	this	research	study,	you	should	know	enough	about	its	risks	and	benefits	to	make	an	informed	judgment.		This	consent	form	gives	you	detailed	information	about	the	research	study	which	a	member	of	the	research	team	will	discuss	with	you.		This	discussion	should	go	over	all	aspects	of	this	research:		its	purpose,	the	procedures	that	will	be	performed,	risks	associated	with	the	procedures,	possible	benefits	of	participation	and	possible	alternatives.		Once	you	understand	the	study,	you	will	be	asked	if	you	wish	to	participate;	if	so,	you	will	be	asked	to	sign	this	form.  Description	of	Procedures If	you	decide	to	participate,	you	will	be	asked	to	come	in	for	several	assessments,	as	well	as	complete	an	eight-week	program	combining	exercise	and	tDCS.  Baseline	Assessment	and	Medical	Clearance.	If	you	decide	to	participate,	you	will	first	complete	an	interview	with	one	of	our	research	staff	members	to	confirm	that	you	are	eligible	for	the	study.	Our	study	staff	will	ask	you	questions	to	learn	about	you	and	your	exercise	habits,	and	determine	if	this	study	is	a	good	fit	for	you.	You	will	be	interviewed	by	research	staff	and	will	also	complete	some	forms	and	questionnaires	on	a	computer.	These	will	include	questions	about	your	exercise	habits,	eating,	physical	health,	and	psychiatric	symptoms.		You	will	also	be	asked	to	complete a brief computer task at the initial appointment and at the end of the 8-week program that is designed to test working memory. The task involves matching letters to those on screen and lasts approximately 10 minutes. You	will	be	asked	to	wear	an	accelerometer	(e.g.,	small	device	that	counts	your	movements	so	that	we	know	how	active	you	are)	for	a	week	before	each	assessment	time	point	including	baseline.	This,	and	other	study	assessments,	will	be	audiorecorded.	 Before	becoming	a	participant	in	this	study,	we	will	need	to	receive	medical	clearance	from	your	primary	care	physician	(PCP).	We	will	ask	you	to	give	us	your	signed	permission	to	be	in	contact	with	your	PCP.		Your	PCP	will	be	receiving	a	letter	that	explains	what	is	involved	in	this	study.	Your	PCP	will	then	indicate	whether	or	not	the	study	is	safe	for	you.	However,	it	is	your	
responsibility	to	inform	study	staff	of	current	medical	conditions	and	of	changes	in	your	health	that	take	place	over	the	course	of	the	study	to	ensure	your	continued	safety	in	the	exercise	program.			After	receiving	medical	clearance,	we	will	determine	your	current	level	of	fitness	by	having	you	participate	in	a	treadmill	exercise	test.	An	exercise	physiologist	on	our	study	team	will	do	the	test	with	you	and	all	procedures	will	be	discussed	with	you	prior	to	the	test.	During	the	exercise	test,	you	will	be	walking	on	a	treadmill	at	a	speed	that	you	can	comfortably	maintain	for	one	mile	(i.e.	you	choose	the	speed).	During	testing,	your	heart	rate	and	blood	pressure	will	be	monitored.	If	you	feel	dizzy,	weak,	or	very	short	of	breath,	or	if	you	have	chest	pains	or	any	other	adverse	signs	and	symptoms,	the	test	will	be	stopped.	During	this	exercise	testing	session,	we	will	also	measure	your	weight,	height,	and	percent	body	fat.			It	is	possible	that,	based	on	the	interview,	medical	screen,	and/or	exercise	test,	you	will	not	be	found	eligible	to	participate	in	this	study.	In	addition,	if	you	are	unable	to	walk	one-mile	on	the	treadmill,	you	will	not	be	eligible	to	participate	in	this	study.	 Exercise	Program	with	tDCS.	After	the	baseline	assessment,	you	will	complete	an	eight	week	exercise	program	which	will	combine	tDCS	and	exercise.	This	program	will	require	you	to	attend	program	sessions	three	times	each	week	for	the	eight	weeks.	Each	session	will	last	about	an	hour.	As	part	of	this	program	you	will	have	either	active	tDCS	or	simulated	tDCS	-	which	one	you	get	will	be	assigned	randomly,	like	the	flip	of	a	coin,	and	neither	you	nor	the	study	staff	you	meet	with	will	know	which	one	you	are	getting.	You	will	have	either	the	active	or	simulated	(sham)	tDCS	for	approximately	20	minutes	at	the	beginning	of	each	exercise	program	visit.	In	order	to	provide	the	active	or	sham	stimulation,	two	wet	sponges	containing	electrodes	will	be	placed	on	your	head.	These	sponges	will	be	held	in	place	by	large	rubber	bands.	During	the	stimulation	period,	these	sponges	and	rubber	bands	will	remain	on	your	head	(see	image).			All	study	participants	will	participate	in	a	moderate-intensity	aerobic	exercise	program,	regardless	of	the	type	of	tDCS	they	get.	During	each	visit,	participants	will	complete	30	minutes	of	exercise	in	our	study	gym	at	Butler	Hospital,	using	exercise	equipment	at	this	facility	(e.g.,	treadmills,	stationary	bikes,	elliptical	machines).	Each	workout	session	will	also	include	a	5-10-minute	warm	up	and	5-10	minute	cool	down.		Throughout	the	8	week	program,	you	will	be	asked	to	keep	a	log	of	any	type	of	exercise	you	do	each	day.	You	may	also	be	asked	to	answer	questions	about	how	you	feel	before,	during,	and	after	exercise,	and	complete	a	brief	working	memory	number	task.		In	order	to	track	your	physical	activity,	you	will	be	asked	to	wear	a	Fitbit	device	each	day	during	the	course	of	the	8-week	program.	We	will	set-up	a	Fitbit	account	for	your	tracker	on	Fitbit.com,	which	you	will	not	have	access	to.	However,	you	will	be	able	to	see	your	daily	activity	data	on	the	tracker’s	display.	At	your	first	exercise	session,	we	will	provide	you	with	instructions	on	how	to	wear	and	use	the	Fitbit.	At	the	beginning	of	each	exercise	session	thereafter,	we	will	sync	the	Fitbit	data	using	a	study	computer.	After	you	have	completed	the	study,	the	Fitbit	is	yours	to	keep	and	you	can	choose	to	create	an	account	on	Fitbit.com	if	you’d	like.		Follow-up	Assessments.	At	the	end	of	the	eight-week	program,	you	will	come	in	for	another	assessment,	similar	to	the	baseline	assessment.	Again,	you	will	be	interviewed	by	our	study	staff	

and	will	be	asked	to	complete	some	forms	and	questionnaires	on	a	computer.	As	in	the	baseline	assessment,	we	will	have	you	walk	on	the	treadmill	and	we	will	gather	information	on	your	physical	health.	You	will	also	be	asked	to	wear	an	accelerometer	(e.g.,	small	device	that	counts	your	movements	so	that	we	know	how	active	you	are)	for	a	week	before	each	assessment.	You	will	come	back	and	complete	similar	assessments	three	months	and	six	months	after	completing	your	baseline	assessment.		 Risks	and	Inconveniences			There	are	minimal	risks	associated	with	participating	in	a	submaximal	exercise	test	(used	to	predict	maximum	aerobic	ability)	and	a	regular	exercise	program	such	as	the	one	we	offer	in	this	study.	You	may	experience	general	fatigue	(tiredness)	during	your	participation	in	these	activities.	You	may	also	experience	sprains,	muscle	pulls,	shin	splints,	or	bone	injuries.		Precautions	should	be	taken	to	prevent	such	injuries,	such	as	careful	adherence	to	your	exercise	prescription.	In	addition,	during	exercise,	your	heart	rate	and	blood	pressure	will	increase,	and	under	extreme	conditions,	this	can	lead	to	a	serious	cardiac	event	(such	as	heart	attack).	The	possibility	of	experiencing	a	serious	cardiac	event	has	been	estimated	to	be	less	than	2	per	20,000	in	exercising	adults.			You	may	experience	mild	and	temporary	stress	associated	with	completing	the	self-report	measures.	You	can	choose	to	not	answer	any	given	question	or	discontinue	the	study	at	any	time.	You may also find the computerized working memory task to be tedious and/or boring. You may choose to discontinue the task at any point. 	You	may	also	experience	worsening	depressive	symptoms.		As	part	of	the	study,	we	will	closely	monitor	your	depressive	symptoms	with	questionnaires	and	brief	interviews.		This	may	also	include	receiving	a	phone	call	from	study	staff	when	you	miss	a	session.		If	your	depressive	symptoms	were	to	significantly	worsen,	we	may	want	to	contact	your	mental	health	treatment	provider.				There	is	some	risk	with	tDCS.	There	is	a	risk	of	skin	irritation	and	temporary	redness	on	your	scalp	where	the	stimulation	occurs.	Local	skin	burns	are	also	possible;	however,	these	would	be	considered	extremely	rare	given	the	type	of	tDCS	used	in	this	study.	Hypomania,	(feelings	of	elevated	mood	or	too	much	energy),	has	also	been	reported	in	a	small	percent	of	people	who	received	daily	tDCS	for	depression.	In	one	study	where	daily	tDCS	was	used	for	depression	with	or	without	antidepressant	medication,	as	many	as	5-6%	of	people	developed	hypomania.	In	most	cases,	the	hypomania	went	away	after	stopping	tDCS	or	by	making	adjustments	to	medications.	However,	the	overall	risk	of	hypomania	occurring	with	tDCS	is	still	unclear.	Thus,	this	may	be	a	risk.	Other	side	effects	such	as	temporary	headache,	nausea,	and	fatigue	are	sometimes	reported	with	tDCS,	as	well.	It	is	possible	that	tDCS	may	have	other	unforeseen	side	effects.	We	will	monitor	you	closely	for	skin	burns	and	discomfort.	However,	if	you	experience	discomfort,	please	tell	us	immediately.	A	physician	will	be	on-call	during	all	tDCS	procedures.	We	will	also	check	in	with	you	regularly	during	your	weekly	visits	about	any	side	effects	you	may	be	experiencing.			We	will	make	all	efforts	to	protect	your	confidential	information.	However,	in	any	study	there	is	always	a	risk	that	your	confidential	information	could	be	disclosed,	despite	our	best	efforts	to	protect	your	information.	In	order	to	keep	the	audio	recordings	of	assessments	confidential	and	private,	research	staff	will	transfer	the	digital	audio	file	to	a	secure	drive	after	the	assessment	or	treatment	session	and	delete	it	from	the	audio	recorder.	These	files	will	not	be	labeled	or	stored	with	your	name	or	any	other	identifying	information	and	will	be	deleted	at	the	end	of	the	study.		
Women	Please	Note:	The	effects	of	tDCS	as	used	in	this	study	during	pregnancy	are	unknown.	Therefore,	if	you	are	a	woman	able	to	bear	children	who	is	pregnant,	who	may	be	pregnant,	who	is	planning	to	become	pregnant,	or	who	is	currently	breastfeeding,	we	cannot	include	you	in	this	study	at	this	time.	For	women	of	child-bearing	age,	we	will	do	a	pregnancy	test	at	the	beginning	of	the	study	to	make	sure	you	are	not	pregnant.	We	will	specifically	ask	you	to	let	us	know	if	you	change	your	mind	and	decide	to	become	pregnant	during	the	study.		Benefits	You	may	have	health	benefits	from	starting	a	new	exercise	program	as	part	of	this	study.	However,	we	cannot	guarantee	that	you	will	benefit.	The	main	benefits	of	this	study	are	to	help	researchers	and	clinicians	develop	future	interventions	to	help	people	start	and	continue	to	exercise.			Economic	Considerations			You	will	receive	up	to	$200	for	completing	all	study	visits/procedures.	You	will	receive	$50	for	completing	the	baseline	assessment,	$50	for	completing	the	assessment	at	the	end	of	the	exercise	program,	and	$50	for	each	of	the	3-	and	6-month	follow-up	assessments.	These	amounts	will	be	distributed	by	a	check	from	Butler	Hospital	or	gift	cards	to	a	local	store,	whichever	you	choose.			Depending	on	the	amount	of	payment	you	might	receive	for	your	participation	in	this	study,	you	might	have	to	provide	your	name,	address,	and	taxpayer	ID	or	Social	Security	number	to	the	Butler/CNE	Research	Accounting	Department.	In	order	to	receive	$300	or	more	for	participation	in	research,	you	will	have	to	complete	and	sign	a	W-9	form.		If	you	are	paid	$600	or	more	in	any	calendar	year	for	research	participation,	the	IRS	will	be	notified	of	the	total	amount	you	were	paid,	in	accordance	with	federal	regulations.	You	should	ask	the	researcher	for	more	information	if	you	have	questions	about	this	process.		In	Case	of	Injury			We	will	offer	you	the	care	needed	to	treat	any	injury	that	results	directly	from	taking	part	in	this	research	study.		We	reserve	the	right	to	bill	your	insurance	company	or	other	third	parties,	if	appropriate,	for	the	care	you	get	for	the	injury.		We	will	try	to	have	these	costs	paid	for,	but	you	may	be	responsible	for	some	of	them.		For	example,	if	the	care	is	billed	to	your	insurer,	you	will	be	responsible	for	payment	of	any	deductibles	and	co-payments	required	by	your	insurer.				Injuries	sometimes	happen	in	research	even	when	no	one	is	at	fault.		There	are	no	plans	to	pay	you	or	give	you	other	compensation	for	any	injury,	should	one	occur.		However,	you	are	not	giving	up	any	of	your	legal	rights	by	signing	this	form.				If	you	think	you	have	been	injured	or	have	experienced	a	medical	problem	as	a	result	of	taking	part	in	this	research	study,	tell	the	person	in	charge	of	this	study	as	soon	as	possible.		The	researcher’s	name	and	phone	number	are	listed	on	the	last	page	of	this	consent	form.					Alternative	Treatments/Alternative	to	Participation		No	treatments	are	being	offered	as	part	of	this	study	for	any	physical	or	mental	health	problem.	As	an	alternative	to	participating	in	this	study,	you	may	also	seek	to	begin	an	exercise	program	on	your	own,	with	your	physician’s	advice	to	do	so,	and	utilize	community	resources	such	as	gyms,	bike	paths,	etc.		Financial	Disclosure			
Not	applicable.			Voluntary	Participation	You	are	free	to	decide	whether	or	not	to	participate	in	this	study,	and	you	are	free	to	withdraw	from	the	study	at	any	time	by	informing	the	researchers	verbally	or	in	writing.		If	you	decide	you	do	not	wish	to	provide	additional	protected	health	information	to	the	researchers,	you	may	withdraw	from	the	study.	Research	information	collected	up	to	the	time	that	you	decide	to	withdraw	will	remain	as	part	of	the	study	data.	A	decision	not	to	participate	or	to	withdraw	from	the	study	will	not	adversely	affect	future	interactions	with	Butler	Hospital	or	Brown	University.	Your	participation	in	the	study	may	be	terminated	by	the	researchers	without	regard	to	your	consent;	in	that	case,	you	are	entitled	to	an	explanation	of	the	circumstances	leading	to	that	decision.		Confidentiality	and	Protection	of	Your	Health	Information		You	will	not	be	personally	identified	in	any	reports	or	publications	that	may	result	from	this	study.		The	confidentiality	of	the	information	you	provide	to	us	will	be	maintained	in	accordance	with	state	and	federal	laws.	To	keep	your	information	safe,	we	will	store	all	information	in	locked	file	cabinets	and	on	password	protected	secure	computer	servers.	To	the	extent	possible,	we	store	identifying	information	(such	as	your	name	or	address)	separately	from	study	data	(such	as	questionnaires	that	you	complete).	In	addition	to	keeping	research	data,	we	will	place	a	note	with	a	brief	description	of	study	involvement	and	procedures	(including	tDCS	procedures)	in	a	Butler	Hospital	medical	record.	All	identifying	information	except	what	is	part	of	your	medical	record	at	Butler	will	be	destroyed	6	years	after	the	completion	of	the	study.			If	you	tell	us	something	that	makes	us	believe	that	you	or	others	have	been	or	may	be	physically	harmed,	we	will	report	that	information	to	the	appropriate	agencies	if	required	by	law.	In	Rhode	Island,	we	are	required	to	report	child	abuse	and	neglect	and	elder	abuse	to	state	authorities.		General	information	about	this	study	has	been	or	will	be	submitted	to	the	federal	clinical	trial	registry	databank,	which	can	be	accessed	on	the	Internet	at	www.ClinicalTrials.gov.		If	you	sign	this	document,	you	give	permission	to	Drs.	Abrantes	and	Garnaat	(study	directors)	and	their	research	staff	at	Butler	Hospital	to	use	and	share	your	health	information	that	identifies	you,	for	the	purpose	of	conducting	the	research	study	described	above.			Your	health	information	related	to	this	study	may	also	be	shared	with	and	used	by	individuals	outside	of	Butler	Hospital,	including:			• Your	primary	care	provider.	We	will	ask	you	to	sign	a	release	of	information	for	that	provider.		Your	primary	care	provider	will	let	us	know	if	it	is	safe	for	you	to	begin	an	exercise	program.		We	may	also	contact	him/her	during	the	study	to	discuss	any	changes	in	your	health	status	that	may	impact	your	ability	to	engage	in	exercise.	• Specialty	mental	health	care	providers	for	whom	you	provide	a	release	of	information.		If	there	is	a	change	to	your	mental	health	status	(e.g.,	you	become	more	depressed	or	experience	new	symptoms	and	may	need	more	treatment),	we	will	communicate	with	your	mental	health	provider	about	this.	• Other	healthcare	and	public	safety	professionals,	if	we	are	concerned	that	you	are	at	risk	of	hurting	yourself	or	others.			
The	health	information	that	we	may	use	or	share	with	others	for	research	purposes	includes	any	information	that	you	give	us	as	part	of	your	study	participation,	and	results	of	any	assessments	that	we	do	as	part	of	the	study.			Your	health	information	may	also	be	shared	with	a	public	health	authority	that	is	authorized	by	law	to	collect	or	receive	such	information	for	the	purpose	of	preventing	or	controlling	disease,	injury,	or	disability,	and	conducting	public	health	surveillance,	investigations,	or	interventions.			Butler	Hospital	is	required	by	law	to	protect	your	health	information.	Individuals	outside	of	Butler	that	receive	your	health	information	may	not	be	required	by	Federal	privacy	laws	(such	as	the	HIPAA	Privacy	Rule)	to	protect	it,	so	we	can	not	guarantee	that	they	will	not	share	it	without	your	permission.		Please	note	that:		• You	do	not	have	to	sign	this	consent	form,	but	if	you	do	not,	you	may	not	participate	in	or	receive	research-related	treatment	in	this	study.			• Butler	Hospital	may	not	withhold	treatment	or	refuse	to	treat	you,	based	on	whether	you	sign	this	consent	form.		• You	may	change	your	mind	and	revoke	(take	back)	this	consent	and	authorization	at	any	time.	If	you	no	longer	want	to	give	us	permission	to	use	your	health	information	for	this	research	study,	you	must	contact	one	of	the	Principal	Investigators,	Ana	Abrantes	or	Sarah	Garnaat	and	you	will	be	instructed	to	provide	a	written	statement.		• Even	if	you	revoke	(take	back)	this	consent	and	authorization,	Butler	researchers	may	still	use	or	share	health	information	about	you	that	they	already	have	obtained,	when	doing	so	is	necessary	to	maintain	the	integrity	or	reliability	of	the	current	research.		• You	generally	will	not	have	access	to	your	personal	health	information	related	to	this	research	until	the	study	is	completed.	At	the	conclusion	of	the	research	and	at	your	request,	you	will	have	access	to	your	health	information	that	Butler	Hospital	maintains	in	a	designated	record	set,	according	to	the	Notice	of	Privacy	Practices	provided	to	you	by	Butler	Hospital.	The	designated	record	set	includes	medical	information	or	billing	records	used	by	doctors	or	other	health	care	providers	at	Butler	Hospital	to	make	decisions	about	individuals.		• Your	health	information	will	be	provided	to	you	or	to	your	physician	if	it	is	necessary	for	your	care.			This	Authorization	will	expire	when	all	the	activities	associated	with	this	research	study	have	concluded.		Questions			In	preparation	of	this	consent	form,	it	was	necessary	to	use	several	technical	words.		Please	ask	for	an	explanation	of	any	that	you	do	not	understand.	
Authorization:		I	have	read	this	form	and	decided	that																																								(name	of	subject)	will	participate	in	the	project	described	above.		Its	general	purposes,	the	nature	of	my	involvement,	and	possible	hazards	and	inconveniences	have	been	explained	to	my	satisfaction.		My	signature	also	indicates	that	I	have	received	a	copy	of	this	consent	form.																																										Signature																																											Relationship	(self,	parent,	guardian)																																											Date																																					Signature	of	Principal	Investigator													Telephone					or																																					Signature	of	Person	Obtaining	Consent																Telephone		If	you	have	further	questions	about	this	project	or	about	research-related	injuries,	please	contact	Ana	Abrantes,	Ph.D.	at	401-455-6440	or	Sarah	Garnaat,	Ph.D.	at	401-455-6659.		If	you	have	questions	about	your	rights	as	a	research	subject,	please	contact	Linda	L.	Carpenter,	M.D.,	Chair,	Butler	Hospital	Institutional	Review	Board,	at	401-455-6349.	THIS	FORM	IS	NOT	VALID	UNLESS	THE	FOLLOWING	BOX	HAS	BEEN	COMPLETED	BY	THE	IRB	OFFICE		
	THIS	FORM	IS	VALID	UNTIL							DATE:								IRBNET	ID#						BUTLER	IRB	REFERENCE#							BY	(ADMINISTRATOR):												 