Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
- 1 -  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Pilot  Study  of  Immunization  of High  Risk  Breast  Cancer  Patients  with a Sialyl  Le wis a- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Ave. 
New  York,  NY 10021  Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018  
Keyhole  Limpet  Hemocyanin Conjugate  plus the Immunological  Adjuvant  QS-21 
 
MSKCC  THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  PROTOCOL  
 
 
Principal  Investigator:  Teresa Gilewski  M.D.  (Department  of Medicine) 
 
 
Co-Principal  Investigator (s):  
 
Tomas  Lyons,  MD 
 
Investigator(s):   
Larry  Norton  M.D.  
Kathy  Panageas  Ph.D.  (Department  of Biostatistics) 
Martin Fleisher Ph.D. (Department of Clinical Chemistry) 
Consenting  Professional(s):  Teresa Gilewski  M.D.  
Larry  Norton  M.D.  
Tomas  Lyons,  MD 
 
- 2 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
Table  of Contents  
MSKCC  THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  PROTOCOL  ................................ ...............................  1 
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  ................................ ................................  2 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC AIMS ................................ ................................ ..........  3 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ ...............  3 
4.1 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ .....................  7 
4.2 DESIGN  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  7 
4.3 INTERVENTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 7 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  ................................ ................................ ....... 7 
6.1 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ....... 8 
6.2 SUBJECT  INCLUSION  CRITERIA  ................................ ................................ ...... 8 
6.3 SUBJECT  EXCLUSION  CRITERIA  ................................ ................................ ..... 9 
7.0 RECRUITMENT PLAN ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 9 
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  ................................ ................................ ................  10 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................  11 
10.0 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  ................................ .........  12 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS ................................ ................................ .........................  14 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  ................  15 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  ................................ ................................  16 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  17 
15.1 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION  
PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 17 
15.2 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION  ................................ ...................  17 
16.1 DATA   MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  ................................ ................................ ..................  18 
16.2 QUALITY  ASSURANCE  ................................ ................................ .........................  19 
16.3 DATA  AND  SAFETY  MONITORING  ................................ ...............................  19 
17.1 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  ................................ ................................ ............  20 
17.2 PRIVACY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  20 
17.3 SERIOUS  ADVERSE  EVENT  (SAE)  REPORTING ................................ ..............  20 
18.1 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ........  21 
18.2 RESEARCH  AUTHORIZATION  ................................ ................................ ........  21 
19.0 REFERENCE(S)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  23 
20.0 APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  26 
APPENDIX  A: PATIENT  CALENDAR  ................................ ................................ ......................  26 
APPENDIX  B: PATIENT  DIARY  ................................ ................................ ...............................  26 
 
 
 
 
 
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  
 
This is a pilot study  of injection  of sialyl lewisa  (sLea) conjugated  to keyhole  limpet  hemocyanin  
(KLH)  plus the immunological  adjuvant  QS-21. Eligible  patients  include  those  with metastatic  
- 3 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
breast  cancer  who have no evidence  of disease  or stable  disease  on hormone  therapy.  Initially  3 
patients  will be entered  at a lower  dose (10 mcg)  of sLea. If safe, 10 patients  will be accrued  at the 
full dose of 30 mcg . If 6 or more  of these  10 patients  have an immune  response  at any time point  
then an additional  10 patients  will be accrued  and injected  with a higher  dose of QS-21. 
 
Injections  will be administered  subcutaneously  during  weeks  1, 2, 3, 7 and 19. Prior  to and during  
therapy, blood samples will be obtained to assess immune response. 
 
The primary  endpoints  of this trial are safety  and immune  response.  Clinical response  will be 
monitored  but will not be a primary  endpoint.  A secondary  endpoint  is the evaluation  of blood  
samples  for circulating  tumor  cells.  
 
2.1 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC AIMS  
 
The primary  objectives  of this trial are to determine  the following  endpoints  after injection  with 
sLea-KLH  plus QS-21: 
 
• Safety  
 
• The IgG and IgM antibody  response  to sLea  and breast  cancer cells expressing  
this antigen  
 
The secondary  objective  of this trial is to monitor  the presence  of circulating  tumor  cells (CTC)  
prior to, during  and after injection  with sLea-KLH  plus QS-21. 
 
Clinical  response  will be monitored  but will not be an endpoint.  As part of standard  care,  patients  
on this trial will be followed  for progression  of disease.  It is unknown  how many  patients  will 
enroll  with evidence  of disease.  Therefore,  we will report  any responses  that are observed  for 
these  patients  in a purely  descriptive  manner  (see section12).  This is consistent  with the pilot 
vaccine trials we have previously conducted. 
 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  
 
3.1 B re as t Cance  r 
 
Invasive  breast  cancer  is now predicted  to affect  one in seven  American  women  at some  
point  in their lifetime.1 A significant  number  of patient  will develop  metastatic  breast  
cancer,  which  in contrast  to early  stage  breast  cancer  is generally  considered  incurable.2 
While  patients  with AJCC  Stage  IV breast  cancer  who have no evidence  of disease  or 
stable  disease  on hormone  therapy  can live for many  years,  ultimately  their disease  will 
likely become  resistant  to current  treatment  options.  Additional  therapeutic  strategies  for 
these  patients  are needed.  
 
3.2 Tre atme  nt B ackground  
 
Dr. Livingston  and colleagues  have shown  that some  patients  have antibodies  in their serum  
which react with highly restricted ganglioside antigens present on melanomas and a variety 
of other  cancers.  In some  cases,  they and others  3,4 noted  that the presence  of  these  
antibodies  has been  associated  with an unexpectedly  favorable  course.   As only few patients  
- 4 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
have these  antibodies  in their serum,  we are attempting  to  induce  antibody  formation  by 
immunizing  the patients  with tumor  vaccines  containing  the relevant  antigens.  
 
Adjuvant  immunotherapy  of breast  cancer  with immunizations  must be based  on the 
identification  of antigens  expressed  by breast  cancers,  which  are immunogenic.   While  many  
antigens  have been  identified  on breast  cancers  using  murine  monoclonal antibodies,  very 
few of these  are known  to be recognized  by the human  immune  system.  Several  of the 
antigens commonly identified on breast cancer cells include the gangliosides GM2 and  
Globo  H5,  blood  group -related  antigens  TF, sTn, Lewis  y (Ley)  6 and the protein  MUC17. 
 
3.2.1  Keyhole  Limpet  Hemocyanin   (KLH)    Various  methods  have been used to increase  
the immunogenicity  of antigens,  in particular  to induce  an IgG response.  The approach  
that Dr. Livingston  and colleagues  have found  to be most successful  at inducing  an 
IgG response  against  the closely  related  T antigen  in the mouse  has been covalent  
attachment  to keyhole  limpet  hemocyanin  (KLH).   KLH  is an immunogenic  protein  
which  is derived  from  the blood  of the keyhole  limpet.  This approach  also resulted  in 
anti-T antigen  delayed  type hypersensitivity  reactions  and partial  protection  against  
cancer  cells expressing  T antigen.  8 Studies  of immunological  tolerance  and of ways  
to overcome  it have shown  that in a variety  of experimental  systems,  T-cell (not 
related  to T antigen)  unresponsiveness  is more  rapidly  induced  and more  easily  
maintained  than B cell unresponsiveness  .9 Levels  of circulating  antigens  suitable  for 
maintaining  T-cell tolerance  frequently  fail to maintain  B cell tolerance.  Consequently  
if T-cell help is provided  (as by potent  irrelevant  antigens  such as KLH  covalently  
attached  to the desired  immunogen),  antibodies  can be induced  to tolerated  T-cell 
dependent  antigens.  This approach  has been successfully  used to induce  IgG 
antibodies  against  a variety  of carbohydrate  antigens,  and the titer of antibody  induced  
is greatly  augmented  with the use of immunological  adjuvants.10 
 
3.2.1.1  Conjugationof antigens  to KLH  can be accomplished  using  a direct  method  
or with a  bifunctional  linker  MMCCH  (M2C2H):  (4-(4-N-maleimidomethyl)  
cyclohexane -1-carboxyl  hydrazide.  This latter  method  of conjugation  was 
developed  to improve  the antigen  epitope:KLH  ratio.11    In mice,  this method  
of conjugation  resulted  in higher  antibody  titers  following  immunization  with 
an sTn based  vaccine.  This method  of conjugation  has also been evaluated  at 
MSKCC  with the Globo  H-KLH  plus QS-21 construct in breast  cancer  patients  
(protocol  97-86). 
 
3.2.2  Immune  Adjuvants  
 
QS-21  In addition  to KLH,  the immunological adjuvant  QS-21 has also been used to 
increase immunogenicity of various antigens. QS-21 is a saponin fraction from the 
bark of the South  American  tree Quillaja  saponaria  Molina.  12    Immunization  of mice 
with synthetic  MUC1  peptides  conjugated  to KLH  and mixed  with QS-21 resulted  in 
significant antibody  titers  against  MUC1  peptide  and MUC1  positive  tumor  cells in 
comparison with minimal immune response to  unconjugated MUC1 peptides mixed 
with BCG  or QS-21. 13 Groups  of melanoma  patients  have been immunized  with 
various  constructs  containing  the adjuvants  DETOX,  BCG  and QS21  or no adjuvant  at 
all. QS-21 was a significantly  more  effective  adjuvant  than the others,  producing  
significantly  higher  titer IgM and IgG antibodies.14   A dose of 100 mcg of QS-21 was 
found  to be minimally  toxic  and immunogenic.  15  Therefore,  QS-21 was selected  for 
- 5 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
future trials due to its adjuvanticity and lack of toxicity.  It has also proven nontoxic 
and highly effective at augmenting the immunogenicity of an FeLV subunit vaccine in 
cats 16 and an HIV-1 recombinant  vaccine  in Rhesus  monkeys.  
 
3.3 M SKCC  Expe  rie nce with Immunization  of B re as t Cance  r Patie  nts 
 
Immunization  against  antigens  found  on tumor  cells represents  a potential  therapeutic  
strategy  for breast  cancer patients.  We have conducted  several  clinical  trials  at MSKCC  
in high risk breast cancer patients to assess the safety and immunogenicity of various 
single  antigens  conjugated  to keyhole  limpet  hemocyanin  (KLH)  and mixed  with the 
immune  adjuvant  QS21.  Antigens  included  the peptide  MUC -1 and the carbohydrates  
Globo-H, GM2 and STn[clustered] (protocol numbers 94-130, 95-67, 97-123, 99-023). 
These immunizations were well-tolerated with the most common toxicities including 
transient  local  skin reactions  at the injection  site and mild flu-like symptoms.  Although,  
there  were  no definite  autoimmune  reactions  attributable  to the injection,  several  patients  
developed  hypothyroidism  or hyperthyroidism.  The majority  of patients  developed  IgM 
and IgG antibody  titers  reactive  with the immunizing  antigen.  There  were  no significant  
differences  in the immune  response  observed  among  patients  with no evidence  of disease  
or those with stable disease. No definite T cell responses were elicited in the MUC-1 
trials.17-20 
 
We subsequently evaluated patients on protocol 01-019 with a polyvalent construct 
containing  7 antigens  conjugated  to KLH  and mixed  with either  QS21  or GPI-0100  (a semi- 
synthetic  saponin).21-23  The injections  were  well tolerated  with common  local  skin reactions  
and mild flu-like symptoms.   Several  patients  receiving  GPI-0100  developed  a transient  
Grade  1-3 elevation  in the hepatic  enzymes  (AST,  ALT).   Following an extensive  hepatic  
evaluation, it was felt that the GPI-0100 was the likely source of the hepatotoxicity. 
Therefore,  the adjuvant  GPI-0100  will not be incorporated  into the current  breast  cancer  
trial. The majority  of patients  also developed  antibody  titers  reactive  with multiple  
immunizing  antigens.  
 
 
3.4 Rationale  for Evaluation  of  sialyl  Lewisa (sLea)-KLH  plus QS-21 
 
The carbohydrate  antigen  sLea  is the antigen  recognized  by monoclonal antibody  19.9 
and is commonly  expressed  on breast  cancer  cells.  In a study  of 43 breast  cancer  patients  
with infiltrating  ductal  carcinoma  it was found  in about  79% of samples.24 There  was 
high expression  in patients  with greater  node involvement.  sLea  may be a ligand  for 
endothelial leukocyte  adhesion  molecule  and therefore  have an impact  on metastatic  
potential.  
 
sLea  is expressed  primarily  as a glycolipid  on the surface  of cancer  cells.  We are  
preparing a polyvalent vaccine for evaluation in patients with breast cancer. It contains 
four antigens  expressed  on mucins  (MUC1,  Tn, sTn and TF) and three  antigens  expressed  
as glycolipids  (GM2,  globo  H and Lewis  Y). There  are advantages  to glycolipid  antigens  
including greater  susceptibility  to activation  of complement  in the presence  of antibodies  
and greater induction of complement medicated cytotoxicity, as recently described.24a  We 
have recently learned that Lewis Y is poorly immunogenic, inducing antibodies in fewer 
than 30% of vaccinated  patients.  If sLea  proves  immunogenic  in this trial, we plan to 
replace Lewis Y in the polyvalent construct with sLea. 
- 6 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
 
In this protocol,  we propose  to evaluate  a construct  containing  the antigen  sLea  for 
toxicity  and immunogenicity.  If the injections  are well tolerated  and immunogenic,  then 
sLea   will be incorporated into a future polyvalent construct. This is the first time that 
sLea  is being  evaluated  in humans.  
 
Our prior breast  cancer  immunization  protocols  used 100 mcg of QS-21. The greatest  
toxicity  primarily  occurred  during  weeks  2 and 3. In an attempt  to increase  the 
immunogenicity of the construct, if six or more of the initial ten patients demonstrate an 
immune  response  against  sLea  and the injection  is well tolerated,  the dose of QS-21 will 
be increased  to 150 mcg during  weeks  1, 7 and 19 in a second  group  of 10 patients.  We 
do not anticipate significant increases in toxicity as prior evaluations of 200 mcg of QS- 
21 were  tolerated.  
 
The potential benefits of this study include generation of an anti-tumor response by 
stimulation  of the immune  system.   While  it is possible that this treatment  will result  in 
shrinkage  of breast  cancer tumors,  delay  a recurrence or decrease  the risk of progression,  
it is not known  whether  these  effects  will occur.  If this study  demonstrates  that the sLea- 
KLH conjugate is safe and immunogenic, it will be incorporated into a polyvalent 
vaccine  that will be evaluated  in high risk breast  cancer  patients  for clinical benefit.  
 
3.5 Evaluation  of Circulating  Tumor  Cells  (CTC)  
 
Circulating  tumor  cells (CTC)  can be detected  in the blood  from  patients  with var ious 
primary  or metastatic  carcinomas.  25-29  Recently  the development  of immunomagnetic  
separation  strategies  has increased  the sensitivity  of these  assays.  28,.29   Several studies  
have reported  that the presence  of CTC  predicted  shortened  disease  free and overall  
survival times.  These  studies  demonstrate  that detection  of CTC  correlates  with prognosis  
at baseline  and that changes  in CTC  levels  during  and after treatment  may be more  
predictive  than other  measures.  30-34  Monoclonal  antibody  based  therapy  (trastuzumab)  
with or without  additional  chemotherapy  was particularly  effective  at eliminating  CTC.  
This was associated  with improved  disease  free and overall  survival.28 
 
Use of peripheral blood  immunomagnetically  enriched  for tumor  cells using  labeled  
antibodies  targeting  epithelial cell surface  markers  on breast   cancer cells and quantitated  
using  a CellSpotterAnalyzer  is now FDA  approved  for this purpose  in breast  cancer  
patients.  Veridex,  LLC.  has provided  MSKCC  with a CellSpotterAnalyzer  for this 
purpose in patients with prostate and breast cancer. To date, Dr. Martin Fleisher, Chief of 
the MSKCC  Department  of Clinical Laboratories,  has validated  the assay  in prostate  
cancer  patient  using  the same  labeled  antibodies  which  are FDA  approved  for use in 
breast  cancer  patients.  
 
Two studies  have identified  CTC  in approximately  95% of breast  cancer  patients  with 
Stage  I/II disease  prior to surgery.35,26. After  resection  of all known  disease,  30% of 
patients  continued  to have CTC  that persisted  for at least 2 weeks.  The patients  that we 
propose  to evaluate  are patients  at a high risk for recurrence.  We estimate  that at least 
30% of these  patients  will have demonstrable  CTC.  
 
In this study,  CTC  will be evaluated  in an exploratory  manner  to determine  whether  they 
can be detected  in this patient  population  at baseline  and if so whether  there  is evidence  
- 7 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
of a decline  in those  patients  who have an immune  response.  CTC  will be monitored  prior 
to, during  and after injection  with sLea-KLH  plus QS-21. The patient  and their primary  
oncologist  will be notified  of all CTC  results.  These  results  will be used for research  
purposes  and will not be used during  the study  to alter clinical  care.  Although  some  
physicians at other centers may use CTC results to evaluate response to therapy, this is 
not considered  standard  care at MSKCC.  
 
4.1 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION 
 
4.2 Design  
This is a pilot study designed to assess the safety and immunogenicity of a sLea-KLH plus QS-21 
construct  in patients  with metastatic  breast  cancer.  Initially  3 patients  will be accrued  to the study  
at a 10 mcg dose of sLea. If safe, then 10 patients  will be accrued  at the 30 mcg dose of sLea. If 6 
or more  of  these  10 patients  have an immune  response  at any time point  then an additional  10 
patients will be accrued and injected with a higher dose of  QS-21. Toxicities will be monitored 
during  the study.  Patients  will be instructed  to complete  a patient  diary  and document  any side 
effects.  
 
Patient  blood  samples  will be evaluated  for an IgG and IgM antibody  response  to sLea  and breast  
cancer  cells expressing  this antigen.  Immunological  response  for a patient  is defined  as an 
antibody  response  of greater  than 1:80 if baseline  value  was 0 and at least an increase  of 8-fold if 
baseline  value  is greater  than 0. Patient  blood  samples  will also be monitored  for the presence  of 
circulating  tumor  cells pre study  and then during  weeks  5, 13, and 23. 
 
 
4.3 Inte rve ntio n 
Patients  will receive  sLea-KLH  plus QS-21 subcutaneously  during  weeks  1,2,3,7  and 19. The first 
3 patients  will receive  a 10 mcg dose of sLea   and subsequently  all patients  will receive  a 30 mcg 
dose of sLea. The dose of QS-21 is 100 mcg for the initial 13 patients.  If immune  responses  are 
observed  at the 100 mcg level  of QS-21 then the dose of QS-21 will be escalated  to 150 mcg,  in a 
subsequent  group  of patients  during  weeks  1, 7 and 19. Blood  samples  will be obtained pre study  
and during  weeks  1,2,3,5  7, 9,13,  19 and 23 to assess  for immune  response.  
 
sLea  is one of multiple  antigens  found  on breast  cancer  cells.  Data  from  this trial will be used to 
determine whether the sLea antigen will be included in a future polyvalent construct. Ultimately 
we plan a multicenter  randomized  clinical  trial to assess  potential  clinical  benefit  of 
immunization  with a polyvalent  construct  in high risk breast  cancer  patients.  
 
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  
 
5.1 Clinical  M ate rial 
 
5.1.1  Sialyl lewisa  (sLea)-KLH conjugate  The conjugate is prepared at Optimer 
Pharmaceutical,  Inc. sLea  pentenyl  glycoside  was synthesized  using a proprietary  
synthetic  method  by Optimer  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. under  GMP.  Its identity  was 
confirmed  by MS and NMR  The glycoside  was purified  by reverse  phase  
- 8 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
chromatography  and the purity  established  to be greater  than 99% by NMR  and HPLC  
analysis.  
 
The pentenyl  glycoside group  on sLea  was bound  to M2C2H  heterobifunctional  linker  
following  ozone  treatment.  Keyhole  limpet  hemocyanin  (KLH)  was activated  by 
introduction  of thiol groups  on the KLH  amino  groups  with 2-Iminothiolane.  Activated  
KLH  was mixed  with sLea-M2C2H  and the resulting  sLea-M2C2H -KLH  purified  and 
washed  by diafiltration.  The carbohydrate  and protein  components  were  quantitated  and 
the conjugate was tested for toxicity and immunogenicity in mice. The sLea/KLH ratio 
was determined  to be greater  than 600/1.  The dose of sLea-KLH   to be studied  is 30 mcg.  
However,  due to concerns  regarding  potential  toxicity  3 patients  will first be entered  at a 
dose of 10mcg.  
 
5.1.2  QS-21 QS-21 is a saponin  prepared  from  the bark of Quillaja  saponaria  Molina.  It 
will be supplied  by Antigenics,  Inc.. All injections  will be vialed  with a dose of 100 mcg 
of QS-21. If there  is an immune  response  in at least six of the ten patients,  then in the 
second  group  of patients,  an additional  50 mcg of QS-21 will be added  to the preparation  
during  weeks  1, 7 and 19. 
 
5.1.3  The injection  will contain sLea-KLH  conjugate  30 mcg (10 mcg for the first 3 
patients)  and QS-21 100 mcg per 1 ml 0.9%  saline.  It will be stored  at -80°. The total 
volume  per vial is 1.1 ml. 
 
 
6.1 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
Breast cancer patients with a history of metastatic disease will potentially be eligible. 
 
6.2 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
 
• AJCC  Stage  IV bre ast cancer  who have no evidence  of disease  
OR 
AJCC  Stage  IV bre ast cancer  who have stable  disease  on hormonal  therapy.  Stable  disease  
must be present for at least 2 months  prior to enrollment  in this study.   Stable  disease  includes  
less than a 30% decrease  or less than a 20% increase  in the sum of the  longest  diameters  of 
target  lesions,  taking  as a reference  the baseline  sum of the longest  diameters  recorded  at the 
last set of scans.  Stable  disease  also includes  no new target  lesions  and no unequivocal  
progression  of non-target  lesions.  
(These  patients  may or may not have an elevation  in the CA153  (BR2729)  or CEA  values).  
 
• Performance  status  > 80 (Karnofsky).  
 
• Patients  must have completed  radiation,  chemotherapy  or surgery  at least 4 weeks  prior to 
treatment.  Patients  must have completed  prior immunotherapy  at least 6 weeks  prior to 
vaccination.  Ongoing  hormone  the rapy is pe rmitte  d. 
 
• Pathology slides from the metastatic site must be reviewed by the Department of Pathology at 
MSKCC to confirm diagnosis. 
- 9 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
 
 
6.3 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
 
• Pregnant  women  are ineligible.  Premenopausal patients  must have a pregnancy  test to exclude  
pregnancy  within  2 weeks  of starting  treatment.  Woman  who may yet bear children  and 
sexually  active  men must  use appropriate  contraception  during  the course  of this study.  
Patients  must be counseled  not to become  pregnant  during  the study.  Patients  must also be 
counseled  that injection  of sLe a  may have unknown  affects  on the viability  of a future  fetus.  
 
• Patients  who are nursing  
 
• Patients  with other  active  cancers  are ineligible,  (excluding  basal  cell or squamous  carcinomas  
of the skin).  
 
• Patients  with:  
 
total lymphocyte  count  of < 0.5 x 106/ml. 
total white  blood  cell count  of < 3,000  cells/cmm  
serum  creatinine  >1.5 x upper  limit of normal  
serum  aspartate  aminotransferase   >1.5 x upper  limit of normal  
serum  alkaline  phosphatase  >1.5 x upper  limit of normal.  
 
• Patients  with a history  of a seafood  allergy.  
 
• Patients  with clinically  significant  NY Heart  Association  Class  3 or 4 cardiac  disease.  
 
• Patients  who have previously  been  immunized  with the sLea antigen.  
 
• Patients with a known history of immunodeficiency or autoimmune disease.  Current use of 
immunosuppressive  medications  (ie corticosteroids)  is prohibited.  
 
• Active  infection  requiring  antibiotic  treatment.  
 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
 
Potential  research  subjects  will be identified  by a memb er of the patient‟s treatment  team,  the 
protocol  investigator,  or research  team  at Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  (MSKCC).   If 
the investigator  is a member  of the treatment  team,  s/he will screen  their patient‟s medical  records  
for suitable research study participants and discuss the study and their potential for enrolling in  
the research  study.   Potential  subjects  contacted  by their treating  physician  will be referred  to the 
investigator/research  staff of the study.  
 
The principal investigator  may also screen  the medical  records  of patients  with whom  they do not 
have a treatment  relationship  for the limited  purpose  of identifying  patients  who would  be eligible  
to enroll  in the study  and to record  appropriate  contact  information  in order  to approach  these  
patients  regarding  the possibility  of enrolling  in the study.  
 
During  the initial conversation  between  the investigator/research  staff and the patient,  the patient  
may be asked to provide certain health information that is necessary to the recruitment and 
- 10 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
enrollment  process.   The investigator/research  staff may also review  portions  of their medical  
records  at MSKCC  in order  to further  assess  eligibility.   They  will use the information  provided  
by the patient  and/or  medical  record  to confirm  that the patient  is eligible  and to contact  the 
patient  regarding  study  enrollment.   If the patient  turns  out to be ineligible  for the research  study,  
the research  staff will destroy  all information  collected  on the patient  during  the initial  
conversation and medical records review, except for any information that must be maintained for 
screening  log purposes.  
 
In most cases,  the initial  contact  with the prospective  subject  will be conducted  either  by the 
treatment  team,  investigator  or the research  staff working  in consultation  with the treatment  team.  
The recruitment process outlined presents no more than minimal risk to the privacy of the patients 
who are screened  and minimal  PHI will be maintained  as part of a screening  log.  For these  
reasons,  we seek a (partial)  limited  waiver  of authorization  for the purposes  of (1) reviewing  
medical  records  to identify  potential research  subjects  and obtain  information  relevant  to the 
enrollment  process;  (2) conversing  with patients  regarding  possible enrollment;  (3) handling  of 
PHI contained  within  those  records  and provided  by the potential subjects;  and (4) maintaining  
information  in a screening  log of patients  approached  (if applicable).  
 
Patients  will be recruited  for this protocol  primarily  by their doctor  at MSKCC.  In addition,  patients  
outside  of MSKCC  may be aware  of this trial from  other  patients,  their local doctors  or the National  
Cancer  Information  Center.  
 
Once  a patient  has indicated  an interest  in participation,  he/she  will be referred  to one of the 
consenting  physicians  for further  evaluation  and discussion  of informed  consent.  If the patient  is 
determined  to be eligible,  he/she  will be registered  according  to standard  MSKCC  policy.  
 
Most  patients  with breast  cancer  are female,  but male patients  will not be excluded.  Children  are 
excluded  from  participation  in this study  since  breast  cancer  is rare in this patient  population  and 
therefore  toxicity  analysis  would  be of questionable  significance.  
 
 
8.1 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  
 
Within 2 weeks of the first injection: 
 
Pregnancy  test for premenopausal  patients  
 
 
Within 3 weeks of the first injection: 
 
• Complete  history  and physical  examination  
 
• Complete  blood  cell count  with differential and platelet  count  (CBC)  
 
• Comprehensive  panel  (COMP):  aspartate  aminotransferase  (AST),  alanine  
aminotransferase  (ALT),  albumin,  alkaline  phosphatase,  bilirubin,  calcium,  
creatinine,  glucose,  total protein,  BUN,  sodium,  potassium,  chloride,  C02 
 
• CEA,  CA153(or  BR27 -29 or CA27 -29) 
- 11 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
• Thyroid  stimulating  hormone  (TSH)  level 
 
• Urinalysis  
 
• Rectal  examination  with Hemoccult  
 
• Blood  (3 red-top tubes)  for immune  response  studies  will be sent to Dr. Philip  
Livingst on‟s laboratory  in 723 Kettering  building . An additional  7.5 ml of blood  
will be drawn  in special  tubes  to go to Dr. Fleisher‟s lab in Clinical  Chemistry  for 
assessment  of circulating  tumor  cells.  These  blood  samples  may be drawn  on the 
day of the first injection,  but prior to the injection.  
 
 
Within 4 weeks of the first injection: 
Imaging  and Diagnostic  Studies  
• CT scan of the chest/abdomen/pelvis  
• Radionuclide  bone scan 
 
 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  PLAN  
The initial 3 patients  will be accrued  at 1 or more  week  intervals  and will receive  10mcg  of sLea   
in the sLea-KLH  + 100mcg  QS-21 vaccine.   Four weeks  or more  after accrual  of the third patient,  
3 additional patients may be accrued at 1 week intervals at the full 30mcg sLea  dose . Four weeks 
after accrual  of the sixth patient,  7 additional  patients  may be accrued  at a rate no greater  than two 
patients  per week.  
 
The sLea-KLH  plus QS-21 vaccines  will be injected  during  weeks  1, 2, 3, 7 and 19 for a total of 
five injections.   They  will be stored  in a freezer  at -80 degrees  Centigrade.  At the time of 
administration  the vaccine  will be thawed  and 1ml drawn  up into a syringe.   Each  1.1 ml vial will 
contain  sLea - KLH  conjugate  30 mcg (except  for the 10 mcg dose)  and QS-21 100 mcg per 1 ml 
of 0.9%  saline.  
 
If a second  group  of 10 patients  is evaluated,  then the dose of QS-21 in that group  will be 
increased  to 150 mcg during  weeks  1, 7 and 19 with the dose remaining  the same  for the other  
injections. The same precautions will apply to the rate of patient accrual. The initial 3 patients in 
this group  will be accrued  at 1 or more  week  intervals.  Four weeks or more  after accrual  of the 
third patient,  7 additional  patients  may be accrued.  
 
All injections will be administered by a trained nurse on an outpatient basis in the Experimental 
Therapeutics  Center at 53rd  Street  outpatient  building.  All patients  will be observed  for 30 
minutes  after each injection  to monitor  for acute  allergic  reactions.  
 
The sites of immunization  (arm  or thigh  usually - buttocks  may be used if necessary)  will be 
rotated  for each of the immunizations.  No injection  will be given  at a location  in which  the 
draining  lymph  nodes  have been removed.  
- 12 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
 
10.0 EVALUATION DURING TREATMENT/INTERVENTION 
 
The study  evaluation  will include  parameters  to assess  the safety  of the injections  as well as 
assessments  of immunity  to sLea  (Appendix  A). Interval safety  assessments  will include the „Patient  
Diary‟ (Appendix  B). Patients  will be provided  with Appendix  A and B. Long  term followup  will 
also be maintained  to assess  toxicity.  Although  not a primary  endpoint,  patients  will be monitored  
for any evidence  of an anti-tumor  effect.  Imaging  to assess  extent  of disease  will be performed  at 
baseline,  then as appropriate  for clinical  circumstances.  Patients  with metastatic  disease  are often  
evaluated  with imaging  every  3 months  as standard  of care.  Clinical benefit  will also be assessed  
by physical  examination  and biochemical  studies  as outlined  below.  
SUMMARY  TABLE  OF EVALUATION  
 
STUDY WEEK  Pre 1 2 3 5 7 9 13 19 23 q3 monthsg 
VACCINATION   1 2 3  4   5   
Clinical :            
History X X    X  X X X X 
Physical  Exam  X X    X  X X X X 
CBC  w/ Diff 
COMP  b X 
X     
X X 
X  X 
X X 
X  
X  
CEA,  CA153  X         Xf  
TSH  X     X    X 
Urinalysis  X          
Pathology Re vie w X          
Pregnancy  Test Xa 
Rectal/Hemoccult  X  
Imaging:  
Bone  scan  X Xf
 
CT Scans  X Xf
 
Response  
Assessmentsd 
Anti -sLea  
Immu  nity:  Xf Xf 
Serology  (3 RTT)   X Xe Xe Xe X Xe X X Xe X X 
CTC  Assay  X X X X 
a Within  2 weeks  of the first injection  for a premenopausal patient..  
b Includes  total bilirubin,  AST,  ALT,  Sodium,  Potassium,  Chloride,  CO 2, Calcium,  Glucose,  
Total Protein, Albumin, Alkaline Phosphatase, Creatinine, BUN, Bilirubin. 
c Patients   may  be  asked  to  obtain   tissue   blocks   from   previous   diagnostic/therapeutic  
procedures. 
d Overall  response  assessment  includes  the measurement  of tumor  by non-imaging  studies  
such as physical  exam.  
e Blood  must be drawn  before  administration  of vaccine  at week  1,2, 3, 7 and 19. An extra  
100ml  of heparinized  blood  may be drawn  once (during  weeks  9-23) during  the course  of 
immunizations  depending  on the serologic  response  in individual patients,   at the 
principal  investigators  discretion,   for evaluation  of the immune  response  at the clonal  
level  by hybridoma  production.  
f These studies  will be performed  as standard  of care if deemed  appropriate  by the patient‟s 
physician. 
- 13 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
g If feasible,  a history  and physical  examination  and serology  will be obtained every  3 
months  until evidence  of disease  progression.  
 
10.1 Clinical Course 
 
Patients  will be examined  by oncologists  at Memorial  Hospital and have laboratory  and 
radiographic  studies  performed  as outlined  in the above  table.  As this is a pilot study  
primarily  concerned  with effect  of injection  of sLea  on immune  response,  intensive  clinical  
follow -up at Memorial  Hospital  will not be required.  However,  if feasible,  patients  who 
remain  clinically  stable  will be asked  to return  to Memorial  Hospital  every  3 months  for a 
history  and physical  examination  and laboratory  studies.  
 
The patient  and their primary  oncologist  will be notified  of all CTC  results.  These  results  
are for research  purposes  and will not be used during  the study  to alter clinical  care.  
 
 
10.2 Immunologic  Res ponse  
 
Serological  response :  Three  10 ml red top tubes  will be drawn  before  the first injection,  
before  each subsequent  injection  and also during  weeks  5, 9, 13 and 23. Sera will be 
evaluated  for reactivity  against  sLea  in ELISA  and/or  immunoprecipitation -western  blot 
assays.  These  assays  detect  antibodies  against  sLea  and confirm  identity  of the reaction.  If 
serologic  reactivity  is detected,  then additional blood  (~10ml)  may be drawn  at later  
times  after the injections  are completed  to determine  the duration  of this response  (every  
3 months  if feasible).   An extra  100ml  of heparinized  blood  may be obtained once during  
the course  of immunizations  depending  on the serologic  response  in individual  patients  at 
the principal investigators  discretion,  for hybridoma  production.   This will be used for 
evaluation  of the B-cell response  to vaccination  at the clonal  level by  establishment  of 
monoclonal antibodies.  This will be performed in collaboration with MabVax 
Therapeutics, Inc., (San Diego, CA).  It will make possible more detailed analysis of the 
most immunogenic  epitopes  on sLea  and more  detailed  comparison  of the avidity  of the 
induced IgG and IgM antibodies than is possible with sera. 
 
T cell response  will not be evaluated  since  this is a carbohydrate  antigen  and significant  T 
cell response  is not anticipated.  The immune  response  analyses  will be conducted  in the 
laboratory  of Dr. Livingston  under  Dr. Ragupathi ‟s supervision.  
 
10.3 Circ ulating  Tumo  r Ce ll M e thodo  logy 
 
Epithelial cell adhesion  molecule  (EpCAM)  is used to concentrate  ciruclating  
epithelial tumor  cells from  a 7.5 ml peripheral  blood  specimen.  A semi-automated  
system  called  CellSearch,  uses EpCAM  antibody -based  immunomagentic  capture  of 
epithelial cells to identify  and isolate  circulating  tumor  cells (CTC).  
Immunomagnetically  captured  CTCs  are stained  and enumerated  using  specially  
prepared  buffers  and three  immunofluorescent  markers:  DAPI  to detect cells with 
intact nuclei; Cytokeratin-PE to detect epithelial cells; and CD-45-APC to detect 
leukocytes. CTCs are defined as DAPI(+), CK-PE(+) and CD-45(-) cells. Digitally 
archived  images  of candidate  CTCs  meeting  these  criteria  also must meet  standardized  
morphologic   inspection.  
- 14 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
 
In our earlier  breast  cancer  immunization  trials,  common  toxicities  included  local skin reactions  
at the injection  sites,  flu-like symptoms  (ie, fever,  fatigue,  myalgias, arthralgias),  and less 
frequent  symptoms  such as pruritis,  rashes,  diarrhea,  nausea  and vomiting.  These  symptoms   
were  transient  and usually  of less than 5 days duration.  In addition,  minimal  transient  decreases  
in hematologic  values,  primarily  white  blood  cell counts  and lymphocyte  counts  were  noted.  It is 
unlikely that these  fluctuations  were  due to the vaccine.  Transient  elevation  in various  laboratory  
values  (ie glucose,  liver enzymes)  were  observed  and also thought  unrelated to the vaccine.  
 
Since  the antigen  in this injection  is present  on the surface  of normal  tissues,  the theoretical  
possibility  of a serious  autoimmune  reaction  exists.  In our previous  breast  cancer  trials,  there  
was no consistent  evidence  of an autoimmune  reaction  due to the immunization.  Several  
episodes  of  hyperthyroidism  or hypothyroidism  have occurred  on these  trials.  Patients  were  
subsequently  treated  with radioactive  I-131 or thyroid  supplementation.  It is unclear  whether  
these  events  were related  to the immunization.  Therefore,  the thyroid  stimulating  hormone  level 
will be monitored  pre therapy,  during  therapy  and post therapy.  
 
In addition, no definite evidence of autoimmunity has been observed in immunization trials in 
prostate  or ovarian  cancer  at MSKCC  (personal communication  with Dr. Slovin  and Dr. 
Sabbatini).  Autoimmune  reactions  may be controlled  by cessation  of the immunization  and anti- 
inflammatory  medications.  The symptoms  would  be dependent  on the organs  involved.  These  
may include but are not limited to diarrhea, dyspnea, numbness, weakness, vaginal bleeding, 
inflammation  of the breast  or pancreas  and blood  in the stool.  This autoimmunity  is considered  
unlikely however,  since  cytotoxic  T-cells and antibodies  against  various  antigens  found  on 
breast  cancer  cells have been recognized  in the peripheral  blood  of patients  with breast  cancer in 
the absence  of any evidence  for autoimmunity.  Some  patients  have also demonstrated  baseline  
antibody  titers  against  various  antigens  used in our prior trials.  
 
In MSKCC  protocol  01-019 several  episodes  of transient  asymptomatic  elevation  of the AST and 
ALT levels (grade 1-3) were observed. The finding was though t to be due to the GPI-0100 and we 
do not anticipate  this toxicity  on this trial using  QS-21. 
 
The rare possibility  of allergic  reaction  exists  (ie wheezing,  hives,  fevers,  chills,  dyspnea).  
 
In prior immunization  trials,  moderate  local discomfort  at injection  sites and flu-like symptoms  
were  observed  with QS-21 at the 200 mcg dose.  The 100 mcg dose was found  to be effective  with 
minimal toxicity.  We do anticipate  significant  toxicity  with the higher  dose of QS-21 (150 mcg).  
The only expected  toxicity  of KLH  is local injection  site reaction.  
 
Grade  III or greater  local or systemic  toxicity  will result  in removal  of the patient  from  the study.  
Grade  II or greater  toxicity  of autoimmune  etiology  will result  in removal  from  the study.  Grade  II 
or greater  allergic  toxicity,  excluding  a fever  or flushing,  will result  in removal  from  the study.  
However,  patients  who develop  a fever  > 38 degrees  Centigrade,  thought  to be due to the vaccine,  
will be monitored  for 60 minutes  in the Immunology  Unit following  the next vaccination.  
 
Any patient removed  from  the study  due to toxicity  will result  in suspension  of the study  pending  
further  investigation  and discussion  with the CBER  IND review  team.   In that case,  if mutually  
agreed  on, the trial may resume  at the 10mcg  sLea dose,  if that was well tolerated.  Patients  will be 
counseled  to avoid  pregnancy.  
- 15 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
 
 
Note:  Grade  3 lymphopenia  is acceptable  since  the eligibility  criteria  allows  for a grade  3 baseline  
value.  
 
Adve rse events will be reported to the Institutional Review Board and to the Food and 
Drug  Administration.  Patients  will be asked  to complete  a diary  after each vaccine.  (Appendix  B) 
 
Criteria for Toxicity: Toxicity will be graded in accordance with the Common Toxicity Criteria 
Version  3.0 developed by the National Cancer  Institute  (NCI).  (Refer  to the Internet  web site  
http://www.nci.nih.gov ) 
 
 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  
 
The primary  endpoints  of this trial are toxicity  and immunologic  response.  Patients  will have 
baseline  imaging  studies  to assess  the extent  of the disease.  However,  patients  will not routinely 
undergo  followup  imaging  studies  unless  felt to be appropriate  by their physician  as standard  of 
care.  
 
12.1 Long  Te rm Followup  
 
Patients  will be followed  every  3 months  if feasible  following  completion  of the vaccine  
trial, until evidence  of disease  progression.  Shorter  time intervals  between  visits  may be 
required,  according  to the standard  of care for the patient‟s state of disease.  
 
12.2 Evaluability  
 
Efforts  shall be made  to account  for all patients  entered  into the study  during  the evaluation  
of results.   All patients  will be considered  evaluable  for safety  and immune  response.  
 
12.3 Clinical  Response  
 
Patients  will be monitored  for anti-tumor  effect,  although  this is not a primary  endpoint.  
Patients  who have evidence  of disease  will be evaluated  at week  19 or at the discretion  of 
their physician.  Responses  will be categorized  using  RECIST response  criteria  as follows:  
 
Complete  Response  (CR):  
Target  Response  Criteria:  The disappearance  of all known  disease  and no new sites or 
disease  related  symptoms  confirmed  at least 4 weeks  after initial  documentation.  All sites 
must be assessed,  including  non-measurable  sites,  such as effusions,  or markers  
Non-Target  Response  Criteria:  Disappearance  of all non-target  lesions  and normalization  of 
tumor  markers  level confirmed  at least 4 weeks  after initial documentation.  
 
 
Partial  Response  (PR):  
- 16 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
Target  Response  Criteria:  At least a 30% decrease  in the sum of the longest  diameters  of 
target  lesions,  taking  as a reference  the baseline  sum of the longest  diameters  confirmed  at 
least 4 weeks  after initial documentation.  PR is also recorded  when  all measurable  disease  
has completely  disappeared,  but a non-measurable  component  (i.e., ascites)  is still present  
but not progressing.  
 
Stable  Disease  (SD):  
Target  Response  Criteria:  Neither  sufficient  shrinkage  to qualify for partial  response  nor 
sufficient  increase  to qualify  for progressive  disease.  
Non-Target  Response  Criteria:  Persistence  of one or more  non-target  lesions  and/or  the 
maintenance  of tumor  marker  level above  the normal  limits.  
 
 
Progressive Disease (PD): 
Target  Response  Criteria:  At least a 20% increase  in the sum of the longest  diameters  of 
target  lesions,  taking  as reference  the smallest  sum of the longest  diameters  recorded  since  
the treatment started;  or the appearance  of one or more  new lesions;  or the unequivocal  
progression  of a non-target  lesion.  
Non-Target  Response  Criteria:  Appearance  of one or more  non-target  lesions  and/or  
unequivocal  progression  of existing  non-target  lesions.  
 
13.1 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY 
 
Cessation  of tre atment  
 
Therapy  may be discontinued  at any time due to severe  unacceptable  side effects,  dose- 
limiting  toxicities  as defined,  life-threatening  events,  patient‟s non-compliance  with the 
defined  treatment  plan, the patient  becomes  pregnant  or the patient‟s request to withdraw  
consent.  
 
With  evidence  of recurrent  disease  or progression  of disease,  the patient‟s primary  
physician  will be notified  immediately  by the protocol investigators.   The decision  
regarding  optimal  therapy  will be made  by the patient and the primary  physician.  The 
patient  may continue  on study  if the patient‟s primary  physician  feels it is acceptable  and 
the only change  in therapy  is hormone  therapy.  
 
The following dose limiting toxicities as evaluated during weeks 1-21 will result in 
cessation  of treatment:  
• Grade  2 or greater  autoimmune  reactions  
• Grade  2 or greater  allergic  reactions  (excluding  isolated  fever and/or  flushing)  
• Grade  3 or greater  toxicity  of any kind (excluding  grade  3 lymphopenia)  
 
If any of these  toxicities  occur,  no additional  patients  will be treated  except  
following  mutual  agreement  after discussion  with the CBER  IND review  team.  
- 17 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  
This is a pilot study designed to assess the safety and immunogenicity of immunization with sLea- 
KLH  plus QS-21 in patients  with high risk breast  cancer.   If immune  responses  are observed  at  
the 100 mcg level  of QS-21 then QS-21 will be escalated  to the 150mcg  level. 
 
The immunization  schedule  comprises  five injections  administered  during  weeks  1,2,3,7  and 19. 
The primary endpoint of this trial is to evaluate immunological response to this single antigen and 
evaluate toxicity. Immunological response for a patient is defined as an antibody response of 
greater  than 1:80 if baseline  value  was 0 and at least an increase  of 8-fold if baseline  value  is 
greater than 0.  Initially, three patients will be accrued to the study at a dose of 10 mcg of sLea. If 
safe, then ten patients  will be accrued  to the study  at the full 30mcg  sLea  dose.   If 6 or more  of 
these 10 patients have an immune response at any time point then an additional 10 patients may  
be accrued  and receive  sLea-KLH  plus QS-21 (at 150mcg)  during  weeks  1, 7 and 19. This sample  
size is chosen  to minimize  the total number  of patients  who need  to be immunized  to identify  a 
promising  agent  with a probability  of an immunological  response  greater  than 50% in a series  of 
immunization trials. The error rates of missing a promising agent or selecting a nonpromising 
agent  are set to be at most 10%.36 
 
At the end of the trial a qualitative  assessment  of the number  of responses  and frequency  of toxicities  
will be made  to determine  which  dose of QS-21 will be carried  forward  in future  studies.  
 
Severe toxicities are not anticipated. Toxicities will be tabulated according to the NCI C TC 
version  3.0. Any grade  3 or greater  toxicity  (excluding  grade  3 lymphopenia)  or grade  2 or greater  
allergic/immunologic  toxicity  (except  isolated  fever  and/or  flushing)  will result  in removal  of the 
patient  from  the study.  Since  the above  listed  toxicities are unexpected,  any event  of this sort will 
result  in suspension  of the study  pending  further  investigation.    Descriptive  statistics  summarizing  
the antibody  responses  will be provided  for each patient.  The length  of the study  will be 
approximately  1-2 years.  
 
Circulating  tumor  cells (CTC)   will be evaluated  in an exploratory  manner  to determine  whether  
CTC  can be detected  in this patient  population  at baseline  and if so whether  there  is evidence  of a 
decline  in those  patients  who have an immune  response.  
 
Severe toxicity is not anticipated. Frequencies of all toxicities will be recorded. We plan to accrue 
approximately  1-2 patients  per month  and therefore  accrual should  be completed  in 10 months.  
 
15.1 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION  
PROCEDURES  
 
15.2 Research  Participant  Registration  
 
The following  persons  can obtain  informed  consent:  
 
Teresa  Gilewski  M.D.  
Maura  Dickler  M.D.  
Clifford  Hudis  M.D.  
Larry  Norton  M.D.  
- 18 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
Confirm  in the electronic  medical  record  that the patient  has received  the Notice  of Privacy  
Practice.   This must be obtained  before  the eligibility  confirmation  and obtaining of the research  
informed  consent.  
 
Confirm  eligibility  as defined  in the section  entitled  Criteria  for Patient/Subject  Eligibility.  
 
Obtain  written  informed  consent,  by following  procedures  defined  in section  entitled  Informed  
Consent  Procedures.  
 
All particpants  must be registered  through  the Protocol Participant  Registration  (PPR)  Office  at 
Memorial Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center.   PPR is available  Monday  through  Friday  from  8:30am  
- 5:30pm  at (646)  735-8000.  The PPR fax numbers  are (646)  735-0008  and  (646)  735-0003.  
Registrations  can be phoned  in or faxed.   The completed  signature  page of the informed  consent  
form,  the completed  signature  page of the Research  Authorization  and a completed  Eligibility  
Checklist  must be faxed  to  PPR.  
 
During the registration process registering individuals will be required to answer specific 
eligibility questions and provide the following information: 
 
Registering Individual [Last, First Name] 
Notice  of Privacy  Status  [Yes,  No, N/A]  
Research  Authorization  [Date]  
MSKCC  IRB Protocol#  
Attending  of Record  (if applicable)  [Last,  First Name]  
Consenting  Professional  [Last,  First Name]  
Informed  Consent  Date 
Participant's  Full Name  [Last,  First Name]  
Participant  MRN  
 
 
 
16.1 DATA  MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  
 
A data profile  in Appendix  A will be completed  for all patients.  
 
A Research  Study  Assistant  (RSA)  will be assigned  to the study.  The responsibilities  of the RSA  
include project  compliance,  data collection,  abstraction  and entry,  data reporting,  regulatory  
monitoring,  problem  resolution  and prioritization  and coordination  of activities  of the protocol  
study  team.  
 
The data collected  for this study  will be entered  into a secure  database  at MKSCC.  Data from this 
tria l will be entered  in the Clinical  Research  Data Base (CRDB).  Source  documentation  will be 
available  to support  the computerized  patient  record.  
- 19 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
16.2 Quality  Assurance  
 
Weekly  registration  reports  will be generated  to monitor  patient  accruals  and completeness  of 
registration  data.   Routine  data quality  reports  will be generated  to assess  missing  data and 
inconsistencies.  Accrual rates and extent and accuracy of evaluations and follow-up will be 
monitored periodically throughout the study period and potential problems will be brought to the 
attention  of the study  team  for discussion  and action.  
 
Random -sample  data quality  and protocol  compliance  audits  will be conducted  by the study  team,  
at a minimum  of  two times  per year,  more  frequently  if indicated.  
 
16.3 Data and  Safety Monitoring  
 
The Data and Safety  Monitoring  (DSM)  Plans  at Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  were  
approved  by the National Cancer  Institute  in September  2001.   The plans  address  the new policies  
set forth by the NCI in the document  entitled  “Policy  of the National Cancer  Institute  for Data 
and Safety  Moni toring  of Clinical  Trials” which  can be found  at:  
http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/researchers/dsm/index.html .    The DSM  Plans  at MSKCC  were  
established  and are monitored  by the Office  of Clinical  Research.   The MSKCC  Data and Safety  
Monitoring  Plans  can be found  on the MSKCC  Intranet  at: 
http://mskweb2.msk  cc.org/irb/index.htm  
 
There  are several  different  mechanisms  by which  clinical  trials  are monitored  for data,  safety  and 
quality.   There  are institutional  processes  in place  for quality  assurance  (e.g.,  protocol  monitoring,  
compliance  and data verification  audits,  therapeutic  response,  and staff education  on clinical  
research  QA) and departmental  procedures  for quality  control,  plus there  are two institutional 
committees  that are responsible  for monitoring  the activities  of our clinical  trials  programs.   The 
committees:  Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Committee  (DSMC)  for Phase  I and II clinical  trials,  and 
the Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Board  (DSMB)  for Phase III clinical  trials,  report  to the Center‟s 
Research  Council  and Institutional  Review  Board.  
 
During  the protocol  development  and review  process,  each protocol  will be assessed  for its level 
of risk and degree  of monitoring  required.  Every  type of protocol  (e.g. NIH sponsored,  in-house  
sponsored,  industrial sponsored,  NCI cooperative  group,  etc.) will be addressed  and the 
monitoring  procedures  will be established  at the time of protocol  activation.  
- 20 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
17.1 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  
 
The study  will maintain  the privacy  of the participant  as noted  in Section  7.1 The patient  will be 
informed  that the study  is voluntary  and the participant  may withdraw  at any time.  Alternative  
options  for the patient  are not to participate  in this study  and receive  no therapy  or to receive  
other  treatments  that may include  hormone  therapy,  chemotherapy,  radiation  therapy,  targeted  
therapy,  surgery  or other  investigational therapy.  The patient  will be informed  that there  is no 
known  clinical  benefit  to the immunization  under  evaluation  in this study.  Potential  benefits  
include generation of an anti-tumor response by stimulation of the immune system. 
 
The patient  is responsible  for all costs  excluding  the sLea-KLH  plus QS-21 immunization,  the 
evaluation  of immune  response  and the assessment  of circulating  tumor  cells.  Potential toxicities  
are outlined  in Sections  11 and 13. 
 
17.2 Privacy  
 
It is the responsibility  of the Research  Staff  to ensure  that protocol  subjects  received  the Center‟s 
Notice  of Privacy  Practices.   If the subject  has not received  one, MSK  personnel  must provide  a 
Notice of Privacy Practices and obtain acknowledgment before the subject participates in the 
study.  
 
MSKCC‟s  Privacy  Office  may allow  the use and disclosure  of protected  health  information  
pursuant to a completed and signed Research Authorization form.  The use and disclosure of 
protected  health  information  will be limited  to the individuals  described  in the Research  
Authorization  form.   A Research  Authorization  form  must  be completed  by the Principal  
Investigator  and approved  by the IRB and Privacy  Board.  
 
17.3 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE)  Reporting  
 
Any SAE must be reported  to the IRB as soon as possible  but no later than 5 calendar  days. The 
IRB requires a Clinical Research Database (CRDB) AE report to be delivered to the Institutional 
SAE Manager (307 East 63rd  Street, 1st  Floor) containing the following information: 
Fields populated from the CRDB: 
• Subject‟s name  
• Medical  record  number  
• Disease/histology  (if applicable)  
• Protocol  number  
Data  needing  to be entered:  
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment  (drug,  device,  or intervention)  
• If the AE was expected  
• The severity  of the AE 
• The intervention  
• Detailed text that includes the following information: 
o A explanation  of how the AE was handled  
o A description  of the subject's  condition  
o Indication  if the subject  remains  on the study  
- 21 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
o If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form  
The PI‟s signature  and the date it was signed  are required  on the completed  report.  
For IND/IDE  protocols  : 
The CRDB  AE report  should  be completed  as above  and the FDA  assigned  IND/IDE  number  
written at the top of the report. The report will be forwarded to the FDA by the Institutional SAE 
Manager  through  the IND Office.  
 
17.2.1  IND Safety Reports  
This protocol  is sponsored  under  an IND.  Therefore,  any serious  adverse  events  will be reported  
to the Food  and Drug  Administration  through  the IND office  of Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  
Cancer  Center , as set forth  in FDA  regulation  312.32.  
 
17.3 Reporting  of Othe  r Adve  rse Eve nts 
 
Une xpected  Toxicities  -   an event  that is not  identified  in terms  of  its nature,  
severity  or frequency  of occurrence  in the expected  toxicities.  
 
The MSKCC  IRB must be notified  in writing  within  5 working  days of the event.  
 
Non-tre atme nt Re late d Toxicities 
 
If a toxicity  is not a serious  adverse  event  and unrelated  to the protocol  treatment,  
this must  clearly  be documented  on the flow sheets  which  are submitted  to the 
MSKCC  clinical  trials  office.  This does not in any way obviate  the need  for 
reporting  the toxicities  described  above.  
 
 
 
18.1 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES 
 
A consenting  professional  will explain  the protocol  to the patient. In addition to the 
verbal  explanation,  patients  will receive  the informed  consent  document to read.   If the 
patient agrees  to participate in the trial, the patient  will sign three  copies  of the informed  
consent.  One copy  will be placed  in the patient‟s  medical record,  one copy  will be 
returned  to the patient.  One copy  will be placed  in the research  file. 
 
 
18.2 Research  Authorization  
 
Procedures  for obtaining  Research  Authorization:  Before  any protocol -specific  procedures  are 
carried  out, investigators  and/or  designated  staff will fully  explain  the details  of the protocol,  
study  procedures,  and the aspects  of patient  privacy  concerning  research  specific  information.   In 
addition  to signing  the IRB Informed  Consent,  all patients  must  sign the Research  Authorization  
component  of the informed  consent  form.   The Research  Authorization  requires  a separate  set of 
- 22 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
signatures  from  the patient.   The original signed  documents  will become  part of the patient‟s 
medical  record,  and each  patient  will receive  a copy  of the signed  documents.  
- 23 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
19.1 REFERENCE(S)  
 
1 Cancer  Control  Continuum.  [Online].  Available:  
http ://ca ncerco  ntro l.c a ncer. go v/od/co  ntinuum.  html [accessed  April  19, 2005].  
 
2 Estimated  U.S. Cancer  Prevalence.  [Online]. Available:  
http ://ca ncerco  ntro l.c a ncer. go v/ocs/p  re va le nce/pre  va le nce. html [accessed  May 31, 2005]  
 
3 Livingston  PO, Natoli  EJ, Jones  Calves  M, Stockert  E, Oettgen  HF, O ld LJ. Vaccines  
containing  purified  GM2  ganglioside elicit  GM2  antibodies  in melanoma patients.  Proc Natl 
Acad  Sci USA  84:2911 -2915,  1987.  
 
4 Jones  PC, Sze LL, Liu PY, Morton  DL, Irie RF. Prolonged survival  for melanoma  patients  
with elevated IgM antibody to oncofetal antigen.  JNCI  66:249-254, 1981.  
 
5 Zhang  S, Cordon -Cardo C, Zhang  HS, Reuter  VE, Adluri  S, Hamilton  WB, Lloyd  KO, 
Livingston  PO. Selection of tumor  antigens  as targets  for immune  attack  using  
immunohistochemistry:  I. Focus  on gangliosides.  Int J Cancer  73:42-49, 1997.  
 
6 Zhang  S, Zhang  HS, Cordon -Cardo C, Reuter  VE, Singhal  AK, Lloyd  KO, Livingston  PO. 
Selection  of tumor  antigens  as targets  for immune  attack  using  immunohistochemistry:  II. 
Blood  group -related  antigens. Int J Cancer  73:50 -56, 1997.  
 
7 Zhang  S, Zhang  HS, Cordon -Cardo C, Ragupathi  G, Livingston  PO. Selection of tumor 
antigens  as targets  for immune  attack  using  immunohistochemistry: Protein  antigens.  Clin 
Cancer  Res 4:2669 -2676,  1998.  
 
8 Henningsson  CM, Selvaraj  S, MacLean  GD, et al. T-cell recognition  of a tumor -associated  
glycoprotein  and its synthetic  carbohydrate  epitopes:  stimulation of anti-cancer  T-cell 
immunity in vivo.  Cancer  Immunol  Immunother  25:231,  1987.  
 
9 Romball  GC, Weigle  WO.  T-cell competence to heterologous  and homologous  
thyroglobulins  during  the induction  of experimental  autoimmune  thyroiditis.  Eur J Immunol  
14:887,  1984.  
 
 
10 Longenecker  BM, Willans  DJ, MacLean  GD, et al. Monoclonal  antibodies and synthetic  
tumor -associated  glycoconjugates  in the study  of the expression of Thomsen-Friedenereich- 
like and Tn- like antigens  on human  cancers.  JNCI  78:489-496, 1987.  
 
11 Ragupathi  G, Koganty  RR, Qiu D, Lloyd  KO, Livingston  PO. A novel  and efficient  
method  for synthetic  carbohydrate  conjugate  vaccine  preparation: synthesis  of sialyl Tn-KLH  
conjugate  using  a 4-(4-N-maleimidomethyl) cyclohexane -1-carboyxl  hydrazide (MMCCH)  
linker  arm. Glycoconjugate  Journal  15:217-221, 1998.  
- 24 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
12 Kensil  CR, Patel  U, Lennick  M, and Marciani  D, Separation and characterization  of 
saponins  with adjuvant  activity  from  Quillaja  saponaria  Molina  cortex.  J. Immunol  146:431- 
437, 1991.  
 
13 Zhang  S, Graeber  LA, Helling  F, Ragupathi  G, Adluri  S, Lloyd  KO, Livingston  PO. 
Augmenting the immunogenicity  of synthetic  MUC1  peptide vaccines  in mice.  Cancer  Res 
56:3315 -3319, 1996.  
 
14 Livingston  PO, Ragupathi  G. Carbohydrate  vaccines  that induce antibodies against  cancer.  
2. Previous  experience and future  plans.  Cancer  Immunol  Immunother  45;10 -19, 1997.  
 
15 Livingston  PO, Adluri  S, Helling  F, Yao TJ, Kensil  CR, Newman MJ and Marciani  D. 
Phase  I trial of immunological adjuvant  QS-21 with a GM2  ganglioside -keyhole  limpet  
hemocyanin  conjugate  vaccine  in patients  with malignant  melanoma.  Vaccines  12;1275 -1280,  
1994.  
 
16 Marciani DJ, Kensil  CR, Beltz GA, Hung  CH, Cronier  J, Aubert  A. Genetically  
engineered  subunit  vaccine  against  feline  leukaemia  virus:  protective  immune  response  in 
cats. Vaccine 9:89-96, 1991.  
 
17 Gilewski  T, Adluri  S, Ragupathi G, et al: Vaccination  of high risk breast  cancer  patients 
with mucin -1 (MUC -1) keyhole  limpet  hemocyanin conjugate  plus QS-21.  Clin Cancer  
Research  6:1693-1701, 2000.  
 
18 Gilewski  TA, Ragupathi  G, Bhuta  S, et al: Immunization of metastatic breast  cancer  
patients  with a fully  synthetic  globo  H conjugate:  a phase  I trial. Proc Natl Acad  Science  
98:3270 -3275, 2001.  
 
19 Gilewski  T, Norton  L, Houghton  A, et al: Vaccination of high risk breast  cancer  patients 
(pts) lacking identifiable disease  with GM2 -kehyhole  limpet  hemocyanin (KLH)  conjugate  
plus QS-21 (abstr)  Proc Am Soc Clin Onc 18;316a,  1999.  
 
20 Dickler  M, Gilewski  T, Ragupathi  G, et al: Vaccination of breast  cancer  patients  (pts) with 
no evidence  of disease  (NED)  with sialyl Tn cluster  (sTn[c])-keyhole limpet  hemocyanin  
(KLH)  conjugate  plus adjuvant  QS-21: preliminary  results.  (abstr)  Proc Am Soc Clin Onc 
16:439a,  1997.  
 
21 Armstrong  JL, Ragupathi  G, Powell  S, et al. Preliminary  data of vaccination  of high risk 
breast  cancer  (BC)  patients (pts) with a heptavalent  antigen:  keyhole  limpet  hemocyanin  
(KLH)  conjugate  plus the immunologic  adjuvant  QS-21. Proc Am Soc Clin Onc 22:675,  
2003.  
 
22 Marciani D, Press  JB, Reynolds RC, Pathak  AK, Pathak  V, Gundy  LE, Farmer  JT, 
Koratich MS, May RD. Development of semisynthetic  triterpenoid  saponin derivatives  with 
immune  stimulating  activity.  Vaccine  18:3141-51, 2000.  
- 25 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
23 Slovin  S, Ragupathi  G, Fernandez  C, Randall  E, Diani M, Biechy  C, Verbel  D, Arauz  G, 
Spassova M,  Bornmann  W, Livingston  PO, Danishefsky  S, Scher  H. A bivalent  vaccine  
containing  glycosylated  MUC -2-KLH  and globo  H-KLH  conjugates  using  a new semi- 
synthetic saponin  immunological adjuvant,  GPI-0100  in biochemically relapsed  prostate  
cancer  (PC).  Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol  11;196a, 2002 (abstr).  
 
24 Steplewska-Mazur K, Gabriel A, Zajecki W, Wylezov, Gluck M. Breast cancer 
progression  and expression of blood  group -related  tumor-associated antigens.  Hybridoma  
10:129 -133, 2000.  
 
24a Ragupathi  G, Liu NX, Musselli  C, Powell  S, Lloyd  K and Livingston  PO. Antibodies 
against  tumor cell glycolipids  and proteins, but not mucins,  mediate  complement-dependent 
cytotoxicity.  J Immunol  174 (9):5706 -5712, 2005.  
 
25 Austrup  F, Uciechowski  P, Eder C, Bockmann B, Suchy  B, Driesel G, Jackel  S, Kusiak  I, 
Grill HJ and Giesing  M.. Prognostic  value  of genomic  alterations  in minimal  residual cancer  
cells purified  from  the blood  of breast  cancer  patients.  Br J Cancer  83(12):1664-1673, 2000.  
 
26 Beitsch  PD and Clifford E. Detection of carcinoma cells in the blood  of breast  cancer  
patients.  Am J Surg  180(6):446-448, 2000.  
 
27 Carey  RW, Taft PD, Bennett  JM and Kaufman  S. Carcinocythemia  (carcinoma cell 
leukemia).  An acute  leukemia - like picture  due to metastatic carcinoma  cells.  Am J Med 
60(2):278-278, 1976.  
 
28 Cristofanilli  M, Budd  GT, Ellis MJ, Stopeck  A, Matera  J, Miller  MC, Reuben  JM, Doyle  
GV, Allard  WJ, Terstappen LW, Hayes  DF. Circulating tumor  cells,  disease  progression and 
survival  in metastatic breast  cancer. N  Engl  J Med 351(8):781-791, 2004.  
 
29 Fehm  T, Sagalowsky  A, Clifford  E, Beitsch  P, Saboorian H, Euhus  D, Meng  S, Morrison 
L, Tucker  T, Lane  N, Ghadimi  BM, Heselmeyer -Haddad  K, Ried T, Rao C, and Uhr J. 
Cytogenetic  evidence  that circulating epithelial  cells in patients with carcinoma  are 
malignant.  Clin Cancer  Res 8(7):2073-2084, 2002.  
 
30 Gaforio  JJ, Serrano  MJ, Sanchez -Rovira  P, Sirvent A, Delgado -Rodriguez  M, Campos M, 
de la Torre N, Algarra  I, Duenas  R, and Lozano  A. Detection  of breast  cancer  cells in the 
peripheral  blood  is positively  correlated  with estrogen -receptor  status  and predicts for poor 
prognosis.  Int J Cancer  107(6):984 -990, 2003.  
 
31 Gallivan  MV and Lokich  JJ. Carcinocythemia  (carcinoma cell leukemia).  Report  of two 
cases  with English  literature review.  Cancer  53(5):1100 -1102,  1984.  
 
32 Myerowitz  Rl, Edwards  PA and Sartiano  GP. Carcinocythemia  (carcinoma cell leukemia)  
due to metastatic  carcinoma of the breast:  report  of a case.  Cancer  40(6):3107-3111 1977.  
- 26 - Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 06 -156 A(4)  
Approval date: 24 -Sep-2018   
  
 
33 Terstappen LW, Rao C, Gross  S and Weiss  AJ. Peripheral  blood  tumor  cell load reflects  
the clinical  activity  of the disease in patients with carcinoma of the breast.  Int J Oncol  
17(3):573-578, 2000.  
 
34 Ashworth TR. A case of cancer  in which cells  similar  to those  in the tumors were  seen in 
the blood  after death.  Aust Med J 14:146-147, 1869.  
 
35 Krag DN,  Ashikaga T, Moss  TJ, et al. Breast  cancer  cells in the blood:  a pilot  study.  
Breast  J 5:354 -358, 1999.  
 
36 Yao TJ, Begg  CB, Livingston  PO. Optimal  sample size for a series of pilot trials  of new 
agents.  Biometrics  55:992 -1001,  1996.  
 
20.0 APPENDICES  
 
APPENDIX  A: PATIENT  CALENDAR  
APPENDIX  B: PATIENT  DIARY  