 
 
 
Atovaquone for the Treatment of COVID -19: ATaQ  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Protocol version 2 Approved August 19,2020  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan updated 2.16.21  
 
 
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 Atovaquone for Treatment of COVID -19 
Ataq COVID -19 
 
Study Design: This is a  random ized, double -blind study of atovaquone therapy  in adult 
participants hospitalized with COVID -19. Approximately  60 participants who meet all 
eligibility  criteria may be randomized in a 2:1 atovaquone /placebo  ratio into one of the  
following treatment groups:   
Treatment Group 1: continued standard of care therapy  together with an oral dos e of 
1500 mg  atovaquone twice daily (administered with a meal or snack) for up to 10 days  
Treatment Group 2: continued standard of care therapy  together with matching placebo  
Primary Efficacy Endpoint: Viral load (Log copy number/ml by RT -PCR) from saliva 
collection  at Day 8 from trial entry, or at hospital discharge (if discharged before Day 8).   
Secondary Efficacy Endpoint s:  
 
1. Change in viral load (Log copy number/ml) from baseline to Day 8 (or to 
discharge if discharged before day 8). 
2. Viral load (log copy number/ml by RT/PCR) from saliva  collection at Day 15 or 
hospital discharge if discharged prior to Day 15.  
3. Days from baseline to decrease in viral load by ≥2 Log copy number /ml. 
4. Proportion with  viral clearance (undet ectable by RT -PCR) by last day of 
hospitalization or Day 8 of trial.  
5. Proportion with viral clearance (undetectable by RT -PCR) by last day of 
hospitalization or Day 15 of trial.  
6. Proportion with ≥2 Log copy number/ml  change by Day 8 or by discharge from 
hospital  if discharged before Day 8. 
7. Proportion with ≥2 Log copy number/ml change by Day 15 or by discharge from 
hospital if discharged before Day 15.  
8. Days to viral clearance among those with  viral clearance (unde tectable by RT -
PCR) on last day of hospitalization or Day 8 if still hospitalized.  
9. Days to viral clearance among those with viral clearance (undetectable by RT -
PCR) on the last day of hospitalization of Day 15 if still hospitalized.  
10. Explora tory clinical endpoint: Time to clinical improvement of ≥2 points on the  
ordinal clinical scale  or discharge alive, whichever comes first  
11. Exploratory endpoint: Change in routinely collected clinical biomarkers such as 
CRP, ferritin, D -Dimer, IL -6 hs-cTnT and NT -proBNP  among those randomized 
to treatment vs. placebo  from baseline through day 8 . 
 
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 For all analyses of viral load and clearance, results from salvia samples  will be used for 
primary  and secondary  analyse s. If salvia cannot be obtained (i. e due to mechanical 
ventilation), a nasopharyngeal swab can be used.  
 
Ordinal Clinical Scale  
The ordinal scale is an assessment of the clinical status at the first assessment of a given 
study day.  Obtain Day 8 Ordinal scale   
1. Death  
2. Hospitalized, on invasive mechanical ventilation or ECMO  
3. Hospitalized, on non -invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen devices  
4. Hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen  
5. Hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen  
6. Discharged  
 
Safety Endpoint:  Between group difference in treatment -emergent adverse 
events  leading to study drug dose reduction or discontinuation.  
 
Statistical Methods:  
All analyses will be performed among randomized participants who received at least one 
dose of study drug  and has at least one post -baseline viral load measurement .  
 
1. Given the skewed distribution of the viral load measurement, viral load will be 
compared at Day 8 and end of hospitalization  among those who are discharged prior 
to Day 8 between groups with the Wilcoxon rank -sum test.  
2. Differences between baseline and day 8 or last day of hospitalization if discharged 
prior to Day 8 viral load will be compared between groups with the Wilcoxon rank -sum 
test. Within group differences will be  assessed via the Wilcoxon signed -rank test.   
3. Days from baseline to decrease in viral load by 2 log copy number/ml will be 
determined using  Kaplan -Meier analysis,  and the treatment groups will be compared 
with the log -rank test. The median number of day s from baseline to the decrease in 
viral load will be compared via the Wilcoxon rank -sum test.  
4. Proportions with viral clearance ≥ 2 log copy number change/mL at  Day 8 or last day 
of hospitalization if discharged prior to Day 8 will be compared between gro ups with 
the Chi square test.   
5. Days to clinical improvement ≥2 points on the ordinal scale or discharged alive , 
whichever comes first,  will be determined using  Kaplan -Meier analysis, and the 
treatment groups will be compared with the log -rank test. The c hange in ordinal score 
will be compared between groups via the Wilcoxon rank -sum test.  
There is no methodological approach for handling missing data values that is universally 
accepted in all situations. However, we propose to use an iterative Markov chain Monte 
Carlo method that can be used when the pattern of missing data is monotone (i.e.  a 
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 patient  attends all visits until a visit is missed and never returns) or non -monotone.  Last 
observation carried forward (LOCF) is generally considered as a conservative approach, 
but the MCMC simulation method we propose will reduce the risk of overesti mation of the 
precision of the treatment effect.   
Sample Size and Statistical Power : 
A total of 60 participants will be randomized in a 2:1 ratio to 2 groups (Approximately 40 
participants in atov aquone group and 20 in placebo group) This sample size would result 
in the following statistical power for the viral clearance endpoints  
1. For the endpoint of viral load (log copy number/ml) at  Day 8 and last day of 
hospitalization 1, assuming a mean difference between the groups of 1.6 log copy 
number/mL, with equal standard deviations of 2, the power will be 82%  
2. For the endpoints of differences between baseline and Day 8 or last day of 
hospitalization  viral load, assuming, a mean difference -in-difference of >2.5 with a 
common SD of 3, the power will be >80%  
3. For the endpoint of days from baseline to decrease i n virial load by ≥2 log copy 
number/ml, the power will be >90% assuming a difference of 2 days between the 
treatment groups with a standard deviation of 1 day.  
4. For the analyses of the proportions with viral clearance, and the proportion with ≥2 log 
copy number change at Day 8, the study will have > 80% power to detect a 40% 
absolute difference between groups and 62% power to detect a 30% difference 
between groups .   
5. Because the ordinal scale and biomarker comparisons are exploratory, no power 
calculations are provided  
Aggregate blinded viral load data will be reviewed during the study and if the magnitude 
and/or rate of viral clearance is lower  than estimated , or the standard deviation is higher, 
consideration will be given to increase the sample size accordingly . 
Interim Analysis:  
 The Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) will meet to evaluate data when 50% of 
enrolled patients have completed 10 days. The DSMB  will review number of deaths, 
number of those on ventilators, and grade 3 and 4 drug related toxicities.  
Background  
In December 2019, a series of pneumonia cases of unknown cause emerged in Wuhan, 
Hubei,  China. Sequencing analysis from the patients ’ respiratory tract samples indicated 
a novel  coronavirus (CoV), wh ich was named COVID -19. As of April 21 2020, more than  
9 million  confirme d cases have been identified globally . More than  400,000 deaths  
associated with COVID -19 have b een reported,  making COVID -19 and major health 
emergency.  On March  11, World Health Organization (WHO) declared the resulting 
disease named  COVID -19 as a pandemic2. Clinical efforts to discover potential  vaccines 
and therapeutics are still ongoing with no clear treatment or prophylaxis  for COVID -19 in 
sight. It is safe to say that a suffic ient understanding of SARSCoV -2, and the full clinical 
picture of the resulting COVID -19 disease will take  some time. Similarly, developing and 
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 widely distributing effective vaccines or  novel antiviral drugs is unlikely to occur during 
this season, which l eaves  healthcare systems vulnerable, and risks high mortality rates. 
Alternatively, drug repurposing  strategies can create viable path ways towards 
identification of potential  therapeutics with established safety profiles that can be used 
individually or in  combinations for targeting molecular regulators of replication or the 
survival of  SARS -CoV-2. While these strategies are unlikely to provide immunity or cure,  
they may identify therapeutics that can alter the clinical course of COVID -19 3-8. 
The betac oronavirus genome encodes structural proteins, including the glycosylated  
spike (S) protein that serves as a major inducer of host immune responses.  The spike 
protein mediates host cell invasion via binding to angiotensin  converting  enzyme 2 
(ACE2) (a homo log of angiotensin converting enzyme ACE)  which is a membrane bound 
carboxypeptidase). The cellular invasion process  appears to be mediated by priming of  
the S protein facilitated by the host cell -produced  serine protease TMPRSS2. In addition, 
the viral ge nome also encodes  nonstructural proteins including RNA -dependent RNA 
polymerase (RdRp), coronavirus  main protease (Mpro), and papain -like protease (PLpro)  
5,9,10.  
Therefore, targeting ACE2, TMPRSS211, RdRp, Mpro, and PLpro, as individual  targets, 
or in combination, is a viable strategy for repurposed drugs. To that end,  different drug 
repurposing efforts have been executed starting with data driven  framework coupled with 
in vitro assays . One study demonstrated  the potential of a poly -ADPribose  polymerase 1 
(PARP1) inhibitor, CVL218, currently in a Phase I clinical  trial, that may serve as a 
potential drug candidate to inhibit SARS -CoV-2 replication in  a dose -dependent manner 
and with no obvious cytopathic effect. CVL218  showed potential binding affinity of the N -
terminal domain of nucleocapsid (N)  protein of COVID -19 virus via in -silico analysis11.  
We adopted a repositioning approach using in -silico molecular modeling to screen  FDA 
approved drugs with established safety profiles for potential inhibitory effects on COVID -
19 virus. Starting with the published crystal structure provided us with structural insights 
for the catalytic binding domain and active druggable sites, while co ncurrently elucidating 
free binding energies with respect to binding affinity and interactions.  Our structure -based 
approach for drug screening was focused on targeting  COVID -19 virus Mpro based on the 
elegant work that resulted in solving the crystal  structure of COVID -19 Mpro in complex 
with an inhibitory peptide N3 (PDB ID:6LU7). In particular, that inhibitory peptide binds 
the substrate -binding pocket of  COVID -19 Mpro. This domain was the focus of our screen 
with regards to the potential  hydrophobic bin ding domain and considering the hydrogen 
bond network.  
We started  with structure -based  drug screening  of more  than 2000  FDA approved  drugs  
against  COVID -19 virus  main  Mpro substrate -binding  pocket  focusing  on two potential  
sites (central  and terminal  sites)  to identify  potential  hits based  on their binding  energies,  
binding  modes,  interacting  amino  acids,  and therapeutic  indications.  In addition,  we 
screened  the top hits at both binding  sites for potential  covalent  binding  via nucleophilic  
thiol attack  of Cys 145. We also elucidate d the preliminary  pharmacophore  features  for 
the top candidates  using  the three  strategies  bound  to COVID -19 virus  Mpro substrate -
binding  pocket.  Finally,  we performed  in vitro viral replication  assays  on a number  of the 
top hits in Vero  cells to confirm  antiviral  activity.   
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
  
The top hits that bound  to the central  site of the Mpro substrate -binding  pocket  include d 
anti-viral drugs  such  as darunavir,  nelfinavir  and saquinavir  (some  of which  are already  
being  tested  in COVID -19 patients, ) as well as the hypercholesterolemia  drug 
rosuvastatin  and the anti-malarial  drug atovaquone.  The top hits that bound  to the 
terminal  site of the Mpro substra te-binding  pocket  include  the anti-asthma  drug 
montelukast  and the anti-histamin e drug fexofenadine , among  others.  Finally,  the top 
candidates  predicted  to undergo  covalent  binding  were  atovaqoune,  mitoxantrone,  and 
metamizole.   
 
We performed  viral replica tion assays  on all top hits from our in silico  screen.  The only 4 
drugs  that inhibited  viral replication  out of the top hits using  the 3 docking  strategies  were  all 
predicted  to bind covalently  to Cys145.  These  drugs  are Atovaquone,  Ouabain,  Dronedarone,  
and Mebendazole.  We determined  the following  IC50s  in Vero  E6 cells:  Atovaquone  (1.5
M); 
Ouabain  (0.030  M); Mebendazole  (0.25 -1.2 M) and Dronedarone  (1.5 M– however  
dronedarone  antiviral  was likely  secondary  to cell toxicity).  Drondarone  had significant  cellular  
toxicity,  while  ouabain  is no longer  approved  in the US and mebendazole  in not marketed  in the 
US any longer.  Therefore,  the top hit from our screen  than can be immediately  repurposed  for 
treatment  of COVID -19 patients  is atovaquone .  
 
  
Atovaquone:  
Investigations into t he treatment for COVID -19 span different mechanism s, as no 
consensus has been reached on what is the main driver of pneumonia , respiratory failure  
and systemic complications . One approach is antiviral in which the investigational drug 
would clear viral infection leading to improvement in clinical outcome; an alternative 
approach is anti -inflammatory in which the investigational drug would reduce levels of 
inflammatory cytokines to improve clinical outcomes. Yet, oth er mechanisms are being 
targeted to treat systemic complications of COVID -19 such as anti-thrombo tics to prevent 
and treat associated venous and arterial thromboses . Which mechanism is the main 
driver of clinical morbidity and mortality is unknown. Current ly the most promising of the 
antiviral thera pies under investigation , remdesivir, requires  IV administration, is only 
available in the setting of a clinical trial or by eIND mechanism for compassionate use, 
and cannot be used in those with severe kidney disease. The oral anti-malaria drug s 
hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine are being evaluated for COVID -19 treatment and 
also prophylaxis , but concerns have been raised because of toxicities, most notably that 
both drugs prolong the QT interval with reported cases of Torsades de Pointes associated 
with each .   
In the present study, we chose to focus on the  antiviral approach.  We seek to evaluate 
atovaquone  to (1) determine antiviral activity (2) to explore  if viral reduction or clearance, 
if achieved, is associated with improvement in clinical outcome.  
Atovaquone is an oral solution used as treatment of pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia 
(PJP) , for those unable to r eceive or tolerate trimethoprim -sulfamethoxazole , at a dose of 
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 750 mg twice a day for 21 days. Atovaquone is also used for prophylaxis against PJP at 
a dose of 1500 mg daily. Other labeled indications include: toxoplasmosis treatment and 
babesiosis treatme nt, at doses up to 3000mg daily  in 2-4 divided doses . 
Mechanism of action and spectrum of activity :  Atovaquone is a competitive inhibitor of 
ubiquinol and specifically inhibits the mitochondrial electron transport chain at the bc1 
complex12. Atovoquone is broad -spectrum and is used to treat malaria with an IC 50 against 
malaria in vitro  of 1-3.5nM. However,  it has high levels of plasma protein binding 
substantially decreasing levels of unbound atov aquone12. Atovaquone has also been 
found to inhibit arbovirus es such as Zika and chikungunya virus  replication by depletion 
of  intracellular nucleotides13. Additionally, atovaquone has been shown to reduce the 
interleukin -6/STAT3 signaling pathway in myeloma cells and in acute myeloid leukemia14. 
Drug concentration:   
Molecular weight: 366.837 g/mol  
MEPRON Suspension has been administered at dosage regimens of 500 mg once daily, 
750 mg once daily, and 1,000 mg once daily to deduce C max concentrations at 15.1 ± 6.1 
(40.89 µM), 15.3 ± 7.6  (41.7 µM), and 16.8 ± 6.4 µg/mL (45.79 µM), respectively.  
In the treatment of PJP, average (C avg/ss) plasma concentrations of 10 to <15 g/mL and 
15 to <20 g/mL yielded 79% to 95% success in treatment. The bioavailability of 
atovaquone is variable as determined in 6 clinical trials in HIV patients when used for the 
treatment of  PJP. This is likely to due to solubility and the effect of food  on GI absorption . 
In a study of 33 patients with either HIV or hematological maligna ncy requiring 
atovaquone, patients were dosed 750 mg twice a day and C min was obtained 12 hours 
after evening dose and C max 1-5 hours after morning dose. The median C min (IQR) was 
11.3 g/ml (6.2 -27.8) and median C max (IQR) was 13.4 g/mL (6.0 -28.3) and we re not 
different between HIV and non -HIV patients. Nineteen of 33 (58%) had C min <15g/mL 
which may impact clinical response for PJP.  
Metabolism:  Under normal conditions, there is no evidence that atovaquone is 
significantly metabolized in humans, or that  metabolism is required for drug elimination. 
It may be possible that certain enzymes could be induced and therefore lead to increased 
atovaquone biotransformation, but this has not been demonstrated 15. 
Elimination:  The pharmac okinetic half-life of atovaquone was 62.5 ± 35.3 hours after IV 
administration and ranges from 67.0 ± 33.4 to 77.6 ± 23.1 hours across studies following 
administration of MEPRON Suspension. Atovaquone pharmacokinetics are characterized 
by an extremely long  elimination half -life of 50 –84 h after oral administration of 250 mg 
16.  
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 Distribution:  Atovaquone is extensively bound to plasma proteins (99.9%) and therefore 
the concentration of unbound atovaquone i n the vascular compartment will be 
significantly lower  than measured plasma concentrations17. In a study of atovaquone 
population pharmacokinetics, the volume of distribution of atovaquone was 7.98 L/kg, 
although individual values were markedly linked to bod y weight; the volume of distribution 
shows a linear increase with increased patient body weight18. This volume of distribution 
indicates that atovaquone is not confined to the intravascular space.  
We were unable to find literature describing the tissue concentration of atovaquo ne 
following systemic administration, however, several reports suggest that atovaquone is 
not confined to the intravascular space, despite being highly bound to albumin given that 
it has a low drug clearance rate, which suggests that it likely accumulates in tissue12 
Another level of evidence in support of tissue accumulation of atovaquone is the effective 
concentration needed for its therapeutic effect. While the IC 50 for atovaquone against 
falciparum malaria is in the low nanomolar  range, the IC 50 for atovaquone for  
pneumocystis  jirovecii pneumonia is from 0.1-3.0 ug/ml, which is equivalent to 8.178 
M.  
The IC50 for atovaquone against SARS -CoV-2 in our assay is approximately 800 nM, 
which is well within the therapeutic range as outlined above. Therefore,  we predict 
that the inhibitory effect on SARS -CoV-2 is well within the  FDA approved dosing 
regimen.  
Drug inte raction:  Atovaquone exposure is markedly decreased when taken with rifampin .  
Tolerability:  Atovaquone has been found to be generally well tolerated.  Adverse events 
have been mild and include rash, fever, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and headache.  
Current studies in COVID -19: Currently , an independent single center, single arm open -
label trial is  underway examining atovaquone 750 mg bid for up to 10 days in combination 
with azithromycin 500mg X 1 followed by 250mg daily for up to 10  days for COVID -19. 
[[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]] However, this study is limited by evaluation of atovaquone only in 
combination with  azithromycin and by the absence of a contemporary control group for  
comparison.  
 
Design of the ATaQ COVID -19 Trial  
The purpose of the current study is to accelerate the use of a clinically available  
therapeutic already  FDA-approved  for other indications  in the setting of pandemic  COVID -
19 addressing a serious and emergent unmet medical need . In consideration of the 
information included  in this protocol, the overall risks to participants are outweighed by 
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 the potential benefits of atovaquone experimental therapy for the treatment of COVID -19. 
The benefit -risk balance for this study is  considered positive.  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Diagnosis of COVID -19 by positive RT -PCR  requiring hospitalization  within 72 
hours  
2. Age ≥18 years old  
3. Able to provide informed consent, or (as allowed by IRB), immediate availability of 
designated legally authorized representative  to provide consent by proxy  
4. Anticipated hospitalization for > 48 hours  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
Patient s who meet any of the following exclusion criteria are not to be enrolled in this 
study:  
1) Participation in any other clinical trial  with antiviral activity against COVID -19  
2) Breastfeeding wome n 
3) Known hypersensitivity to atovaquone  or formulation excipient  
4) Active trea tment with rifampin  
5) HIV patients with AIDS requiring treatment for Pneumocystis jirovecii  or Toxoplas ma 
gondii   
6) Not expected to survive  for 72 hours.  
7) >14 days from symptom onset  
Randomization  
Patients who meet eligibility criteria and volunteer to participate will be randomized in a 
2:1 ratio to atovaquone or placebo  on Day 1 using computerized randomization . An 
unblinded investigational pharmacist  not otherwise involved in the trial will know treatment  
assignment  and dispense investigational product . As GI absorption of atovaquone 
increased when taken with food, so we will administer with a meal or snack.  
Blinding  
Double b linding of treatment assignments wil l be performed in this study , with the s tudy 
team and patient s blinded to treatment assignment.  
The list of concomitant medications will be assessed  only from Day 1 prior to enrollment 
to Day 15 or discharge , whichever is earlier.   
Patient  Enrollment and Treatment Assignment  
Entry into screening does not guarantee enrollment into the study. In order to manage the 
total study enrollment, the study researchers may suspend screening and/or enrollment 
at any  at any time.  
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 Pretreatment Assessments  
Screening Visit  
Patient s will be screened within 2 days before randomization and dosing to determine 
eligibility  for participation in the study.  Screening will occur under approved HIPAA waiver 
for research to identify and screen a ll hospitalized COVID -19 positive patients on a daily 
basis.  
Obtain informed consent.  
After informed consent  has been negotiated and the form signed,  the following 
assessments will be performed to determine eligibility  requirements as specified in the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria:  
• Review of f ocused medical history including the following information (e .g., date of 
first symptoms,  overall symptoms, exposure source, demographics, baseline 
characteristics), allergies and  past medical history . 
• Review an d record medications and therapies for the current illness  
• Recording of  vital signs (heart rate, temperature, blood pressure),  body weight, 
and height  
• Documentation of respiratory support : Respiratory Rate , Oxygen supplementation: 
room air, nasal canula, f ace mask, non-rebreather, high -flow device, mechanical 
ventilation ; and FiO 2 
• SpO 2 at rest or PaO2  
• Radiographic findings  
  
Study patient s who qualify and volunteer to participate should be immediately consented 
and randomized. Randomization and initiation of dosing  should occur on the same day if 
possible.  
Baseline/Day 1 Assessments  
The following evaluations are to be completed at the Day 1 visit. The investigator must 
have  confirmed eligibility and signing of consen t before proceeding with randomization 
on the Day 1 visit , followed immediately by first dose of investigational product. The 
assessments can be completed by the patient care team and do not need to be repeated 
by research personnel. The  following assessme nts must be documented before 
administer ing investigational product, using the most recent data available at the time of 
randomization : 
Recording of vital signs (heart rate, temperature, blood pressure, body  weight , height ) 
Documentation of respiratory status:  
Respiratory rate  
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 Oxygen supplementation  and FiO 2: room air, nasal canula, face mask, non-rebreather, 
noninvasive ventilation or  high flow oxygen devices, mechanical ventilation, or ECMO  
Oxygenation: (SpO 2 or PaO 2) 
Radiographic findings (if available)  
Review AEs and document concomitant medications  
Document Ordinal Scale at baseline  
Obtain saliva sample and nasopharyngeal swab samp le for viral load quantification  at day 
1 prior to initial dose  
Obtain blood for research sample  
Daily Study Assessments (Days 2 -10) 
The following evaluations are to be documented daily from Days 2 – 10 or until discharge  
whichever comes earlier , using the data recorded at or closest to 12:00 noon each day : 
• Vital signs (heart rate, temperature, blood pressure), body weight (if available).  
• Documentation of respiratory status:  Respiratory rate , Oxygen supplementation  
and FiO 2: room air, nasal canula, face mask, non-rebreather, noninvasive 
ventilation or  high flow oxygen devices, mechanical ventilation, or ECMO  
• Oxygenation: (SpO 2 or PaO 2) 
• Radiographic findings (if available)  
• Review of AEs and document concomitant medications   
• Saliva sample for COVID -19 RT -PCR  every 12 hours  (Days 2 -8) 
• Saliva sample for COVID -19 RT -PCR once daily (Days 9 -10)  
• Additional blood draws  for biobanking (Day 3,  and 5 only ) 
• A patient who does not have 5 saliva samples collected prior to discharge, the 
patient may be given saliva kits for home collection if deemed that patient can 
follow instructions and collect saliva correctly.  
Clinical Laboratory Assessments  
Clinical labor atory assessments will be conducted as clinically indicated and a ll laboratory 
testing will be completed  by local laboratories. Clinical laboratory data to be captured in 
the trial database will  include serum chemistries , liver function tests, complete blood 
counts including absolute neutrophil count,  CRP, hs-CRP, D -dimer , ferritin, IL -6, troponin, 
NTpBNP .  
SARS -CoV-2 testing will include RT -qPCR to detect or quantify SARS -CoV-2 or virus  
sequencing results  from saliva  (baseline and daily until discharge or death , and 8 days 
and last day of hospitalization or Day 15 if still hospitalized.  
Pretreatment and  posttreatment samples with detectable SARS -CoV-2 may be 
sequenced for resistance monitoring  of the viral polymerase gene . For all clinical 
laboratory tests, except those at Day 1, when more than 1 result is available in a  calendar 
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 day, the value closest to 12:00 noon  should be captured in the eCRF . For Day 1 tests, 
the most recent result before dosing  should be used.  
Physical Examination  
No physical examination is mandated by the study protocol beyond the capture of vital 
signs (heart rate, respiratory rate, temperatu re, blood  pressure, SpO 2 at rest or PaO 2) as 
documented clinical ly.  
Post -treatment Assessments  
Treatment will continue to complete a 10 Day course or until viral clearance is 
documented, whichever occurs first.   
Telephone call on Day 15 and 29  for those discharged. The phone  call  will include a 
brief survey on symptoms  and  information on any re -hospitalizations.   
Final r eview of AE s and concomitant medication  
Vital signs  will be captured if still inpatient  and the ordinal scale will be assessed . 
Assessments for Early Discontinuation from Study  
If a patient  discontinues study dosing (for example, as a result of an AE , intolerance of 
investigational product,  or clinically significant  laboratory abnormality  felt to be at least 
possibly trial -related ), every attempt should be made to keep the patient  in the study and  
continue to perform the required study -related follow -up and procedures . If this is not 
possible or acceptable to the patient  or investigator, t he patient  may be discontinued from 
the trial, with phone call for vital status on trial Day 29. 
Drug Dosage Reduction:   
Atovaquone should be given with food to increase absorption and to possibly limit GI 
intolerance . Known adverse events including nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. If patient 
develops moderate to severe GI symptoms, a reduction in dose to 750 mg bid can be 
instituted per investigator discretion to enhance the likelihood for the patient  to complete 
therap y.  
Criteria for Discontinuation of Study Treatment  
Study medication may be interrupted or discontinued in the following instances:  
 
• Intercurrent illness that would, in the judgment of the investigator, affect 
assessments of  clinical status to a significan t degree. Following resolution of 
intercurrent illness, the patient  may resume study dosing at the discretion of the 
investigator.  
• Unacceptable toxicity, or toxicity that, in the judgment of the investigator, 
compromises the  ability to continue study -speci fic procedures or is considered to 
not be in the patient ’s best  interest  
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 • Patient  request to discontinue for any reason  
• Discontinuation of the study at the request of a regulatory agency or an institutional  
review board (IRB)  
• DSMB recommends termination of trial 
• Patient may be  able to receive  other treatments for COVID -19 at the discretion of 
the treating providers if there is disease progression or after completion of 10 days 
of treatment.  Study medication does not need to be stopped when additional 
medication is started.  
 
End of Study  
The end of the study will occur when the last participant’s last observation (or visit).  
Post Study Care  
The long -term care of the participant will remain the responsibility of their primary treating  
provider . Atovaquone is being supplied with curative intent. There is no provision for post -
study  availability.  
 
  
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 References:  
1. Zheng  S, Fan J, Yu F, et al. Viral  load  dynamics  and disease  severity  in patients  
infected  with  SARS -CoV -2 in Zhejiang  province,  China,  January -March  2020:  
retrospective  cohort  study.  BMJ.  2020;369:m1443.  
2. Malik  YS, Sircar  S, Bhat  S, et al. Emerging  nove l coronavirus  (2019 -nCoV) -current  
scenario,  evolutionary  perspective  based  on genome  analysis  and recent  
developments.  Vet Q. 2020;40(1):68 -76. 
3. Du L, He Y, Zhou  Y, Liu S, Zheng  BJ, Jiang  S. The spike  protein  of SARS -CoV --a target  
for vaccine  and therape utic development.  Nat Rev Microbiol.  2009;7(3):226 -236.  
4. Wrapp  D, Wang  N, Corbett  KS, et al. Cryo -EM structure  of the 2019 -nCoV  spike  in the 
prefusion  conformation.  Science.  2020;367(6483):1260 -1263.  
5. Hoffmann  M, Kleine -Weber  H, Schroeder  S, et al. SAR S-CoV -2 Cell Entry  Depends  on 
ACE2  and TMPRSS2  and Is Blocked  by a Clinically  Proven  Protease  Inhibitor.  Cell.  
2020.  
6. Anthony  SJ, Johnson  CK, Greig  DJ, et al. Global  patterns  in coronavirus  diversity.  
Virus  Evol.  2017;3(1):vex012.  
7. Anand  K, Ziebuhr  J, Wadhwani  P, Mesters  JR, Hilgenfeld  R. Coronavirus  main  
proteinase  (3CLpro)  structure:  basis  for design  of anti-SARS  drugs.  Science.  
2003;300(5626):1763 -1767.  
8. Wang  F, Chen  C, Tan W, Yang  K, Yang  H. Structure  of Main  Protease  from  Human  
Coronavirus  NL63:  Insights  for Wide  Spectrum  Anti -Coronavirus  Drug  Design.  Sci 
Rep.  2016;6:22677.  
9. Gorbalenya  AE, Enjuanes  L, Ziebuhr  J, Snijder  EJ. Nidovirales:  evolving  the largest  
RNA  virus  genome.  Virus  Res. 2006;117(1):17 -37. 
10. Baez -Santos  YM, St John  SE, Mesecar  AD. The SARS -coronavirus  papain -like 
protease:  structure,  function  and inhibition  by designed  antiviral  compounds.  
Antiviral  Res. 2015;115:21 -38. 
11. Chang  KO, Kim  Y, Lovell  S, Rathnayake  AD, Groutas  WC.  Antiviral  Drug  Discovery:  
Norovirus  Proteases  and Development  of Inhibitors.  Viruses.  2019;11(2).  
12. Nixon  GL, Moss  DM,  Shone  AE, et al. Antimalarial  pharmacology  and therapeutics  of 
atovaquone.  J Antimicrob  Chemother.  2013;68(5):977 -985.  
13. Cifuentes  Kottkamp  A, De Jesus  E, Grande  R, et al. Atovaquone  Inhibits  Arbovirus  
Replication  through  the Depletion  of Intracellular  Nucleotides.  J Virol.  2019;93(11).  
14. Stevens  AM, Xiang  M, Heppler  LN, et al. Atovaquone  is active  against  AML  by 
upregulat ing the integrated  stress  pathway  and suppressing  oxidative  
phosphorylation.  Blood  Adv.  2019;3(24):4215 -4227.  
15. Nixon  GL, Moss  DM,  Shone  AE, et al. Antimalarial  pharmacology  and therapeutics  of 
atovaquone.  Journal  of Antimicrobial  Chemotherapy.  2013;68(5 ):977 -985.  
16. Dixon  R, Pozniak  AL, Watt  HM,  Rolan  P, Posner  J. Single -dose  and steady -state  
pharmacokinetics  of a novel  microfluidized  suspension  of atovaquone  in human  
immunodeficiency  virus -seropositive  patients.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother.  
1996;40(3): 556 -560.  
17. Zsila  F, Fitos  I. Combination  of chiroptical,  absorption  and fluorescence  
spectroscopic  methods  reveals  multiple,  hydrophobicity -driven  human  serum  
albumin  binding  of the antimalarial  atovaquone  and related  
hydroxynaphthoquinone  compounds.  Org Biomol  Chem.  2010;8(21):4905 -4914.  
 
STU2020 -0707, Jain, FormA -ResearchProtocol -V2, Mod_3, 08 -10-20  
Protocol version 2  August 2, 2020  
 18. Hussein  Z, Eaves  J, Hutchinson  DB, Canfield  CJ. Population  pharmacokinetics  of 
atovaquone  in patients  with  acute  malaria  caused  by Plasmodium  falciparum.  Clin 
Pharmacol  Ther.  1997;61(5):518 -530.  
 
February 10, 2021  
 
 
 
ATAQ Trial Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Prospectively will o mit any sample with no detectable GADPH housekeeping and any with GADPH Ct >34  
Values below detection limit will be assigned a value ½ between lowest detection limit and zero  
All analyses will be intention -to-treat  
 
Primary analysis: Between group differences in viral load (Log copy  number /ml) using generalized linear 
mixed -effect  models of repeated measures  (GLMM ), using data from all samples  
Secondary/exploratory analyse s: 
1. Between group differences in viral load ( Log copy number/ml ) using GLMM , assessing 
differences at at 3, 5, and 7 days  
2. AUC comparison between groups of viral load (Log copy number/ml ) through day 3 and day 7  
via the trapezoidal rule.  
3. Between group differences in viral load ( Log copy number/ml ) using  GLMM  stratified by  
a. Morning (a)  and evening (b) samples  
b. By any remdesivir  use 
c. By any monoclonal  or polyclonal  antibod y use  
d. By median split of baseline values  
e. By median split time from onset  of symptoms  
f. By median split of BMI  
g. By DM status  
h. Sex 
i. Age 
4. Between group comparison of t ime to drop in viral load ( Log copy number/ml ) of 2 log units  
using Kaplan -Meier estimation  
5. Change of ≥2 points on the ordinal scale at Day 5 by chi -square analysis  