Martino - 1 
 Project Description  
 
Date:  04/07 /2022 Revision of Original Protocol to Adjust for Covid Pandemic  
 Project Title:  Feasibility and Acceptability of The Equus Effect: A Small Randomized Controlled Pilot 
Study of an Equine- facilitated Therapy  
 
Principal Investigator:  Steve Martino, Ph.D.  
 Purpose 
We propose to pilot test an innovative equine- facilitated therapy called The Equus Effect (TEE)  as a 
complement to Veterans ’ existi ng VA mental health services to  improv e social functioning.  TEE aims to 
improve Veterans’ social functioning by developing their emotion regulation and interpersonal skills through 
therapeutic interactions with horses. In line with recommendations for pilot investigations , we will conduct a 
randomized pilot study to 1) evaluate the feasibility of study procedures, assessments,  and outcomes, 2) 
demonstrate experimental and control interventions can be delivered with fidelity, and 3) examine the acceptability of the interventions. To accomplish these goals, we will enroll a transdiagnostic cohort of 40 
Veterans involved in VA mental health services with social dysfunction and emotion dysregulation.  We will 
randomize participants to receive either 1) TEE or 2) attention control (AC), both group int erventions.  Each 
week, the 4-session TEE will include 1) mindfulness  activit ies, 2) emotion regulation and interpersonal skills 
education, 3) experiential activities with horses incorporating opportunities to develop emotion regulation and 
interpersonal  skills, and 4) between- session application of lessons learned from  the equine activities . AC will 
have similar elements without equine features.  Intervention outcom es will be measured at 4- and 16- weeks 
post randomization.  Specifically, using mixed quantit ative -qualitative methods, we aim to: 
Aim 1 :  Determine  the feasibility of recruitment, randomization, retention, assessment procedures, and 
implementation of TEE and AC. Hypothesis : Rates of recruitment will be > 8 participants per month, and 
Veterans randomized to TEE will attend intervention sessions, remain in the study, and experience clinically significant changes in social functioning and emotion dysregulation at rates equal to or superior to AC.  
Aim 2 :  
 Dem onstrate TEE and AC can be delivered with fidelity . Hypothesis : Facilitators will deliver each 
intervention consistently and as intended across sessions.   
Aim 3 :  Establish acceptability of TEE and AC by assessing intervention credibility and satisfaction and the 
usefulness of TEE as a complementary mental health intervention using mixed quantitative- qualitative 
methods . Hypothesis : Veterans will find TEE and AC credible and satisfying and Veterans and their mental 
health clinicians will qualitatively report the therapeutic benefits of TEE  as a complementary and integrative 
health (CIH) intervention for mental health treatment.    
 This small pilot project takes a bold step forward in proposing to investigate EFT with scientific integrity and 
has the potential to lend initial credibility to the therapeutic claims of this increasingly popular CIH. Should data indicate that TEE and methods to study its effects are feasible and acceptable, it will set the stage for a RR&D IIR proposal to test the efficacy of TEE in a multi -site randomized controlled trial . 
 Background 
In 2016 the VA Office of Patient Centered Care and Cultural Transformation (OPCC&CT) launched the Whole 
Health i nitiative to change VA’s healthcare system from a traditional medical model focused on treating specific 
conditions to a more holistic personalized, proactive, patient -driven approach.
1 With Whole Health , Veterans  
develop healthcare plans that center  on achieving meaningful life goals  and improving  functioning, consistent  
with a psychosocial rehabilitation emphasis on recovery -oriented outcomes related to functioning in the 
community.2 A key component of Whole Health is the use of complementary and integrative health (CIH)  
approaches  with traditional services . Currently , one facility in each of 18 VISN s are designated as VA Whole 
Health flagship s ites, and many more VA facilities  within each of these VISNs  are implementing elements of 
the Whole Health system and expanding CIH options for  Veterans .1 
One class of CIH  is animal -facilitate d therapy, such as the use of support dogs3 or interacting with 
horses .4,5 Among animals, horses confer unique therapeutic benefits.   As prey animals, they are extremely 
sensitive to the environment and have developed an ability to assess the emotional states , behaviors, and 
intentions  of their herds, other animals, and predators,6,7 mirror body language,8 and immediately respond to 
Martino - 2 
 subtle nonverbal cues .9  Through domestication, horses  have transferred these skills to relationships with 
people and can sense a person’s emotions  even when the person lacks emotional self -awareness.6,7  Like a 
mirror, they give  immediate feedback about a person’s emotional state and nonverbal behavioral cues (e.g., 
pinning their ears back or walking away from someone who is angry  or abrupt ; moving tensely and putting their 
head up high when someone is anx ious; relaxing with ears forward and approaching a person who is calm ).9-11 
To gain a horse’s cooperation, a person must regulate emotional distress  and present in a calm, patient, 
attentive, and confident manner .  As such, interactions with horses provide opportunities for people to refl ect 
on and change behaviors that impede effective inter personal  connection, collaboration, and control and to 
apply these equine- facilitated experiences in their relationships with other people.12 
Equine- facilitat ed therapy ( EFT) leverages these unique therapeutic benefits  by having people interact with 
horses using  unmounted activities (no riding) , allowing  horses to act naturally  without the control of riders.13 
Typically, a horse specialist and a m ental health prov ider work together with participants .  The horse specialist 
focuses on the participant ’s physical safety and explains the horse’s behaviors, and the mental health provider 
focuses on the participant ’s experience, behavior s, and emotional reactions.  Most programs have participants:  
1) practice mindfulness activities (e.g., deep breathing, body scanning) to i ncrease nonjudgmental self -
awareness of  thoughts, emotions, and sensations , as well as to  prepar e for horse interactions;  2) learn 
didactically about horses  and their therapeutic value; 3) participate in equine activities  (e.g., handling, 
grooming, leading)  to understand  their internal experiences and  explore and address  mental health and 
interpersonal issues ; and 4) debrief  experiences and identify  opportunities for application between 
sessions .4,5,14  EFT  is increasingly available at t he VA, with approximately 30 VA facilities  currently partnering 
with EFT programs for Veterans .15  VA-partnered EFT availability is likely to grow in that the 2018 Military 
Construction and Veterans Affairs Appropriations Act  included an amendment to expand funding by 5 million 
dollars for EFT within the VA .16 
EFT at the VA  has been used to address a variety of  diagnostic issues  commonly experienced by 
Veterans , including PTSD, depression, anxiety, substanc e use and eating disorders, and relationship 
problems .5,17 Wide application of EFT  may be due to its  focus on the management of emotion dysregulation, a 
transdiagnostic phenomenon underpinning impaired functioning associated with many mental health 
conditions.18 In addition, EFT may be recommended when patients respond poorly  to traditional mental health 
treatments ; the complementary value of EFT  is that the salient emotion- based learning with horses may 
cataly ze progress on issues concurrently  addressed in traditional mental health services.14 Finally, preliminary 
reports of EFT  suggest it may help people reduce anger and aggressive behavior ,12,19 improve mood,20 and 
reduce depression21,22 and PTSD symptoms ,22,23 further supporting its transdiagnostic appeal.   None of these 
reports focus  on social functio ning as a main outcome, a surprising absence given that  high quality social 
functioning depends on effective regulation of one’s emotions,24 a presumed key mechanism targeted by EFT.  
Research about EFT  is in its infancy , despite increasing utilization of it in the VA .  Few peer -reviewed 
studies about EFT  exist, and those that do are generally of poor  methodological  quality.4,5,17 Quantitative 
research has been limited by the lack of  operationalized EFT interventions , independent fidelity assessment , or 
use of psychometrically established assessments, control conditions, randomization, or  post-intervention 
follow- ups. In addition, qualitative research has not focused on discerning patients’ perceptions about effective 
and ineffective EFT components or how EFT works to improve functioning and well -being. Furthermore, 
clinicians’ perceptions of benefits catalyzed by EFT within traditional mental health services have not been 
studied, a clear limitation  given the presumed c omplementary value of EFT.  Moreover, almost all the research 
on EFT has focused on school -age chi ldren and adolescents, not adults.  Given VAs increasing embrace of 
EFT, careful ly conducted research that aims to systematically develop and study EFT  for Veterans is sorely 
needed to ensure that it  works . 
 
Significance  
The proposed pilot study will advance knowledge in rehabilitation research by studying the feasibility and 
acceptabil ity of conducting a randomized controlled trial of an EFT, called The Equus Effect  (TEE) , currently 
available to Veterans at VA Connecticut Healthcare System  (VACHS) .  TEE is a 4 -session intervention that  
incorporates  mindfulness strategies, emotion regulation and interpersonal skill development , and experiential 
equine activit ies to improve social functioning for a mixed diagnostic group of Veterans.  Data from the pilot 
study will inform development of a RR&D IIR proposal testing the efficacy of TEE in a multi- site randomized 
controlled trial . The proposed research aligns with the RR&D SPiRE Program Priority Areas  for studying 
Martino - 3 
 promising non -pharmacological activity -based interventions to maximize functional recovery ,25 OPCC&CT 
promotion of  CIH within the Whole Health i nitiative,1 and the VA 2018- 2024 Strategic Plan to ensure Veterans 
receive integrated care and support that emphasizes their well -being and independence.26 
 
Research Plan  
1.  Study design and overview . We will test the feasibility and acceptability of a randomized controlled trial 
design to study TEE to improve social functioning. We will enrol l a transdiagnostic cohort of 40 Veterans with 
social dysfunction and emotion dysregulation  who are receiving VA mental health services and randomize 
them to either  weekly TEE or attention control (AC) sessions over 4 weeks. Social functioning will serve as the 
primary outcome; emotion dysregulation will serve as the secondary outcome. Following best practice 
recommendations for pilot investigations ,27,28 we will use m ixed quantitative and qualitative methods. Feasibility 
will examine performance of study procedures , assessment measures,  and outcomes  (Aim 1) and fidelity of 
TEE and AC (Aim 2) . Acceptability will involve assessing TEE and AC credibility  and satisfaction, as well as 
conducting key informant interviews with Veterans  assigned to TEE  and their clinicians (n = 20) to examine 
perceptions of the acceptability and usefulness  of TEE and the ways in which it complement s standard mental 
health care  (Aim 3).  Intervention outcomes will be measured at baseline and 4- and 16- weeks post -
randomization. 
2.  Study timeline.  Year 1 will include start -up tasks and initiating the pilot trial.  Year 2 will involve completing 
the pilot trial, cleaning and analyzing data, and preparing manuscripts and the RR&D IIR RCT proposal to test 
TEE efficacy  (see Table 1).  
 
Table 1. Study Timeline . 
 Year 1  Year 2  
Activities  Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
IRB X X       
Hire and train RA  X X       
Develop AC  X X       
Develop TEE and AC fidelity measure   X X      
Recruit participants/provide TEE & AC   X X X     
Complete assessments   X X X X    
Enter and clean data   X X X X X   
Analyze data      X X   
Present findings       X X  
Prepare manuscript and RR&D IIR RCT        X X 
 
3.  Setting.  All research procedures will be conducted at VA Connecticut West Haven and Newington 
campuses.  TEE and AC will be delivered off -site at the TEE location  in Sharon, CT.  
4.  Participant e ligibility criteria .  Inclusion criteria for Veterans are: 1) seeing a VACHS mental health 
clinician at  least three times in  the past 3 months with  intent  to remain in treatment during study enrollment ; 2) 
age 18 and over ; 3) social dysfunction (score > 2.5 on the Social Adjustment Scale–S elf-Report  or > 1.5 on the 
Inventory of I nterpersonal Problems –32); 4) emotion dysregulation (score > 95 on D ifficulties in Emotion 
Regulation Scale) ; and 5) consent to all study procedures, including audio recording of group intervention 
sessions. Exclusion criteria are: 1) psychotic disorder as self -reported by the Veteran and verified in the 
electronic health record or as determined by  the M ini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview ; 2) acute 
suicidality, 3) inability to read English or communicate in spoken English; 4) anticipated unavailability  to the 
study during the next 16 weeks; 5) participat ion in any EFT  in the past 24 weeks; and 6) una vailability of a 
landline or cellular telephone. Clinicians are eligible for study participation if 1) they have seen one of the 
Veteran participants assigned to TEE at least th ree times in the past 3 months at the participant’s baseline 
assessment , and 2) this Veteran received at least one TEE session and one psychotherapy /counseling 
session with the clinician prior to the key informant interview.   
 J ustification . Veterans must report a moderate  level of impaired social functioning (primary outcome) for 
study interventions to demonstrate clinically significant changes  in this area; proposed c ut-offs exclude 
Veterans who report few or no problems with social functioning. W e also included a cut -off of at least moderate 
emotion dysregulation (secondary outcome) given how TEE and most EFTs purport to lessen emotion 
Martino - 4 
 dysregulation as a key mechanism to improve social functioning.  Veterans must receive consistent mental 
health treatment  from a clinician  to enable qualitative examination of EFT’s complementary therapeutic value.  
Phone contact is necessary to coordinate transportation to Sharon, CT  and arrange study assessments .  
5.  Randomization.  Eligible Veterans will be recruited to fo rm one TEE and one AC group every four weeks. 
We will use  permuted block randomization (1:1 ratio) , with variable block size, to maintain balanced 
assignment to conditions  given potential differences in monthly recruitment .  The project coordinator will 
conduct randomization.  
6.  Recruitment  and feasibility.  Recruitment will begin at the end of Q2 in Year 1. In FY2018, VACHS served 
over 58 ,687 unique Veterans in Connecticut  and southern New England, with 14,687 enrolled in mental health 
services.  Most Veterans are seen at our West Haven and Newington campuses.  The West Haven campus 
has five outpatient mental health clinics, three intensive outpatient  treatment programs , two residential 
psychosocial rehabilitation treatment programs, and the psychosocial rehabilitation Errera Community Care 
Center.   The Newington campus has two outpatient programs and two intensive outpatient  treatment 
program s. We will recruit 8 -12 Veterans per 4 -week cycle to form a large enough cohort each month for block 
randomizing a sufficient number of Veterans to either TEE or AC.  Hence, recruiting 40 Veterans should take 
about 4 months ; we have planned seven months in our timeline in cas e recruitment is slower than expected.  
Recruiting 40 Veterans should be quite feasible given the large number of Veterans in VACHS  mental health 
services, the broad transdiagnostic eligibility criteria, and record of Veteran engagement in TEE  thus far (> 200 
in the past 4 years) . 
 Direct -to-participant and clinician recruitment will occur via flyers, visits to clinic rounds, and email to 
clinicians  at VA Connecticut sites, including Vet Centers in Connecticut . The study also will be presented to 
Veterans during community meetings at Errera Community Care Center programs located in West Haven and Newington.   In addition, clinicians and peer specialists will be provided with study cards that they can hand to 
Veterans  if they feel the Veterans  might be appropriate for  study participation. If Veteran participants have 
more than one mental health clinician, they will be asked to identify which clinician they see as primarily providing them mental health psychotherapy/ counseling, and the research assistant will invite that pers on to 
participate in the study.  The decision of Veterans’ clinicians to enroll in the study will not affect potential Veteran participants’ study eligibility, particularly because their clinicians will be approached for study  
participation after Veterans have already enrolled.  The PI, project coordinator, and Co- Is will have monthly 
meetings to review the number of individuals assessed  for eligibility  and those who were found ineligible (with 
reasons), declined to participate (with reasons), randomized, started, completed, withdrew, and completed 
assessmen ts at eac h timepoint. Quarterly /semi -annual  reports of these numbers will be provided to the Data 
Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB).  
7.  Screening.  We will seek waivers of writt en informed consent and HIPAA authorization for an initial phone 
screening. The research assistant (RA) will offer Veterans information about the study and invite interested 
parties to complete a brief phone screening on quickly obtained eligibility criteria  (e.g., if they have received 
EFT in the past 6 months) . Individuals who remain eligible will next attend an in -person meeting in which to 
learn more about the study in detail, including completing an additional screening to further determine inclusion 
and exclusion criteria (e.g., completi on of psychiatric interview, social functioning,  and emotion dysregulation 
assessments). If the potential participant is agreeable, t he RA will invite individuals to provide written informed 
consent  and then will complete the screening to determine eligibility.  Only individuals who meet eligibility 
criteria will be invited to continue in the study and participate in the baseline assessment.  
 Given the vacillating COVID -19 pandemic conditions  and Veteran preferences , the entire screening 
process can occur remotely, via phone or a VA -approved video conference platform , rather than in- person . If 
conducted in -person, participants will be required to wear a 2 -ply face mask when in the room with research 
staff, and if they do not have one, one will be provided for them.   Likewise, research st aff will utilize masks and 
social distancing during study visits and will sanitize the office between each in- person visit and at the end of 
the day.   
If conducted remotel y, the consent form will be handled in one of two ways.  Preferably, research staff will 
use an e -consent approach with VA DocuSign. In advance of the next scheduled phone or video conference  
following the brief phone screening, research staff will send a DocuSign envelope (email containing links to the 
informed consent and HIPAA authorization documents ).  The email will contain a reminder for the recipient to 
not sign the document prior to the scheduled contact time to review it and have questions answered.  During 
the remote visit, research staff will review the documents  in the same manner as doing so in person. If the 
Martino - 5 
 potential participant agrees to participate in the continued screening and study, if found eligible, research staff 
will guide them to fill in the fields in the e- consent form (e.g., Last, First, Middle Initial name fields) and to 
electronically sign it and click “FINISH” to finalize the document.  While still on the phone/video conference platform with the participant, research staff will receive an email notification to log into DocuSign, verify that all 
fields are completed accurately, and sign as a witness.  The participant will be shown how to download a copy 
of the informed consent to their computer for their record or will be mailed a hard copy, if preferred.  
If VA DocuSign is infeasible to use with potential participants, the consent form will be mailed to subjects after 
participating in the phone screening to determine initial eligibility.  Upon receipt of the consent form, a nother  
remote  encounter will occur with the potential participant  to review it, and  have it signed and returned to the 
research team, if the Veteran remains interested.  Once received, a member of the research team will meet 
remotely  again with the participant to complete the screening , determine eligibility, and, if found eligible, have 
the participant finish the remaining baseline assessments.  Remote sessions will not be recorded.  
8.  Intervention conditions.  Veterans will receive either TEE or AC, both closed group programs  in which all 
members begin the group intervention at the same time. TEE and AC each will  consist of  four 4- hour weekly 
sessions  over 4- weeks , with 4 -6 Veterans att ending per 4- week cycle . Activities in both conditions contain a 
mixture of indoor and outdoor activities; group facilitators and participants will wear 2- ply face mask s indoors or 
outdoors as dictated by prevailing VACHS guidelines.  Masks will be provided to participants who do not have 
them . Jane Strong and David Sonatore, LCSW will conduct TEE sessions. They are Experiential Learning with 
Horses Instructors  who trained at the Epona Equestrian Services Program in Tucson, A Z – an internationally 
acclaimed equine educational program that trains  people in EFT. They have worked together for the past 
decade developing and delivering TEE to Veterans.   Peer specialists from VACHS or  staff from the facility in 
Sharon, CT not delivering TEE will conduct AC sessions.  They have experience facilitating general support 
groups and will be trained by Dr. Martino to deliver  the control intervention. 
TEE. Each session includes: 1) mindf ulness -based activities;  2) didactics about emotion regulation  and 
interpersonal skills ; and 3) experiential learning activities with horses that provide opportuni ties to practice  
emotion regulation and interpersonal skills. At the end of each session, Veterans debrief about what  they 
learned and identif y how they might apply  this knowledge to manage their mental health concerns and function 
better socially.  Ms. Strong and Mr. Sonatore have prepared a  manual detailing the program’s major 
components and content  and will co-facilit ate its deliver y to participants in this pilot study.  
AC. A C will exclude equine- related activities or discussions  but maintain mindfulness -based activities, 
emotion regulation and interpersonal skills  didactics , and experiential learning activities with between -session 
application. During the first five months of the study, Dr s. Martino , Harpaz -Rotem, and Decker  will develop and 
manualize AC to parallel the focus, content , and activities of TEE. Instead of experiential equine activities, A C 
will rely on team -building activities  (e.g., scavenger hunt ), which aim to enhance social relations by involving 
participants in collaborative tasks and providing opportunities for emotion regulation and interpersonal skills  
practice .29 Group leaders  will practice the finalized  curriculum with the research team in month 5 and then co-
facilitate  it for Veterans randomized to this condition.  
TEE will occur at the horse stables  and pastures /ring where the program occurs in Sharon, CT.  AC will 
occur at a cottage on the same property, but not in the stables and pastures /ring. Table 2  compares  TEE and 
AC sessions. All TEE and AC sessions will be audio recorded, except for the experiential equine activities 
because of excessive logistical challenges.  
Veterans will  have the choice to be transported by van to and from the intervention location by the Peer 
Specialists from VACHS or the Disabled American Veterans Department of Connecticut . If they choose to use 
van transportation provided for this study, they  will first be screened by the driver for symptoms that could be 
consistent with COVID -19 infection.  Participants  will only be permitted to enter the vehicle if they  pass 
symptom screening.  During the drive, they  will always wear 2- ply masks, which will be provided to those who 
do not have one . They  will not be allowed to eat or drink while in the vehicle, and weather permitting, windows 
will be slightly open to allow for air circulation.  COVID -19 risk mitigation procedures for travel will be adjusted 
according to prevailing VACHS guidelines.  
Rationale for AC . For most Veterans , interacting with horses will be  an unusual experience, and driving to 
the countryside and spending four hours in a bucolic setting may confer  therapeutic benefits  (e.g., stress 
reduction). Replicating TEE without  horse -specific components will be  essential to determine therapeutic gains 
specific to equine interactions. We elected not to include interactions with another large, familiar animal (e.g., a 
cow) as a more stringent test of  “the equus effect” because of its impracticality, uncommonness as a  
Martino - 6 
 socia l/recreational activity , and the possibility that other animals could elicit different responses from different 
people (e.g.,  fear/hesitation vs. attraction/approach), making interpretation of potential condition differences 
difficult.  
    
Table 2. TEE vs. AC.  
 Content/Activities  
Session  Focus  TEE AC (manual to be developed)  
 
 
 
1 Mindfulness  Joint fluidity/body scan in horse barn  Joint fluidity /body scan in cottage  
Emotion regulation & 
interpersonal skills  Fear and vulnerability/video, 
discussion w/ parallels to horses  Fear and vulnerability; video, 
discussion ; no horse parallels  
Experiential learning 
activity  Setting healthy boundaries/ 
grooming, leading, yielding, backing 
up with hor se  Team building activity  requiring 
disclosure and boundary 
management  
 
 
2 Mindfulness  Joint fluidity/body scan in horse barn  Joint fluidity/body scan  in cottage  
Emotion regulation & 
interpersonal skills  Anger/ Frustrati on/Agitation; video, 
discussion w/ parallels to horses  Anger/Frustration/Agitation;  video, 
discussion ; no horse parallels  
Experiential learning 
activity  Collaboration/ grooming, obstacle 
course with horse  Team building activity requiring 
collaboration  
 
 
3 Mindfulness  Joint fluidity/body scan in horse barn  Joint fluidity /body scan in cottage  
Emotion regulation & 
interpersonal skills  Sadness and Grief;  video, 
discussion  w/ parallels to horses  Sadness and Grief ; video, 
discussion ; no horse parallels  
Experiential learning 
activity  Collaboration/ grooming, walk 
through labyrinth or trail with horse  Team building activity requiring 
collaboration  
 
 
4 Mindfulness  Joint fluidity/body scan in horse barn  Joint fluidity /body scan in cottage  
Emotion regulation & 
interpersonal skills  Review of emotional states;  video, 
discussion w/ parallels to horses  Review of emotional states;  video, 
discussi on; no horse parallels  
Experiential learning 
activity  Collaboration/ grooming, hooking up 
with horse in roun d pen  Team building activity requiring 
communication in pairs  
 9.  Assessment s. Assessments will occur at screening, baseline, 4 - and 16 -weeks post -randomization. Dr. 
Martino will train the RA (blind  to condition) to administer assessments . Assessments will be conducted either 
in-person or remotely , depending on COVID- 19 pandemic conditions and the participants ’ preference.  As with 
the screening process, if conducted in -person, research staff and par ticipants will be required to wear a 2- ply 
face mask during study visits and social distance.  I f the participants  do not have a mask , one will be provided 
for them.   Research staff will sanitize the office between each in- person visit and at the end of the day.  If 
conducted remote ly, research staff will use either phone or a VA- approved video conference platform. 
Assessment sessions, regardless of mode of delivery, will not be recorded. The RA will schedule assessment 
sessions. Veterans will be instructed to not tell the RA their intervention assignments . 
 Sample description. Demographics will be assessed with the 15 -item Phen -X adult Demographic protocol.  
Military demographics and experiences will be assessed with the 11- item Phen- X Military Service 
Demographics  measure.  The Mini- International Neuropsychiatric Interview30 will assess p sychiatric diagnoses . 
Outcomes . The  primary outcome will be social functioning as measured by the Social Adjustment Scale–
Self Report  (SAS- SR)31 and Inventory of Interpersonal Problems -32 (IIP-32).32 We chose the SAS -SR because 
it details social functioning in a range of  role areas  (e.g., work, social and leisure, family), contains skip- outs for 
nonapplicable items, and has been widely used in clinical trials and outcome research with participants with  
mixed psychiatric diagnostic characteristics.33 The overall SAS- SR score is 1 (no impairment), to 5 (highest 
impairment). We chose IIP -32 because  it taps people’s interpersonal difficulties across role areas (e.g., hard to 
be assertive, too aggressive) and is reliable and valid when used with diagnostically mixed groups of 
psychiatric outpatients.32 The IIP -32 total score is 0 (no difficulties), to 4 (extreme difficulties). Both aspects of 
social functioning may be affected by TEE.  Our secondary outcome is  emotion dysregulation as measured by 
the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS ).34 DERS scores range from 36- 180, with higher scores 
indicating more dysregulation. A total score of >105 falls between nonclinical mean scores  (M=77.99- 80.66)34 
and the mean of adults with extreme interpersonal and emotional dysregulation (M=128.03).35 
Martino - 7 
 Other  outcomes will include mindfulness (Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire),36 psychiatric symptoms 
(Phen- X Cross -Cutting Symptom measure that assess es 13 psychiatric domains, including depression, anger, 
mania, anxiety, somatic symptoms, suicidal ideation, psychosis, sleep problems, memory, repetitive thoughts 
and behaviors, dissociation, personality  functioning, and substance use ),37 PTSD symptoms (PCL -5),38 coping 
skills  (DBT Ways of Coping Checklist),39 and the Brief Pain Inventory (BPI).40 If a participant reports current 
suicidal ideation, the research assistant  will contact the PI, Dr. Martino,  or one of the co- investigators who will 
conduct  a thorough assessment and, as warranted, either contact/escort the Vet to see their clinician and/or 
escort the Vet eran to the psych iatry ER at VACHS .  If this event were to occur during remote assessment 
session, whoever is doing the assessment will contact the PI who will do a more detailed imminent risk 
assessment over the phone.  If the PI believes there is risk and is concerned for the study participant’s safety, 
911 will be called for a welfare check.  
Intervention Fidelity . Fidelity assessment will follow methods from the Yale Adherence and Competence 
System (YACS), a reliable and valid system for assessing fidelity of psychosocial treatments.41 YACS is a 
general rating system for evaluating the adherence (how often) and com petence (how well) of therapists 
delivering psychosocial treatments. Items are developed to capture components of a treatment that are unique and essential (e.g., psychoeducation about unique therapeutic features of horses, experiential equine-
activities), essential but not unique (e.g., teaching emotion regulation or interpersonal skills), and antithetical to 
an approach (e.g., direct confrontation).  Independent raters trained in the system rate items along 7 -point 
Likert scales (adherence = 1 [did not occur], to 7 [extensively]; competence = 1 [very poor], to 7 [outstanding]) to determine the fidelity of intervention delivery. YACS also includes therapist checklists completed after each 
session to indicate intervention elements conducted. Dr. Martino co -authored the last edition of the YACS,
42 
trained many research groups in it as Education Director of the Yale Psychotherapy Development Center, and has modified and used it to assess the different psychotherapies in several studies. Drs. Martino, Harpaz -
Rotem, and Decker will develop a TEE/AC fidelity measure based on the YACS during months 4- 9 of the 
study. Dr. Martino will train two to three independent raters to use the measure to reliably rate all recorded TEE and AC sessions.  We will use therapist checklists completed by TEE and AC group facilitators  each week to 
document adherence to prescribed experiential activities.  
Intervention credibility and satisfaction. T
 he credibility of and satisfaction with TEE and AC will be assessed 
with adaptations of the Credibility and Expectancy of Improvement Scale43 and the Client Satisfaction 
Questionnaire ,44 respectively.  
Key informant interviews . K ey informant individual 20/ 30-minute interviews will take place post -intervention 
to assess Veteran and clinician perceptions of the accept ability , usefulness , and satisfaction  of TEE. Drs. 
Martino, Portnoy, and Fenton, and Ms. Strong and Mr. Sonatore will develop the Veteran and clinician interview guides to ensure questions and probes ascertain main topics. These interviews will be audio 
recorded  using either Microsoft TEAMS (from a VA desktop or laptop) or a VA -approved audio recorder . 
Microsoft TEAMS is a HIPAA- compliant, VA approved platform for video conferencing and has transcription 
generating capacity.  We will also gather some demographic and professional characteristics of clinician 
participants (i.e., age, sex, race/ethnicity, profession/discipline, professional status (e.g., staff, trainee), Veteran status, months treating Veteran, years providing clinical services, and major focus of mental health service 
provided to Veteran)  to characterize the sample. 
10.  Data m anagement.  Quantitative assessment measure responses will be entered into VA REDCap to 
provide secure automated export procedures for data to be downloaded to Excel and common statistical 
packages (e.g., SAS) for data analysis. REDCap catches unclear characters, out -of-range variable and logical 
inconsis tencies. The research assistant wi ll check files m onthly so that errors can be readily corrected.  
11.  Data analysis.  
Quantitative . To assess feasibility (Aim 1), we will use CONSORT reporting standards to diagram the 
number of Veterans screened, found eligible and ineligible (with reasons), consented, attended sessions, 
completed TEE and AC  interventions, and retained through follow -up. We also will track rates of unanticipated 
study -related adverse events in both conditions  and participants’ rate of completion of all outcome measures . 
Means, standard deviations, and median scores will be calculated for outcome assessments. The proport ions 
of participants with clinically significant change in outcomes from baseline to 4- and 16- weeks post -
randomization will be calculated using each measure’s test -retest reliability and clinical cutoffs from the 
literature, or change of two standard deviations from the baseline mean when clinical cut -offs are not 
available.45  To assess intervention fidelity (Aim 2), we will determine the proportion of sessions that contain all 
Martino - 8 
 prescribed program elements and reach YACS -based proficiency and examine intervention discrimination. For 
acceptability (Aim 3), we will examine  means, standard deviations, and median scores calculated for  
intervention credibility and satisfaction measures . 
Qualitative . To further assess acceptability (Aim 3) , we will conduct, audio record, and transcribe verbatim 
key informant  interviews assessing the acceptability, usefulness, and satisfaction of TEE and TEE’s effect on 
the Veterans’ use of traditional mental health services from the perspective of Veterans and their clinicians.  
We will use an established rapid content analysis approach commonly utilized VA- funded research.46 Analysis 
will occur throughout data collection, allowing for quick and accurate reduction of qualitative data and 
production of results useful for evaluating ongoing interventions.46 As transcripts become available, they will be 
reviewed and summarized by two members of the research team  (Drs. Portnoy and Fenton). Discrepancies in 
the summary pairs  will be discussed and resolved through consensus. We will then transfer the summaries into 
matrices and use matrix analysis methods to identify key themes related to the acceptability , usefulness  and 
satisfaction of TEE.47 Matrices systematically note the similarities, differences, and trends in responses across 
interviews, thereby expediting synthesis and summary of findings. We will identify themes that are evident 
across multiple exit interviews. These cross -cutting themes will become the framework for our final analysis, for 
which we will use a hybrid deductive and inductive analytic approach48 in which the established themes will be 
evaluated against the data and new themes will be incorporated into the evolving coding s cheme.49   
Martino - 9 
 References  
1. VA Office of Patient Centered Care and Cultural Transformation, Whole Health for Life  [online]. (2019). 
{cited 2019 Jan 24}  
2. Corrigan, P.W., & Mueser, K.T. (20 16). Principles and practices of p sychiatric rehabilitation: an empirical 
approach, second edition. New York, NY: Guildford Press.   
3. Taylor, M.F., Edwards, M.E., & Pooley, J.A. (2013). Nudging them back to reality": Toward a growing public 
acceptance of the role dogs fulfill in ameliorating contemporary veterans' PTSD symptoms. Ant hrozoos, 26 , 
593-611. 
4. Lee, P., Dakin, E., & McLure, M. (2016). Narrative synthesis of equine- assisted psychotherapy literature: 
Current knowledge and future research directions.  Health and Social Care in the Community, 23 , 225 -246. 
5. Selby, A., & Smith -Osbo rne, A. (2013). A systematic review of effectiveness of complementary and adjunct 
therapies and interventions involving equines.  Health Psychology, 32 , 418 -432. 
6. Mandrell, P.J. (2006). Why horses? In Introduction to equine assisted psychotherapy.  A comprehensive overview (pp. 23 -29). Maitland, FL: Xulon Press.  
7. Vidrine, M., Owen- Smith, P., & Faulkner, P. (2002).  Equine- facilitated group psychotherapy:  Applications 
for therapeutic vaulting.  Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 23 , 587 -603. 
8. Rothe, E.Q., Vega, B.J., Torres, R.M., Soler, S.M.C., & Pazos, R.M.M. (2005). From kids and horses: Equine facilitated psychotherapy for children.  International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology, 5 , 
373-383. 
9. Trotter, K.S. (2008). The efficacy of equine- assisted group counseling with at -risk children and 
adolescents.  Journal of Creativity in Mental Health, 3 , 254 -283. 
10. Path Intl. (2019). About PATH International  [online]. (2019). {cited 2019 Jan 24}  
11. Roberts, F., Bradberry, J., & Williams, C. (2002). Equine- facilitated psychotherapy benefits students and 
children.  Holistic Nursing Practice, 18 , 32-35. 
12. Yorke, J. (2010). The significance of human -animal relationships as modulators of trauma effects in 
children: A de velopmental neurobiological perspective.  Early Child Development and Care, 180, 559 -570. 
13. Thomas, L., & Lytle, M. ( 2016). Transforming therapy through horses . Case stories teaching the EAGALA 
model in action.  EAGALA, the Equine Assisted Growth and Learning Association, Santaquin, UT.  
14. Johansen, S.G., Wang, C.E.A, Binder, P., & Malt, U.F. (2014). Equine- facilitated body and emotion -
oriented psychotherapy designed for adolscents and adults not responding to mainstream treatment: A 
structured program. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 24, 323- 335. 
15. Wallace, S.E. How horse therapy helps treat Veterans’ PTSD. THE WEEK [online]. (2018). {cited 2019 Jan 24} 
16. 2018 Mili tary Construction and Veterans Affairs Appropriations H.Amdt. 771 — 115th Congress (2017-
2018) [online]. (2018). {cited 2019 Jan 24}  
17. Anestis, M.D., Anestis, J.C., Zawilinski, L.L., Hopkins, T.A., & Lilienfeld, S.O. (2014). Equine- related 
treatments for mental disorders lack empirical support: A systematic review of empirical investigations.  Journal of Clinical Psychology, 70, 1115 -1132.  
18. Garland, E.L. & Howard, M.O. (2014). A transdiagnostic perspective on cognitive, affective, and 
neurobiological processes  underlying human suffering. Research on Social Work Practice, 24, 142 –151. 
19. Klontz, B.T., Bivens, A., Leinert, D., & Klontz, T. (2007). The effectiveness of equine- assisted experiential 
therapy: Results of an open trial.  Society & Animals: Journal of Human -Animal Studies, 15, 257- 267. 
20. Meinersmann, K.M., Bradberry, J., & Roberts, F.B. (2008). Equine- facilitated psychotherapy with adult 
female survivors of abuse. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Services, 46 , 36-42. 
21. Masini, A. (2010). Equine- assisted psychotherapy in clinical practice.  Journal of Psychosocial Nursi ng and 
Mental Health Services, 48, 30 -34. 
22. Lanning, B.A., Wilson, A.L., Woelk, R., & Beaujean, A.A. (2018). Therapeutic horseback riding as a 
complementary intervention for military service members with PTSD.  Human -Animal Interaction Bulletin,  6, 
58-82. 
23. Burton, L.E., Qeadan,  F., & Burge , M.R. (2019). Efficacy of equine- assisted psychotherapy in veterans with 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Integrative Medicine, 17, 14-19. 
24. Gross, J.J. (2002). Emotion regulation: Affective, cognitive, and social con sequences. Psychophysiology, 
39, 281 -291. 
25. RR&D Small Projects in Rehabilitation Research (SPiRE) (I21)  [online]. (2019). {cited 2019 Jan 24}  
Martino - 10 
 26. Department of Veteran Affairs FY 2018 -2024 Strategic Plan [online]. (2018). {cited 2019 Jan 24}  
27. Onken, L.S., Carroll, K.M., Shoham, V., Cuthbert, B.N., & Riddle, M. (2014). Reenvisioning Clinical 
Science: Unifying the Discipline to Improve the Public Healt h.  Clinical Psychological Science,  2, 22-34. 
28. Leon, A.C., Davis, L.L., & Kraemer, H.C. (2011). The role and interpretation of pilot studies in clinical research. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45, 626 -629. 
29. Salas, E., Diazgranados, D., Klein, C., Burke, C . S., Stagl, K. C., Goodwin, G. F., & Halpin, S. M. (2008). 
"Does Team Training Improve Team Performance? A Meta -Analysis". Human Factors: The Journal of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 50, 903. 
30. Sheehan, D., Lecrubier, Y., S heehan, K., et al. (1998). The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview 
(M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and 
ICD-10. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 59, 22-33. 
31. Weisman, M.M., & Bothwell, S. (1976). Assessment of social adjustment by patient self -report.  Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 33, 111- 1115.  
32. Barkham, M, Hardy, G.E., & Startup, M. (1996). The IIP -32: A short version of the Inventory of 
Interpersonal Problems . British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 35, 21 -35. 
33. Weissman, M.M., Olfson, M., Gameroff, M.J., Feder, A., Fuentes, M. (2001). A comparison of three scales for assessing social functioning in primary care. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 460 -466. 
34. Gratz, K.L. & Roem er, E. Multidimensional Assessment of Emotion Regulation and Dysregulation: 
Development, Factor Structure, and Initial Validation of the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 26: 1, 41 -54. 
35. Gratz , K.L., Lacroce,  D.M., & Gunderson , J.G. (2006). Measuring changes in symptoms relevant to 
borderline personality disorder following short -term treatment across partial hospital and intensive 
outpatient levels of care. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 12, 153-159. 
36. Baer, R. A., Smith, G. T., Hopkins, J., Krietemeyer, J., & Toney, L. (2006). Using self -report assessment 
methods to explore facets of mindfulness. Assessment, 13 , 27-45. 
37. Narrow, W.E., Clarke, D.E., Kuramoto, S.J., et al. (2013). DSM -5 Field Trials  in the United States and 
Canada, Part III: development and reliability testing of a cross -cutting symptom assessment for DSM -5. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 170 , 71-79. 
38. Bovin, M. J.,  Marx, B.P., Weathers, F.W.,  et al. (2016). Psychometric properties of  the PTSD Checklist for 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders -Fifth Edition (PCL -5) in Veterans. Psychological 
Assessment, 28 , 1379- 1391.  
39. Neacsiu, A., Rizvi, S.L., Vitaliano, P.P., Lynch, T.R., & Linehan, M. (2010). The Dialectical Behavior  
Therapy Ways of Coping Checklist (DBT- WCCL): Development and psychometric properties. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 66, 563- 82. 
40. Cleeland,  C.S., & Ryan , K.M. (1994). Pain assessment: global use of the Brief Pain Inventory. Annals of 
the Academy of Medicine, 23 ,129-38. 
41. Nuro, K.F., Maccarelli, L., Martino, S., Ball, S.A., Baker, S.M., Rounsaville, B.J., & Carroll, K.M. (2005). 
Yale Adherence and Competence Scale. Second Edition. Yale University Psychotherapy Development 
Center Substance Abuse Center, West Haven, CT.  
42. Carroll, K.M., Nich, C., Sifry, R.L., et al. (2000). A general system for evaluating therapist adherence and competence in psychotherapy research in the addictions. Drug & Alcohol Dependence, 57, 225 -238. 
43. Borkovec, T.D., & Nau, S .D. (1972). Credibility of analogue therapy rationales. Journal of Behavior Therapy 
and Experimental Psychiatry, 3 , 257 -260. 
44. Larsen, D.L., Attkinsson, C.C., Hargreaves, W.A., & Nguyen, T.D. (1979). Assessment of client/patient 
satisfaction: Development of a general scale.  Evaluation and Program Planning, 2, 197- 207. 
45. Jacobson, N.S., & Truax, P. (1991). Clinical significance: A statistical approach to defining meaningful 
change in psychotherapy research.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59 , 12-19. 
46. Hamilton A. (2013). Qualitative methods in rapid turn- around health services research. V A HSR&D 
December 11, 2013 2013.  
47. Averill,  J.B. (2002).  Matrix analysis as a complementary analytic strategy in qualitative inqui ry. Qualitative 
Health Research, 12 , 855-866. 
48. Fereday , J., & Muir-Cochrane,  E. (2006). Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis: A hybrid approach 
of inductive and deductive coding and theme development. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 5 , 
80-92. 
Martino - 11 
 49. Ritchie , J., & Spencer , L. (1993). Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research. In: Bryman A, 
Burgess R, eds  (pp. 173 -194). Analysing Qualitative Data . London: Routledge.  
 