Version 2.0 05/04/2018   
Study Protocol Title: Prospective randomized trial of Stratafix vs. Vicryl on operati ng room 
time and wound closure time in Total Hip Arthroplasty.  
 
 
Protocol Version: 2.0 
Protocol Date: 05/04/2018 
Principal Investigator: Dr. Viktor Krebs, Phone#: 216-445 -3834, Email: krebsv@ccf.org 
Funding Sponsor: Johnson and Johnson, Somerville, New Jersey 
Project Contact:   
Christine Romanowski, MD, CCRA  
Sr. Clinical Project Manager  Clinical Development  ETHICON, Inc. a Johns on & Johnson Company  
P: 908-218-3156   F: 908-218-5490 Email: cromanow@its.jnj.com  
 
Regulatory Sponsor: 
This study is an Investigator Ini tiated research trial. Each st udy site will be considered its own 
regulatory sponsor and is responsible for internal data monitor ing and any study reporting 
required by ClinicalTrials.gov.            
Version 2.0 05/04/2018  Introduction: 
Total hip arthroplasty is an eff ective orthopedic procedure to improve function, correct 
gait, and alleviate symptoms of late-stage arthritis in patient s who have failed non-operative 
management.  With constant introduction of various techniques f or wound closure, assessment 
of closure times and outcomes will be a topic of marked importa nce.  
The STRATAFIX (Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson, Somerville, New Je rsey) Knotless 
Tissue Control suture device is a barbed suture that uses ancho r technology to securely engage 
with the soft tissues while also eliminating the need for knots .  The anchors, or barbs, are 
pressed out of the device core o r formed within the core in a g eometric pattern and arranged in a 
tapered manner to allow the device to pass through tissue in th e direction toward the needle 
during closure.  These knotless tissue control devices are depl oyed using a continuous 
technique, which we anticipate to be faster and more cost-effec tive than interrupted suturing. 
 
Background and Significance/Preliminary Studies:  
Preclinical and biomechanical st udies have demonstrated efficac y in cosmetic skin and 
deep tissue closures.[1], [2] In addition, barbed sutures have been shown to provide water-tight 
closure and wound strength comparable to or superior to closure  with conventional sutures. 
Many comparative studies have b een published contrasting barbed  sutures to conventional 
closure techniques in multiple surgical fields. [3], [4] 
Various studies have evaluated t he outcomes of different barbed  suture devices, however 
there are no reports assessing the length of closure times usin g STRATAFIX (Ethicon, Johnson 
and Johnson, Somerville, New Jersey) Knotless Tissue Control De vices during deep closure in 
total hip arthroplasty. Stephens  et al. [5] performed a prospec tive randomized study of 500 total 
knee arthroplasty patients who received either barbed suture (2 50) or conventional sutures (250) 
for deep closure of the surgical wound. The mean operating time  was significantly shorter in the 
barbed group as compared to conventional group (64.3 vs 68.1 mi nutes, p=<0.001). In a study 
of 80 TKA (61 barbed, 19 conventional deep sutures) and 54 THA patients (37 barbed, 17 
conventional deep sutures), Smith et al. [6] found significantl y shorter closure time in the 
barbed suture group (16.78 vs. 26.5 minutes, p<0.001). One stud y reports one the use of Stratfix 
suture for intracorporeal suturi ng in myomectomy. Giampaolino e t al. [7] performed a 
prospective randomized study on 47 patients and evaluated the m ean operative time for 
Version 2.0 05/04/2018  laparoscopic posterior myomectomy using Stratafix or convention al suture for intracorporeal 
suturing. There was a significant decrease in mean operative ti m e  a s s o c i a t e d  w i t h  u s e  o f  
Stratafix suture as compared t o conventional suture (66.3 vs 73  minutes, p=0.005). 
This prospective randomized single-center study will examine th e outcomes, mainly 
closure time, of deep closure during total hip arthroplasty usi ng the STRATAFIX Symmetric 
PDS Plus (Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson, Somerville, New Jersey)  barbed suture compared to 
interrupted VICRYL suture ( Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson, Somerv ille, New Jersey).   
 
Study Design:  
In this prospective study examining the deep closure during tot al hip arthroplasty, active 
subjects will receive the STRATA FIX Symmetric PDS Plus (Ethicon , Johnson and Johnson, 
Somerville, New Jersey) suture while the control subjects will receive interrupted VICRYL 
suture (Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson, Somerville, New Jersey).  Superficial closure will be the 
standard of care for both groups.   The purpose of this study is to c ompare end points (see below):  
 The primary endpoint  of the study will be closure t ime and operative time.   
 Secondary endpoints  will examine: wound complications, costs comparison between th e 
two techniques. 
Post-operatively, patients will be assessed at clinic visits at  6 weeks and 3 months.  At these 
time points, we will assess (Table 1):  
Table 1.  
REQUIRED STUDIES Pre-Op Intra-
operative 6 week post-op 3 month post-op 
Informed Consent x    
Length of surgery time  x   
Length of closure time  x   
Amount of suture material used  x   
Surgeon experience level   x   
Wound complications   x x 
 
Methods 
Version 2.0 05/04/2018   A prospective randomized pilot study 
Sample 
 60 subjects for a pilot study 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Males and females, between the ages of 18 to 80 years at the ti me of signing the 
informed consent document. 
2. Understand and voluntarily sign an informed consent document pr ior to any study-
related assessments/pro cedures are conducted. 
3. Able to adhere to the study vis it schedule and other protocol r equirements. 
4. Able to fluently speak and unde rstand the local language 
5. If female, is non-pregnant (nega tive pregnancy test results at the baseline/randomization 
visit) and non-lactating. 
6. End-stage osteoarthritis pa tients planning to undergo primary t otal hip arthroplasty 
7. BMI less than 40 kg/m2 
Exclusion Criteria: 
1. BMI greater than or equal to 40 kg/m2. 
2. History of known bleeding disorder.  
3. History of medical co-morbidity that may result in poor wound h ealing (i.e. diabetes 
mellitus, peripheral vascular disease). 
4. Patients <18 or >80 years of age.  
5. Patients who are prisoners.  
6. Mentally unable to sign informed consent. 
7. Has an uncontrolled illness that, in the opinion of the investi gator, is likely to cause the 
patient to be withdrawn from the trial or would otherwise inter fere with interpreting the 
results of the study. 
Screening and Recruitment: Informed Consent 
 
Informed consent will be obtained by one of the study coordinat ors/co-investigators 
during a clinical visit prior to procedure in the privacy of an  examination room or an office.  
Patients will be informed about t he study and inquired about th eir interest to participate. A 
consent document will be given an d key parts of the research st udy will be explained in lay-
terms to the patient to ensure  full understand ing.  Any questio ns regarding the research study 
Version 2.0 05/04/2018  will be answered at that time.  It will be emphasized that part icipation is voluntary.  Those 
patients who are willing to part icipate will be asked to sign t he consent documen t along with the 
consenting researcher.  A signed copy of the consent document w ill be handed to the patient 
while another copy is kept  in their study file.   
 
In the event that an approach prior to the day of surgery is no t feasible, same day of 
procedure consenting will be attempted. Patients will be contac ted by telephone (see phone 
script), and those interested in participating in the study wil l be informed about what is 
involved, the follow-up visit, and that participation in the st udy is strictly voluntary, and will not 
affect the scheduling of their upcoming surgery. If the patient  is interested in participating, the 
patient can be either mailed or emailed a copy of the informed consent form, and then 
arrangements will be made to complete the informed consent proc ess prior to the patient being 
taken back into the preoperative  area on the day of surgery. Th e patient will be asked to come to 
the hospital on the day of surgery earlier than the time they w ere told to arrive by surgical 
scheduling in order to make sure there will be adequate time to  discuss the study, including 
what is involved, risks, benefits , and alternatives. We do not believe that an eventual approach 
on the same day of procedure would represent an added stress fo r the patient or delay the start 
of the procedure.  Similar to obtaining informed consent prior t o  t h e  d a y  o f  p r o c e d u r e ,  t h e  
process will occur in a private setting with ample time to disc uss the study’s implications, risks, 
benefits, and alternatives. No procedures or tests will be cond ucted on the screening visit after 
consenting the patient. 
 
Randomization procedures: 
Patients will be randomized to either arm of the study as follo ws: sealed envelopes in a random 
order will be used to place study participants in either the ba rbed suture arm or in the traditional 
suture arm of the study. Patients will be randomized in a one t o one ratio. At the 
commencement of each arthroplasty, a random envelope will be dr awn which dictated the type 
of suture to be used, thus bli nding the patients to the type of  suture they received. 
 
Research Procedure:  
Version 2.0 05/04/2018  A standard posterior approach will be performed by the particip ating surgeons. For the 
traditional closure (control group), Abductor muscles  will be  repaired using Ethibond, and the 
deep fascia will be repaired using interrupted number 1 braided  absorbable sutures (Vicryl, 
Ethicon; Johnson & Johnson, Somerv ille, NJ). The subcutaneous f at layer will be then closed 
with simple interrupted knots using number 2-0 braided absorbab le sutures (Vicryl), followed by 
closure of the subcutaneous layer using a number 2-0 monofilame nt absorbable suture with 
inverted interrupted knots (M onocryl, Ethicon; Johnson & Johnso n) followed by the use of steri-
strips and adhesive (See table 2).  
For the active arm of the study, wound closure will be performe d in this fashion: 
abductor muscles will be repaired using Ethibond 2-0 (Excel MX6 9G), and STRATIFIX 
symmetric PDS Plus #1 will be used to close the fascia. (See Ta ble 2).  The subcutaneous fat 
layer will be then closed with simple interrupted knots using n umber 2-0 braided absorbable 
sutures (Vicryl), followed by cl osure of the subcutaneous layer  using a number 2-0 
monofilament absorbable suture with inverted interrupted knots (Monocryl, Ethicon; Johnson & 
Johnson) followed by the use of ste ri-strips and glue (See tabl e 2).  
Closure with the unidirectional barbed suture involves starting  at the upper end of the 
wound and proceeded distally. At the ends of the wounds, the su ture is backstitched toward the 
midpoint for further reinforcement before bringing the needle o ut through the skin; the suture is 
then cut flush with the tissue at its free end. With each throw , the leading end of the suture is 
pulled with only enough tension to  engage the barbs with the su rrounding tissue, thereby locking 
the wound edges into approximation. As with the traditional clo sure and in concordance with our 
routine protocol, barbed closure s were finished with skin steri -strips and adhesive. 
 
Table 2: Suture Type for Closure  Following Total Hip Arthroplas ty. 
Layer Control Group Active Group 
Muscle Ethibond 2-0 (Excel MX 69G) Ethibond 2-0 (Excel MX69G) 
Fascia Vicryl #1 (J947H#1) S TRATIFIX (SXPP1A04#1) 
Subcutaneous Vicryl 2.0 (J945H  2-0) Vicryl 2.0 (J945H 2-0) 
Subcuticular Monocryl 3.0 ( Y496H) Monocryl 3.0 (Y496H) 
Version 2.0 05/04/2018  Skin Steri-strips, glue (Standard of 
care) Steri-strips, glue (Standard of 
care) 
 
  
Patient Protection: 
 All data collection sheets will be de-identified. All patients  will be assigned a study ID. 
All data collected will be entered into Excel sheet and stored on Cleveland Clinic secure 
computers. Only members of the study team (listed on the IRB ap plication) will have access to 
protected health information of pa tients included in this study .  
 
Safety Monitoring Plan  
Procedural safety will be documented in this study through pati ent and surgeon reported 
adverse events. AEs will be documented for all cases in this st udy. An Unanticipated Problem 
involving risks to participants o r others is any event that (1)  is unforeseen, (2) caused harm or 
placed a person at increased ris k of harm, and (3) is related t o the research procedures. 
An Adverse Event (AE) is any untoward or unfavorable medical oc currence, including 
any abnormal sign (for example, abnormal physical exam or labor atory finding), symptoms, or 
disease. Adverse events can encompass both physical and psychol ogical harms. An Internal 
Adverse Event (AE) is an untoward medical occurrence, which occ urs to participants in 
research conducted by Cleveland Clinic and/or Cleveland Clinic is the IRB of record. External 
Adverse Event (AE) is an untow ard medical occurrence experience d by subjects enrolled at 
other institutions for the same study approved at Cleveland Cli nic or a different study using the 
same study drug/device. A Serious Adverse Event (SAE) is any ad verse experience that results 
in any of the following outcomes: 
 Death 
 A life-threatening experience 
 Inpatient hospitalization or  prolongation of existing hospitali zation 
 A persistent or significan t disability/incapacity. 
 A congenital anomaly/birth defect 
Version 2.0 05/04/2018   Important medical events that may not result in death, be life- threatening, or 
require hospitalization may be c onsidered a serious adverse dru g experience 
when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopard ize the patient 
or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
outcomes listed in this definition. 
An Unexpected Adverse Event means any AE not previously known o r included in the 
current Investigator’s Brochure , consent form or other risk inf ormation. 
Related/Possibly Related means there must be reasonable evidenc e to suggest the event was 
caused by the drug, device or inves tigational intervention. 
1. Internal Serious Adverse Events  ( e v e n t s  t h a t  o c c u r  t o  p a r t i c i p a n t s  e n r o l l e d  i n  
research being conducted by Cleveland Clinic or when Cleveland Clinic is the IRB of record) 
must be promptly reported to the IRB using the IRB AE Report Fo rm within10 working days 
from discovery/awareness which m eet any of the following criter ia as assessed by the PI/Co-I: 
a) Serious, Unexpected and R elated/Possibly Related. 
b) AE’s determined to be occurring at a significantly higher fr equency or severity than 
expected. 
 c) Other Unexpected AE’s, regar dless of severity, that changes  the risk benef it ratio of the 
study and results in changes to the Research Protocol or Inform ed Consent 
process/document. 
            All Internal SAEs are als o reported at continuing r eview using the AE Summary Log. 
 2. External Serious Adverse Events  (events experienced by subjects enrolled at other 
institutions for the same study approved at Cleveland Clinic or  a different study using the same 
study device/drug) are reportable to the IRB using the IRB AE R eport Form within 10 working 
days from discovery/awareness when: 
a. The External SAE report includes reasonable evidence as asse ssed by a central 
monitoring   entity [Coordinating or Statistical Center, or a D ata Safety 
Monitoring Board (DSMB) or Data Monitoring Committee (DMC)] tha t the 
event is Serious, Unexpected, and Related/Possibly Related AND places the 
subjects or others at a greater risk of physical or psychologic al harm than was 
previously known or recognized. This will require a change in t he protocol 
and/or consent document. 
Version 2.0 05/04/2018   b. External SAE reports provided by the Sponsor to the investi gator indicating the 
event is Serious, Unexpected and Related/Possibly related but w ithout reasonable 
evidence or DSMB/DMC determination of greater risk are not repo rtable to the 
IRB within the 10 day window. W ithout Sponsor evidence or asses sment the 
implications of the event cannot be determined by the research team and 
therefore need not be reviewed. These SAE’ shall be placed on t he AE Summary 
log to be submitted at the annual continuing renewal. 
3. DEATHS  are to be reported to the IRB using the IRB AE Report Form acc ording to the 
following guidelines: 
a) Internal Death: 
 Related/possibly related whether expected or unexpected– within  5 working days 
from discovery/awareness 
 Not related and expected – at time of continuing review 
 Not related and unexpected – at tim e of continuing review excep t cancer studies. 
 Cancer: Not related and unexpect ed within 10 working days from 
discovery/awareness 
b) External Death: 
Related/possibly related and un expected – within 5 working days  f r o m  
discovery/awareness not related whether expected or unexpected – at time of 
continuing review related/possibly related and expected – at ti me of continuing 
review 
c) ALL Deaths are also reported at time of continuing review us ing the AE summary 
log. 4. Non-serious Adverse events  (Internal and External) that are both Related/Possibly 
related and unexpected are reported on the AE Summary Log at ti me of continuing review to 
assess trends. 
5. An IRB staff  (a qualified, licensed practiti oner assigned to this function by the IRB chair 
and IRB Executive Director) reviews Adverse Event Reports to de termine whether they 
represent Unanticipated Problem  Involving Risks to Participants  or Others. Events that are 
assessed, by either the IRB Staff or Investigator, to place sub jects or others at a greater risk of 
harm than was previously known or recognized, or changes the ri sk/benefit ratio of the study, or 
Version 2.0 05/04/2018  requires a change in the protocol and/or consent document are r eferred to Full Board for review 
under Policy #70. Events that do not involve risk to Participan ts or Others or changes to the 
informed consent or protocol do not require further review. Inv estigators are informed of the 
determination and the IRB file is updated. 
6. The AE Summary Log  is reviewed by the IRB at the  time of continuing review to 
identify trends in frequency a nd severity which may impact subj ect safety. 
This study is an Investigator Initiated research trial. Each st udy site will be considered 
its own regulatory sponsor and is responsible for internal data  monitoring and any study 
reporting required by C linicalTrials.gov. 
 
Data Analysis:  
Unless otherwise indicated, all testing of statistical signific ance will be two-sided, and a 
difference resulting in a p-value of less than or equal to 0.05  will be considered statistically 
significant. Also, after each analysis, General Linear Models ( GLM) will be used to control for 
possible confounders, including B MI, gender, age and ethnicity.  
 
References: 
[1] A. Sull, S. Inceoglu, A. August, S. Gregorius, and M. D. Wo ngworawat, “Comparison of 
Barbed Sutures in Porcine Flexor Tenorrhaphy,” HAND , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 475–478, 
Dec. 2016. 
[2] P. J. Regier, D. D. Smeak, and K. C. McGilvray, “Security a nd biomechanical strength of 
three end-pass configurations for  the terminal end of intraderm al closures performed with 
unidirectional barbed suture material in dogs,” Am. J. Vet. Res. , vol. 77, no. 12, pp. 1392–
1400, Dec. 2016. 
[3] P. M. Parikh, S. P. Davison, and J. P. Higgins, “Barbed Sut ure Tenorrhaphy: An Ex Vivo 
Biomechanical Analysis,” Plast. Reconstr. Surg. , vol. 124, no. 5, pp. 1551–1558, Nov. 
2009. 
[4] A. M. Trocchia, H. N. Aho, and G. Sobol, “A Re-Exploration o f  t h e  U s e  o f  B a r b e d  
Sutures in Flexor Tendon Repairs,” Orthopedics , vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 731–735, Oct. 2009. 
[5]  Stephens S, Politi J, Taylor BC. Evaluation of Primary Tot al Knee Arthroplasty Incision 
Closure with the Use of Continuous Bidirectional Barbed Suture.  Surg Technol Int. 2011 
Version 2.0 05/04/2018  Dec;21:199–203.  
[6]  Smith EL, DiSegna ST, Shukla PY, Matzkin EG. Barbed versus  traditional sutures: 
closure time, cost, and wound related outcomes in total joint a rthroplasty. J Arthroplasty. 
2014 Feb;29(2):283–7.  
[7]  Giampaolino P, De Rosa N, Tommaselli GA, Santangelo F, Nap pi C, Sansone A, et al. 
Comparison of bidirectional barb ed suture Stratafix and convent ional suture with  
intracorporeal knots in laparoscopic myomectomy by office trans vaginal 
hydrolaparoscopic follow-up: a preliminary report. Eur J Obstet  Gynecol Reprod Biol. 
2015 Dec;195:146–50.  
 