 
atlas : An Interactive Text Messaging Program Combining Weather Alerts With  
Hyper -Localized Resources & Actionable Insights for Addressing Climate Change 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Unique Protocol ID: R43ES035344 
April 18 , 2025  
 
  
Unique Protocol  
Objective:  
The purpose of this research i s to develop and establish the feasibility and potential impact of 
the atlas  in a 30- day pilot test. This  interactive text messaging program leverages insights from 
behavior change science and integrates data from the National Weather Service to engage a 
broad spectrum of users with varying levels of concern about climate change and tailor the user 
experience.   
Design:  
As this i s a Phase I study, it utilizes  a single group, pre- post pilot test of the atlas program . 
The atlas  text messaging program  has various components:  
• providing information on current climate- related and environmental risks (e.g., high 
temperatures, air quality alerts, asthma triggers etc.) that might adversely affect a user’s 
current health conditions;  
• linking users to local zip- code matched resources to mitigate their specific risk (e.g., 
cooling centers, hurricane shelters)  
• implementing a full range of best practices in tailored health behavior change communications to personalize ongoing communications regarding the link between 
human actions and extreme weather based on the user’s level of concern about and 
belief in climat e change;  
• providing customized actionable tips for addressing climate change to promote climate 
efficacy at the individual, community, and policy/advocacy level based on the user’s level 
of motivation.  
Methods:  
The protocol involves a a 30- day pilot test. The initial onboarding assessment (Session 1) 
begins  with a brief screener that assesse s age, level of concern about extreme weather, level of 
certainty that climate change is happening now, and extent to which users believe climate 
change is caused by human actions.  
 
Individuals under 18 years old and/or those who respond "not at all" to the screening questions 
will be excluded from the study with an option to explore helpful resources around climate 
change and extreme weather.  
 All other users will be  invited to provide informed consent to participate in the 30- day pilot test. 
Users who provide informed consent continue in Session 1, which includes:  
• A 3-item measure of response efficacy  that assessed  individual,  community,  and 
governmental/policy  level efficacy  
• A question about  frequency  of taking  action on climate  change in the past year  
• A question about  confidence for taking action in the next month  
• Individually  tailored feedback  on all questions  
• A brief demographic  assessment   
 
All atlas  users  are opted into text messages  that are activated  by an API call from any weather  
alerts  issued  by the National  Weather  Service.  Resources  and tips for protecting oneself  from 
the specific  type of extreme  weather  are matched  to the severity of the alert (e.g.,flood watch  vs. 
flood warning)  and regionalized (e.g.,  cooling centers  and weatherization  programs  in the 
specific  city in which  participants  reside).   
 
Following  Session 1, up to 30 days  of daily tailored text messages  are queued for each  user.  
Thus,  even  if they do not respond  to subsequent  assessment  questions,  they continue  to 
receive personalized text tips and weather  alerts.  Every  seven  days,  atlas  prompt s users  to 
respond to additional  brief assessments  that enable their feedback  to be further  customized.  
 
Thirty  days  post-baseline,  users  are invited  to complete an online follow- up assessment  that re-
asked all baseline (Session 1) questions,  anxiety,  norms,  unmet  social  needs,  and intention to 
take climate  action,  as well as asking what  climate  actions  the user has taken  in the past month  
and intends  to take in the next month.  Users  are also asked to respond  to an evaluation  of atlas  
that includes 11 Likert -scale  response  as well as a series  of open- ended  questions  about  what  
they liked best and least  about  atlas  and how it could  be improved. Up to 5 emails and/or text 
reminders  and 2 phone calls  to complete the follow -up assessment a re sent.  Participants 
receive a $35 gift card after they finish the first session of atlas  and a $40 gift card after they 
complete the final survey.    
 