Page 1 of 4 
 Study Protocol  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Official Title:  A Randomized Controlled Pilot Trial of Indomethacin 
in Acute Pancreatitis  
 
 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID (NCT number):  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]    
 
 
 
 
Protocol Date:  June 1st, 2013  
 
 
  
Page 2 of 4 
 Scientific Background  
 
AP is an inflammatory disease with a highly  variable clinical course that is potentially lethal. 
This disease is currently the leading cause of gastrointestinal -related hospital admissions in the 
United States and continues to rise in incidence. The inciting event leading to the development of 
AP is the premature activation of the digestive pro -enzyme trypsinogen to trypsin within 
pancreatic acinar cells, resulting in pancreatic auto -digestion and inflammation. Inflammation 
localized to the gland can subsequently progress to a systemic inflammatory response affecting 
distant organs.  
 
Studies have revealed a key role for phospholipase A2 in propagating this inflammatory response 
by inducing the production of inflammatory mediators, including arachidonic acid metabolites. 
Elevated levels of phospholipa se A2 have been found in the serum of patients with AP who 
develop severe complications, including pancreatic necrosis, shock, and OF. The in vitro 
inhibition of phospholipase A2 using NSAIDs has been evaluated as a potential treatment 
strategy for AP, wit h indomethacin shown to be the most potent inhibitor among 17 tested 
agents. NSAIDs also inhibit the interaction of neutrophils with endothelial cells, thus preventing 
the accumulation of neutrophils at the site of injury.  
 
In animal models of AP, NSAIDs h ave been shown to attenuate AP severity and improve 
survival. Most human studies, however, have primarily assessed the role of NSAIDs in PEP 
prophylaxis. A meta -analysis of 4 randomized, controlled studies evaluating this effect revealed 
a protective role for these medications, and a recent multicenter, randomized controlled trial 
found that administrating rectal indomethacin to patients at increased risk for PEP significantly 
reduced the incidence and severity of pancreatitis. In 1985, a small randomized c ontrolled trial 
(n=30) of rectal indomethacin in patients with AP reported a significant decrease in the duration 
of pain. This is the only study to date evaluating NSAIDs following the onset of AP and did not 
evaluate systemic inflammation. The effect of rectal indomethacin in mitigating disease 
progression in patients at risk for developing severe disease thus remains to be evaluated.  
SIRS is a simple clinical score, ranging from 0 -4, that utilizes objective, routine clinical 
parameters (body temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate or arterial carbon dioxide tension and 
white blood count) that directly reflect the underlying inflammat ory response. The persistence of 
SIRS, defined by the presence of a SIRS score ≥2 at 48 hrs following presentation, has been 
shown to be significantly associated with the development of OF, pancreatic necrosis and death 
in patients with AP. Additionally, s erum levels of CRP at 48 hours following admission have 
also been closely correlated with the development of OF.  
 
Study Objectives  
 
The predefined primary endpoint was the change in the SIRS score from randomization to 48h 
after the initial intervention, and to compare whether this change was different between subjects 
receiving rectal indomethacin and placebo. Secondary endpoints included (i) change in CRP 
levels from baseline to 48 hours, (ii) change in SIRS score at 24 and 72 hours, (iii) development 
of organ failure, (iv) AP severity, (v) length of hospital stay, and (vi) mortality. Other study 
outcomes included length of ICU stay, and PASS score at 24h, 48h, and 72h.  
Page 3 of 4 
  
Study Design  & Methods  
 
This was a single -center, parallel -group, double -blind, rand omized placebo -controlled trial 
conducted at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC), Pittsburgh, PA, USA.  
 
Randomization and masking  
Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 allocation ratio to either rectal indomethacin or placebo 
control with in 72 hours of presentation to the emergency department. Simple non -block 
randomization was used. The randomization sequence was generated using computer -based 
random numbers and was only available to the central UPMC pharmacy to ensure allocation 
concealm ent. A 24 -hour pharmacist was assigned to implement the randomization sequence, 
immediately after the study coordinator communicated the enrollment of a participant. Study 
participants, investigators, study coordinators, outcome evaluators, and care provid ers, were 
blinded to treatment assignment.  
 
Study interventions  
Patients randomized to the intervention arm received a loading dose of two 50 -mg indomethacin 
suppositories, which was administered by the registered nurse assigned to the patient’s care 
team. This was followed by five maintenance doses of 50 -mg rectally administered at intervals 
of 8 hours for a total of 48 hours and up to six doses. The rectal route was used based on 
previous data demonstrating more rapid and complete availability of the  drug as compared to 
oral administration. (3) Patients in the placebo arm received at similar intervals glycerin 
suppositories identical in shape, size, color, and packaging to the indomethacin group. All 
patients were co -administered a daily dose of intravenous 40 -mg pantoprazole for 
gastrointes tinal prophylaxis. Otherwise, all patients received conventional management 
according to standards of care of AP in the United States. (4, 5)   
 
Data Collection  
Data on demographics, comorbidities, etiology, history of AP, and transfer status, were recorded 
at the time of randomization. SIRS score (0 -4) was calculated upon randomization and at 24h, 
48h, and  72h from the time of initial intervention. The levels of C -reactive protein (CRP) were 
measured at the time of randomization and at 48h from the initial intervention. Other clinical 
outcomes and treatment strategies were evaluated daily until the end of t he hospitalization. The 
development of organ failure (OF) was defined as a score ≥ 2 for cardiovascular, respiratory or 
renal systems, using the Modified Marshall Scoring System. (6) Duration of organ failure for 
over 48h was defined as persistent OF. Severity of AP during the hospital admission was 
categorized as mild, moderately -severe, and severe based on the Revised Atlanta 
Classification. (7) Daily recorded data was used for post -hoc calculation  of the pancreatitis 
activity scoring system (PASS) at baseline and daily post -intervention. (8) This score is the 
summation of the following five param eters: organ failure (×100 per organ), oral intolerance 
(×40), systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) (×25 per criterion), morphine 
equivalent dose (MED) (×5), and pain score (×5). Detailed information on fluid resuscitation 
within the first 24h wa s obtained from medical records. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) 
was obtained at the discretion of the care providers, and was interpreted by expert abdominal 
radiologists, who were blinded to the study arm. If more than one CT scan was performed during  
Page 4 of 4 
 the admission, the one obtained closest to the third day of presentation was used to report the 
presence of pancreatic and peripancreatic necrosis.    
 
The development of adverse events (AEs) was monitored by the study coordinator on a daily 
basis during the hospitalization. Any major AEs were reported to the IRB and DSMB. These 
reportable AEs included gastrointestinal bleeding, perforated viscus, acute kidney injury 
(increase in serum creatinine ≥0.3 mg/dL within 48 hours), allergic reaction, myocardial 
infarction, and death.  
 
Eligibility Criteria  
 
Adult subjects (≥18 years of age) admitted to UPMC with a diagnosis of AP were assessed for 
eligibility. Acute pancreatitis was defined based on at least two of the following criteria: 
abdominal pain characteristic of AP; serum amylase and/or lipase greater than 3 times the upper 
limit of normal; or characteristic findings of AP on cross sectional images. (1) Patients with SIRS 
within the first 72 hours (h) of initial hospital presentation were eligible for randomization. SIRS 
was defined by the presence of t wo or more of the following criteria: a) pulse >90 beats/min; b) 
respiratory rate >20/min or PaCO2 <32 mmHg; c) temperature >38°C or <36°C; and d) white 
blood cell count >12,000 or <4000 cells/mm3 or >10% immature neutrophils (bands). (2) 
Exclusion criteria included SIRS onset after 72h of initial hospital presentation, cardiovascular 
failure (systolic blood pressure ≤ 90 mmHg), respiratory failure (partial pres sure of oxygen < 60 
mmHg), renal failure (creatinine > 1.5 mg/dL), active peptic ulcer disease, pregnancy, active use 
of NSAIDs within 1 week of presentation, and allergy to NSAIDs. Participants were identified 
by daily electronic lipase laboratory alerts,  and by care teams in the emergency department, 
medical floor, intensive care unit (ICU), and pancreatobiliary consult service, who directly 
contacted the study team. Eligibility was determined by the principal investigator (GP). Eligible 
subjects were inv ited for enrollment by the study coordinator (PP, IP). All enrolled participants 
provided written informed consent.  
 
Statistical Considerations  
 
Descriptive statistics are reported as absolute values (percentage), mean ± standard deviation 
(SD), or median (interquartile range [IQR]), as appropriate. For the analysis of the primary 
endpoint, we used a two -sided Wilcoxon rank -sum test to analyze the difference in the change of 
SIRS scores between the treatment groups. Missing data of the primary outcome was h andled 
using the last observation carried forward imputation method. Comparisons of baseline 
characteristics and secondary endpoints were evaluated using chi -square or Fisher’s exact tests 
for categorical data and t –test or Wilcoxon rank sum test for conti nuous data, as appropriate. 
Kaplan -Meier methodology was used to estimate the overall risk of organ failure in each 
treatment group. The log -rank test was used to test the difference in risk of organ failure between 
treatment arms. Patients were followed u p until date of organ failure or censoring. All analyses 
were performed according to the intention -to-treat principle. Per -protocol analysis was also 
performed. Statistical significance was defined as P<0.05.  
 
 