Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023   
MSK Protocol  Cover  Sheet  
 
Calypso -based Deep  Inspiration Breath Hold  (DIBH)  Radiation  Treatments  of Lung 
Cancer  
Principal  Investigator:  Daphna Gelblum,  MD in the Department  of Radiation  Oncology  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial Sloan- Kettering  Cancer Center 
1275 York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
 
 
 
 
1 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
2 
Amended:  03-JUN-2016   
 Table of Contents  
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR SCHEMA ..................................................................... 3 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND  SCIENTIFIC AIMS  .............................................................................. 6 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  ................................................................................... 6 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION .......................................................... 10 
4.1 Design  .......................................................................................................................... 10 
4.2 Intervention ................................................................................................................... 11 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC AGENTS  ......................................................................... 11 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ......................................................................... 13 
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  .............................................................................................. 13 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  ............................................................................................. 13 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN ..................................................................................................... 14 
8.0 PRETREATMENTEVALUATION  ..................................................................................... 15 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN .............................................................................. 15 
10.0 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  .................................................. 20 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS ........................................................................................... 21 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC RESPONSE/OUTCOME ASSESSMENT  ...................... 21 
13.0 CRITERIA FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  ..................................................................... 23 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  .............................................................................................................. 23 
15.0 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION AND  RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURES25  
15.1 Research Participant  Registration  ................................................................................. 25 
15.2 Randomization  .............................................................................................................. 25 
16.0 DATA MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  ....................................................................................... 25 
16.1 Quality  Assurance ......................................................................................................... 25 
16.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring ........................................................................................... 25 
17.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  .......................................................................... 26 
17.1 Privacy .......................................................................................................................... 27 
17.2 Serious  Adverse Event  (SAE)  Reporting ....................................................................... 27 
17.2.1   28 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  .......................................................................... 28 
19.0 REFERENCES  ................................................................................................................. 29 
20.0 APPENDICES  .................................................................................................................. 32 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
3 
Amended:  03-JUN-2016   
 1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR SCHEMA 
This trial  will investigate the feasibility of implanted anchored Beacon® electromagnetic  lung 
transponders  (Calypso®) to  guide and monitor deep- inspiration  breathhold (0IBH)  treatments 
in patients with inoperable thoracic malignancies. Currently, many patients with thoracic 
tumors cannot be  treated to the  optimal intended radiation dose due to strict dosimetric 
limitations for normal tissues nearby. Furthermore, all  lung tumors  that are  treated to the full 
radiation dose exhibit tumor motion with respiration which  requires the radiation field to  be 
expanded to an internal target volume (ITV)  that encompasses all  possible tumor positions 
during the treatment in order to avoid missing the target. This results in  the unnecessary 
treatment of larger amounts of normal lungs, esophagus and other nearby organs at  risk 
which  are responsible for the majority of adverse events in  thoracic radiation oncology.  
 
Several  techniques  to reduce respiratory  motion during radiation  therapy  have been explored 
and are clinically  available.  One of the most  promising approaches is  to immobilize  the tumor 
by having patients hold their breath. This has been found to result in  effective reduction of 
tumor motion as well  as an expansion of the lungs and other normal  tissues to be  moved 
away from the  radiation target. However,  0IBH is currently performed based on external 
markers and radiographic surrogates such as  the diaphragm to monitor the patient's 
breathhold. It  is known that external  markers and the diaphragm frequently do not  correlate 
well with internal  motion  and tumor  position.  Using  implanted Calypso beacons would for the 
first time allow  real-time monitoring of  tumor  position and breathhold in patients with  thoracic 
malignancies . This technology was  initially developed for prostate cancer patients with  great 
success. A new anchored  lung transponder  has been developed  for its application in thoracic 
malignancies in which there is significantly more tumor motion.  Based on our experience in 
prostate cancer patients, it is  our expectation that this transponder would improve the 
reproducibility  of localizing and monitoring tumor position during breathhold in real  time, 
decrease radiation dose to organs at risk in close  proximity to the radiation target and allow 
dose escalation to desired radiation doses. In addition, limiting tumor motion  to a minimum 
and thus increasing  our confidence in intrafraction  tumor  position would  allow  decreasing  the 
ITV margins that are currently added to the tumor to account for tumor motion. This would 
ultimately lead to improved local  control  rates and decreased adverse events attributable to 
the radiation treatments . 
Patients  who are able to hold their breath at least  for 5 breathholds  of more than 20 seconds 
each and  are planned to  undergo radiation treatment to tumors in the thorax will  be eligible 
for this study . 
First, 2 -3 anchored lung transponders will  be placed bronchoscopically  in or near the target 
tumor. Patients will  be given instructions to learn and practice the 0IBH maneuver. After a 
minimum of 3 days,  the patient will undergo a  CT simulation for  radiation treatment planning, 
and a free- breathing  40 CT scan and a CT scan  in 0IBH will be obtained using the Varian® 
Real -time Position Management ™ (RPM) system. Two radiation therapy  plans will be 
developed, one based on the free-breathing 40 CT scan  and one based on the 0IBH scan . At 
the time of treatment, the  patient will  be initially positioned according to standard setup  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
4 
Amended:  03-JUN-2016   
 procedures based on external  tattoos and room lasers.  A free- breathing  trace  of the Calypso 
transponders will  be obtained to  allow the  patient to settle  on the treatment table and to study 
real-time respiratory traces. The patient will then be asked to perform a therapist -coached 
modified slow vital  capacity  maneuver and  DIBH  maneuver [1]  and hold their breath.  Patients 
will have  the ability  to perform this  maneuver  with or without biofeedback  from digital  goggles 
that are placed over the  patient's eyes and display the breathing trace of the Calypso 
transponders . The use of the digital  goggles will  be determined by  patient preference or  at the 
discretion  of the treatment  team.  This will allow  us to investigate  whether  real-time biofeedback 
adds to the reproducibility  of patients holding their breath. A DIBH cone- beam CT will be 
acquired in approximately  three breath- holds, once a week for standard fractionated RT 
patients  or with each  fraction  for SBRT patients. After review and approval of the  images,  the 
patient will be treated while holding their breath using the DIBH maneuver . In standard 
fractionated  RT patients the radiation treatment  will be guided by the  external tattoos and 
daily 2D kV imaging. The Calypso transponder  signal will be used to monitor the  level of the 
breath- hold during  treatment.  The breath- hold level  based on the Calypso transponder signal 
will be verified daily by the 2D imaging  and once a week  in 3D by the DIBH cone- beam CT. 
In SBRT patients, the radiation treatment will be guided by the external tattoos and daily 
DIBH  cone- beam CT.  The Calypso transponder  signal  will be used to monitor the level of  the 
breath- hold during treatment. The therapists will  monitor the  respiratory  trace signal  from the 
Calypso transponders  throughout the  treatment and will  initiate the radiation treatment 
delivery when the patient holds  his/her breath within the tolerance level the patient has  been 
assigned to. This will be continued up until the initially planned 30 patients are accrued..  Should 
the transponder signal  indicate that the target  has moved outside of  the preset tolerance,  the 
therapists will  hold further radiation treatment delivery until  the patient's breathhold has 
returned to the desired target range or until  the patient's setup has been corrected. In  the 
additional  25 patients  planned, the margins will  be reduced  in a step-wise fashion.  The gate will be 
decreased 1mm  per each set of 5 patients  until the duty cycle  (beam -on time)  and number  of DIBH 
attempts  are doubled.  The gate at which  this occurs will be considered the minimum clinically 
feasible gate  
The study will determine for  the first time based on real -time tumor positioning information 
whether  patients  are able to reproducibly  hold their breath in DIBH within  excursions of  5.+/- 
0.5cm or less . Furthermore, it will determine whether visual biofeedback improves the 
reproducibility  of the breathhold.  It will provide a unique dataset that will  allow us to 
determine the concordance level  of real -time tumor position information from the  Calypso 
transponders, external  surface signal  and radiographic imaging. Ultimately, this  study will 
allow  us to quantify the decrease in radiation dose to organs at risk, decreased toxicity  and 
amount of dose escalation made possible by the DIBH maneuver using real -time tumor 
position information . 
Patients will be considered evaluable for protocol when they have had successful calypso 
beacon implantation without  the beacons  migrating> 5cm,  and they have completed training 
in DIBH. In the extension of the protocol described below, 25 patients will be accrued; the 
expected time for completion of this study is 3 year from its approval.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
5 
Amended:  03-JUN-2016   
 
 
Radiation  
Treatment  setup 
Calypso  signal 
recording  
 
RT treatment  with DISH 
with or without visual 
biofeedback  
 
Follow -up 
 
 
months  af ter RT 
with clinical 
assessments 
and diagnostic CT chest   
 
 
Bronchoscopic 
Calypso Beacon 
Implantation Simulation  
 
Free-breathing  
---+ scan 
4D CT scan 
- DISH  CT scan  
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical 
evaluation  for 
5x 20 second 
breathhold  ---+ 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
6  
 2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC AIMS  
Primary  objectives:  
• To evaluate  the feasibility  of using  internal  tumor  surrogates  (Calypso  beacons)  during 
repeated deep inspiration breath hold maneuvers for DIBH radiation treatments.  
Secondary objectives:  
• To compare  the reproducibility  with visual  versus  without  visual  biofeedback.  
• To assess differences in  the ability  of maintaining the  DIBH  maneuver within the  gate with and 
without visual biofeedback  
• To measure  the residual  intrafraction tumor  motion and  associated improvement in normal 
tissue  dosimetry  during DIBH  based on the Calypso  lung transponder signal  as a surrogate  
• To measure the increase in dose escalation  and the potential  for decreasing  margins  made 
possible by Calypso- guided DIBH  
• To determine the minimum clinically  feasible gate margin  for radiation  
• To assess tumor  shrinkage, beacon position and  centroid changes in conventionally 
fractionated patients  
• To assess  intra- and inter-fraction  variation in lung volume preservation of  multiple DIBH 
maneuvers  
 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND  RATIONALE  
3.1 Respiratory motion in lung cancer  radiation treatment  
Non- small  cell lung cancer  (NSCLC)  remains  the malignancy  associated  with the highest 
number of cancer -related  deaths in the US.  
Patients with  inoperable early -stage NSCLC are  typically  treated with  high-dose stereotactic 
body  radiation therapy (SBRT) resulting in excellent local  control of >90%.[2- 5] SBRT is  now 
also being used for metastatic disease in  the lungs, with equally good  local control rates and 
low rates of toxicity as  observed in  early -stage NSCLC .[8-11] Currently, a  4D free breathing 
CT scan  is obtained at simulation. The 4D scan  is used to determine the entire volume swept 
out as  the tumor moves through the respiratory cycle. This volume (the ITV) is further 
increased by the addition of 0.5 to 1 cm margins  of healthy tissue  to create the volume (the 
target) which  is treated to the prescription dose.  The margins of healthy lung are needed to 
account for positioning uncertainties during treatment. Significant respiratory tumor  motion 
results in  an increase of the ITV and therefore the volume of healthy lung within the  target 
volume.  The volume of  healthy lung within  the target, and  the volumes of adjacent normal 
tissues such  as chest wall  increase  rapidly with  increasing  ITV size. Since  these patients are 
usually medically inoperable due to severe emphysema or other medical comorbidities,  any 
reduction in radiation  dose  to organs  at risk is desirable.  The most common toxicities  observed 
with SBRT include respiratory toxicity, esophagitis, chest wall pain, and  rib fractures. The rate 
of toxicities from SBRT appears to be directly related to the irradiated volume, the tumor  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
7  
 location and the radiation  dose.[5 -7] 
 
Locally -advanced NSCLC patients  receive  fractionated RT, ideally  60 Gy in 30 fractions  when 
given with concurrent chemotherapy .[12-14] Frequently, the predicted toxicity from radiation 
dose  to the lungs and spinal  cord using widely  agreed upon  dose constraints to  these organs 
limit our ability to treat patients to  the optimal prescription dose . [15, 16]  Respiratory motion 
can significantly increase the treated  volume,  especially  in patients  with already  large tumors. 
The most common toxicities in this patient population are esophagitis and respiratory toxicity 
including radiation pneumonitis.[14,  17] The same challenges exist for patients with limited-  
stage small  cell lung cancer treated  with chemotherapy and thoracic radiation therapy.[18 -20] 
Techniques  to address  intrafraction tumor  motion  include  abdominal  compression, respiratory 
gating, and active breathing control (ABC) .[21] While these are all clinically approved 
techniques, they are not  currently widely used in practice. Abdominal compression  can be 
uncomfortable to the patients and does  not necessarily control  internal motion well.[22] In 
addition,  it compresses  the lungs  and does  not consistently  improve sparing of normal  tissues, 
but may actually worsen the dosimetry.[23]  Respiratory gating  based on external  markers  can 
be misleading due to the  potential discrepancy between external marker and true internal 
target motion.[24, 25]  ABC is  an involved process using a  spirometer which  is frequently 
uncomfortable to the patient, and  there are problems with changes in tidal volume, volume 
expansion, patients' response and adaptation to  the system.[26, 27] These techniques all 
depend on unreliable surrogates of the target position, and frequently cannot be  tolerated by 
patients because of patient discomfort or are too complex for patients to manage, making 
them  far from ideal . 
In principle, DISH  is a promising approach to minimize respiratory motion. It  has been shown 
to reduce respiratory motion, increase lung volume, and allow dose escalation. [1, 21, 28, 29] 
Currently, DISH  is feasible in about 25%  of patients who undergo lung  radiation therapy. This 
is because of the difficulty  many  patients  have in adequately  performing the modified  slow vital 
capacity maneuver currently used for DISH, which consists of a  deep inhalation, deep 
exhalation, second deep inhalation and  breath hold.  When performed well, the maneuver 
results in  a reproducible lung inflation and thereby tumor position. We currently use it in 
selected patients  who are able to perform this  maneuver well. Currently, DISH is  based on 
external markers e.g. RPM, or radiographic surrogates such as the diaphragm, since lung 
tumors are typically not  well enough delineated on 2D radiographs. However, DISH  based on 
surrogates like external markers and radiographic surrogates such as the diaphragm  is 
fraught with the same problems as respiratory gating based on external markers or  the ABC 
device. There may  be a lack of correlation between external marker and internal target 
motion, e.g.  drifts or shifts of the internal target that may not be accurately detected by  an 
external marker.[24, 25]  
We therefore propose using implanted Calypso lung transponders for guidance and 
monitoring of  DISH  in patients  with thoracic  malignancies who are treated with radiation 
therapy.  This would represent a significant improvement over  current DISH techniques  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
8  
 by having  available  reliable,  real-time tumor position  information prior  to and throughout 
the radiation treatment delivery . With real-time tumor position feedback, it  will not be 
necessary to perform the difficult DIBH  maneuver; instead, a simple inhalation and 
breath hold will be sufficient to position the  tumor with high  reproducibility.  We expect 
this to  substantially improve the patient eligibility rate compared to other methods for 
DIBH  guidance, such  as spirometry or  external  markers. As  a result, we  expect to  more 
frequently  be able to treat patients with locally -advanced lung cancers to  the intended 
total dose  of 60 Gy as a direct  benefit to  patients  from using  this technique. If  successful 
this study will  lead to a new clinical technique that  will allow  us to decrease the volume 
of healthy  lung and adjacent  tissues exposed  to high doses,  thus further  decreasing the 
risk for toxicities. This makes possible a strategy for dose escalation and  thus the 
potential  for improved local  control in patients where current treatments are  limited by 
normal tissue constraints.  
 
3.1.1 Rationale  for the use of Calypso  lung  transponders  
 
In prostate cancer RT, the use of electromagnetic  Calypso transponders has been found to 
allow  real-time tracking  of inter- and intrafraction motion,  as well as reduction in PTV margins 
and patient -reported acute morbidity.[31 -33] Submillimeter accuracy was established to a 
range of 27cm distance from the detection array  and at speeds  of up to 3cm/s,  thus making it 
the most  accurate real-time motion  monitoring device available.[34]  Electromagnetic  Calypso 
transponders revealed prostate motion of >5mm in 97% of patients, thus providing a 
significant benefit over  conventional  patient positioning. In addition, a cost -utility analysis 
demonstrated significant benefits in quality -adjusted life years (QALY)  compared to 
conventional localization.[35]  Outside of prostate cancer, these transponders have been 
shown  to also be feasible for inter-and intrafraction  motion detection in pancreatic  cancer.[36]  
The implantation of the transponders  as part of the staging  laparoscopy was  well-tolerated and 
minimal migration of the transponders was observed. It  was shown that breathholding 
significantly decreased tumor motion.  
Until recently, no such  transponder system was available for  lung tumors,  due to the difficulty 
of developing a transponder that would stay fixed  after implantation. Varian Medical  has now 
developed a modified transponder for use in  lung cancer by  adding anchors to  the same 
transponders that  are in routine clinical  use for prostate cancer. The  anchors of the lung 
transponder stabilize the transponder in  small  airways of the lungs.  A pilot study from  the 
University  of Stellenbosch, Tygerberg,  South  Africa,  and the University  Hospital  Basel,  Basel, 
Switzerland, has found the first use in humans to be safe and feasible.[22, 37] No patients 
developed pneumonia, pneumothorax or adverse pulmonary symptoms . Significant 
intrafraction variability of tumor motion was detected, even with the use  of external 
compression  devices.  Currently,  these anchored transponders  are being tested  for safety and 
feasibility in  the lungs in  an ongoing larger clinical study ("Evaluating an Anchored 
Transponder in  Lung Cancer Patients  Receiving Radiation Therapy" ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ), 
www .clinicaltrials .gov). Preliminary findings of this study in the US showed that out of 48  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
9  
 evaluable patients, two patients experienced a pneumothorax  (Grade 2), one patient had 
anesthesia- related  cardiac arrest (Grade 4), two patients experienced cough (Grade 2) and 
one patient had dyspnea (Grade 2) after the bronchoscopy,  one patient had  lung infection 
(Grade 3), and two patients had  migration of one fiducial  marker each that  did not impact the 
ability  to track the  tumor  during radiation treatments.[38,  51.] The use of Calypso  transponders 
holds the potential  for a great benefit of  real-time tumor position information without  the use of 
ionizing radiation from additional intrafraction imaging . Calypso transponders have been 
routinely used in our department as a motion monitoring system for prostate RT for about 5 
years. The entire system including 4D console, electromagnetic  array, tracking station and 
optical  system  is in place  on a linear accelerator that  is equipped for lung RT and on-board kV 
imaging.  
 
3.1.2 Rationale  for the use of SuperDimension®  system  and radial  probe 
Endobronchial Ultrasound  
The SuperDimension®  system is an electromagnetic  navigation bronchoscopy (ENB) system 
that allows minimally invasive procedures in  the periphery of the lungs with higher accuracy 
than conventional bronchoscopy alone[39]. It  allows bronchoscopic biopsies, fine needle 
aspirations  and fiducial  marker  placements  with a reduced risk of pneumothorax  as compared 
to transthoracic approaches . Given its extended range it has been shown  to reach peripheral 
lung tumors with  accuracy >80%. This system allows for virtual guidance based upon CT 
reconstructions  and electromagnetic  tracking.  Therefore, real -time confirmation can be 
provided by radial  probe endobronchial  ultrasound (rEBUS; Olympus Medical) which further 
improves the  accuracy.[40, 41]  In certain cases, rEBUS alone is sufficient to  localize 
peripheral pulmonary lesions.[42 -45] However, it  has been shown that the combination of 
these  technologies  provides  the highest  diagnostic  yield  for biopsies  of peripheral  lung lesions 
by improving lesion localization accuracy.  Both  of these localization technologies are  in 
routine use by our interventional  pulmonologists  and thoracic surgeons and are fully 
compatible with the Calypso anchored transponder system . 
Prior studies have demonstrated safety in  placing other fiducial markers bronchoscopically 
(ENB  +/- rEBUS) for lung tumors with low migration rates and low pneumothorax rates.[46 - 
48] Comparisons of  transcutaneous  versus ENS- guided fiducial marker placement shows a 
higher risk of pneumothorax in the transcutaneous  group.[48]  Furthermore, early studies in 
Switzerland  and South  Africa  have  shown  the feasibility, stability  and safety  of bronchoscopic 
Calypso transponder placement.[37]  We therefore propose to  use the SuperDimension  ENB 
system and rEBUS  for the placement of Calypso transponders whenever possible.  
Alternatively,  conventional  bronchoscopy  may be used for Calypso  transponder placement 
where  feasible.  Radial  probe  endobronchial  ultrasound (EBUS)  may be used when needed 
for more accurate placement of the Calypso transponders.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
10  
 3.2 Preliminary  Data 
 
DIBH  has been previously  explored  using coached breath- hold monitored by spirometry  [28, 
49] and radiographic imaging and using spirometry plus  the Elekta  "ABC device" together 
with radiographic imaging[21  ][18, 27]. An initial  series of 5  patients at MSKCC who 
underwent CT scans under 4 different respiration conditions including  DIBH  showed that 
DIBH can reduce the volume of lung receiving more than 25 Gy by 30% compared to  free- 
breathing radiation plans. Patients were  able to comfortably hold their breath for 12 -16 
seconds and perform 10 -13 breath- holds in a single session.[28]  
We then showed  that coached DIBH  with spirometer monitoring decreased  estimated normal 
tissue  complication probabilities while allowing for increased tumor doses.[1] Patients were 
initially  maintained at quiet tidal  breathing,  followed by  a deep inspiration, a deep expiration, 
a second deep inspiration, and breath- hold in deep inspiration (DIBH). Simulation, 
verification and radiation treatments took place during this  last phase of DIBH. Seven 
patients received a total  of 164 treatment sessions with excellent tolerability. None of the 
seven patients  needed to discontinue  treatment  or resume the free-breathing backup method  
due to fatigue or inability  to perform  the DIBH  maneuver.  On average,  the radiation  dose could 
be increased from 69.4 Gy to 87.9 Gy without increasing the risk of toxicity by using DIBH.  
In a subsequent analysis of 7  patients  undergoing over 250 treatments, we found that 
reproducibility  was excellent as judged by spirometry and verification films using the 
diaphragm as a surrogate. Presumed respiration- dependent  tumor motion was thus 
significantly reduced from 0.8 +/ - 0.5cm to 0.02 +/ - 0.14 cm  (mean and  standard deviation) 
compared to free breathing.[49]  The main  advantages  observed  with the use of DIBH  were  an 
increase in lung volume and motion of the PTV away  from critical  structures, e.g.  spine.  Thus, 
DIBH  is an excellent  tool to decrease target  motion,  decrease radiation  dose  to normal  organs 
at risk and thus  allow dose escalation to the tumor . DIBH treatments are currently clinically 
used  in our department in appropriate patients. However, all  DIBH  treatments to date have 
relied  on external  or indirect markers  as surrogates, sometimes  combined with fluoroscopy or 
radiographic imaging for position verification.  Given the potential pitfalls of  external 
surrogates,  we propose to investigate and  improve DIBH treatment delivery using real -time 
tumor position information from implanted electromagnetic  Calypso anchored transponders.  
In addition,  the use of Calypso  anchored  transponders  would  simplify  the DIBH  maneuver  to 
a single, comfortable breathhold, thus  making it  an attractive treatment option  for a wider 
patient population.  
Early  studies  in Switzerland and South Africa  have shown  the feasibility, stability  and safety of 
bronchoscopic Calypso anchored transponder placement.[37]  They have also demonstrated 
successful  intrafraction motion detection.[22]  An ongoing prospective international trial 
explores the safety and  feasibility of endobronchial implantation of these electromagnetic 
fiducials.  Interim results reported at ASTRO 2012 showed that 149  transponders were 
successfully implanted in  48 patients.[38,  51.] Two patients developed cough (G2), 1 patient  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
11  
 had dyspnea (G2)  after bronchoscopy, two patients had pneumothoraces  (G2), one patient 
had an anesthesia- related cardiac arrest (G4), and one patient had a  lung infection (G3) 
concurrent  with marker  migration.  One other  patient  experienced an asymptomatic  migration 
of one transponder in a  large  airway that did  not prevent localization and tracking by  the 
Calypso system. Positional stability of these transponders is  therefore 99% to date.  
4.0 OVERVIEW OF  STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION 
4.1 Design  
 
The primary  objective  of this study  is to evaluate  the feasibility  of Calypso transponders as 
an internal tumor surrogate to guide DIBH radiation treatments in real time.  
 
The use of Calypso transponders has  the potential to  result in improved reproducibility  of 
tumor positioning during DIBH treatments. We therefore plan to analyze the obtained 
respiratory traces from the Calypso signal as well as the imaging data from CBCTs and 
radiographs to  explore  a set of  secondary objectives. These  include a comparison of  the 
reproducibility  of DIBH tumor position with visual versus without visual biofeedback  (for 
patients who agree to use the digital  goggles), measurement of any  residual intrafraction 
tumor  motion,  improvement in  normal  tissue  dosimetry  during DIBH based on the Calypso 
lung transponder signal  as a surrogate, and determination of any increase  in dose 
escalation and the potential for decreasing margins made possible by Calypso- guided 
DIBH. Given the successful radiation localization in the first 25  patients, we will  also aim 
to determine the  minimum clinically feasible gate  margin for  radiation. We will reduce the 
gate from +/ -5mm by 1mm for every 5  patients treated. Once the minimum gate is 
determined,  the remaining patients will be treated at  +1mm from this value. We will also 
plan to enroll at least 10 additional conventionally fractionated patients to assess the 
impact  of tumor  shrinkage on  beacon position  and centroid  changes. Finally,  lung volume 
preservation will be assessed on  wide field of view cone- beam CTs and compared intra - 
and interfraction within each patient to check for reproducibility or variability of lung 
volumes across multiple DIBH maneuvers.  
 
The radiation treatment for patients  on this study will  be performed according to routine 
procedures  using standard  equipment,  techniques  and treatment  planning  procedures . The 
radiation dose prescription criteria will  not be changed based on the DIBH  maneuver or 
Calypso transponder implantation on this study . Patients will be  followed as per our 
institutional standard at  approximately 3, 6,  9 and 12 months after radiation treatments.  
Following  completion of study  participation,  patients  will be followed  as per our institutional 
standard. They will be evaluated for any potentially transponder -related  toxicity. Any 
toxicities will be carefully evaluated case by case according to the Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4.0.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
12  
 4.2 Intervention 
 
The Calypso signal will  be used to verify and monitor the patient's DIBH maneuver at  each 
treatment session. In addition, physician evaluation of  patient setup  accuracy will  be 
performed using all available images  and adjustments will  be made as per standard practice. 
Should the transponder signal  indicate that the target has  moved outside of  the preset 
tolerance, the system will automatically hold  further radiation  treatment delivery until  the 
patient's breathhold has  returned to the desired target range or until  the patient's setup has 
been corrected.  
For imaging, we will use the  on-board kV imaging system.  Patients  undergoing SBRT will 
receive standard CBCTs for patient setup, but no more than 2 CBCTs per treatment for 
protocol  purposes . Patients undergoing conventionally  fractionated RT will undergo weekly 
imaging  sessions  with CBCT  for protocol  purposes.  A maximum  of 8 CBCTs  over the entire 
treatment course will be permissible for protocol purposes in patients undergoing 
conventionally fractionated RT.  
Radiation therapy  dose guidelines, treatment  planning  process  and followup  will not be 
changed by enrollment on this study.  
 
 
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  
The major components required for this study are the anchored Calypso beacon 
transponders, the SuperDimension electromagnetic  navigation bronchoscopy system, 
Olympus  radial  probe endobronchial  ultrasound and RPM system  on the simulator  and the 
Calypso tracking system at the treatment machine.  
The anchored Calypso beacon transponders and training and user documentation will be 
provided by Varian  Medical  Systems, Palo Alto, CA, as  part of a  research agreement. The 
Calypso Anchored beacon transponders received FDA 510(k) clearance. Previously, a 
physician- sponsored  investigational  device exemption {IDE) application had  been approved 
by the Food and Drug administration (FDA) to permit the use of Anchored Beacon Transponders in  lung for this study. A cross- reference to the IDE for the ongoing Calypso 
feasibility trial  which is already  on file at the FDA has been kindly  provided by Varian  Medical 
Systems.
 
The SuperDimension  ENB and Olympus rEBUS are both in routine use by  our lnterventional 
Pulmonology  and Thoracic  Surgery  services  including  the disposable  GuideSheath Extended 
Working  Channels  (EWC), Locatable Guides  (LG),  and the planning and navigation  software.  
Prior  to undergoing  treatment,  the patient  will have a CT chest  for Navigation performed at 
MSKCC.  The images  obtained  from this specially formatted CT scan  will be uploaded into 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
13  
 the SuperDimension iLogic software suite.  The lesion of interest will  be selected, a 3- D 
airway  model  created  and a pathway(s)  to the lesion will be selected  and confirmed.  This 
"patient plan" will be brought to  the operating room for use during  the placement of the 
Calypso fiducials, as part of the standard use of the SuperDimension  ENB system.  The 
following is an outline of the basic schema of how the procedure will  be performed:  
 
Bronchoscopic  Intervention  with Calypso  beacon  transponder  placement:  
 
1. Pre-operative "patient  plan"  created and confirmed to be appropriate for beacon 
transponder placement  
2. Anesthesia  induction  via laryngeal  mask  airway  or endotracheal  tube 
3. Standard  bronchoscopic  evaluation  of the airways  
4. The LG and EWC  are advanced through the working channel  of the 
bronchoscope  
5. Registration  of the SuperDimension ENB  system  3-D model  with the airways  in 
real time is performed  
6. Navigation of the LG and EWC to the lesion of interest  
7. Flouroscopy to confirm  location of EWC  and that it does  not move during the 
placement of the beacon transponders  
8. Removal  of the LG while  maintaining  the EWC  in place  
9. Confirmation  with rEBUS  that the EWC  is at the lesion of interest  
10. Placement  of 3 Calypso  beacon transponders in or near the lesion of interest  under 
fluoroscopic guidance  
11. Fluoroscopic  confirmation of placement  
12. Removal  of EWC  
13. Final  bronchoscopic  evaluation of the airways  
14. Emergence from anesthesia with standard post-procedural  care,  including  a 
portable CXR  
During the procedure, all  care will be taken to reduce the risk of adverse events for the 
placement of the fiducials.  The use of Olympus rEBUS and  fluoroscopy, in addition to the 
SuperDimension ENB system, will further reduce the risk of adverse events, including 
pneumothorax . As previously noted, the risk of adverse events during the placement of 
fiducials  is very low, with the majority  of the risk associated with anesthesia.  [37, 46-48, 50]. 
There is an inherent increased risk for these patients since they  will have to undergo a 
bronchoscopy for the placement of  fiducials as part of the radiation therapy, unlike patients 
who are undergoing radiation  therapy  without  fiducial  placement.  Since the majority  of these 
patients  have many  medical  comorbidities and  have been deemed non-operable, a complete 
pre-operative assessment will  be performed by  either the  Thoracic Surgery or Pulmonology 
service,  with standard anesthesia evaluation  done  during pre-surgical  testing,  to confirm  that 
the patient is an acceptable risk for anesthesia . This may include formal cardiac and 
pulmonary studies, as well as appropriate specialty consultations,  including internal  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
14  
 medicine, geriatrics or cardiology, at the discretion of the treating physician . If it is 
determined that the risk of anesthesia is  too great,  the patient  will not be eligible  for this 
study.  
 
The entire Calypso monitoring system including 4D console, electromagnetic  array, tracking 
station and optical system is in  place and currently in routine use for prostate cancer 
patients . The linear accelerator is equipped for intensity modulated radiation therapy as is 
used for lung RT and on- board kV imaging. For patients  who agree to use the digital 
goggles, the visual  feedback  of the Calypso  signal  will be captured  by an iPhone that records 
the Calypso signal  on the screen. This will  be transmitted to a pair of video goggles or  an 
iPhone to be viewed  by the patient.  The visual  feedback system is not part of the Calypso  device. 
We have successfully tested, on volunteers, the  ability of this  system to  adequately display 
the signal on the viewing device.  
6.0 CRITERIA FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
6.1 Subject  Inclusion Criteria  
 
• Patients  must  have histologic  proof  of malignancy  suitable for thoracic  radiation therapy  
• Patients  planning to undergo  radiation therapy  for primary  or recurrent  malignancy of  the 
lung or metastatic  malignancy to the lung.  
Note:  this may be delivered by  SBRT or standard fractionation,  based on the discretion 
of the treating physician.  
• Age 18 years  old 
• KPS 60% 
• Ability  to hold their breath  for >20 seconds  for 5 times  
• Patients  who are able to tolerate flexible  bronchoscopy  
• Patients  with life expectancy  of at least  12 months  
• Patients  able to have bronchoscopic  placement  of Calypso  transponders  as confirmed on a 
recent (within the past 8 weeks) CT scan.  
• Patients  who are able to comply  with the protocol  follow -up schedule.  
 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
 
• Patients  unable to comply  with instructions  for DIBH  
• Patients  with implants  in the chest  region that contain  metal  or conductive  materials  (e.g., 
metal implants, rods, or  plates) which Varian Medical  considers will interfere with  the 
Calypso System's electromagnetic localization.  
• Patients with active implanted devices, such  as pacemakers, defibrillators,  and drug 
infusion  pumps  since  the effects of the Calypso  System  operation  on these devices  are 
unknown.  
• Patients  with clinically  significant  active  infections.  
• Patients  with bronchiectasis  in the region of the intended implantation  sites.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
15  
 • Patients  with a history of hypersensitivity  to nickel.  
• Patients  whose lung tumors  are being  monitored  with MR imaging (MR imaging  of the 
anchored transponders is safe but yields an image artifact around the anchored 
transponders).  
• Posterior  lesions  that would  be >19cm  distance  from Calypso  detector  plate.  Patients 
may be treated  in the prone  position in order  to meet  the required minimum distance.  
• Patients  with any other  medical  condition  or laboratory value  that would,  at the discretion 
of the  investigator, preclude the patient from participation in  this clinical study.  
• Patients  who are deemed unable to safely undergo  or tolerate  flexible  bronchoscopy  
• Patients  who are unable to tolerate  anesthesia or sedation  
• Patients  enrolled in any other  clinical studies  the investigator  believes  to be in conflict 
with this investigation.  
• Female patients  who are pregnant  or nursing  
 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  with Limited  Waiver  of Authorization  
Patients will  be evaluated by  the attending physician from the Department of Radiation 
Oncology  and entered  onto the study  if they are appropriate.  The attending physician, or  his 
designate, will obtain informed consent from the patient.  
We have taken notice of NIH/ADAMHA policies concerning the  inclusion of women and 
minorities in clinical research populations.  We expect that the study population will be fully 
representative of the range of patients  seen at MSKCC without  exclusion to age (> 18 years), 
or ethnic  background.  Given  the limited  number of  subjects to  be entered onto the study,  no 
specific outreach efforts are planned.  
Potential  research  subjects  will be identified by a member  of the patient's  treatment  team,  the 
protocol  investigator, or  research team at Memorial Sloan- Kettering  Cancer Center 
(MSKCC) . If the  investigator is a member of the treatment team, s/he will screen their 
patient's medical  records for suitable research study participants and discuss the study and 
their potential for enrolling in  the research study.  Potential subjects contacted by their 
treating physician will be  referred to the investigator/research staff of the study.  
The principal  investigator  may also screen the medical  records  of patients  with whom  they do 
not have a treatment relationship for the limited  purpose  of identifying patients  who would  be 
eligible to  enroll  in the study and  to record appropriate contact information in  order  to 
approach these patients regarding the possibility of enrolling in the study.  
During the  initial  conversation between the investigator/research staff and the patient, the 
patient may be asked to provide certain health information that is  necessary to  the 
recruitment and enrollment process.  The investigator/research staff may also review 
portions of their medical records at  MSKCC in order to  further assess eligibility.  They will 
use the information provided by the patient and/or  medical  record  to confirm  that the patient  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
16  
 is eligible and to contact the patient regarding study enrollment.  Patients  will be asked to 
perform a DIBH  maneuver  in clinic  of five breathholds  of 20 seconds  each.  If the patient  turns 
out to  be ineligible for the  research study, the research staff will destroy all  information 
collected on the patient during the initial  conversation and medical  records review, except  for 
any information that must be maintained for screening log purposes.  
The initial  contact with the prospective  subject  will be conducted  either  by the treatment  team, 
investigator or the research staff working in consultation with the treatment team.  The 
recruitment process  outlined presents  no more than minimal  risk to the privacy of  the patients 
who are screened and  minimal PHI  will be maintained as part of a  screening log. For these 
reason, we seek  a limited  waiver  of authorization for  the purposes  of (1) reviewing relevant to 
the enrollment process; (2) conversing with patients  regarding possible enrollment; (3)  handling 
of PHI contained  within  those records and  provided by  the potential  subjects; and (4) 
maintaining information in a screening log of patients approached (if applicable).  
We expect  to accrue 1-2 patients  per month  for a total of 30 patients.  
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  
 
• Pathology  review  to confirm  diagnosis  
• History  and physical  exam  
• The DIBH maneuver consists of a comfortably deep inhalation followed by a breath 
hold. Patients will  be clinically tested  (typically at the time of consultation) to  hold their 
breath for a minimum of 20  seconds xS  times in a simulated treatment position with 
their arms raised  above their  heads.  The patient  will be asked to practice  at home,  and 
coaching will be repeated at the time of treatment.  
• CT scan  of the chest  for navigation  
• Pregnancy  test, if applicable  
• Consultation with thoracic  surgery  or interventional  pulmonology  for transponder 
implantation  
 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  PLAN 
Using ENB  and rEBUS,  three  Calypso  transponders will  be bronchoscopically  placed within a 
small bronchial airway according to the Anchored Beacon Transponder Instructions for Use 
provided by Varian Medical  (see section 20.0 Appendices). Two Calypso transponders will  be 
permissible if  it is technically not possible to place  three  transponders, as  the tracking  system 
works  with a minimum  of two transponders.  Placement within  2 cm from the pleura  should  be 
avoided if possible to  minimize the risk of pneumothorax . The position of the anchored 
transponders will be verified by  fluoroscopy at the time of placement.  
After a  minimum of 3 days, the patient will  be brought to  the radiation simulation suite and 
immobilized  using  a custom- mademold,  as per our standard  protocol.  Immobilization  will be 
in a supine position  unless prone treatment is  required to meet the distance requirement  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
17  
 between the Calypso  beacons  and the Calypso  detector  plate.  The patient will  be coached 
through the DIBH maneuver and a breath- hold level  that the patient can comfortably and 
reproducibly  achieve  using the Calypso system will  be determined. A free-breathing (FB) 4D 
CT scan  of the thorax and a CT  scan  in DIBH mode will  be obtained using the RPM  system. 
The patient's position and setup will be documented by tattoos and photographs.  
Target volumes and  normal  structures will  be delineated on the FB scan  and on the DIBH 
scan . Target delineations will be performed on  the registered 4DCT image set and on  the 
DIBH  scan  as per current  clinical practice.  The Calypso beacons  will also be delineated on 
each phase of the 4DCT study and on the DIBH scans.  
 
Analysis of  the 4DCT will provide an initial  evaluation of  the motion concordance between the 
Calypso beacon and the RPM external marker. Two radiation treatment plans will be 
developed,  one based on the free-breathing  scan and one based on the DIBH scan . These 
will be used for dosimetric comparison of  treatment plans between a free- breathing and DIBH 
treatment. Only the  DIBH treatment plan will  be used clinically, unless a patient is  unable to 
complete the DIBH  maneuvers at  the time of treatment.  In that case, the plan based on the FB 
scan will  serve as a backup plan.  The beacon coordinates for the DIBH scan will be input to 
the Calypso system.  
 
In the additional 25 patients to be accrued the window will  be reduced in  a step-wise fashion 
by 1mm for every 5 patients. Number of beam holds, treatment interruptions and total 
treatment time from first beam- on time to the last beam- off time will be recorded by the 
therapists.  
If a patient cannot achieve the desired breath  hold after 3  attempts and discussion with the 
therapist,  the therapist  can treat with the best breath- hold achievable and  report  the change 
in level  to the treating  physician. Additionally, the therapist will  acquire an orthogonal  pair of 
images . The physicist will  then estimate  the dosimetric effects per day in case  the patient  is 
still unable to achieve adequate breath  hold the next day. Depending on the estimated 
dosimetry and the patient's reasons  for not being able to achieve breath hold,  the patient 
may be taken off protocol if unable to perform the breath hold to within +/ - 5 mm for 3 
consecutive treatment days . Patients who are taken off protocol prior to treatment 
completion will be treated based on the free- breathing  treatment planning scan for the 
remainder of the radiation treatment course.  
 
9.1 For patients  undergoing SBRT  in 10 or less fractions, the following  procedures will be 
performed:  
1. Standard setup  procedures  based on external  tattoos will be performed.  
 
2. The Calypso  antenna will be deployed and positioned over the patient's  chest.  Tracking  of 
the Calypso transponder signal will commence.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
18  
  
3. For patients who have been selected to use the digital goggles, the DIBH  maneuver will be 
performed with visual  biofeedback at  least once a week and at least one fraction will  be done 
without visual feedback. During treatment the radiation therapist will  coach the  patient on 
how to hold their breath during the treatment. On treatment days with visual feedback, the 
patient will  be able to view and control  his/her breathing through biofeedback using goggles 
(Myvu  Personal  Media Viewer, Myvu Corporation)  or an iPhone that displays  the Calypso 
trace . The couch position will  be adjusted by the therapists in  the treatment room to 
accurately set  up the patient  for treatment in DIBH  based on the Calypso  signal.  The Calypso 
trace will be set to zero based on the DIBH level.  
4. The patient  will resume regular  breathing and the therapists  will leave  the room.  
 
5. The patient will be  remotely asked to  repeat the DIBH maneuver and a CBCT will be 
obtained over several  breathholds  (exact  number  depending  on the patient's  ability  to hold 
their breath)  using partial  arcs and the assigned  breath  hold tolerance  window.  
6. The CBCT images will  be evaluated and the patient will  be repositioned for a soft tissue 
match  as needed.  The soft tissue  match  will then be evaluated and approved by the treating 
physician as is  our normal clinical process. The isocenter coordinates in  Calypso will be 
changed based on the patient's repositioning shift dictated by the CBCT soft tissue match. 
No more than 2 CBCTs per treatment will  be done for protocol purposes.  
The patient will  then be remotely asked to reproduce  the DIBH maneuver with the tolerance 
window to which they have been assigned and be treated in  DIBH.  Number of beam holds, 
treatment interruptions  and total  treatment time from first beam -on time to the last beam- off 
time will be recorded by the therapists. Beacon position  during DIBH  will be monitored by the 
therapist to  assure that the patient maintains the DIBH position throughout the  treatment 
delivery. If the Calypso beacon signal  indicates that the  tumor has  moved outside of  the 
tolerance window, the radiation beam will  be automatically held  by the system and resumed 
when the target is within range.  
 
 
 
9.2 For patients  undergoing standard fractionated  RT the following  procedures will be 
performed:  
1. Standard setup  procedures  based on external  tattoos  will be performed.  
 
2. The Calypso  antenna will be deployed and positioned over the patient's  chest.  Tracking  of 
the Calypso transponder signal will commence.  
Optional:  In patients  where the Calypso  antenna external  markers  detected by an in-house 
infrared tracking system can be  arranged in such a way  that both signals  can be obtained  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
19  
 simultaneously  (depending on  body habitus), a free- breathing  trace of the Calypso 
transponders  over 2 minutes  in combination with the external  marker  signal  will be obtained . 
These will be used for future analysis and building of an  external/internal  respiration model.  
3. For patients who have been selected to use the digital  goggles, the DIBH  maneuver will be 
performed  with visual  biofeedback at  least once a week and at least one  fraction will  be done 
without visual  feedback .During  treatment  the radiation therapist will  coach  the patient  on how 
to hold their breath during  the treatment. On treatment days with visual  feedback, the patient 
will be able to view and control  his/her breathing through biofeedback using goggles (Myvu 
Personal  Media Viewer,  Myvu  Corporation) or an iPhone that displays the  Calypso trace . The 
couch position will  be adjusted by  the therapists in the treatment room to accurately  set up 
the patient for treatment in DIBH  based on  the Calypso signal. The Calypso trace will  be set 
to zero based on the DIBH level.  
 
4. The patient  will resume  regular  breathing and the therapists  will leave  the room.  
 
5. The patient  will be remotely  asked  to repeat  the DIBH  maneuver and a set of orthogonal  kV 
images  will be obtained. These will be used to verify that no beacon has migrated from its 
initial position.  
7. Once a  week, the patient will  be remotely asked to  repeat  the DIBH  maneuver and a CBCT 
will be obtained over several  breathholds  (exact  number  depending on the patient's  ability  to 
hold their breath) of 15 seconds each using partial arcs and the assigned breath hold 
tolerance window. No more than 8  weekly imaging sessions with CBCT will be done for 
protocol purposes . 
8. The CBCT images will  be evaluated and the patient will  be repositioned for a soft tissue 
match  as needed.  The soft tissue  match  will then be evaluated and approved by the treating 
physician. The isocenter coordinates in Calypso will be changed based on the patient's 
repositioning shift dictated by the CBCT soft tissue match . 
 
The patient will then be remotely asked to reproduce the DIBH maneuver with a tolerance 
window  to which  they have been assigned  and be treated in DIBH  Number of  beam holds, 
treatment interruptions  and total  treatment time from first beam -on time to the last beam- off 
time will be recorded by the therapists. Beacon position  during DIBH  will be monitored by the 
therapist to  assure that the patient maintains the DIBH position throughout the  treatment 
delivery. If the Calypso beacon signal  indicates that the  tumor has  moved outside of  the 
tolerance window, the radiation beam will  be automatically held  by the system and resumed 
when the target is  within range. For treatments between CBCT sessions, the patient will  be 
set up according to  steps 1 -4, kV images will be acquired (Step 5) to verify beacon stability 
and the day's treatment with breath- hold will proceed without further imaging.  
 
10.0 EVALUATION DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
20  
  
Physician evaluation of  patient setup accuracy will  be performed using all available images 
and adjustments will  be made as  per standard practice.  In addition, the Calypso signal  will 
be used to verify and monitor the patient's DIBH maneuver . Should the transponder signal 
indicate that  the target has moved outside  of the preset tolerance, radiation treatment 
delivery will be held until the patient's  breathhold has returned to the desired  target  range or 
until the patient's setup has been corrected.  
Patients will return for follow up at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months(+/ - 4 weeks)  following 
completion of radiation therapy. Data from any clinical followups between 12 and 24 
months following completion of radiation therapy(+/ - 4 weeks) will be collected 
retrospectively  through a retrospective research  protocol.  The following  assessments will 
be performed at  these visits: history and physical  exam,  diagnostic CT  chest, and toxicity 
assessment. The history and physical exam may be completed in the medical oncology 
clinics for patients who experience progression of disease.  In this case, the toxicity 
assessment  will be completed over the phone with the treating radiation oncologist.  
 
 
 
Pre- 
treatment   
Simulation  Radiation 
Treatment 
(SBRT)  Radiation  
Treatment 
(standard  
fractionation)  Follow -up 
3, 6, 9 
and 12 
months  
History  & physical  X    X 
Pregnancy  test 
(if applicable)  X     
Evaluation  for 
DIBH fitness  X     
Beacon 
implantation  X     
CT scan  for 
navigation  X     
Free-breathing scan  X    
4DCT   X    
DIBH CT  X    
Set-up   X X  
Calypso  signal 
recording     
X  
X  
RT with DIBH  with or 
without visual 
feedback     
X  
X  
Daily  Orthogonal 
KV images      
X  
Weekly  CBCT  (up 
to 8)     
X  
      
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
21  
  
Daily  CBCT  (up to 2 
CBCTs per fraction 
for protocol purposes)     
 
X   
Diagnostic  CT 
chest   
X     
X 
Toxicity 
assessment    Weekly  
during 
treatment  Weekly  
during 
treatment   
X 
 
 
  
 
11.0 
TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
 
Patients will be monitored for  study -related toxicities according to CTCAE v4.0. Only  side 
effects  that are possibly,  probably  or definitely  related  to the protocol  therapy  and grades  2-5 will 
be documented.  This includes  the following  toxicities:  
 
1. Potential  side effects related  to anesthesia:  
a. Hypotension  
b. Arrhythmia  
c. Respiratory  failure  
2. Potential  side effects  related  to flexible  bronchoscopy:  
a. Sore throat  
b. Post-extubation  bronchospasm  
c. Throat  or chest  tightness  
3. Potential  side effects  related to the implantation and/or  the fiducial  markers:  
a. Bronchopleural  fistula  
b. Lung or airway  damage  
c. Bleeding  
d. Fever  
e. Hemoptysis  
f. Respiratory  infection  / pneumonia  
g. Lung Infection  
h. Pneumothorax  
i. Cough  
j. Dyspnea  
k. Fiducial  embolization  
I. Migration  of fiducial  markers  
4. Potential  side effects  related  to radiation therapy:  
a. Fatigue  
b. Cough  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
22  
 c. Dyspnea  
d. Pneumonitis  
e. Dysphagia  
f. Esophagitis  
g. Nausea  
h. Vomiting  
i. Diarrhea  
j. Anorexia  
k. Dehydration  
I. Radiation dermatitis  
m. Respiratory  infection / pneumonia 
 
Abnormal laboratory values, regardless of grade, will not be reported. Toxicities of 
treatments that are not associated with  the protocol therapy (i.e.  chemotherapy -related 
side effects) will not be graded nor attributed.  
 
Only toxicities communicated directly  to, and reviewed by,  the treating physician or study 
Pl, and deemed possibly, probably or definitely related to the protocol treatment will be 
documented.  
 
A clinical study  summary  can be found  at: http://oncology.varian.com/calypsolungstudy  
 
DEFINITIONS  
 
1. Definition  of an Adverse Event  (AE) 
a.  An Adverse Event  is defined by  the GCP  (Guide  to Good  Clinical Practice)  as any 
undesirable experience occurring to a subject during a clinical trial, whether  or not 
it is considered related to the investigational  product(s).  
 
2. Definition  of a Serious  Adverse Event  (SAE)  
a. A Serious  Adverse Event  is an adverse experience that: 
i. is fatal or life-threatening 
ii. is disabling  
iii. results  in hospitalization  or prolongation  of hospitalization  
iv. results  in a congenital  anomaly  or occurrence of malignancy  
 
b.  Any neurologic and musculoskeletal toxicity  that is grade 3 or higher will be 
considered a serious adverse event.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
23  
 c. Only serious  adverse events that  are at least  possibly related  to the 
investigational product will be reported as the radiation therapy is 
considered standard of care.  
3. Definition of an Unexpected Adverse  Event  
 
a. An Unexpected AE is an experience not previously reported (in nature, severity, 
or incidence)  in the current  Investigator's  Brochure or general  investigational  plan.  
Evaluation  of SAE:  
Review of the patient record including the treatment dosimetry will  be undertaken by the 
principal investigator. The principal investigator may decide to continue  the protocol without 
modification,  discontinue the study  altogether,  or to modify  the protocol  prior to enrolling  more 
patients pending the results of the  review. However, if the SAE meets the criteria for the 
stopping rule, as defined in Section 14.0, the trial will be stopped.  
 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  
Primary  objectives:  
 
• To evaluate  the feasibility  of Calypso  transponders as  an internal  tumor  surrogate to guide 
DIBH radiation treatments in real time.  
 
•  Feasibility is defined as  completion of all  treatments using the DIBH treatment plan  and 
Calypso transponders. Patients who cannot have  their transponders placed accurately 
bronchoscopically  or for whom Calypso- guided DIBH will  not be possible will be considered 
a failure . Patients who  are removed from the protocol  as a result of  being unable to perform 
the breath hold  for 3 consecutive treatment days at any point in  the treatment course for 
reasons that  are not  related to the Calypso transponders, Calypso detection or 
complications  of using the Calypso  implantation or system  (e.g. disease progression,  severe 
side effects  from treatment, e.g. esophagitis, infections, failure to thrive, generalized 
weakness, low  blood counts etc.), will  be replaced by new evaluable patients. Those 
patients will  be treated with the free- breathing  backup radiation treatment plan . The reason 
for the patient's inability to hold their breath will be recorded.  
Secondary objectives:  
 
• To compare the reproducibility  with visual  versus without  visual  biofeedback.  
• To assess differences in  the ability  of maintaining the DIBH maneuver within the fate with 
and without visual biofeedback  
• To measure the  residual  intrafraction tumor motion and associated improvement in 
normal  tissue  dosimetry  during DIBH  based on the Calypso  lung transponder signal  as a 
surrogate  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
24  
 • To measure the increase in dose escalation  and the potential  for decreasing  margins 
made possible by Calypso- guided DIBH  
• To determine the minimum clinically  feasible gate margin for radiation  
• To assess tumor  shrinkage, beacon position  and centroid changes in conventionally 
fractionated patients  
• To assess intra - and inter-fraction  variation in lung volume preservation of  multiple DIBH 
maneauvers  
Reproducibility  of using internal tumor surrogates (Calypso beacons) during repeated deep 
inspiration breath hold maneuvers with and without visual  biofeedback will  be evaluated by  
posthoc analysis of the Calypso signal traces.  The ability  to maintain the breathhold to within 
the tolerance level  to which they have been assigned will  be assessed. Number of  beam  holds 
and treatment interruptions will  be recorded as  an objective measure of the patient's ability to 
maintain their breathhold.  Whether or not visual biofeedback will aid in the ability to  hold their 
breath reliably and  within the  target region will  be assessed using the number of treatment 
interruptions.  We will also assess differences in  duty cycle and number of  DIBH attempts with 
and without visual biofeedback. Differences in  the ability of maintaining the DIBH maneuver 
within the gate with and without visual biofeedback  will be measured as  duty cycle, a 
quantifiable measure of how long it  takes to  deliver a radiation treatment. It is related to how 
well patients can hold their breath and the tumor in the target position. Each patient will have 
the goggles 50% of the treatments and without goggles the other 50% of the time. Wilcoxon 
rank sum tests will be done to compare the duty cycle.  
The residual  intrafraction motion and drift during DIBH will  be determined based on the 
Calpyso signal  traces which may  provide critical insight into  the ability  to immobilize the 
tumor by DIBH. Beacon position stability will  be determined on acquired cone- beam CTs by 
measuring the distance  of the beacons  to the center  of the gross target  volume {GTV)  as well 
as the distance of the beacons  to each other.  Improvement of  normal  tissue  dosimetry based 
on Calypso -guided DIBH will  be determined  from the treatment plans developed on the free - 
breathing  and DIBH  simulation  CT scans . Specific dosimetric parameters  will include the chest 
wall V30, total  lung V20,  mean lung dose, lung toxicity model  metrics (Lyman model  NTCP 
and parallel  model  fraction damaged (fdam)), mean and maximum esophageal dose, and 
maximum spinal cord dose.  
 
To determine the  minimum clinically feasible gate margins we will decrease the gate in  a 
step-wise progression as  far as a  minimum of 2 mm. The gate will be reduced from +/ - 
5mm  by 1mm  for every  5 patients treated. Halving of  the duty cycle will  be considered the 
minimum gate that is  clinically feasible . Once the minimum gate is determined, the 
remaining patients will be treated at +1mm from this value . 
 
In the additional 10 conventionally fractionated patients, tumor shrinkage will be 
summarized as  relative shrinkage in a percentage. Beacon position and  centroid are  3D 
coordinates that will  be determined as  a distance  from a landmark such  as a bone or the 
carina.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
25  
  
Lung volume preservation will  be assessed  on wide field of view cone- beam CTs  and 
compared intra - and interfraction within each patient to check for reproducibility or 
variability of lung volumes across multiple DIBH maneuvers . 
 
 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  
1. Found to be ineligible for the protocol  as described in  the section  on Criteria  for 
Patient/Subject  Eligibility  
2. Patient  and/or  guardian requests  to withdraw from study  for any reason  
3. Referring  physician requests  to withdraw  from study  for any reason,  including  believing 
that it would be in the patient's best interest  
4. Refusal  of patient  to continue treatment  and/or  observations  
5. Loss  to follow -up 
6. Patient  death  
7. Calypso beacon migration  of >5cm  from original  implantation  position may be taken  off 
study if the Calypso signal can no longer be detected  
8. Patient  unable  to adequately  perform  the breath  hold for 3 consecutive  treatment  days  
 
 
Acquired data from patients  who would  be removed from the protocol  after a portion  of the 
treatment has been completed can be used for analysis.  
 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  
 
The primary objective of this nonrandomized study is  to test the feasibility of anchored Calypso 
transponders to guide and monitor DIBH radiation treatments. Feasibility is  defined as  patients being 
able to successfully complete the course of treatment. Patients who cannot have their transponders 
placed accurately  bronchoscopically  and for whom Calypso- guided DIBH will not be possible as a 
consequence of that will be considered a failure.  Patients who are removed from the protocol as a 
result of being unable to  perform the  breath hold  for 3 consecutive treatment days at any point in  the 
treatment course for reasons that  are not related to the Calypso transponders, Calypso detection or 
complications of using the Calypso implantation or system (e .g. disease progression, severe side 
effects from treatment, e.g. esophagitis , infections, failure to  thrive , generalized weakness, low blood 
counts etc.),  will be replaced by new evaluable  patients.  The patients who are removed will  be treated 
with the free-breathing backup radiation treatment plan . The reason for the patient's inability to hold 
their breath will be recorded.  
 
For this objective the first and second set  of 25 evaluable patients will  be stratified and analyzed 
separately. Some details are provided below.  
We will enroll  30 patients  upfront and  we expect  that at least 25  evaluable (DIBH training can be 
done and Calypso beacons can be implanted without migrating > 5cm) patients can be used in  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
26  
 assessing the feasibility rate.  To establish the decision rule we will  compute the sample feasibility 
rate (i.e., the number of  patients who could be successfully treated divided by the total  number of 
evaluable patients, which we expect to  range from 25 to 30) and form an 80% 2- sided Clopper - 
Pearson exact  confidence interval.  If the lower  bound of this exact confidence interval  is greater than 
66% then we  will declare this procedure feasible. Namely, we will  test the  hypotheses  Ho: 9<=0.66 
vs. H1: 9>0.66 at  alpha=0.05,  where 9  denotes the feasibility rate. The test statistic will  be the  lower 
bound of the 90% 2-sided  Clopper -Pearson exact  confidence interval  for binomial trials.  Equivalently, 
this test statistic can  be written as  Beta(0.05, X,  N+1-X), i.e.,  the 5th-percentile  of the beta distribution 
with two parameters X and N+1- X, where X and N denote the number of successes and the total 
sample size (expected to be from 25 to 30), respectively . When the sample size is as small as 25, 
the power of  rejecting the null hypothesis is  61%,  84% and 97% when  the true feasibility rate  is 0.80,  
0.85 and 0.90, respectively. When the sample size is as large  as 30, such power becomes 61%,  85% 
and 97%. Since we expect the feasibility rate to be  around 0.85, the sample size is  sufficiently large. 
We expect to finish the recruitment in 4 years.  
 
For protective purposes we will implement a  stopping  rule to prevent  excessive rate  of pneumothorax 
or hospitalization (related to the proposed procedure). If 6  or more events (i .e., procedure- related 
pneumothorax  or hospitalization) among the first 30 patients, or 11 or more events among the total 
55 patients we  plan to  enroll are observed, we will halt the trial to thoroughly investigate such events. 
This sequential stopping rule has the following probability of halting the trial:  
 
True event  probability I0.05 I 0.08 I 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 
Probability  of halting the trial I0.00 3I 0.03 0I 0.081  0.342  0.679 0.900 0.978  
 
In addition, a second stopping rule  will be implemented if  a maximum of  two device migrates to a 
critical organ, such as the heart or brain, or if one device- related  death is  observed.  
 
For the 1st secondary  objective, we will compare the visual  vs no visual  biofeedback  treatments (for 
patients who  agree to use the digital  goggles) by  the number of  treatment interruptions.  We expect 
that there will  be fewer treatment interruptions when using biofeedback. To this  end Wilcoxon 
signed- rank tests will  be conducted based on the  patients who can successfully be treated.  
 
For the 2nd secondary objective, we will assess differences in the ability of maintaining the DIBH 
maneuver within the fate with and without visual  biofeedback.  Such differences will  be measured 
as duty cycle, and  will be compared using Wilcoxon signed- rank tests based on the patients  who 
can successfully be treated.  
 
For the  3rd secondary objective, the  residual  intrafraction tumor  motion  (surrogated by  Calypso) will 
be measured in all 3 dimensions and the euclidean distance will  be calculated, which will  then be 
correlated with the normal tissue dosimetry (see end of Section 12 .0). Patients will  receive multiple 
fractions and  thus multiple measurements of  such  distance will  be obtained from  the same patients.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
27  
 These repeated measures will  be averaged for each patient and  the correlation will be examined by 
simple linear regression. If such continuous data are skewed, we may either use an appropriate 
monotone transformation, or examine the  nonparametric  correlation coefficient (such as Spearman 
rank correlation coefficient) between the tumor motion and the normal tissue dosimetry instead . 
 
For the  4th secondary objective, the  potential increase in dose  escalation and decrease in margins 
made  possible by Calypso - guided DIBH, as  contrasted to those  obtained from the 40 CT scan,  will 
be formulated as pair data from each patient and tested by using Wilcoxon signed- rank tests . 
Dosimetric parameters  listed  at the end of Section  12.0 will be used again for such  analysis . 
 
The 5th secondary  objective does  not require  statistical  analysis.  See Section  12.0 for details.  
 
For the 6th secondary objective, tumor shrinkage, beacon position and centroid changes in 
conventionally  fractionated patients (totally 10),  all measured as  continuous variables, will  be 
summarized descriptively.  
 
For the 7th secondary objective, intra-  and inter-fraction variation in  lung volume preservation of 
multiple DIBH maneauvers will be recorded within each patient and summarized descriptively.  
 
15.0 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION AND  RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURES  
15.1 Research Participant  Registration  
 
Confirm eligibility as defined in the section entitled Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria. Obtain 
informed consent, by following procedures defined in section entitled Informed Consent 
Procedures.  During the  registration process registering individuals will be required to 
complete a protocol specific  Eligibility Checklist. The  individual signing the Eligibility Checklist 
is confirming that the  participant is eligible to  enroll in the study.  Study staff are responsible 
for ensuring that all institutional requirements necessary to  enroll a participant to the study 
have been completed . See related Clinical Research Policy and Procedure #401 (Protocol 
Participant Registration).  
 
15.2 Randomization 
No randomization will occur  in this study.  
 
16.0 DATA MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  
A Clinical Research Coordinator (CRC) and/or Clinical  Research Associate (CRA) will be 
assigned to the study.  The responsibilities  of the CRC or  CRA include  project  compliance, 
data collection, abstraction and  entry, data reporting, regulatory monitoring, problem 
resolution and prioritization,  and coordination of the activities of the protocol study team . 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
28  
 The data collected for this study  will be entered into a secure  database.  Source 
documentation will  be available to support the computerized patient record.  
 
16.1 Quality  Assurance 
Regular  registration  reports  will be generated to monitor  patient  accruals  and completeness  of 
registration data.  Routine data quality reports will be generated to assess  missing data and 
inconsistencies.  Accrual  rates and extent and accuracy of evaluations and follow -up will be 
monitored periodically throughout the  study period and potential problems  will be brought to 
the attention of the study team for discussion and action.  
 
Random -sample  data quality  and protocol  compliance  audits  will be conducted by the study 
team, at a minimum of  two times per year, more frequently if indicated.  
 
16.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring 
The Data and Safety Monitoring (DSM) Plans at Memorial Sloan- Kettering Cancer Center 
were approved by  the National  Cancer Institute  in September 2001.  The plans  address  the 
new policies set forth by  the NCI in the document entitled "Policy of the National Cancer 
Institute for Data  and Safety Monitoring of Clinical Trials" which can be found at: 
http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/researchers/dsm/index.html.  The DSM Plans  at MSKCC  were 
established and are monitored by the Office of Clinical Research.  The MSKCC Data and 
Safety Monitoring Plans can be found on the MSKCC Intranet at:  
http://mskweb2.mskcc.org/irb/index.htm  
 
There are several  different mechanisms by which clinical trials  are monitored for data, safety 
and quality . There are institutional processes in place for quality assurance (e.g., protocol 
monitoring,  compliance  and data verification  audits,  therapeutic  response,  and staff education 
on clinical research QA) and  departmental procedures for  quality  control,  plus there are two 
institutional committees that are  responsible for monitoring the activities of our  
clinical  trials  programs.  The committees:  Data  and Safety Monitoring  Committee (DSMC)  for 
Phase I and II clinical trials, and  the Data  and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) for Phase Ill 
clinical trials, report to  the Center's Research Council  and Institutional Review Board.  
During  the protocol  development and  review  process, each  protocol will  be assessed  for its 
level  of risk and degree  of monitoring required . Every  type of protocol  (e.g.,  NIH sponsored, 
in-house sponsored, industrial  sponsored, NCI  cooperative group,  etc.) will  be addressed 
and the monitoring procedures will  be established at the time of protocol  activation.  
 
 
17.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Risks:  There are small  risks  of side  effects related to the implantation of the Calypso 
transponders  into small  airways  near the tumor  or the tumor  itself. These  risks  include but 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
29  
 are not limited  to fever,  bleeding,  airway  obstruction, pneumothorax, device embolization, 
device migration and pneumonia.  Radiation exposure  due to additional  protocol  imaging is 
minimal. Doses required for kV conebeam imaging are on the order of 3- 4 cGy per scan; 
doses for standard radiographic imaging are less  than 0.1  cGy /image.  
 
Costs:  All of the treatments, studies, and procedures are considered standard of  care, 
including the placement of standard  fiducials for radiation therapy.  The patient and/or 
patient's insurance will  be responsible for all  charges, which are  part of the standard of care . 
No financial  reimbursement or  other  financial  incentive will  be provided  for patients  to enroll  in 
this study.  The Calypso beacons will  be provided by Varian and are research non -billable.  
The implantation of the beacons will  be billable to  insurance. Any complications from the 
Calypso  beacon implantation will be managed as per responsible physician and any tests or 
interventions related to the management of potential complications will be billed to the 
patient's insurance.  Performing the  placement of the Calypso beacon transponders in the 
context  of a clinical trial will allow  for a more indepth and objective evaluation of  the system.  
 
Benefits: There  is a potential clinical benefit  from this  clinical trial in terms of decreased 
toxicity  from radiation  treatments  and/or  achieving a higher  total treatment  dose  due to DIBH. 
We hope that in the future, knowledge from this  trial will help patients that  are candidates for 
the implantation of Calypso transponders as well as patients who are not candidates by 
improving our understanding of real -time tumor position changes with respiration.  
 
Side  effects:  Side effects  of the study  specific to the implantation of the fiducial  markers  are 
anesthesia risk,  bleeding, infection, pulmonary toxicities, and migration of the fiducial 
markers.  
 
17.1 Privacy 
MSKCC's Privacy Office may allow the use and disclosure of protected health information 
pursuant  to a completed  and signed Research Authorization form.  The use and disclosure  of 
protected health information will  be limited to the individuals described in  the Research 
Authorization form.  A Research Authorization form must be  completed by  the Principal 
Investigator and approved by the IRB and Privacy Board (IRB/PB) . 
The consent  indicates that  individualized de identified information collected for the purposes 
of this study may be shared with other qualified researchers . Only researchers who have 
received approval from MSK will  be allowed to  access this information which  will not include 
protected health information, such as the participant's name, except for dates. It is also 
stated in the Research Authorization that their research data may be shared with other 
qualified researchers . 
 
17.2 Serious Adverse Event  (SAE)  Reporting  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
30  
  
 
An adverse  event is  considered  serious  if it results in ANY  of the following  outcomes:  
 
• Death  
• A life-threatening adverse event  
•  An adverse  event  that results in inpatient hospitalization  or prolongation of  existing 
hospitalization  
•  A persistent or  significant incapacity or  substantial disruption of  the ability  to 
conduct normal life functions  
• A congenital  anomaly/birth defect  
•  Important Medical Events (IME) that  may not result  in death,  be life threatening, or 
require hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon medical 
judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or participant and  may require medical 
or surgical intervention to prevent one  of the outcomes listed in  this definition  
Note:  Hospital  admission for  a planned procedure/disease treatment is  not considered an 
SAE. 
 
 
SAE reporting is required as soon as  the participant  starts investigational 
treatment/intervention.  SAE reporting is required for 30- days after the participant's last 
investigational  treatment/intervention. Any  event  that occur  after the 30-day period  that is 
unexpected and at least possibly related to protocol treatment must be reported.  
 
 
Please note: Any SAE that occurs prior to the start of investigational 
treatment/intervention and is related  to a screening test or  procedure (i.e ., a screening 
biopsy) must be reported.  
 
 
All SAEs  must  be submitted  in PIMS.  If an SAE requires  submission to the HRPP  office  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
31  
 per IRB SOP RR -408 'Reporting of Serious Adverse Events', the SAE report must be 
submitted within  5 calendar days of  the event.  All other  SAEs must  be submitted within 
30 calendar days of the event.  
 
 
The report  should contain  the following information:  
 
• The date the adverse event  occurred  
• The adverse event  
• The grade  of the event  
• Relationship of the adverse event  to the treatment(s)  
• If the AE was  expected  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  
o An explanation of how the AE was handled  
o A description of the participant's  condition  
o Indication  if the participant  remains on the study  
• If an amendment  will need  to be made to the protocol  and/or  consent  form 
• If the SAE is an Unanticipated  Problem  
 
 
For IND/IDE  protocols:  
The CRDB AE  report  should  be completed  as above and the FDA assigned IND/IDE  number 
written at the top  of the report. If appropriate, the report will be forwarded to the FDA by  the 
SAE staff through the IND Office.  
 
17.2.1   
Not applicable  
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
Before protocol -specified procedures are  carried out, consenting professionals will  explain 
full details of  the protocol  and study procedures as  well as  the risks  involved to participants 
prior to their inclusion in the study . Participants will also be  informed that they are free to 
withdraw from the study at any time.  All participants must  sign an IRB/PB -approved consent  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
32  
 form indicating their consent to  participate. This  consent form meets  the requirements of the 
Code of Federal  Regulations  and the Institutional  Review Board/Privacy  Board of this Center. 
The consent form will include the following:  
1. The nature and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits  of the intended  study.  
2. The length of study  and the likely  follow- up required.  
3.  Alternatives to the proposed study. (This will include available standard and 
investigational  therapies . In addition, patients will  be offered an option of supportive 
care for therapeutic studies.)  
4. The name of the investigator(s)  responsible for the protocol.  
5. The right of the participant  to accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions  and to 
withdraw from participation at any time.  
Before any protocol -specific  procedures  can be carried  out, the consenting professional  will 
fully explain the aspects  of patient privacy concerning research specific information.  In 
addition to signing the  IRB Informed Consent, all patients must agree to the Research 
Authorization component of the informed consent form.  
Each  participant  and consenting professional  will sign the consent  form.  The participant  must 
receive a copy of the signed informed consent form.  
 
19.0 REFERENCES  
1. Rosenzweig KE,  Hanley J,  Mah D et al. The deep  inspiration breath- hold technique in the 
treatment of inoperable non- small- cell lung cancer. International Journal of Radiation 
Oncology Biology Physics 2000; 48: 81- 87. 
2. Timmerman R,  Paulus R,  Galvin J  et al. Stereotactic  body radiation therapy for inoperable 
early  stage  lung cancer.  JAMA - Journal  of the American Medical  Association 201O; 303: 1070-  
1076.  
3. Baumann P, Nyman  J, Hoyer  Met al. Outcome  in a prospective phase  II trial of medically 
inoperable stage I non- small -cell lung cancer patients treated with stereotactic body 
radiotherapy. Journal of Clinical Oncology 2009; 27: 3290 -3296.  
4.  Fakiris AJ, McGarry RC, Yiannoutsos CT et al. Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy for 
Early -Stage Non-Small- Cell Lung Carcinoma: Four -Year  Results  of a Prospective Phase II 
Study. International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics 2009; 75: 677 -682. 
5.  McGarry RC, Papiez L, Williams M  et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy of early -stage 
non-small- cell lung carcinoma: Phase I study . International Journal of Radiation Oncology 
Biology Physics 2005; 63: 1010 -1015.  
6. Timmerman R,  McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C et al. Excessive toxicity when treating central 
tumors  in a phase II study  of stereotactic  body  radiation therapy  for medically  inoperable early - 
stage lung cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology 2006; 24: 4833 -4839.  
7.  Ong CL, Palma D,  Verbakel  WFAR  et al. Treatment of  large stage  I-II lung tumors  using 
stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT): Planning considerations and early toxicity . 
Radiotherapy and Oncology 2010; 97: 431- 436. 
8. Schefter  TE, Rusthoven  KE, Kavanagh BO et al. Multi- institutional  phase  1/11 trial of 
stereotactic  body  radiation therapy  for lung metastases . Journal  of Clinical Oncology  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
33  
 2009;27:  1579- 1584.  
9. Dhakal S, Corbin KS, Milano MT et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for pulmonary 
metastases  from soft-tissue sarcomas:  Excellent  local lesion  control  and improved patient 
survival. International Journal  of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics  2012; 82:  940-945. 
10. Milano  MT, Katz  AW, Zhang H, Okunieff  P. Oligometastases  treated with  stereotactic body 
radiotherapy: Long -term follow -up of prospective study . International Journal of Radiation 
Oncology Biology Physics 2012; 83: 878- 886. 
11. Ricardi U, Filippi AR, Guarneri  A et al. Stereotactic body  radiation therapy  for lung 
metastases. Lung Cancer 2012; 75: 77 -81. 
12. Perez  CA, Pajak  TF, Rubin  P. Long- term observations  of the patterns  of failure  in patients 
with unresectable non -oat cell  carcinoma of the lung treated with definitive radiotherapy. 
Report by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group. Cancer 1987; 59: 1874- 1881.  
 
13. Curran Jr WJ, Paulus  R, Langer  CJ et al. Sequential vs  concurrent chemoradiation for stage  iii 
non-small cell lung cancer: Randomized phase Ill  trial RTOG 9410. Journal  of the  National 
Cancer lnstitute2011; 103: 1452 -1460.  
14.  Auperin A, Le Pechoux  C, Rolland  E et al. Meta -analysis of  concomitant versus  sequential 
radiochemotherapy  in locally advanced non - small -cell lung cancer. Journal of Clinical 
Oncology 2010; 28: 2181- 2190.  
15. Marks  LB, Bentzen SM,  Deasy  JO et al. Radiation  Dose -Volume Effects  in the Lung. 
International Journal of  Radiation Oncology Biology Physics 201 O; 76: S70- S76. 
16. Kirkpatrick JP, van der Kogel AJ, Schultheiss TE. Radiation Dose- Volume Effects in the 
Spinal  Cord.  International  Journal  of Radiation Oncology*Biology*Physics  201O; 76: S42-S49. 
 
17. Palma DA, Senan S,  Tsujino Ket al. Predicting Radiation Pneumonitis After Chemoradiation 
Therapy  for Lung  Cancer:  An International  Individual  Patient  Data  Meta -analysis.  International 
Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics 2012.  
18. Pignon JP, Arriagada R, Ihde DC et al. A meta -analysis of  thoracic  radiotherapy  for small -cell 
lung cancer. New England Journal of Medicine 1992; 327: 1618 -1624.  
19. De Ruysscher D,  Pijls-Johannesma  M, Bentzen SM  et al.  Time  between the first day  of 
chemotherapy and the last day of chest radiation is the  most important predictor of 
survival  in limited -disease small- cell lung cancer . Journal  of Clinical Oncology  2006;  24: 
1057- 1063.  
20.  Van Meerbeeck JP,  Fennell  DA, De Ruysscher DKM.  Small- cell lung cancer.  The Lancet 
2011;378: 1741- 1755 . 
21. Giraud  P, Morvan  E, Claude Let al. Respiratory  gating techniques  for optimization of  lung 
cancer radiotherapy. Journal of Thoracic Oncology 2011; 6: 2058- 2068.  
22. Papachristofilou A, Petermann H,  Gross  M et al. Real-Time  Electromagnetic  Localization and 
Tracking of Human Lung Cancer Using Internal Fiducials During Radiation Therapy: 
Implications for Target Planning and Treatment Delivery. International Journal of Radiation 
Oncology Biology Physics 2011; 81: S762- 763. 
23. Bouilhol  G, Ayadi  M, Rit S et al. Is abdominal  compression useful  in lung stereotactic  body 
radiation therapy? A 4DCT and dosimetric lobe- dependent  study. Physica Medica 2012.  
24.  Hunjan S,  Starkschall G,  Prado Ket  al. Lack of Correlation Between External Fiducial 
Positions  and Internal  Tumor  Positions  During  Breath -Hold CT. International  Journal  of 
Radiation Oncology Biology Physics 201 O; 76: 1586- 1591.  
25. Li R, Mok E,  Han B  et al.  Evaluation of the  geometric accuracy of  surrogate -based gated 
VMAT  using intrafraction kilovoltage x-ray images.  Medical  Physics 2012;  39: 2686 -2693.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
34  
 26.  Wong JW, Sharpe  MB, Jaffray  DA et al. The use of active  breathing control  (ABC)  to reduce 
margin for breathing motion. International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics 
1999; 44: 911 -919. 
27. Dawson  LA, Brock  KK, Kazanjian Set  al. The reproducibility  of organ  position using active 
breathing control  (ABC) during liver radiotherapy. International Journal  of Radiation 
Oncology Biology Physics 2001; 51: 1410- 1421.  
28.  Hanley  J, Debois  MM, Mah D et al. Deep inspiration  breath -hold technique for lung tumors: 
The potential value of target immobilization and reduced lung density in dose escalation. 
International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics 1999; 45: 603- 611. 
29. Barnes EA, Murray BR, Robinson OM et al. Dosimetric evaluation of lung tumor 
immobilization  using breath hold at deep inspiration.  International  Journal  of Radiation 
Oncology Biology Physics 2001; 50: 1091- 1098.  
30. Duggan OM, Ding GX, Coffey Ii  CW et al. Deep -inspiration breath -hold kilovoltage cone - 
beam  CT for setup  of stereotactic body  radiation therapy  for lung tumors:  Initial  experience. 
Lung Cancer 2007; 56: 77- 88. 
31. Tanyi JA,  He T, Summers PA et al. Assessment of planning target volume margins for 
intensity -modulated  radiotherapy  of the prostate gland:  Role of daily  inter- and intrafraction 
motion.  International Journal  of Radiation Oncology  Biology  Physics 2010;  78: 1579 -1585.  
32.  Sandler HM, Liu PY,  Dunn RL et al. Reduction in Patient -reported  Acute Morbidity in 
Prostate Cancer Patients Treated With 81 -Gy Intensity -modulated Radiotherapy Using 
Reduced Planning Target  Volume  Margins  and Electromagnetic  Tracking:  Assessing  the 
Impact of Margin Reduction Study. Urology 2010; 75: 1004 -1008.  
33. Shah AP,  Kupelian PA, Willoughby  TR et al. An evaluation of intrafraction motion of  the 
prostate in the prone  and supine positions  using electromagnetic  tracking.  Radiotherapy 
and Oncology 2011; 99: 37- 43. 
34. Balter JM,  Wright  JN, Newell LJ et al.  Accuracy of a wireless localization system  for 
radiotherapy.  International  Journal  of Radiation Oncology  Biology  Physics 2005;  61: 
933-937. 
35.  Quigley MM, Mate TP, Sylvester JE. Prostate tumor alignment and continuous, real -time 
adaptive radiation therapy  using electromagnetic  fiducials:  Clinical and cost-utility  analyses. 
Urologic Oncology: Seminars and Original Investigations  2009; 27: 473- 482. 
36. Shinohara ET, Kassaee A, Mitra  N et al. Feasibility of  electromagnetic  transponder  use to 
monitor inter - and intrafractional  motion in locally advanced pancreatic cancer patients. 
International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics 2012; 83: 566- 573. 
37.  Bolliger CT, Koegelenberg CFN, Von Groote- Bidlingmaier  Fetal. First Report of 
Implantation of Anchored  Electromagnetic  Fiducials  in Human Lung  Cancers  for Real-Time 
Tumor Localization and  Tracking During Radiation Therapy. International Journal of 
Radiation Oncology Biology Physics 2011; 81: S578- 579. 
38. Papachristofilou A, Nader D, Roeder FF et al. Prospective International Trial of 
Endobronchial Implantation of Electromagnetic  Fiducials for Localization and Real -time 
Tracking of Tumors  in Lung Cancer  Patients  Undergoing Radiation Therapy.  International 
Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics 2012; 84: S175.  
39. Gildea TR, Mazzone PJ, Karnak D et al. Electromagnetic  navigation diagnostic 
bronchoscopy:  A prospective  study.  American  Journal  of Respiratory  and Critical Care 
Medicine 2006; 174: 982 -989. 
40. Eberhardt  R, Anantham D,  Ernst  A et al. Multimodality bronchoscopic  diagnosis  of peripheral 
lung lesions:  A randomized controlled trial. American  Journal  of Respiratory  and Critical Care  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 13- 174 A(15)  
Approval  date:  26-Dec-2023  
35  
 Medicine 2007;  176: 36-41. 
41. Asahina H, Yamazaki K, Onodera Yet  al. Transbronchial  biopsy using endobronchial 
ultrasonography  with a guide sheath and virtual  bronchoscopic  navigation.  Chest  2005;  128: 
1761-  1765.  
42. Kurimoto N, Miyazawa T, Okimasa S et al. Endobronchial ultrasonography  using a guide 
sheath increases  the ability  to diagnose peripheral  pulmonary  lesions  endoscopically . Chest 
2004; 126: 959 -965. 
43. Kikuchi  E, Yamazaki  K, Sukoh N et al. Endobronchial  ultrasonography  with guide- sheath for 
peripheral pulmonary lesions. European Respiratory Journal 2004; 24: 533- 537. 
44. Eberhardt  R, Ernst A,  Herth  FJF. Ultrasound -guided transbronchial  biopsy of  solitary 
pulmonary  nodules  less than 20 mm. European  Respiratory  Journal  2009;  34: 1284 - 
1287.  
45.  Steinfort  DP, Khor  YH, Manser  RL, Irving  LB. Radial  probe endobronchial  ultrasound for  the 
diagnosis of  peripheral lung cancer: Systematic review and meta- analysis.  European 
Respiratory Journal 2011; 37: 902 -910. 
46. Schroeder  C, Hejal  R, Linden PA. Coil spring fiducial  markers  placed safely  using navigation 
bronchoscopy in inoperable patients allows accurate delivery  of CyberKnife stereotactic 
radiosurgery . The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular  Surgery 201O; 140: 1137 -1142.  
47. Harley  DP, Krimsky  WS, Sarkar  Set al. Fiducial  Marker  Placement  Using  Endobronchial 
Ultrasound and Navigational  Bronchoscopy  for Stereotactic  Radiosurgery: An Alternative 
Strategy. The Annals of Thoracic Surgery 201 O; 89: 368 -374. 
48. Kupelian PA, Forbes A,  Willoughby TR et al.  Implantation and Stability of Metallic Fiducials 
Within  Pulmonary  Lesions.  International  Journal  of Radiation Oncology*Biology*Physics  2007; 
69: 777 -785. 
49. Mah D, Hanley J,  Rosenzweig KE  et al. Technical  aspects  of the deep inspiration  breath -hold 
technique in the treatment of thoracic cancer. International Journal of Radiation Oncology 
Biology Physics 2000; 48: 1175 -1185.  
50. Anantham D, Feller -Kopman D, Shanmugham LN  et al. Electromagnetic  navigation 
bronchoscopy -guided fiducial placement  for robotic  stereotactic  radiosurgery of  lung 
tumors: A feasibility study. Chest 2007; 132: 930- 935. 
51. Papachristofilou A, Nader D,  Roeder FF et al. Clinical Utilization of  Electromagnetic 
Real-Time Lung Tumor Localization During Radiation Therapy: A Prospective 
International Multicenter Study.  International Journal  of Radiation Oncology  Biology 
Physics 2013; 87:2, S35.  
 
20.0 APPENDICES  
 
Appendix  1: 
Patient  Instructions:  Beacon care  package - Lung instructions  