1  
 
 
 
 A Two Year Multicenter Study of Robotic -Arm Assisted THA: 
Acetabular Cup Placement Accuracy and Clinical Outcomes 
(The MAKO Trial)  
 
 
Sponsor:  
 
Stryker  
IRB RC Number 
           1808218345  
          [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Protocol Date:  12AUG2018 
  
 
:  
  
Brock A . Lindsey, MD (Principal Investigator)  
WVU Medicine  
Department of Orthopaedics  
PO Box 9196 
Morgantown, WV 26506 
Phone: 304-293-1317 
2  
1 BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND RATIONALE  
1.1 Introduction 
The incidence of dislocation following total hip arthroplasty (THA) has been reported to be 
from 1 percent to as much as 3.2 percent (Woo and Morrey 1982; Pellicci 1998). The demand for THA is expected to increase. Post dislocation solutions include closed reduction, open reduction, THA revision and constrained cup, conversion to hemi-arthroplasty, allograft , or girdlestone resection. These solutions are often costly, painful, and can involve 
substantial additional risks and complications. Acetabular cup placement is an important factor in the stability of the THA. Cup malpositioning has been associated with bearing surface wear  and dislocation (Callanan, 2011). For most subjects, acceptable angles are 40 
degrees of  abduction (+10 degrees) and 20 degrees (+ 5 degrees) of version (Lewinnek 1978; 
Soong 2004). However, malpositioning continues to occur resulting in cup angles outside acceptable ranges which leaves  subjects with an increased risk of dislocation. 
 
1.2 Name and Description of Investigational Product or  Intervention  
This study will involve a quantitative assessment of prospectively collected computed tomography, radiographic, and patient reported  outcomes data from multiple centers.  
 
1.3 Compliance  Statement 
This study will be conducted in full accordance with all applicable West Virginia University Research Policies and  Procedures and all applicable federal and state laws and  
regulations including 45 CFR and 46. All episodes of noncompliance will be documented. 
The investigators will perform the study in accordance with this protocol, will obtain 
consent and assent (if applicable) , and will report unanticipated problems involving risks to 
subjects or others in accordance with t he WVU Institutional Rev iew Board ( IRB) Policies 
and Procedures and all federal requirements. Collection, recording, and reporting of data 
will be accurate and will ensure the privacy, health, and welfare of research subjects during and after the study.  
2 STUDY  OBJECTIVES  
2.1 Primary Objective (or  Aim)  
The objective of this study is to examine the acetabular cup placement of THA subjects and compare results for subjects who undergo THA with robotic- arm assistance to  those who 
undergo traditional THA. The central hypothesis is that robotic -arm assisted acetabular cups 
will have greater accuracy of placement and better long -term outcomes over those 
traditionally placed. To obtain the most definitive assessment of cup placement, the study will utilize a digital imaging analysis program called the Martell Hip Analysis Suite (HAS, Chicago, IL) as well as computed tomography (CT) scans. Patient reported outcomes (HOOS, PROMIS10, hip stability, and return to function) will also be collected at specified intervals. Using CT scans an d HAS analysis allows for a complete description of cup
3  
placement and better accounts for factors such as pelvic rotation and/or tilt, otherwise not 
accounted for in radiographic analysis (Ghelman 2009). 
2.2 Secondary Objectives (or  Aim)  
Specific Aim #1: Determine the accuracy of placement of robotic -arm assisted acetabular 
cups versus manual cup placement. The working hypothesis is that robotic- arm assisted cup 
placement will demonstrate more accurate cup placement compared to conventional manual cup placement . 
Specific Aim #2: Assess the frequency with which the robotic- arm assisted placements of 
acetabular cups are accurately placed compared to the surgical  plan. The working hypothesis 
is that robotic -arm assisted THA will demonstrate greater accuracy by adhe ring to the 
surgical plan  more frequently than non-robotic- arm assisted cases.  
Specific Aim #3: Examine the patient reported outcomes of robotic- arm assisted THA 
subjects. The working hypothesis is that subjects undergoing robotic- arm assisted acetabular 
cup placement will report better outcomes than subjects with conventional manual cup placements.  
3 INVESTIGATIONAL  PLAN  
3.1 General Schema of Study  Design  
Subjects of eight surgeons at two institutions (A llegheny Health N etwork or AHN and W est 
Virginia University  or WVU ) will be enrolled in the study, providing a valuable multi-
center perspective and reducing the inherent bias produced from a single surgeon or single site study. This group of providers represents surgeons at varying levels of experience which are average annual volume, and robotic experience, factors found to contribute to accuracy of cup placement (Callanan 2010). Our institution will conduct this study at WVU Medicine and at two sites that are part of AHN , Allegheny General Hospital (AGH) and 
Forbes Regiona l Hospital. We will enroll a total of 192 subjects, which is 24 subjects per 
surgeon. 
3.2 Allocation to Treatment Groups and Blinding 
3.3 Duration of Study  Participation  
The study duration per subject will be up to 2 years (+6 months). 
3.4 Total Number of Study Sites/Total Number of Subjects  Projected  
To achieve accuracy of cup placement within 5 degrees of the target version (40 degrees + 5) 
and abduction (20 degrees +5) angles 90 percent of the time, we will enroll 24 subjects  per 
provider. The study will be conducted at two investigative sites in the United States and recruitment will stop when a total of 192 subjects are enrolled at these facilities. It is 
expected that 120 subjects will be enrolled at WVU Medicine, 48 subjects will be enrolled at Allegheny General Hospital (AGH) , and 24 subjects at Forbes Regional Hospital. 
4  
3.5 Study  Population  
The study population is defined in section 3.6 (inclusion criteria) and 3.7 (exclusion 
criteria).  
3.6 Inclusion  Criteria  
1) Males and f emales age 18 years and  older. 
2) Subjects requiring primary total hip  arthroplasty.  
3) Subjects agreeable to  randomization. 
4) Subjects willing and able to comply with follow -up requirements.  
5) Subjects willing to sign an IRB approved Informed Consent Form (ICF).  
3.7 Exclusion  Criteria  
1) Subjects with a Body Mass Index (BMI) >40. 
 
2) Subjects with an active infection or suspected latent infection in or about the hip joint.  
 
3) Bone stock that is inadequate for support or fixation of the prosthesis. 
 
4) Previous major hip surgery excluding hip arthr oscopy. 
 
5) Total hip arthroplasty using cement fixation or resurfacing.  
 
6) Pregnant or planning on becoming pregnant within the next two years.  
 
Subjects that do not meet all of the enrollment criteria may not be enrolled. Any violations of these criteria must be reported in accordance with IRB Policies and Procedures. 
5  
4 STUDY  PROCEDURES  
 
  
Screening/Pre - 
Op ( -30 days)   
Visit 2/Intra - 
op Visit 3/3 -6 
months  
(+ 1 months)   
Visit 4/1 year 
(+ 3 months)   
Visit 5/2 year 
(+ 6 months)  
Consent  X     
Inclusion/Exclusion  X     
Demographics  X     
Medical History  X     
Surgical Details   X    
Function  
Evaluation/ROM   
X   
X  
X  
HOOS  X  X X X 
PROMIS 10  X  X X X 
Dislocation/Ad Events    X X X 
Radiographs  X  X X X 
Computed Tomography  X  X   
HAS Analysis    X X X 
Con Meds  X X X X X 
Physical Exam  X     
 
4.1 Concomitant  Medication  
All prior and concomitant medications used within 30 days prior to the screening visit and 
through the end of the study will be recorded. The dates of administration, dosage, and reason for use will be included. 
4.2 Subject  Completion/Withdrawal  
Subjects may withdraw from the study at any time without prejudice to their care.  They may also be discontinued from the study at the discretion of the Investigator for lack of adherence to study treatment or visit schedules or adverse events ( AEs). The Investigator 
may also withdraw subjects who violate the study plan, or to protect the subject for reasons of safety or for administrative reasons. It will be documented whether or no t each subject 
completes the clinical study. If the Investigator becomes aware of any serious related adverse events, both serious and non-serious after the subject completes or withdraws from the study, they will be recorded in the source documents and on the case report form  (CRF ). 
4.3 Early Termination Study  Visit  
Subjects who withdraw from the study will have all procedures enumerated for Visit 5 as the early termination visit.  
6  
5 STUDY EVALUATIONS AND  MEASUREMENTS  
5.1 Medical Record  Review  
• The following variables will be abstracted from the subject’s electronic medical 
record: Preoperative Diagnosis [avascular necrosis/fracture, osteoarthritis, congenital/development dysplasia, and other (tumors, inflammatory disease, or metabolic  diagnosis)]. 
 
5.2 Physical  Examination  
The physical examination is considered standard of care prior to surgery. 
5.3 Diagnostic Tests, Scales, Measures, etc.  
This study will involve a quantitative assessment of prospectively collected computed tomography, radiographic, and patient reported  outcomes data. Function measures include 
Range of Motion (ROM) scores. Outcomes measures include the HOOS, PROMIS 10, and HAS evaluation (cup placement measurements conducted on specific MAKO software).  
5.4 Safety  Evaluation 
Subject safety will be monitored by adverse events, physical examinations, and questionnaires. 
6 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  
6.1 Sample Size and  Power  
Patient characteristics and demographics will be analyzed using Chi-square or F isher’s exact 
test as appropriate for categorical variables and parametric and non -parametric hypotheses 
tests for continuous variables as appropriate. The central hypothesis will be evaluated using a univariate logistic regression model to determine the accuracy of cup placement using the NON-ROBOTIC ARM group as the reference. Confounding factors will be controlled for in the model and interaction between terms will also be evaluated. 
 
Data will be analyzed by the West Virginia University biostatistics team/core ; other tests may 
be added at the discretion of those experts. 
 
7 SAFETY  MANAGEMENT  
The PI and Co-Is will be responsible for the safety management of this study. Since the study procedur es are not greater than minimal risk, serious adverse events ( SAEs ) are not 
expected. If any unanticipated problems related to the research involving risks to subjects or others happen during the course of this study (including SAEs), they w ill be reported  to 
the IRB . AEs  that are not serious but that are notable and could involve risks to subjects 
will be summarized in narrative or other format and submitted to the IRB at the time of continuing review. 
7  
7.1 Clinical Adverse Events  
Clinical adverse events (AEs) will be monitored throughout the study. 
7.2 Adverse Event  Reporting 
Unanticipated problems related to the research involving risks to subjects or others that 
occur during the course of this study (including SAEs) will be reported to the IRB in accordance with WVU IRB SOP : Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects. 
AEs that are not serious but that are notable and could involve risks to subjects will be summarized in narrative or other format and submitted to the IRB at the time of continuing review.  
7.3 Definition of an Adverse  Event  
An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject who has received an intervention (drug, biologic, or other intervention). The occurrence does not necessarily have to have a causal relationship with the treatment. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable or unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding, for example), symptom, or disease temporarily associated with the intervention, whether or not considered related to the  intervention. 
All AEs (including serious AEs) will be noted in the study records and on the CRF with 
a full description including the nature, date and time of onset, determination of non-serious versus serious, intensity (mild, moderate, severe), duration, causality, and outcome of the event.  
7.4 Definition of a Serious Adverse Event  (SAE)  
An SAE is any adverse experience that results in any of the following outcomes: 
• Death;  
• Life-threatening event (at risk of death at the time of the  event);  
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing  hospitalization  required ; 
• Persistent or significant disability/incapacity; and 
• Congenital anomaly/birth defect in the offspring of a subject.  
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse event when, based upon appropriate 
medical judgment, they may jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. 
A distinctio n should be drawn between serious and severe AEs. A severe AE is a major 
event of its type. A severe AE does not necessarily need to be considered serious. For 
example, nausea which persists for several hours may be considered severe nausea, but would not be an SAE. On the other hand, a stroke that results in only a limited degree of disability may be considered a mild stroke, but would be an SAE. 
8  
7.5 Relationship of SAE to study drug or other  intervention  
The relationship of each SAE to the study intervention should be characterized using one of 
the following terms in accordance with WVU IRB Guidelines: definitely, probably, possibly, unlikely, or unrelated. 
7.6 IRB Notification of SAEs and Other Unanticipated  Problems  
The Investigator will promptly notify the IRB of all on -site unanticipated, serious Adverse 
Events that are related to the research activity. Other unanticipated problems related to the research involving risk to subjects or others will also be reported promptly. Written reports will be filed using the IRB system and in accordance with the timeline in the IRB SOP. External SAEs that are both unexpected and related to the study intervention will be reported promptly after the investigator receives the report. 
7.7 Follow -up report  
If an SAE has  not resolved at the time of the initial report and new information arises that  
changes the investigator’s assessment of the event, a follow -up report including all relevant 
new or reassessed information (e.g., concomitant medication, medical history) should be submitted to the IRB. The investigator is responsible for ensuring that all SAE s are 
followed until either resolved or stable. 
8 STUDY  ADMINISTRATION  
8.1 Treatment Assignment  Methods  
The method of THA surgery (robotic-arm assisted or not) will be randomly assigned using a 
pre-populated randomization schedule after patient  consent. Patients in the control group 
will undergo traditional THA surgery without robotic- arm assistance. The same variables 
will be collected for both study groups 
 
8.2 Data Collection and  Management  
1. Confidentiality  
• A master list containing personal health information ( PHI) and subject identification  
(ID) number separate from data forms (paper and electronic) that have only a study 
ID number. The master list will be kept on a separate computer, removable disk drive, or in a locked file cabinet.  
 
• Data files will be stored electronically on a WVU password protected restricted drive. Only the key study personnel associated with this study will have access to the data files.  
 
2. Security  
The subject master list will be stored electronically on a password protected Excel spreadsheet housed on secure servers at  West Virginia University . Patient binders 
and information will be stored in a locked cabinet in the clinical research 
coordinator’s locked office.  
9  
3. Destruction  
All data will be retained for 10 years and be kept in a locked room. Each document 
will be marked with a destroy date with earliest dates at the front.  
8.3 Confidentiality  
All data and records generated during this study will be kept confidential in accordance with Institutional policies and  The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ( HIPAA ) 
on subject privacy. The Investigator and other site personnel will not use such data and records for any purpose other than conducting the study. 
The Institution owns all Study Data, excluding Site’s patient medical records and 
Investigator’s personal notes. Institution hereby grants to the Site a non-exclusive, non-
transferable, non- sub-licensable right to use the Study Data solely for its own internal, non-commercial research and educational purposes.  
In performance of this Study, Site shall not provide to Institution any individually 
identifiable health information. All Study Data provided by Site to Institution shall be  de- 
identified. Any individually identifiable health information collected or produced by Site or 
Site Investigator shall be in accordance with the Protocol and only for the purpose of complying with applicable law, provided that all such uses are disclos ed in the IRB - 
approved ICF. Institution may use information that is not identifiable under any applicable U.S. laws for any research and development purpose. Institution will not contact any Study subjects, unless permitted by the ICF. 
8.4 Regulatory and Ethi cal Considerations  
IRB approval will be obtained from the West Virginia University  IRB board. The study will 
be conducted according to the IRB/West Virginia University  policies and procedures. This 
study will be reviewed by the IRB on a yearly basis.  
The p roposed study anticipates recruiting a proportion of racial/ethnic minorities (African 
Americans, Asian -Americans, and Hispanics) as well as non -Hispanic and white subjects. 
The study will not include children or prisoners. 
It is the Investigators ’ responsibility to conduct the protocol under the current version of 
Declaration of Helsinki, ICH Guidelines, Good Clinical Practice , and the rules of the West 
Virginia University IRB. The investigator must ensure that the patient’s anonymity be 
maintained within the data.  
All paper records will be kept in locked file cabinets in a locked office. All electronic 
records of study data will be stored on password protected computers in restricted drives. Clinical information will not be released without written permiss ion of the patient, except 
as necessary for monitoring by the IRB. Consent procedures and forms, and the communication, transmission , and storage of patient data will comply with individual site 
IRB and requirements for compliance with HIPAA . 
10  
Study Discontinuation: Participants will be informed that they may discontinue the study at 
any time, for any reason. They will be assured that the medical care which they receive at the participating facility will not be affected should they elect to dis continue participation in 
the study. 
8.5 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
The PI and Co-Is will be responsible for safety management of this study. The study 
progress will be monitored quarterly with the study team. Since the study procedures are not 
greater than minimal risk, SAEs are not expected. If any unanticipated problems related to the research involving risks to subjects or others happen during the course of this study (including SAEs), these will be reported to the IRB in accordance with IRB SOP : 
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects. Adverse Events that are not serious but that are notable and could involve risks to subjects will be summarized in narrative or other format and submitted to the IRB at the time of continuing review.  
8.6 Risk  Assessment  
As a hip replacement candidate, all risks for this surgical procedure will be explained in detail to you by your surgeon prior to surgery. Some, but not all, of the risks involved with surgery are blood clots, infection, fracture, dislocation, change in leg length, and prosthesis/implant loosening. 
This study requires you to undergo two  CT scans of your pelvis. Exposure to radiation is 
associated with an incre ased risk of cancer. Patients will be exposed to additional 
radiation from the CT scan 1-2 times over the course of the study based on which 
TREATMENT METHOD [arm] they are randomized to. The risk of developing cancer as a result of  
exposure to radiation depends on the part of the body exposed, the individual’s age at exposure, and the individual’s gender. For the purpose of radiation protection, a 
conservative approach that is generally used is to assume that the risk for adverse health 
effects from cancer  is proportional to the amount of radiation dose absorbed and that there is 
no amount of radiation that is completely without risk. The possibility of fatal cancer from radiation is approximately 1 chance in 2000 for an equivalent radiation dose of 10 milliSievert. The equivalent radiation dose range for one CT scan of the hip is 0.2-25 milliSievert, depending on patient size. Therefore, the possibility of fatal cancer from radiation is approximately 1 chance in 2000, equal to the dose from one or two hip C T 
scans, depending upon patient height and weight.  
This study may involve risks to the unborn child. For this reason, women who are pregnant 
will not be accepted. If you are a woman  who could become pregnant, you will not be 
allowed to participate in the s tudy until you have a negative pregnancy test. You must use a 
medically approved method of birth control while you are on this study. 
11  
8.7 Risk -Benefit  Assessment  
The expected outcome of this study will be to demonstrate that acetabular cups placed 
with robotic- arm assistance during THA are more frequently and accurately placed 
resulting in better patient outcomes and fewer dislocations long- term. The  results of this 
study could benefit future hip replacement patients.  
The surgical procedure being studied in this protocol, total hip arthroplasty (THA), is a 
standard of care procedure. Risks associated with THA (not an  inclusive list) are  blood 
clots, infection, fracture, dislocation, change in leg length, and prosthesis/implant 
loosening. 
The minimal risk of potential breach of private health information also exists. However, 
there are safeguards  in place by study personnel to minimize this risk. The data will be 
recorded in such a manner that the subjects cannot be identified directly. The electronic personal health information (E PHI) will be stored only under the individual West Virginia 
University’s users’ log -ins of the key personnel, therefore it will be password protected. It 
is believed that potential benefits for future patients outw eigh these minimal risks.  
8.8 Recruitment  Strategy  
The orthopaedic surgeon investigators will screen viable subjects from their pre-operative orthopaedic surgery clinic. If agreeable, subjects will consent and enroll in the study at this visit. Advertising will not be used. There will be sufficient subjects to achieve enrollment goals within the practice.  
 
8.9 Informed Consent/Assent and HIPAA  Authorization 
The orthopedic surgeon investigators will screen viable subjects from their pre-operative 
orthopedic surgery clinic. They will be told that their care will not be affected regardless of 
their participation and will be advised that they can withdraw consent any time before the surgery. After full explanation of the study, informed consent will be obtained and witnessed and a signed copy of the consent given to the patient or family member. A combined consent-HIPAA authorization will be used. 
 
8.10 Payment to  Subjects/Families  
The subject will be paid $50 for the 3-6 month visit and $100 for the 1 and 2 year follow-up visits for a total of $250. The subject will receive a VISA Gift Card , which can be used 
anywhere that debit Visas are accepted (including online). When the patient receives the card, they will be provided further information about the card including how to use it, confidentiality, and privacy information. 
12  
9 REFERENCES  
Banerjee S, Cherian JJ, Elmallah RK, Pierce TP, Jauregui JJ, MontMA. Robot- assisted total 
hip arthroplasty. Expert Rev Med Devices. 2016 Jan;13(1):47-56. doi: 
10.1586/17434440.2016.1124018. Epub 2015 Dec 
21. PubMed PMID: 26592900. 
Elson L, Dounchis J, Illgen R, Marchand RC, Padgett DE, Bragdon CR, Malchau H. 
Precision of acetabular cup placement in robotic integrated total hip arthroplasty. Hip Int. 2015 Nov 25;25(6):531-6. doi: 10.5301/hipint.5000289. Epub 2015 Sep 10. PubMed PMID: 26391264. 
Kanawade V, Dorr LD, Banks SA, Zhang Z, Wan Z. Precision of robotic guided 
instrumentation for acetabular component positioning. J Arthroplasty. 2015 Mar;30(3):392- 
7. doi: 10.1016/j.arth.2014.10.021. Epub 2014 Oct 22. PubMed PMID: 25453633. 
Werner SD, Stonestreet M, Jacofsky DJ. Makoplasty and the accuracy and efficacy of 
robotic-assisted arthroplasty. Surg Technol Int. 2014 Mar;24:302-6. PubMed PMID: 24574012. 
Tarwala R, Dorr LD. Robotic assisted total hip arthroplasty using the MAKO platform. Curr 
Rev Musculoskelet Med. 2011 Sep;4(3):151-6. doi: 10.1007/s12178-011-9086-7. PubMed PMID: 21728013; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3261258. 
Callanan MC, Jarrett B, Bragdon CR, Zurakowski D, Rubash HE, Freiberg AA, Malchau H. 
The John Charnley Award: risk factors for cup malpositioning: quality improvement through a joint registry at a tertiary hospital. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2011 Feb;469(2):319-29. doi: 10.1007/s11999-010-1487-1. PubMed PMID: 20717858; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3018230. 
Woo RY, Morrey BF. Dislocations after total hip arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1982 
Dec;64(9):1295-306. PubMed PMID: 7142237. 
Lewinnek GE, Lewis JL, Tarr  R, Compere CL, Zimmerman JR. Dislocations after total hip - 
replacement arthroplasties. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1978 Mar;60(2):217- 20. PubMed PMID: 
641088. 
Domb B, El Bitar, Sidak A, Stake C, Botser I. Comparison of Robotic assisted and 
Conventional Acetabul ar Cup Placement in THA: A Matched - pair Controlled Study. CORR 
(2014) 472:1, 329-36. 
Banjaree S, Cherian J, Elmallah R, Jauregui J, Pierce T, Mont M. Robotic- assisted knee 
Arthroplasty. Expert Review of Medical Devices. 2015;12(6):727-35. doi: 
10.1586/17434440.2015.1086264. Epub 2015 Sep 12. 
Roche M. Robotic- assisted Unicompartmental Knee Arthroplasty: The MAKO Experience. 
Orthop Clin N Am 46 (2015) 125-31. http://dx.doi.orf/10.1016/j.ocl.2014.09.008. 
Soong M1, Rubash HE, Macaulay W. Dislocation after total hip arthroplasty. J Am Acad 
Orthop Surg. 2004 Sep-Oct;12(5):314-21. 
13  
Pellicci PM1, Bostrom M, Poss R. Posterior approach to total hip replacement using enhanced 
posterior soft tissue repair. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1998 Oct; (355): 224-8. 
 
Ghelman B, Kepler CK, Lyman S, Della Valle AG. CT outperforms radiography for determination of acetabular cup version after THA. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2009; 467:2362- 2370. 
 
Redmond JM, Gupta A, Hammarstedt JE, Petrakos A, Stake CE, Domb BG. Accuracy of Component Placement in Robotic-Assisted Total Hip Arthroplasty. Orthopedics. 2016 May 1;39(3):193-9. doi: 10.3928/01477447-20160404-06. PMID:27064781. 
 
El Bita r YF, Stone JC, Jackson TJ, Lindner D, Stake CE, Domb BG. Leg- Length Discrepancy 
After Total Hip Arthroplasty: Comparison of Robot- Assisted Posterior, Fluoroscopy-Guided Anterior, and Conventional Posterior Approaches. Am J Orthop (Belle Mead NJ). 2015 Jun;44(6):265-9. PMID: 26046996 . 
 
Gupta A, Redmond JM, Hammarstedt JE, Petrakos AE, Vemula SP, Domb BG. Does Robotic- Assisted Computer Navigation Affect Acetabular Cup Positioning in Total Hip Arthroplasty in the Obese Patient? A Comparison Study. J Arthroplasty. 2015 Dec;30(12):2204-7. doi: 10.1016/j.arth.2015.06.062. Epub 2015 Jul 2. 
 
El Bitar YF, Stone JC, Jackson TJ, Lindner D, Stake CE, Domb BG. Leg - Length 
Discrepancy After Total Hip Arthroplasty: Comparison of Robot- Assisted Posterior, Fluoroscopy-Guided Anterior, and Conventional Posterior Approaches. Am J Orthop (Belle Mead NJ). 2015 Jun;44(6):265-9. PMID: 26046996. 
 
Elson L, Dounchis J, Illgen R, Marchand RC, Padgett DE, Bragdon CR, Malchau H. Precision of acetabular cup placement in robotic integrated total hip arthroplasty. Hip Int. 2015 Nov-Dec;25(6):531-6. doi: 10.5301/hipint.5000289. 
 
Bukowski BR, Anderson P, Khlopas A, Chughtai M, Mont MA, Illgen RL 2nd. Improved Functional Outcomes with Robotic Compared with Manua Total Hip Arthroplasty. Surg Technol Int. 2016 Oct 26;XXIX:303- 308. 
 
Kamara E, Robinson J, Bas MA, Rodriguez JA, Hepinstall MS. Adoption of Robotic vs Fluoroscopic Guidance in Total Hip Arthroplasty: Is Acetabular Positioning Improved in the Learning Curve? J Arthroplasty. 2017 Jan;32(1):125-130. doi: 10.1016/j.arth.2016.06.039. PMID: 27499519. 