 
 
 
Systematic Pediatric Assessment of Rome Criteria (SPARC)  
 
Principal Investigator: William Bennett MD  
 
IRB Protocol # 1811325201  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
#1811325201  - Systematic Pediatric Assessment of Rome 
Criteria (SPARC)  
Protocol Information  
Review Type  
Expedited  
Status  
Approved  
Approval Date  
Sep 10, 2024  
Continuing Review Date  
Dec 05, 2020  
Expiration Date  
-- 
Initial Approval Date  
Dec 05, 2018  
Initial Review Type  
Expedited  
Feedback  
Approval Comment  
Amendment A017 This research is approved under the following expedited categories: - Category 5 - 
Category 7  
Protocol Amendment Form  
Amendment Request  
4000  
Select your Protocol Type  
Expedited/Full Board   
4012  
Amendment Number  
A017  
4001  
Select the types of  changes being made.  
Personnel update  
4002  
Does this amendment include a change in PI?  
No 
 
General Information  
Principal Investigator  
Bennett, William  
Lead Unit  
IN-PGAS - PED-GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASES  
Protocol Title  
Systematic Pediatric Assessment of Rome  Criteria (SPARC)  
Personnel  
Person  
Bennett, William  
Email Address  
webjr@iupui.edu  
Researcher Role  
Principal Investigator (PI)  
Home Unit  
IN-PGAS - PED-GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASES  
Contact Roles  
 
Permissions  
Full Access  
Affiliation Type  
IU 
Training  
• Biomedical Researcher - Stage 4 - CITI 
• 08/07/20  - 08/06/25  
Status:  Approved  
Personnel Attachments  
Protocol Type  
Select Protocol Type  
Expedited  
Participant Type  
Participant Information  
Participant Type  
Children  
Participant Number  
10000  
Participant Type  
Economically/Educationally Disadvantaged  
Participant Number  
600 
Participant Type  
Total  
Participant Number  
10600  
Organizations  
Organizations List  
Organization  
ESKENAZI HEALTH CENTER  
Organization  
INDIANA UNIVERSITY  
Funding  
Will the study be funded, fully or partly by, any of the following 
sources (this includes pass through funding)?  Select all that apply.  
Federal funding  
Funding Sources  
Funding Source  
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DIABETES, DIGESTIVE & KIDNEY  
Conflicts of Interest  
q134  
Are any of the investigators listed in the personnel section aware of an 
institutional conflict of interest which could affect or be affected by 
this research?  
No 
 
q24901  
Do any of the investigators listed in the Personnel section (or their 
immediate family members) have a significant  financial interest which 
could affect this research?  
No 
q24905  
Does the Principal Investigator affirm all investigators listed as 
personnel on this protocol have agreed to participate in this project, 
are aware of their status and role, and have been adeq uately trained 
to participate in the project?  
Yes 
A-Level of Review  
q720  
Does any research activity in this study present more than minimal risk 
to human subjects?  
No.The  research may qualify for Expedited review if all research procedures fall into 
one of the categories below.  
 
q721  
Check all category(ies) which apply to this research.  
Category 5 - Research involving materials (data, documents, records, or specimens) 
that have been collected, or will be collected solely for nonresearch purposes  
Category 7 - Research on individual or group characteristics or behavior, or research 
employing survey, interview, oral history, focus group, program evaluation, human 
factors evalu ation, or quality assurance methodologies  
 
q724  
Will the researchers be using a data collection form?   
No 
 
q725  
List all data points that will be recorded or collected.  
FGID Module: Data points collected for participation in the retrospective review of 
FGID module data include date(s) of visit, physician name, patient vitals and 
demographics, contact information, patient/parent answers to GI questions, who is 
answering th e questions (parent or patient or both), and physician notes about GI 
diagnoses, treatments, and recommendations. Tool Usability Questionnaire: Data 
points collected in the Gastrointestinal Symptom Survey Tool and FGID Module (as 
above) Survey (online and phone): In addition to the FGID Module data points above, 
we will use parent and patient answers to the phone survey, along with parent -
reported demographics. Baseline retrospective review: DOB, date/diagnosis (ICD 
codes), Eskenazi clinic(s) of care Health  care utilization retrospective review: • The 
presence of outpatient sick visits within the Eskenazi system clinic for any complaint 
• The presence of outpatient sick visits within the Eskenazi system clinic with an 
associated GI billing code • The presenc e of visits to statewide providers, including 
inpatient hospital stays, outpatient clinic visits, and emergency room visits. • The 
occurrence of any GI -related testing and procedures – specifically radiologic, 
laboratory testing, endoscopy, and surgical pr ocedures related to GI diagnoses • The 
use of any medications prescribed to treat Rome IV diagnoses – specifically acid -
suppressants, antispasmodics, antidepressants, stool softeners and laxatives, and 
pro-motility agents.  
q23340  
Would identification of su bjects and/or their responses reasonably 
place them at risk for any of the following (check any that apply):  
None  
B-Lay Summary Research Design  
q22122  
Describe the purpose of this study in lay terms, including research 
question(s) and hypothesis.   
Function al gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs) are extremely common in children and 
adolescents, and represent a wide range of disorders that are apparently related to 
the gastrointestinal tract, but which have no clear structural, anatomic, or 
histopathologic caus e. FGIDs represent an enormous burden on patients and 
families, and patients with these functional disorders have much higher health care 
utilization and related costs. FGIDs are diagnosed according to the symptom -based 
Rome criteria. The Rome criteria hav e been developed by experts in pediatric 
functional disease through literature review and a consensus process. Unfortunately, 
FGIDs are often diagnosed incorrectly by primary care providers and patients often 
wait months to years before a correct diagnosis  is made, and effective treatment is 
begun. Furthermore, primary care providers are often unaware of recent guideline 
changes or the evidence base for children with FGIDs, leading to overuse of testing, 
inappropriate or ineffective treatment, and increased  costs. Given this information, it 
is essential that we develop interventions that target pediatric primary care 
providers to improve their care for children with FGIDs. We propose that using a 
Clinical Decision Support System (CDSS) that incorporates the Rome IV criteria for 
diagnosis and evidence -based care for FGIDs will improve the (1) accuracy of 
diagnosis and (2) effectiveness of clinical care, thereby improving clinical outcomes 
and reducing the economic burden of FGIDs in children. Once a FGID scree ning and 
care module within Epic is developed and tested, when a patient is scheduled to see 
or presents to any primary care clinics in the Eskenazi health system which support 
general pediatric care, the patient (and/or parent) will be asked to complete F GID 
screening questions prior their provider visit as part of standard care. Rules have 
been established within EPIC to determine how often patients receive the FGID 
questionnaire to avoid redundancy, inappropriate use, and/or burden to the patient. 
Screen ing results will be available to physicians immediately, and physicians in the 
intervention clinics will have access to specific guidance for the diagnosis and 
treatment/management of the FGID, as well as information to share with families. 
Physicians may chose to document their FGID assessments and plans in the patient's 
EMR via EPIC. We hypothesize that automation of screening, diagnosis, and 
management of FGIDs will result in improved resolution of FGIDs (primary outcome), 
as well as decreased utilizatio n of medical services (secondary outcomes). We 
propose to test this hypothesis using the following specific aims: Aim 1: Develop 
computer -based decision support system, to screen children 0 to 18 years of age for 
functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGID s) using the Rome IV criteria, and provide 
guidance regarding diagnosis and management of probable FGIDs. (Please note that 
Aim 1 does not involve the use of human subjects/PHI.) Aim 2: Demonstrate the 
feasibility and effectiveness of thie FGID Module to i mprove clinical care measures 
(e.g., resolution of Rome IV criteria) and reduce utilization of healthcare services (e.g. 
repeat outpatient visits, ED visits).  
 
q22123  
List and describe all research interactions and/or interventions, 
including the frequency  and duration of procedures, and length of 
participation for individual subjects.  
In order to determine the effect of the FGID decision support module, we will 
complete the following study procedures: FGID module (data review): There is no 
contact with sub jects for this portion of the study; this is a retrospective and 
prospective review of data. We will pull retrospective and prospective patient data 
from the EMR for FGID screening, diagnosis, and treatment in order to analyze 
module process and outcome da ta, including any difference in physician behavior at 
control vs. intervention clinics in the diagnosis, treatment, and symptom resolution 
of FGIDs. Control verses intervention clinic will be determined by cluster 
randomization at the clinic site level. A0 02: In order to determine the usability, 
"patient -friendliness" of this module, we will collect qualitative feedback about of 
the user's experience from a subset of 50 families who completed it. This one time 
questionnaire will be administered by REDCap su rvey. A003:Tool usability 
questionnaire: Expand enrollment aim to 50 to 100 participants. Survey (online and 
phone): We will also conduct surveys with a subset of parents of patients and 
patients with a positive FGID screen to assess symptoms, parental con cern, and 
parent satisfaction. With the parent's permission, patients ages 10 -17 will also be 
invited to participate in the phone survey about their symptoms and satisfaction. The 
surveys will be conducted over various time points: approximately 1, 3, 6, a nd 12 
months after the positive screen for a FGID. (We anticipate conducting surveys with 
a maximum of 600 parents/legal guardians and older patients.) Survey responses can 
be obtained from the parent, parent and child, or child only (age 10 -17). 
Determina tion as to who completeness the questionnaire at each time point will be 
influenced by family availability and desire to not place burden. All participants will 
be offered the option to complete surveys online or by phone to accommodate their 
changing need s at the designated timepoints. The patient facing online surveys will 
be bilingual (English and Spanish) and will include the same data elements as the 
instruments designated for the demographics and the diagnosis specific follow up 
questionnaires . The s urvey version will include participant instructions/prompts to 
guide independent completion. A012: To offer potential participants two different 
channels for participation, enrollment and surveys will be offered electronically and 
by phone. Online enrollme nt will be deployed in 2 phases. Phase 1 (A012) will be for 
English and the Phase 2 for Spanish. Future amendment will be submitted to initiate 
Phase 2. For those who read the E -Consent but opt to not consent/participate, the 
person reading the consent wil l be asked one additional question in an effort to 
better understand the decision not to participate. This question is voluntary and 
included in the REDCap E -Consent draft. A014: To remain in compliance with 
University and IU Health Policies, we will infor m participants that personal email is 
not a secure means of communication and obtain their permission to use email for 
communications. Baseline retrospective review: We will submit a query to the 
Indiana Health Information Exchange at the Regenstrief Insti tute for FGID diagnosis 
data to determine the prevalence for each functional GI disorder diagnosed by the 
primary care provider prior to the implementation of the FGIDs Modules. Health care 
utilization retrospective review: We will query Epic, and Indiana Network for Patient 
Care (INPC) via RMRS for data to assess health care utilization including outpatient 
visits, inpatient hospital stays, emergency room visits, and the use of GI -related 
testing and procedures and any medications prescribed to treat Rome IV diagnoses. 
A003: Reference: Where FGID screening module, patient facing questionnaire is 
"Gastrointestinal (GI) Symptom Survey". Where tool usability questionnaire, patient 
facing questionnaire is "Gastrointestinal Symptom Survey Tool: Usability and 
Qualitative Data Survey" with 2 versions for age  
 
 
q23358  
Will any non -English study documents be uploaded?  
Yes 
 
q23359  
The PI affirms that translated versions are complete and accurate 
translations which do not contain information not presented within 
the context of the English version(s).  
Yes 
 
q24919  
Is this research funded by, or has a funding application been 
submitted to, a federal agency? This includes federal pass -through 
funding.   
Yes 
 
q25019  
Provide the name of the federal funding agency.  
q23234  
List inclusion criteria - eligibility criteria for subjects.   
FGID module: Any child between the ages of 0 through 18 who is a pediatric primary 
care clinic in the Eskenazi health system and the PCP/physician who sees them A002 
Tool usability questionnaire : A subset of patients who completed the FGID module 
between age 0 and 17 Survey (online and phone): A subset of patients with a positive 
screen for a FGID and their parents between age 0 -17 Baseline retrospective review: 
Any patient ages 0 -18 who presente d to a a pediatric primary care clinic in the 
Eskenazi health system prior to the implementation of the FGID module Health care 
utilization retrospective review: Any patient ages 0 -18 who presents to a pediatric 
primary care clinic in the Eskenazi health s ystem after the implementation of the 
FGID module  
 
q23235  
List exclusion criteria (any criteria which would exclude otherwise 
acceptable subjects).   
FGID module, retrospective reviews: none A002 Tool usability questionnaire: does 
not meet inclusion for FGI D module and did not complete the module Survey (online 
and phone): Parent and patient be able to provide consent/assent in English or 
Spanish. We do not currently have the resources to include participants who speak a 
language other than English and Spani sh. 
 
q23346  
Will subjects be paid for their participation in the study?  Payment 
includes reimbursement of expenses (other than compensation for 
injury).  
Yes 
 
q23347b  
Describe the payment arrangement, including amount and timing of 
disbursement.   
FGID module, retrospective reviews: none (no patient interaction) Survey 
participation (online and phone): Patients and parents/legal guardians will receive a 
$25 gift card for completing enrollment and the 1 mo survey. They will receive a $10 
gift card fo r each phone survey they complete thereafter. Requested timepoints are 
3, 6, and 12 months. For those that complete all time points, they will receive a $20 
bonus after completing the 12 month phone survey. All gift cards will be sent 
electronically unless  a physical card is requested by the participant. In those 
circumstances, the study team will work to make an accommodations where can. 
A002 Tool usability questionnaire: Patients will receive a $20 e gift card for after 
completing the survey  
 
q23348  
Justi fy the proposed payment arrangement described above, 
specifically why payment does not provide undue influence for subject 
participation.  
Survey participation (online and phone): We do not believe that the payments 
described above provide undue influence b ecause the time requested. Time required 
to enroll is approx. 20 minutes and each phone call approx. 10 minutes. A002 Tool 
usability questionnaire: Participation is voluntary. Payment of $20 is a thank you for 
the time dedicated to completing the questions . This is a minimal risk study and the 
amount offered should not coerce or create undue influence to participate.  
 
 
 
q23349  
Will partial payment be provided if the subject withdraws prior to 
completion of the study?  
No 
q23350  
Explain why failure to offer p artial payment will not unduly influence 
subjects to complete the study.  
Survey participation (online and phone): Each data collection point will offer a 
payment so even participants who chose to withdraw will receive payment for their 
time. A002 Tool usab ility questionnaire: Only completed surveys will be 
compensated. If the participant feels uncomfortable answering questions or for 
other reason chooses not to complete the questionnaires, compensation at this level 
should not unduly influence subject to pr oceed.  
 
q23352  
Does this research involve (choose all that apply):   
• the STUDY of any of the following products (regardless of FDA approval status). 
“The study of” means at least one objective of the study is related to obtaining 
data about the product  
• USE of any of the following products which have not been cleared or approved 
by the FDA for use in the US  
• USE of any of the following products for open label extension, treatment, or 
compassionate use  
NONE  
 
q23454a  
This research involves (check all that apply):  
None of the Above  
 
q25049a  
Is this research considered a prospective clinical study?  
Yes - This study may require entry in OnCore.  
 
 
 
q30000a  
Is this community -engaged research?  
No 
C-Sites and Collaborations  
q700  
Are there additional locations of research, not already listed?  
No 
q704  
Are you requesting that IU provide IRB approval for any researchers 
who are NOT IU affiliates?  
No 
q710a  
 Is this a multi -center study or multi -site clinical trial?  
No 
 
D-Recruitment Methods  
q23236  
Describe how potential subjects will be initially identified.   
Potential subjects will be identified via the following: FGID module: child age 0 
through 18 year old who is patient of a pediatric primary care clinic in the Eskenazi 
health system via age/DOB and all phys icians at these clinics A002 Tool usability 
questionnaire: patient completed FGID module, age 0 -17 years Survey (online and 
phone): patients with a positive FGID screen per the module, age 0 -17 years Baseline 
retrospective review: query of RMRS for FGID di agnoses in pediatric primary care 
clinic in the Eskenazi health system Health care utilization retrospective review: 
patients with a positive FGID screen via the module  
 
q30002  
Check any of the following sources of information which will be used 
to identif y potential subjects.   
Medical records or clinic schedules  
 
q30003  
Describe how potential subjects will be initially contacted.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: There is no contact with subjects 
for this part of the study as it is retrospect ive and prospective data review. Before 
the FGID module launches in clinic, physicians at both control and intervention clinics 
will be informed about the module and its respective functions. Phone survey: Study 
staff will contact parents and patients via phone and will use the verbal script 
(included in survey) to present the study to the potential subject. If phone attempt is 
unsuccessful, RA may send a follow up email if they deem this to be beneficial and 
not intrusive. Email script in Notes and Attachm ents. Expanded recruitment option 
for phone surveys: For patients who completed a FGID screening module with a 
positive result, patients may receive a MyChart message that will introduce this 
study opportunity prior to receiving a call from study team. A01 2: The MyChart 
message will include the option for online enrollment for English speakers (phase 1). 
The MyChart message for patients with Spanish as the preferred language, will 
remain unchanged from A011. The online enrollment option will be added for 
Spanish speakers in a later amendment (phase 2). A002 Tool usability questionnaire: 
After the parent, parent/ patient dyad, or patient has completed the FGID module, 
they will receive electronic communication [via EPIC MyChart (preferred) or email] 
on behalf  of the study team offering the opportunity to provide voluntary feedback.  
 
q23237  
Check any of the following recruitment materials which will be used to 
contact potential subjects.   
Direct Mail/Email  
Verbal Scripts  
Other  
 
q23237C7Text  
Explain the Other recruitment material(s) which will be used to 
contact potential subjects.  
EPIC MyChart  
 
q25426b  
Select any of the following circumstances which apply to this research.  
None of the above.  
 
q23245  
Would participation in this study preclude subjects from part icipating 
in other research studies?   
No 
 
E-Risks Benefits Protections  
q23296  
List and describe (in lay terms) the potential risks to which subjects 
may be exposed as a result of their participation in the research.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: minimal risk of loss of 
confidentiality A002 Tool usability questionnaire: As with phone surveys, minimal 
risk of loss of confidentiality and possible discomfort answering questions Survey 
(online and phone): minimal risk of loss of confidentialit y and possible discomfort 
answering questions  
 
q23297  
Describe procedures for protecting against, or minimizing, the 
potential risks listed above. Include any procedures that are already 
being performed on subjects for diagnostic, treatment, or standard 
purposes.  
All procedures: Study team personnel have been trained in human subjects’ research 
practices and HIPAA regulations (i.e. confidentiality, privacy and security practices). 
Furthermore, all data will be securely transferred and stored on fire -walled,  
encrypted and password -protected hard drives and databases, and locked file 
cabinets will be used to store any confidential paper study materials. Tool Usability 
Questionnaire: If participants do not feel comfortable completing the questionnaire 
they have  the right to discontinue their participation right and end the session.  
 
q23299  
Explain how research data will be protected so that only approved 
persons have access to subjects’ identifiable data (i.e. confidentiality 
of data).  
FGID module: The EPIC syst em runs on a server in the Eskenazi Health network. This 
server resides behind the Eskenazi firewall and is accessible only to Eskenazi IT staff. 
Study data pulls are handled by faculty and staff with appropriate IRB approvals and 
HIPAA compliance training . Identifiable data is secured in transit via SSL encryption 
or via encrypted files in the case of data pulls for data analysis.  A002 Tool usability 
questionnaire: Responses will be securely stored in a REDCap database with access 
limited to the study te am members. Survey(online and phone): All survey data will 
be securely stored in a REDCap database with access limited to the study team 
members. Baseline retrospective review: All data will be securely access, transferred, 
and stored for analysis and only  accessible to members of the study team. Health 
care utilization retrospective review: see above  
 
q23300  
Explain how subjects’ physical privacy will be protected, both during 
recruitment/screening and during participation in the research.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: There is no contact with patients 
for this portion of the study; this is a retrospective and prospective review of data. 
Physicians will document any FGID assessments/plans in an environment deemed 
appropriat e by the provider to document usual clinical care. Survey(online and 
phone): Phone: The verbal consent, authorization, assent (if applicable) and surveys 
will take place with study personnel completing the procedures in a private space. 
Online: The questio nnaire will be completed in a space deemed appropriate by the 
participant who is filling out the questionnaire independently. A002 Tool usability 
questionnaire: The questionnaire will be completed in a space deemed appropriate 
by the participant who is fil ling out the questionnaire independently.  
 
q23301  
Is there a potential for subjects to benefit directly from participation in 
the study?  
Yes 
 
q23302  
Describe the potential benefits to be gained by the individual 
SUBJECT.  Please note that payment for participation is not considered 
a benefit.    
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: There are no potential benefit to 
patients for being part of a data review. Physicians at intervention clinics may benefit 
from knowledge gained via the automated guidance for diagnosing and managing 
FGIDs. A002 Tool usability questionnaire: Obtaining user feedback is a means to 
ensure the tool provides optimal user experience. The user may not directly benefit 
from this encounter but may benefit from the informatio n learned if/when they 
complete this module again in future visits to their care provider. Survey(online and 
phone): no potential benefit  
 
 
 
 
q23303  
State the potential benefits or information which may accrue to 
SCIENCE or SOCIETY in general as a result o f this work.  
There is a significant benefit to society at large as the results of this research allow us 
to substantially improve the care of patients with functional GI disoders by 
standardizing health information technology -based interventions that can t hen be 
used in a variety of settings to accomplish transition. The lessons we learn from this 
intervention could then be used at a health system and national level.  
 
F-Data Safety Monitoring  
q23304  
Describe the provisions for monitoring the data to ensure the safety of 
subjects.    
All procedures: Oversight for the conduct of the study will be provided by the 
principal investigator. Adverse events are not anticipated, but any occurring will be 
documented and reported according to Human Research Protection Program (HRPP) 
at Indiana University policies and procedures. The PI will take primary responsibility 
for data collection and verification, and review of cumulative adverse events. Any 
cumulative adverse events and study progress summary will be communicat ed to the 
IRB at the time of continuing review.  
G1-Children  
q22116  
Select the category below which best applies.  
45 CFR 46.404: Research not involving greater than minimal risk to children.  
 
q23199  
Will you be enrolling foster children or children who are considered 
wards (i.e. who have been placed in the legal custody of the State or 
other agency, institution per local, state, or federal law)?  
No 
H-Informed Consent  
q901  
Will all or some subjects consent to participate in the research?  
Some subjects (or the ir legally authorized representative) will consent to participate 
in the research, and some subjects will not.  
 
q902  
Explain which subjects will consent to the research, and which subjects 
will not.    
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: No cons ent will be obtained for 
using the prospective and retrospective data reviews. A002 Tool usability 
questionnaire: If the individual agrees to participate by voluntarily proceeding to 
questionnaire, consent is implied. Survey(online and phone): Phone: verba l 
consent/assent will be obtained. Online: electronic signature will be obtained 
Subjects who age up to 18 while on study, whose parents will continue to answer the 
phone survey on their behalf, will not be consented.  
 
q909  
For those subjects who will cons ent to participate, explain how 
subjects (or subjects’ legally authorized representative) will be 
presented with the information needed to decide to participate, 
including all elements of informed consent.    
Survey(online and phone): Phone: The RA will ver bally review the Study Information 
Sheet/Auth over the phone with the parent/legal guardian and, when appropriate, 
with the patient, and answer any questions before obtaining verbal consent from the 
parent for both his/her own parental participation as wel l as the participation of the 
minor/patient. A copy of the study SIS/Auth will be sent to participants done 
electronically where able after receiving consent to send email to the participant. 
Online: A MyChart message will be sent to the patient/patient pr oxy to introduce the 
study opportunity. This introduction will include the SIS/Auth. The English version 
will include a time limited participant specific link to the REDCap e -consent. (Patient 
communication uploaded in Notes and Attachments). Recognizing t hat the MyChart 
account for patients 14 -17 may not have a parent proxy assigned, a statement is 
added to the introduction requesting interested teens share this study information 
with a parent/legal guardian for full consideration and consent. A002 Tool us ability 
questionnaire: After the parent, parent/ patient dyad, or patient (add A003 "or 
patient") has completed the FGID module, they will receive communication offering 
opportunity to provide voluntary feedback. If interested in providing feedback, they 
will be presented with the electronic SIS (in Notes and Attachments) for them to read 
independently.  
 
 
 
 
q903  
Describe any informed consent tools which will be used to present 
information to potential subjects (i.e. consent documents, videos, 
brochure, drug/device information, etc) and how they will be used.   
Survey(online and phone): SIS/Auth form A002 Tool usabi lity questionnaire: SIS  
 
q925  
Describe the timing of the informed consent process, including how 
you will ensure potential subjects have sufficient opportunity to 
discuss and consider participation before agreeing to participate in the 
research.  
Survey( online and phone): Phone: The informed consent process for phone surveys 
will take place over the phone when the patient and parent indicate their interest 
and availability. Any participants wishing more time to consider will be called back at 
a different time. Online: After reviewing the MyChart recruitment message, the 
potential participant will be able to advance directly to the online enrollment process 
when they desire. A002 Tool usability questionnaire: After the parent, parent/ 
patient dyad, or patie nt has completed the FGID module, expressed interest in 
providing feedback, read the SIS, and implied consent by voluntarily proceeding to 
the questionnaire.  
q30127a  
Will you include all required elements of consent in your consent 
process?    
Yes 
 
q921  
Indicate in what language(s) the consent conversation will be 
conducted.  
English  
 
q926  
Explain how you will ensure potential subjects understand the 
information you have presented to them before they agree to 
participate in the study.   
Survey(online and phone ): Phone: An RA will ask participants if they have any 
questions (and provide the answers to those questions) before the subject agrees to 
participate. Online: The e -consent instrument will contain instructions for 
completion. Within those instructions wil l be PResNet contact information for 
questions. If participants proceed without asking questions, it is implied that the 
content was understood. A002 Tool usability questionnaire: Participants will 
voluntarily agree to fill out questionnaire before being p resented with the survey. If 
they do not understand the content or choose not to participate, they are given the 
option to decline participation.  
 
q929  
Briefly describe any training provided to investigators who are 
obtaining informed consent.    
Phone surv eys: PResNet Research Assistants have been trained in obtaining informed 
consent (and assent) through online CITI training, university -sponsored training, and 
internal training and QA programs.  
 
q931  
Does the research include any minimal risk procedures to  which 
subjects will not consent?    
Yes 
 
q932  
A waiver of consent for those procedures is required. List the 
procedures and explain how they involve no more than minimal risk to 
the subject.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: We are requesting  a waiver of 
consent for this part of the research. Patients and parents will be asked (but not 
required) to respond to yes/no questions about GI symptoms as part of standard 
care. No part of this research presents more than a minimal risk to subjects. Stu dy 
team personnel have been trained in human subjects’ research practices and HIPAA 
regulations (i.e. confidentiality, privacy and security practices). Furthermore, all data 
will be securely transferred and stored on fire -walled, encrypted and password -
protected hard drives and databases, and locked file cabinets will be used to store 
any confidential paper study materials.  
 
q933  
Explain how the waiver will not adversely affect the rights and welfare 
of subjects.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective revie ws: The waiver will not adversely affect 
the rights and welfare of subjects as we are only (securely) accessing and using data 
generated in a clinical setting under standard care.  
 
q905  
Explain how the research could not be practicably carried out if 
infor med consent were required.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: If informed consent were required, 
we could not practicably obtain consent from the patients who answer module 
questions or whose data is used in the retrospective reviews as there are no study 
staff present in clinics.  
 
q30004b  
Explain why the research could not be practicably carried out without 
identifiers.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: Without identifiers, we could not 
conduct the research because we need to lin k patient encounter data to past and 
prospective health data to look at patient outcomes.  
 
q914  
Explain how subjects will be informed of pertinent results at the 
conclusion of the study, if appropriate.  If subjects will not be 
informed, enter N/A.    
N/A 
q23678a  
For those subjects who will consent to participate, choose whether the 
consent process will be documented by a written signature from 
subjects.  
Some subjects will provide a written signature as documentation of consent, and 
some subjects will not.  
 
q30129a  
Will subjects participate in any study activity prior to physically signing 
a consent document?  
No 
 
q939a  
Explain which subjects will provide a written signature as 
documentation of consent, and which subjects will not.    
Survey participants who enroll online will be asked for a printed (typed) signature.   
 
q940b  
Explain the process for obtaining a written signature from subjects.   
Using the REDCap e consent platform parents/guardians will type their name in a 
signature box  
 
q934a  
Since some subje cts will not provide a written signature as 
documentation of consent, a waiver of documentation of consent is 
required.  Choose the option which most appropriately applies to your 
study.     
The research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects  AND involves 
no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research 
context.  
q23764  
Since some subjects will not consent to participation in the research, a 
waiver of consent is required.  Choose the appropriate reason for 
waiving consent.    
Research is minimal risk and obtaining consent is not practicable.  
 
q904b  
Explain how the research involves no more than minimal risk to the 
subjects.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: No part of this research presents 
more th an a minimal risk to subjects. Study team personnel have been trained in 
human subjects’ research practices and HIPAA regulations (i.e. confidentiality, 
privacy and security practices). Furthermore, all data will be securely transferred and 
stored on fire -walled, encrypted and password -protected hard drives and databases, 
and locked file cabinets will be used to store any confidential paper study materials. 
Survey(online and phone): : N/A - Parents and older patients will verbally or 
electronically consent (for those who agree to receive emails) to participate. A002 
Tool usability questionnaire: There is a minimal risk for loss of confidentiality. The 
questions capture information about the user's interaction with the module. A005, 
regarding new waiver for c hild subjects who age up while on the study: The study 
activity will remain unchanged. Patients and/or parent will continue to answer of 
short phone surveys at defined timepoints.  
 
q906b  
Explain how the waiver will not adversely affect the rights and welfa re 
of subjects.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: The waiver will not adversely affect 
the rights and welfare of subjects as we are only (securely) accessing and using data 
generated in a clinical setting under standard care. A005, regarding new waiver for 
child subjects who age up while on the study: The study activity will remain 
unchanged and is minimal risk. Patients and/or parent will continue to answer of 
short phone surveys at defined timepoints. Participants can opt to withdraw from 
study at any time.  
 
q907b  
Explain how the research could not be practicably carried out if 
informed consent were required.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: If informed consent were required, 
we could not practicably obtain consent from the pat ients who answer module 
questions or whose data is used in the retrospective reviews as there are no study 
staff present in clinics. A005, regarding new waiver for child subjects who age up 
while on the study: Intent is to limit any barriers to ongoing par ticipation. In the 
event that the parent has been the main source of information for the phone surveys  
(for teen age 17), we wanted to minimize any disruptions.  
 
q30004d  
Explain why the research could not be practicably carried out without 
identifiers.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: Without identifiers, we could not 
conduct the research because we need to link patient encounter data to past and 
prospective health data to look at patient outcomes. Survey(online and phone): The 
research coul d not be practicably carried out without identifiers because we are 
contacting patients who screened positive in clinic. A002 Tool usability 
questionnaire: The research could not be practicably carried out without identifiers 
because we are only surveying family who have completed the module and meet our 
inclusion age and setting  
q908b  
Explain how subjects will be informed of pertinent results at the 
conclusion of the study, if appropriate.  If subjects will not be 
informed, enter N/A.    
N/A 
J-Child Assent P arent Consent  
q23808  
Can children provide legal consent for themselves to participate in this 
study?  
No children can provide legal consent for themselves.  
 
q936  
Will consent be obtained from subjects’ parents/guardians? Select 
both options if consent will be obtained from some parents but not all.  
Yes 
No. I am requesting a waiver of parental consent.  
 
q23779  
Explain how parents/guardians will be presented with the information 
needed to decide to allow their children to participate, including all 
elements of  informed consent.   
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: N/A - We will not obtain parental 
consent for the inclusion of their children's data in the data reviews. We are seeking 
a waiver of parental consent for this portion of the research. A002  Tool usability 
questionnaire: The potential participant will have no interaction with a research 
team member at the point the questionnaire opportunity is introduced. We will 
inform prospective subjects about the research opportunity via a SIS. It is not 
practical to obtain signed consent. If the individual agrees to participate by 
voluntarily proceeding to questionnaire, consent is implied. A003 Tool usability 
questionnaire:The 14 -17 year old will assent for self, parental consent deemed not 
feasible and waiver parental consent requested for this age group. For patients 14 -
17year old, the parent has limited permissions to access the patient"s MyChart 
account. This age group will complete the FGID module independently or with assist 
if they choose. We reque st a waiver of parental consent since the 14 -17 year old has 
their own account and thus getting parental consent is not feasible. Survey(online 
and phone): Phone: For the phone surveys, we will seek verbal consent from the 
parent for the child's participat ion. The RA will verbally review the SIS/Auth form 
over the phone and answer any questions before obtaining verbal consent and auth 
from the parent the participation of the minor/patient if age 10 -17 years old. Online: 
A MyChart message will be sent to the  patient/patient proxy to introduce the study 
opportunity. This introduction will include the SIS/Auth and a time limited 
participant specific link to the REDCap e -consent. (Patient communication uploaded 
in Notes and Attachments). Recognizing that the MyC hart account for patients 14 -17 
may not have a parent proxy assigned, a statement is added to the introduction 
requesting interested teens share this study information with a parent/legal 
guardian for consideration and consent.   
 
q23780  
Describe any inform ed consent tools which will be used to present 
information (i.e. consent documents, videos, brochure, drug/device 
information, etc) and how they will be used.   
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: N/A Survey(online and phone): 
SIS/Auth form A002  Tool usability questionnaire: Study Information Sheet  
 
q23784  
Describe the timing of the informed consent process, including how 
you will ensure parents/guardians have sufficient opportunity to 
discuss and consider their children’s participation before ag reeing to 
allow their children to participate in the research.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: N/A Survey(online and phone): 
Phone: The informed consent process for phone surveys will take place over the 
phone when the patient and parent in dicate their interest and availability. Any 
participants wishing more time to consider will be called back at a different time. 
Online: After reviewing the MyChart recruitment message, the potential participant 
will be able to advance directly to the onlin e enrollment process when they desire. 
A002 Tool usability questionnaire: After the parent, parent/patient dyad, or patient 
(add A003 "or patient") has completed the FGID module, expressed interest in 
providing feedback, read the SIS, and implied consent b y voluntarily proceeding to 
the questionnaire.  
 
q30127c  
Will you include all required elements of consent in your consent 
process?   
Yes 
q23789  
Indicate in what language(s) the consent conversation will be 
conducted.  
English  
 
q23793  
Explain how you will ens ure parents/guardians understand the 
information you have presented to them before they agree to allow 
their children to participate in the research.   
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: N/A Survey(online and phone): 
Phone: An RA will ask parti cipants if they have any questions (and provide the 
answers to those questions) before the subject agrees to participate. Online: The e -
consent instrument will contain instructions for completion. Within those 
instructions will be PResNet contact informati on for questions. If participants 
proceed without asking questions, it is implied that the content was understood. 
A002 Tool usability questionnaire: Participants will voluntarily agree to fill out 
questionnaire before being presented with the survey. If t hey do not understand the 
content or choose not to participate, they are given the option to decline 
participation.  
 
q23798  
Briefly describe any training provided to investigators who are 
obtaining informed consent.    
Phone surveys: Research Assistants hav e been trained in obtaining informed consent 
(and assent) through online CITI training, university -sponsored training, and internal 
training and QA programs.  
 
q23800  
Does the research include any minimal risk procedures to which 
parents/guardians will not consent for their children to participate?    
No 
 
q30330  
For those parents/guardians who will consent to allow their children 
to participate, choose whether the consent process will be 
documented by a written signature.  
Some parents/guardians will provide a  written signature as documentation of 
consent, and some will not.  
 
q30331  
Will subjects participate in any study activity prior to 
parents/guardians physically signing a consent document?  
No 
 
q30334  
Explain which parents/guardians will provide written sig nature as 
documentation of consent, and which will not.  
Survey participants who enroll online will be asked for a printed (typed) signature.   
 
q30333b  
Explain the process for obtaining a written signature from 
parents/guardians.  
Using the REDCap  e consent platform parents/guardians will type their name in a 
signature box  
 
q30335  
Since some parents/guardians will not provide a written signature as 
documentation of consent, a waiver of documentation of 
parental/guardian consent is required.  Choose the option which most 
appropriately applies to your study.    
The research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects AND involves 
no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research  
q942  
Choose the option which most appropriately applies to your study.     
Parental/guardian consent cannot be practicably obtained.  
 
q943  
Explain how the research involves no more than minimal risk to the 
subject.   
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: For the data reviews, parental 
consent cannot be practicably obtained as there are no study staff in clinic and 
attempting to reach each parents of so many patients is not feasible. There is a 
minimal risk fo r loss of confidentiality but not beyond the risk of a routine clinic visit. 
No part of this research presents more than a minimal risk to subjects. Study team 
personnel have been trained in human subjects’ research practices and HIPAA 
regulations (i.e. co nfidentiality, privacy and security practices). Furthermore, all data 
will be securely transferred and stored on fire -walled, encrypted and password -
protected hard drives and databases, and locked file cabinets will be used to store 
any confidential paper study materials.  
 
q944  
Explain how the waiver will not adversely affect the rights and welfare 
of subjects.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective data reviews: There is a minimal risk for loss 
of confidentiality but not beyond the risk of a routine clinic  visit. The subjects will 
continue to receive care as normal, waiver will not affect care provided. No part of 
this research presents more than a minimal risk to subjects. Study team personnel 
have been trained in human subjects’ research practices and HIP AA regulations (i.e. 
confidentiality, privacy and security practices). Furthermore, all data will be securely 
transferred and stored on fire -walled, encrypted and password -protected hard drives 
and databases, and locked file cabinets will be used to store any confidential paper 
study materials.  
 
q945  
Explain how the research could not be practicably carried out if 
informed consent were required.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews: The research could not be 
practicably carried out if informed con sent of patients at clinic visits were required 
because there are no study staff on site to conduct the consent process. (Research 
staff are not based in the study clinics.) Additionally, informing patients that they are 
part of a study involving GI disord ers may bias the results given to the clinician, and 
in turn, to the FGID module.  
 
q30004i  
Explain why the research could not be practicably carried out without 
identifiers.  
FGID module: The research could not be practicably carried out without identifiers  
because GI screening questions are based on patient DOB/age. Survey(online and 
phone): The research could not be practicably carried out without identifiers because 
we are contacting patients who screened positive in clinic. A002 Tool usability 
questionna ire: The research could not be practicably carried out without identifiers 
because we are only surveying family who have completed the module and meet our 
inclusion age and setting  
 
q946  
Explain how subjects will be informed of pertinent results at the 
conclusion of the study, if appropriate.  If subjects will not be 
informed, enter N/A.    
N/A 
q950  
In order to describe the process for obtaining assent from children, 
check all that apply.  
Some/all children are not capable of providing assent.  
Some/all childre n will not provide assent even though they are otherwise capable. A 
waiver of assent will be requested.  
Some/all children will provide assent.  
 
q951  
Explain why children are not capable of providing assent.  Consider 
age, maturity, and psychological state, and situations where capability 
is so limited that they cannot reasonably be consulted.   
This research will include patients ages 0 through 17 and children age 0 -6 are 
typically not considered mature enough to provide assent.  
 
q952  
Choose the option which most appropriately applies to your study.     
Assent cannot be practicably obtained.  
 
q953  
Explain how the research involves no more than minimal risk to the 
subject.   
FGID module: In clinic, patients and parents will be asked (but not required) to 
respond to yes/no questions about GI symptoms as part of standard care. There is a 
minimal risk for loss of confidentiality but not beyond the risk of a routine clinic visit. 
Phone surveys: N/A - will get verbal assent from older patients Retrospective 
reviews: Th ere is only a minimal risk of loss of confidentiality as all data will be 
securely accessed, transferred, and analyzed. A002 Tool usability questionnaire: 
There is a minimal risk for loss of confidentiality. The questions capture information 
about the user 's interaction with the module.  
 
q954  
Explain how the waiver will not adversely affect the rights and welfare 
of subjects.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews:There  is a minimal risk for loss of 
confidentiality for the retrospective and prospective review of data but not beyond 
the risk of a routine clinic visit. Phone surveys: N/A (verbal consent/assent) A002 
Tool usability questionnaire: Consent implied through agr eement to participate  
 
q955  
Explain how the research could not be practicably carried out if child 
assent were required.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospective reviews:: The research could not be 
practicably carried out if informed assent of patients at cl inic visits were required 
because there are no study staff on site to conduct the consent process. (Research 
staff are not based in the study clinics.) Additionally, informing patients that they are 
part of a study involving GI disorders may bias the resul ts given to the clinician, and 
in turn, to CHICA. Phone survey: N/A (verbal consent/assent) A002 Tool usability 
questionnaire: The parent, parent/child dyad, or patient (add A003 "or patient") who 
filled out the tool will be presented with the SIS. The SIS  will serve as a consent and 
assent tool, the questionnaire is targeted to the individual or individuals who 
completed the module.  
 
q30004j  
Explain why the research could not be practicably carried out without 
identifiers.  
FGID module, retrospective/prospe ctive reviews:: The research could not be 
practicably carried out without identifiers because GI screening questions and are 
based on patient DOB/age. Retrospective reviews are based on patient DOB, 
symptoms, and diagnoses. Phone survey: The research could  not be practicably 
carried out without identifiers because we are contacting patients who screened 
positive in clinic. A002 Tool usability questionnaire: The research could not be 
practicably carried out without identifiers because we are only surveying f amily who 
have completed the module and meet our inclusion age and setting  
 
q956  
Explain how subjects will be informed of pertinent results at the 
conclusion of the study, if appropriate.  If subjects will not be 
informed, enter N/A.    
N/A 
q958  
Describe the  timing of the assent process, including how you will 
ensure children have sufficient opportunity to discuss and consider 
participation before agreeing to participate in the research.  
Surveys Phone enrollment: After getting permission from the parent/LG to  speak 
with the patient ages 10 through 17, the RA will verbally review the SIS/Auth with 
the youth at the same time it is reviewed with the parent, answer any questions, and 
call back later if s/he would like more time to consider participation. Online 
enrollment: In a brief introduction to the online consent process on the E -consent 
page, it is asked that the child age 10 and older review the online consent document 
with the parent. During the recruitment phone contact or online enrollment: If the 
parent has the desire to complete enrollment and the youth is unavailable, 
enrollment will proceed without assent to decrease burden on family and barrier to 
enrollment. A002 Tool usability questionnaire: After the parent, parent/patient dyad, 
or patient (add A00 3 "or patient") has completed the FGID module, they will receive 
communication offering the opportunity to provide voluntary feedback. If interested 
in providing feedback, they will be presented with the electronic SIS (in Notes and 
Attachments)  
 
q959  
Desc ribe any assent tools which will be used to present information to 
potential subjects (i.e. assent document, study information sheet, 
videos, brochure, drug/device information, etc) and how they will be 
used.   
Phone surveys: SIS/Auth form will be used for assent of patients 10 years and older. 
Will not seek assent for child < 10. Assent tool will be used for those 10 -13 and 
consent form will be used for ages 14 -17. Only verbal assent will be obtained. A002 
Tool usability questionnaire: electronic SIS (in No tes and Attachments)  
 
 
 
 
q996  
Will children indicate their consent with a signature on an assent or 
consent statement?  
Subjects will not provide a signature  
K-HIPAA  
q23253  
Are you part of a covered entity (health care provider that transmits 
health informa tion electronically) or are you receiving information 
from a covered entity as part of your research?   
Yes 
 
q23254  
Will protected health information be utilized, accessed, collected, or 
generated as part of the study?  
Yes 
 
q30347a  
Select the electronic systems to be used for the collection and/or 
storage of protected health information (ePHI).  Choose all that apply.  
REDCap  
IU Box Health Data Account  
q23257  
Will you be accessing or collecting protected health information for 
RECRUITMENT purposes?    
Yes 
 
q23258  
Choose all that apply to the recruitment plans.    
Review of medical records by the study team  
 
q23259  
Will review of medical records for recruitment purposes be conducted 
by an investigator who is NOT a part of the potential subject's care 
team?   
No 
q23277  
HIPAA applies to your study, and requires that you obtain 
authorization for PARTICIPATION in research, or that you request a 
waiver.  Check all that apply.  
I will obtain written, signed authorization from subjects prior to their participation  
I will  obtain authorization from subjects prior to their participation but subjects will 
not physically sign a document  
I will not obtain authorization prior to their participation  
 
q23650  
List all data elements to be used or disclosed (do not refer to an 
attach ment).  
FGID Module: Data points collected for participation in the retrospective review of 
FGID module data include date(s) of visit, physician name, patient vitals and 
demographics, contact information, patient/parent answers to GI questions, who is 
answe ring the questions (parent or patient or both), and physician notes about GI 
diagnoses, treatments, and recommendations. Phone survey: In addition to the FGID 
data points above, we will use parent and patient answers to the phone survey along 
with parent -reported demographics. Baseline retrospective review: DOB, 
date/diagnosis (ICD codes), Eskenazi clinic(s) of care Health care utilization 
retrospective review: • The presence of outpatient sick visits within the CHICA 
system clinic for any complaint • The p resence of outpatient sick visits within the 
CHICA system clinic with an associated GI billing code • The presence of visits to 
statewide providers, including inpatient hospital stays, outpatient clinic visits, and 
emergency room visits. • The occurrence o f any GI -related testing and procedures – 
specifically radiologic, laboratory testing,endoscopy, and surgical procedures related 
to GI diagnoses • The use of any medications prescribed to treat Rome IV diagnoses 
– specifically acid -suppressants, antispasmo dics, antidepressants, stool softeners and 
laxatives, and pro -motility agents. A005, regarding child subjects who age up to 18 
while on the study, whose parents will continue to answer the phone survey on their 
behalf: Will proceed with the same data colle ction as prior to birthday. Will as 
before, collect responses from the FGID Module, phone survey responses and parent 
reported demographics for self (where applicable).  
 
 
 
 
 
q23651  
A waiver of the requirement for a written signature must be approved 
by the  IRB. Explain how this research involves no more than minimal 
risk of loss of confidentiality to the subject.   
No part of this research presents more than a minimal risk of loss of confidentiality 
to subjects. Study team personnel have been trained in huma n subjects’ research 
practices and HIPAA regulations (i.e. confidentiality, privacy and security practices).  
 
q23652  
Describe the plan for protecting identifiers from improper use and 
disclosure.   
All data will be securely transferred and stored on fire -walled, encrypted and 
password -protected hard drives and databases, and locked file cabinets will be used 
to store any confidential paper study materials.  
 
q23653  
Describe the plan to destroy identifiers at the earliest opportunity 
appropriate for the resear ch, considering the purpose of the research 
and local data retention requirements.  
We will destroy identifiers in the database (and any paper records) at the earliest 
opportunity appropriate for the research and allowable by law.  
 
q23654  
Confirm that the s tudy team will assure identifiable PHI will not be re -
used or disclosed to individuals outside the study team, except as 
required by law.   
PHI will not be re -used or disclosed to individuals outside the study team, except as 
required by law.  
 
q23655  
Explai n how the research could not be practicably conducted without 
waiver of authorization or alteration of authorization requirements.   
The research could not be practicably carried out if authorization for the use of PHI 
were required because there are no stu dy staff on site to conduct the informed 
authorization process. (Research staff are not based in the study clinics.) Regarding 
new waiver for child subjects who age up while on the study: Intent is to limit any 
barriers to ongoing participation. In the eve nt that the parent has been the main 
source of information for the phone surveys  (for teen age 17), we wanted to 
minimize any disruptions.  
 
q23656  
Explain how the research could not be practicably conducted without 
access to and use of identifiable PHI.   
The research could not be practicably conducted without access to PHI because we 
are identifying patients based on health information (FGIDs) and their connecting 
data across sources.  
q23278  
Will you be collecting information from subjects’ medical records ? 
Yes, I have uploaded an Authorization template to the Attachments section.  
 
q23693  
Explain which subjects will sign a written authorization form and which 
subjects will not.  
Surveys Phone enrollment: Parents will provide verbal authorization for use of t heir 
child's PHI via phone. (No one will provide written/signed authorization.) Online 
enrollment: Parents will provide electronic signature on the the REDCap E -consent to 
document consent and authorization to participate  
 
q23694  
Explain how the elements of authorization will be presented to 
potential subjects, including a description of any tools used.   
The elements of authorization will be presented to parents via phone by review of 
the Authorization form. (Parents may also choose to receive a copy via m ail with 
their gift card.)  
Attachments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FGID Algorithm Tool Usability and Qualitative Survey - Ages 0 -13 - with SUS and 
demographics_4.9.20 MF.docx  
Name  
Gastrointestinal Symptom Survey Tool – Usability a nd Qualitative Data Survey Ages 0 
to 13 Years  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FGID Algorithm Tool Usability and Qualitative Survey - Ages 14 -17 - with SUS and 
demographics_4.9.20 MF.docx  
Name  
Gastrointestinal Symptom Survey Tool – Usability and Qualitative Data Survey Ages 
14 to 17 Years  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpFunctionalDyspepsiaEpi.pdf  
Name  
Functional Dyspepsia - Epigastric Pain Syndrome Subtype 8yr to 18 yr Phone Survey 
Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpIrritableBowelSyndrome.pdf  
Name  
Irritable Bowel Syndrome 8yr to 18 yr Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpAbdominalPainOtherwise.pdf  
Name  
Abdominal Pain -Otherwise not specified 8yr to 18 yr Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpAbdominalMigraine8yrTo.pdf  
Name  
Abdominal Migraine 8yr to 18 yr Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpInfantRegurgitation012 -2.pdf  
Name  
Infant Regurgitation 0 -12mo Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpInfantColic06mo_System.pdf  
Name  
Infant Colic 0 -6mo Phone S urvey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpInfantDyschezia012mont.pdf  
Name  
Infant Dyschezia 0 -12months Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpAerophagiaAllAges0mo18.pdf  
Name  
Aerophagia all ages 0mo -18yrs Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpInfantRuminationSyndro.pdf  
Name  
Infant Rumination Syndrome 0 -12mo Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpRumination4yrsTo18yrs_.pdf  
Name  
Rumination 4yrs to 18yrs  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpFunctionalConstipation.pdf  
Name  
Funct Constipation 0 -12 mo  Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpFunctionalConstipation.pdf  
Name  
Funct Constipation 12 mo to 18yrs Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpCyclicVom itingSyndrome -2.pdf  
Name  
Cyclic Vomiting Syn 0 -18yrs Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpFunctionalDiarrhea6moT.pdf  
Name  
Functional Diarrhea 6mo to 8 yrs Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data  Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpNonRetentiveFecalIncon.pdf  
Name  
Non Retentive Fecal Incontinence 4yr to 18 yr Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpFunctionalVomiting8yrT.pdf  
Name  
Functional Vom iting 8yr to 18 yr Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpFunctionalNausea8yrTo1.pdf  
Name  
Functional Nausea 8yr to 18 yr Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
FollowUpFunctionalDyspepsiaPos.pdf  
Name  
Functional Dyspepsia - Postprandial Distress Subtype 8yr to 18 yr Phone Survey Draft  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Other  
Attachment  
MyChart%20Msg_FGID%20module%20pilot_6.11.20.docx  
Name  
MyChart script (for batch messaging)  to patient introduce FGID module for pilot 
testing  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Recruitment Materials  
Attachment  
SIS Usability Questionnaire _recruitment Intro_4.17.20.docx  
Name  
Introduction to SIS For Tool Usability Survey (questionnaire)  
Comments  
A002: Vers ion 1.27.20 A003:4.17.20 Draft of email communication to introduce SIS 
for tool usability questionnaire.  
Attachment Type  
Recruitment Materials  
Attachment  
A012_MyChart Intro to Phone Surveys.docx  
Name  
Phone Survey Recruitment: MyChart Introduction  
Comments  
A012 replaced A008 version   
Attachment Type  
Recruitment Materials  
Attachment  
A014_Verbal Intro _Phone Contact_Parent_Patient.docx  
Name  
Phone Surveys PResNet Intro Script  
Comments  
Replaces: A011_Verbal Intro _Phone Contact_Parent_Patient.docx  
Attachment Typ e 
Study Information Sheet  
Attachment  
1811325201A002_SIS Usability survey__4.17.20 .docx  
Name  
SIS for Tool Usability Survey  
Comments  
A002: Version 1.27.20 A003: Version 4.17.20  
Attachment Type  
Study Information Sheet  
Attachment  
1811325201A014 - Bennett, W - SIS and Auth Phone or Online Survey - Oct 
2023.docx  
Name  
Phone Survey SIS   
Comments  
A011: Version 2.15.23 A012: Version 5.30.23 A013: Version 7.18.2023  
Attachment Type  
Recruitment Materials  
Attachment  
A011_Email Script_Phone Survey Recruitment.docx  
Name  
Comments  
A014: Cease use of this document. With updated requirements, will not send email 
communication to potential participants without attaining their consent to send.  
Attachment Type  
Recruitment Materials  
Attachment  
A012.1_MyChart Intro to Phone Survey s-1_Spanish rev.docx  
Name  
Comments  
replaced A008 version  
Attachment Type  
Recruitment Materials  
Attachment  
A014_Verbal Intro _Phone Contact_Parent_Patient_Spanish rev.docx  
Name  
Comments  
Replaces: A011_Verbal Intro _Phone Contact_Parent_Patient_Spanish rev.d ocx 
Attachment Type  
Study Information Sheet  
Attachment  
1811325201A014 - Bennett, W - SIS and Auth Phone Survey - Oct 2023_Spanish rev -
2.docx  
Name  
Phone Survey SIS - Spanish  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Recruitment Materials  
Attachment  
A011_Email Script_Phone  Survey Recruitment_Spanish rev.docx  
Name  
Comments  
A014: Cease use of this document. With updated requirements, will not send email 
communication to potential participants without attaining their consent to send.  
Attachment Type  
Other  
Attachment  
A015 - Draf t E-Consent.docx  
Name  
Comments  
New: For the online enrollment of survey participants. Same language as SIS/Auth 
placed in RC E -consent framework. A015 replaced A013.  
Attachment Type  
Other  
Attachment  
A014 _RA phone script re communicating with Research Part icipants by Email.docx  
Name  
Comments  
A014: Script for RA to discuss email communication with existing participants  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
Demographics RC Draft.docx  
Name  
Comments  
Attachment Type  
Data Collection Instrument  
Attachment  
Payment language RC Draft.docx  
Name  
Comments  
language added to the end of follow up questionnaires completed online   
End of Protocol Form  
 
KC IRB History  
approvalDate  
December 5, 2018  
FOR HSO OFFICE USE ONLY  
Action History  
Description  
Expedited Approval  
Date  
December 18, 2020  
Action Date  
December 18, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Approved  
Updated By  
kwcrain  
Update Time  
2020 -12-18T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Assigned to Agenda  
Date  
December 18, 2020  
Action Date  
December 18, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005:   
Updated By  
kwcrain  
Update Time  
2020 -12-18T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
December 17, 2020  
Action Date  
December 17, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
ashlmeye  
Update Time  
2020 -12-17T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
December 17, 2020  
Action Date  
December 17, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Open to revise Amendment QU and KC QUs.  
Updated By  
ashlmeye  
Update Time  
2020 -12-17T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
December 16, 2020  
Action Date  
December 16, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
ashlmeye  
Update Time  
2020 -12-16T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
December 16, 2020  
Action Date  
December 16, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Open to upload final ver sions of study documents to notes and 
attachments.  
Updated By  
ashlmeye  
Update Time  
2020 -12-16T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
December 11, 2020  
Action Date  
December 11, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
stasulli  
Update Time  
2020 -12-11T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
December 10, 2020  
Action Date  
December 10, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Open to edit Amendment and KC Questionnaires, and upload final 
version of study docs to notes and attachments.  
Upda ted By  
ashlmeye  
Update Time  
2020 -12-10T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
December 8, 2020  
Action Date  
December 8, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
stasulli  
Update Time  
2020 -12-08T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI 
Date  
December 5, 2020  
Action Date  
December 5, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Sending pre -review to study team.  
Updated By  
ashlmeye  
Update Time  
2020 -12-05T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Annual Reminder Generated - Expedited or Full Board  
Date  
December 5, 2020  
Action Date  
December 5, 2020  
Comments  
Annual Reminder  
Updated By  
kc 
Update Time  
2020 -12-05T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
November 24, 2020  
Action Date  
November 24, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
stasulli  
Update Time  
2020 -11-24T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Amendment Created  
Date  
September 8, 2020  
Action Date  
September 8, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -005: Created  
Updated By  
stasulli  
Update Time  
2020 -09-08T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Expedited Approval  
Date  
July 29, 2020  
Action Date  
July 29, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -004: Approved  
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -07-29T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Assigned to Agenda  
Date  
July 29, 2020  
Action Date  
July 29, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -004:   
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -07-29T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
July 29, 2020  
Action Date  
July 29, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -004: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -07-29T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
July 29, 2020  
Action Date  
July 29, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -004: open to prepare for approval  
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -07-29T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
July 29, 2020  
Action Date  
July 29, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -004: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
stasulli  
Update Time  
2020 -07-29T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Amendment Created  
Date  
July 26, 2020  
Action Date  
July 26, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -004: Created  
Updated By  
stasulli  
Update Time  
2020 -07-26T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Expedited Approval  
Date  
April 21, 2020  
Action Date  
April 21, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -003: Approved  
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -04-21T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Assigned to Agenda  
Date  
April 21, 2020  
Action Date  
April 21, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -003:   
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -04-21T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
April 21, 2020  
Action Date  
April 21, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -003: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -04-21T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
April 21, 2020  
Action Date  
April 21, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -003: open to prepare for approval  
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -04-21T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
April 17, 2020  
Action Date  
April 17, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -003: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By 
stasulli  
Update Time  
2020 -04-17T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Amendment Created  
Date  
April 3, 2020  
Action Date  
April 3, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -003: Created  
Updated By  
stasulli  
Update Time  
2020 -04-03T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Expedited Approval  
Date  
January  30, 2020  
Action Date  
January 30, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -002: Approved  
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -01-30T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Assigned to Agenda  
Date  
January 30, 2020  
Action Date  
January 30, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -002:   
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -01-30T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
January 30, 2020  
Action Date  
January 30, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -002: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -01-30T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
January 30, 2020  
Action Date  
January 30, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -002: open to ensure study is on most current version of questionnaires  
Updated By  
khersber  
Update Time  
2020 -01-30T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
January 27, 2020  
Action Date  
January 27, 2020  
Comments  
Amendment -002: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
stasulli  
Update Time  
2020 -01-27T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Amendment Created  
Date  
December 18, 2019  
Action Date  
December 18, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -002: Created  
Updated By  
stasulli  
Update Time  
2019-12-18T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Annual Reminder Generated - Expedited or Full Board  
Date  
December 5, 2019  
Action Date  
December 5, 2019  
Comments  
Annual Reminder  
Updated By  
kc 
Update Time  
2019 -12-05T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Expedited Approval  
Date  
May 29, 2019  
Action Date  
May 29, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -001: Approved  
Updated By  
slbenken  
Update Time  
2019 -05-29T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Assigned to Agenda  
Date  
May 29, 2019  
Action Date  
May 29, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -001:   
Updated By  
slbenken  
Update Time  
2019 -05-29T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
May 29, 2019  
Action Date  
May 29, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -001: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
williaud  
Update Time  
2019 -05-29T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
May 29, 2019  
Action Date  
May 29, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -001: Comments from reviewer  
Updated By  
williaud  
Update Time  
2019 -05-29T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
May 28, 2019  
Action Date  
May 28, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -001: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
williaud  
Update Time  
2019 -05-28T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
May 28, 2019  
Action Date  
May 28, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -001: Pre -Review  
Updated By  
williaud  
Update Time  
2019 -05-28T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
May 24, 2019  
Action Date  
May 24, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -001: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
elinder  
Update Time  
2019 -05-24T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
May 23, 2019  
Action Date  
May 23, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -001: Pre -Review  
Updated By  
williaud  
Update Time  
2019 -05-23T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
May 22, 2019  
Action Date  
May 22, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -001: Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
elinder  
Update Time  
2019 -05-22T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Amendment Created  
Date  
May 17, 2019  
Action Date  
May 17, 2019  
Comments  
Amendment -001: Created  
Updated By  
elinder  
Update Time  
2019 -05-17T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Expedited Approval  
Date  
December 5, 2018  
Action Date  
December 5, 2018  
Comments  
A Certificate of Confidentiality has been issued for this study. Subjects' identifiable 
sensitive research information must be protected in accordance with the terms of 
the certificate.; Research complies with and is subject to 45 CFR 46 effective January 
21, 2019 (i.e. Revised Common Rule or 2018 Requirements).; Waiver of informed 
consent per IU HRPP Policies; Waiver of documentation of informed consent per IU 
HRPP Policies; Waiver of authorization under 45 CFR 164.512(i); The PHI to be used 
or disclosed i s determined to be necessary; The explanation of how this research 
involves no more than minimal risk of loss of privacy to the subject is sufficient; 
There exists an adequate plan to protect the identifiers from improper use and 
disclosure; There exists a n adequate plan to destroy the identifiers at the earliest 
opportunity consistent with conduct of the research; There exist adequate written 
assurances that the requested information will not be reused or disclosed to any 
other person or entity, except as required by law, for authorized oversight of the 
research study, or for other research for which the use or disclosure of the requested 
information would be permitted by the Privacy Rule; The explanation of how this 
research could not be practicably conduc ted without waiver of authorization is 
adequate; The explanation of how this research could not be practicably conducted 
without access to and use of the individually identifiable health information is 
appropriate; Plan for soliciting the assent of the chi ldren and/or the parent/guardian 
permission is appropriate.; Child Category 404: not greater than minimal risk to the 
children; Waiver of assent for children per IU HRPP Policies; Waiver of 
parental/guardian permission approved per IU HRPP Policies; Waiver  of 
documentation of parental/guardian permission per IU HRPP Policies  
Updated By  
droessin  
Update Time  
2018 -12-05T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Assigned to Agenda  
Date  
December 5, 2018  
Action Date  
December 5, 2018  
Comments  
A Certificate of Confidentiality has been issued for this study. Subjects' identifiable 
sensitive research information must be protected in accordance with the terms of 
the certificate.; Research complies with and is subject to 45 CFR 46 effective January 
21, 2019 (i.e. Revised Common Rule or  2018 Requirements).; Waiver of informed 
consent per IU HRPP Policies; Waiver of documentation of informed consent per IU 
HRPP Policies; Waiver of authorization under 45 CFR 164.512(i); The PHI to be used 
or disclosed is determined to be necessary; The exp lanation of how this research 
involves no more than minimal risk of loss of privacy to the subject is sufficient; 
There exists an adequate plan to protect the identifiers from improper use and 
disclosure; There exists an adequate plan to destroy the identi fiers at the earliest 
opportunity consistent with conduct of the research; There exist adequate written 
assurances that the requested information will not be reused or disclosed to any 
other person or entity, except as required by law, for authorized overs ight of the 
research study, or for other research for which the use or disclosure of the requested 
information would be permitted by the Privacy Rule; The explanation of how this 
research could not be practicably conducted without waiver of authorization i s 
adequate; The explanation of how this research could not be practicably conducted 
without access to and use of the individually identifiable health information is 
appropriate; Plan for soliciting the assent of the children and/or the parent/guardian 
perm ission is appropriate.; Child Category 404: not greater than minimal risk to the 
children; Waiver of assent for children per IU HRPP Policies; Waiver of 
parental/guardian permission approved per IU HRPP Policies; Waiver of 
documentation of parental/guardia n permission per IU HRPP Policies  
Updated By  
droessin  
Update Time  
2018 -12-05T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
December 5, 2018  
Action Date  
December 5, 2018  
Comments  
Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
pattonle  
Update Time  
2018 -12-05T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
December 5, 2018  
Action Date  
December 5, 2018  
Comments  
Updated By  
pattonle  
Update Time  
2018 -12-05T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
December 5, 2018  
Action Date  
December 5, 2018  
Comments  
Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
elinder  
Update Time  
2018 -12-05T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
December 4, 2018  
Action Date  
December 4, 2018  
Comments  
Updated By  
pattonle  
Update Time  
2018 -12-04T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
December 3, 2018  
Action Date  
December 3, 2018  
Comments  
Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
elinder  
Update Time  
2018 -12-03T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Returned To PI  
Date  
November 26, 2018  
Action Date  
November 26, 2018  
Comments  
Updated By  
pattonle  
Update Time  
2018 -11-26T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Submitted to IRB  
Date  
November 21, 2018  
Action Date  
November 21, 2018  
Comments  
Submitted to IRB  
Updated By  
elinder  
Update Time  
2018 -11-21T12:00:00.000Z  
Description  
Protocol Created  
Date  
November 13, 2018  
Action Date  
November 13, 2018  
Comments  
Protocol created  
Updated By  
elinder  
Update Time  
2018 -11-13T12:00:00.000Z  
Administrative Details Form  
Protocol Details  
9031  
Protocol Type  
Expedited  
Billing Account #  
Study Status  
Submission Details  
9000  
Submission Review Level  
Expedited  
9030  
Expedited Category.  
Category 5: Data or specimens that have been or will be collected for nonresearch 
purposes  
Category 7: Survey, interview, focus groups, human factor, group behavior or 
characteristics  
9002  
Criteria for Approval. Select to confirm.  
Approved: The criteria for approval of the research are satisfied in accordance with 
IU HRPP Policies, and applicable federal regulations.  
Protocol Determinations  
9003  
Protocol Level of Risk.  
Minimal risk  
9020  
Is renewal required for this research?  
No 
9004  
Check all determinations that need to be made.  
Informed Consent Waiver  
HIPAA Waiver  
Vulnerable Population  
Certificate of Confidentiality  
9005  
Informed Consent Waivers  
Waiver of informed consent granted in accordance with IU HRPP Policies  
Waiver of documentation of i nformed consent granted in accordance with IU HRPP 
Policies.  
9006  
HIPAA Waivers  
Participation  
9010  
Brief description of PHI - Participation  
FGID Module: Data points collected for participation in the retrospective review of 
FGID module data include date(s)  of visit, physician name, patient vitals and 
demographics, contact information, patient/parent answers to GI questions, who is 
answering the questions (parent or patient or both), and physician notes about GI 
diagnoses, treatments, and recommendations. Su rvey (online and phone): In 
addition to the FGID data points above, we will use parent and patient answers to 
the phone survey along with parent -reported demographics. Baseline retrospective 
review: DOB, date/diagnosis (ICD codes), Eskenazi clinic(s) of ca re Health care 
utilization retrospective review: The presence of outpatient sick visits within the 
CHICA system clinic for any complaint; The presence of outpatient sick visits within 
the CHICA system clinic with an associated GI billing code; The presence  of visits to 
statewide providers, including inpatient hospital stays, outpatient clinic visits, and 
emergency room visits.; The occurrence of any GI -related testing and procedures – 
specifically radiologic, laboratory testing, endoscopy, and surgical proc edures related 
to GI diagnoses; The use of any medications prescribed to treat Rome IV diagnoses – 
specifically acid -suppressants, antispasmodics, antidepressants, stool softeners and 
laxatives, and pro -motility agents.  
9009  
Participation HIPAA Waiver  
Alteration of authorization criteria satisfied in accordance with 45 CFR 
164.512(i)(2)(ii). Alteration of authorization approved in accordance with 45 CFR 
164.512(i).  
Waiver of authorization criteria satisfied in accordance with 45 CFR 164.512(i)(2)(ii). 
Waive r of authorization approved in accordance with 45 CFR 164.512(i).  
9011  
Identify population(s) involved in this research.  
Children  
9012  
Involvement of Children: Select to confirm.  
The involvement of children in the research is appropriate in accordance with  IU 
HRPP Policies.  
9013  
Children Category.  
The involvement of children in the research satisfies the conditions of Category 404 
in accordance with IU HRPP Policies.  
9014  
Parental Consent/Waivers. Choose all that apply.  
The plan for soliciting parental/guar dian permission is appropriate in accordance 
with IU HRPP Policies.  
Waiver of parental/guardian permission granted in accordance with IU HRPP Policies.  
Waiver of documentation of parental/guardian permission granted in accordance 
with IU HRPP Policies.  
9015 
Child Assent. Choose all that apply.  
The plan for soliciting and documenting assent from children is appropriate in 
accordance with IU HRPP Policies.  
Waiver of assent from children who are otherwise capable of providing assent 
granted in accordance with IU HRPP Policies.  
9025  
Certificate of Confidentiality.  
The research is subject to the NIH Policy for Issuing Certificates of Confidentiality and 
therefore has been issued a Certificate.  
9028  
Other Determinations.  
 