1  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Title of Research Project: Adapting an Evidence-based Intervention for Stigma-related Stress, Mental Health, and HIV Risk for MSM of Color in Small Urban Areas (ESTEEM-conneCT)  Study Protocol Last Approved by IRB Date 4.24.2019    
2  
        HRP-503E– Protocol for Social or Behavioral Science or Educational Research (2017-1)   Protocol Title: Adapting an evidence-based intervention for stigma-related stress, mental health, and HIV risk for MSM of color in small urban areas (ESTEEM-conneCT)   Principal Investigator: John Pachankis, PhD and Krystn Wagner, MD    Version Date: 4/24/2019    (If applicable) Clinicaltrials.gov Registration #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]    INSTRUCTIONS  This template is intended to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes all of the necessary information needed by the IRB to determine whether a study meets approval criteria. Read the following instructions before proceeding:  1. Use this protocol template for a PI initiated study that includes direct interactions with research subjects. Additional templates for other types of research protocols are available in the system Library:  • If the study involves genetic testing, blood draws, or MRIs, do not use this form. Use the biomedical protocol template. • If the study involves secondary analysis of data, use the Secondary Analysis of Data protocol. • For activities that may qualify as exempt research, use the Request for Exemption form (which includes a decision tree to determine whether or not your study qualifies as exempt).  2. If a section or question does not apply to your research study, type “Not Applicable” underneath.  3. Once completed, upload your protocol in the “Basic Information” screen in IRES IRB system.           
3    SECTION I: GENERAL INFORMATION   1. Probable Duration of Project: State the expected duration of the project, including all follow-up and data analysis activities.   The study timeline will take place over the course March 1, 2018 to November 30, 2019. The first three months will be dedicated to IRB processes and staff development, followed by participant recruitment and pre-test assessments. Starting in the 7th month and continuing through August of 2019, participants will be enrolled and participate in the ESTEEM-conneCT intervention. Two separate intervention cohorts will be recruited: one in the Fall of 2018 and one in the Spring of 2019. The final quarter of the project timeline will be committed to post-test assessments, the dissemination of findings, and preparation of an R34 NIH grant application.       2. Study location: State where the study will take place and in what setting.   The intervention study will take place in New Haven, CT with a partnership between the Fair Haven Community Health Center (FHCHC) and the Yale School of Public Health (YSPH).  Participants will only participate at FHCHC; data will be collected and stored at both sites.  If international, complete and submit International checklist (http://your.yale.edu/policies-procedures/forms/450-ch-1-international-research-checklist) Note: If your research involves interactions with any embargoed countries you should contact the Director of Corporate Contracts and Export Control Licensing (Donald.Deyo@yale.edu or call 203.785.3817) for guidance on how to proceed.      3. Help us categorize your research. Are you using any of the following? ☐ Class Project ☐ Participant Observation ☒ Interviews ☒ Surveys ☒ Focus groups (study is not anonymous) ☐ Research in K-12 schools (submit a School Agreement form for the study) ☐ Deception (submit a Debriefing sheet) ☒ Audiotaping, videotaping or photography of individuals (study is not anonymous) ☐ Public viewing of videotapes or photographs  ☐ Yale Psychology Pool (study does not qualify for exemption) ☐ International research sites (attach the International Checklist) ☒ Online (web-based) activities ☐ Social networks   
4  SECTION IV: RESEARCH PLAN  1. Statement of Purpose: State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested.   Gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men (MSM) represent the only major risk group for whom new incident cases of HIV are increasing in the US; indeed, MSM of color living in the US represent one of the most at-risk populations in the world.1-3 At current rates, 1 in 3 MSM of color in the US will be diagnosed with HIV in their lifetime.1 Vast racial disparities in HIV exist despite the fact that MSM of color do not engage in greater rates of risk behaviors (e.g., condomless anal sex with serodiscordant partners, substance abuse) compared to white MSM.3-5 Explanations for these disparities, therefore, lie in the structural disadvantage surrounding MSM of color.4 Experiences of racial stigma and discrimination can erode coping resources and social support and ultimately drive poor mental health,6-9 HIV risk behavior,10,11 and their co-occurrence.10,12 In fact, MSM of color report greater depressive distress than white MSM,13 which in turn predicts HIV risk behavior.14 MSM of color’s exposure to racism and homophobia together drive HIV-risk behavior, lack of testing, lack of status disclosure, and among HIV-positive MSM, lack of antiretroviral adherence.15 While the ultimate elimination of structural barriers should represent the primary goal of HIV prevention programs for MSM of color, as long as such barriers persist, another justifiable target of public health interventions is the empowerment of MSM of color to develop resilience against stigma through building mental health and stigma coping strategies.   MSM of color who reside in small urban areas of the US are at particular risk of acquiring HIV,16 yet the majority of preventive interventions have only been developed and tested in major cities. Our research shows that MSM of color living in small urban areas face distinct barriers to psychosocial health, including a loss of physical “safe” gay spaces and community visibility as a result of increasing technology use, and exclusion from the limited remaining gay spaces because of segregation and racism.17,18 Through psychological experiences of social exclusion, low self-worth, and hopelessness, sexual and racial stigma drive mental health problems (e.g., depression, substance abuse), which in turn serve as a known risk factor for HIV infection among syndemically affected populations.11,12,14,15   The proposed research will draw upon our previous qualitative work with MSM of color in small urban areas17,18 and other qualitative work documenting the resilience displayed by MSM communities of color19,20 to create and deliver a group-based intervention to improve stigma coping and mental health among MSM of color. Because the psychosocial effects of interpersonal and structural stigma represent the syndemic precursors to HIV risk,21-23 we expect that this intervention will help buttress MSM of color’s defenses against HIV transmission in small urban areas. This intervention addresses three gaps in current approaches. First, although our team has created the first evidence-based intervention to reduce MSM’s HIV risk behavior by improving stigma coping and mental health,24-26 this intervention has been developed and delivered in major cities.  Second, although about half of the participants in our original intervention trials were MSM of color, the treatment has not specifically addressed the intersecting sources of stigma that MSM of color face. Third, because this treatment has only been delivered in one-on-one settings, it has not taken advantage of the ability of group delivery to promote healthy peer norms, role modeling, and social connections that might be particularly important in the social and sexual networks of MSM living in small urban areas.27,28   
5  In Aim 1, we will modify our existing intervention manual using feedback from our previous qualitative interviews with MSM in New Haven and Hartford, CT, and other recent qualitative research on MSM of color’s resilience, regarding the ways in which racial minority stigma impacts the mental health of MSM in small urban areas and adaptive coping skills that MSM can use in the face of these health threats.   In Aim 2, we will deliver the intervention to approximately 30 young MSM to gather the feasibility and acceptability pilot data necessary for an NIMH R34 intervention development grant. Pre-post comparisons of quantitative assessments will yield effect sizes estimates for powering future proposals. Qualitative interviews will provide information regarding intervention feasibility, acceptability, and refinement.  This project integrates expertise in culturally-sensitive evidence-based interventions for MSM’s HIV risk into a community-based HIV prevention and care context at the Fair Haven Community Health Center, where the intervention will be delivered to the existing patient population. This community-research alliance maximizes this project’s ability to receive widespread community implementation to improve stigma coping and mental health en route to reducing HIV-transmission risk among one of the highest-risk populations in our region and the world.  2. Background: Describe the background information that led to the plan for this project. Provide references to support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.   MSM of color living in the US represent one of the highest-risk groups for HIV infection in the world. While gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men (MSM) represent the only risk group for whom new incident cases of HIV are increasing in the US, MSM of color are at even greater risk.1,2 Like many preventable diseases in the US,29-32 as the HIV epidemic progresses, its burden has become most strongly carried by already disadvantaged populations. At current rates, 1 in 2 African American MSM and 1 in 4 Latino MSM in the US will become infected with HIV in their lifetimes.1 This rate is nearly four times the rate of White MSM and over 40 times the rate of US men overall. Far from being an equal health threat to all, HIV is increasingly concentrated among MSM of color.1,3  As a fundamental cause of health disparities,29-32 structural racism drives vast racial inequities in the HIV epidemic. Vast racial disparities in HIV exist despite the fact that MSM of color do not engage in greater rates of individual risk behaviors (e.g., condomless anal sex with serodiscordant partners, substance abuse) compared to white MSM. Explanations for these disparities, therefore, lie in the structural disadvantage surrounding MSM of color. In addition to experiencing the structural stigma affecting all MSM (e.g., sexual orientation discrimination, lack of legal protections, concealment demands), MSM of color also face structural inequities associated with race in the US. Specifically, MSM of color are more likely to be unemployed and incarcerated, and therefore to be economically disenfranchised, than white MSM.3 Because of structural racism and associated economic inequities, MSM of color are also less likely to have health insurance, more likely to have untreated sexually transmitted infections, and, among those with HIV, less likely to adhere to antiretroviral therapies and to be virally suppressed.33 Thus, any effective preventive intervention for MSM of color must address structural forms of stigma and racism, rather than solely individual risk behaviors.4  Despite the fact that small urban areas now represent the highest-risk locations for MSM of color in the US, HIV-preventive interventions continue to be focused on MSM in major cities. 20 of the 25 US metropolitan areas with the highest HIV prevalence among MSM are 
6  characterized as small urban areas.16 One in four MSM living in small US cities like Jackson, Mississippi; Columbia, South Carolina; and El Paso, Texas, are infected with HIV.16 The majority of new HIV cases among MSM in Connecticut occur among MSM of color living in one of Connecticut’s four small urban areas.34 The racial disparities in HIV infection in small urban areas of Connecticut parallel national trends: While Blacks and Hispanics make up only 23% of Connecticut’s population, they comprise 66% of all HIV cases. In 2014, Black males in Connecticut were diagnosed at a rate approximately 8 times that of white males and Hispanic males were diagnosed at a rate approximately 4 times that of white males.34  MSM of color living in small urban areas face distinct risks for HIV infection, which are currently overlooked in HIV-prevention interventions. Our pilot research recently uncovered distinct sources of HIV risk among MSM of color living in Connecticut’s small urban areas. Specifically, in qualitative interviews with 29 HIV-negative and HIV-positive MSM (n = 16 MSM of color), participants noted that the advent of social and sexual networking technologies has ushered a decline of physical spaces that historically served as “safe” venues for gay and bisexual men regardless of race.35,36 Participants perceived the remaining spaces as catering to white MSM or university affiliates and excluding MSM of color. MSM of color also noted a loss of the intergenerational mentorship, free of sexual overtones, facilitated by these spaces. Many frequently travel to nearby gay enclaves, typically New York City, where personal health-protective values are often discarded in the context of this relatively unfamiliar urban environment full of sexual opportunities.35-37   Sexual and racial stigma drive HIV infection risk through diminished coping and social support. As noted above, structural racism represents the primary driver of US racial disparities in HIV infection. Structural racism is known to be particularly intractable in that it operates through interchangeable mechanisms to perpetuate its effects over time.31 For instance, while separate-but-equal (i.e., Jim Crow) laws have been recognized as unconstitutional since 1964, Black men today have a 1 in 3 chance of being imprisoned in their lifetimes, 1 in 8 currently cannot vote, and the racial disparity in unemployment remains what it was in 1954.38,39 Racist financial lending policies have created under-resourced racially segregated neighborhoods, such as those in small urban areas like New Haven.40 Clearly, powerful forces ensure that barriers to racial equity persist, with undeniable consequences for the health of MSM of color.4,5,41 MSM of color’s experiences of racial stigma and discrimination can erode coping resources and social support and ultimately drive poor mental health,6-9 HIV risk behavior,10,11 and their co-occurrence.10,12 In fact, MSM of color report greater depressive distress than white MSM,13 which in turn predicts HIV risk behavior.14 MSM of color’s exposure to racism and homophobia together drive HIV-risk behavior, lack of testing, lack of status disclosure, and among HIV-positive MSM, lack of antiretroviral adherence.15 While the ultimate elimination of structural barriers should represent the primary goal of HIV prevention programs for MSM of color, as long as such barriers persist, another justifiable target of public health interventions is the empowerment of MSM of color to resist stigma through building mental health and stigma coping.   3. Research Plan: Summarize the study design and research procedures using non-technical language that can be readily understood by someone outside the discipline. If working with a Non-Government Organization (NGO) or other organization, be sure to highlight which are research-only activities and which activities would occur regardless of the research. If working with survey firms, please specify what research activities the research firm will be responsible for.    
7  Recruitment and consent. Participants will be recruited through referrals from Fair Haven Community Health Center, posters in New Haven community venues frequented by young MSM, and online via gay-related websites and mobile apps. Consent will take place at four points – before the eligibility screener, before the phone assessment, before the online assessment, and before the first group intervention session.  For these latter three assessments, the same consent form will be used,  Screening and pre-intervention (baseline) assessment. Interested participants will complete a brief online screener, where they will be prompted to provide contact information that will not be linked to the remainder of their data, and instructed that, if they are eligible, a study team member will email them with a consent form and schedule an interview by phone. The project coordinator will email eligible participants with a copy of the consent form and will schedule a phone assessment of HIV risk behavior. During the call, study staff will briefly review the consent form and gain verbal consent before proceeding to the phone assessment. After the phone assessment, participants will complete a baseline survey assessment containing questions regarding demographics, HIV-risk behavior, social cognitive mediators of HIV risk, mental health, substance use, and experiences of homophobic and racist stress. Participants without internet access will be invited to complete the baseline survey using a laptop at Fair Haven Community Health Center before the first group session.   Intervention. Up to 30 participants will be assigned to one of two groups, a first cohort in Fall 2018 and a second cohort in Spring 2019. 10 group sessions will take place at regular times once per week over the course of four months. The group will be “closed,” in that no new members will be allowed to join after the first week in order to promote open self-disclosure and trust among group members. Prior to the start of the first session of the ESTEEM conneCT intervention, study staff will again review the same study consent form and participants will sign a copy to indicate consent for study participation. All group sessions will take place in a reserved room at the Fair Haven Community Health Center, where many participants will be currently receiving care. Although group members will be told that confidentiality from the group cannot be guaranteed, all members will be asked to not share information about other group members outside of the group sessions during and after the study (see Human Subjects). Participants will be told that attendance is required and that missing more than four sessions will result in dismissal from the group. The project coordinator will contact participants who miss more than one session in order to ascertain their reason for missing the session, problem-solve barriers to attendance, and assess motivation for future attendance.   Post-intervention assessment. 3 months after the final session, participants will complete the same phone interview and survey assessments they completed at baseline. 3 months after the final session, both therapists and all study participants will be individually contacted by the project coordinator to complete a qualitative interview that assesses participants’ experience in the intervention and suggestions for future refinement. We have used this qualitative procedure successfully in previous pilot intervention trials with young MSM.26  Participant payment. At the end of the baseline assessment, participants will receive $40. After each session, participants will receive $10 plus transportation costs (up to an additional $10). Upon completing the post-intervention assessment measures, participants will receive $40 for their time spent completing the measures. Upon completion of the qualitative interview, participants will also receive $60.   
8  4. Participant Population: Provide a detailed description of the types of participants who will be recruited into this study.    Recruitment Rationale We focus on young MSM (ages 18-35) because the ESTEEM intervention has been developed for young MSM given the developmental-specific impact of minority stress exposure, the importance of intervening at this critical age period during which behavioral risk peaks and unhealthy behavioral patterns potentially become crystallized, and because young MSM represent the highest risk group for new HIV infection. We focus on HIV-negative and HIV-positive MSM given that partner pool risk, rather than individual risk behaviors, is a key driver of HIV infection among MSM of color. Because the intervention targets the psychological mechanisms (e.g., internalized homophobia, rejection hypervigilance, identity concealment, emotion regulation) through which stigma exposure drives risk behavior, its principles and exercises are broadly applicable regardless of sero-status, as empirically established by PI Pachankis and colleagues. In fact, in addition to its initial test with 63 HIV-negative MSM, the ESTEEM intervention was also tested with 12 HIV-positive MSM and showed strong preliminary effect sizes in mental, behavioral, and sexual health. Including men regardless of serostatus in the proposed group-based adaptation trial provides pilot data for future research focused on either HIV-prevention among HIV-negative MSM or the reduction of mental health problems and behavioral comorbidity (e.g., substance use, antiretroviral nonadherence) among HIV-positive MSM. We will form two groups, one for HIV-positive and one for HIV-negative MSM, given that young HIV-positive MSM may not be willing to disclose their status to HIV-negative or status-unknown men, especially within the tight social networks of young MSM of color in small urban areas. Including men regardless of HIV-risk behavior ensures feasible recruitment during this time-limited pilot study and is also commensurate with the study aims to determine feasibility and acceptability of this novel intervention in preparation for future testing during which stricter risk eligibility criteria might be employed. Heterogeneity of HIV-risk outcomes does not pose a problem to estimating feasibility and acceptability and, instead, ensures the broadest possible use of this pilot data in future intervention development. Participants must speak fluent English in order to communicate with the potentially linguistically diverse group members.  Describe how access to the population will be gained in the study.   Participants will be recruited through existing community services and online. PI Wagner currently oversees the care of 25 HIV-positive young MSM of color and 15 HIV-negative young MSM who are currently prescribed PrEP and will communicate the existence of this study to her patients directly. Because Dr. Wagner maintains close connections with AIDS Project New Haven, we also plan to work with this community setting to recruit MSM for this study. We will also recruit additional HIV-negative MSM of color from the general clinic patient population at Fair Haven Community Health Center. Finally, we will follow our previously successful online recruitment strategies in New Haven to recruit MSM who might be out-of-reach of existing services, including those who conceal their sexual identities. In fact, 20.7% of participants in our prior research in New Haven were not out. These online recruitment strategies include advertisements placed on social-sexual networking apps (i.e., Grindr, Scruff, GROWLr), online sex-seeking forums (e.g., the “M4M casual encounters” section of Craigslist.com), and Facebook posts targeting local LGBT-oriented groups.   5. Participant classification: Check off all classifications of participants that will be specifically recruited for enrollment in the research project. Will participants who may require additional 
9  safeguards or other considerations be enrolled in the study? If so, identify the population of participants requiring special safeguards and provide a justification for their involvement.  ☐   Children                ☐X   Healthy   ☐   Fetal material, placenta, or dead                  fetus  ☐    Non-English Speaking  ☐   Prisoners  ☐ Economically disadvantaged      persons  ☐    Decisionally Impaired  ☐    Employees  ☐      Pregnant women  ☐    Yale Students    ☐    Females of childbearing potential   ☐   Fetuses    NOTE: Is this research proposal designed to enroll children who are wards of the state as potential participants? ☐Yes  ☒ No    6. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What are the criteria used to determine participant inclusion or    exclusion?   Eligible participants will: 1) be between the ages of 18 and 35, 2) report anticipated 6-month residential stability in New Haven county, 3) self-identify as a gay or bisexual man or report being a man who has had past-12-month sex with a man; 4) self-identify as an ethnic or racial minority, including Black, African American, Caribbean American, Hispanic, and Latinx, 5) speak fluent English; and 6) provide consent.   SECTION V: RECRUITMENT/CONSENT AND ASSENT PROCEDURES   1. Recruitment Procedures:  a. Describe how potential participants will be identified and contacted, and by whom.  Participants will be recruited through existing community health services, gay community venues, and online.   Existing community health services. PI Wagner currently oversees the care of 25 HIV-positive young MSM of color and 10 HIV-negative young MSM who are currently prescribed PrEP and will communicate the existence of this study to her patients directly. Because Dr. Wagner maintains close connections with AIDS Project New Haven, we also plan to work with this community setting to recruit MSM for this study. We will also recruit additional HIV-negative MSM of color from the general clinic patient population at Fair Haven Community Health Center. Dr. Wagner and other medical staff will provide potentially eligible patients at Fair Haven Community Health Center with study flyers and contact information for eligibility screening.    
10  Gay community venues.  We will post study flyers in gay bars, clubs, and other community venues frequently by MSM in and around New Haven. Flyers will contain study contact information for eligibility screening.   Online. Finally, we will follow our previously successful online recruitment strategies in New Haven to recruit MSM who might be out-of-reach of existing services, including those who conceal their sexual identities. Recruitment strategies in our previous work have involved ads placed on social-sexual networking apps (i.e., Grindr), online sex-seeking forums (e.g., the “M4M casual encounters” section of Craigslist.com), and Facebook posts targeting local LGBT-oriented groups. Upon recruitment, interested participants will be contacted by research staff who will conduct an eligibility screen by phone. Individuals interested in study participation will indicate this through a brief online screener described above.   Are you collecting any information about the individuals prior to their signing a consent form?  Yes ☒     No ☐  If yes, indicate what information you will be collecting and how it will be gathered (phone screen, paper questionnaire, etc.)   Prior to signing a physical copy of the consent form, study participants will undergo a phone screen, over-the-phone Timeline Follow-Back (TLFB) interview, and complete an online survey composed of several baseline questionnaires.  The screener, interview, and online survey will ask participants questions regarding study eligibility, contact information, demographics, sexual risk behaviors, past substance use behaviors, and past and/or current mental health with particular focus on stigma and stress regarding sexual identity and/or behaviors and racial identity.  2. Indicate recruitment methods below.  Attach copies of any recruitment materials that will be used.  ☒ Flyers ☒   Internet/web postings ☐   Radio ☒   Posters ☐   Mass email solicitation ☒   Telephone ☐   Letter ☐   Departmental/Center website ☐   Television ☒   Through local NGO or other local contact ☐   Departmental/Center research boards ☐   Newspaper ☒   Table set-up / in-person recruitment of public                   ☒   Snowball sampling  ☐   Classroom recruitment ☒   Social Media (Twitter/Facebook):   ☐   Other:     3. Targeted Enrollment: Give the number of participants: a.   Targeted for enrollment at Yale for this protocol   Up to 30 participants will be enrolled into two separate cohorts, one beginning in the fall of 2018 and one in the Spring of 2019.  b. If this is a multi-site study, give the total number of participants targeted across all sites   N/A  4.   How was this estimate derived?  
11   This pilot study is powered to identity feasibility and acceptability of the ESTEEM intervention adapted for delivery in groups to young MSM of color in small urban areas. We believe that one group per HIV status (i.e., positive and negative) is the minimum possible number of groups to gain this information.  Using PI Pachankis’ clinical experience delivering psychotherapy groups, we believe that approximately 10-15 participants per group is the ideal number of group members to facilitate optimal learning and information exchange.   Our primary analysis plan involves 1) qualitative interviews with the intervention recipients and therapists to gather feedback necessary for future testing and implementation and 2) quantitative analyses appropriate for estimating effect sizes necessary to power future trials. We are recruiting 30 men to participate in the pilot study to generate sufficient depth and breadth of qualitative data. Drawing from similar research in the field, we estimate that 30 participants will allow us to gather data until saturation is reached and no new data will be introduced through further interviews. The quantitative data gathered from the ~30 participants at baseline and post-intervention will provide preliminary data to guide a future trial with a larger sample population.   5. Assessment	of	Current	Health	Provider	Relationship	for	HIPAA	Consideration:	Does	the	Investigator	or	any	member	of	the	research	team	have	a	direct	existing	clinical	relationship	with	any	potential	subject?		☐Yes,	all	subjects	☒Yes,	some	of	the	subjects	☐No		If	yes,	describe	the	nature	of	this	relationship.	Several	study	participants	are	likely	to	be	patients	of	Fair	Haven	Community	Health	Center	who	are	seen	by	Krystn	Wagner,	MD	for	primary	care	services.		6. Request	for	waiver	of	HIPAA	authorization:	(When	requesting	a	waiver	of	HIPAA	Authorization	for	either	the	entire	study,	or	for	recruitment	purposes	only.		Note:	if	you	are	collecting	PHI	as	part	of	a	phone	or	email	screen,	you	must	request	a	HIPAA	waiver	for	recruitment	purposes.)	Choose	one:		☐	For	entire	study		☒	For	recruitment/screening	purposes	only	☐	For	inclusion	of	non-English	speaking	subject	if	short	form	is	being	used	and	there	is	no	translated	HIPAA	research	authorization	form	available	on	the	University’s	HIPAA	website	at	hipaa.yale.edu.		i. Describe	why	it	would	be	impracticable	to	obtain	the	subject’s	authorization	for	use/disclosure	of	this	data:			It	would	be	impracticable	to	obtain	potential	study	participants’	authorization	for	use	of	this	data	given	the	large	number	of	individuals	to	be	screened	for	this	study	weighed	against	the	protections	in	place	to	protect	sensitive	data	(see	above	and	below).				ii. If	requesting	a	waiver	of	signed	authorization,	describe	why	it	would	be	impracticable	to	obtain	the	subject’s	signed	authorization	for	use/disclosure	of	this	data:	It	would	be	impracticable	to	obtain	study	subjects’	signed	authorization	for	use/disclosure	of	
12  screening	data	because	all	screening	communications	will	be	conducted	over	the	phone	and	staff	will	therefore	be	unable	to	obtain	signed	authorizations	from	study	participants.		The	investigator	assures	that	the	protected	health	information	for	which	a	Waiver	of	Authorization	has	been	requested	will	not	be	reused	or	disclosed	to	any	person	or	entity	other	than	those	listed	in	this	application,	except	as	required	by	law,	for	authorized	oversight	of	this	research	study,	or	as	specifically	approved	for	use	in	another	study	by	an	IRB.		Researchers	are	reminded	that	unauthorized	disclosures	of	PHI	to	individuals	outside	of	the	Yale	HIPAA-Covered	entity	must	be	accounted	for	in	the	“accounting	for	disclosures	log”,	by	subject	name,	purpose,	date,	recipients,	and	a	description	of	information	provided.		Logs	are	to	be	forwarded	to	the	Deputy	HIPAA	Privacy	Officer.	  7. Process of Consent/Assent (NOTE: When a study includes minors, parent provide permission [not consent] for the child’s participation, and the child provides assent for participation)  Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, including parental permission or surrogate permission and the steps taken to ensure participants’ independent decision-making.   Participants will consent to participation at four separate points prior to study enrollment—1) At the start of the online screener, 2) during the call for the phone assessment of HIV risk behavior, 3) before the online assessment, and 4) before the first group therapy session.  Screening	consent.		Individuals	interested	in	participation	in	the	study	will	be	directed	to	the	online	screener	and	complete	a	brief	consent	form	at	the	start	of	the	screener	agreeing	to	participation	in	screener	survey.	At	the	close	of	the	screener	they	will	be	directed	to	a	separate	survey	to	provide	study	staff	with	contact	information.	Data	from	the	two	surveys	will	not	be	linked	to	protect	participant	confidentiality.	They	will	be	told	a	study	staff	member	will	contact	them	via	email	if	they	are	eligible	with	the	details	for	consenting	to	participate	and	to	schedule	an	interview	by	phone.		Phone	assessment	consent.		Interested	individuals	who	meet	eligibility	criteria	for	the	study	will	be	contacted	by	a	research	staff	member	via	email	and	will	receive	a	copy	of	the	full	informed	consent	form	as	well	as	details	for	scheduling	their	phone	assessment.	Study	staff	will	instruct	them	to	read	the	form	before	the	call	and	that	they	will	have	an	opportunity	to	discuss	and	ask	questions	about	the	form	during	the	call.	The	project	coordinator	will	call	the	participant	at	the	scheduled	time	and	spend	the	first	few	minutes	of	the	call	discussing	study	details,	reviewing	the	consent	form,	and	answering	any	questions	the	participant	might	have.	Before	initiating	the	phone	risk	interview,	the	project	coordinator	will	gain	verbal	consent	from	the	participant	for	study	participation.		Online	assessment	consent.	Participants	will	be	presented	with	the	identical	consent	form	before	completing	the	online	assessments	that	they	will	be	asked	to	complete	prior	to	the	first	group	session.		
13  Intervention	consent.	At	the	first	group	session,	participants	will	physically	sign	the	same	consent	form	that	they	have	already	received	via	email	and	seen	in	the	baseline	survey.		 8. Evaluation of Participant(s) Capacity to Provide Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the personnel obtaining consent will assess the potential participant’s ability and capacity to consent to the research being proposed, if applicable.  For the online screener, participants will be asked to read details of the screener and be provided information about potential risks and benefits of completing the online screener. They will be asked to provide consent for completing the screener prior to answering the screener questions.   Participants will be emailed a version of the full study consent form to read and review prior to their phone assessment with research staff. At the start of the call, a trained Research Assistant (RA) will dedicate time to review key points of the consent form with participants and to answer any questions about the study or ICF. Verification of comprehension will be gained by asking participants to recall key points of the study participation process. Participants will be asked to provide verbal consent prior to proceeding in the study and beginning the phone risk assessment.   Prior to the start of the first group session, a trained RA will gather participants' consent and assess comprehension in a reserved room at the Fair Haven Community Health Center. The RA will ensure that the participant understands the risks associated with the study. Verification of comprehension of study participation requirements will be accomplished by asking participants to recall central points in the consent process; points of confusion will be clarified. Once participants have fully understood the consent form and the steps required for participating in the study, they will be asked to sign a physical copy of the consent form. RAs will be instructed to contact the PI or project coordinator if they are unsure about any participant's capacity to consent.       9. Documentation of Consent/Assent: Specify the documents or verbal scripts that will be used during the consent/assent process. Copies of all documents should be appended to the protocol, in the same format that they will be given or spoken to participants.   Please find attached a copy of the: 1) online screener consent text, 2) full study informed consent form to be presented a) before the phone assessment, b) before the online assessment, c) before the first group intervention.  10. Non-English-Speaking Participants: Explain provisions in place to ensure comprehension for research involving non-English speaking participants. Translated copies of all consent materials must be submitted for approval prior to use. Do you speak the local language? Will you require a translator? (If so, please elaborate on how the translators will be trained).  This study will only be recruiting English-speaking participants.  Therefore, this section does not apply for this study.  
14  11. Are any of the study procedures likely to yield information subject to mandatory reporting requirements? (e.g. HIV testing – reporting of communicable diseases; parent interview -incidents of child abuse, elderly abuse, etc.). Please verify to whom such instances will need to be reported.   Suicidality, Homicidality   Our ESTEEM clinical protocol successfully guides reporting instances of suicidality and homicidality in our ESTEEM pilot trial. We will employ the same protocol in this study.  The clinical protocol is attached. The protocol specifies that, in the event that a participant is at imminent risk of harming themselves or another person, as determined by a study staff member with mental health training, study staff will contact 911 to dispatch police or paramedics. Only the minimal necessary identifying information will be provided to these personnel. In less imminent instances of distress, we will refer distressed participants to local mental or behavioral health services. Clinical staff members will receive an alert if the participant answers the online questionnaires in a manner that signals distress; such participants will be contacted by a clinical staff member to assess risk.   Participants will be notified of the reporting requirements under these circumstances during the consent process.  12. Waiver of Consent/Documentation of Consent: In certain circumstances, the IRB may grant a waiver of documentation of consent, or a full waiver of consent, depending on the study. If you will request either a waiver of consent, or a waiver of signed consent for this study, complete the appropriate section below.    ☐Not Requesting any consent waivers   ☒Requesting a waiver of signed consent (e.g., verbal or online consent only): ☒ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will apply to recruitment activities only) ☐ Entire Study (Note that an information sheet may be required.)  
   Consent will be obtained for all study components: 1) consent for answering screener questions will be gauged at the start of the screener survey, 2) verbally for the phone risk assessment and online baseline assessment, and 3) signed on paper prior at first group session for the group therapy  For a waiver of signed consent, address the following:  • Would the signed consent form be the only record linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☒  • Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal risk to subjects? YES ☒  NO ☐    OR • Does the research pose greater than minimal risk? YES ☐    NO☒  • Does the research include any activities that would require signed consent in a non-research context? YES ☐   NO ☒  
15  participation, post-intervention survey, and qualitative interviews, as described above. The brief online screener survey will assess age, HIV status, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation identity and recent same-sex sexual behavior, HIV status, and substance use risk behavior, and depression and anxiety symptoms to determine preliminary eligibility for this study.  This brief online screener does not pose greater than minimal risk. Participants’ identifying information, including their name, will be kept in a separate database from the remainder of their study responses. Participants will ultimately provide verbal, typed, and signed consent before engaging in the group intervention sessions.    ☐  Requesting a waiver of consent (if you are not obtaining ANY consent):  ☐  Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will apply to recruitment activities only) ☐  Entire Study    
       SECTION VI: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS  1. Confidentiality & Security of Data: Describe the steps that will be taken to secure the data during storage, use and transmission as outlined in the below sections.  NOTE: Data can include paper files, data on the internet or websites, computer files, audio/video files, photographs, etc. and should be considered in the responses to the below sections.          The primary potential risk to participants is breach of confidentiality. Breaches of confidentiality will occur if a participant reports a clear intention to harm himself or another person. Health care professionals are required by state law to report suspected cases of abuse or neglect. Breach of confidentiality can also occur if participants in this group-based intervention disclose information about participants to outside parties. Participants will be informed during the consent process that any information shared during group sessions may be discussed outside of the intervention, although study staff will encourage participants to respect each other’s privacy. Moreover, participants will be reminded at the beginning of each session that all information shared in the intervention setting is private and confidential. Participants will also be notified on the consent form and at the start of each session that by participating in the study they acknowledge the risk that other participants will become aware of any information they disclose during the group intervention sessions and might disclose such information to others outside of the study.    For a waiver of consent, please address all of the following:  • Does the research pose greater than minimal risk to subjects?   ☐   Yes   If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot be granted.   ☐   No • Will the waiver adversely affect subjects’ rights and welfare? YES ☐    NO☐ • Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without the waiver?  Click or tap here to enter text. • Where appropriate, how will pertinent information be returned to, or shared with subjects at a later date? Click or tap here to enter text.  
16  The likelihood that any additional breaches of confidentiality would occur is minimal, as steps will be taken to guard against this risk. To protect participants’ confidentiality, NIH funded studies automatically receive a Certificate of Confidentiality (CoC) prior to enrolling participants. All counselors and research assistants (RAs) will undergo rigorous training in maintaining participants’ privacy and confidentiality and will be in possession of valid Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) certificates. Further, immediately upon providing consent, all participants will be assigned an identification number. Study staff will maintain four password protected databases tracking participant data. The first database, and only database to link participant contact information (ie: name, age, email, address, phone number) with their ID, will be used for scheduling participant appointments and follow-ups. The second database will track participant attendance and study task completion. The third database will track participant payment, and the fourth and final database will contain data gathered about participants through assessments and therapy sessions. These databases will all be stored on a secure server to which only study staff will have access. Confidential participant information will not be stored with any other data and no other identifying information will appear on any form. All contact with participants will be made by counselors and research staff under explicit guidelines to preserve confidentiality when telephoning, emailing, or mailing information to participants. Upon enrollment participants will also be asked to provide study staff with an alternative contact information (email, phone numbers, and mailing address) for compensation and study retention purposes. This information will be treated in the same confidential manner as all participant information, as described here.    Secure digital (SD) memory cards for the recording equipment will be stored at the research study site. The SD card in the video camera at Fair Haven Community Health Center will be retrieved weekly and brought back to PI Pachankis’ office at YSPH. Data will immediately be uploaded to the Secure Box server on a Yale computer and the memory cards will be cleared.  Additionally, participants will have the choice of using pseudonyms in the audio-recordings to protect their confidentiality on the audio-recordings.  What participant information will you be collecting? Describe the identifiers that will be included or associated with the data and/or specimens (e.g., names, addresses, telephone/fax numbers, email addresses, dates (date of birth, admission/discharge dates, etc.), medical record numbers, social security numbers, health plan beneficiary numbers, etc.) Click or tap here to enter text.  We will collect online numeric data, video-recorded data, and audio-recorded data.  Participant name and contact information will be collected at the end of the online screen and will not be linked to participant data except in the case of emergency (e.g., to provide paramedics with participant address). All data will be stored in a password protected contact database on secure Box only accessible to research staff. Participant names and contact information will only be used to schedule or reschedule participant appointments, or to reach contact nearby emergency services if necessary, and will not be connected to any data.    The full packet of study measures and assessments is attached to this application.  We propose to collect information about participants’ general mental health status; HIV risk; demographics; HIV status; experiences with stigma-related stress; depression and anxiety; cognitive, affective, and interpersonal functioning (e.g., rumination, social support, assertiveness); mental health treatment history and perspectives; substance use; sexual compulsivity; and perceptions of intervention helpfulness.    
17  We will also video video-record all intervention sessions and audio-record post-treatment qualitative interviews.  Participants will have the choice of using pseudonyms in the audio-recordings to protect their confidentiality on the audio-recordings.     Other potentially identifying information to be collected: ☒Audiotapes ☒Videotapes ☐Faces (focus groups, photographs or other way that an individual would be physically recognized) ☐Potential for identification from the bulk of the information, even if direct identifiers are not collected (deductive disclosure).  2. How will the research data be collected and recorded? Click or tap here to enter text.  Research data will be collected via telephone, electronic databases, survey websites, paper-and-pencil, electronic documents, and video recording.  Screening data will also be collected on a secure survey website (Qualtrics.com) to determine eligibility. Participants will complete online surveys at home via yalesurvey.qualtrics.com. If a participant does not have personal computer or internet access we will invite them to complete the baseline survey at the Fair Haven Community Health Center. Participants themselves will enter most data into Qualtrics directly. Online surveys (yalesurvey.qualtrics.com) will use an encrypted web service (https) and will not ask participants’ name or other identifying information, only participant ID number. Intervention sessions will be audio-recorded for quality control and will be downloaded to Yale’s HIPAA-compliant Secure Box drive upon retrieval from study cameras.   4. If identifiers will be associated with the data and/or specimens, describe whether a record or list containing a code (i.e., code number, pseudonyms) will be used, where the list will be stored, who will have access to the list and when it will be destroyed.        Participant tracking and scheduling data will be recorded on a study database.  One password-protected linking database—the study contact database—containing participant names and ID codes will be kept on Yale’s HIPAA-compliant Secure Box drive and will only be accessible to study staff.  All study computers will be encrypted and password protected.  All filing cabinets will be locked.  Online surveys (yale.qualtrics.com) will use an encrypted web service (https) and will not ask participants’ name or other identifying information, only participant ID number. The linking database used for participant scheduling and retention will be kept separate from study data, on a secure server, and will be password protected.  All study materials, including recordings, will be destroyed three years after the conclusion of the study.    5. Describe where, how and for how long the data (hardcopy (paper) and/or electronic data) and/or specimens will be stored.   
18  During the study, data will be stored on an encrypted, password-protected server at the Yale School of Public Health. The identifiable data will remain separate from the remainder of participant data. After three years of study completion, the link to personal identifiers will be destroyed.  Additionally, all study recordings will be destroyed after three years of study completion.  All portable devices must contain encryption software, per University Policy 5100.  If there is a technical reason a device cannot be encrypted please submit an exception request to the Information Security, Policy and Compliance Office by clicking on url http://its.yale.edu/egrc or email it.compliance@yale.edu    6. Identify who will have access to the data and/or specimens. If the data and/or specimens will be transferred to and/or from outside collaborators, identify the collaborator to whom the data and/or specimens will be transferred and how the data and/or specimens will be transferred.     Access to the data will be limited to members of the IRB-approved research study staff including, but not limited to, principal investigators, project coordinators, research assistants, and clinically trained psychological counselors.  Dr. Krystn Wagner will not have access to identifiable study data and she will not be analyzing study data.  However, Dr. Krystn Wagner may have access to patient health information for several study participants since we will be recruiting from her patient panel at Fair Haven Community Health Center.  What will be done with the data when the research is completed? Are there plans to destroy the identifiable data or the link to personal identifiers? If yes, describe how, by whom and when identifiers will be destroyed. If no, describe how the data and/or identifiers will be secured. Click or tap here to enter text.  After three years of study completion, the link to personal identifiers will be destroyed by IRB approved study staff.   7. Will a Certificate of Confidentiality be needed? (See also the NIH Certificate of Confidentiality Kiosk, http://grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/coc/index.htm) Click or tap here to enter text.  We have received an NIH Certificate of Confidentiality.  SECTION VII: POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS  1. Risks: Describe the reasonably foreseeable risks, including risks to participant privacy, discomforts, or inconveniences associated with participants participating in the research. Note: All studies have the potential for risk, if not physical, there may be psychological, reputational, or financial risks or risks to breach of confidentiality.  The study participants are at minimal risk of harm as a result of participation in the proposed research study. Although unlikely, one risk of the proposed study is that participants will experience emotional discomfort as a result of completing the quantitative assessments or the intervention. Breach of participants' confidentiality presents another possible risk. Breach of confidentiality can also occur if participants in this group-based intervention disclose information about other participants to outside parties. The investigative team's strategies to protect against these risks are described below.   
19  2. Minimizing Risks: Describe the manner in which the above-mentioned risks will be minimized.  Recruitment and Informed Consent: The investigative team has conducted a number of studies involving young gay and bisexual men, which have involved asking participants to complete potentially sensitive interviews and self-report measures. Thus, we have extensive protocols in place for all aspects of the study. All staff will complete IRB (re)certification as required. All new staff and research volunteers will receive local training in issues pertinent to research among young gay and bisexual men, and will sign a confidentiality pledge prior to any contact with participants or data. No identifying information is collected prior to the moment at which a participant provides informed consent.   Participants will be actively recruited into the study through referral by a health professional at FHCC or through venue-based flyers or online advertisements. When completing the online screener, participants will be prompted to provide consent for answering screener questions. If determined eligible for the study, research staff will email them a copy of the full consent form and establish a call to discuss the study and set up a phone assessment of HIV-risk behavior. During the call, a study staff member will review key points of the study and participation requirements with the participant and clarify any participant questions. Participants will verbally consent to participation during the call prior to completing the phone assessment. Participants will again see the consent form at the beginning of the baseline survey that they will complete after the phone assessment and again, in print, before their first group therapy session.   Prior to the in-office appointments, a trained Research Assistant (RA) will assess participants' consent in a private room. The RA will ensure that the participant understands the risks associated with the disclosure of information that could indicate imminent threat to self or others. Verification of comprehension of informed consent will be accomplished by asking participants to recall central points in the consent process; points of confusion will be clarified. Once participants have fully understood the consent, they will be asked to sign the consent form. RAs will be instructed to contact the PI or project coordinator if they are unsure about any participant's capacity to consent.   Protection Against Emotional Discomfort.  It is possible that participants may experience emotional discomfort in responding to assessments. While every possible step will be taken to minimize such risk, consent documentation will make it clear that if participants have any concerns about any aspect of the study they may refuse to continue with the study at any time, without penalty. In addition, we will remind participants during the course of their assessments that they can refuse to answer any questions and may discontinue participation at any time. Research team members will receive training from a licensed clinical psychologist in appropriate response practices in instances of participant distress and will follow the clinical protocol in any situation where a participant indicates risk of self-harm or harm to others. This training will address the appropriate handling of imminent threats and provision of referrals to free counseling services in less imminent clinical situations. As noted above, our Clinical Protocol, attached to this application, will guide this training and its implementation during instances of participant distress.   Protection Against Breach of Confidentiality. The primary potential risk to participants is breach of confidentiality. Breaches of confidentiality will occur if a participant reports a clear intention to harm himself or another person. Health care professionals are required by state law to report suspected cases of abuse or neglect.  Breach of confidentiality can also occur if participants in this group-based intervention disclose information about participants to outside parties. Participants will agree in their signed consent forms that any information shared during group sessions may not be discussed outside of the intervention.  Moreover, participants will be reminded at the beginning of each session to keep all information shared during the group intervention sessions private; that is, 
20  the session therapist will ask all group members to not disclose any other participant’s information outside of the group setting. Participants will also be told, however, that this protection cannot be guaranteed by the group leader. Participants will also be notified on the consent form and at the start of each session that by participating in the study they acknowledge the risk that other participants will become aware of any information they disclose during the group intervention sessions and might disclose such information to others outside of the study. The likelihood that any additional breaches of confidentiality would occur is minimal, as steps will be taken to guard against this risk. To protect participants’ confidentiality, NIH funded studies automatically receive a Certificate of Confidentiality (CoC) prior to enrolling participants. All counselors and research assistants (RAs) will undergo rigorous training in maintaining participants’ privacy and confidentiality and will be in possession of valid Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) certificates.  Further, immediately upon providing consent, all participants will be assigned an identification number. Only one database will contain participant information with a link to identification numbers and no data will be stored on this file. This database will be stored on Yale’s HIPAA-compliant Secure Box server and will be password protected. This information will not be stored with any participant data and no other identifying information will appear on any form. All contact with participants will be made by counselors and research staff under explicit guidelines to preserve confidentiality when telephoning, emailing, or mailing information to participants.   3. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) based on the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HSC will make the final determination of the risk to subjects.). a. What is your assessment of the overall risk level for subjects participating in this study? Minimal  b. If children are involved, what is your assessment of the overall risk level for the children participating in this study?  N/A c. Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan. Examples of DSMPs are    available here http://your.yale.edu/policies-procedures/other/data-and-safety-monitoring-plan-template  for i.Minimal risk ii.Greater than minimal/moderate risk   The principal investigator is responsible for monitoring the data, assuring protocol compliance, and conducting the safety reviews quarterly. During the review process the principal investigator will evaluate whether the study should continue unchanged, require modification/amendment, or close to enrollment.  The principal investigator and the Institutional Review Board (IRB) have the authority to stop or suspend the study or require modifications.  This protocol presents minimal risks to the subjects and Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others (UPIRSOs), including adverse events, are not anticipated. In the unlikely event that such events occur, Reportable Events (which are events that are serious or life-threatening and unanticipated (or anticipated but occurring with a greater frequency than expected) and possibly, probably, or definitely related) or Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others that may require a temporary or permanent interruption of study activities will be reported immediately (if possible), followed by a written report within 5 calendar days of the Principal Investigator becoming 
21  aware of the event to the IRB (using the appropriate forms from the website) and any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies. The investigator will apprise fellow investigators and study personnel of all UPIRSOs and adverse events that occur during the conduct of this research project (e.g., through regular study meetings, via email as they are reviewed by the principal investigator.)  The protocol’s research monitor(s), e.g., the DSMBs, NIH, will be informed of serious or unanticipated adverse events within 5 days of the event becoming known to the principal investigator.  d. For multi-site studies for which the Yale PI serves as the lead investigator:  i. How will adverse events and unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others be reported, reviewed and managed? N/A ii. What provisions are in place for management of interim results? N/A iii. What will the multi-site process be for protocol modifications? N/A  4. Potential Benefits: Identify any benefits that may be reasonably expected to result from the research, either to the participant(s) or to society at large. (Payment of participants is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk benefit assessment.)   Sexual risk behavior among young gay and bisexual men is a clear public health concern. All participants in the present study will be exposed to information about HIV transmission risks in relation to social stress and co-occurring mental health disorders. We anticipate that participants will acquire knowledge and skills and will receive support needed to improve their capacity for managing HIV risk. Benefits to society in general are anticipated through the dissemination of intervention findings. Results will better inform local and national public health agencies about potentially effective outreach and prevention strategies that can be delivered to YGBM who experience lifetime stress-sensitive mental health disorders, such as depression and anxiety, and HIV risk behavior. Given the unique experiences of YGBM men of color experiencing sexual orientation stigma and race-based discrimination, research to incorporate knowledge of stigma and discrimination mechanisms into a tool for HIV prevention can be a significant benefit for this community. In sum, the potential benefits outweigh the potential risks to subjects, which are minimal.  We propose to further test a preliminarily efficacious intervention to better help YGBM manage their HIV risk. Findings from this study can be used to help guide prevention efforts for both YGBM and other socially disadvantaged groups who experience stress-sensitive mental health disorders and are at risk of HIV infection.  Given the public health importance addressed by this project and the potential benefit of the information to be gained, we believe that the risk to subjects is reasonable. Further, the information from this intervention can serve to benefit more widespread sexual risk-reduction efforts. Specifically, information from this study will inform public health agencies regarding the effectiveness of an intervention that addresses co-occurring behavioral risk factors for HIV infection.  This test will lay the groundwork for future studies examining the strategic implementation of this intervention alongside effective structural and biomedical approaches.             SECTION VIII: RESEARCH ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS  1. Alternatives: What other alternatives, if any, are available to the study participants outside of the research?  
22  All participants and potential participants will be provided with a list of community referrals, including medical, HIV/STD testing, psychological, substance use, and housing supports.  2. Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe payments that will be made to participants, if any, the amount and timing of payments, and the conditions for receiving this compensation (if applicable). If you plan to hold a drawing, be sure to include the following on any consent or recruitment materials mentioning the lottery: 1) the value of the prize; 2) the sponsor of the prize (this cannot be a federal funding source); 3) the odds of winning; and 4) that there are no restrictions to winning.  You will receive the following compensation for completing each portion of the study:   • Ten counseling sessions: $10 per session plus transportation costs (up to an additional $10), equaling a total of $100 plus transportation costs (up to an additional $100).  • The online survey & phone interview (before the first counseling session): $40 • The follow-up online survey & phone interview (3 months after the final counseling session): $40 • The final interview (3 months after the final counseling session): $60   Payment for the pre-counseling surveys & phone interview will be provided during the first counseling session along with the payment for the first counseling session.  All other counseling session payments will be provided during those respective counseling sessions.  Payment for the post-counseling surveys & phone interview and for the final interview will be provided at a date/time agreed upon by each study participant and the ESTEEM-conneCT research staff.  If you withdraw from the study, you can keep the compensation that you have earned up to that point, but you will not receive compensation for those parts of the study that you have not completed.  3. Costs for Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly describe the participant’s costs associated with participation in the research, if any, and the interventions or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost to participants.      Study participation will generate no cost for participants. All study treatment (ESTEEM-conneCT) will be provided free of charge to all study participants.   BIBLIOGRAPHY 1.         Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Half of black gay men and a quarter of Latino gay men projected to be diagnosed within their lifetime. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;2016. 2. Johnson AS, Hall HI, Hu XH, Lansky A, Holtgrave DR, Mermin J. Trends in Diagnoses of HIV Infection in the United States. 2002-2011. Jama-J Am Med Assoc. 2014;312(4):432-434. 3. Millett GA, Peterson JL, Wolitski RJ, Stall R. Greater risk for HIV infection of black men who have sex with men: A critical literature review. Am J Public Health. 2006;96(6):1007-1019. 4. Millett GA, Peterson JL, Flores SA, et al. Comparisons of disparities and risks of HIV infection in black and other men who have sex with men in Canada, UK, and USA: a meta-analysis. Lancet. 2012;380(9839):341-348. 5. Maulsby C, Millett G, Lindsey K, et al. HIV Among Black Men Who Have Sex with Men (MSM) in the United States: A Review of the Literature. Aids Behav. 2014;18(1):10-25. 
23  6. Taylor J, Turner RJ. Perceived discrimination, social stress, and depression in the transition to adulthood: Racial contrasts. Soc Psychol Quart. 2002;65(3):213-225. 7. Meyer IH, Schwartz S, Frost DM. Social patterning of stress and coping: Does disadvantaged social statuses confer more stress and fewer coping resources? Soc Sci Med. 2008;67(3):368-379. 8. Frost DM, Meyer IH, Schwartz S. Social Support Networks Among Diverse Sexual Minority Populations. Am J Orthopsychiat. 2016;86(1):91-102. 9. Diaz RM, Ayala G, Bein E, Henne J, Marin BV. The impact of homophobia, poverty, and racism on the mental health of gay and bisexual Latino men: Findings from 3 US cities. Am J Public Health. 2001;91(6):927-932. 10. Diaz RM, Ayala G, Bein E. Sexual risk as an outcome of social oppression: data from a probability sample of Latino gay men in three U.S. cities. Cultur Divers Ethnic Minor Psychol. 2004;10(3):255-267. 11. Ayala G, Bingham T, Kim J, Wheeler DP, Millett GA. Modeling the impact of social discrimination and financial hardship on the sexual risk of HIV among Latino and Black men who have sex with men. Am J Public Health. 2012;102 Suppl 2:S242-249. 12. Reisner SL, Mimiaga MJ, Skeer M, et al. Clinically significant depressive symptoms as a risk factor for HIV infection among black MSM in Massachusetts. Aids Behav. 2009;13(4):798-810. 13. Cochran SD, Mays VM. Depressive distress among homosexually active African American men and women. Am J Psychiatry. 1994;151(4):524-529. 14. Lelutiu-Weinberger C, Gamarel KE, Golub SA, Parsons JT. Race-based differentials in the impact of mental health and stigma on HIV risk among young men who have sex with men. Health Psychol. 2015;34(8):847-856. 15. Arnold EA, Rebchook GM, Kegeles SM. 'Triply cursed': racism, homophobia and HIV-related stigma are barriers to regular HIV testing, treatment adherence and disclosure among young Black gay men. Cult Health Sex. 2014;16(6):710-722. 16. Rosenberg ES, Grey JA, Sanchez TH, Sullivan PS. Rates of prevalent HIV infection, prevalent diagnoses, and new diagnoses among men who have sex with men in US states, metropolitan statistical areas, and counties, 2012-2013. JMIR public health and surveillance. 2016;2(1). 17. White Hughto JM, Pachankis JE, Eldahan AI, Keene DE. "You Can't Just Walk Down the Street and Meet Someone": The Intersection of Social-Sexual Networking Technology, Stigma, and Health Among Gay and Bisexual Men in the Small City. Am J Mens Health. 2017;11(3):726-736. 18. Keene DE, Eldahan AI, White Hughto JM, Pachankis JE. 'The big ole gay express': sexual minority stigma, mobility and health in the small city. Cult Health Sex. 2017;19(3):381-394. 19. Wilson BDM, Miller RL. Strategies for managing heterosexism used among African American gay and bisexual men. Journal of Black Psychology. 2002;28:371-391. 20. Choi KH, Han CS, Paul J, Ayala G. Strategies for managing racism and homophobia among U.S. ethnic and racial minority men who have sex with men. AIDS Educ Prev. 2011;23(2):145-158. 21. Newcomb ME, Mustanski B. Moderators of the Relationship Between Internalized Homophobia and Risky Sexual Behavior in Men Who Have Sex with Men: A Meta-Analysis. Arch Sex Behav. 2011;40(1):189-199. 22. Pachankis JE, Hatzenbuehler ML, Hickson F, et al. Hidden from health: structural stigma, sexual orientation concealment, and HIV across 38 countries in the European MSM Internet Survey. Aids. 2015;29(10):1239-1246. 23. Wang K, Pachankis JE. Gay-Related Rejection Sensitivity as a Risk Factor for Condomless Sex. Aids Behav. 2016;20(4):763-767. 
24  24. Pachankis JE, Hatzenbuehler ML, Rendina HJ, Safren SA, Parsons JT. LGB-affirmative cognitive-behavioral therapy for young adult gay and bisexual men: A randomized controlled trial of a transdiagnostic minority stress approach. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2015;83(5):875-889. 25. Pachankis JE. A transdiagnostic minority stress treatment approach for gay and bisexual men's syndemic health conditions. Arch Sex Behav. 2015;44(7):1843-1860. 26. Pachankis JE. Uncovering Clinical Principles and Techniques to Address Minority Stress, Mental Health, and Related Health Risks Among Gay and Bisexual Men. Clin Psychol (New York). 2014;21(4):313-330. 27. Young LE, Schumm P, Alon L, et al. PrEP Chicago: A randomized controlled peer change agent intervention to promote the adoption of pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV prevention among young Black men who have sex with men. Clin Trials. 2017:1740774517730012. 28. Mays VM, Chatters LM, Cochran SD, Mackness J. African American families in diversity: Gay men and lesbians as participants in family networks. J Comp Fam Stud. 1998;29(1):73-+. 29. Branstrom R, Hatzenbuehler ML, Pachankis JE, Link BG. Sexual Orientation Disparities in Preventable Disease: A Fundamental Cause Perspective. Am J Public Health. 2016;106(6):1109-1115. 30. Hatzenbuehler ML, Phelan JC, Link BG. Stigma as a Fundamental Cause of Population Health Inequalities. Am J Public Health. 2013;103(5):813-821. 31. Phelan JC, Link BG. Is Racism a Fundamental Cause of Inequalities in Health? Annu Rev Sociol. 2015;41:311-330. 32. Rubin M, Colen C, Phelan J, Link B. Examination of disparities in HIV mortality in the United States (US) from a fundamental cause perspective. Am J Epidemiol. 2008;167(11):S34-S34. 33. Sullivan PS, Peterson J, Rosenberg ES, et al. Understanding Racial HIV/STI Disparities in Black and White Men Who Have Sex with Men: A Multilevel Approach. Plos One. 2014;9(3). 34. Connecticut Department of Public Health. Epidemiological Profile of HIV in Connecticut. 2016. 35. Hughto JMW, Pachankis JE, Eldahan AI, Keene DE. "You Can't Just Walk Down the Street and Meet Someone": The Intersection of Social-Sexual Networking Technology, Stigma, and Health Among Gay and Bisexual Men in the Small City. Am J Mens Health. 2017;11(3):726-736. 36. Keene DE, Eldahan AI, Hughto JMW, Pachankis JE. 'The big ole gay express': sexual minority stigma, mobility and health in the small city. Cult Health Sex. 2017;19(3):381-394. 37. Pachankis JE, Eldahan AI, Golub SA. New to New York: Ecological and Psychological Predictors of Health Among Recently Arrived Young Adult Gay and Bisexual Urban Migrants. Ann Behav Med. 2016;50(5):692-703. 38. Pettit B, Western B. Mass imprisonment and the life course: Race and class inequality in US incarceration. Am Sociol Rev. 2004;69(2):151-169. 39. Western B, Pettit B. Black-white wage inequality, employment rates, and incarceration. Am J Sociol. 2005;111(2):553-578. 40. Nier CL. Perpetuation of Segregation: Toward a New Historical and Legal Interpretation of Redlining Under the Fair Housing Act. John Marshall Law School Review. 1998;32.  