Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019   
 
 
 
 
Risk-Adapted Therapy For Patients With Untreated Age-Adjusted International 
Prognostic  Index  Low-Intermediate   Risk,  High -Intermediate   Risk,  Or High  Risk  
Diffuse  Large  B Cell Lymphoma  
 
MSKCC  THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC   PROTOCOL  
 
 
 
Principal  
Investigator/Department:  Andrew  D. Zelenetz,   M.D.,  Ph.D  Medicine:  Lymphoma 
 
Co-Principal  
Investigator(s)/Department:  
 
Heiko  Schöder,  M.D.   
 
Radiology  
 
Investigator(s)/Department:   
Kurt Bantilan,  M.P.H. 
 
Reiko  Nakajima,  M.D.  
Laure  Michaud,  M.D.  
 
Jazmin  Schwartz,  M.D.  
John Humm,   Ph.D   
Medicine:  Lymphoma 
Radiology:  SKI 
 
Medical  Physics  
 
 
 
Consenting  
Professional(s)/Department   
 
 
 
Andrew  D. Zelenetz,   M.D.,  Ph.D.   
 
 
 
Medicine:  Lymphoma 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275 York  Avenue  
New  York,  NY 10021  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019   
 
 
 
 
Table  of Contents  
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND  
SCHEMA  
1 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  
AIMS   1 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  
RATIONALE  
2 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN  / 
INTERVENTION  
7 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  
AGENTS  
12 
6.1 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  
ELIGIBILITY  
18 
6.2 Subject Inclusion 
Criteria  
 
18 
6.3 Subject Exclusion 
Criteria  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019   
 
 
 
 
19 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  
PLAN  19 
8.0 PRETREATMENT  
EVALUATION  
19 
9.0 TREATMENT  
INTERVENTION/PLAN  
21 
10.0 EVALUATION   DURING  
TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  
24 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  
EFFECTS  
26 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  
STUDY  
29 
14.0  
BIOSTATISTICS  
30 
15.0 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION   AND  RANDOMIZATION  
PROCEDURES  
32 
16.0 DATA  MANAGEMENT  
ISSUES  
33 
17.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  
SUBJECTS  
34 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  
PROCEDURES  
39 
19.0  
REFERENCES  
39 
20.0 APPENDIX  
1 42 
21.1 APPENDIX  
2 43 
21.2 Treatment   Timeline:  Screening  
Period  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019   
 
 
 
 
43 
21.3 Treatment  Timeline  for Induction and Interim 
Restaging  
 
44 
21.4 Treatment   Timeline   for Consolidation  
A 
 
45 
21.5 Treatment   Timeline   for Consolidation  
B 
 
46 
21.6 Treatment   Timeline   for Consolidation  
C 
 
47 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 1 -  
  
 
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND  
SCHEMA  
 
 
The goal of this study is to assess 2 year PFS rates of patients with intermediate and high 
risk diffuse large B cell lymphoma who are treated according to an accelerated treatment 
program  that incorporates  chemotherapy  and rituximab   and uses risk stratification   to one 
of three consolidation  programs  based  upon  results  of interim  restaging  FDG -PET 
evaluation;  positive  FDG-PET is confirmed  by biopsy. 
 
Schema  is depicted  below:  
 
 
 
 
2.1 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  
 
2.2 Primary  
objective  
 
 
To determine the 2-year PFS and overall survival from the start of induction therapy 
conditional  on attaining  either  a negative  FDG -PET or a negative  biopsy  at the 
interim evaluation. The probability of this outcome will be evaluated separately in 
the Ki-67 <80 (Consolidation  A) and the Ki-67 ≥80 (Consolidation  B) cohorts.  
    FDG -PET agent    
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 2 -  
  
 
2.3 Secondary  Objectives  
 
 
a. To obtain  preliminary  data on biodistribution,  dosimetry  and potential  clinica  l 
usefulness  of the proliferation  marker  [18F]  fluorothymidine  (FLT)  in patients  with 
diffuse large cell lymphoma, using combined positron emissio n 
tomography/computed   tomography  (FLT -PET/CT).   These  scans  will  be obtained  
at baseline,  and prior to the start of cycle  3; the earliest  the second  scan can be 
obtained is the day after prednisone completion. FLT-PET scans will be done for 
the first 60 patients.  
 
b. To determine  the role of CT volumetric  analysis  compared  to standard  
unidimensional  CT in this patient  population.  These  scans  will be obtained  at 
baseline  (when possible), after cycle 4 of therapy and at the conclusion of treatment. 
 
 
3.1 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  
 
3.2 Introduction  
 
Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common lympho id 
malignancy  in the United  States  and Europe  accounting  for one third  of cases.  In the past 
5 years, several phase III random assignment trials have demonstrated an improvement in 
PFS with the addition  of the chimeric  anti-CD20  monoclonal  antibody  rituximab  to CHOP  
or CHOP -like chemotherapy  regimens.  (Coiffier,  Lepage  et al. 2002;  Feugier,  Van Hoof  et 
al. 2005;  Habermann,  Weller  et al. 2006;  Pfreundschuh,  Trumper  et al. 2006)  However,  
patients < 60  years of age with unfavorable prognostic features have not been included in 
these  randomized  trials;  in this cohort  of patients  the PFS is < 50%.  The standard  of care 
remains  controversial  for these  patients.   These  patients  are the subject  of the current  study.  
 
 
 
3.3 Pre-Treatment  Prognostic  Factors  
 
 
The most widely used clinical models for prognosis are the International Prognostic 
Index  (IPI) and the more  commonly  used,  age-adjusted  IPI (aaIPI).  The aaIPI  consists  of 
three factors (adverse factors include: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance 
Status [ECOG PS]  2; LDH > normal; Ann Arbor clinical stage III or IV) and is applied 
independently  to groups  of patients  either  uniformly   60 years  of age or > 60 years  of age; 
the four risk groups  are determined  by the number  of adverse  factors:  Low (L), 0; Low- 
Intermediate  (LI), 1; High -Intermediate  (HI) 2; and High (H) 3. For example,   the aaIPI  
has been particularly  useful  in the analysis  of the results  of trials in a restricted  age group  
such as those  involving  high dose therapy  (HDT)  and ASCT  (Hamlin,  Zelenetz  et al. 2003)  
or uniform   treatment   of the older  patient.   (Feugier,   Van Hoof  et al. 2005)  As useful   as 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 3 -  
  
 
clinical   models  have  been  in  identifying   risk  groups,  they  do  not  identify   specific 
abnormalities   that could  lead to therapy  tailored   to molecular   lesions.  
The work  of the Lymphoma,  Leukemia,  Myeloma  Profiling  Project  (LLMPP)  has 
identified  two subtypes  of DLBCL:  germinal  center  (GC);  and activated  B cell (ABC).  
(Alizadeh, Eisen et al. 1999;  Rosenwald, Wright et al. 2002)  Subsequent work has 
associated the ABC tumors with constitutive activation of the NFB signaling pathway. 
(Rosenwald,  Wright  et al. 2002;  Feuerhake,  Kutok  et al. 2005)  In patients  treated  with 
doxorubicin -based  chemotherapy  programs  without  rituximab  the  ABC   subtype   of 
DLBCL has an inferior outcome compared to the GC subtype (Rosenwald, Wright et al. 
2002 ); however, this difference may be overcome by the addition of rituximab. (Farinha, 
Sehn et al. 2006)  Furthermore, molecular studies have validated the clinical findings 
(Hamlin, Portlock et al. 2004)  that primary mediastinal large B cell lymphoma  (PMLBCL) 
is a distinct  subtype  of DLBCL;  the molecular  features  are more  closely  related  to Hodgkin  
Lymphoma (HL) than either the GC or ABC subtypes of DLBCL.(Rosenwald, Wright  et 
al. 2003;  Savage,  Monti  et al. 2003)  In addition  outcome  of some  of the more  unusual 
subtypes of aggressive lymphoma are yet to be defined in the era of rituximab-based 
chemotherapy.  Though  gene signatures  predictive  of outcome  have been developed,  they 
remain  impractical  as they depend  on gene expression  array  analysis  which  is still some  
years away from routine clinical use.  However, the predictive  models have been adapted 
to quantitative  polymerase   chain  reaction  (PCR)  using  only 6 genes   (Lossos,  Czerwinski 
et al. 2004)  and immunohistochemistry  using  only 3 antibodies  (Hans,  Weisenburger  et al. 
2004);  both of these  models  have been  able to predict  outcome  in patients  treated  with 
conventional chemotherapy, but remain to be validated in patients treated with immuno - 
chemotherapy.  
 
3.4 Interim  Evaluation  
 
Though pre-treatment factors influence outcomes of patients with DLBCL, none 
provides  a definitive  prediction  of outcome.   Thus,  early identification  of patients  who may 
or may not respond  to standard  therapy  may provide  the opportunity  to adapt  therapy.   This 
is an important area of ongoing investigation by the Lymphoma Service at MSKCC. 
Ideally,   patients  with a negative   interim  result  would  be destined  to do well and those  with 
a positive  results  fair poorly.  We and others  have used early restaging  FDG -PET in this 
setting.  The published  literature  suggests  that those  patients  with a negative   interim 
restaging  FDG -PET scan have ≥ 80% chance  of being  progression -free at 3 years;  however  
patients  with a positive  test have PFS that ranges  from 10-50%.  Hence,  the positive  
predictive  value  of an interim  restaging  FDG -PET scan is suspect.  Despite  these  data, 
many  major  centers  change  therapy  to a more  aggressive  approach,  an autologous  stem cell 
transplant,  if the interim  FDG -PET scan is positive,  nearly  always  without  biopsy  
confirmation  of active  disease.  
 
 
3.5 MSKCC  Protocol  01-142 
 
As stated  above  in patients  < 60 yrs. old, therapy  for poor risk (aaIPI  HIR or HR) 
DLBCL  remains  controversial.  The standard  of care in the United  States  is treatment  with 
R-CHOP -21 (every   3 weeks).     However,   in  many   centers   in  the  United   States   and 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 4 -  
 PET 
 
 
internationally,  patients  with aaIPI  HIR or HR disease  receive  consolidation  therapy  with 
high dose therapy  (HDT)  and ASCT  despite  the lack of a clear overall  survival 
improvement compared to the use of HDT and ASCT in the relapsed setting. We recently 
completed  a risk-adapted,  phase  II study  for patients  with stage  IIX, III, and IV DLBCL 
with 1-3 risk factors  defined  by the age-adjusted  IPI (MSKCC  protocol  01-142).  Induction  
therapy  consisted  of 4 cycles  of R-CHOP -14 (doses  of cyclophosphamide -1000  mg/m2 , 
doxorubicin -50 mg/m2 and un-capped  vincristine  at 1.4 mg/m2).  After  interim   restaging  
with FDG -PET,  patients  with a negative  FDG -PET scan received  non-cross  resistant  
chemotherapy  with 3 cycles  of ICE. If the PET scan was positive,  a repeat  biopsy  was 
performed,  and if negative,  ICE was administered;   if positive,   therapy  consisted  of ICE x 
3, followed   by HDT  and ASCT.  
 
MSKCC  01-142: DLBCL:  Risk  Adapted  for Therapy  
CS IIX, III or IV disease,  age-adjusted  IPI 1, 2, or 3 Risk  Factors,  
Transplant  Eligible  
 
 
 
R-C1000HOuncapped P-14 x 4 
 
+ FDG -PET agent  -  
 
⚫ Prospective,  biopsy  
 
determination  of 
“positive  PET”  
⚫ Therapy  interval  2 
Repea t Bx  
 
 
 
 
ICE XX  33 
ffoolllloowweedd  bbyy 
Observat ion weeks  
⚫ PET 10-14 days  post  
cycle  4 
⚫ Treatment  is adapted  
by biopsy,  not PET 
⚫ No radiation  therapy  
permitted  except  for 
testicular  disease  
⚫ IT methotrexate  for 
aaHR,  paranasal  
sinus,  testis,  BM 
 
 
Eighty -seven  patients  have received  therapy  on study.  Baseline  characterist  ics 
include: At a median follow-up of 30 months the event-free survival (EFS) is 88%. Only 
one patient  had progressive  disease  on R-CHOP -14. At interim  restaging,  31/86  pts had 
FDG-PET avid disease of which only 4 had a positive biopsy. There was no difference in 
PFS for pts with an interim  restaging  negative  FDG -PET scan (50/55)  vs. positive  FDG - 
PET positive  (27/31),  p=0.36;  hence  the false positive  rate of the interim  restaging  FDG - 
PET scan was 87%.  Pts with PMLBL  had the same  outcome  as patients  with standard  
DLBCL,  p=0.41.  In univariate  analysis,  the only factor  that had a negative  prognostic  
impact  was Ki-67 ≥ 80, p=0.0006.  Our-dose dense  approach  overcame  the poor prognostic  
features  of the standard  prognostic  models  used for DLBCL,  and obviates  the need for an 
upfront  ASCT  in nearly  all patients.   (Moskowitz  CH 2006)  
We were unable  to risk-adapt  therapy  based  upon  imaging  modalities  and 
surprisingly Ki-67 expression has prognostic import in this patient population. This 
followup   study  focuses  on these  2 issues.  Bx - 
Bx + 
ICE XX  22 
RRIICCEE  xx  11 
ffoolllloowweedd  bbyy 
HDT/ASCT  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 5 -  
  
 
 
 
3.6 Nuclear  Medicine  Imaging  
The International  Working  Group  response  criteria  did not provide  striking  
discrimination  in outcomes  of patients  between  those  categorized  as a partial  response  (PR) 
and those  categorized  as a complete  response  (CR).  Recently,  it has been  shown  that 
inclusion of FDG-PET at the conclusion of therapy can dramatically enhance the 
discrimination  between  CR and PR in patients  with DLBCL;  thus, FDG -PET has been  
incorporated  in to a modified   version  of the International  Working  Group  response  criteria.  
In MSKCC 01-142, the role of interim re-staging evaluation with FDG-PET was 
limited  by the very poor positive predictive  value;  based upon biopsy evaluation of the 
abnormal site of activity. However, we confirmed  others findings  that the negative 
predictive  value was high.  The false positive  FDG-PET appears to be influenced  by a 
number of variables  including:  intralesional inflammation;  time between therapy and 
scan; and influence  of the immunotherapy.   The study design of MSKCC 01-142 clearly 
did not permit  optimal  use of FDG -PET.   In the current  study  we have modified   several  
treatment  parameters   we hope will improve   the positive   predictive   value  of FDG -PET.  
 
18F Fluorothymidine   PET 
3'-deox y-3'-[(18)F]  fluorothymidine  ([(18)F]FLT)  is a new PET radiotracer  that 
can be used to assess  tumor  cell proliferation   (Mier,  Haberkorn  et al. 2002).  Imaging  with 
FLT takes advantage of the fact that pyrimidine  nucleosides  and several of their 
analogues  are phosphorylated  to the respective monophosphate  (MP) by thymidine  kinase 
1 (TK-1) and are incorporated into DNA. FLT is also substrate for thymidine  kinase-1 
(TK-1), which  has been demonstrated  both in vitro  (Rasey,  Grierson  et al. 2002) and in 
vivo (Buck,  Halter  et al. 2003;  Vesselle,   Grierson  et al. 2003;  Wagner,  Seitz  et al. 2003).  
TK-1 activity  is up-regulated   in cells entering  the S-phase,  whereas  the protein  is nearly  
undetectable   in growth  arrested  cells.   TK-1 catalyzes   the phosphorylation  of FLT to 
FLT-monophosphate.   Because  it lacks  a 3'-hydroxyl  group,  very little  FLT is 
incorporated  into DNA.  Thus,  FLT measures  an early event  in DNA  synthesis,  rather  than 
DNA  incorporation.   Nevertheless,   many  reports  have shown  a positive  correlation  
between  FLT uptake  and S-phase  fraction  of cells in vitro (Seitz,  Wagner  et al. 2001;  
Rasey,  Grierson  et al. 2002;  Schwartz,  Tamura  et al. 2003)  and the fraction  of 
proliferating  cells in vivo (MIB -1; Ki-67) (Vesselle,   Grierson  et al. 2002).  Accordingly,  
FLT might   be a useful  imaging  agent  to monitor  the early response  to therapy  in cancer  
patients. While there are no convincing clinical  data at this time, some studies  (Dittmann, 
Dohmen  et al. 2002;  Apisarnthanarax,   Alauddin  et al. 2006)  showed  a close  correlation  
between  FLT uptake  in tumor  cell cultures   or xenografts   and growth  arrest.  Since  there is 
limited  clinical experience  with this new radiotracer in patients undergoing 
chemotherapy,   we will obtain  data to a) assess  biodistribution,   b) verify  published  
dosimetry data, and c) address the potential clinical  usefulness  of this new imaging agent 
in patients with lymphoma  treated on this new study and correlate the results with other 
clinical and biologic  prognostic factors.  The data derived from this study will tell us if 
and how (time point  of imaging,   details  of image  acquisition)   PET with FLT will be 
meaningful  in lymphoma  patients.   It is expected that FLT will be the next PET tracer to 
be approved for broad clinical  use by the FDA.  However, it is essential to establish the 
utility of this tracer in the evaluation of lymphoma.   In this study, we will examine  the 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 6 -  
  
 
biodistribution  of FLT in patients  with DLBCL  and determine   what impact  therapy  has 
on that distribution.    It is hoped  that FLT imaging  may provide  an early read out on 
treatment  response.   Therefore,   we will obtain  scans  at baseline   and after the first  or 
second  cycle  of chemotherapy.  
 
3.7 Volumetric  Segmentation  and Response  Assessment  in Lymphoma  
 
Traditionally,  tumors  have been  measured  with a single  diameter  (uni-dimens  ion) 
on computed  tomography  (CT) before,  during,  and after therapy,  and the changes  of the 
measurement are used to assess tumor response to therapy. However, these conventional 
measurement techniques may not accurately reflect true tumor size change since most 
tumors  and lymph  nodes,  in particular,  are not perfectly  spherical  and they do not change  
symmetrically. Continuous advances in CT imaging technology have afforded  the 
capability of acquiring “isotropic” images, alllowing tumor volumes to be measured with 
higher  degrees  of accuracy.  A question  facing  us is whether  change  in tumor  volume  can 
serve  as a better  marker  for response  assessment  than the single  or two diameters  used by 
conventional methods. Our hypotheses are that volume change of a lymphomatous mass 
measured  on longitudinal  CT images  may serve  as a more  accurate  surrogate  for therapy  
response  compared  to unidimensional  size changes.  Residual  masses  after therapy,  
especially in lymphoma patients, often contain fibrosis or necrosis that cannot be 
differentiated  from viable  tumor  with anatomic  CT imaging.  However  even functio  nal 
FDG -PET imaging  has a modest  false negative  rate and as indicated  above  potential  for 
false positives.  Therefore,  the two may play a complementary  role. Accurate  anatomic  
localization  and size measurement  using  CT will continue  playing  an important  role in the 
detection, diagnosis,  staging,  and response assessment  in lymphoma. 
An automated  lymph  node segmentation  algorithm  has been developed  which  will 
greatly  improve  the efficiency  of routine  radiological/oncological  image  interpretation,  as 
well as provide  a methodology  of objective  and reproducible  tumor   size determinat  io n. 
This is essential  to the evaluation  of volumetric  techniques  to be used in response  
assessment and to the acceptance of such techniques in clinical practice, and  may 
ultimately  play the same  important  role in the detection  of other  solid tumors  that 
metastasize   to the lymph  nodes.  
 
3.8 Proposed  Treatment  and Rationale  
 
Our dose-dense  R-CHOP -14/ICE  program  used in MSKCC  01-142 was highly  
efficacious. However, we identified two major limitations. First, as designed, the interim 
FDG -PET (without  a confirmatory  biopsy)  was not able to identify  patients  destined  to 
relapse.   Second,  patients  with high tumor  growth  fractions   indicated   by Ki-67 staining  of 
≥ 80% had a significant poorer outcome. The current phase II study attempts to address 
these limitations by selecting alternative therapy for patients with high growth fractions 
and by incorporating new multiple imaging modalities to predict which patient may benefit 
from a consolidative  upfront  ASCT.  Risk stratification  willl   continue  to be based  upon  
biopsy confirmation of abnormal interim restaging. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 7 -  
  
 
 
 
 
 
4.1 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN  / INTERVENTION  
 
4.2 Design  
 
 
 
 
Patient  accrual  
 
Transplant  eligible  patients between the ages of 18 and 65 with CD20+ d iffuse  large B 
cell lymphoma.   Patients must meet eligibility criteria outlined  in section 6.0. 
 
End of Study  (for each  patient)  
 
End of study will be defined as either death, loss to follow-up,  early withdrawal,  or 
removal from study, failure  to achieve a CR, 2-year relapse-free survival  and 5-year 
overall survival.   Patients will be followed  until the end of study. 
 
Number  of centers:  Single  institution  
Number  of patients:  90 
Estimated   study  duration:  44-48 months  
    FDG -PET agent    
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 8 -  
  
 
 
 
4.3 Intervention  
 
All induction   and consolidation  treatment  visits  have  a +/- 3 day window  (excluding  
the interim  restaging  scans).  
 
Antimicrobial  Prophylaxis: Throughout  induction  and all consolidation  chemotherapy 
(excluding  transplant),   the following  antimicrobial  prophylaxis   will be given:  
Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole   160/800 (DS) oral twice  daily TIW (patients  with 
known  allergy  to Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole   can receive  alternative   pneumocystis  
carinii prophylaxis),  Acyclovir  400 mg oral bid, and Fluconazole  100 mg oral qd.  For 
prophylaxis   during  Consolidation  C transplant,   see below.  
 
INDUCTION:  RR-CHOP -14 Chemotherapy   for Three  Cycles  
 
Each  cycle  lasts approximately   14 days.  
A total of 3 cycles  of RR-CHOP -14 will be given.    One cycle  of CHOP  will follow.  
 
There  are no dose reductions  of the Rituximab,  cyclophosphamide,  or doxorubicin.  If 
patients  develop  grade  III/IV  neurotoxicity  from vincristine,  the dose can be reduced  at the 
discretion  of the primary  attending.  Treatment  is delayed   until  the absolute   neutrophil  
count  is > 1000/ul  and the platelet  count  is > 50,000/ul.  
 
Cycle  s 1-3: RR-CHOP -14 
 
Day -2 or Day 2: 
Rituximab   375 mg/m2  IVPB  
 
Day 0: 
Rituximab   375mg/m2  IVPB  
Cyclophosphamide   1000 mg/m2  IVPB  
Doxorubicin   50mg/m2   IVP 
Vincristine   1.4 mg/m2   (no cap) IVP 
Prednisone  100mg  PO daily for five days 
Alternatively,   Prednisone   may be started  on Day 1 and continue   through  Day 5. 
 
Growth  factor  support:  
G-CSF SQ Days  6-10 at either  300ug  or 480 ug /day OR Pegfilgrastim   6mg once 24-48 
hrs post completion of intravenous  chemotherapy. 
 
Day 0 of next cycle  is day 14 as long as ANC  ≥ 1000 and platelets  ≥50 k  (this requireme  nt 
is not applicable  for patients  with bone marrow  involvement);  RCHOP  in cycle  3 and 
CHOP  in cycle  4 should  be two weeks  apart  also. 
 
 
Cycle  4: CHOP,  no rituximab   will be administe  re d 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 9 -  
  
 
 
 
This cycle  will last 21 days 
 
Day 0: 
Cyclophosphamide   1000 mg/m2  IVPB  
Doxorubicin   50mg/m2   IVP 
Vincristine   1.4 mg/m2   (no cap) IVP 
Prednisone  100mg  PO daily for five days.  
Alternatively,   Prednisone   may be started  on Day 1 and continue   through  Day 5. 
 
Growth  factor  support:  
G-C SF SQ Days  6-10 at either  300ug  or 480 ug/day  OR Pegfilgrastim  6mg once 24-48 hrs 
post completion of intravenous  chemotherapy. 
 
Inte rim re staging  CT (with  volume  tric analysis) and FDG -PET scanning  will be done  
on days 17-20 of cycle  4 of induction   che mothe  rapy.  
 
 
CONSOLIDATION  
 
Risk-Adapted  based  on Biopsy  and Pre-treatment  Ki-67. If the interim  FDG -PET 
scan is positive  in a site of measurable  disease  and correlates  to disease  shown  on the CT 
scan,  the patient  will undergo  a repeat  biopsy.  
If the biopsy  is negative,  the patient  will receive  consolidation  A or B depending  
upon  pre-treatment  Ki-67 expression;  if positive  the patient  will receive  consolidation  C. 
Patients  whose  bone  marrow  was initially  positive  and remains  positive  post-induction  will 
receive  consolidation   C. 
 
Consolidation  A: Patients  whose  disease  is FDG -PET negative  or patients  whose  
FDG -PET scan  is positive  but repeat  biopsy  is negative  and whose  initial  Ki-67 
expression  is < 80% will receive  3 cycles  of standard  dose  ICE Chemotherapy.  
 
Each  cycle  of ICE lasts 14 days.  Patients  must have a platelet  count  of 50,000/ul  and an 
ANC  of at least 1000/ul  to proceed  to subsequent  cycles  of ICE. For delays  of greater  than 
2 weeks,  the PI must be notified  and it the delay  must be reported  the IRB/PB.  Creatinine  
clearance is estimated from 12 hour urine collections  obtained on admission. 
 
Days  1-3: 
Etoposide  100 mg/ m2  IVPB  Days  1, 2, 3 
Carboplatin  AUC  5 (maximum   dose 800 mg [equivalent   to CrCl  of 135 ml/min)   IVPB  
AUC  dosing  is calculated   by the Calvert  Formula:  
AUC  5 = 5 x  (CrCl+25)  
 
 
Day 2: 
Ifosfamide   5 g/m2  admixed   with MESNA  5 g/m2  IVCI  over 24 hours  beginning   on Day 2. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 10 -  
  
 
 
 
Growth  factor  support:  
Pegfilgrastim 6mg 24-48 hrs post completion of chemotherapy or G-CSF SQ Days 5-12 at 
either  300ug  or 480 ug/day  
 
 
Consolidation  B: Patients  whose  disease  is FDG -PET negative  or patients  whose  
FDG -PET scan  is positive  but repeat  biopsy  is negative  and whose  initial  Ki-67 
expression is ≥80%  will receive 2 cycles of augmented RICE Chemotherapy (as per 
MSKCC  protocol  03-075).  
 
Days  1 and 3: 
Rituximab   375 mg/m2  IVPB  
 
Admit  for RICEaug  chemotherapy.    Each  cycle  of RICEaug  lasts 21 days.   Patients  must 
have a platelet  count  of 50,000/ul  and an ANC  of at least 1000/ul  to proceed  to 
subsequent  cycles  of RICEaug  (this requirement   is not applicable   for patients  with bone 
marrow  involvement).   For delays  of greater  than 2 weeks,  the PI must be notified   and it 
the delay  must be reported  the IRB/PB.  Creatinine   clearance  is estimated  from 12 hour 
urine collections  obtained on admission. 
 
Days  4-6: 
Etoposide  200 mg/m2   IVPB  q12 hrs x 3 
Ifosfamide   5 g/m2/day administered   with MESNA  5 g/m2/day mixed   IVCI  over 24 hours  
x 2 starting  on Day 4 (Total  dose of both Ifosfamide   and MESNA  is 10 gm/m2) 
Carboplatin  AUC  5 (maximum   dose 800 mg equivalent   to CrCl  of 135 ml/min)   IVPB  on 
Day 6 
AUC  dosing  is calculated   by the Calvert  Formula:  
AUC  5 = 5 x  (CrCl+25)  
 
Growth  factor  support:  
Pegfilgrastim 6mg 24-48 hrs post completion of chemotherapy or G-CSF SQ Days 5-12 at 
either  300ug  or 480 ug/day . 
 
 
Consolidation  C: Patients  with biopsy  proven  disease  after  induction   therapy  
Patients  whose  bone  marrow  remain  positive  at interim  restaging  will have  the option  
of getting  an allogeneic  stem  cell transplant,   in lieu of an ASCT,   if they have  an 
acceptable  HLA  match   donor.    The allogeneic  stem  cell transplant   regimen  will be 
decided  by the MSK  Bone  Marrow  Transplant  Service.  
 
 
Part 1: RICEaug  Chemotherapy   for 2 cycles  (as above)  
However,  after Cycle  2 patients  will  receive   G-CSF at 10 ug/kg  instead  of pegfilgrast  im, 
continuing until the completion of leukapheresis. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 11 -  
  
 
Part 2: Stem  Cell Collection  
The  target   yield  for leukapheresis   will  be 5x106  CD34+  cells/kg.  Leukapheresis   will 
continue   for up to 5 days until the target  yield is reached.  
 
Part 3: High  dose  chemoradiotherapy   and ASCT  
Patients will be eligible  to receive IFRT if clinically indicated  beginning 2 weeks prior to 
initiation of high dose chemotherapy. 
 
High dose cytoreduction  will be with CBV -N chemotherapy.  
 
Day 0 is the day of stem cell reinfusion;  CBV-N will be administered  as follows: 
 
• Mitoxantrone  (45 mg/m2)  IVPB x 1 on day – 8 
• Carmustine   (300 mg/m2)   IVPB  x 1 on day – 4 
• Cyclophosphamide   (1500  mg/m2)   IVPB  daily x 4 days on day – 7, - 6, - 5, - 4 
• Etoposide  (250 mg/m2)   IVPB  daily x 4 days on day – 7, - 6, - 5, - 4 
 
PBPC will be infused  approximately  24-48 hours after completion of chemotherapy  (day 
0). 
 
Post Stem  Cell Rescue  Rituximab  Maintenance  
No later than Day +35 post ASCT  patients  will receive  rituximab   bimonthly  for 6 doses.  
 
 
Radiation  Therapy  
Radiation  therapy  is not permitted  for patient  treated  on this study  other  than as stipulated  
above in Consolidation  C and for scrotal radiation in patients with testicular  lymphoma. 
Intrathecal  Prophylaxis  
Patients  willl      receive  6 doses  of intrathecal  methotrexate   or cytarabine  during  the course  of 
induction and consolidation therapy in the following circumstances: 
Testicular   involvement  
Paranasal  sinus or nasopharynx   involvement  
Bone marrow involvement  by large celll      lymphoma 
Patients  with aaIPI  HR disease  
Patients  with more  than 2 extra -nodal  sites of disease  
 
Antimicrobial   Prophylaxis  
Antimicrobial  prophylaxis  for Augmented  RICEx2  is the  same   as  specified   in 
Consolidation  B. Antimicrobial  prophylaxis  for transplant  phase:  On admissio  n: 
Ciprofloxacin  500 mg PO b.i.d.  (continue  until the patient  requires  broad  spectrum  
antibiotics for neutropenic fever) Fluconazole 100 mg PO or IV b.i.d. (continue until the 
ANC  is > 1000/mm3  X 3 days or until amphotericin  B therapy  is initiated).  Nystatin  
powder  applied  to the groin  and the axilla BID Vitamin  K 10 mg PO or sc. one to three  
times  per week  unless  added  to TPN.  Day +5 : G-CSF 480 ug sc. QD ( continue   until ANC  
> 1000/mm3  x 3 days.)  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 12 -  
  
 
 
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC   AGENTS  
 
Doxorubicin  
Mechanism  of action:  is an anthracycline   antibiotic   derived  as a fermentation  product  of 
Streptomyces  peucetius   (caesius).   The drug is tightly   bound  to DNA,  preventing   DNA - 
directed  DNA  and RNA  synthesis.   The drug may also act via a free radical  mechanism.   It 
appears  to be active  in all phases  of the cell cycle.  
Formulatio  n:  The drug is supplied  reconstituted   in 10, 50 and 200 mg vials. 
Storage: Reconstituted  solutions  are stable at room temperature  for 24 hours and under 
refrigeration  for 48 hours.  
Administratio n: The drug is administered  via a freely-flowing intravenous  line over 15 
minutes.   Care must be taken to avoid extravasation. 
Toxicity:   include  nausea, vomiting,  itching,  hives or red rash at the injection site. Urine 
can be pink or red in color  for as long as 48 hours  after the treatment.   Alopecia,  
stomatitis,   and reversible   myelosuppression  can occur.  
Extravasation may occur if leakage around the intravenous  site occurs. 
Cardiomyopathy  has been reported  with this compound,   usually   in patients  who have 
received  total doses  in excess  of 500 mg/m2.  
 
Cyclophosphamide  
Mechanism  of action : a nitrogen  mustard  derivative,   is converted  to polyfunctional  
alkylating  metabolites   by hepatic  microsomal   enzymes.    It interferes   with DNA  
replication and RNA transcription,  and possesses potent immunosuppressive  activity. 
Formulatio  n:  The drug is supplied  as a lyophilized   powder  in 100 mg, 200 mg, 500 mg, l 
g, and 2 g vials. 
Preparation/Stora  ge :  It is reconstituted   to result  in a concentration  of 20 mg/mL.    It is 
stable  for 24 hours  at room  temperature  or for 6 days refrigerated   (2°-8° C). 
Toxicity:   include   nausea,  vomiting,   anorexia,  edema,  cardiomyopathy,   skin rash, 
alopecia,  reversible   myelosuppression,   hemolytic   anemia,  possible   sterility,   hemorrhagic  
cystitis,   and syndrome   of inappropriate   antidiuretic   hormone  production.  
 
Vincristine  
Mechanism  of action:  is a member  of the vinca  alkaloid   class of natural  product  anti- 
tumor  agents.  It exerts  its antineoplastic   effects  by binding  to tubulin,   resulting  in 
inhibition of microtubule  assembly.  This, in turn, blocks formation of the mitotic  spindle 
resulting  in the accumulation  of cells in mitosis.  
Formulatio  n:  The drug is supplied  reconstituted   to a concentration  of 1 mg/ Ml 
Preparation/Stora ge :  The drug is administered  via a freely-flowing intravenous  line over 
1-2 minutes,  with care taken to avoid extravasation. 
Toxicity:  include  peripheral neuropathy,  constipation,  alopecia, metallic  taste in the 
mouth,  mild nausea,  paraesthesia  and paresis.   Extravasation  may result  in soft tissue  
necrosis.  
 
Rituximab  (Rituxan®,  C2B8)  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 13 -  
  
 
Mechanism  of action:  Rituximab   binds  to the CD20  antigen  expressed  on B-cells and 
causes  cell death  by complement   mediated  lysis  and ADCC.  
Formulatio  n:  Rituximab   is a genetically  engineered,   chimeric,   murine/human  monoclonal  
antibody  directed against the CD20 antigen found on the surface of normal and malignant 
pre-B and mature  B cells.  The antibody  is an IgG 1  κ immunoglobulin   containing  murine  
light-and  heavy-chain variable  region sequences and human constant region sequences. 
Rituximab   is composed  of two heavy  chains  of 451 amino  acids  and two light  chains  of 
213 amino  acids  (based  on cDNA  analysis)   and has an approximate   molecular   mass  of 
145 kD.  Rituximab   has a binding  affinity  for the CD20  antigen  of ~8.0 nM.  Rituximab  
is supplied  as 100 mg and 500 mg sterile,  preservative -free,  single -use  vials. 
Preparation:  DO NOT  ADMINISTER  AS AN INTRAVENOUS  PUSH  OR BOLUS.   Do 
not infuse  rituximab  concomitantly with another IV solution or other IV medications. 
The appropriate dose is withdrawn and diluted  to a final concentration of 1-4 mg/ml in 
either 0.9%  sodium chloride  or 5% dextrose solution.  The solution is then stable at 2° to 
8°C for 24 hours  and at room  temperature  for an additional  12 hours.  
Storage:  Vials  can be stored  at 2o to 8oC. They  should   be protected  from sunlight.  
Administratio n: The first infusion should be administered  at an initial rate of 50 mg/hr.   If 
hypersensitivity  or infusion -related   events  do not occur,  the rate may be increased  by 50 
mg/hr every 30 minutes  up to a maximum of 400 mg/hr.  Subsequent infusions  may be 
started at 100 mg/hr and the rate increased by 100 mg/hr at every 30 minutes  to a 
maximum   of 400 mg/hr,   as tolerated.  Patients  will be premedicated  with acetaminophen  
650-mg po, diphenhydramine   50 mg IV, and lorazepam  0.5 mg IV 30 minutes   prior to 
beginning the rituximab  infusion.  For severe reactions, the infusion will be stopped and 
can be resumed  at 50% of the prior rate once the reactions  are treated  and symptoms  
resolved.  
Toxicity:   common:  Fever,  chills,   fatigue,   headache;  less common:  nausea,  vomiting,  
rhinitis,   pruritus,   hypotension;   rare: neutropenia,   thrombocytopenia,   asthenia,   arthritis,  
vasculitis,   lupus -like  syndrome,   pleuritis,   bronchiolitis   obliterans,   uveitis,   optic neuritis,  
and skin reactions  such as toxic epidermal  necrolysis   and pemphigus.  
 
Fatal Infusion Reactions: Severe and fatal cardiopulmonary events, including 
angioedema,   hypoxia,   pulmonary  infiltrates,   acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome,  
myocardial infarction,  and cardiogenic  shock, have been reported.  These severe reactions 
typically occurred during the first infusion with time to onset of 30-120 minutes. 
 
Cardiac Events:  Patients with preexisting cardiac conditions,  including arrhythmia  and 
angina,  have had recurrences of these cardiac events during rituximab  infusions. 
 
Tumor  Lysis  Syndrome:   Tumor  lysis syndrome  has been reported  and is characterized  
in patients with a high number of circulating malignant  cellls (≥25,000 ul) by rapid 
reduction  in tumor  volume,   renal insufficiency,   hyperkalemia,   hypocalcemia,  
hyperuricemia,   and hyperphosphatemia.  
 
Renal Events:  Rituximab  has been associated with severe renal toxicity including acute 
renal failure   requiring  dialysis,   and in some  cases  has lead to death.   Renal  toxicity  has 
occurred in patients with high numbers of circulating malignant  cellls (≥25,000 /mm2  ) or 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 14 -  
  
 
high tumor  burden  who experience  tumor  lysis  syndrome  and in patients  administered  
concomitant   cisplatin.  
 
Mucocutaneous Reactions: Severe bullous  skin reactions, including fatal cases of toxic 
epidermal  necrolysis   and paraneoplastic   pemphigus,   have been reported  in patients  
treated  with rituximab.    The onset  of reaction  has varied  from 1 to 13 weeks  following  
rituximab   exposure.  
 
Hematologic Events: In clinical trials, Grade 3 and 4 cytopenias were reported in 48% of 
patients treated with RITUXIMAB;  these include: lymphopenia  (40%), neutropenia 
(6%),  leukopenia   (4%),  anemia  (3%),  and thrombocytopenia   (2%).   The median  duration  
of lymphopenia   was 14 days (range,  1 to 588 days)  and of neutropenia   was 13 days 
(range,  2 to 116 days).   A single   occurrence  of transient   aplastic  anemia   (pure  red cell 
aplasia)  and two occurrences  of hemolytic   anemia  following   RITUXIMAB   therapy  were 
reported.  
In addition,   there have been a limited   number  of post-marketing   reports  of 
prolonged  pancytopenia,   marrow  hypoplasia,   and late onset  neutropenia   (defined  as 
occurring 40 days after the last dose of RITUXIMAB)  in patients with hematologic 
malignancies.    In reported  cases  of late onset  neutropenia   (NCI -CTC  Grade  3 and 4), the 
median  duration  of neutropenia   was 10 days (range  3 to 148 days).   Documented  
resolution of the neutropenia  was described in approximately one-half of the reported 
cases;  of those  with documented  recovery,  approximately   half received  growth  factor  
support.  In the remaining cases, information on resolution was not provided.  More than 
half of the reported  cases  of delayed  onset  neutropenia   occurred  in patients  who had 
undergone   prior autologous   bone marrow  transplantation.    In an adequately  designed,  
controlled,  clinical trial, the reported incidence  of NCI-CTC, Grade 3 and 4 neutropenia 
was higher  in patients receiving RITUXIMAB in combination with fludarabine  as 
compared to those receiving fludarabine  alone (76% [39/51] vs. 39% [21/53]). 
 
Infectious Events: Rituxan induced B-cell depletion in 70% to 80%  of patients with 
NHL  and was associated  with decreased  serum  immunoglobulins   in a minority  of 
patients; the lymphopenia  lasted a median of 14 days (range, 1-588 days).  Infectious 
events occurred in 31% of patients: 19% of patients had bacterial infections,  10% had 
viral infections,  1% had fungal infections,  and 6% were unknown infections.   Serious 
infectious  events (Grade 3 or 4), includ ing sepsis, occurred in 2% of patients. 
 
Other Serious Viral Infections:  The following additional serious viral infections,  either 
new, reactivated or exacerbated, have been identified  in clinical studies or postmarketing 
reports. The majority of patients  received Rituxan in combination with chemotherapy or 
as part of a hematopoietic  stem cell transplant.  These viral infections  included  JC virus 
(progressive  multifocal  leukoencephalopathy [PML]), cytomegalovirus,  herpes simplex 
virus,  parvovirus   B19,  varicella   zoster  virus,   West  Nile virus,  and hepatitis   C. In some  
cases, the viral infections  occurred up to one year following discontinuation of Rituxan 
and have resulted  in death.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 15 -  
  
 
Hepatitis  B virus (HBV) reactivation with fulminant  hepatitis,  hepatic failure,  and death 
has been reported in some patients with hematologic  malignancies  treated with rituximab. 
The majority  of patients  received  rituximab   in combination  with chemotherapy.    The 
median time to the diagnosis  of hepatitis  was approximately 4 months after the initiation 
of rituximab   and approximately  one month  after the last dose.  
 
PML is a rare demyelinating disease of the brain caused by infection with the JC virus 
that usually leads to death or severe disability. JC virus infection resulting in PML and 
death  has been reported  rarely  in patients  with hematologic   malignancies   receiving  
rituximab.   The majority  of these  patients  had received  rituximab   in combination  with 
chemotherapy  or as part of a hematopoietic   stem cell transplant.  Cases  of PML  resulting  
in death  have also been reported  in patients  with systemic   lupus  erythematosus   (SLE)  
treated  with rituximab.    These  patients  with SLE had longstanding  disease,  history  of 
prior immunosuppressant   therapy,  and were diagnosed  with PML  within  12 months   of 
their last infusion of rituximab. 
Physicians  should consider PML in any patient presenting with new onset neurologic 
manifestations.   Consultation  with a neurologist,   brain  MRI,  and lumbar  puncture  should  
be considered as clinically indicated.   In patients who develop PML, rituximab  should be 
discontinued   and reductions   or discontinuation  of any concomitant   chemotherapy  or 
immunosuppressive   therapy  should  be considered.  
 
Bowel Obstruction   and Perforation:    Abdominal  pain, bowel  obstruction  and 
perforation,  in some cases leading to death, were observed in patients receiving Rituxan 
in combination  with chemotherapy  for DLBCL.  In post-marketing  reports,  which  include  
both patients  with low-grade  or follicular   NHL  and DLBCL,  the mean  time to onset  of 
symptoms   was 6 days (range  1−77) in patients  with documented  gastro -intestinal  
perforation.   Complaints   of abdominal  pain, especially  early in the course  of treatment,  
should prompt a thorough diagnostic  evaluation and appropriate treatment. 
 
Additional   Safety Signals:   The following  serious  adverse  events  have been  reported  to 
occur in patients following completion of rituximab  infusions:  arthritis,  disorders of 
blood  vessels  (vasculitis,   serum  sickness  and lupus -like  syndrome),   eye disorders  (uveitis  
and optic neuritis),  lung disorders including pleuritis  and scarring of the lung 
(bronchiolitis   obliterans),   that may result  in fatal outcomes,  and fatal cardiac  failure.  
 
Supplier : Genentech,  Inc., IDEC  Pharmaceuticals   Corp.  
 
Ifosfamide  (Ifex®)  
Mechanism  of action : Ifosfamide   is activated  in the liver  by microsomal  enzymes   and the 
subsequent ifosfamide  mustard causes direct alkylation of DNA. 
Formulatio n:  Ifosfamide  is supplied in single  dose vials for constitution and 
administration by IV infusion.   Each contains 1 gram or 3 grams of sterile ifosfamide. 
Preparation : Injections   are prepared  by adding  sterile   water  to the vial.  The 1-gram  dose 
is mixed  with 20 mL and the 3-gram  dose with 60 mL for a final concentration  of 50 
mg/mL.  
Storage : The dry powder  may be stored  at room  temperature.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 16 -  
  
 
Toxicity :  Alopecia,  nausea  and vomiting,   hematuria,   gross  hematuria,   CNS  toxicity,  
infection,  renal dysfunction,  allergic  reactions and at high doses, cardiotoxicity. 
Supplier : Bristol -Myers   Squibb  
 
Carboplatin   (Paraplatin®)  
Mechanis  m of action : Carboplatin  binds  to DNA  and causes  cross -linking  with a non-cell 
cycle dependent tumor cell lysis.   It inhibits  DNA synthesis  by altering the template  via 
the formation of intrastrand  cross-links. 
Formulatio n:  Paraplatin®  is supplied  as a sterile lyophilized  powder available  in single- 
dose vial containing  50 mg, 150 mg, and 450 mg of carboplatin  for administration  by IV 
infusion.   Each vial contains  equal parts of carboplatin and mannitol. 
Preparation : Immediately  before  use the content  of each vial must be reconstituted   with 
sterile solution: 50 mg strength with 5 mL, 150 mg with 15 mL and 450 mg with 45 mL. 
These solutions  produce a concentration of 10 mg/mL.  The solution is stable for 8 hours 
at room  temperature.  
Storage : Unopened  vials are stable  for the life  indicated  on the insert  if protected  from 
light. 
Toxicity :  Myelosuppression,   nausea,  vomiting,   peripheral  neuropathy,   ototoxicity,  
hepatic  toxicity,   electrolyte   abnormalities,   hypomagnesemia,   hypocalcemia,   and allergic  
reactions.  
Supplier : Bristol -Myers   Squibb  
 
VP-16 (etoposide,  Vepesid®)  
Mechanism of action: Induction of an irreversible  blockade of cells in the premitotic 
phases  of the cell cycle  leading  to accumulation  of cells in late S or G2 phases.  This 
mechanism   is secondary  to interference   of the scissors -reunion  reaction  of the enzyme  
topoisomerase  II. 
Formulatio n:  VP-16 injection is available  in 100-mg (5-mL) sterile multiple-dose vials. 
The pH is 3-4. Each  mL contains  20-mg etoposide,  2-mg citric acid, 30-mg benzyl  
alcohol,  80-mg polysorbate  80, 650-mg polyethylene   glycol  300 and 30.5%  alcohol.  
Preparation:  The computed  dose is diluted   in 500 mL of normal  saline  and given  by 
intravenous  infusion over 1 hour. 
 
Storage:  Unopened  vials of VP-16 are stable  for 24 months  at room  temperature.   Vials  
are diluted  as recommended   to a concentration  of 0.2 or  0.4 mg/mL   and are stable  for 96 
and 48 hours  respectively,   at room  temperature   under  normal  light  in both plastic  and 
glass containers.  
Toxicity:   Leukopenia,  thrombocytopenia,   alopecia,  nausea,  vomiting,   headache,  fever,  
hypotension,  anorexia, and allergic  reactions. 
Supplier : Bristol -Myers   Squibb  
 
Mesna  (Mesnex®)  
Mechanism of action: Mesna was developed as a prophylactic  agent to inhibit 
hemorrhagic  cystitis  induced by ifosfamide  and is analogous  to the cysteine-cystine 
system;  mesna  is rapidly  metabolized   to mesna  disulfide   and acts as a free radical  
scavenger.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 17 -  
  
 
Formulatio  n:  Mesna  is a sterile  preservative   free aqueous  solution  of clear,  colorless  
appearance  in clear glass vials for IV administration.    Mesna  injection  contains  100 
mg/ml Mesna, 0.25 mg/ml acetate disodium,  and sodium hydroxide to maintain pH 6.5- 
8.5. 
Preparation: For IV administration the drug is diluted  in sterile solution to make a final 
concentration  of 20 mg/ml.  
Storage: Diluted  solutions  are chemically and physically stable for 24 hours at room 
temperature.  It is recommended   that solutions   be refrigerated   and used within  6 hours.  
Toxicity:   Nausea,  vomiting,   diarrhea  
Supplier : Bristol -Myers   Squibb  
 
Neupogen®  (Filgrastim,   G-CSF)  
Mechanism  of action : NEUPOGEN®  is a human  protein,  which  is involved   in the 
promotion of the growth and maturation of granulocytic  progenitors  and the stimulation 
of functional  activity.  
Formulatio n:  Available  as a recombinant  DNA product supplied as 1 or 2 ml vials 
containing clear colorless sterile protein solution. 
Storage : It can be stored  at 2-6°C and is stable  for at least 30 months.  
Toxicity:   Bone  pain, exacerbation  of preexisting  autoimmune   disorders,  transient   and 
reversible   changes  in alkaline   phosphatase,  uric acid and LDH.  
Supplier : Amgen,  Inc. 
 
Neulasta® (Pegfilgrastim,  G-CSF)  
Mechanism  of action : NEULASTA®  is a human  protein,  which  is involved   in the 
promotion of the growth and maturation of granulocytic  progenitors  and the stimulation 
of functional  activity.   It is a covalent  conjugate  of recombinant   methionyl   human  G-CSF 
(Filgrastim)   and monomethoxypolyethylene   glycol  
Formulatio n:  Available  as a pegalated recombinant  DNA product supplied as .6mL 
prefilled  syringe  containing clear colorless sterile protein solution. 
Storage : It can be stored  at 2-8°C and is stable  for at least 30 months.  
Toxicity:   Bone  pain, exacerbation  of preexisting  autoimmune   disorders,  transient   and 
reversible   changes  in alkaline   phosphatase,  uric acid and LDH,  nausea,  fatigue,   alopecia,  
diarrhea,  vomiting,   constipation,   fever,  anorexia,  skeletal  pain, headache,  taste 
perversion,   dyspepsia,  myalgia,   insomnia,   abdominal  pain, arthralgia,   generalized  
weakness,  peripheral  edema,  dizziness,   granulocytopenia,   stomatitis,   mucositis,   and 
neutropenic   fever  
Supplier : Amgen,  Inc. 
 
18F Fluorothymidine  
Please  see section  3.5 Background  and Rationale.  
FLT will be synthesized   by the MSKCC  cyclotron  facility.    FLT has been  synthesized   by 
the MSKCC  cyclotron  facility  for about  2 years  and has been used in patients  with gastric  
cancer  at MSKCC,  and in patients  with a variety  of diseases  (e.g.,  lung, esophageal  and 
colorectal cancer) in several institutions  in this country and Europe.  No side effects have 
been  reported  from any of the institutions.    The primary  source  of the FLT will be the 
MSKCC  cyclotron   facility;   however,  alternative   commercial   sources  are available   to ensure  
consistent   supply   of FLT.  If a commercial   supplier   of FLT is used for a particular   study,  the 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 18 -  
  
 
supplier  will  be required  to meet all of the acceptance criteria outlined  in the FDA-approved 
MSKCC  FLT IND (#104742)   prior to administration.    Here at MSKCC,  we have 
extensively  tested  the FLT for toxicity  and pyrogenicity,   and the product  has met all 
requirements.   The radiochemical  purity  is > 95%. For  each scan,  we will inject  8mCi  of 
FLT. By doing so, the effective  dose equivalent  from these 2 scans will be 3.87 rem. 
Although FLT will be administered  as part of an FDA-approved IND application,  based 
on published   dosimetry  data, the dose from FLT is indeed  within  the (more  conservative)  
dose restrictions  set forth for radiopharmaceutical  studies done under the aegis of the 
radioactive   drug research  committee   (see Appendix  table 1). 
 
 
6.1 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
6.2 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
 
• Histologic  diagnosis  of diffuse  large B cell lymphoma,  PMLBL, or follicular 
lymphoma  grade 3B confirmed  by the department of hematopathology at MSKCC. 
Patients  with discordant  bone marrow  involvement   (i.e. involvement   by small  
cleaved cells or small lymphocytic  lymphoma)  are eligible 
• Tumors  express  CD20  as determined   by immunohistochemistry.  
o Ki-67 evaluation  of tumor  tissue  
• Patients  must have stage  III, or IV disease.   Patients  with IIX disease  must have at 
least one other  age-adjusted  IPI risk factor.  
o KPS ≤ 70 
o LDH  > upper  limit  of normal  
• All patients  must have FDG -PET avid (minimum   SUV  2.5) measurable   disease.  
• Patients must have normal baseline  cardiac function based upon echocardiogram or 
gated  blood  pool scan (MUGA)  with an ejection  fraction   ≥ 50% 
• Patients  must have a serum  creatinine   of ≤ 1.5 mg/dl;  if creatinine   >1.5 mg/dl  
creatinine   clearance  must be >60 ml/minute.  
• Patients  must have ANC>1000/mcl  and Platelets>50,000/mcl.   If patient  has 
cytopenias due to bone marrow involvement,  these requirements  are not applicable. 
• Patients must have a bilirubin level of < 2.0 mg/dl in the absence of a history of 
Gilbert's  disease  (or pattern  consistent   with Gilbert’s).  
• Patients  must be Hepatitis   B surface  antigen  negative,   Hepatitis   B core antibody  
negative,   and Hepatitis   C negative.  
• All patients  of childbearing  and child -creating  age must be using  an acceptable  
form of birth control from the initiation of treatment on study until 1 year after 
completion of chemotherapy and/or transplant. 
• Women  who are pre-menopausal  must have a negative   pregnancy  test 
• Age between  18 and 65 
• Patients  must be HIV negative.   This test may be pending  in a patient  without   risk 
factors, as determined  by the patient’s  physician. 
• If patients have a history of malignancy other than cutaneous basal cell or squamous 
cell carcinoma,  they must be disease-free for ≥ 5 years at the time of enrollment. 
• Patients  or their guardians   must be capable  of providing  informed   consent.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 19 -  
  
 
• Patients  must be suitable   to undergo  stem cell transplant  
 
6.3 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
 
• Any lymphoma  subtype other than DLBCL, PMLBL, follicular  lymphoma  grade 
3B. 
• Patients  with either  parenchymal  brain  or lepto -meningeal   involvement.  
• No more  than 14 days of prednisone  therapy  between  the diagnostic   biopsy  of either  
DLBCL, PMLBL, or follicular  lymphoma  grade 3B and the initiation of treatment 
on study.  
• Known  pregnancy  or breast -feeding.  
• Medical illness  unrelated  to NHL which in the opinion of the attending physician 
and principal  investigator   will preclude  administration  of chemotherapy  safely.  
This includes  patients with uncontrolled  infection,  chronic renal insufficiency, 
myocardial infarction within the past 6 months,  unstable angina,  cardiac 
arrhythmias   other  than chronic  atrial  fibrillation  and chronic   active  or persistent  
hepatitis,   or New  York  Heart  Associatio  n Classification  III or IV heart disease.  
• History  of any malignancy  for which  the disease -free interval  is <5 years,  excluding  
curatively  treated  cutaneous  basal  cell or squamous  cell carcinoma   and carcinoma  
in-situ of the cervix.  
 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
 
Patients seen in the inpatient  or outpatient  setting who meet eligibility criteria will be 
recruited to this study.  A Lymphoma  disease management  team physician will evaluate 
all patients.  Participation is voluntary.  The patient will be made aware of their diagnosis, 
current  nature  of this treatment  program.   All patients  will be required  to sign a statement  
of informed   consent  that conforms  to FDA  and IRB/PB  guidelines.  
8.1 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  
All patients  will have the following  baseline   studies:  
Within 2 weeks prior to treatment initia tio n 
• Complete  history  and physical  
• CBC  with differential  
• Electrolytes  (Na, K, Cl, CO2), BUN, Cr, bilirubin,  total protein, albumin,  alkaline 
phosphatase,  uric acid, phosphorus,  AST,  ALT,  LDH,  urinalysis,   and pregnancy  
test in pre-menopausal  women  
• EKG  
 
Within 4 weeks prior to treatment initia tio n: 
• Documentation  of ejection  fraction  by echocardiogram   or MUGA  scan 
• Documentation  of HIV seronegativity  at MSKCC  
• Hepatitis   B surface  antigen  & core antibody,  Hepatitis   C antibody  
• CT scans  of the chest,  abdomen,  and pelvis   (with  volumetric   analysis   when  
possible)  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 20 -  
  
 
• FDG -PET/CT  scan 
• Bilateral  Bone  marrow  biopsy  
o Note:  Bilateral  bone marrow  biopsy  not required  if unilateral  bone  
marrow biopsy within 4 weeks prior to treatment  initiation shows 
involvement  by lymphoma 
• Creatinine   clearance  if serum  Cr>1.5  mg/dl  
• FLT PET/CT  (only  the first 60 patients   will receive  the FLT-PET scan):  
o FLT PET/CT  can be waived  for the following  patients:  
▪ Patients who have aggressive  disease that requires immediate 
treatment;   these  patients  may enroll  on the protocol  without   an 
FLT PET scan.  
▪ Patients  with other  extenuating  circumstances,   as determined  
by the principle   investigators   of the study.  
▪ Patients  who enroll  on study  after 60 patients  have already  
been imaged  with an FLT-PET scan 
 
o Patients  should  be fasted  for 6 hours,  but liberal  intake  of water  is allowed  
o Two Intravenous  lines will be established:   one line for FLT administration 
(Mediport  or forearm)  and the other  line for obtaining  one blood  sample  
(forearm).  
o An area of interest  will be determined   based  on prior CT scan and/or  FDG  
PET,  for instance,   the largest  nodal  mass  identified   on CT and/or  lesion  with 
them  most intense  FDG  uptake  
o Patient  will be placed  in the FDG -PET/CT  scanner.   A low dose scout  view 
and CT of the selected  body  region  (1 field  of view = 15 cm) will be obtained.  
o Approximately  8mCi  (296 MBq)  FLT will be injected  intravenously  and 
dynamic   images  will be acquired  for up to 40 min over this lesion.  During  that 
time the patient  will rest comfortably  in the PET scanner.  
o Following dynamic  image acquisition,  the patient will be removed from the 
scanner  and will have an opportunity  to stretch,  use the rest room  etc. 
o Then  a PET/CT  scan of the body,  extending  from skull base to approximately  
the upper  thighs,   will be obtained.   Again,  during  this scan the patient  will rest 
comfortably  on the scanner  bed, but this time the table will move   
consecutively  through  the scanner.  One three (3) ml blood  sample  will be 
obtained  for metabolite   analysis   at the end of the scan.  
o The IV lines will be removed  at the end of the study  
o The radiopharmacy will keep a log of all activities  administered  under this 
protocol.  
 
FLT PET is considered  investigational,   and thus these  scans  will be performed  under  an 
FDA-approved Investigational New Drug (IND) application.   The results of the FLT 
scans  will have no impact  on patient  management.  
 
Prior to ICE administratio  n: 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 21 -  
  
 
 
• Tissue blocks or 10 unstained  slides, if original biopsy done at outside 
institutions,  to further characterize  the underlying lymphoma 
• Ki-67 staining  of tumor  
 
9.0 TREATMENT  INTERVENTION/PLAN  
 
All induction   and consolidation  treatment  visits  have  a +/- 3 day window  (excluding  
the interim  restaging  scans).  
 
Antimicrobial  Prophylaxis: Throughout  induction  and all consolidation  chemotherapy 
(excluding  transplant),   the following  antimicrobial  prophylaxis   will be given:  
Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole   160/800 (DS) oral twice  daily TIW (patients  with 
known allergy to Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole  can receive alternative  pneumocystis 
carinii prophylaxis),  Acyclovir  400 mg oral bid, and Fluconazole  100 mg oral qd.  For 
prophylaxis   during  Consolidation  C transplant,   see below.  
 
INDUCTION:  RR-CHOP -14 Chemotherapy  for Three  Cycles  
Each  cycle  lasts approximately  14 days.  
A total of 3 cycles  of RR-CHOP -14 will be given.   One cycle  of CHOP  will follow.  
 
There  are no dose reductions  of the Rituximab,  cyclophosphamide,  or doxorubicin.  If 
patients  develop  grade  III/IV  neurotoxicity  from vincristine,  the dose can be reduced  at the 
discretion  of the primary  attending.  Treatment  is delayed  until the absolute   neutrophil  
count  is > 1000/ul  and the platelet  count  is > 50,000/ul.  
Cycle  s 1-3: RR-CHOP -14 
Day -2 or Day 2: 
Rituximab   375 mg/m2  IVPB  
 
Day 0:  
Rituximab   375mg/m2  IVPB  
Cyclophosphamide   1000 mg/m2  IVPB  
Doxorubicin   50mg/m2   IVP 
Vincristine   1.4 mg/m2   (no cap) IVP 
Prednisone  100mg  PO daily for five days 
Alternatively,   Prednisone   may be started  on Day 1 and continue   through  Day 5. 
 
Growth  factor  support:  
G-CSF SQ Days  6-10 at either  300ug  or 480 ug /day OR Pegfilgrastim   6mg once 24-48 
hrs post completion of intravenous  chemotherapy. 
 
Day 0 of next cycle  is day 14 as long as ANC  ≥ 1000 and platelets  ≥50 k (this requireme  nt 
is not applicable  for patients  with bone marrow  involvement)  ; RCHOP  in cycle  3 and 
CHOP  in cycle  4 should  be two weeks  apart  also. 
 
Cycle  4: CHOP,  no rituximab   will be administe  re d 
This cycle  will last 21 days 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 22 -  
  
 
 
 
Day 0:  
Cyclophosphamide   1000 mg/m2  IVPB  
Doxorubicin   50mg/m2   IVP 
Vincristine   1.4 mg/m2   (no cap) IVP 
Prednisone  100mg  PO daily for five days.  
Alternatively,   Prednisone   may be started  on Day 1 and continue   through  Day 5. 
 
Growth  factor  support:  
G-C SF SQ Days  6-10 at either  300ug  or 480 ug/day  OR Pegfilgrastim  6mg once 24-48 hrs 
post completion of intravenous  chemotherapy. 
 
Inte rim re staging  CT (with  volume  tric analysis)  and FDG -PET  scanning  will be done  
on days 17-20 of cycle  4 of induction   che mothe  rapy.  
 
CONSOLIDATION  
Risk-Adapted  based  on Biopsy  and Pre-treatment  Ki-67. If the interim  FDG -PET scan is 
positive  in a site of measurable  disease  and correlates  to disease  shown  on the CT scan,  the 
patient  will undergo  a repeat  biopsy.  If the biopsy  is negative,  the patient  will receive  
consolidation  A or B depending  upon  pre-treatment  Ki-67 expression;  if positive  the 
patient will receive consolidation C. Patients  whose bone marrow was initially  positive 
and remains   positive  post-induction  will receive  consolidation   C. 
 
Consolidation  A: Patients  whose  disease  is FDG -PET negative  (any residual  lesion  
seen  on companion  CT with FDG  uptake  < blood  pool activity  in large  vessels  in the 
same  field of view  ) or patients  whose  FDG -PET scan  is positive  but repeat  biopsy  is 
negative  and whose  initial  Ki-67 expression  is < 80%  will receive  3 cycles  of standard  
dose ICE Chemotherapy.  
 
Each  cycle  of ICE lasts 14 days.  Patients  must have a platelet  count  of 50,000/ul  and an 
ANC  of at least 1000/ul  to proceed  to subsequent  cycles  of ICE. For delays  of greater  than 
2 weeks,  the PI must be notified  and it the delay  must be reported  the IRB/PB.  Creatinine  
clearance is estimated from 12 hour urine collections  obtained on admission. 
 
Days  1-3: 
Etoposide  100 mg/ m2  IVPB  Days  1, 2, 3 
Carboplatin  AUC  5 (maximum   dose 800 mg [equivalent   to CrCl  of 135 ml/min)   IVPB  
AUC  dosing  is calculated   by the Calvert  Formula:  
AUC  5 = 5 x  (CrCl+25)  
 
Day 2:  
Ifosfamide   5 g/m2  admixed  with MESNA  5 g/m2  IVCI  over 24 hours  beginning   on Day 2. 
 
Growth  factor  support:  
Pegfilgrastim 6mg 24-48 hours post completion of chemotherapy or G-CSF SQ Days 5-12 
at either  300ug  or 480 ug/day . 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 23 -  
  
 
 
 
Consolidation  B: Patients  whose  disease  is FDG -PET negative  or patients  whose  
FDG -PET scan  is positive  but repeat  biopsy  is negative  and whose  initial  Ki-67 
expression is ≥80%  will receive  2 cycles  of augmented  RICE Chemotherapy  (as per 
MSKCC  protocol  03-075).  
 
Days  1 and 3: 
Rituximab   375 mg/m2  IVPB  
 
Admit for RICEaug chemotherapy. Each cycle of RICEaug lasts 21 days. Patients must 
have a platelet  count  of 50,000/ul  and an ANC  of at least 1000/ul  to proceed  to subsequent  
cycles  of RICEaug.  For delays  of greater  than 2 weeks,  the PI must be notified  and it the 
delay  must be reported  the IRB/PB.  Creatinine  clearance  is estimated  from 12 hour urine  
collections  obtained on admission. 
 
Days  4-6: 
Etoposide  200 mg/m2   IVPB  q12 hours  x 3 
Ifosfamide   5 g/m2/day administered   with MESNA  5 g/m2/day mixed   IVCI  over 24 hours  
x 2 starting  on Day 4 (Total  dose of both Ifosfamide   and MESNA  is 10 gm/m2) 
Carboplatin  AUC  5 (maximum   dose 800 mg equivalent   to CrCl  of 135 ml/min)   IVPB  on 
Day 6 
AUC  dosing  is calculated   by the Calvert  Formula:  
AUC  5 = 5 x  (CrCl+25)  
 
Growth  factor  support:  
Pegfilgrastim 6mg 24-48 hours post completion of chemotherapy  or G-CSF SQ Days 5-12 
at either  300ug  or 480 ug/day . 
 
 
Consolidation  C: Patients  with biopsy  proven  disease  after  induction   therapy  
Patients  whose  bone  marrow  remain  positive  at interim  restaging  will have  the option  
of getting  an allogeneic  stem  cell transplant,   in lieu of an ASCT,   if they have  an 
acceptable  HLA  match   donor.    The allogeneic  stem  cell transplant   regimen  will be 
decided  by the MSK  Bone  Marrow  Transplant  Service.  
 
Part 1: RICEaug  Chemotherapy   for 2 cycles  (as above)  
However,  after Cycle  2 patients  will  receive  G-CSF at 10 ug/kg  instead  of pegfilgrast  im, 
continuing until the completion of leukapheresis. 
 
Part 2: Stem  Cell Collection  
The target   yield  for leukapheresis   will  be 5x106  CD34+  cells/kg.  Leukaphereses   will 
continue   for up to 5 days until the target  yield is reached.  
 
Part 3: High  dose  chemoradiotherapy   and ASCT  
Patients will be eligible  to receive IFRT if clinically indicated  beginning 2 weeks prior to 
initiation of high  dose chemotherapy. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 24 -  
  
 
 
 
High dose cytoreduction  will be with CBV -N chemotherapy.  
 
Day 0 is the day of stem cell reinfusion;  CBV-N will be administered  as follows: 
 
• Mitoxantrone  (45 mg/m2)  IVPB x 1 on day – 8 
• Carmustine   (300 mg/m2)   IVPB  x 1 on day – 4 
• Cyclophosphamide   (1500  mg/m2)   IVPB  daily x 4 days on day – 7, - 6, - 5, - 4 
• Etoposide  (250 mg/m2)   IVPB  daily x 4 days on day – 7, - 6, - 5, - 4 
 
PBPC will be infused  approximately 24-48 hours after completion of chemotherapy (day 
0). 
 
Post Stem  Cell Rescue  Rituximab  Maintenance  
No later than Day +35 post ASCT  patients  will receive  rituximab   bimonthly  for 6 doses.  
 
Radiation  Therapy  
Radiation  therapy  is not permitted  for patient  treated  on this study  other  than as stipulated  
above in Consolidation  C and for scrotal radiation in patients with testicular  lymphoma. 
Intrathecal  Prophylaxis  
Patients  willl      receive  6 doses  of intrathecal  methotrexate   or cytarabine  during  the course  of 
induction and consolidation therapy in the following circumstances: 
Testicular   involvement  
Paranasal  sinus or nasopharynx  involvement  
Bone marrow involvement  by large celll      lymphoma 
Patients  with aaIPI  HR disease  
Patients  with more  than 2 extra -nodal  sites of disease  
 
Antimicrobial   Prophylaxis  
Antimicrobial  prophylaxis  for Augmented  RICEx2  is the same   as  specified   in 
Consolidation  B. Antimicrobial  prophylaxis  for transplant  phase:  On admissio  n: 
Ciprofloxacin  500 mg PO b.i.d.  (continue  until the patient  requires  broad  spectrum  
antibiotics for neutropenic fever) Fluconazole 100 mg PO or IV b.i.d. (continue until the 
ANC  is > 1000/mm3  X 3 days or until amphotericin  B therapy  is initiated).  Nystatin  
powder  applied  to the groin  and the axilla BID Vitamin  K 10 mg PO or sc. one to three  
times  per week  unless  added  to TPN.  Day +5 : G-CSF 480 ug sc. QD ( continue   until ANC  
> 1000/mm3  x 3 days.)  
 
10.1 EVALUATION   DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  
 
10.2 Pre-Treatment  Evaluation  
 
Prior to treatment   as per institutional  guidelines,   patients  will have a repeat  
Echocardiogram   or MUGA  scan and PFT’s  (PFTs  for Consolidation  C only).  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 25 -  
  
 
10.3 Evaluation  During  Treatment  
 
• Physical  exam,  CBC  prior to each cycle  of therapy,  and assessment  of toxicity  
prior to each chemotherapy.  
 
• Interim restaging (including all previously positive  imaging studies and bone 
marrow examinations)  2-3 weeks after fourth cycle of induction;  patients with 
FDG -PET negative   disease  will receive  consolidation  A/B and those  with FDG  
PET avid disease  will undergo  repeat  biopsy.   A positive   FDG  PET scan is 
defined  as follows:   any uptake  equal  to or greater  than surrounding  background  
activity.    This is dependent  upon  the location  of the lesion;   therefore  the SUV  
value  itself cannot  be used as a criteria   for a positive   or negative   scan.  
 
• FLT PET 
One FLT PET/CT  scan will be obtained  prior to the start of cycle  2 (first 30 
patients  on study)  or prior to the start of cycle  3 (the next thirty  patients  to receive  
FLT PET scans);  the earliest  the scan can be obtained  is the day after prednisone  
completion  in that cycle.  If the FLT PET scan was waived at baseline, a follow- 
up FLT PET scan after cycle  1 or 2 is not required.  
The first 30 consecutive   patients  who enroll  to the study  will undergo  FLT PET 
scanning  at baseline   and prior to the start of cycle  2; an additional  30 patients  (not 
necessarily  consecutive)   will receive  FLT PET scans  at baseline   and prior to cycle  
3.  Scans  will be obtained  as described  above  under  8.0.  FLT imaging  is 
exploratory,   therefore  no therapeutic   decisions  will be based  on FLT scan findings  
in this trial.  Interim  analyses   of our first set of patient’s  shows  that dynamic  
images may have to be acquired for up to 60 minutes  in order to capture significant   
data points  for kinetic   analysis.   Therefore,  we will obtain  dynamic   images  over a 
selected  body  region/lesion  for up to 60 min, followed   by a scan of the torso  from 
skull base to upper  thigh.  One three (3) ml blood  sample  will be 
taken  at the end of the scan for metabolite   analysis.  
 
Funding  for FLT studies  was initially   intended  for 60 patients.    Now  that 60 
patients  have undergone   the FLT-PET scan at baseline   and either  after cycle  1 
(Cohort  1) or cycle  2 (Cohort  2), the FLT-PET scan will now be replaced  by an 
FDG -PET scan that will be done  after cycle  2 for the remaining  30 patients  to 
enroll  on study  (Cohort  3). The results  of this FDG -PET scan after cycle  2 will be 
for research  purposes  only and will have no impact  on patient  management.  
10.4 Post-Treatment  Evaluation  
Consolidation  A/B:  
4-6 weeks post completion of ICE-based chemotherapy,  CT scans (with volumetric 
analysis)   and FDG  PET scans  will be repeated.  Patients  will be seen on a three to four 
month  basis for the first two years  post-therapy.   Imaging   studies,  either  a CT or a FDG  
PET scan will be done at 5-7 month intervals  post-therapy for the first two years and then 
at the discretion of the attending physician thereafter. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 26 -  
  
 
Consolidation  C: 
Patients  will be seen every  one to three weeks  post transplant   until the restaging  
evaluation,  a CT scan (with volumetric  analysis)  and a FDG PET scan, at 90-120 d ays 
post-treatment.   Thereafter,   patients  will be seen on a one to three month  basis for the 
first two years  post-transplant.    Imaging  studies,  either  a CT or a FDG  PET scan will be 
done at 5-7 months after the initial imaging studies for the first two years and then at the 
discretion of the attending physician thereafter. 
 
11.1 TOXICITIES/SIDE   EFFECTS  
 
Toxicity  will be graded  according  to NCI toxicity  criteria   version  3.0.  The side effects  
and expected  toxicities   associated  with the various   agents  are listed  in section  5.0 and in 
the Investigator’s  Brochure; any toxicity that is not listed is considered unexpected.  In 
addition,  placement   of a leukapheresis   catheter  can be associated  with pneumothorax,  
deep venous thrombosis,  infection and bleeding. 
 
 
11.2 Collecting  and Reporting  
Non-he matologic  toxicitie  s : 
CHOP chemotherapy  has been standard of care for lymphoma  management  since 1975,  
and ICE chemotherapy is standard management  for relapsed aggressive  lymphoma  based 
upon  randomized   data and has been administered   to >1500 pts at MSKCC  since 1993,  
when we were the first institution to do a phase 2 clinical  trial with combination therapy. 
Therefore,   we will not be reporting  the data of expected  grade  I-II non-hematologic  
toxicities  to the IRB/PB .  The following  are the most common  non-hematologic  
toxicities   that have occurred  and are expected  in most patients:  
 
• Febrile  Neutropenia  
• Diarrhea  
• Peripheral  Neuropathy  
• Constipation  
• Fever  
• Nausea  
• Fatigue  
• Headache  
• Mucositis  
• Vomiting  
 
We will be recording  and reporting  unexpected  grade  I-II and all grade  III-V non- 
hematologic  toxicities  to the IRB/PB  as Serious  Adverse  Events .  Neutropenic   fever  is 
expected  and will not be reported  to the IRB/PB.   Any patient  who has neutropenic   sepsis  
and positive   blood  cultures   will be reported  to the IRB/PB . 
 
He matologic  toxicitie  s (Comple  te Blood  Count  Abnormalitie  s): 
All patients  on study  will have laboratory  data collected,  both in their medical  records  
and in MSK’s database, CRDB.  This includes  all grades I-V hematologic  toxicities.   All 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 27 -  
  
 
grade  I-III hematologic  toxicities  are expected  and will not be reported  to the 
IRB/PB.   The following  are the most common  expected  hematologic   toxicities   in most 
patients  who enroll  on study:  
 
• Low hemoglobin  
• Low lymphocytes  
• Low platelets  
• Low leukocytes  
• Low neutrophil/granulocyte   count  
Grade IV/V hematologic  toxicities  willl      be captured in the patient’s  medical record, as 
welll      as MSK’s database,  CRDB.   The only grade  IV hematologic  toxicity  that will be 
reported  to the IRB/PB  is thrombocytopenia   with evidence  of bleeding.   Grade  IV 
thrombocytopenia  without  evidence of bleeding and requiring  a blood transfusion 
will not be reported  to the IRB/PB.   All grade  V hematologic  toxicities  will be 
reported  to the IRB/PB.  
Ele ctrolyte  and Live r Function  Te st Abnormalitie  s (Compre  he nsive  M e tabolic  
Pane  l Abnorma  litie s) 
All electrolyte  and liver function test abnormalities  will be captured in CRDB. 
Grade  I-III abnormalities   in glucose,  albumin,   alkaline   phosphatase,   potassium,   sodium,  
magnesium,  phosphorus,  bilirubin,  and calcium are expected with this course of treatment 
and will not be reported  to the IRB/PB;  grade  IV/V  abnormalities   will be reported  to the 
IRB/PB.  Grade II-V liver  function test abnormalities  in AST and ALT and grade III-V 
abnormalities   in creatinine,   amylase,  and lipase  will be reported  to the IRB/PB.  
 
ALL  grade  V events  will be reported  to the IRB/PB  if a participant   is enrolled  and 
actively  participating   in the trial OR when  event  occurs  within  30 days of the last 
protocol  treatment  intervention.  
 
For detailed information regarding SAE reporting,  see section 17.2.  
 
11.3 Expected  Toxicities:  
 
The expected  side effects  and toxicities   associated  with the various  agents  are listed  
below,  in section  5.0 and in the Investigator’s   Brochure;  any toxicity  that is not listed  is 
considered  unexpected.  
 
Etoposide : Myelosuppression,   alopecia,  nausea,  vomiting,   headache,  fever,  hypotension,  
anorexia,  and alllergic  reactions.  
 
Doxorubicin : Nausea,  vomiting,   itching,   hives or red rash, alopecia,  stomatitis,   reversible  
myelosuppression,  extravasation,  and cardiomyopathy. 
 
Cyclophosphamide: Nausea, vomiting,  anorexia, edema, cardiomyopathy,  skin rash, 
alopecia,  reversible   myelosuppression,   hemolytic   anemia,  possible  sterility,   hemorrhagic  
cystitis,   and syndrome   of inappropriate   antidiuretic   hormone  production.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 28 -  
  
 
 
 
Vincristine:  peripheral neuropathy,  constipation,  alopecia, metallic  taste in the mouth, 
mild nausea,  paraesthesia  and paresis.   Extravasation  may result  in soft tissue  necrosis.  
 
Ifosfamide:  Alopecia, nausea and vomiting,  hematuria,  gross hematuria,  CNS toxicity, 
infection,  renal dysfunction,  allergic  reactions and at high doses, cardiotoxicity. 
 
 
Carboplatin : Myelosuppression,   nausea,  vomiting,   peripheral  neuropathy,   ototoxicity,  
hepatic  toxicity,   electrolyte   abnormalities,   hypomagnesemia,   hypocalcemia,   and allergic  
reactions.  
 
Neupogen : Bone  pain, exacerbation  of preexisting  autoimmune   disorders,  transient   and 
reversible   changes  in alkaline   phosphatase,  uric acid and LDH.  
 
 
Mesna : Nausea,  vomiting,   diarrhea.  
 
Rituximab: Fever, chilll   s,  nausea, asthenia,  hypotension,  angioedema,  respiratory distress, 
tumor  lysis  syndrome,  neutropenia.   A very rare side effect  is progressive   multifocal  
leukoencephalopathy  (PML);  it is almost  always  fatal. 
 
[18F]FLT:  
 
Placement  of a catheter for infusion of [18F] FLT and blood samples may cause pain, 
bruising,  infection and venous scarring.   Standard medical care will be used to minimize 
these  risks.  
 
When  FLT was given  to HIV patients  in higher   concentrations   liver failure   was seen,  but 
in this study  less than 1000 fold of FLT will be used.   (Flexner  et. al. 1994)  In many  
patients  where  FLT has been studied  in the U.S. and Europe,  none of this was 
documented.  
 
 
 
 
12.0 Criteria  for Therapeutic  Response/Outcome  Assessment 
 
Response Definition Nodal  Masses  Spleen,  Liver  Bone  Marrow  
 
CR  
Disappearance  of 
all evidence  of 
disease   
(a) FDG -avid or PET 
positive  prior  to therapy;  
mass  of any size permitted  
if FDG -PET negative  (b)  
Not palpable,  
nodules  
disappeared   
Infiltrate  cleared  on repeat  
biopsy;  if indeterminate  by 
morphology,  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 29 -  
  
 
 
  Variably  FDG -avid or PET 
negative;  regression  to 
normal  size on CT   immunoh istochemistry 
should  be negative  
PR Regression  of 
measurable  
disease  and no 
new sites 50% decrease  in SPD of 
up to 6 largest  dominant  
masses;  no increase  in size 
of other nodes  (a) FDG - 
avid or PET positive  prior  
to therapy;  one or more  
PET positive  at previously  
involved  site (b) Variably  
FDG -avid or PET negative;  
regression  on CT  50% d ecrease in 
SPD of nodules  
(for single  nodule  
in greatest  
transverse  
diameter);  no 
increase  in size of 
liver or spleen  Irrelevant  if positive  prior  to 
therapy;  cell type  should  be 
specified 
SD Failure  to attain  
CR/PR  or PD (a) FDG -avid or PET 
positive  prior  to therapy;  
FDG -PET positive  at prior  
sites of disease  and no new 
sites on CT  or PET   
(b) Variably  FDG -avid or  
PET negative;  no change  in 
size of previous  lesions  on 
CT 
Relapsed  
disease  or 
PD Any new lesion  or 
increase  by 50% 
of previously  
involved  sites 
from  nadir  Appearance  of a new 
lesion(s)  > 1.5 cm in any 
axis, 50% increase  in 
SPD of more  than one 
node,  or 50% increase  in 
longest  diameter  of a 
previously  identified  node  
> 1 cm in short  axis > 50% increase  
from  nadir  in the 
SPD of any 
previous  lesions  New  or recurrent  
involvement  
Lesions  FDG -PET positive  
if FDG -avid lymphoma  or 
FDG -PET positive  prior  to 
therapy  
 
Abbreviations: CR, complete remission;  FDG, [18F]fluorodeoxyg lucose;  PET, positron 
emission tomography;  CT, computed tomography;  PR, partial remission;  SPD, sum of the 
product  of the diameters;  SD, stable  disease;  PD, progressive   disease.  
 
 
 
Determining  Overall  Best  Response:  Since  this is a combination  therapy  protocol,  
remission status and best response is determined  one-month post completion of 
treatment.   The interim  scan is not used to determine  a patient’s remission status or 
overall  best response;  rather,  the interim  scan is used only to determine   whether  a patient  
needs  to have a biopsy  and the outcome  of this biopsy  determines   the type of 
consolidation  treatment   a patient  receives  on protocol.  
 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  
 
The following  patients  will be removed  from study:  

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 30 -  
  
 
 
• Patients  who have progression  of disease  while  on treatment.   These  patients  may 
be offered  alternate  treatments.  
• Patients  who develop  unacceptable  toxicity.  
• Patients who develop active HBV infection or hepatitis. 
• Patients  who request  that they be removed  from study.   This will not compromise  
the care they receive at this institution. 
• Patients  who are non-compliant   with treatment  or follow - up. 
 
 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  
 
This protocol  implements   a risk adaptive  therapeutic   approach  for patients  with 
untreated diffuse  large B cell lymphoma.  All patients will receive RR-CHOP-14 
induction chemotherapy.  If their Ki-67 pretreatment  evaluation is <80, then the patient 
will be assigned  to ICE consolidation  therapy  (Consolidation  A), otherwise  they will 
receive  augmented   RICE  consolidation  therapy  (Consolidation  B). An additional  
component  of this study  is that patients  will receive  a FDG -PET scan and biopsy  interim  
evaluation.  Patients that are biopsy positive will not receive Consolidation A or B. 
Instead  they will receive  consolidation  C, which  is augmented   RICE  followed   by a 
HDT/ASCT  consolidation  therapy , or alllogeneic  stem celll      transplant   if a patient’s  bone  
marrow remains positive  after induction therapy and they have an acceptable HLA match 
donor.  
 
The primary  outcome  of this study  is remaining  alive  and progression  free for two years  
from the start of induction therapy conditional on attaining either a negative  FDG-PET or 
a negative  biopsy at the interim evaluation.  The probability of this outcome will be 
evaluated  separately  in the Ki-67 <80 cohort  (Consolidation  A) and the Ki-67 ≥80 cohort  
(Consolidation B). All patients that do not experience the progression free survival 
endpoint and have a negative  biopsy at the interim  evaluation will attempt to be followed 
for a minimum of 2 years from initiation of therapy on protocol.  Patients who have a 
negative   biopsy  and are lost to follow   up prior to 2 years  who are alive  will be counted  as 
failures   for the primary  endpoint.  
 
 
For Ki-67 <80 and either  a negative   FDG -PET or a negative   biopsy  at the interim  
evaluation,  the therapy will not be considered sufficiently active if the two year 
progression free survival probability is less than 0.80.  Fifty patients will be accrued to 
this cohort.   If at the end of the trial, 45 patients  are alive and progression  free at 24 
months  (+/-2 months),   then this combination  therapy  will be considered  promising  in this 
patient  population.    This design  has a type 1 error  equal  to 0.05 and has power  greater  
than 0.95 when the two-year progression free survival  probability is 0.95.  
 
 
For Ki-67 ≥80 and either  a negative   FDG -PET or a negative   biopsy  at the interim  
evaluation,  the therapy will not be considered sufficiently active if the two-year 
progression free survival probability is less than 0.50.  Twenty six patients will be 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 31 -  
  
 
accrued  to this cohort.   If at the end of the trial, 17 patients  are alive and progression  free 
at 24 months  (+/-2 months),  then this combination  therapy  will be considered  promising  
in this patient  population.    This design  has a type 1 error  equal  to 0.10 and has power  
greater than 0.90 when the two-year progression free survival probability is 0.75.  
 
At the conclusion of the study, within each study cohort, the probability of progression 
over time will be computed using the cumulative  incidence  function (competing risks 
methodology)   to account  for patients  removed  from the follow -up  due to a positive  
biopsy at the interim evaluation.   In addition,  a competing risks regression model will be 
employed  to explore  the factors  that are associated  with the time to progression.  
 
Based  on our experience  in MSKCC  01-142, we expect  an accrual  of approximately  2 
patients  per month;  thus, the study  will take approximately  44-48 months  to complete.  
Enrollment will continue until 26 patients with high Ki-67 are enrolled, not necessarily 
stopping  when  90 patients  are accrued  overall.  
 
Secondary  endpoints:  
The reference  radiologists   will evaluate  all sites of disease  on sequential  imaging  studies  
(pre-treatment,   after cycle  4, and at conclusion  of therapy)  in this research  study.   The 
secondary  endpoints  will be evaluated  in as many  patients  as possible  (all consolidations,  
A, B and C, will be included). 
 
Functional   imaging:  
Patients  will undergo  FDG  PET/CT  at baseline,  after cycle  4 of chemotherapy  and after 
the end of treatment.    Diagnostic   CT will also be obtained  at these  time points.   In 
contrast,  FLT PET/CT  will be done  at baseline   and after cycle  1 or cycle  2 of 
chemotherapy,   for the first 60 patients  who undergo  the FLT-PET scan.   The remaining  
30 patients  to enroll  on study  will receive  an additional  FDG  PET scan after cycle  2. 
In this protocol, we will obtain preliminary data on biodistribution,  and potential clinical 
usefulness   of the proliferation  marker  [18F]  fluorothymidine   (FLT)  in patients  with 
diffuse  large cell lymphoma,  using combined positron emission tomography/computed 
tomography  (FLT -PET/CT).    For the first 30 consecutive   patients,  the FLT PET scans  
will be obtained  at baseline  (prior  to therapy)  and after cycle  1. After  the first 30 patients  
are accrued  to the study,  an additional  30 patients  (not necessarily  consecutive)   will 
receive  FLT PET scans  at baseline   and after cycle  2 of chemotherapy.   We will study  the 
biodistribution of FLT in large cell lymphoma  and changes in FLT distribution in 
response to chemotherapy.  The latter may provide first insights  into the potential clinical 
usefulness  of FLT in monitoring the response to chemotherapy in lymphoma.  Note, 
however,  that FLT PET is exploratory  only; that is, FLT findings   will not affect  treatment  
decisions.  
FLT PET will be obtained as a dynamic  study, with image acquisition  for up to 40 min 
over one 15 cm field of view (for one ion more  than one lesion(s)   identified   on previous  
CT scan and/or  FDG  PET).  This will be followed   by a whole  body  scan from the skull 
base to at least the upper  thigh (further   extending  if disease  more  distally  was found  
clinically  or on the prior FDG  PET study).  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 32 -  
  
 
In the analysis,  we will correlate FLT findings  with CT and FDG PET findings  (e.g., does 
uptake  occur  in all lesions  seen on CT and/or  FDG  PET,  and what is the intensity  of such 
uptake  in a given  organ  (e.g.,  liver versus  lung)  and in comparison  to FDG  uptake).  A  
two sample non-parametric  test will be used to assess whether  there is a difference  in  
FLT SUV  after the first or second  cycle  of chemotherapy,   or in the degree  of decline  in 
FLT uptake  (baseline   → post cycle  1 or post cycle  2), between  groups  of patients  with 
response  on CT and/or  FDG  PET after cycle  4 of chemotherapy.   The correlation  between  
FLT and FDG SUV uptake will be assessed via Spearman rank correlation coefficient. 
We will correlate  the degree  of Ki-67 staining  at baseline   with FLT uptake  in the baseline  
scan and the improvement  on FLT scan done between baseline and cycle 1 or between 
the baseline  scan and cycle  2 . We will also investigate   if changes  in FLT uptake   
(baseline  → po st cycle 1 or 2) correlate with ultimate  patient outcome (DFS; binary 
outcome).  
 
The data analysis  equipment  and software for nuclear medicine  imaging is continuously 
changing  and evolving.   As new imaging  analysis   methods  are developed,  we will apply  
those that are optimal to the imaging purpose, including automated and semi-automated 
determination  of quantitative   measures  such as standardized   uptake  values  (SUV),  
location  and extent  of lesion,  site within  the body,  gating  lesion  motion  to 
respiration/pulse,   and all other  kinetic  approaches  to determine   uptake.  
 
CT Volumetric   Analysis:  
To determine   the role of CT volumetric   analysis   compared  to standard  CT in this patient  
population.    We will explore  the relative   tumor  burden  determined   following  means:  
unidimensional  measurements  of the largest cross-sectional dimension;  sum of the 
products of the maximal perpendicular  cross-sectional measurements;  volumetric  sum of 
lymph node masses.  These measurements  will be determined  at baseline  whenever 
possible,  after 4 cycles  of therapy  and at the end of therapy.   The three CT volumetric  
measurements   will be compared  via the ranked  based  Friedman's  test for paired  data. 
 
 
 
15.1 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION 
PROCEDURES  
 
Patients  wishing  to enroll  will be registered  after signing  an informed   consent.  
 
 
15.2 Research  Participant   Registration  
 
Confirm eligibility as defined in the section entitled  Criteria for Patient/Subject 
Eligibility. 
 
Obtain  informed   consent,  by following  procedures  defined  in section  entitled   Informed  
Consent  Procedures.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 33 -  
  
 
During the registration process registering individuals  will be required to complete a 
protocol  specific   Eligibility   Checklist.  
 
All participants   must be registered  through  the Protocol  Participant   Registration  (PPR)  
Office at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. PPR is available  Monday through 
Friday  from 8:30am  – 5:30pm  at 646-735-8000.  The PPR fax numbers  are (646)  735- 
0008 and (646)  735-0003.  Registrations   can be phoned  in or faxed.  The completed  
signature   page of the written  consent/verbal  script  and a completed  Eligibility  Checklist  
must be faxed  to PPR.  
 
16.1 DATA  MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  
 
A Research  Study  Assistant  (RSA)  will be assigned  to the study.   The 
responsibilities  of the RSA include  project compliance,  data collection,  abstraction and 
entry, data reporting, regulatory monitoring,  problem resolution and prioritization and to 
coordinate  the activities   of the protocol  study  team.  
The data collected  for this study  will be entered  into a secure  database.   Source  
documentation will be available  to support the computerized  patient record. 
Data to be collected will include:  FDG-PET scan results, CR, PR and failure  rates, 
CD34+  cell yields,   toxicities   of treatment,  and duration  of treatment.  
 
16.2 Quality  Assurance  
 
Weekly  registration  reports  will be generated  to monitor   patient  accruals  and 
completeness  of registration data.  Routine  data quality reports will be generated to assess 
missing data and inconsistencies.   Accrual rates, extent,  and accuracy of evaluations  and 
follow-up  will be monitored  periodically throughout  the study period and potential 
problems  will be brought  to the attention  of the study  team  for discussion  and action.  
Random -sample   data quality  and protocol  compliance   audits  will be conducted  by the 
study  team,  at a minimum   of two times  per year, more  frequently  if indicated.  
 
Retention  of Records:  All documentation  of adverse  events,  records  of study  drug receipt  
and dispensation,  and all IRB/PB correspondence will be retained for at least 2 years after 
the investigation  is completed.  
 
16.3 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
 
The Data and Safety  Monitoring  (DSM)  Plans  at Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  
Cancer  Center  were approved  by the National  Cancer  Institute   in September  2001.  The 
plans  address  the new policies   set forth by the NCI in the document  entitled   “Policy  of 
the National Cancer Institute  for Data and Safety Monitoring of Clinical Trials” which 
can be found  at:  http://cance  rtria ls. nc i. nih. go v/researc  hers/dsm/inde  x. html.   The DSM  
Plans at MSKCC were established  and are monitored  by the Office of Clinical Research. 
The MSKCC  Data and Safety  Monitoring  Plans  can be found  on the MSKCC  Intranet  at:  
http://msk  web2.msk  cc.org/irb/index  .htm 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 34 -  
  
 
There are several different  mechanisms  by which clinical  trials are monitored  for data, 
safety  and quality.    There  are institutional  processes  in place  for quality  assurance  (e.g.,  
protocol monitoring,  compliance  and data verification audits, therapeutic  response, and 
staff education on clinical  research QA) and departmental procedures for quality control, 
and there are two institutional committees  that are responsible  for monitoring the 
activities  of our clinical  trials programs.  The committees:  Data and Sa fety Monitoring 
Committee (DSMC) for Phase I and II clinical  trials, and the Data and Sa fety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB) for Phase III clinical trials, report to the Center’s Research Council and 
Institutional  Review  Board.  
 
 
During  the protocol  development   and review  process,  each protocol  will be assessed  for 
its level of risk and degree  of monitoring  required.   Every  type of protocol  (e.g.,  NIH 
sponsored,  in-house  sponsored,  industrial  sponsored,  NCI cooperative  group,  etc.) will be 
addressed  and the monitoring  procedures  will be established   at the time of protocol  
activation. 
 
17.1 PROTECTION   OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  
Potential  Risks  
Potential risks and adverse events associated with this trial include:  fever, chills,  asthenia, 
hypotension,  anaphylaxis,  tumor lysis syndrome, death, CNS toxicity,  microscopic  and 
gross  hematuria,   nausea,  vomiting,   alopecia,  cardiotoxicity,   neutropenia,   febrile  
neutropenia,   thrombocytopenia,   anemia,  peripheral  neuropathy,   ototoxicity,   hepatic  
toxicity,   renal insufficiency,   electrolyte   abnormalities,   allergic   reactions,  teratogenicity,  
pneumothorax,   deep  venous  thrombosis,   and catheter -related   sepsis.  
 
 
Mild to moderate  medullary  bone pain is the most common  side effect  associated  with G- 
CSF therapy  and occurs  in approximately  20-25% of patients.  It is effectively  treated  
with non-narcotic   analgesics.    Other  side effects  include   transient   and reversible   changes  
in alkaline   phosphatase,  uric acid, and LDH.  Exacerbation  of pre-existing  autoimmune  
disorders,  subclinical  splenomegaly,   alopecia,  and cutaneous  vasculitis   are rarely  
reported.  
 
Potential  Benefits  
 
Patients  who achieve  a CR with CHOP  chemotherapy  do significantly  better  than those  
patients  who fail upfront  therapy.   Patients  on this trial may have a higher   probability  of 
achieving  a CR than they would  with standard  CHOP  and therefore  may have a longer  
relapse-free and overall survival. 
 
Provisions  for preventing  and treating  adverse  events  
 
Treatment   of febrile   neutropenia,   cytopenias,   ifosfamide -related   gross  and microscopic  
hematuria,   and catheter  related  sepsis,  thrombosis,   and pneumothorax  will be in 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 35 -  
  
 
accordance  with standard  medical  practices  employed  at MSKCC.  Rituximab  
administration  will be premedicated   with acetaminophen,   Diphenhydramine,   and Ativan  
in order to prevent infusion-related  adverse effects.   Infusion will be titrated as tolerated 
as described in section 5.0. In the event of an adverse reaction,  the infusion will be 
stopped,  the patient  will be assessed  and treatment   will be administered   in accordance  
with standard  medical  practice.  
Patients  will receive  standard  anti-emetics   as prophylaxis   against   nausea  and vomiting.  
 
Alternatives/Options   for treatment  
 
For patients eligible,  alternative  therapy would consist of CHOP in standard dosing, in an 
accelerated  fashion,   or R-CHOP  
 
Costs  
 
The patient will be responsible  for all costs related to treatment  and complications  of 
treatment, including G-CSF, pegfilgrastim,  and all hospitalizations. FLT is 
investigational  and the patients  will not pay for the FLT scans.  
 
Privacy  and confidentiality  
 
Confidentiality will be maintained  within the limits  of the law.  Only qualified 
individuals  from MSKCC; the National Cancer Institute;  the FDA; Genentech;  will be 
able to review  patients'  medical  records.   Neither  the patients'  names  nor other  identifying  
information will be used in reports or publications  arising from this study. 
17.2 Privacy  
 
MSKCC’s  Privacy  Office  may alllow the use and disclosure  of protected  
health  information  pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form.  
The use and disclosure of protected health information will be limited to the individuals 
described  in the Research  Authorization  form.  A Research  Authorization  form must be 
completed  by the Principal  Investigator   and approved  by the IRB and Privacy  Board.  
17.3 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE)  Reporting  
 
Any SAE must be reported  to the IRB/PB  as soon  as possible  but no later than 5 calendar  
days. The IRB/PB requires a Clinical Research Database (CRDB) SAE report be 
submitted   electronically  to the SAE Office  at sae@mskcc.org  containing  the following  
information:  
Fields  populated  from the CRDB : 
• Subject’s name (generate the report with only initia ls  if it will be sent outside 
of MSKCC) 
• Medical  record  number  
• Disease/histology  (if applicable)  
• Protocol  number  and title 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 36 -  
  
 
Data needing  to be entered:  
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• Relationship  of the adverse event to the treatment  (drug, device, or intervention) 
• If the AE was expected  
• The severity  of the AE 
• The intervention  
• Detailed text that includes  the following information: 
o An explanation of how the AE was handled  
o A description of the subject's condition 
o Indication  if the subject remains on the study 
o If an amendment   will need to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form 
 
The PI’s signature   and the date it was signed  are required  on the completed  report.   
For IND/IDE  protocols:  
The CRDB  AE report  should  be completed   as above  and the FDA  assigned  IND/IDE  
number  written  at the top of the report.  If appropriate,  the report  will be forwarded  to the 
FDA  by the SAE staff through  the IND Office  
 
In the event  of an adverse  event,  the first concern  will be for the safety  of the subject.  
Investigators   are required  to report  all serious  adverse  events , regardless  of causality  to 
rituximab,   whether  expected  or unexpected , to Genentech  Drug  Safety  and the IRB/PB.  
 
All serious  adverse  events  meeting  these  criteria  will be reported  for the time period  
beginning  with any amount  of exposure  to rituximab   through  the protocol -defined  
follow -up  period  (i.e., 30 days since last treatment   on protocol).   Serious  criteria,  
definitions,  and guidance for reporting follow. 
 
An adverse  event  (AE)  is any untoward  medical  occurrence  in a subject  participating  in 
an investigational  trial or protocol  regardless  of causality  assessment.   An adverse  event  
can be an unfavorable  and unintended  sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), 
symptom,   syndrome  or disease  associated  with or occurring  during  the use of an 
investigational  product  whether  or not considered  related  to the investigational   product.  
 
Serious  adverse  events  (SAE)  are adverse  events  occurring  at any dose which  meet one 
or more  of the following   serious  criteria : 
 
• Results  in death  (i.e. the AE caused  or lead to death)  
 
• Is life-threatening (i.e. the AE placed the subject at immediate risk of death; it does 
not apply  to an AE which  hypothetically  might  have caused  the death  if it were more  
severe)  
 
• Requires or prolongs inpatient  hospitalization  (i.e. the AE required at least a 24-hour 
inpatient  hospitalization or prolonged a hospitalization beyond the expected length of 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 37 -  
  
 
stay; hospitalizations   for elective   medical/surgical   procedures,  scheduled  treatments,  
or routine   check -ups are not SAEs  by this criterion).    Hospitalizations   for 
uncomplicated   febrile   neutropenia   do not need to be reported  as SAEs.  
 
• Is disabling (i.e. the AE resulted in a substantial disruption of the subject’s ability to 
carry out normal life functions) 
 
• Is a congenital  anomaly/birth   defect  (i.e., an adverse  outcome  in a child or fetus of a 
subject  exposed  to the trial drug prior to conception  or during  pregnancy)  
 
• It does not meet any of the above serious criteria  but may jeopardize  the subject and 
may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed 
above  
 
SAEs include  any sign, symptom or medical condition that meets any of the above 
criteria  and emerges  during  rituximab   treatment  or during  a post-treatment   follow -up 
period  that (1) was not present  at the start of treatment   and is not a chronic   condition  that 
is part of the patient’s   medical  history,   OR (2) was present  at the start of treatment  or as 
part of the patient’s  medical  history  but worsened  in severity  and/or  frequency  during  
therapy.  
 
Expected  adverse  events  are those  adverse  events  that are listed  in section  5.0, section  
11.1 or characterized   in the current  Investigator   Brochure.  
 
Unexpected  adverse  events  are those  not listed  in section  5.0, section  11.0, the current  
Investigator   Brochure  or not identified.    This includes   adverse  events  for which  the 
specificity or severity is not consistent  with the description in the Investigator  Brochure. 
For example, under this definition,  hepatic necrosis would be unexpected if the 
Investigator   Brochure  only referred  to elevated  hepatic  enzymes   or hepatitis.  
 
Attribution:   All serious  adverse  events  will be graded  according  to CTCAE  version  3.0 
and willl      be recorded  in MSKCC’s  CRDB  database  and reported  to the IRB/PB.   The 
following  categories  and definitions   of causal  relationship   to treatment   intervention  as 
determined  by the physician will be used: 
• Definite:  The SAE is clearly related to treatment intervention 
• Probable:  The SAE is likely  related  to treatment  intervention  
• Possible:  The SAE may be related  to treatment  intervention  
• Unlikely:  The SAE is doubtfully  related  to treatment  intervention  
• Unrelated:  The SAE is clearly  NOT  related  to treatment  intervention  
 
Reportable  events  are those  which  occur  within  30 days from the last day of treatment  on 
protocol.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 38 -  
  
 
Reporting  of Serious  Adverse  Events  Associated  with Rituximab  
 
All serious  adverse  events  (SAEs)  outlined  above  that we will be reporting,  regardless  of 
causality to rituximab should be recorded on the institution’s own Serious Adverse Event 
report  form (with  patient  identifying  information  removed  with the exception  of D.O.B.,  
initials,  subject number) and faxed to: 
 
Genentech  Drug  Safety  
Tel: (888)  835-2555  
Fax: (650)  225-4682  or (650)  225-4683  
 
(Please  use the safety  reporting  fax cover  sheet  attached  to this document  for your fax 
transmission.)  
 
Follow -up  information:  
 
Additional  information  may be added  to a previously  submitted   report  by any of the 
following  methods:  
 
• Adding to the original  report and submitting it as follow-up 
• Adding  supplemental  summary  information  and submitting  it as follow - up  with the 
original  form 
• Summarizing new information  and faxing it with a cover letter including subject 
identifiers  (i.e. D.O.B. initial,  subject number),  protocol description and number, if 
assigned,  suspect  drug,  brief adverse  event  description,   and notation  that additional  or 
follow -up  information  is being  submitted    (The patient  identifiers   are important   so 
that the new information is added to the correct initial  report) 
 
Occasionally Genentech may contact the reporter for additional information,  clarification, 
or current status of the subject for whom and adverse event was reported.  For questions 
regarding  SAE reporting,  you may contact  the Genentech  Drug  Safety  representative  
noted  above.  
 
Study  Drug  Relationship:  
 
The investigator   will determine   which  events  are associated  with the use of the study  
drugs.   For reporting  purposes,  an AE should  be regarded  as possibly  related  to the use of 
the investigational   product  if the investigato  r  believes:  
 
• There  is a clinically  plausible   time sequence  between  onset  of the AE and rituximab  
administration;   and/or  
• There  is a biologically  plausible   mechanism  for rituximab   causing  or contributing  to 
the AE; and 
• The AE cannot  be attributed  solely  to concurrent/underlying  illness,   other  drugs,  or 
procedures.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 39 -  
  
 
 
 
 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
 
Before  protocol -specified   procedures  are carried  out, consenting   professionals   will 
explain  full details  of the protocol  and study  procedures  as well as the risks involved   to 
participants  prior to their inclusion in the study. Participants  will also be informed  that 
they are free to withdraw   from the study  at any time. All participants   must sign an 
IRB/PB -approved  consent  form indicating  their consent  to participate.   This consent  form 
meets the requirements  of the Code of Federal Regulations  and the Institutional Review 
Board/Privacy  Board  of this Center.  The consent  form will include   the following:  
 
1. The nature  and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits   of the intended  study.  
2. The length  of study  and the likely  follow -up  required.  
3. Alternatives  to the proposed study. (This will include  available  standard and 
investigational  therapies.  In addition,   patients  will be offered  an option  of 
supportive   care for therapeutic   studies.)  
4. The name  of the investigator(s)   responsible   for the protocol.  
5. The right of the participant   to accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions   and 
to withdraw   from participation  at any time. 
Before  any protocol -specific   procedures  can be carried  out, the consenting  professional  
will fully explain the aspects of patient privacy concerning research specific  information. 
In addition  to signing  the IRB Informed  Consent,  all patients  must agree  to the Research  
Authorization  component  of the informed   consent  form.  
 
Each  participant   and consenting  professional  will sign the consent  form.  The participant  
must receive  a copy  of the signed  informed   consent  form.  
 
19.1 REFERENCES  
 
(1993 ). "A predictive  model for aggressive  non-Hodgkin's  lymphoma.  The International 
Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma  Prognostic Factors Project." N Engl J Med 329(14): 987-94. 
 
Alizadeh,  A., M. Eisen, et al. (1999 ). "The lymphochip: a specialized  cDNA microarray 
for the genomic-scale  analysis  of gene expression in normal and malignant  lymphocytes." 
Cold Spring  Harb  Symp  Quant  Biol 64: 71-8. 
 
Apisarnthanarax,   S., M. M. Alauddin,   et al. (2006).  "Early  detection  of 
chemoradioresponse   in esophageal  carcinoma   by 3'-deoxy -3'-3H-fluorothymidine   using  
preclinical   tumor  models."  Clin Cancer  Res 12(15):  4590 -7. 
 
Buck,  A. K., G. Halter,  et al. (2003).  "Imaging  proliferation  in lung tumors  with PET:  
18F-FLT versus  18F-FDG."  J Nucl  Med 44(9): 1426 -31. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 40 -  
  
 
Coiffier,  B., E. Lepage, et al. (2002 ). "CHOP chemotherapy plus rituximab  compared 
with CHOP alone in elderly patients with diffuse  large-B-cell lymphoma."  N Engl J Med 
346(4): 235-42. 
 
Dittmann,   H., B. M. Dohmen,  et al. (2002).  "Early  changes  in [18F]FLT  uptake  after 
chemotherapy:  an experimental   study."  Eur J Nucl  Med Mol Imaging   29(11):  1462 -9. 
 
Farinha,  P., L. Sehn,  et al. (2006).  "Addition  of Rituximab   (R) to CHOPImproves   
Survival in the Non-GCB Subtype of Diffuse  Large B Cell Lymphoma  (DLBCL)."  Blood 
108(11):  Abstract  816. 
 
Feuerhake, F., J. L. Kutok, et al. (2005 ). "NFkappaB activity,  function,  and target-gene 
signatures  in primary mediastinal  large B-cell lymphoma  and diffuse  large B-cell 
lymphoma  subtypes." Blood 106(4): 1392-9. 
 
Feugier,  P., A. Van Hoof,  et al. (2005).  "Long -Term  Results  of the R-CHOP  Study  in the 
Treatment  of Elderly Patients With Diffuse  Large B-Cell Lymphoma: A Study by the 
Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes  de l'Adulte."  J Clin Oncol. 
 
Flexner  C, van der Horst  C, Jacobson  MA, Powderly  W, Duncanson  F, Ganes  D, 
Barditch -Crovo  PA, Petty  BG, Baron  PA, Armstrong  D, et al. (1994)  "Relationship  
between plasma concentrations  of 3'-deoxy-3'-fluorothymidine  (alovudine)  and 
antiretroviral  activity in two concentration-controlled  trials." J Infect Dis 170:1394–1403  
 
Habermann,  T. M., E. A. Weller,  et al. (2006).  "Rituximab -CHOP  versus  CHOP  alone  or 
with maintenance rituximab in older patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma." J Clin 
Oncol  24(19):  3121 -7. 
 
Hamlin,   P. A., C. S. Portlock,  et al. (2004).  "Primary  Mediastinal   Large  B Cell 
Lymphoma: Elucidating Optimal Therapy and Prognostic Factors; an Analysis  in 141 
Consecutive   Patients  Treated  at Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  from 1980 -1999."  Blood  
104(11):  Abstract  614. 
 
Hamlin,   P. A., A. D. Zelenetz,   et al. (2003).  "Age -adjusted  International  Prognostic   Index  
predicts  autologous   stem cell transplantation  outcome  for patients  with relapsed  or 
primary  refractory  diffuse   large B-cell lymphoma."  Blood  102(6): 1989 -96. 
 
Hans,  C. P., D. D. Weisenburger,   et al. (2004).  "Confirmation  of the molecular  
classification  of diffuse  large B-cell lymphoma  by immunohistochemistry using a tissue 
microarray."   Blood  103(1): 275-82. 
 
Lossos, I. S., D. K. Czerwinski,  et al. (2004 ). "Prediction of survival  in diffuse  large-B- 
cell lymphoma  based on the expression of six genes." N Engl J Med 350(18): 1828-37. 
 
Mier,  W., U. Haberkorn,  et al. (2002).  "[18F]FLT;  portrait  of a proliferation  marker."  Eur 
J Nucl  Med Mol Imaging   29(2): 165-9. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 41 -  
  
 
 
 
Moskowitz  CH, H. P., Horwitz  SA et al ( 2006 ). "Phase  II Trial of Dose -Dense  R-CHOP  
Followed  by Risk-Adapted  Consolidation  with Either  ICE or ICE and ASCT,  Based  upon  
the Results  of Biopsy  Confirmed   Abnormal  Interim  Restaging  PET Scan,  Improves  
Outcome  in Patients  with Advanced  Stage  DLBCL."  Blood  108: 532. 
 
Pfreundschuh,   M., L. Trumper,  et al. (2006).  "CHOP -like chemotherapy  plus rituximab  
versus  CHOP -like chemotherapy  alone  in young  patients  with good -prognosis   diffuse  
large-B-cell lymphoma: a randomised  controlled  trial by the MabThera International 
Trial (MInT)  Group."  Lancet  Oncol  7(5): 379-91. 
 
Rasey,  J. S., J. R. Grierson,  et al. (2002).  "Validation  of FLT uptake  as a measure  of 
thymidine  kinase-1 activity in A549 carcinoma  cells." J Nucl Med 43(9): 1210-7. 
 
Rosenwald, A., G. Wright,  et al. (2002 ). "The use of molecular  profiling to predict 
survival  after chemotherapy for diffuse  large-B-cell lymphoma." N Engl J Med 346(25): 
1937 -47. 
 
Rosenwald,  A., G. Wright,   et al. (2003).  "Molecular   diagnosis   of primary  mediastinal  B 
cell lymphoma  identifies  a clinically favorable subgroup of diffuse  large B cell 
lymphoma  related to Hodgkin lymphoma."  J Exp Med 198(6): 851-62. 
 
Savage,  K. J., S. Monti,  et al. (2003).  "The molecular   signature   of mediastinal  large B- 
cell lymphoma  differs from that of other diffuse  large B-cell lymphomas  and shares 
features  with classical  Hodgkin  lymphoma."   Blood  102(12):  3871 -9. 
 
Schwartz,  J. L., Y. Tamura,  et al. (2003).  "Monitoring  tumor  cell proliferation  by 
targeting DNA synthetic  processes with thymidine  and thymidine  analogs."  J Nucl Med 
44(12):  2027 -32. 
 
Seitz, U., M. Wagner, et al. (2001 ). "In vivo evaluation of 5-[(18)F]fluoro-2'- 
deoxyuridine  as tracer for positron emission tomography in a murine  pancreatic cancer 
model."  Cancer  Res 61(10):  3853 -7. 
 
Vesselle, H., J. Grierson, et al. (2002 ). "In vivo validation of 3'deoxy-3'- 
[(18)F]fluorothymidine   ([(18)F]FLT)  as a proliferation  imaging  tracer  in humans:  
correlation  of [(18)F]FLT  uptake  by positron  emission  tomography  with Ki-67 
immunohistochemistry  and flow cytometry  in human  lung tumors."   Clin Cancer  Res 
8(11):  3315 -23. 
 
Vesselle,   H., J. Grierson,  et al. (2003).  "18F -Fluorothymidine   radiation  dosimetry  in 
human  PET imaging  studies."   J Nucl  Med 44(9): 1482 -8. 
 
Wagner,  M., U. Seitz,  et al. (2003).  "3'-[18F]fluoro -3'-deoxythymidine   ([18F] -FLT)  as 
positron emission tomography tracer for imaging proliferation in a murine  B-Cell 
lymphoma  model and in the human disease." Cancer Res 63(10): 2681-7. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 42 -  
  
 
 
 
Haioun  et al (2001)  Tandem  autotransplant   as first-line  consolidative   treatment  in poor- 
risk aggressive  lymphoma:  A pilot study of 36 patients.  Annals of Oncology 12: 1749- 
1755.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.0 APPENDIX  1  
 
 
Absorbed Doses  
 (1) 
    
1 FLT PET-CT  2 FLT PET- 
CT 3 FLT PET- 
CT 
   
1 * 8 m Ci 0.9 rad (2) +  2 * 0.9 rad + 3 * 0.90 rad + 
3 * 8 m Ci 
 F18-FLT1  FLT 8 m Ci FLT  2 * 8 m Ci FLT FLT 
Target  Organ  rad/m  Ci rad rad  rad rad 
Adrenals  0.08 0.61 1.51  3.03 4.54 
Bone  Surfaces  0.06 0.47 1.37  2.74 4.10 
Brain  0.01 0.10 1.00 . 2.00 3.00 
Breasts  0.03 0.25 1.15  2.30 3.45 
Gall Bladder  Wall 0.06 0.50 1.40  2.80 4.20 
Heart  Wall 0.06 0.49 1.39  2.79 4.18 
Kidneys  0.13 1.05 1.95  3.91 5.86 
Large  Intestine  - Lower  Wall 0.02 0.13 1.03  2.07 3.10 
Large  Intestine  - Upper  Wall 0.05 0.37 1.27  2.53 3.80 
Lens  of Eye 0.04 0.31 1.21  2.42 3.63 
Liver  0.17 1.34 2.24  4.49 6.73 
Lungs  0.04 0.30 1.20  2.40 3.60 
Muscle  / Other  tissue  0.06 0.50 1.40  2.79 4.19 
Pancreas  0.09 0.68 1.58  3.16 4.74 
Red Marrow  0.09 0.71 1.61  3.22 4.83 
Skin  0.02 0.13 1.03  2.06 3.09 
Small  Intestine  0.05 0.42 1.32  2.64 3.96 
Stomach  Wall 0.05 0.42 1.32  2.63 3.95 
Testes  0.05 0.39 1.29  2.58 3.87 
Thyroid  0.04 0.31 1.21  2.42 3.62 
Total  Body  0.05 0.37 1.27  2.55 3.82 
Urinary  Bladder  Wall  0.00     
45-min Voiding  Interval  0.03 0.24 1.14  2.27 3.41 
1-hr Voiding  Interval  0.04 0.32 1.22  2.43 3.65 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 43 -  
  
 
 
1.5-hr Voiding  Interval  0.06 0.47 1.37 2.75 4.12 
2-hr Voiding  Interval  0.08 0.63 1.53 3.07 4.60 
Effective  Dose  Equivalent  
("rem")   
0.10  
1.04  
1.94  
3.87  
5.81 
 
REFERENCES  
1. Vesselle  et al. J Nucl Med 44: 1482 -1488,  2003.  
2. Wu et al. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging  31:38 -43, 2004.  
21.1 APPENDIX  2 
 
21.2 Treatment  Timeline:  Screening  Period  
 
a. FLT-PET/CT    scans will be performed   under  an IND 
b. Creatinine  clearance  only if serum Cr> 1.5 mg/dl  
c. Documentation  of HIV seronegativity  mus t be performed   at MSKCC . 
d. A tissue  biopsy  confirming   the Diffuse  Large   B Cell Lymphoma   diagnosis.  Results  must  be 
 
Treatment  Screening    
Visit  
Prior  to ICE 
administration  Within  one month  
of treatment  
initiation  Within  2 weeks  
treatment  of 
initiation  
Hepatitis   B surface  antigen  & core antibody   X  
Hepatitis   C antibody   X  
Echocardiogram   or MUGA   X  
Ki-67 Staining  of tumor  X   
Tissue  blocks  or 10 unstained   slides  X   
HIV testc  X  
CT Scan  of Chest/Abdomen/Pelvisf  X  
FDG -PET/CT  scan  X  
FLT-PET/CT  scang  Xa  
Bilateral  Bone  Marrow  Biopsyh  X  
Creatinine   Clearance   Xb  
Complete  history    X 
Physical  Exam    X 
CBC  w/ differential    X 
Comprehensive   Metabolic  Panel    X 
Urinalysis    X 
Pregnancy   Teste   X 
EKG    X 
confirmed   by MSKCC  
e. Pregnancy  test in pre-menopausal  women  only 
f. The CT scan  should  be done  with volumetric   analysis  when  possible  
g. Unless  not required  per protocol  
h. Bilateral   bone  marrow  biopsy  not required  if unilateral  bone  marrow   biopsy  don e within  4 weeks  
prior  to treatment  initiation  shows  involvement  by lymphoma  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 44 -  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.3 Treatment  Timeline  for Induction   and Interim  Restaging  
 
 
 
Treatment  Induction  Interim 
Restaging  
Visit  
Cycles  1- 
3, Day -2d  
Cycles  1- 
3, Day 0  
Cycles  1- 
3, Day 2 Cycles  1- 
3, Days  
6-10 PO ST 
cycle  1 or 
Cycle  2 Cycle  
4f Day 
0 Cycle  4 
Days 0- 
4 Cycle  4 
Days  6- 
10  
Cycle  4 Days  
17-20 
CT Scan  of 
Chest/Abdomen/  
Pelvisi         
X 
FDG -PET/CT    scan         X 
FLT-PET/CT      Xa, b, c     
Bilateral   Bone  
Marrow  Biopsy          Xg 
Physical  Exam  X     X    
CBC  w/ differential  X     X    
Rituximab    375 
mg/m2   IVPB  Xj X Xj       
Cyclophosphamide  
1000  mg/m2  IVPB   X    X    
Doxorubicin   50 
mg/m2  IVPB   X    X    
Vincristine   1.4 
mg/m2  IVP (no cap)  X    X    
Prednisone  100 mg 
PO daily  for 5 days   X     X   
Growth   Factor  
Supporte    X    X  
Antimicrobial  
Prophy laxish X X X X X X X X X 
a. FLT-PET/CT   scans  will be performed   under  an  FDA  IND.  
b. The FLT-PET  scan  should  be performed   after completion  of prednisone  in cycle  1 or cycle  2 and 
before  the first dose  of Rituximab    in cycle  2 of induction  therapy.   The first 30 consecutive  
patients  on study  had the FLT PET scan  after cycle  1; the next 30 who have  an FLT PET  scan  will 
have   their FLT PET scan  after cycle  2. 
c. Only  60 patients  will  receive  FLT-PET   scan.  For the subsequent  30 patients  who enroll  on study,  
FLT-PET  scan  at baseline  and after cycle  2 will not be done  and will be replaced  with an FDG- 
PET scan  after cycle  2. 
d. Day 0 of next cycle  is Day 14 as long as ANC  > 1000  and platelets  > 50,000.  
e. SQ at either  300ug/day  or 480 ug/day  OR Pegfilgrastim  6 mg  once  24-48  hrs post completion  of 
intravenous   chemotherapy.  
f. Cycle  4 will  last 21 days.  
g. Bilateral   Bone  Biopsy  for patients  with a positive  scan  only, can be done  at any point  post-therapy  
in cycle  4. Only  unilateral  biopsy  required  at interim  if unilateral  biopsy  at baseline  showed  
involvement  by lymphoma.  
h. Trimethoprim/Sulfametho  xa zole   160/800   (DS)  oral twice  daily  TIW (patients  with known  allergy  
to Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxa zole   can receive alternative pneumocystis carinii prophy laxis), 
Acyclovir  400 mg oral bid, and Fluconazole  100  mg oral qd 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 45 -  
  
 
 
i. The CT scan  must  be done  with volumetric   analysis  
j. Rituximab    is to be given  EITHER   on Day -2 or Day 2, not on both days.  
 
21.4 Treatment  Timeline  for Consolidation  A 
 
 
Treatment  Consolidation  A1, 2 
 
 
Visit   
Cycles  1-3, 
Day 1  
Cycles  1-3, 
Day 2  
Cycles  1-3, 
Day 3  
Cycles  1-3, 
Day 4 Cycles  1-3, 24 - 
48 hours  post 
completion  of 
chemotherapy  4-6 weeks  
post 
completion  
of cycle  3 
Physical  
Exam  X      
CBC  X      
Etoposide  
100 mg/m2 
IVPB   
X  
X  
X    
Carboplatin  
AUC  5 
IVPB3   
X     
Ifosfamide   5 
g/m2  with 
MESNA  5 
g/m2  IVCI4  
X     
Pegfilgrastim  
6 mg     X  
CT scan6      X 
FDG  PET 
scan      X 
Antimicrobial  
Prophylaxis5 X X X X X X 
1. Consolidation  A: Patients  whose  disease  is FDG-PET negative  or patients  whose  FDG -PET scan  is 
positive  but repeat  biopsy  is negative  and whose  initial  Ki-67 expression is ≥80%  will receive  3 
cycles  of standard  dose  ICE Chemotherapy.  
2. Patients  must  have  a platelet  count  of 50,000/ul   and an ANC  of at least 1000/ul   to proceed  to 
subsequent  cycles  of ICE. 
3. Maximum   dose  800 mg (equivalent  to CrCl  of 135 ml/min).   AUC  dosing  is calculated  by the Calvert  
Formula:  AUC  5 = 5 x (CrCl+25)  
4. Ifosfamide  5 g/m2  admixed   with MESNA   5 g/m2 IVCI  over 24 hours beginning  on Day 2. 
5. Trimethoprim/Sulfametho  xa zole   160/800   (DS)  oral twice  daily  TIW (patients  with known  allergy  
to Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxa zole   can receive alternative pneumocystis carinii prophy laxis), 
Acyclovir  400 mg oral bid, and Fluconazole  100  mg oral qd 
6. The CT scan  must  be done  with volumetric   analysis  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 46 -  
  
 
21.5 Treatment  Timeline  for Consolidation  B 
 
 
 
1. Consolidation  B: Patients  whose  disease  is FDG-PET negative  or patients  whose  FDG -PET scan is 
positive  but repeat  biopsy  is negative  and whose  initial  Ki-67  expression is ≥80 will receive  2 cycles  
of augmented  RICE   Chemotherapy  (as per MSKCC   protocol  03-075) 
2. Patients  must  have  a platelet  count  of 50,000/ul   and an ANC  of at least 1000/ul   to proceed  to 
subsequent  cycles  of ICE. 
3. Etoposide  is administered  every  12 hours  starting  on day 4. 
4. Maximum   dose  800 mg (equivalent  to CrCl  of 135 ml/min).   AUC  dosing  is calculated  by the Calvert  
Formula:  AUC  5 = 5 x (CrCl+25)  
5. Ifosfamide  5 g/m2  admixed   with MESNA   5 g/m2 IVCI  over 24 hours beginning  on Day 4. 
6. Trimethoprim/Sulfametho  xa zole   160/800   (DS)  oral twice  daily  TIW (patients  with known  allergy  
to Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxa zole   can receive alternative pneumocystis carinii prophy laxis), 
Acyclovir  400 mg oral bid, and Fluconazole  100  mg oral qd 
7. The CT scan  must  be done  with volumetric   analysis  Treatment  Consolidation  B1, 2 
 
 
 
Visit   
Cycles  1-2, 
Day 1  
Cycles  1- 
2, 
Day 3  
Cycles  1- 
2, Day 4  
Cycles  1- 
2, Day 6 Cycles  1-2, 
24-48  hours  
post 
completion  of 
cycle  4-6 weeks  
post 
completion  
of cycle  2 
Physical  
Exam  X 
CBC  X 
Etoposide  
100 mg/m2 
IVPB  X 
Carboplatin  
AUC  5 
IVPB4  
X 
Ifosfamide   5 
g/m2  with 
MESNA  5 
g/m2  IVCI5  
X 
Pegfilgrastim  
6 mg X 
Rituximab  
375 mg/m2 
IVPB   
X  
X 
CT scan7 X 
FDG -PET 
scan X 
Antimicrobial  
Prophylaxis6 X X X X X X 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 47 -  
  
 
21.6 Treatment  Timeline  for Consolidation  C 
 
 
Treatment  Consolidation   C1, 2  Part I Part II Part III 
 
Visit   
Cycles  
1-2, 
Day 1  
Cycles  
1-2, 
Day 3  
Cycles  
1-2, 
Day 4  
Cycles  
1-2, 
Day 6 Cycles  1- 
2, 24-48 
hours  post 
completion  
of cycle  Stem cell 
collection,  
post cycle  
213 Stem  Cell 
Transplant  
& Post 
transplant  
Physical  Exam  X       
CBC  X       
Etoposide  100 
mg/m2  IVPB3   X     
Carboplatin  AUC  
5 IVPB4    X    
Ifosfamide   5 g/m2 
with MESNA  5 
g/m2  IVCI5   X     
Pegfilgrastim  6 mg     X   
Rituximab   375 
mg/m2   IVPB  X X     X10 
FDG -PET Scan        X8 
CT scan11       X8 
Leukapheresis       X6  
High dose 
chemoradiotherapy  
and ASCT7        
X 
Bone  Marrow  
Biopsy        X9 
Antimicrobial  
Prophylaxis12 X X X X X X X 
1. Consolidation  B: Patients  whose  disease  is FDG-PET negative  or patients  whose  FDG -PET scan is 
positive  but repeat  biopsy  is negative  and whose  initial  Ki-67  expression is ≥80 will receive  2 cycles  
of augmented  RICE   Chemotherapy  (as per MSKCC   protocol  03-075) 
2. Patients  must  have  a platelet  count  of 50,000/ul   and an ANC  of at least 1000/ul   to proceed  to 
subsequent  cycles  of ICE. 
3. Etoposide  is administered  every  12 hours  starting  on day 4. 
4. Maximum   dose  800 mg (equivalent  to CrCl  of 135 ml/min).   AUC  dosing  is calculated  by the Calvert  
Formula:  AUC  5 = 5 x (CrCl+25)  
5. Ifosfamide  5 g/m2  admixed   with MESNA   5 g/m2 IVCI  over 24 hours beginning  on Day 4. 
6. The target  yield  for leukapheresis  will  be 5x106    CD34+   cells/kg.   Leukaphereses  will  continue  for 
up to 5 days  until the target  yield  is reached.  
7. Patients  will  be eligible  to receive  IFRT   if clinically   indicated  beginning  2 weeks  prior  to initiation  
of high  dose  chemotherapy. (CBV -N)   it will  be administered  as follows:  
Mitoxantrone (45 mg/m2)   IVPB  x 1 on day – 8 
Carmustine  (300 mg/m2)  IVPB   x 1 on day – 4 
Cyclophosphamide  (1500   mg/m2)   IVPB   daily  x 4 days  on day – 7, - 6, - 5, - 4 
Etoposide  (250 mg/m2)   IVPB   daily  x 4 days  on day – 7, - 6, - 5, - 4 
PBPC   will  be infused  approximately   24-48  hours  after completion   of chemotherapy  (day 0). 
8. 90-120  Days  after high dose  therapy.  
9. Only  necessary  if patient  had a positive  bone  marrow   biopsy  at restaging.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 08 -026 A(15)  
Approval date: 06 -Nov-2019  
- 48 -  
  
 
 
10. No later than Day +35 post ASCT  patients  will receive  rituximab    bimonthly  for 6 doses.  
11. The CT scan  must  be done  with volumetric   analysis  
12. Antimicrobial   prophy laxis for Augmented  RICEx2   is the same  as specified  in Consolidation  B. 
Antimicrobial   prophy laxis for transplant  phase:  On admission:  Ciprofloxacin   500 mg  PO b.i.d.  
(continue  until the patient  requires  broad  spectrum  antibiotics  for neutropenic  fever)  Fluconazole  
100 mg PO or IV b.i.d.  (continue  until the ANC  is > 1000/mm3   X 3 days  or until amphotericin  B 
therapy  is initiated).  Nystatin  powder  applied  to the groin  and the axilla   BID Vitamin   K 10 mg PO 
or sc. one to three  times  per week  unless  added  to TPN.   Day +5 : G-CSF  480 ug sc. QD ( 
continue  until ANC  > 1000/mm3    x 3 days.)  
13. Patients  whose  bone  marrow   remain   positive  at interim  restaging  will  also have  the option  of 
getting  an allogeneic  stem cell transplant,  in lieu of an ASCT,  if they have  an acceptable  HLA  
match  donor.   The allogeneic  stem cell transplant  regimen   will  be decided  by the MSK  Bone  
Marrow  Transplant  Service  