 
Version  5.6.14 
 1
 
        
D0928  
 
A Study to Evaluate the Use of Supine MRI Images 
In Breast Conserving Surgery 
   
Principal Investigators: 
Richard J. Barth Jr., MD 
Keith D. Paulsen, PhD 
 
Co-investigators: 
Steve Poplack, MD 
Kari Rosenkranz, MD 
Burton Eisenberg, MD 
Tor Tosteson, PhD 
Wendy Wells, MD 
 
          
Breast Oncology Program 
Radiobiology and Bioengineer ing Research Program 
Norris Cotton Cancer Center 
     
 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 2
 
SUMMARY 
 
 
 
Section 1.  INTRODUCTION 
 Most women with breast cancer have their tumors detected by screening 
mammography or breast MRI, before the tumors become clinically palpable.  
Most of these women with small breast cancers will choose breast conserving surgery. The goal of breast conserving sur gery is to completely  resect the tumor 
with negative margins and simultaneously pres erve the shape of the breast.  The 
standard technique for breast conserving surgery for patients with non-palpable breast cancer is to place a wire into the cancer pre-operatively (in Radiology 
under mammographic, ultrasound or MRI gui dance) and then, in the Operating 
Room, to excise the tissue around the wire.  This technique, initially developed in 
the 1970’s, has several limitations.  It adds a separate procedure to the surgical 
resection, thereby complicating and lengthening the process.  Standard 
localization involves placement of one wire as close as possible to the clip left at 
the time of diagnostic core biopsy, or cl ose to residual masses or calcifications.  
Mammographic images are then taken in two projections and the surgeon must 
then estimate the location of the cancer from these wire locali zation films.  In 
many cases this imprecisely localizes t he cancer, resulting in positive margin 
rates from 30-50% (1,2).  Additional pr ecision can be gained by  placing additional 
wires, but this increases the length of time for the localization procedure (3).  Wire localization is an ineffici ent and imprecise technique.  
 Because of these limitations, effort s have been made to find alternatives 
to wire localization.  Intra-operative ultrasound has been evaluated and been shown to be superior to wire localization (4-6), but over half of mammographically 
visible invasive cancers and most ductal carcinoma in situ lesions are not visible on US.  Targeting the resection at the hem atoma left from the initial core biopsy 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 3
has had some success in early retrospective  studies (7,8).  Neither of these 
techniques has been widely adopted. 
 MRI of the breast has been shown by multiple studies to be more sensitive 
than mammography (9-12) for the detecti on of breast cancer.  Furthermore, 
several studies have demonstrated the ability of MRI to detect mammo-graphically and clinically occult foci of cancer in the ipsilateral breast in approximately 25% of patients (9,13-15).  In many cases the local extent of the 
tumor is better defined by MRI, while in some cases additional foci of cancer are 
seen in other quadrants of the breast.  
While it seems intuitive that a sur geon would want to precisely know the 
extent of disease prior to lumpectomy , some argue that MR I is not justified 
unless it is shown to have a significant c linical impact, i.e., that MRI appropriately 
changes the surgical management, or that t he positive margin rate is decreased, 
or that the local recurrence rate is less in patients who undergo pre-op MRI.  The 
retrospective studies described above did demonstrate that MRI resulted in a 
change in surgical management in 25%  of patients (performing larger 
lumpectomies so as to try to completely  resect the tumor or  excising additional 
multicentric tumors in the breast).  T hese studies did not address whether the 
positive margin rate was decreased by the us e of MRI.  This wi ll be addressed in 
the Comparative effectiveness of MRI in br east cancer (COMICE) trial in Great 
Britain, where 1600 patients were randomized to receive MRI or no MRI prior to 
breast conserving therapy.  Two studies retrospectively evaluated whether the 
local recurrence rate in breast conservation patients undergoing MRI was lower than that seen in concurrent patients not receiving MRI.  These studies had 
conflicting results.  In one, 215 women w ho had MRIs had a LR rate of 3%, which 
was not significantly diffe rent than the rate of 4%  in 541 women not undergoing 
MRI (16).  In contrast, Fischer found a lo wer rate of in breast recurrence in pts 
who had MRI (1% vs 7%) (17).  In summary, breast MRI has been shown to 
better define the local extent of t he breast cancer than mammography and 
results in changes in surgical management, but has not yet been demonstrated to decrease the positive margin rate or the rate of local recurrence.  While it is 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 4
being used as part of the initial di agnostic evaluation for patients newly 
diagnosed with breast cancer in many c enters, and is reimbursed in NH and VT, 
it is not yet considered to be standard of care. 
 A limitation of all of these MRI studies is that the MRI exams are performed with the patient prone and the breasts in a pendant position, which is 
markedly different than the pos ition of the breast when the patient is supine on 
the Operating Room table.  The spatial information the surgeon receives from the 
prone MRI about the site of the tumor in t he breast is hard to mentally translate 
into the actual site of the tumor in the breast of a supi ne patient prepared for 
surgery.  Of particular interest is a recent Japanese study that evaluated 
resections based on supine MRI in 24 pat ients with DCIS and compared them to 
28 patients who had prone MRI and wire localiz ed resections (18).  The positive 
margin rate was lower in the supine  MRI group (12% vs 39%, p=0.03) and the 
volume of breast tissue removed was less ( 27 vs 57 cm3, p=0.001).  In this study 
the supine MRI image was correlated to t he position on the OR table by taking 
plain xrays in the OR and lining up a metallic button on the surface of the breast with a clip left at the time of biopsy.  
 
Section 2.  OBJECTIVES  
 We propose to use a novel technique ( optical scanning) to correlate the 
supine MRI image to the surgical positi on in the OR and then to confirm and 
extend the Japanese study described above.  In the first phase of the study, 5-25 
patients with palpable invasive breast cancer will undergo pr e-operative supine 
MRI and optical scanning in the surgical position.  The purpose of this phase will be ensure that the images created from the optical scanner-adjusted supine MRI 
images closely correspond to the locati on of the palpable tumors in these 
breasts.  All patients will then have thei r tumor resected using the standard 
method of either palpation or image guided wire localization.  
 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 5
In the second phase of the study, patients with non-palpable invasive 
breast cancer or DCIS who desire breast conservation will be randomized to 
either a usual care group, or a group receiving a supine MRI in addition to conventional imaging (mammogram and prone MRI) and undergoing breast cancer resection without the wire localization technique. 
 The primary objective will be to determine whether the addition of supine MRI to 
conventional imaging with mammography and or sonography and prone MRI will result in a lower positive margin rate  in patients undergoing breast conserving 
surgery.  Our secondary objectives will be to determine: 
1. whether there are differences betw een the two groups in the volume of 
breast tissue removed. 
2. whether diagnostic information obtained from a supine MRI is equivalent 
to that obtained from the prone MRI. 
 
 
Section 3. ELIGIB ILITY CRITERIA 
 
 
Inclusion Criteria Phase 1 
 
1. Age > 18 years 
2. Histologic diagnosis of palpable in vasive breast cancer or ductal 
carcinoma in situ 
3. Patient desire to undergo breast surgery 
3. Patients will have provided informed consent to participate, documented 
by their signature on the study consent form 
4. The cancer enhances on breast MRI imaging.    
 
Version  5.6.14 
 6
Inclusion Criteria Phase 2 
 
1. Age > 18 years 
2. Histologic diagnosis of invasive breas t cancer or ductal carcinoma in situ 
3. The tumor is visible and enhances on prone MRI and is > 1 cm in greatest 
diameter. 
5. Determination by the surgeon that the neoplasm is non-palpable. A patient 
with a palpable hematoma from co re biopsy, but a non-palpable 
neoplasm, will be eligible for study 
6. Patient desire to undergo breast conserving surgery 
7. Patients will have provided informed consent to participate, documented 
by their signature on the study consent form. The process of informed consent will be documented in the m edical record and a copy of the 
signed consent form will be given to the patient. 
 
Exclusion Criteria (Phases 1 and 2) 
 
1. Absolute contraindication to MR I, including presence of implanted 
electrical device (pacemaker or neur ostimulator), aneurysm clip or metallic 
foreign body in or near eyes 
2. Severe claustrophobia 3. Contraindication to use of gadol inium based intravenous contrast, 
including life threatening allergy or compromised renal function (creatinine > 2.0) 
4. History of median sternotomy 
5. Pregnancy (Patient attestation that they are not pregnant will be 
acceptable, as per standard policy for MRIs at DHMC)  
6. Multicentric breast cancer, defined as  two or more tumo rs in different 
quadrants of the breast. 
An eligibility worksheet will be completed for each patient prior to enrollment and 
will be signed and dated by t he surgeon investigator. 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 7
 
Section 4.  TREATMENT PLAN 
 
Phase 1   Patients with a percutaneous core biopsy demonstrating invasive 
carcinoma or ductal carcinoma in situ will undergo contrast enhanced bilateral 
breast MRI in the prone position, as is t he current clinical standard at Dartmouth. 
At the time of surgical c onsultation, patients with palpabl e invasive breast cancer 
or DCIS who desire breast surgery will be invi ted to be a part of the study.  Prior 
to surgery these patients will undergo a contrast enhanced supine MRI and an  
optical scan.  The optical scan will be done with the patient in the surgical 
position.  This image will be used to  adjust the MRI image obtained pre-
operatively into a highly accurate r epresentation of the breast and the MRI-
defined tumor mass to correspond to the po sition of the patient at the time of 
surgery.  This image will be projected on a screen above one side of the patient’s 
head for easy viewing.  This image display will indicate the distances at a particular radian (measured in terms of clock hours and minutes) from the nipple to all aspects (cranial, caudal, medial, la teral) of the tumor.  The image display 
will also indicate the distances from t he skin to the tumor and from the tumor to 
the chest wall.  Measurement s of the distance from the nipple to these edges of 
the palpable tumor at specif ied, measured radians will also will be made by the 
surgeon and will be compared to the opt ical scanner adjusted supine MRI 
images.   
 
Phase 2.  Patients with  histologic evidence of  invasive carcinoma or ductal 
carcinoma in situ will undergo bilateral breas t MRI in the prone position, as is the 
current standard at Dartmouth.   At the time of surgical  consultation, patients with 
non-palpable breast cancers who desire breast conservation will be invited to be a part of the study.  Consenting patients will undergo randomization,  stratified by 
DCIS vs invasive cancer and for invasive  lobular cancer vs invasive ductal 
cancer.  Patients in Group W will undergo wi re-localized partial mastectomy.  
 
Version  5.6.14 
 8
Patients randomized to Group S will under go a contrast enhanced supine MRI 
and optical scan, followed by partial mastectomy using the image guidance 
system we developed and verifi ed in Phase I (19).  
 Standard radiologic images (mamm ograms, ultrasounds, prone MRI 
images) will be available to the surgeon at the time of surgery for all patients.  
Patients in Group W, the usual care group, will undergo standard of care breast conserving surgery as practiced at our institution for non-palpable breast 
cancers. 
Patients in Group S will undergo a supine MRI at a convenient time within 
a week of surgery. They will have an optic al scan of the breast surface while on 
the OR table on the day of surgery. Using the methods de scribed and validated 
in Phase I, the scan data will be used to adjust (coregister) the supine MRI image 
volume obtained pre-operatively into a highly accurate representation of the 
breast and MRI defined tumor mass at the ti me of surgery. This coregistered 
image will be projected on a screen for easy viewing by the surgeon. A hand 
held, sterile stylus pointer will be tr acked during surger y and will allow the 
surgeon to point to a specific location on the breast and see exactly where that 
point is on the screen image display. The image display will indicate the 
distances from the nipple to all aspects (c ranial, caudal, medial , lateral) of the 
tumor, as well as the distances from t he tumor to the skin and from the tumor to 
the chest wall. Guided by the coregi stered image information the surgeon will 
mark on the surface of the breast the extent  of resection. The sterile stylus probe 
may be used during the procedure to relate points in the surgical field to their 
corresponding location on the coregist ered supine MRI image. The surgeon will 
resect the breast tumor volume that is identified by the im age guidance system.  
The surgical specimens will be water di splaced to determine their volume. 
The specimen will then be inked by the surgeon with 6 different colors to orient the specimen (black: deep, blue: super ficial, green: caudal, orange: cranial, 
yellow: lateral and red: medial), and will undergo specimen mammography. Specimens will then be sent to Pathology.  Margins for invasive cancers will be considered positive if cancer cells ar e present at the edge.  Margins will be 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 9
considered positive for DCIS if there are tumor cells < 1 mm from the edge.  The 
distance to the nearest margin will be determined in all cases. 
At the end of patient a ccrual, prone and supine MRIs from patients in 
Group S will be separately interpreted by two radiologists.  The cases will be 
divided in halves.  One radiologist will init ially interpret half of the supine and half 
of the prone MRIs, the other  will initially interpret the other half.  After a 6-week 
interval, each Radiologist will interpret the other half of the images.  Concerning 
lesions on each study will be identified, and then a comparison will be made between the supine and prone images to de termine if lesions identified on the 
supine images are concordant with the num ber and size of lesions identified on 
the prone images.    
 
Section 5.  PO TENTIAL TOXICITY  
 
Supine MRIs are administered accordi ng to standard-of-care practice for 
prone breast MRI and represent no more additional risk than would be experienced by women receiving these exams as part of their (non-research) 
breast care.  The risk of c ontrast enhanced MRI is very low, reflecting the minute 
risk of life threatening allergy and devel opment of nephrogenic sclerosis related 
to gadolinium based intravenous contrast.  Patients deemed to be at higher risk 
for gadolinium induced nephrogenic scleros is because of compromised renal 
function will not be eligible for partici pation.  Patients who experience a 
significant allergic reaction to gadolinium based intravenous contrast at the time 
of their clinical prone MRI will also be cons idered ineligible for study participation. 
 Optical scans will be performed using a GO!Scan 3D optical scanner (Creaform, Levis, Quebec, Canada). This scanner will be able to scan the entire 
breast in 1 minute. It uses white light (L ED) to form the image, like a flashlight. 
There are no anticipated risks associated with the use of this scanner.   
 
Section 6.  DRUG FORM ULATION AND PREPARATION 
 
Not applicable. 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 10
 
 
Sections 7 and 8.  Clinical ENDPOINTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
 
 The primary objective of the first phase will be to determine how closely 
the optical scan adjusted images of the tumor location correspond with the 
location as identified by intraoperat ive tumor palpation and measurement.  
Precise distances from the nipple to the superior, inferior, medial and lateral 
edges of the tumor will be taken from the adjusted MRI images and then marked on the patient’s skin.  T he surgeon will then palpate the tumor and measure the 
distance between the palpable superior, inferior, medial and lateral tumor edges 
and the spots located by MRI. An adjust ed image will be considered acceptable if 
all 4 image guided measurement s are < 1 cm from  the palpable tumor edge.  We 
will enroll at least 5 patients on this phas e of the study.  We will move on to 
Phase II when 90% of the measurement s in the previous 5 patients are 
acceptable, as defined above.  If by te chnical modifications we cannot meet 
these criteria for moving to phase II afte r 25 patients the protocol will be closed. 
The primary objective of the seco nd phase is to determine whether the 
addition of supine MRI to conventi onal imaging with mammography and prone 
MRI will result in a lower positive margin rate in patients undergoing breast conserving surgery.  Follo wing informed consent and enr ollment, patients will be 
assigned to usual care or usual care  plus supine MRI.  A permuted block 
randomization will be used wit hin strata defined by DCIS and type of invasive 
cancer to achieve balance in treatment to tals within strata.  The positive margin 
rate in the two groups will be com puted and compared using a chi-squared 
statistic. 
Our senior breast Pathologist, Dr. Wendy Wells, has performed a detailed 
analysis of the surgical margins for patients who had a core biopsy which was 
positive for cancer or DCI S and then underwent partial mastectomy at Dartmouth 
in the year 2005.  A total of 125 patient s with invasive ductal carcinoma were 
identified: 31 (25%) had positive margins.  Twenty six of 53 patients undergoing partial mastectomy for DCIS had positive margins (45%).  Overall, 57/178 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 11
patients (32%) had positive margins.  A two-thirds decrease in the positive 
margin rate (i.e., from 32%  to 11 percent or less) woul d be clinically meaningful. 
The primary analysis will cons ist of computing the positive margin rate observed 
in the two groups and comparing them wit h a chi-squared test.  Based on a chi-
squared test with a significance level of 0.05 and a power of 80%, a sample size 
of 69 patients will be requi red in each group.  
We will adopt a sequential testing procedure to assure that possible 
increases in the expected margin rate ar e detected.  After 10% of the patients 
are enrolled, or 7 in each group, an exac t test for proportions will be applied.  If 
proportion of positive margins is greater th an 32% and the p-value for the test is 
less than 0.004, the trial will be stopped as possibly increasing the rate.  This 
procedure maintains the significance level at 0.05 and the power at 80% using 
Pocock boundaries for the Lan and Demets alpha spending function.[20] 
Annually at Dartmouth we care for approximately 300 patients with 
invasive ductal cancer and 100 patients with DCIS.  Approximately ⅔  of these 
patients (266) will undergo breast conserving  surgery.  Approx imately ¾ of these 
patients will have non-palpable tumors ( 200).  We anticipat e that it will be 
possible to accrue one third (67) of these patients per year.  Thus, we expect that 
it will take 2 years to complete accrual. 
Secondary endpoints will be analyzed as follows.  The mean specimen  
volume from Group S will be compared to the mean specimen volume from 
Group W using t - statistics.  The concor dance between lesion volumes identified 
on the supine MRI images and the prone MRI images will be evaluated through 
correlation and regression analysis.  
Relevant data will be saved in Velos ca se report forms.  The NCCC Safety 
and Data Monitoring Committee will m onitor this trial quarterly.  
 
Section 9.  HUMAN SUBJECTS 
 
 The patients for this study will be accrued from the population treated at 
the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center .  All patients will sign an informed 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 12
consent, which describes the treatment  to be performed and discusses the risks 
and benefits of participation in the study. 
 Risk/Benefit analysis:  
Risks associated with the experimental arm of this study include the risks 
of an additional MRI and all participants hav e potential confident iality risks.  The 
risk of an additional MRI is negligible  and reflects the minute risk of life 
threatening allergy and development of nephrogenic sclerosis related to 
gadolinium based intravenous contrast.  Patients deemed to be at higher risk for gadolinium induced nephrogenic sclerosis  because of compromised renal 
function will not be eligible for partici pation.  Patients who experience a 
significant allergic reaction to gadolinium based intravenous contrast at the time 
of their clinical prone MRI will also be consid ered ineligible for study participation.  
Risk of breach of confidentiality of the medical records of participants will 
be minimized.  Subject identity is numerically coded and is not available to research investigators or otherwise st ored on the databases maintained by the 
researchers to archive the clinical encounters accrued as part of the studies 
conducted under this protocol.  In this regard, all conventional clinical image data 
is de-identified prior to its use for analys is.  Databases which are used to store 
subject-sensitive information, even though completely de-identified as stored, are 
password-protected and encrypted during file/data transfers from viewing 
terminals.  As further safe-guard, t he Data Safety Monitoring and Accrual 
Committee of the Norris Cotton Cancer Center will oversee the conduct of the 
trial. 
The potential benefits associ ated with the experimental  arm of this study 
include lower positive margin rates,  smaller excision volumes, and less 
discomfort since they will avoid the wire placement.  
The importance of the knowledge to  be gained and the ultimate potential 
for benefit for future patients if this new technology is effective far outweighs the 
nominal risks experienced by the women wh o participate in this clinical study.  
 
Version  5.6.14 
 13
Pregnant women will be excl uded due to the potential risk of gadolinium to 
the fetus.  
Women with child-bearing potential are eligible for enrollment into the 
study.  The risks of participating in t he imaging sessions for these women is no 
greater than for any other participant.  Risks associated with br east surgery vis-à-
vis child-bearing potential is outlined as  part of standard of care.  Thus, any 
woman of child-bearing years enrolled in  this protocol would already understand 
(and have accepted) the surgic al risks to her fertility.  
Only women will be enrolled in th e study because breast cancer is 
predominantly a female disease.  The imaging apparatus is design to 
accommodate the size and shape variati ons associated with the adult female 
breast.  While a very small proportion of  breast cancer appears in males, the 
imaging systems are not designed to image the male breast.  All racial and ethnic 
categories will be recruited commensurate with the racial /ethnic composition of 
the DHMC patient catchment area. 
Patients will be considered “on study ” and will be monitored for adverse 
events by the operating sur geon from the time of regi stration until 2 weeks after 
surgery.  
 
Section 10.  REFERENCES 
 
1. Kaufman CS, Delbecq R, Jacobson L.  Excising the reexcision: stereo-
tactic core-biopsy decreases the need for reexcision of breast cancer. 
World J Surg  1998; 22:1023-8. 
2. Cangiarella J, Groos J, Symmans W et al.  The incidence of positive 
margins with breast conserving ther apy following mammotome biopsy for 
microcalcification. Surg Oncol  2000; 74:263-6. 
3. Kirstein L, Rafferty E, Specht M,  et al.  Outcomes of multiple wire 
localization for larger breast cancers: when can mastectomy be avoided? J Am Coll Surg  2008; 207: 342-6. 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 14
4. Harlow S, Krag D, Ames S, et al.  Intraoperative US localization to guide 
surgical excision of non- palpable breast carcinoma. J Am Coll Surg  1999; 
189:241-6. 
5. Rahusen F, Bremers A,  Fabry H et al.  US guided lumpectomy of non-
palpable breast cancer vs wire-guided resection: a randomized clinical 
trial. Ann Surg Oncol  2002; 9: 994-8. 
6. Kaufman C, Jacobson L, Bachman B et al.  Intraoperative US facilitates 
surgery for early breast cancer. Ann Surg Oncol  2002; 9: 988-93. 
7. Rahman R, Crawford S, Larkin A.   Superiority of sonographic hematoma 
guided resection of mammogram only visible breast cancer: wire 
localization should be an ex ception- not the rule. Ann Surg Oncol  2007; 
14: 2228-32. 
8. Smith L, Henry-Tillman R, Harme s S et al.  Hematoma directed and 
ultrasound guided breast biopsy. Ann Surg  2001; 233:669-75. 
9. Berg W, Gutierrez L, NessAiver  M, et al.  Diagnostic accuracy of 
mammography, clinical examination, US and MR imaging in preoperative 
assessment of breast cancer. Radiology  2004; 233: 830-49. 
10. Kriege M, Brekelmans CT, Boetes  C, et al.  Efficacy of MRI and 
mammography for breast-cancer scr eening in women with a familial or 
genetic predisposition.  N Engl J Med  2004; 351:427-437. 
11. Leach MO, Boggis CR, Dixon AK, et  al.  Screening with magnetic 
resonance imaging and mammography of a UK population at high familial risk of breast cancer: a prospective  multicentre cohort study (MARIBS). 
Lancet  2005;365:1769–1778. 
12. Warner E, Plewes DB , Hill KA, et al.  Surveillance of BRCA1 and BRCA2 
mutation carriers with magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound, 
mammography, and clinical breast examination. JAMA  2004;292:1317–
1325. 
13. Hwang E, Kinkel K, Esserman L, et  al.  MRI in pati ents diagnosed with 
DCIS: value in the diagnosis of resi dual disease, occult invasion and 
multicentricity. Ann Surg Onc  2003; 10:381-88. 
 
Version  5.6.14 
 15
14. Bedrosian I, Mick R, Orel S et al.  Changes in the surg ical management of 
patients with breast carcinoma based on preoperative magnetic 
resonance imaging. Cancer 2003; 98: 468-73. 
15. Schell A, Rosenkranz K, Lewis P.  Role of breast MRI in the preoperative 
evaluation of patient s with newly diagnosed breast cancer.  AJR Am J 
Roentgenol.  2009 May;192(5):1438-44. 
16. Solin L, Orel S, Hwang W, et al.  Relationship of breast MRI to outcome 
after breast conservation treatment with radiation for women with early 
stage invasive breast carcinoma or DCIS. J Clin Onc  2008; 26: 386-91. 
17. Fischer U, Zachariae O, Baum F et al.  The influence of preoperative MRI 
of the breasts on recurrence rate  in patients with breast cancer. Eur Radiol  
2004; 14:1725-31. 
18. Sakakibara M, Nagashima T, Sangai  T et al. Breast conserving surgery 
using projection and reproduction techni ques of surgical position breast 
MRI in patients with DCIS. J Am Coll Surg  2008; 27:62-8. 
19. Pallone M, Poplack S, Avutu H, Paulsen K, Barth R. Supine breast MRI 
and 3D optical scanning: a novel approach to improve tumor localization for breast conserving surgery. A nn Surg Onc 2014, in press.  
20. Reboussin, D M, DeMets, D L, Kim, K M, and Lan, K K G.  Computations 
for group sequential boundar ies using the Lan-DeMets spending function 
method. Controlled Clinical Trials 2000, 21:190-207  