 1 
  
A pharmacokinetic analysis of tacrolimus ER dosing in obese kidney transplant 
recipients  
              
I
NVESTIGATOR : 
Patricia West -Thielke, PharmD, BCPS 
Director of Clinical Research  
Assistant Professor of Surgery 
Clinical Assistant Professor of Pharmacy  
office: 312-996-5695 
fax: 312-996-3579  
mobile: 312-533-1390  
pwest@uic.edu  
   
September 19, 2016  
 
SPONSOR: 
Astellas Pharma US, Inc.  
1 Astellas Way  
Northbrook, IL 60062  
Phone: 1 (800) 888-7704
Version #2 September 19, 2016 Page 1 of 16 
 
 2 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
   
1.0       INTRODUCTION                                                                              
   1.1       Background and Rationale                                                                
1.2       Description of tacrolimus extended release                    1.3 Chemistry, Manufacturing and Control 
Information/Pharmacology Toxicology Information 
  
2.0  STUDY OBJECTIVE (S)                  
   2.1       Primary Objective                                                                              
  
3.0       INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN                  
   3.1       Study Design     
3.2       Hypothesis                                                                        
3.3       Study Population                 
3.3.1.   Inclusion Criteria                                                                   
3.3.2    Exclusion Criteria     
3.3.3 Trial Population                                                       
3.4       Study Duration                                                                                  3.5       Study Procedures                 
3.5.1    Subject Screening                                                                   
3.5.2    Baseline Evaluations                                                            
3.5.3    Randomization                                                                    3.5.4    Follow- Up Visits                                                    
 3.5.4.1 Scheduled Visits             3.5.5    Termination                                                                          
3.6  Interim Analysis                
3.7       Adverse Events                
3.7.1    Adverse Event  Reporting                                                    
3.7.2    Serious Adverse Event Reporting                                       3.7.3    Stopping Rules               3.7.4    Risk Analysis                                                                      
3.8       Data and Statistical Plan              
3.8.1    Data and Statistical Plan  
3.8.2    D
ata Collection                                                                    
 4.0      SUMMARY OF PREVIOUS HUMAN EXPERIENCE  
 
5.0      REFERENCES                                                                                                     
  
6.0 APPENDICES  
Appendix A                Table 1: Schedule of Visits & Procedures  
Appendix B                Consent to Participate in Research  
Appendix C                Case Report Forms (E ligibility, Baseline Evaluation)   
Appendix D             24 Hour PK Flowsheet  
Version #2 September 19, 2016 Page 2 of 16 
 
 3 
Appendix E                Package Insert for Tacrolimus Extended Release  
Appendix F                Investigator Curriculum Vitae and Medical License   
 
 
                                         
Version #2 
September 19, 2016 Page 3 of 16 
 
 4 
1.0       INTRODUCTION 
1.1              Background and Rationale  
Tacrolimus exhibits significant inter - and intra- individual variability of its absorption 
and metabolism. Because of this variability, standard dosing is not an accurate predictor of drug exposure. In clinical use, tacrolimus whole blood trough concentrations are measured to ensure efficacy and safety. Furthermore, the relatively  
low bioavailability of tacrolimus is thought to be a result of the combination of poor water-solubility, pre- systemic metabolism of tacrolimus in the gastrointestinal tract 
and activity of the P -glycoprotein efflux pump found in the enterocytes of the GI 
tract. Tacrolimus is extensively metabolized by the cytochrome P -450 system 
(CYP3A). The plasma protein binding of tacrolimus is approximately 99%. Tacrolimus is bound mainly to albumin and alpha-1-acid glycoprotein. The distribution of tacrolimus between blood and plasma depends on several factors including hematocrit, temperature at the time of plasma separation, drug concentration, and plasma protein concentration.   Pharmacodynamic studies have revealed that, depending on time following transplantation, maintaining whole blood trough levels between 5 and 20 ng/mL provides adequate protection against acute rejection and limits the occurrence of adverse events. The management of tacrolimus blood levels is complicated by variable intra - and inter- patient ab sorption, interaction with food and concomitant 
medications, and the relatively low bioavailability of tacrolimus from the Prograf formulation (17 ± 10% in adult kidney transplant patients).  
Previous studies examining immunosuppressants have shown that dr ug levels in the 
immediate post- transplant period are a major determinant of subsequent acute cellular 
rejection. It is known that tacrolimus (TAC) < 10 ng/mL is associated with increased 
rates of acute cellular rejection by one month post-transplant.  
 
There is controversy regarding the appropriate dosing weight to use for 
immunosuppressants (IS). Weights use range from ideal body weight (IBW) to total body weight (TBW) depending on the institution and drug being dosed.  This becomes particularly important in the obese population when there are significant differences between IBW and TBW.  Our institution has always used IBW for the dosing of all IS due to concerns for nephrotoxicity with initial high blood levels of tacrolimus.  The concern in obese patients is that we are underdosing this population that could be at higher risk for rejection due to higher circulating concentrations of pro-inflammatory cytokines.  The introduction of the novel use of a robotic 
transplantation procedure at our institution for this patient population has led to increasing numbers of transplant in obese recipients; therefore,  we decided to re-evaluate our dosing protocol. Data from an internal study at UIC show that our use of IBW for tacrolimus dosing is not sufficient for th e obese population (body mass index 
[BMI] ≥30).  The dose used through month 3 was closer to 0.1 mg/kg/day when total body weight was utilized.  However, the use of an adjusted body weight (aBW) is 
Version #2 
September 19, 2016 Page 4 of 16 
 
 5 
common for medication dosing in obese patients.  Adjusted body weight is calculated 
if the TBW is greater than 30% of the calculated IBW.  aBW = IBW + 0.4(TBW - IBW). There is limited data available supporting the use of either IBW or aBW in dosing tacrolimus within obese patients as these patients are typically excluded from 
most clinical trials, particularly the pharmacokinetic trials. In addition, no literature is available comparing the two dosing weights to determine which leads to therapeutic concentrations most effectively.   
Summary and Present Study 
Tacrolimus extended release (Astagraf) has recently been approved by the FDA as a 
once a day dosing regimen.  This formulation has the potential to improve compliance. Current dosing recommendation for the extended release formulation in renal transplant is 0.15 mg/kg/day administered once daily in the morning. There are no specifications on appropriate dosing in obese patients or on whether to use actual, ideal or and adjusted weight.  It will be advantageous to understand the pharmacokinetics of this medicatio n in the obese to determine the appropriate dosing 
regimen. In this study, obese p atients will be randomized to receive tacrolimus 
extended release 0.15 mg/kg/day based on either ideal body weight (IBW) or adjusted 
body weight ( aBW).   
 
1.2       Descripti on of tacrolimus extended release 
ASTAGRAF XL is a calcineurin -inhibitor immunosuppressant indicated for the 
prophylaxis of organ rejection in patients receiving a kidney transplant with 
mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and corticosteroids, with or without  basiliximab induction  
 
Risks and Medication Interaction: 
This study poses no additional risks to the patient. Tacrolimus is a mainstay of immunosuppressant therapy at this healthcare organization. Safety data that is collected during the usual standard of car e visits will also be assessed in this study 
including: serum creatinine, graft function, and side effects. Additionally trough tacrolimus levels will be reviewed by study coordinator and dosage adjustments will be made as necessary to stay within goal target range. The safety data will be analyzed as descriptive data with reports of adverse effects in each study arm.   
 Since tacrolimus is metabolized mainly by CYP3A enzymes, drugs or substances known to inhibit these enzymes may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. 
Drugs known to induce CYP3A enzymes may decrease tacrolimus whole blood 
concentrations.  Dose adjustments may be needed along with frequent monitoring of tacrolimus whole blood trough concentrations when ASTAGRAF XL is administered 
with CYP3A inhibitors or inducers. In addition, patients should be monitored for 
adverse reactions including changes in renal function and QT prolongation. . Mycophenolic Acid Products 
Version #2 
September 19, 2016 Page 5 of 16 
 
 6 
With a given dose of mycophenolic acid (MPA) products, exposure to MPA is higher 
with ASTAGRAF XL  coadministration than with cyclosporine coadministration 
because cyclosporine interrupts the enterohepatic recirculation of MPA while 
tacrolimus does not. Clinicians should monitor for MPA associated adverse events and reduce the dose of concomitantly administered mycophenolic acid products, if needed. 
 Grapefruit Juice  
Grapefruit juice inhibits CYP3A -enzymes resulting in increased tacrolimus whole 
blood trough concentrations, and patients should avoid eating grapefruit or drinking grapefruit juice i n combination with ASTAGRAF XL. 
 Alcohol Consumption of alcohol with ASTAGRAF XL may increase the rate of release of tacrolimus and/or adversely alter the pharmacokinetic properties and the effectiveness 
and safety of ASTAGRAF XL. Therefo re, alcoholic  beverages should not be 
consumed with ASTAGRAF XL.  Protease Inhibitors  
Most protease inhibitors inhibit CYP3A enzymes and may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. It is recommended to avoid concomitant use of tacrolimus with nelfinavir unless the benefits outweigh the risks. Whole blood concentrations of 
tacrolimus are markedly increased when  coadministered with telaprevir or with 
boceprevir. Monitoring of tacrolimus whole blood concentrations and tacrolimus -
associated adverse reactions, and appropriate adjustments in the dosing regimen of tacrolimus are  recommended when tacrolimus and protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir, 
telaprevir, boceprevir) are used  concomitantly. 
 Antifungal Agents Frequent monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are  recommended when concomitant use of the following 
antifungal drugs with tacrolimus is initiated or discontinued . Azoles: Voriconazole, 
posaconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole, fluconazole and clot rimazole inhibit 
CYP3A metabolism of tacrolimus and increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. When initiating therapy with  voriconazole or posaconazole in patients 
already receiving tacrolimus, it is recommended that the tacrolimus dose  be initially 
reduced to one-third of the original dose and the subsequent tacrolimus doses be adjusted based on the tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Caspofungin is an inducer of CYP3A and decreases whole blood concentrations of tacrolimus.  Calcium Channel Blocke rs 
Verapamil, diltiazem, nifedipine, and nicardipine inhibit CYP3A metabolism of tacrolimus and may increase  tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of 
whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended wh en these calcium channel blocking drugs and tacrolimus are used  
Version #2 September 19, 2016 Page 6 of 16 
 
 7 
concomitantly. 
 Antibacterials  
Erythromycin, clarithromycin, troleandomycin and chloramphenicol inhibit CYP3A metabolism of tacrolimus  and may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. 
Monitoring of blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these drugs and tacrolimus are used concomitantly.  
 Antimycobacterials  
Rifampin and rifabutin are inducers of CYP3A enzymes and may decrease 
tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of whole blood concentrations 
and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these 
antimycobacterial drugs and tacrolimus are used  concomitantly. 
 Anticonvulsants Phenytoin, carbamazepine and phenobarbital induce CYP3A enzymes and may decrease tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these drugs and tacrolimus are used concomitantly. Concomitant administration of phenytoin with tacrolimus may also increase phenytoin plasma concentrations. Thus, frequent monitoring of phenytoin plasma concentrations and adjusting the phenytoin dose as needed are recommended when tacrolimus and phenytoin are administered concomitantly.  
 St. John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum) St. John’s Wort induces CYP3A enzymes and may decrease tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when St.  John’s Wort and tacrolimus are 
coadministered.  
 Gastric Acid Suppressors/Neutralizers  
Lansoprazole and omeprazole, the proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), as CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 substrates, share the same CYP3A4 system with tacrolimus for th eir hepatic 
elimination, and may potentially competitively inhibit the  CYP3A4 metabolism of 
tacrolimus and thereby substantially increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations, especially in transplant patients who are intermediate or poor CYP2C19 metaboli zers 
in which the PPIs metabolic  pathway shifts from 2C19 to 3A4, as compared to those 
patients who are efficient CYP2C19 metabolizers.  Cimetidine, a CYP2C19 and 
CYP3A4 inhibitor, may also inhibit the CYP3A4 metabolism of tacrolimus and thereby substantial ly increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. 
Coadministration with magnesium and aluminum hydroxide antacids increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these drugs and tacrolimus are used concomitantly.  
Version #2 
September 19, 2016 Page 7 of 16 
 
 8 
Other Drugs  
Amiodarone, bromocriptine, nefazodone, metoclopramide, danazol, ethinyl estradiol 
and methylprednisolone may inhibit CYP3A metabolism of tacrolimus and increase tacrolimus wh ole blood concentrations. Monitoring of blood concentrations and 
appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these drugs and tacrolimus are coadministered.  
 
Dosage and Administration  
The initial dose of tacrolimus extended release will be tacrolimus extended release  0.15 mg/kg/day given in the morning based on either IBW or aBW depending on which arm the patient is randomized.  Subsequent doses will be adjusted to maintain the target whole blood trough level of 8-12 ng/mL per institution transplant protocols.  ASTAGRAF XL is a once daily extended -release oral formulation of tacrolimus.  
To ensure consistent and maximum possible drug exposure, ASTAGRAF XL capsules should be taken consistently every morning, preferably on an empty stomach at least 1 hour before a meal or at least 2 hours after a meal.  ASTAGRAF XL should be swallowed whole and should not be chewed, divided, or crushed.  Patients should not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice in combination with ASTAGRAF XL.  If a dose of ASTAGRAF XL is missed, the dose may be taken up to 14 hours after the scheduled time.  Beyond the 14-hour time frame, the patient should wait until the usual scheduled time the following morning to take the next regular daily dose. It is not recommended to double the dose of ASTAGRAF XL to make up for the missed dose.  
Supply and Storage  
ASTAGRAF XL is supplied in short, square bottles as well as in blister cartons; the statement 'ONCE DAILY' appears on its label.  ASTAGRAF XL and tacrolimus immediate -release capsules are further differentiated by different color schemes.  
 Store and Dispense Store at 25°C (77°F); excursions permitted to 15°C-30°C (59°F-86°F). 
 
1.3 Chemistry, Manufacturing and Control Information/Pharmacology Toxicology Information 
We believe our application may rely on the previous FDA’s acceptance of the CMC 
and Pharmacology and Toxicology information related to the approved marketed drug 
intended for this investigation. 
 
2.0        STUDY OBJECTIVES  
2.1        Primary Objective 
The primary objective of this research is to determine the best dosing method of 
tacrolimus extended release for obese kidney transplant recipients.  
 
Version #2 
September 19, 2016 Page 8 of 16 
 
 9 
3.0       INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
3.1       Study Design  
This is a prospective, randomized, single- center, dual arm study to be conducted 
under an FDA exempt protocol.  Our site will enroll 25 eligible patients for this study. 
Subjects will be followed for 14 days  (+/- 3 days).  We anticipate that it will take one 
year to enroll 2 5 patients.  
 
3.2       Hypothesis  
Obese patients will require a tacrolimus extended release dose that is greater than that 
calculated using ideal body weight.    
 
3.3       Study Population 
3.3.1    Inclusion Criteria  
1. The subject is a recipient of a living donor or deceased donor kidney only transplant  
2. Subject is > 18 years of age  
3. BMI≥30 on POD 0 
 
3.3.2    Exclusion Criteria  
1. Multi-organ transplant 
2. Subjects taking tacrolimus pre -transplant (i.e. positive crossmatch transplants 
or re-transplants) 
3. Patients undergoing simultaneous sleeve gastrectomy  at the time of transplant.  
 
3.3.3 Trial Population 
This study will randomize de novo kidney transplant recipients who are at least 18 
years of age and obese as evidenced by a BMI ≥ 30 on the day of transplantation POD 0.  Demographics at this institution are approximately 50% African American, 35% Hispanic, and 15% Caucasian.    
3.4       Study Duration 
Subjects will be followed for a period of 14 days .  We anticipate that it will take one 
year to enroll 2 5 patients.  
 
3.5       Study Procedures   
3.5.1    Subject Screening  
Subjects will be recruited from patients undergoing kidney transplantation at the 
University of Illinois Health System.  Medical history and pre- operative surgical visit 
and laboratory results will be utilized for  the subject screening.    
  3.5.2      Baseline  Evaluations  
• Demographics: age, gender, and race 
• Height, weight  and BMI  
• Blood pressure 
Version #2 September 19, 2016 Page 9 of 16 
 
 10 
• Results of Standard of Care Preoperative CBC  
• Medical History, Physical and Laboratory Tests  
• Results of Standard of Care Preoperative Urine pregnancy test (for female 
subjects) 
 
3.5.3        Randomization  
Patients will be randomized to receive tacrolimus extended release 0.15 mg/kg/day 
based on either IBW or aBW within 48 hours of transplant.   
 
3.5.4     Follow- Up Care 
3.5.4.1  Scheduled Follow Up  
Post-transplantation, three pharmacokinetic (PK) assessments will be performed over a 14-day period in order to determine area under the curve (AUC).  
 On Study Day 1, the first PK assessment will be done on the day the patient receives the first dose of study drug. This may be on post-operative day (POD) 0- 2 depending 
on post-operative urine output and attending surgeon preference.    Additional trough level measurements will be obtained pre-dose on days 2-5.   Study Day 7 will be defined as the second P K assessment and must occur between 
POD 5 – 9 and prior to discharge. 
 Study Day 14 will be defined as the third PK assessment and must occur between 6 – 8 days after the second PK assessment which correlates to POD 11 -17. 
 
Pharmacokinetic Assessments : 
Study Day 1, 7, and 14 PK blood sampling points include: 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 
12 and 24 hours after the dose of tacrolimus extended release. This results in a total of 33 blood samples. 
 
3.5.5        Termination  
If a subject decides to withdraw from  the study and desires the sole use of standard of 
care immunosuppressant dosing, the subject will be withdrawn and standard of care 
immunosuppressant dosing will be utilized .   
 
3.6              Interim  Analysis  
No interim analysis are planned . 
 
3.7           Adverse Events  
3.7.1        Adverse Event Reporting  
Any adverse event will be reported to the University of Illinois at Chicago 
Institutional Review Board (IRB ) within 15 business days by submitting a prompt 
report.  The Chairman of the IRB will be notified via this mechanism.   
Version #2 September 19, 2016 Page 10 of 16 
 
 11 
 
(1)        Subject's initials and subject number (2)        Investigator's name (3)        Protocol title and number (4)        Subject's date of birth, gender, and race (5)        Concomitant medication(s): dose, route, durat ion of treatment, date of last  
dose 
(6)        Information regarding the adverse event:  (i)         description 
 (ii)        date(s) the event began and ended  
 (iii)       whether the experience resulted in death or was life- threatening  
 (iv)       wheth er hospitalization was required or prolonged 
 (v)        any treatment(s) required  
 (vi)       outcome(s) of treatment(s)  
 (vii)      Investigator's determination of relationship to the test article(s).  
 All adverse events will be recorded on appropriate c ase report form(s). A summary of 
the adverse events i ncluding frequency, type, and severity will be reported.  
 
3.7.2        Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
Any adverse event will be reported to the University of Illinois at Chicago 
Institutional Review Boa rd (IRB) within 5 business days by submitting a prompt 
report.  The Chairman of the IRB will be notified via this mechanism.    
 (1)        Subject's initials and subject number (2)        Investigator's name (3)        Protocol title and number (4)        Subject's date of birth, gender, and race (5)        Concomitant medication(s): dose, route, duration of treatment, date of last dose (6)        Information regarding the adverse event:  (i)         description 
 (ii)        date(s) the event began and ende d 
 (iii)       whether the experience resulted in death or was life- threatening  
 (iv)       whether hospitalization was required or prolonged 
 (v)        any treatment(s) required  
 (vi)       outcome(s) of treatment(s)  
 (vii)      Investigator's determinat ion of relationship to the test article(s).  
 All adverse events will be recorded on appropriate case report form(s). A summary of the adverse events including frequency, type, and severity will be reported.  
 
3.7.3        Stopping Rules  
The investigators will stop the study in the event that the following events occur.    
 
Version #2 
September 19, 2016 Page 11 of 16 
 
 12 
 (1)  One subject experiences death related to  tacrolimus extended release.   
  
In the event of study termination, the investigator will notify the FDA and IRB that enrollment is stopped.  
3.7.4        Risk Analysis  
The study drug poses no additional risks to the patient. Tacrolimus is a mainstay of 
immunosuppressant therapy at this healthcare organization. Risks from the study 
procedures include loss of confidentiality and slight pain, bruising or infection from the blood draws. Safety data that is collected during the usual standard of care visits will also be assessed in this study including: serum creatinine, graft function, and side effects. Additionally trough tacrolimus levels will b e reviewed by study coordinator 
and dosage adjustments will be made as necessary to stay within goal target range. The safety data will be analyzed as descriptive data with reports of adverse effects in each study arm.  
 
3.8            Data  and Statistical  Analysis  
3.8.1    Data and Statistical Plan  
All demographic data, pharmacokinetic parameters, and laboratory data will be 
summarized using descriptive statistics. For continuous data, the mean, standard deviation, median, minimum and maximum will be repor ted and compared using a 
paired t-test. For categorical data, percent and frequency will be reported. For the 
endpoint comparing percents between aBW and IBW, Chi- square analyses with 
Fisher’s Exact as needed will be conducted.  Noncompartmental pharmacoki netic 
parameters (AUC0 -24, Cmax, Tmax, C24, T½) will be calculated from blood 
concentration -time data. In addition, pharmacokinetic profiles will be analyzed using 
nonlinear mixed effects modeling to assess differences in rate of absorption and clearance b etween the aBW and IBW groups.  A sample size of 10 subjects per group 
will be recruited for this pilot PK investigation.  
 
3.8.2    Data Collection and Storage  
We will collect relevant medical history information from the subject's medical 
records includi ng illnesses and hospitalizations that occurred prior to or occur after 
subject participation in the research .  Additionally, we will collect age, gender, race, 
height, weight, BMI, CBC, medical history, physical examination, laboratory tests, 
and urine pr egnancy test (for female subjects ). All data will be recorded on case 
report forms and used for analysis.  Results will be compiled  to assess aggregate 
outcomes and address the issues of reliability  and efficac y.  Data will be maintained 
in a database in a password protected computer. 
 
3.8.3 Pharmacogenetic Analysis  
One additional sample will be stored for potential future analysis.   
 
3.8.4 Endpoints  
Version #2 September 19, 2016 Page 12 of 16 
 
 13 
1.  Difference in tacrolimus exposure (AUC24) in obese patients dosed using 
aBW compared to IBW.  
2. Difference i n the time to a therapeutic tacrolimus trough level in the aBW 
group compared to the IBW group. 
 
While there is limited data for dosing tacrolimus in the obese patient population internal data conducted at the University of Illinois Health System has demon strated a 
statistically significant difference between dosing based on ideal body weight and actual body weight.  Additionally  the acute rejection rate was 55% in obese patient s 
and 22% in non-obese patients, possibly as a result of under dosing in the obes e 
population. It is well established that low tacrolimus levels especially in the first week of transplant are associated with acute rejections. At the same time high tacrolimus levels increase the risk of nephrotoxicity.  Therefore, it is vital that the c orrect weight 
be utilized in dosing tacrolimus extended release, especially in a medication that will require a full day to wait for a dosage adjustment. The proposed endpoints will give the transplant community a better understanding of which weight to utilize in dosing this unique patient population. The AUC calculation will help to optimize the appropriate dosing in the obese patients to ensure a therapeutic level is maintained in a medication with high lipophilicity.  
 
4.0 SUMMARY OF PREVIOUS HUMAN EXPERIENCE  
We believe our application can rely on the FDA’s acceptance of the previous human 
experience related to the approved marketed drug intended for investigation.  Please refer to pages 27 -30 of the package insert.  
                     
Version #2 
September 19, 2016 Page 13 of 16 
 
 14 
5.0 REFERENCES  
Kino, T., et al. FK-506, a novel immunosuppressant is olated from a Streptomyces. II.  
Immunosuppressive effect of FK-506 in vitro. J. Antibiot. 40, 1256-1265 (1987). 
 Laskow, D.A., et al. The role of tacrolimus in adult kidney transplantation: a review. Clin. Transplant. 12, 489-503 (1998). 
 Shapiro, R. Tacrolimus (FK-506) in kidney transplantation. Transplant. Proc. 29, 45 47 (1997).  Ihara, H., et al. Intra- and interindividual variation in the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus (FK506) in kidney transplant recipients --importance of trough level as a  
practical indicator. International journal of urology : official journal of the Japanese Urological Association 2, 151-155 (1995).  Staatz, C., Taylor, P. & Tett, S. Low tacrolimus concentrations and increased risk of early acute rejection in adult renal transplantation.  Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. 16, 
1905-1909 (2001).  Borobia, A.M., et al. Trough Tacrolimus Concentrat ions in the First Week After  
Kidney Transplantation Are Related to Acute Rejection. Ther. Drug Monit. 31, 436 442 (2009).  O'Seaghdha, C., et al. Higher tacrolimus trough levels on days 2-5 post- renal 
transplant are associated with reduced rates of acute r ejection. Clin. Transplant. 23, 
462-468 (2009).  Olyaei, A.J., de Mattos, A.M. & Bennett, W.M. Nephrotoxicity of  
immunosuppressive drugs: new insight and preventive strategies. Current opinion in critical care 7, 384 -389 (2001). 
 Stratta, P., et al. The interactions of age, sex, body mass index, genetics, and steroid weight-based doses on tacrolimus dosing requirement after adult kidney 
transplantation. Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 68, 671-680 (2012).  Kuypers D.R., Peeters P.C., Sennesael J.J. Improved adherence to tacrolimus once daily formulation in renal recipients: a randomized controlled trial using electronic  
monitoring. Transplantation 95, 333-340 (2013).  
 
 
     
Version #2 September 19, 2016 Page 14 of 16 
 
 15 
Appendix A                  
Table 1: Schedule of Visits & Procedures  
A pharmacokinetic analysis of tacrolimus ER dosing in obese kidney transplant 
recipients  
 
 
     
              Schedule of Visits and Procedures  Prior to 
Transplant  Visit 1 Visit 2 Visit 3 
Post Operative Day   0-2 5-9 11-17 
Informed Consent  X    
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X    
Randomization  X    
Medical History  X    
Physical  Exam  X    
Demographics  X    
Height X    
Weight/BMI  X    
Basic chemistry profile  X X X X 
Hematology profile  X X X X 
Urine pregnancy test (if female, as needed)  X    
Tacrolimus level  (0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 24 
hours post dose )  X X X 
Concomitant medications  X X X X 
Adverse Event Reporting  X X X X 
Version #2 September 19, 2016 Page 15 of 16 
 
 16 
Appendix B                Consent to Participate in Research  
Appendix C                Case Report Forms (Eligibility, Baseline Evaluation) 
Appendix D    24 Hour PK Flowsheet  
Appendix E                Package Insert for Tacrolimus Extended Release  
Appendix F                Investigator Curriculum Vitae and Medical License   
  
      
  
Version #2 
September 19, 2016 Page 16 of 16 
 