Page 1 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016Protocol Title: Physical  Activity and Screen-Time Regulations in  Childcare Centers: 
Influence on Young Children’s Health Behaviors (Pause & Play) – Aim  2
Academic PI Name: Amanda E. Staiano, PhD, MPP
Co-Investigator’s Name: Corby K. Martin, PhD
Sponsor: Gulf States Health Policy Center (NIMHD)
Protocol Version Date: 10/06/2016
IRB Review  History:  Initial Submission Approved 7/1/15
Objectives
A. Specific Aims
Reducing  childhood obesity is identified as a top priority of the Mayor’s Health  
City Initiative  (MHCI) of Baton  Rouge, Louisiana, which is a non-profit organization that  
brings together key community stakeholders to promote healthy living and active 
lifestyles. Louisiana’s prevalence of obesity in preschoolers is 60% higher than the 
national average: 13.8% of preschoolers  in the state are obese1 compared to 8.4% 
nationally.2 Obesity prevalence is particularly high among non-Hispanic  black children.2 
Childhood obesity  contributes to a higher risk of adult obesity,  premature mortality, and 
comorbidities including diabetes, hypertension, ischemic heart disease,  stroke, asthma, 
and polycystic ovary  syndrome.3 Physical  activity is a protective factor against  childhood 
obesity,4 whereas  sedentary behavior has emerged as a risk  factor for obesity.5 Yet the 
majority of preschoolers  do not meet  nationally recommended guidelines for physical 
activity or sedentary behavior. Less  than 10% of preschoolers  obtain the recommended 
1 hour/day of moderate-to-vigorous physical  activity.6,7 Despite  recommendations of no  
more than 2 hours/day  of screen-time,8 which  is the most common  sedentary activity 
among preschoolers,9 children view on average 4.1 hours  of screen-time each  day.10 
Childcare  centers represent  an opportunity to increase physical activity and  
reduce sedentary behavior  in preschool-aged children,  since over 80% of children 
spend some time in childcare settings by the age of 3 years.10 Indeed, almost 50% of 
the variation in preschool  children’s physical activity occurs in childcare centers.11 Yet 
the majority  of childcare  centers are conducive  to low levels of physical activity  and high 
levels of screen-time:  many centers schedule  little time and  do not create designated 
space for physical activity,12 and children spend  on average 1.3 hours/day watching  a 
screen in these centers.9 Non-Hispanic  black children and children with obesity are 
most likely  to have both low levels of physical activity and high  levels of screen  time,13 
indicating that this population is particularly important  to target  to improve health 
behaviors. 
Most  states do not have strong regulations  for physical activity  or screen-time in 
childcare settings.14 Louisiana’s Department  of Education (DOE) is implementing new 
regulations for children  in childcare settings in 2015 to comply with  national 
recommendations: 1) physical activity of at least  1 hour/day and 2) screen-time limited 
to 2 hours/day. The DOE is also providing extensive training and  programmatic support 
to the centers.  For the proposed project, the MHCI joins academic  researchers at 
Pennington Biomedical to evaluate the implementation of these regulations and to 
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 2 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016examine effects on children’s health behaviors. During this project, we will answer three 
major questions: 1) are the regulations being implemented as intended; 2) do  the 
policies benefit  the intended audience; and 3) what do stakeholders identify as the most 
important strategies  to improve children’s health behaviors. The demographics of Baton 
Rouge provide an opportunity  to examine these questions in a high  risk population: 46% 
of city residents  are non-Hispanic black and 28% of children under the age of 5 years 
live in households below the federal poverty  level.15 
The aims of the project are:
Specific Aim 2: To examine  the physical activity and screen-time behaviors  of 
children enrolled in licensed  childcare centers before and after the enactment  of 
new state regulations.
Through this academic-community  partnership, we are  taking advantage of a 
natural policy experiment to examine the childcare environment  and children’s 
behaviors before and after implementation of a policy change. We will also facilitate 
conversations among stakeholders  to create  additional strategies to increase young 
children’s physical activity and decrease  screen-time both in childcare centers  and in 
other settings. The overall goal is to increase  physical activity  and reduce screen-time 
among preschoolers enrolled  in childcare centers.  If successful,  we will disseminate 
findings throughout  the Gulf States  region  as a model of  how changing  policies  in 
childcare settings can improve  children’s health  behaviors and reduce  childhood 
obesity.
Background
The Problem to Address: Obesity  and Physical Inactivity in Preschool Children
The Gulf States  of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama each rank in the top ten 
for highest  prevalence  of childhood obesity, adult obesity,  physical inactivity,  type 2 
diabetes, and hypertension.16 In Louisiana, obesity affects  13.8% of children aged  3 to 5 
years1 and 29% of all children aged 2 to 17 years,17 which is substantially higher  than 
the national  prevalence.2 Obesity during childhood contributes to several  serious  
comorbidities including diabetes, hypertension, ischemic heart disease,  stroke, asthma, 
and polycystic ovary  syndrome.3 Moreover, children with obesity are at higher risk for 
premature mortality.3 
Increased  physical activity  and decreased sedentary behavior are key 
recommendations to reduce the risk for obesity  and related  comorbidities.18 Low levels 
of physical activity  and high levels of sedentary activity contribute  to a variety of  mental 
and physical health consequences during  the preschool and  early childhood years,  
including obesity, high blood  pressure,  behavioral problems,  academic problems, 
irregular sleep, and feelings  of sadness  and boredom.9 Indeed, physical activity  and 
screen-time together  explain 65% of the variance in children’s body mass  index (BMI) 
from age 3 to 7 years.19 However,  children are not obtaining sufficient levels of physical  
activity and are spending too much time in sedentary pursuits. Nearly  half of preschool-
aged children do not meet the recommended 1 hour of  moderate-to-vigorous physical 
activity (MVPA)  each  day.7 Screens are highly  prevalent in children’s lives due  to 
increased device availability and marketing efforts,20 and preschool children are 
estimated to spend  between 1.5 and 7.0 hours  each day in screen-time21,22  despite 
recommendations for 2 or fewer hours of daily screen-time.
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 3 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016Reducing  childhood obesity is identified as a top priority of the Mayor’s Health  
City Initiative  (MHCI) of Baton  Rouge, which is a non-profit organization that  brings 
together key stakeholders in the community to promote  healthy living and  active 
lifestyles. Pennington Biomedical has joined  with the MHCI to lead  a number  of projects 
to establish the prevalence of obesity and health risk factors in the community,  to 
evaluate simulated effects  of policy changes  on childhood obesity prevalence, and to 
coordinate medical, academic, and non-profit organizations  to strategize ways to 
promote healthy behaviors  among children and families. This proposal  represents a 
step forward in the partnership between the MHCI and Pennington  Biomedical to 
empirically test the effects of a health  policy  aimed at improving  children’s health 
behaviors in childcare settings. Given the vast majority of preschool children  attend 
childcare centers,10 implementing policies that promote physical activity in  these centers  
may have direct, impactful health benefits for young children.
A Carrot and Stick  Approach to Improve  Community Policies
Over  the past year, the Louisiana Department of  Education (DOE) has been 
given authority of childcare center licensing  in the state of Louisiana.  A 2012 state  
legislative mandate seeks  to create a unified early childhood system under  the DOE. 
With this transition,  all licensing  requirements are being revised; early care and 
education programs are being  organized under local childcare  center networks; new 
standards are being implemented for all childcare center providers that accept  public 
funds; and a quality  rating system  is being  redeveloped. Specific to the proposed 
project, new licensing standards will affect children attending over 1,300 licensed  
childcare centers state-wide  and include: 1) physical  activity of at least 1 hour/day and 
2) screen-time  prohibited for children younger than 2 years and  limited to 2 hours/day  
for children over 2 years.  Childcare centers in East Baton  Rouge Parish  must begin 
implementing changes  by 2016 to renew  their annual license.  
In addition to the mandated regulations, the DOE is also offering new training 
and programmatic opportunities to help childcare centers achieve the regulations. The 
DOE has engaged directly with childcare centers around  the state  by supporting the 
implementation of the Nutrition and Physical Activity Self-Assessment  for Child  Care 
(NAP SACC) intervention, which is funded by the state's Maternal  and Child Health  Title 
V Block Grant and 1305 funding. NAP SACC is a national evidence-based intervention  
to prevent and reduce childhood obesity.23 It is implemented in childcare  centers and is  
designed to promote  healthy weight development in preschool children  by improving the 
nutritional quality of food served, amount and quality  of physical activity, staff-child 
interactions, nutrition and physical activity policies and practices,  and related  
environmental characteristics.  Over 200 centers  have participated in the program  and 
have integrated practices that support healthy weight behaviors  since NAP SACC 
began in Louisiana in 2010. The Louisiana DOE  will train childcare center personnel  in 
East Baton Rouge Parish on these new regulations  in 2015-16,  offering a natural  
opportunity to examine  childcare centers before  and after implementation of the new 
policy.
Preliminary Data
Baton Rouge, which  is part of the Lower  Mississippi Delta (LMD),  represents one 
of the most medically underserved,  at-risk populations living  in the U.S. The Louisiana 
LMD is characterized by high levels of poverty,  food insecurity, obesity, and  related 
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 4 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016diseases. Approximately 40% of the Louisiana LMD  population is African American, and 
28% of residents live in poverty, compared  to 12% at the national level.15 This grant  
proposal arose from an ongoing collaboration between MHCI Director  Mr. Allen and 
academic researcher  Dr. Staiano,  based  on a shared interest to improve the health  
behaviors of young children in the Baton Rouge area.  As part of a national effort 
organized by the U.S. Conference of Mayors, the MHCI was launched  in Baton Rouge  
in response to the growing obesity epidemic  and its relationship  to chronic diseases  
which may be prevented or lessened through regular exercise and healthy eating. 
Community PI Mr. Allen directs  the efforts  of MHCI, which is a 501(c)(3) non-profit  
organization and includes three Advisory Boards that  bring together community  
stakeholders on a monthly  basis. As an Assistant Professor  at Pennington  Biomedical, 
a world-renowned nutrition and obesity academic research  center, Dr. Staiano serves  
on the academic advisory board  of the MHCI. Additionally, a medical advisory board 
and a community advisory  board bring together  stakeholders from area hospitals, non-
profit organizations, and government agencies.
This partnership arose from several  years of collaboration  between Pennington 
Biomedical and local health organizations. From 2008-2012, Louisiana researchers and  
child health advocates, through the leadership of Pennington  Biomedical, released an  
annual report  card (Louisiana’s  Report  Card  on Physical Activity & Health for Children 
and Youth25) that provided grades  on indicators related to  children’s physical activity 
and health. The Report Card is an advocacy  tool targeting adult decision makers and is 
intended to increase  awareness  of the health concerns associated with physical 
inactivity, to highlight  the growing  problem  of physical inactivity and  obesity among  
children and youth in Louisiana, and to generate political will for policy and 
environmental reform. In the 2011 Report  Card,26 rather than assign grades, the Report 
Card research advisory  committee followed  the model  set by the Healthy  People 
initiative27 and established specific  targets to reach by the year 2020 for each of the 
report’s indicators. These targets  were  also released for  public comment. The target set 
for childhood obesity  was a 20% reduction  from baseline  levels to year  2020. In 2012, a 
committee composed of Pennington Biomedical  researchers including Dr. Staiano, as 
well as the lead policy analyst for chronic disease outcomes  within the Louisiana 
Department of Health  and Hospitals, and the Louisiana Director  for Advocacy and 
Government Relations for the American Heart  Association, convened to determine 
whether the 2020 childhood obesity target was achievable and  to make evidence-based  
recommendations about policy  approaches that would make  the biggest improvements 
for this indicator. Our team used  the Prevention Impact Simulation Model (PRISM),  a 
systems model capable  of projecting  changes  in obesity prevalence  overall and among 
children.28,29 Eight  of the policy and environmental interventions considered within 
PRISM are interventions advocated for childhood obesity, and one of these eight 
focuses on physical activity in childcare  centers.  The PRISM model  estimated that a 
childcare center policy to increase children’s  physical activity and reduce screen-time to 
meet recommendations would  reduce overall childhood obesity prevalence by 2% by 
the year 2020. Given the new 2015 DOE state  regulations  to require physical activity 
and reduce screen-time  in childcare centers, the MHCI’s prioritization of childhood 
obesity prevention, and the prior work by Pennington Biomedical and the MHCI, this 
academic-community partnership is primed to evaluate  progress towards creating 
healthier childcare centers in the city of Baton Rouge. The proposed project  allocates 
resources to both the MHCI and Pennington  Biomedical, using a community-based  
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 5 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016participatory research  approach  to ensure  findings will directly impact  the local  
community.
Significance
We created a unique partnership  between  a community-based  non-profit 
organization (the MHCI)  and a world-renowned academic research  institute (Pennington 
Biomedical) to examine the effects of a health policy change  in childcare centers on 
children’s health behaviors. The timing is ideal  to establish  baseline  values of the 
physical activity environment and behaviors  of children, then to  evaluate these 
environments and behaviors one year after the childcare centers receive training,  
programmatic support,  and mandated regulations to achieve the new physical activity  
and screen-time regulations. Community stakeholders in the MHCI have identified 
childhood obesity  prevention as a top priority,  but the majority of parents fail to 
recognize obesity in preschool  children,24 and many mistakenly think  that obesity is not 
a health problem at this age. We seek  a shift in the climate  of the community to 
recognize that preschool is a critical opportunity to improve  health behaviors in order to 
put children on a trajectory  towards life-long healthy living.
Inclusion and Exclusion  Criteria
From  the 10 selected  childcare centers, 266 children and their parent(s) will be  
recruited to complete additional measures  of physical activity and screen-time 
behaviors. 
Inclusion Criteria :
A child who is 3 or 4 years old
Child spends at least 6 hours per day, 5 days per  week at a participating  
childcare center
Child will continue to attend the same childcare center for the next year
Exclusion Criteria :
Parent/legal guardian is unwilling  to provide written informed  consent 
Number of Subjects and Subject Timeline
We plan to enroll 266 children. Each child will participate in the study  for 
approximately 1 year. Surveys, anthropometric measures, fundamental motor skill  
assessments, and screen-time observations will take approximately 2 days to complete,  
and the child will be given an accelerometer  to wear at home for 7 days  at both baseline 
and 1 year follow-up.  Staff members will spend  approximately 2 weeks at each 
childcare center at baseline and 1 year follow-up to complete study procedures with 
each child. 
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 6 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016Study Timeline
This study  will last from March 2016 until June 2018.  A proposed timeline of  all 
study procedures  is listed below:
March to 
April 2016May 2016 to 
April 2017
 May 2017 to 
April 2018May to 
June 2018
MOP development and IRB submission X
Recruitment of children X
Baseline data collection X
1 year follow-up data collection X
Data management and analysis X X
Manuscript preparation X
Recruitment Methods
All parents of children between the ages of 3-4 years at selected  childcare 
centers will receive an informational  handout/flyer and consent form to participate in 
Aim 2 study procedures. Informational materials about the study may also be 
distributed to parents via email, mail, fax, phone, in-person, or through the school. 
Children for whom a completed consent  form is returned by their parent or legal  
guardian will be eligible to complete additional measures of physical activity  and screen-
time behaviors. Out of the pool of 192 DOE  licensed childcare centers, totaling  a 
capacity for approximately 16,500 students, in EBR Parish, we do not envision  
difficulties enrolling  266 children for study  participation. We aim to  recruit all 266 
children between May 2016 and April 2017.
Train Schedule
Below are the procedures that will be completed during study participation. 
Baseline 1 Baseline  2 Follow-up 1 Follow-up 2
Consent X 
Parent Survey X X
Height X X
Weight X X
BMIz score X X 
TGMD-3 X X
MABC-2 X X
Accelerometry Application
X X 
Accelerometry Return
X X 
Procedures
Consent Process. Informed consent for the child  will be obtained from one  of the 
participant’s parents/legally  authorized representatives  prior to conducting any study 
procedures. The parent/legally authorized representative will be given an informed 
consent form to read and sign indicating their permission to allow their child to 
participate in the study. Parents will return  this consent form to  the study staff before the 
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 7 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016child’s first visit. Because there is not a greater than minimal risk, informed consent will 
be obtained from one parent  even  if the other parent is alive, known,  competent, 
reasonably available,  and shares legal  responsibility for  the care  and custody  of the 
child.
Children  will not be asked  to provide documented assent  due to their young age, 
but all procedures will be explained in child-friendly terms and a child’s  refusal to 
participate will be respected by study  staff.  However, if a childcare site has  specific 
assent requirements, we will comply  by creating a site-specific parental consent  that 
includes the necessary language.
Parent survey . Parents will be asked to complete a questionnaire that will provide 
information on the child’s sociodemographic characteristics,  including sex, date of birth, 
and parents’  marital status,  highest level of education,  family income,  occupation, and 
employment status. The poverty  guidelines developed by the Department of  Health  and 
Human Services31 will be used as our measure of socioeconomic status.
Anthropometric measurements. Height and weight of each child will be measured 
in a private setting with children dressed in light clothing. Height  will be measured to the 
nearest 1.0 cm using  a portable stadiometer.  Weight will be  measured to the nearest 
0.1 kg using high-precision  electronic scale. Body mass index  (BMI) z-score will be 
calculated based  on the child’s  age, sex, height, and weight, then compared to the 2000  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  (CDC) Growth  Charts.32
Fundamental Motor  Skill Assessments.  The Test of Gross Motor Development  -
3rd edition  (TGMD-3) and the Movement Assessment Battery for Children -2nd edition  
(MABC-2) will be administered with the cooperation and support of the childcare center 
staff in small  group settings.  Groups of approximately  3-4 students will complete  the 
assessments together.  The  TGMD-2  uses  direct observation to evaluate performance 
on 13 skills  including running,  horizontal  jumping, hopping, skipping,  sliding, galloping, 
and balls skills (two-hand striking,  one-hand striking, catching, kicking, overhand 
throwing, underhand throwing and dribbling).   The TGMD-2 involves a trained  
administrator demonstrating  the proper execution of the skill, and the participant is 
allowed one practice  trial then two formal trials that will be evaluated.  The MABC-2 
examines eight  tasks that are categorized as manual dexterity, balance,  aiming and 
catching.  This is a field-based assessment  that examines correct  performances on a 
variety of skills that are not evaluated by the TGMD-3 and will provide a holistic  picture 
of children’s motor  abilities.  These  assessments will be  audio and video recorded.  
Physical activity. Physical activity and time spent in moderate to vigorous 
physical activity will be measured by a triaxial accelerometer (Actigraph GT3X+, 
Actigraph of Ft. Walton Beach, FL). Children will be measured on 7 full days during the 
baseline and follow-up  periods. The child will be outfitted with the accelerometer on an 
elasticized belt, on the right mid-axillary line. The Actigraph is  one of the most common 
accelerometers used for scientific  purposes,  and the GT3X+ version  provides extensive 
data on steps/day  and time spent in various activity intensities.  Parents will be 
encouraged to have their child wear the accelerometer 24  hours per  day for at  least 7 
days (plus an initial familiarization  day and the morning of the final day),  including 2 
weekend days.  During wear weeks,  study  staff will check  accelerometry wear during 
school hours to assess for compliance.  Accelerometer use will be documented and  
parents of children who do not have accelerometers on wear  check days will be 
contacted via call, text, flyer, email, etc. as a reminder.  The minimal  amount of  
accelerometer data that will be considered acceptable  is 4 days with at least 10 hours of 
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 8 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016wear time per day, including at least  one weekend  day. Following  the final day of  data 
collection, the research team will verify the data for completeness using  the most recent 
version of the ActiLife software (version  5.6 or higher; ActiGraph, Pensacola, FL) 
available at the time.  The research team will ask the parents to have  the children wear  
the accelerometer for additional days (to a maximum of 14 days) to  ensure that  minimal 
data requirements are met. Cut points will be assigned based  on Van Cauwenberghe  et 
al.,33 with 0 to 372 counts per minute (CPM) classified as sedentary, 373 to  584 CPM  as 
light, 585 to 880 CPM as moderate, and ≥ 881 CPM as vigorous.  MVPA will be defined 
as total minutes ≥ 585 CPM.
Screen  time. Screen time will be assessed using  classroom  observation at the 
childcare center (from the EPAO  observation in Aim 1) and parent-report for screen-
time outside of the childcare center. Parents will complete a survey adapted  from Jago 
et al.34 to provide information about the child’s  screen-time (separately for  TV, 
computer, games console  and smartphone) on weekdays and weekend days. For each 
item the parent will be asked to report the time the child spent  using it for (a) a normal 
weekday and (b) a normal weekend  day, with response options:  none; 1 to 30 minutes; 
31 minutes to 1 hour; 1 to 2 hours; 2 to 3 hours; 3 to  4 hours;  4 hours or more.  The 
assessment of TV viewing using  parental report  has been  shown to correlate  
moderately (r=0.60) with 10 days  of TV diaries  among  young children.35
 Primary Endpoints and Data  Analysis  Plan
Primary endpoints will include 1) changes in objective  child physical activity, as 
measured via 7-day accelerometer at baseline and 1 year, including  minutes/day MVPA 
in childcare center,  minutes/day MVPA total; 2) classroom observation of child screen-
time, as measured with EPAO observation method to quantify average minutes/day 
screen-time in childcare center; and 3) parent reports of child screen  time to quantity 
minutes/day screen-time total. Age, sex, BMI z-score, and sociodemographic 
characteristics will be included as covariates.  We will also assess the cross-sectional 
and longitudinal associations among  sedentary  behavior (by screen-time 
observation/self-report and by accelerometry), physical activity  (by accelerometry), and 
fundamental motor  skills.
A repeated measures ANCOVA model will be used to  test for effects of policy 
implementation on each dependent  continuous  variable  (minutes/day MVPA in childcare  
center, minutes/day  screen-time in childcare  center, minutes/day MVPA total, 
minutes/day screen-time total).  Covariates will include age, sex,  BMI z-score, and 
sociodemographic characteristics. Correlations and a repeated measures  ANCOVA will 
be used to test for the relationships among sedentary behavior, physical activity, and 
change in fundamental  motor skills. 
Power Analysis
A minimum of 266 children will be enrolled to ensure a well-powered  study with 
significance level of α = 0.05 while  allowing for a dropout rate of 25% between years 1 
and 2. Estimation of change was based on data from Dowda et al.,12 which observed a 
significant difference between MVPA in children in  preschools rated  low vs. high  on 
physical activity environment.
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 9 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016Data Management and Confidentiality
The Pediatric Obesity and Health Behavior Laboratory, supervised by Dr. 
Staiano, will have primary responsibility for data collection, data management,  manual 
data entry,  and data analysis. Each participant  will be issued  a number that  will be 
utilized throughout the study. A secure master file linking  names and  participant 
numbers will be maintained  in a confidential computer file accessible only to the 
investigators. Access to data  files can be made only with permission of the Academic 
Principal Investigator.  All electronic data will be stored in the secure  Pennington 
database, with access given to only necessary, HIPAA-certified staff. All hard copies  of 
data will be stored in a secure, locked  cabinet  at Pennington  Biomedical Research 
Center. Data collected at the childcare centers will be securely transported to PBRC  by 
trained staff. Data will be stored  for 5 years following study completion.
Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  and Monitor the Data  to 
Ensure the Safety of Subjects
This study  does not involve  more  than minimal risk to  participants. Survey  items 
about the child (to be completed by the parent) do not contain sensitive  items to  ensure 
individuals are comfortable  responding. During  individual  measurements, the study staff 
will ensure  full privacy of participants by taking measurements in a private or semi-
private area (ex: the nurse’s office or a separate  room) with only the participant and 
researcher present (unless  the school requires for a teacher/nurse  to be present). The 
parent and/or pertinent  childcare personnel will be notified of  any significant health  
problems that are brought  to our attention and participants will be  referred to the 
participant’s usual  source of medical care. 
Data will be stored in a secured  area and all study staff must be
HIPAA certified. Following transcription  of the TGMD-3 and  MABC-2, all recordings
will be de-identified and original audio/video  tapes  that contain  names and images will
be destroyed, to occur no later than 3 years after the study ends.  Only pertinent study 
staff will have access to study data.
Withdrawal of Subjects
Participation is voluntary,  so participants may withdraw from the study at any 
time. Data  that have  already been collected during the course of study participation  from 
a withdrawn participant  will be used, unless a specific request is otherwise received. 
Participants may be withdrawn  from the study for the following reasons:
Unwillingness on behalf  of the parent/child to participate in the study  or 
cooperate with study  staff
Risks to Subjects
We have  found there is no more risk to the fundamental motor  skill assessments 
than during  typical play time.  There  are no foreseeable risks or discomforts with the 
anthropometric measurements.   In the unlikely  event that  a child experiences  an injury,  
the assessments will be discontinued.  Participants may find  the accelerometer 
uncomfortable or bothersome to wear;  however;  the accelerometer is small, light,  and 
comes with an adjustable strap  to make the device as comfortable and unobtrusive as 
possible. 
Potential Benefits  to Subjects
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 10 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016Participants may experience changes  in physical activity and screen-time due to  
the policy changes in their childcare center. Benefits of participating  in this study should 
outweigh the risks for all participants  in this study. 
Vulnerable Populations
This study  will involve young children as participants (3-4 year olds). As such, the  
parent/legally authorized representative will provide written informed  consent  allowing 
the child to participate in individual study procedures. Due to  the young age and lack of 
cognitive/decision-making capacities  of this age group,  participants will not be asked to 
provide documented assent; however,  all procedures will be explained in  child-friendly 
terms and a child’s refusal to participate will be respected by study staff. 
All participants will be explicitly  told that their participation  is voluntary and that 
they may terminate their participation at any time. If a participant  indicates that they 
wish to stop participating, all study  procedures they are undertaking at  that time will be  
stopped to protect their rights and welfare.
Sharing of Results with Subjects
Study  results will not be shared  with participants unless  requested. If requested, 
individual results may be made  available.
Setting
All study procedures involving  children will be conducted  in the East  Baton 
Rouge community, at selected DOE licensed Class A or B childcare  centers. Each  
childcare center will be required to provide  written documentation  to allow the conduct 
of study procedures  at that site.
Resources Available
Amanda E. Staiano, Ph.D., M.P.P., Academic  Principal Investigator, is  Assistant 
Professor and Director of the Pediatric Obesity and Health  Behavior  Laboratory at 
Pennington Biomedical. Dr. Staiano is a developmental psychologist with expertise  in 
epidemiological surveys  of children’s screen-time  and public policy related  to children’s 
health.
Elizabeth  “Kip”  Webster, Ph.D., Co-Investigator, is  an Assistant Professor  in 
the School of Kinesiology at Louisiana State  University.  Dr. Webster  is a pediatric 
motor developmentalist  and physical activity specialist with expertise  in measuring and 
assessing health behaviors in young  children.  She previously assisted  with the 
revisions of the 3rd edition of the Test of Gross Motor Development (TGMD) as a 
Postdoctoral Research Fellow  at the University  of Michigan.  Dr. Webster  will provide  
training and facilitate the fundamental gross motor skills assessments (TGMD-3 and 
MABC-2).
Corby Martin, Ph.D.,  Academic Mentor , Associate Professor, is a licensed  
clinical psychologist  with extensive  experience conducting population-based  cluster 
randomized trials, including an ongoing clinical  trial to  test a home-based obesity  
intervention for preschool  children. As a senior faculty member, Dr. Martin will provide 
ongoing mentorship to Dr. Staiano.
Andrew T. Allen, B.A., Community Consultant,  is the Director of the Mayor’s 
Healthy City Initiative and Community  Outreach  Coordinator  for the Office of the Mayor-
President in the City of Baton Rouge.
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 11 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016Additional staff members, including  a PBRC project coordinator, a PBRC 
research specialist, and policy  student worker located at the Mayor-President’s Office  
will oversee  data collection and conduct the focus groups.
Both principal investigators  have extensive networks to childcare  centers 
throughout the city. Staff members  will spend  at least 2 weeks  in each childcare center  
at baseline and 1 year later to establish  rapport  for recruitment and data collection.  
There are currently 192 licensed childcare  centers and 13  Head Start centers located in 
EBR Parish. These  available childcare  centers  in EBR Parish provide a capacity for 
approximately 16,500  students, so we do not envision difficulties  recruiting 266  children 
between the ages  of 3-4 years  old for individual assessments out of this large  possible 
pool of children  available at DOE licensed childcare centers in EBR Parish.
Prior Approvals
The director/administrator  of each childcare center will be required  to provide 
written approval to allow the conduct  of study  procedures at their site.
Compensation for Research-Related Injury
No form of compensation  for medical  treatment or for other damages (i.e., lost 
wages, time lost from work, etc.) will be available for this research study. In the event  of 
injury or medical illness resulting from the research procedures, participants will be 
referred to a treatment  facility.
Economic Burden to Subjects and Compensation
All study procedures will take place at the childcare  center during normal hours 
or at home in conjunction with normal, everyday  activities, and will not add any 
economic burden on the participants.  Thus, no monetary compensation  will be provided 
to participants or their parents. Participants will receive  a handstamp  or sticker  as a 
reward for completing  the anthropometric measures and returning their accelerometer.  
Handstamps and stickers are extremely rewarding items that  are well-received by 
children of this age, whereas additional compensation could  be coercive for children  of 
such a young  age.
Drugs or Devices
N/A
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 12 of 13 V4.0  10/06/2016References
1. Polhamus B, Dalenius  K, Borland  E, Mackintosh H, Smith B, Grummer-Strawn L. Pediatric 
nutrition surveillance  2007 report.  Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2009.
2. Ogden CL, Carroll  MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence  of childhood and adult obesity  in the 
united states, 2011-2012.  JAMA. 2014;311(8):806-814.
3. Reilly JJ, Kelly  J. Long-term impact  of overweight and obesity in childhood and adolescence 
on morbidity and premature mortality in adulthood: systematic  review.  Int J Obes. 
2011;35(7):891-898.
4. Ekelund U, Luan J, Sherar LB, Esliger DW, Griew  P, Cooper A. Moderate to vigorous  
physical activity and sedentary  time and cardiometabolic risk factors in children and 
adolescents. JAMA 2012;307(7):704-712.
5. Tremblay M, LeBlanc A, Kho M, et al. Systematic review of sedentary  behaviour and health  
indicators in school-aged children and youth. Intn J Beh Nutr Physical  Activity.  2011;8(1):98.
6. National Association  for Sport  and Physical Education. Active  Start:  A Statement of Physical 
Activity Guidelines for children from Birth to Age 5, 2nd Edition: Physical Education, Recreation, 
and Dance; 2009.
7. Beets MW, Bornstein D, Dowda M, Pate RR. Compliance With National Guidelines for 
Physical Activity in U.S. Preschoolers:  Measurement and Interpretation. Pediatrics.  
011;127(4):658-664.
8. The American  Academy of Pediatrics Council  on Communications Media.  Policy  Statement -- 
Children, Adolescents, Obesity, and the Media.  Pediatrics. 2011;128(1):201-208.
9. Vanderloo LM. Screen-viewing among preschoolers in childcare: a systematic  review. BMC 
Pediatr. 2014;14:205.
10. Tandon PS, Zhou C, Lozano P, Christakis  DA. Preschoolers’ total daily screen time at home 
and by type of child care. J Pediatr. 2011;158(2):297-300.
11. Pate RR, Pfeiffer KA, Trost SG, Ziegler P, Dowda M. Physical activity among children 
attending preschools. Pediatrics. 2004;114(5):1258-1263.
12. Dowda M, Pate RR, Trost SG, Almeida  MJC, Sirard JR. Influences of preschool  policies  and 
practices on children's physical activity. J Commun Health. 2004;29(3):183-196.
13. Anderson  SE, Economos CD, Must A. Active play and screen time in US children  aged  4 to 
11 years  in relation  to sociodemographic and weight status characteristics:  a nationally 
representative crosssectional analysis. BMC Public  Health.  2008;8(1):366.
14. Larson N, Ward DS, Neelon SB, Story M. What Role Can Child-Care Settings Play in 
Obesity Prevention? A Review of the Evidence  and Call for Research Efforts. J Amer Diet Assn.
2011;111(9):1343-1362.
15. U.S. Census Bureau. American FactFinder,  2014. Available at: http://factfinder.census.gov  
2014.
16. Trust for America's Health and Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The State of Obesity  
2014. Washington, D.C.2014.
17. Romero P LCoOPaM.  Overweight and obesity  data from the Department of Health and  
Hospitals Adolescent School Health Program - Louisiana School Based Health Centers.  2010.
18. U.S. Department  of Agriculture. Dietary Guidelines for Americans,  2010.
19. Jago R, Baranowski  T, Baranowski J, Thompson D, Greaves  K. BMI from 3-6 y of age is 
predicted by TV viewing and physical activity,  not diet. Int J Obes Relat  Metab  Disord.  
2005;29(6):557-564.
20. Strasburger VC, Hogan MJ, Mulligan DA, et al. Children, adolescents, and the media. 
Pediatrics. 2013;132(5):958-961.
21. Rideout VJ, Foehr UG, Roberts  DF. Generation  M2: Media in the lives of 8- to 18-year-olds. 
Menlo Park, California, 2010.
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016
Page 13 of 13 V4.0  10/06/201622. Heelan KA, Eisenmann JC. Physical  activity,  media time,  and body composition  in young 
children. J Physical  Activity & Health. 2006;3(2):200.
23. Benjamin SE, Ammerman AS, Ward DS, et al. Peer Reviewed: An Intervention to Promote 
Healthy Weight:  Nutrition  and Physical Activity Self-Assessment for Child  Care (NAP  SACC) 
Theory and Design. Prev Chronic Dis. 2007;4(3).
24. Lundahl A, Kidwell KM, Nelson TD. Parental  Underestimates of Child Weight:  A Meta-
analysis. Pediatrics. 2014;133(3):e689-e703.
25. Pennington Biomedical Research Center. Louisiana's Report Card on Physical Activity & 
Health for Children & Youth: Past Report  Cards. http://www.pbrc.edu/report_card/past/. 
Accessed January 15, 2015.
26. Pennington Biomedical Research Center. Charting the Course  for 2020: 2011 Louisiana's 
Report Card  on Physical Activity & Health for Children  and Youth.  
http://www.pbrc.edu/report_card/pdf/2011%20LA%20Report%20Card%20Long.pdf. Accessed 
January 15, 2015.
27. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  Healthy People.  
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/healthy_people.htm. Accessed  January  15, 2015.
28. Homer J, Milstein  B, Wile K, Pratibhu P, Farris R, Orenstein DR. Modeling the local 
dynamics of cardiovascular health: risk factors, context, and capacity. Prev Chronic Dis. 
2008;5(2):A63.
29. Homer J, Milstein  B, Wile K, et al. Simulating and evaluating local interventions  to improve  
cardiovascular health. Prev Chronic Dis. 2010;7(1):A18.
30. Bower JK, Hales DP, Tate DF, Rubin DA, Benjamin  SE, Ward DS. The childcare 
environment and children’s physical activity. Amer J Prev Med. 2008;34(1):23-29.
31. U.S. Department  of Health and Human Services. The 2008 HHS  poverty  guidelines. 2010;
http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/08Poverty.shtml. Accessed February 20, 2015.
32. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  A SAS program for the CDC growth charts. 
2011; http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/growthcharts/resources/sas.htm.  Accessed February  
20, 2015.
33. Van Cauwenberghe E, Labarque V, Trost  SG, De Bourdeaudhuij  I, Cardon  G. Calibration 
and comparison of accelerometer cut points in preschool children. Int J of Pediatr Obes.
2011;6(2Part2):e582-e589.
34. Jago R, Thompson J, Sebire  S, et al. Cross-sectional  associations between  the screen-time 
of parents and young children: differences by parent and child gender and day of the week.  Int J 
Behav Nutr Physical Activity. 2014;11(1):54.
35. Anderson  D, Field D, Collins P, Lorch  E, Nathan  J. Estimates of young  children's time with 
television: a methodological comparison of parent  reports with time-lapse video home 
observation. Child Dev. 1985;56(5):1345 - 1357.
36. McKenzie,  T. L., Marshall,  S. J., Sallis, J. F., & Conway, T. L. (2000a). Leisure-time physical 
activity in school  environments: An observational study using SOPLAY. Preventive  Medicine,  
30, 70-77.
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 10/17/2016