Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
 
Protocol Title 
A Phase II Study Evaluating Efficacy and Safety of Hypomethylat ing Agent Guadecitabine in 
Combination with Carboplatin in E xtensive Stage Small Cell Lung  Cancer 
  
Sponsor Investigator 
Shadia Jalal, MD 
Indiana University Melvin a nd Bren Simon Cancer Center 
 
Co-Investigators 
Lawrence Einhorn, MD 
Nasser Hanna, MD 
Greg Durm, MD 
 
Statistician 
Susan Perkins, PhD 
 
Trial Management Provided by  
Hoosier Cancer Res earch Network, Inc. 
500 N. Meridian, Suite 100 
Indianapolis, IN 46204 
  
Trial Supported by  
Astex Pharmaceuticals 
 
Investigational New Drug (IND) #: 142701 
  
 
 
Initial Protocol Version Date:  20MAR2019  
Protocol Amendment Version Date:  18MAR2020   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 Confidential Page 2 of 41 PROTOCOL SIGNATURE PAGE 
 
A Phase II Study Evaluating Efficacy and Safety of Hypomethylat ing Agent Guadecitabine in 
Combination with Carboplatin in E xtensive Stage Small Cell Lung  Cancer 
  
VERSION DATE: 18MAR2020 
I confirm I have read this pr otocol, I understand it, and I wil l work according to this protocol and 
to the ethical principles stated in the latest version of the D eclaration of Helsinki, the applicable 
guidelines for good clinical practi ces, whichever provides the greater protection of the 
individual. I will accept the monitor’s overseeing of the study . I will promptly submit the 
protocol to applicable institutional review board(s).  
 
  ____________________________________ ________________________ 
 S i g n a t u r e  o f  S i t e  I n v e s t i g a t o r        D a t e    ____________________________________  Site Investigator Name (printed)   
____________________________________ 
 Site Investigator Title   ____________________________________  Name of Facility   ____________________________________  Location of Facility (City and State)    
 PLEASE COMPLETE AND EM AIL A COPY TO HCRN 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 Confidential Page 3 of 41 SYNOPSIS  
TITLE A Phase II Study Evaluating Efficacy and Safety of Guadecitabin e in 
Combination with Carboplatin in E xtensive Stage Small Cell Lung  
Cancer 
SHORT TITLE Phase II Study of Guadecitabi ne in Small Cell Lung Cancer 
PHASE  II 
OBJECTIVES Primary Objective: 
Determine Progression Free Surv ival (PFS) of the combination of  
Guadecitabine and platinum in patie nts with extensive stage sma ll cell 
lung cancer previously treated w ith platinum containing chemoth erapy.  
 Secondary Objectives: 
• Evaluate the toxicity profile of  the combination of Guadecitabi ne 
and carboplatin in patients with ext ensive stage small cell lun g 
cancer patients previously tr eated with platinum containing 
chemotherapy. 
• Estimate Objective Response Rate (ORR), Disease Control Rate 
(DCR, defined as Complete Response + Partial Response + Stable 
Disease), and Overall Survival  (OS) of the combination of 
Guadecitabine and carboplati n in the above mentioned population . 
 Exploratory Objectives: 
• Measure platinum induced DNA adducts in peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and t umor tissue on Cycle 1 Day 1 
and Cycle 2 Day 5 prior to carboplatin treatment. 
• Methylation status change in P BMCs and tumor biopsy for global 
DNA and selected genes in tum or tissue on Cycle 1 Day 1 and 
Cycle 2 Day 5 prior to c arboplatin treatment. 
• Analyze IHC expression of EZH2 and EZH2 target genes on 
Cycle 1 Day 1, Cycle 2 Day 5 prior to carboplatin treatment and  at 
progression (optional). EZH2 expression changes will be correlated with response to Guad ecitabine in combination with 
carboplatin.  
• Determine circulating tumor ce ll (CTC) burden prio r to initiati ng 
treatment. 
 
STUDY DESIGN Phase II, open-label, s ingle arm, single-st age study. A total o f 34 
evaluable patients will be enro lled, of which we expect 70% to be 
chemotherapy sensitive and 30% to be chemotherapy resistant. Th is study 
is powered for chemotherapy sensi tive patients. Chemotherapy re sistant 
patients will be enrolled but anal
yzed separatel y and descriptivel y only.
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 Confidential Page 4 of 41 KEY ELIGIBILITY 
CRITERIA (See Section 3 for full eligibility criteria) Inclusion Criteria 
1. Male or female subjects, age ≥ 18 years.  
2. Histological or cytological dia gnosis of small cell lung cancer ; 
extensive stage disease.  
3. Patients must have received first line therapy with a platinum-
based chemotherapy. Patients s hould not have re ceived more 
than 1 prior line of chemother apy (could have received 
immunotherapy which does not c ount as chemotherapy) 
4. ECOG PS 0-1 
5. Measurable disease as per R ECIST v1.1. Subjects may have 
bone-only disease. 
6. Adequate bone marrow, liver, a nd renal function, as assessed 
by the following laborat ory requirements:  
o Hemoglobin ≥ 9.0 g/dL  
o Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥1,500/mm3  
o Platelet count ≥100,000/mm3  
o Total bilirubin ≤1.5 x upper limi t of normal (ULN). For 
subjects with Gilbert’s Di sease, Total bilirubin ≤3 x 
ULN  
o ALT and AST ≤2.5 x ULN. For subjects with 
documented liver metastases, ALT and AST ≤5×ULN 
o Estimated glomerular fi ltration rate (eGFR) ≥ 60 
mL/minute/1.73 m2 as determined using the (by Cockcroft-Gault formula) 
7. Male and female subjects of child - bearing poten tial must agree  
to use contraception as outlined in Section 5.4 from the screening visit through 6 months a fter the last dose of study 
drug.  
 
Exclusion Criteria 1. Platinum refractory disease de fined as disease progression 
during platinum containing c hemotherapy. Progression 
following platinum based trea tment is not an exclusion.
 
2. Prior therapy with a hyp omethylating agent. 
3. Previously untreated (non-ir radiated), symptomatic brain 
metastases. No prior treatment i s required for non-symptomatic 
brain metastases. Previousl y treated symptomatic brain 
metastases are  permitted.  
4. Unstable or clinically significan t concurrent medical condition , 
psychiatric illness or social situation that w ould, in the opin ion 
of the investigator, jeopardize the safety of a subject and/or 
their compliance with the protocol.  
5. Clinically signifi cant acute infection requiring systemic 
antibacterial, antifungal, or an tiviral therapy. (Suppressive 
therapy for chronic infections a llowed, for example: Subjects 
with HIV/AIDS with ade quate antiviral therap y to control viral 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 Confidential Page 5 of 41 load would be allowed. Subject s with viral hepatitis with 
controlled viral load would be a llowed while on suppressive 
antiviral therapy.)  
6. Hypersensitivity to (IMP)  or components of the study 
treatment regimen.  
7. Treated with any investigationa l drug within 3 weeks of first 
dose of study treatment.  
STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 Null Hypothesis: Median PFS with c ombination of Guadecitabine 
with carboplatin in patients with e xtensive stage small cell lu ng 
cancer previously treat ed with platinum cont aining chemotherapy  
is 3 months or less.  Alternative Hypothesis: Med ian PFS with combination of 
Guadecitabine with carboplatin i n patients with extensive stage  
small cell lung cancer previously  treated with platinum contain ing 
chemotherapy is 6 months or longer.  Acceptable Type I (alpha) error: 10% (one sided) 
Acceptable Type II (beta) error: 20% 
Power: 80% 
 This study is powered for c hemotherapy sensitive 
patients. Chemotherapy resistan t patients will be enrolled but 
analyzed separately and desc riptively only. For  the chemo-
sensitive group, when the sampl e size is 24, a non-parametric t est 
(single-group) with a one-side d 0.10 significance level will ha ve 
80% power to detect the differenc e between a median survival of  
3.0 months vs 6.0 months. With 24 patie nts in the chemo-sensiti ve 
group, we expect to enroll approxi mate 34 subjects total, thus we 
will have approximately 10 chemo -resistant patients to generate  
pilot data from.  
TOTAL NUMBER OF SUBJECTS N = 34 
ESTIMATED 
ENROLLMENT PERIOD Estimated 18 months 
ESTIMATED 
STUDY DURATION  Estimated 12 months 
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 Confidential Page 6 of 41 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Schema ........................................................ ............................................................... ........ 7  
1. Background and Rationale ...................................... ............................................... 8  
2. Study Objectives and Endpoints................................. .......................................... 11  
3. Eligibility Criteria .......................................... ........................................................ 12  
4. Subject Registration........................................... .................................................... 14  
5. Treatment Plan................................................. ...................................................... 14  
6. Toxicities and Dose Delays/Dose Modifications ................. ................................. 16  
7. Study Calendar & Evaluations .................................. ........................................... 19  
8. Biospecimen Studies and Procedures ............................ ....................................... 22  
9. Criteria for Disease Evaluation ............................... ............................................. 23  
10 Drug Information .............................................. ..................................................... 27  
11 Adverse Events ................................................ ....................................................... 29  
12 Statistical Methods ........................................... ...................................................... 33  
13 Trial Management .............................................. ................................................... 35  
14. Data Handling and Record Keeping .............................. ...................................... 37  
15 Ethics ........................................................ ...............................................................  38 
16 References .................................................... ........................................................... 39  
 
   
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 7 of 41 SCHEMA 
 
 
 
 
    
Treatment Regimen 
Guadecitabine  30mg/m2 subcutaneously Days 1-5 
Carboplatin AUC of 4 intravenously on Day 5 
Continue for 4 cycles; 1 Cycle = 28 Days 
Disease Assessment after completion of 4 cycles of treatment  
Continue follow up per protocol 
• ES SCLC patients  
• Must have prior treatment with p latinum containing chemotherapy  regimen 
• PS 0-1 
• Adequate organ function 
    

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 Confidential Page 8 of 41 1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
 1.1 SCLC General Background 
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is  an aggressive malignancy chara cterized by early hematogenous 
spread, initial chemotherapy sensi tivity followe d almost unifor mly with rapid resistance and high 
genetic instability(1). The maj ority of patients present with e xtensive stage disease and platinum 
based chemotherapy remains the st andard first line treatment(2) . Chemo-sensitivity  is defined as 
a response to initial platinum t herapy that la sts ≥90 days. Che mo-resistance is defined as 
response to platinum therapy that lasts <90 days. Initial respo nse rates to platinum based 
chemotherapy in extensive stage  SCLC are 65-70%. Second line tr eatment options for SCLC 
include a number of chemothera py agents, all with response rate s of 20-30% and minimal 
survival benefit(3). Topotecan remains the only FDA approved se cond line therapy in SCLC 
with low response rates and minima l improvement in survival(4-6 ). Median survival of extensive 
stage SCLC patients therefore remains less than a year. SCLC ha s lagged behind many 
malignancies with limited impro vements in the development of no vel therapies.(7, 8)  
 The initial remarkable sensitivi ty of SCLC to platinum, includi ng complete responses in the 
extensive stage setting, suggests a potential role of platinum re-sensitization in the treatment of 
relapsed SCLC.  Platinum resis tance is a complex phenomenon wit h multiple key pathways 
involved including DNA repair path ways(9). Cisplatin exerts its  cytotoxicity through the 
formation of DNA adducts that inhi bit multiple fu ndamental cell ular processes including DNA 
replication and transcription(10) . Adducts lead to a cascade of  events that stimulate several 
signal transduction path ways culminating in a poptosis. Increase d repair rate of cisplatin induced 
adducts via the nucleotide excisi on repair and increased tolera nce of cisplatin induced adducts 
via the homologous recombinati on pathway have been tied to plat inum resistance(11).  In 
addition, epigenetic changes in cluding alterations in DNA methy lation, histone modifications 
and nucleosome positioning have be en shown to be involved in th e development of platinum 
resistance in lung cancer a nd other malignancies(12, 13). Sever al epigenetic disru ption of distinct 
biological pathways were observe d during the development of pla tinum resistance in ovarian 
cancer(14).  The exact mechanisms of platinum resistance in SCL C are not well defined. 
However, epigenetics changes li kely play a role both in the dev elopment of SCLC and in its 
response to platinum based therapy. In fact, a very recent stud y showed smoking induces 
epigenetic changes in the lungs a nd are potentially the first s tep towards the development of lung 
cancer.  Chronic cigarette smoke i nduced chromatic changes that  later manifested as abnormal 
DNA methylation(15).   1.2 DNA Methylation in SCLC 
DNA methylation is an epigeneti c modification involved in gene expression regulation. In 
cancer, the DNA methylation patt ern becomes aberrant, causing a n array of tumor suppressor 
genes to undergo promoter hypermet hylation and become transcrip tionally silent. In fact, DNA 
methylation profiles in cancer c ells are unique from normal, di fferentiated cells (16).  In cancer 
cells, widespread methylation o ccurs throughout the genome and enriched hypermethylation is 
focused in CpG islands. CpG isla nds are located in the promoter s of tumor suppressor genes 
including some of the most common ly mutated genes in cancer in general and small cell lung 
cancer in particular such as ret inoblastoma (Rb) gene. In a stu dy of patients with small cell lung 
cancer, significant me thylation differences were noted at 62 Cp G sites in 52 independent genes 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 Confidential Page 9 of 41 in the peripheral blood compared to case controls(17).  DNA met hylation patterns were 
evaluated in 18 primary SCLC tum ors and 5 SCLC cell lines using  a target-specific CpG island 
promoter array. The study ident ified DNA methylation peaks in 7 3 genes specific to SCLC with 
a significant representation of  neuroendocrine-specifying trans cription factor genes. Methylation 
and inactivation of tumor suppres sor genes TCF21 and RB1 were d escribed in SCLC in addition 
to BCL2. Methylation patterns id entified 3 distinct subtypes of  SCLC, yet all shared methylation 
of RB1 and TCF21. The chromatin m odifier EZH2 was among the mos t significantly 
overexpressed genes in SCLC, expressed >12 fold higher than in normal lung. EZH2, a histone 
methyltransferase component of  the PRC2 complex, has been impli cated in dysregulation of 
DNA methylation in cancer through i ts effects on histone methyl ation, particularly histone H3 
lysine 27 tri-methylation. EZH2  is a known target of E2F, whic h is activated in SCLC by gene 
copy loss and loss of f unction mutations in RB1, the gene encoding the E 2F repressor pRB(18). 
Pharmacologic inhibition of EZH2 in a SCLC patient derived xeno graft using EPZ-6438 
suggests hypomethylating agents might have activity in SCLC.  
 1.3 Hypomethylating Agents for Treatment of Cancer 
Re-expression of methylation silenc ed tumor suppressor genes by  inhibiting the DNA 
methyltransferases (DNMT11, DNMT3, and DNMT3B) has emerged as a n effective strategy 
against cancer(19). The expressi on of DNA methyltransferase 1 ( DNMT1) being high in S phase 
of cell cycle makes it a specifi c target for methylation inhibi tion in rapidly dividi ng cancer cells. 
The first compounds that demons trated DNA hypomethylation activ ity in cancer cells were 
cytidine analogs such as 5-Azacyidine which has activity in the  treatment of myelodysplastic 
syndrome and acute myelogenous l eukemia. Despite the success of  5-azacytidine in hematologic 
malignancies multiple challenges  arise due to the instability o f the compound and it’s in vivo  
deamination by cytidin e deaminase(20). Thi s has led to the deve lopment of Guadecitabine. 
 
1.4 SGI-110 (Guadecitabine) and its ro le in platinum re-sensitizati on 
While the FDA-approved demethyla ting agent decitabine is prone to deamination by cytidine 
deaminase, Guadecitabine (Aste x Pharmaceuticals, Inc.), a dinuc leotide analogue of decitabine, 
is more stable, less toxic, and a  promising alternative to rest oring silenced tumor suppression 
genes (TSG) expression in cancer cells by reversal of DNA methy lation(21). Guad ecitabine is a 
dinucleotide combin ing 5-aza-dC and deoxyguanosine that has bee n shown to be more stable 
than 5-aza-dC making it an attrac tive alternative. Guadecitabin e is resistant to cytidine 
deaminase(22).  Guadecitabine i s currently under investigation in multiple clinical trials 
including high- risk myelodysplas tic syndrome and acute myeloge nous leukemia(23). In 
addition, preclinical data has de monstrated the combination of Guadecitabine wit h cisplatin in 
platinum resistant ovarian models  re-sensitized o varian cancer cells to platinum (24). This re-
sensitization was not a result  of inhibition of r epair of plati num induced DNA as originally 
thought. DNA damage induced by pla tinum was increased by Guadec itabine as measured by 
inductively coupled plasma mass sp ectrometry analysis. A phase I trial of Guadecitabine and 
carboplatin in platinum resistant  recurrent ovarian cancer was recently completed (25). 
Guadecitabine was administere d once daily subcutaneously on day s 1-5 followed by carboplatin 
IV day 8 of every 28 days cycle. The  maximum tolerated dose of the combination was 
Guadecitabine at 30mg/m2 SQ days 1-5 in combination w ith carboplatin AUC 4 on day 8. Th e 
dose limiting toxiciti es were grade 4 neutropenia and grade 4 t hrombocytopenia. Common 
treatment related adverse events  were neutropenia, nausea, fati gue, anemia, injection site 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 10 of 41 reaction, thrombocytopenia, le ukopenia and vomiting. The combin ation of Guadecitabine and 
platinum is currentl y being investigated in platinum refractory  testicular cancer and seems to be 
potentially promising with a res ponse rate of 35%(26). In SCLC,  re-sensitization of a platinum 
resistant SCLC was recently de monstrated using RRx-001, an agen t that epigenetically 
modulates DNA methylation and histone deacetylation(27). This d ata provides proof of concept 
of the potential role of Guadeci tabine in platinum re-sensitiza tion in SCLC. A common 
characteristic between testicul ar cancer, ovarian cancer and sm all cell lung cancer is their initial 
exquisite sensitivity to platinum. Guadecitabine has been shown  to prime hepatocellular 
carcinoma cells to oxaliplatin in vitro(28) . Guadecitabine is currentl y under investigation in 
combination with durvalumab/trem elimumab in SCLC. This will be the first study combining 
Guadecitabine with platinum in S CLC. This study is unique as gu adecitabine has been mainly 
studied as a radio-sensitizer i n acquired platinum resistance. Some of the patients on this study 
will be platinum resistant and gua decitabine could re-sensitize  them to platinum. However, some 
of the patients will have low sensitivity to platinum and guade citabine could potentially serve as 
an “enhancer” rather than ‘re-s ensitizer” to plat inum sensitivi ty in these patients.  
 1.5 Rationale for Combining Guad ecitabine with Carboplatin 
The DNA methylation changes desc ribed in SCLC in addition to th e potential role of 
hypomethylating agents in reversa l of platinum resistance sugge st a potential role for hypo-
methylating agents in the trea tment of SCLC. EPZ-6438 (a histon e methyltransferase inhibitor) 
profoundly inhibited SCLC growth in vivo (18). Guadecitabine had single agent activity and 
reduced tumor burden by 35% in a no n-small cell lung cancer in an in vivo  model. In addition 
Guadecitabine induced genome wide  promoter region demethylation  and impacted the 
expression of a number of EZH2- target genes(29). This finding h as the potential to be pertinent 
in SCLC with overexpression of EZH2(30).  
 
The goal of this study i s to explore the poten tial for the epig enetic agent Guadecitabine in re-
sensitizing SCLC patients who ha ve progressed following a plati num based doublet regimen. 
Progression free surviv al will be the prima ry endpoint. A longe r PFS than noted with first line 
platinum doublet would suggest this combina tion is promising in  SCLC.  
 There are no optimal drugs for the treatment of recurrence SCLC . SCLC has been shown to 
respond to platinum re-challenge( 31). In fact, there have been at least two studies that compared 
platinum re-challenge in SCLC  to topotecan or Amrubicin. The re sponse rate to platinum re-
challenge was higher than topotec an and comparable to amrubicin . Re-challengi ng patients with 
platinum is therefore a reasona ble treatment for recurrent SCLC (32, 33).  Current evidence in 
ovarian cancer shows Guadecitabi ne re-sensitizes patients to pl atinum re-treatment. It is unclear 
if guadecitabine or hypomethylator s enhance the response to a s econd platinum exposure.  We 
will analyze that potential benefit in this study.     
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 11 of 41 
SGI-110  
Days 1-5 
SGI-110  
Days 1-5 
Biopsy and 
CTCs  
Prior to C1D1 
SGI-110  
Days 1-5 
Carboplatin 
Day 5
SGI-110  
Days 1-5 
Carboplatin 
Day 5 
Cycle 1 Cycle 2 Cycle 3 Cycle 4 
Biopsy, 
PBMCs 
 Prior to C2D5
Progression
Biopsy (optional), 
PBMCs, CTCs 
Carboplatin 
Day 5 
 
                2. STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 
 2.1 Objectives 
 2.1.1 Primary Objective 
Determine Progression Free Survival (PFS) of the combination of  Guadecitabine and platinum in 
patients with extensive stage s mall cell lung cancer previously  treated with platinum containing 
chemotherapy.  
 
2.1.2 Secondary Objectives 
• Evaluate the toxicity profile of the combination of Guadecitabi ne and carboplatin in 
patients with extensive stage s mall cell lung cancer patients p reviously treated with 
platinum containing chemotherapy. 
• Estimate Objective Response Rate ( ORR) of the combination of Gu adecitabine and 
carboplatin in the above mentioned population. 
• Estimate disease Control Rate of the combination of Guadecitabi ne and carboplatin in the 
above mentioned population. 
• Estimate Overall Survival (OS) of  the combination of Guadecitab ine and carboplatin in 
the above mentioned population. 
 2.1.3 Correlative/Exploratory Objectives 
• Measure platinum induced DNA ad ducts in peripheral blood mononu clear cells (PBMCs) 
and tumor tissue on Cycle 1 Day 1 and Cycle 2 Day 5 prior to ca rboplatin treatment. 
• Methylation status change in PBMCs and tumor biopsy for global DNA and selected 
genes in tumor tissue on Cycle 1 Day 1 and Cycle 2 Day 5 prior to carboplatin treatment. 
• Analyze IHC expression of EZH2 and EZH2 target genes on Cycle 1  Day 1, Cycle 2 Day 
5 prior to carboplatin treatment  and at progression (optional).  EZH2 expression changes 
will be correlated with response to Guadecitabine in combinatio n with carboplatin. 
• Determine circulating tumor cell (CTC) burden prior to initiati ng treatment. Carboplatin 
Day 5
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 12 of 41 2.2 Endpoints 
 2.2.1 Primary Endpoint 
• PFS as defined as the time from Day 1 of treatment until the cr iteria for disease 
progression is met as define d by RECIST 1.1, MD Anderson (MDA) criteria or death as a 
result of any cause, whichever occurs first.  
2.2.2 Secondary Endpoints 
• Occurrence of all treatment rel ated toxicities as defined by th e NCI Common 
Terminology Criteri a for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) v5.0 
• ORR will include confirmed complete response (CR) + confirmed p artial response (PR) 
and will be determined as per RECIST 1.1 or MDA criteria.  
• DCR defined as CR + PR + Stable Disease (SD) per RECIST 1.1 or MDA criteria  
• OS as defined as the time from Da y 1 of treatment until death f rom any cause 
 
3. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
 3.1 Inclusion Criteria 
Subject must meet all  of the following app licable inclusion cri teria to participate in this study: 
 
1. Male or female subjects, age ≥ 18 years.  
 
2. Histological or cytological dia gnosis of small cell lung cancer . Subjects must have 
extensive stage disease, defin ed as disease beyond the ipsilate ral hemithorax, 
mediastinum and ipsilateral supr aclavicular area and including malignant pleural or 
pericardial effusion or he matogenous metastases. 
 
3. Patients must have received first line therapy with a platinum- based chemotherapy. 
Patients should not have receive d more than 1 prior line of che motherapy (could have 
received immunotherapy which doe s not count as chemotherapy). 
 
4. ECOG PS 0-1 
 
5. Measurable disease as per REC IST v1.1. Subjects may have bone-o nly disease. NOTE:  
Bone-only subjects are eligible if their  disease can be documen ted/evaluated by bone 
scans, CT or MRI. Their disease will be assessed using MD Ander son criteria.(34) 
NOTE:  Previously irradiate d lesions are eligible as a target lesion only if there is 
documented progression of the  lesion after irradiation. 
 
6. Adequate bone marrow, liver, and renal function, as assessed by  the following laboratory 
requirements:  
o Hemoglobin ≥ 9.0 g/dL  
o Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1,500/mm3  
o Platelet count ≥ 100,000/mm3  
o Total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 x upper limit  of normal (ULN). For subjec ts with Gilbert’s 
Disease, total bilirubin ≤ 3 x ULN  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 13 of 41 o ALT and AST ≤ 2.5 x ULN. For subject s with documented liver met astases, ALT 
and AST ≤ 5×ULN 
o Estimated glomerula r filtration rate (e GFR) ≥ 60 mL/minute/1.73  m2 as 
determined using the Cockcroft-Gault formula.  
 
7. Women of child-bearing potential  must not be pregnant or breast feeding and must have a 
negative pregnancy t est at screening. 
 
8. Male and female subjects of child - bearing poten tial must agree  to use contraception as 
outlined in Section 5.4 from the screening visit through 6 mont hs after the last dose of 
study drug.  
 3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
1. Platinum refractory disease de fined as disease progression duri ng first line platinum 
containing chemotherapy regime n. Progression following platinum  based therapy is 
allowed.  
2. Prior therapy with a hyp omethylating agent. 
 
3. Previously untreated (non-irradi ated), symptomatic brain metast ases. No prior treatment 
is required for non-symptomatic b rain metastases. Previously tr eated symptomatic brain 
metastases are  permitted.  
 
4. Unstable or clinically significan t concurrent medical condition , psychiatric illness or 
social situation that would, in t he opinion of the investigator , jeopardize the safety of a 
subject and/or their comp liance with the protocol.  
 
5. Clinically significant acute i nfection requiring systemic antib acterial, antifungal, or 
antiviral therapy. (Suppressive t herapy for chronic infections allowed, for example: 
Subjects with HIV/AIDS with ade quate antiviral therapy to contr ol viral load would be 
allowed. Subjects with viral hepa titis with controlled viral lo ad would be allowed while 
on suppressive antiviral therapy.)  
 
6. Hypersensitivity to (IMP) or com ponents of the study treatment regimen. 
 
7. Treated with any investigationa l drug within 3 weeks of first d ose of study treatment. 
 
8. Pregnant or breastfeeding. 
 
9. Second malignancy currently requi ring active therapy except bre ast or prostate cancer 
stable on or responding t o endocrine therapy. 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 14 of 41 4. SUBJECT REGISTRATION 
All subjects must be registered through HCRN’s electronic data capture (EDC) system prior to 
starting protocol therapy. S ubjects must begin therapy within  7 business days  of registration.  
 Registered patients will be assigned to chemo-sensitive or chem o-resistant group based on the 
time of disease progression since t he completion of platinum co ntaining chemotherapy. Chemo-
sensitivity is defined as a res ponse to initial p latinum therap y that lasts ≥ 90 days. Chemo-
resistance is defined as respons e to platinum therapy that last s < 90 days. 
 
5. TREATMENT PLAN 
This is a phase II, open-label, s ingle arm, single-stage study.  Both, chemo-sensitive and chemo-
resistant patients wi ll be enrolled and treated with 4 cycles o f combination of Guadecitabine and 
carboplatin as detailed in the s tudy schema. Premedication and hydration will be provided as per 
institutional standards for ad ministration of c arboplatin.  
 5.1 Drug Administration  
Drug Dose1 Route Schedule2 Cycle 
Length 
Guadecitabine  30 mg/m2  Subcutaneously (SC) Days 1-5 4 weeks  
(28 days) Carboplatin  AUC 4 Intravenously (IV) Day 5 
1 Body surface area (BSA) shoul d be recalculated when weight ch anges based on institutional guidelines 
2 A window of ± 3 days may be applied to all Day 1 and 5 visits  to accommodate obse rved holidays, 
inclement weather, scheduling co nflicts etc. Date and time of e ach drug administration should be clearly 
documented in sub ject’s chart and electronic case report forms (eCRFs).
 
5.2 Concomitant Medications 
 5.2.1 Allowed Concomitant Medications 
All treatments that the investigator considers necessary for a subject’s welfare may be 
administered at the discretion of  the investigator in keeping w ith the community standards of 
medical care.  
 
5.2.2 Prohibited Concomitant Medications 
Drug-drug interaction studies have  not been conducted with guad ecitabine. In vitro  studies 
suggest guadecitabine is unlikel y to inhibit or induce human cy tochrome p450 (CYP) enzymes 
and is not a substrate for CYPs , indicating that CYP-mediated d rug-drug interactions with 
guadecitabine are unlikely to occu r. Neither guadecitabine, nor  the active metabolite decitabine 
inhibit major human drug trans porters.  Therefore, no specific concomitant medications are 
prohibited.  5.3 Supportive Care 
Institutional standards shoul d be followed for  supportive care such as symptom management, 
hydration and transfusions. Filg rastim should be utilized based  on NCCN guidelines.  
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 15 of 41 5.4 Contraception 
The following restrictions apply while the patient is receiving  study treatment and for the specified 
times before and after:  Female patient of ch ild-bearing potential 
• Females of childbearing potential  who are sexually active with a non-sterilized male 
partner must use at least 1 highly  effective method of contra ception from the time of 
screening and must agree to continue using such precautions for  180 days after the last 
dose of durvalumab + guadecitabine . Non-sterilize d male partner s of a female patient 
must use male condom plus spermi cide throughout this period. Ce ssation of birth control 
after this point should be discu ssed with a responsible physici an. Not engaging in sexual 
activity for the total duration of  the drug treatment and the d rug washout period is an 
acceptable practice; however, periodi c abstinence, the rhythm m ethod, and the 
withdrawal method are not acceptable methods of birth control. Female subjects should 
also refrain from breastfe eding throughout this period. 
 Male subjects with a female pa rtner of childbearing potential 
• Non-sterilized males who are sex ually active with a female part ner of childbearing 
potential must use a male condom pl us spermicide from screening  through 180 days after 
receipt of the final dose of dur valumab + guadecitabine or. Not  engaging in sexual 
activity is an acceptable practice; however, occasional abstine nce, the rhythm method, 
and the withdrawal method are not acceptable methods of contrac eption. Male subjects 
should refrain from sperm  donation throughout this period. 
• Female partners (of childbeari ng potential) of male subjects mu st also use a highly 
effective method of contraception throughout this period.  
 Females of childbearing potenti al are defined as those who are not surgically ster ile (i.e., bilateral 
tubal ligation, bilate ral oophorectomy, or com plete hysterectom y) or post-menopausal.  
 
Women will be considered post-menopausal if they have been amen orrheic for 12 months without 
an alternative medical cause. The  following age-specific requir ements apply:  
• Women <50 years of age would be c onsidered post-menopausal if t hey have been 
amenorrheic for 12 months or m ore following cessation of exogen ous hormonal 
treatments and if they have lut einizing hormone  and follicle-st imulating hormone levels 
in the post-menopausal range for  the institution or underwent s urgical sterilization 
(bilateral oophorectomy or hysterectomy).  
• Women ≥50 years of age would be c onsidered post-menopausal if t hey have been 
amenorrheic for 12 months or m ore following cessation of all ex ogenous hormonal 
treatments, had radiation-induced  menopause with last menses >1  year ago, had 
chemotherapy-induced menopause with last menses >1 year ago, or  underwent surgical 
sterilization (bilat eral oophorectomy, bilate ral salpingectomy or hysterectomy). 
 Highly effective methods of cont raception, defined as one that results in a low failure rate (i.e., 
less than 1% per year) when used c onsistently and correctly are
 described in the table below. 
Note that some contr aception methods are not  considered highly effective (e.g. male or female 
condom with or without spermicide;  female cap, diaphragm, or sp onge with or without 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 16 of 41 spermicide; non-copper containing i ntrauterine device; progesto gen-only oral hormonal 
contraceptive pills where inhi bition of ovulation is not the pr imary mode of action; and triphasic 
combined oral contraceptive pills).  
Highly Effective Methods of Con traception (<1% Failure Rate) 
Barrier/Intrauterine me thods Hormonal Methods
Copper T intrauterine device 
Levonorgestrel-releas ing intrauterine 
system (e.g., Mirena®)a 
 Etonogestrel implants: e.g. Implanon 
Intravaginal device: e .g. ethinylestradiol 
and etonogestrel 
Medroxyprogesterone injection: e.g. 
Depo-Provera  
Normal and low dose combined oral 
contraceptive pill 
Norelgestromin/ethinylestradiol 
transdermal s ystem 
a This is also considered a hormonal method 
 6. TOXICITIES AND DOSE DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS 
The NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v5.0 will be used to 
grade adverse events. Subjects enrolled in this study will be e valuated clinically and with 
standard laboratory tests before  and at regular intervals durin g their participation in this study as 
specified in Study Calendar & Ev aluations. Subjects will be eva luated for adverse events (all 
grades), serious adverse events , and adverse events requiring s tudy drug interruption or 
discontinuation as specified in S tudy Calendar & Evaluations.   
 6.1 Dose Delays/Dose Modifications 
Unless otherwise noted in the dos e modification t ables below, t reatment may be delayed ≤ 2 
weeks from the expected day of the  next treatment for any reaso n. If treatment is delayed ≥ 2 
weeks, subjects will proceed wit h the next cycle of treatment a t the dose level recommended 
according to the tables below.  
 6.2 Dose Levels for Dose Reductions 
 
Dose level Dose of carboplatin Dose of Guadecitabine 
Starting Dose AUC 4 30mg/m2 
Dose level (-1) AUC 4 24mg/m2 
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 17 of 41 Dose Modification Guidance Table  (applies to Day 1 for all cycles except for Cycle 1) 
 
Neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count [ANC]) 
Toxicity Grade Stipulations Suggested Action 
 
G3 
500 - 999/mm3 
(w/out fever [>38.3°C 
or 101.0°F]) ≤ 14 days of 
interruption/delay • hold treatments until ANC 
>1000/mm3 
• Prophylaxis with granulocyte 
colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) 
starting with next cycle should be 
considered by treating physician. In these patients GCSF support will be given on Day 6 through an on-body injector (neulasta onpro) 
• no change in Guadecitabine or 
carboplatin dose  
G3 500 - 999/mm
3  
(w/out fever) > 14 days of 
interruption/delay • hold treatments until ANC 
>1000/mm3 
• Prophylaxis with granulocyte 
colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) starting with next cycle should be considered by treating physician. In these patients GCSF support 
will be given on Day 6 through an 
on-body injector (neulasta onpro) 
• reduce Guadecitabine by one dose 
level  
 G 3  
500 - 999/mm3  
(w/ fever)  • hold treatments until ANC 
>1000/mm3 
• Prophylaxis with granulocyte 
colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) 
starting with next cycle should be 
considered by treating physician. In these patients GCSF support will be given on Day 6 through an on-body injector (neulasta onpro) 
• reduce Guadecitabine by one dose 
level  G4 (w/out fever) Lasting ≤ 14 days 
Any 
episode G4 (w/out fever) G4 lasting > 14 days • discontinue subject from study  
 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 18 of 41 Thrombocytopenia  
Toxicity Grade Suggested Action 
1 G3 25,000 - 50,000/mm3 • hold treatments until plt ≥ 50,000/mm3 
• reduce Guadecitabine by one dose level  
G4 < 25,000/mm3 • discontinue subject from study  
 
6.3 Protocol Therapy Discontinuation 
In addition to discontinuation from therapy related to toxiciti es as outlined above, a subject will 
also be discontinued from prot ocol therapy and followed per pro tocol under the following 
circumstances outlined below.  T he reason for discontinuation o f protocol therapy will be 
documented on the electronic case report form (eCRF)   
• Documented disease progression.   
• Site investigator determines a  change of therapy would be in th e best interest of the 
subject 
• Subject requests to discontinue  protocol therapy, whether due t o unacceptable toxicity or 
for other reasons 
o In a subject decides to prematur ely discontinue protocol therap y (“refuses 
treatment”), the subject should be  asked if he or she may still  be contacted for further 
scheduled study assessments. The ou tcome of that discussion sho uld be documented 
in both the medical records and in the eCRF. 
• Female subject becomes pregnant  
• Protocol therapy is inte rrupted for ≥ 6 weeks.  
 6.4 Protocol Discontinuation  
If a subject decides to discontin ue from the protocol (and not just from protocol therapy) all 
efforts should be made to compl ete and report st udy assessments  as thoroughly as possible. A 
complete final evaluation at the time of the subject’s protocol  withdrawal should be made with 
an explanation of why the subject is withdrawing from the proto col. If the reason for removal of 
a subject from the study is an adverse event, it will be record ed on the eCRF. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 19 of 41 7. STUDY CALENDAR & EVALUATIONS 
 
Study Evaluation   
Cycle = 28 days Screening On Treatment Cycle 1-4 Safety follow up 
visit9 Long-term Follow 
up10 
-28 days Day 1 
± 3 days Day 5 
± 3 days 30 days 
post last dose 
(± 7 da ys)Every 2 months  
(±14 days) 
REQUIRED  ASSESSMENTS 
Informed Consen t X  
Medical Histor y1 X 
Physical Exa m X X  X
Vital si gns and ECOG Performance Status2 XXX  X
AEs & concomitant medications X X X X
LABORATORY ASSESSMENTS  
Complete Blood Cell Count with diff (CBC) X X8 X X
Comprehensive Metabolic Profile (CMP) X X8 X X
Pregnanc y test (urine or serum) (WOCBP)3 X 
DISEASE ASSESSMENT 
CT or PET CT of ches t4 X Prior to C3D1  X X
CT, PET CT or MRI of abdomen and pelvis4 X Prior to C3D1  X X
Bone Scan4 X Prior to C3D1  X X
TREATMENT EXPOSURE 
Guadecitabine Dail y D1-D5 
Carboplatin X 
SPECIMEN C OLLECTION  
Archival Tumor Tissue or Fresh Tissue5 X5 X5 C2D5 X
Whole bloo d for somatic baseline and CTCs6C1D1  
Whole blood for PBMCs6 C1D1 C2D5 X 
BANKING SAMPLES 
Whole blood7 C 1 D 1
Whole blood for plasma and serum7 C1D1  X
FOLLOW-UP  
Survival Status, Subsequent Therapy      X  
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 20 of 41 CBC with differential and platelet to include: WBC, ANC, Hgb, H ct, PLT. CMP to include sodium, potassium, chloride, creatinine , blood urea 
nitrogen; liver function tests (LFTs) to include AST, ALT, tota l bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase and LDH 
 
Key to Footnotes  
 1: Medical History; other data to obtain during this assessment  includes: diagnosis and staging to include pathology report an d staging 
documentation. A smoking history  questionnaire and trial awaren ess question. Prior anti-cancer treatment should be documented including 
medications (chemotherapy, chec kpoint inhibitors, etc) radiatio n or surgery.   
 
2: Vital signs to include blood pressure, temperature, pulse, o xygen saturation, weight, and height (screening only) and ECOG performance status.   
 3: For women of childbearing potential (WOCBP): urine or serum βhCG if clinically appropriate. If a urine test is done and it is positive or cannot 
be confirmed as negative, a serum  pregnancy test will be requir ed. Testing is required at screening. 
 
4: Tumor response assessment will c onsist of evaluation by CT o r PET CT scan of chest. An MRI, C T or PET CT scan of the abdome n and pelvis 
may be done if there is measura ble disease that is not detectab le by CT or PET CT of the chest. A  bone scan may be used for su bjects with bone 
only disease or if there is suspicion of bone metastasis. Imagi ng will be performed at screening, prior to Cycle 3 and at the D30 safety follow up 
visit (± 7 days). Imaging selected for each subject should rema in the same throughout the study . If tumor assessments are avai lable for subjects 
who have not yet experienced progressive disease (PD) at the ti me treatment is discontinued, the  follow-up tumor evaluations w ill be documented 
in the eCRF until PD or death is  confirmed, or until another tr eatment is initiated.  
 5: Archival tissue is required if available and should be ident ified at screening and shipped by C2D1. If archival tissue is n ot available, subjects 
may still be eligible.  Biopsies w ill be obtained prior to C1D1  from 15 patients with easily accessible disease regardless of availability of archival 
tissue. These same 15 patients w ill be required to undergo a re peat biopsy 
prior to treatment on C2D5 if c linically feasible. These same 
subjects will have the opti on to undergo a biopsy at progressio n/safety visit. See Correlative Laboratory Manual (CLM) for detailed 
instructions.  
 
6: Whole blood will be collected f or somatic baseline and CTCs prior to treatment C1D1.  Whole blood will be collected prior to treatment C1D1, 
C2D5 and at progression/Safety Follow Up visit for isolation of  peripheral blood mononuclear ce lls. See CLM for detailed instr uctions. 
 7: Samples for banking for future unspecified cancer related re search include: Whole blood: collected prior to treatment on Cy cle 1 Day 1. Whole 
blood for Serum and Plasma: collected prior to treatment on Cyc le 1 Day 1 and at the 30-day Safe ty Follow-up visit. See CLM fo r detailed 
instructions. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 21 of 41 8: CBC and CMP to be performed during screening for eligibility  and on C1D1 prior to treatment. For the remainder of the Cycle s, CBC and CMP 
may be performed within 4 days prior to Day 1 of treatment.  
 
9: The safety follow-up visit should only occur when subjects p ermanently stop study treatment f or whatever reasons (toxicity,  progression, or at 
discretion of site investigator) and should be performed 30 day s (± 7 days) after the last dose of treatment. Subjects who hav e an ongoing Grade ≥ 
2 or serious AE (SAE) at this vi sit will continue to be followe d until the AE resolves to ≤ Gra de 1 or baseline, deemed clinic ally insignificant, 
and/or until a new anti-cancer tr eatment starts, whichever is e arlier. 
 
10: Long-term follow up will occur in  all subjects until documented disease progression. Radiology im aging should be performed every 2 months 
(± 7 days). Subjects who discontinue treatment for any reason w ithout documented disease progressi on will be followed every 2 months for 1 year 
(± 14 days). Once disease progression is documented, subjects w ill enter a survival follow up p eriod every 3 months for 1 year  from the time of 
documented progression. Follow up may be accomplished via clini c visit, phone call, or other avenues as appropriate.   
 
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 22 of 41 8. BIOSPECIMEN STUDIES AND PROCEDURES 
Please refer to the Correlative La boratory Manual (CLM) for add itional details on studies 
outlined below.  8.1 Tissue 
 8.1.1 Archival Tissue Archival tissue is required if av ailable. Archival tissue shoul d be identifie d at screening, 
requested after registration a nd shipped by C2D1. If archival t issue is not available, subjects may 
still be eligible.  This tissue will be used to analyze EZH2 ex pression. 
 8.1.2 Fresh Biopsy Tissue 
For 15 patients with easily accessible disease, biopsies are re quired Cycle 1 Day 1 (regardless of 
archival tissue availability ) and Cycle 2 Day 5 to assess methy lation changes, EZH2 expression, 
and platinum-induced DNA adducts . A biopsy at progression is op tional for the same 15 patients 
and similar analysis  will be performed. 
 8.2 Peripheral Blood Samples  
 8.2.1 Somatic Baseline 
Whole blood will be collected for  somatic baseline prior to tre atment C1D1. This sample is 
required.  8.2.2 Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) 
Whole blood will be collected for  CTCs prior to treatment C1D1.  This sample is required and 
will be used to determine circul ating tumor cell (CTC) burden p rior to initiating treatment.  
 8.2.3 Peripheral Blood Mononuclear cells Whole blood will be collected pr ior to treatme nt on C1D1, C2D5 and at progression for isolation 
of peripheral blood mononuclear cel ls. Changes in LINE1 methyla tion levels in PBMCs will be 
assessed. In addition, platinum i nduced DNA lesions will be qua ntified. DNA will be extracted 
and ICP-MS performed to determine global DNA lesions.  8.3 Samples for future unspecified cancer related  
Subject consent will be obtaine d to collect addi tional samples for future unspecified cancer 
related research. Hoosier Cancer  Research Network will manage t he banked samples. Samples 
will be banked indefinitely in the  Hoosier Cancer Research Netw ork Biorepository until they are 
used up. Collection of samples is optional.  This includes: 
• Whole blood: Whole blood will be c ollected prior to treatment o n Cycle 1 Day 1.  
• Pre- and Post-treatment plasma: W hole blood for plasma will be collected prior to treatment 
on Cycle 1 Day 1 and at the 30-da y Safety Follow-up visit.  
• Pre- and Post-treatment serum: Whole blood for serum will be co llected prior to treatment on 
Cycle 1 Day 1 and at the 30-da y Safety Follow-up visit. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 23 of 41 Please refer to the Correlative La boratory Manual (CLM) for all  sample collection, processing, 
labeling, and shipping instructions.  8.4 Storage of Biospecimens Any specimens remaining (leftove r) once protocol described bios pecimen-based studies are 
complete will be stored for fu ture unspecified cancer related r esearch. Permission to store these 
samples will be obtained  during informed consent. 
 8.5 Confidentiality of Biospecimens Samples that are collected w ill be identified by a subject’s se quence ID assigned at the time of 
registration to the trial. Any mat erial issued to collaborating  researchers will be anonymized and 
only identified by the sub ject’s study number. 
 9. CRITERIA FOR DISEASE EVALUATION 
 9.1 Measurable Disease 
Measurable disease is defined as the presence of at least one m easurable lesion. Measurable 
lesions are defined as those that can be accurately measured in  at least one dimension (longest 
diameter to be recorded) as > 20 mm by chest x-ray, as >10 mm wi th CT scan, or >10 mm with 
calipers by clinical exam. All tumo r measurements must be recor ded in millimeters (or decimal 
fractions of centimeters). 
 9.1.1 Malignant Lymph Nodes 
To be considered pathologically e nlarged and measurable, a lymp h node must be >15 mm in 
short axis when assessed by CT s can (CT scan slice thickness re commended to be no greater 
than 5 mm). At baseline and in f ollow-up, only the  short axis w ill be measured and followed. 
 9.2 Non-measurable Lesions 
All other lesions (or sites of di sease), including small lesion s (longest diameter <10 mm or 
pathological lymph nodes with ≥  10 to <15 mm short axis), are c onsidered non-measurable 
disease. Bone lesions, leptomeni ngeal disease, ascites, pleural /pericardial effusi ons, lymphangitis 
cutis/pulmonitis, inflammator y breast disease, and abdominal ma sses (not followed by CT or 
MRI), are considered as non-measurable.  NOTE:   Cystic lesions that meet the c riteria for radiographically de fined simple cysts should not 
be considered as malignant lesi ons (neither measurable nor non- measurable) since they are, by 
definition, simple cysts. ‘Cys tic lesions’ thought to represent  cystic metastases can be considered 
as measurable lesions, if they m eet the definition of measurabi lity described above. However, if 
non-cystic lesions are present i n the same subject, these are p referred for sele ction as target 
lesions.  9.3 Target Lesions 
All measurable lesions up to a  maximum of 2 lesions per organ a nd 5 lesions in total, 
representative of all involve d organs, should be identified as target lesions and recorded and 
measured at baseline. Target lesions should be selected on the basis of their size (lesions with the 
longest diameter), be represent ative of all involved organs, bu t in addition should be those that 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 24 of 41 lend themselves to reproducible  repeated measurements. It may b e the case that, on occasion, the 
largest lesion does not lend itsel f to reproducib le measurement  in which circumstance the next 
largest lesion which can be m easured reproducibly should be sel ected. A sum of the diameters 
(longest for non-nodal lesions, shor t axis for nodal lesions) f or all target lesions will be 
calculated and reported as the ba seline sum diameters. If lymph  nodes are to be included in the 
sum, then only the short axis is added into the sum. The baseli ne sum diameters will be used as 
reference to further characterize any objective tumor regressio n in the measurable dimension of 
the disease.  9.4 Non-target Lesions 
All other lesions (or sites of di sease) including any measurabl e lesions over and above the 5 
target lesions should be identif ied as non-target lesions and s hould also be record ed at baseline. 
Measurements of these lesions a re not required, but the presenc e, absence, or in rare cases 
unequivocal progression of eac h should be noted throughout foll ow-up. 
 9.5 Evaluation of Target Lesions 
NOTE:  In addition to the informatio n below, also see section 4.3.2 i n the international criteria 
proposed by the Response Evaluation  Criteria in Solid Tumors (R ECIST) Committee, version 
1.1 (Eur J Cancer 45;2009:228-247)  for special notes on the ass essment of target lesions.  
 
Complete Response (CR) Disappearance of all target lesions. Any  pathological lymph nodes 
(whether target or non-target) must have reduction in short axi s to 
<10 mm.
Partial Response (PR) At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the  diameters of target 
lesions, taking as reference the baseline sum diameters 
Progressive Disease (PD) At least a 20% increase in the sum of the diameters of target 
lesions, taking as reference the smallest sum on study (this in cludes 
the baseline sum if that is the smallest on study). In addition  to the 
relative increase of 20%, the s um must also demonstrate an 
absolute increase of at least 5 mm. (Note:  the appearance of o ne or 
more new lesions is also considered progressions). 
Stable Disease (SD) Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for  PR nor sufficient 
increase to qualify for PD, taking as reference the smallest su m 
diameters while on study
 
 9.6 Evaluation of Non-Target Lesions 
 
Complete 
Response (CR) Disappearance of all non-target lesions and normalization of tu mor marker 
level. All lymph nodes must be non-pathological in size (<10 mm  short axis) 
NOTE :  If tumor markers are initia lly above the upper normal limit,  they must 
normalize for a subject to be considered in complete clinical r esponse. 
Non-CR/ Non-
PD Persistence of one or more non-target lesion(s) and/or maintena nce of tumor 
marker level above the normal limits
Progressive Disease (PD) Appearance of one or more new lesions and/or unequivocal progre ssion of 
existing non-target lesions. Unequivocal progression should not  normally 
trump target lesion status. It must be representative of overal l disease status 
change, not a single lesion increase.
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 25 of 41 Although a clear progression of “no n-target” lesions only is ex ceptional, the opinion of the site 
investigator should prevail in s uch circumstances, and the prog ression status should be 
confirmed at a later time by the sponsor investigator. 
 9.7 Evaluation of Best Overall Response 
 
Target Lesions Non-Target Lesions New Lesions Overall Response 
CR C R No C R 
CR Non-CR/ Non-PD No P R 
CR Not evaluate d No P R 
PR Non-PD/ or not all evaluate d No P R 
SD Non-PD or not all evaluate d No SD 
Not all evaluate d Non-PD No Non-evaluable
PD An y Yes or No PD 
Any PD* Yes or No PD 
Any A n y Yes PD 
*In exceptional circumstances, unequivocal progression in non-t arget lesions may be accepted as 
disease progression. 
 
Subjects with a global deteriora tion of health status requiring  discontinuation of treatment 
without objective evidence of dis ease progression at that time should be classified as having 
“symptomatic deterioration.” Eve ry effort should be made to doc ument the objective progression 
even after discontin uation of treatment. 
 In some circumstances, it may be  difficult to d istinguish resid ual disease from normal tissue. 
When the evaluation of complete response depends on this determ ination, it is r ecommended that 
the residual lesion be investigat ed (fine needle aspirate/biops y) to confirm the complete response 
status.  9.8 Definitions for Response Evaluation – RECIST 1.1 
 9.8.1 Objective Response Rate  The objective response rate is the proportion of all subjects w ith confirmed PR or CR according 
to RECIST 1.1, from the start of  treatment until disease progre ssion/recurrenc e (taking as 
reference for progressi ve disease the smalle st measurements rec orded since the start of 
treatment).  9.8.2 Disease Control Rate 
The disease control rate is the proporti on of all subjects with  stable disease (SD) for 8 weeks, or 
partial response (PR), or complete response (CR) according to R ECIST 1.1, from the start of 
treatment until disease progression/recurrence (taking as refer ence for progressive disease the 
smallest measurements recorded s ince the start of treatment). 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 26 of 41 9.8.3 Progression Free Survival 
A measurement from Day 1 of treat ment until the criteria for di sease progression is met as 
defined by RECIST 1.1 or death, whi chever occurs first. Subject s who have not progressed will 
be right-censored at the date of  the last disease evaluation. 
 9.8.4 Overall Survival 
Overall survival is define d by the duration from day 1 of treat ment to date of death from any 
cause.  9.9 Definitions for Response Cri teria for patients with bone-on ly metastases; MD 
Anderson (MDA) criteria
36 
 
Complete Response (CR) • Complete sclerotic fill-in  of lytic lesions on XR or CT 
• Normalization of bone density on XR or CT 
• Normalization of si gnal intensity on MRI 
• Normalization of tracer uptake on SS
Partial Response (PR) • Development of a sclerotic rim  or partial sclerotic fill-in of 
lytic lesions on XR or CT 
• Osteoblastic flare - Interval  visualization of lesions with 
sclerotic rims or new sclerotic lesions in the setting of other  
signs of PR and absence of progressive bony disease 
• ≥ 50% decrease in measurable  lesions on XR, CT, or MRI 
• ≥ 50% subjective decrease in the  size of ill-defined lesions 
on XR, CT, or MRI 
• ≥ 50% sub jective decrease in tracer uptake on SS 
Progressive Disease (PD) • > 25% increase in size of meas urable lesions on XR, CT, or 
MRI 
• > 25% subjective increase in the s ize of ill-defined lesions 
on XR, CT, or MRI 
• > 25% subjective increase in tracer uptake on SS 
• New bone metastases
Stable Disease (SD) • No change 
• < 25% increase or < 50% decr ease in size of measurable 
lesions 
• < 25% subjective increase or <  50% subjective decrease in 
size of ill-defined lesions 
• No new bone metastases
Abbreviations: XR: radiography;  CT: computed tomography; SS: sk eletal scintigraphy; MRI: 
magnetic resonance ima ging. 
 Measurements are based on the s um of a perpendicular, bi-dimens ional measurement of the 
greatest diameters of e ach individual lesion. 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 27 of 41 10 DRUG INFORMATION 
 10.1 Guadecitabine; SGI-110 
Guadecitabine is a potent inhib itor of DNA methylation that has  been shown to induce a dose-
dependent decrease of global DNA and gene-specific methylation in many different human 
cancer cell lines.  10.1.1  Supplier/How Supplied 
Astex Pharmaceuticals will supply Guadecitabine at no charge to  subjects participating in this 
clinical trial.   The investigator sha ll take responsib ility for and shall take a ll steps to mainta in appropriate 
records and ensure a ppropriate supply, sto rage, handling, distr ibution, and usage of 
investigational product in accordance with the protocol and any  applicable laws and regulations. 
 10.1.2  Preparation 
Guadecitabine is available as a two-vial system, referred to as  (1) Guadecitabi ne for Injection, 
100mg and (2) Guadecitabine Diluent for Reconstitution, 3mL or 1.2mL: 
• Guadecitabine for Injection, 100m g contains guadecitabine, 100m g as a dry lyophilized 
powder  
• Guadecitabine Diluent for Rec onstitution, 3mL contains 3mL of a  non-aqueous diluent 
for constitution. 1.2mL contains  1.2mL of a non-aqueous diluent . 
 
The diluent is comprised of 3 c ommonly used excipients, propyle ne glycol, glycerin and ethanol, 
which are generally recognized a s safe. All 3 excipients are ph armaceutically acceptable solvents 
previously in drug productions a pproved for SC administration. Guadecitabine solution is 
reconstituted at a maximum con centration of 100mg/mL for SC adm inistration. 
 Both product and diluent are cont ained in clear glass vials sto ppered with a latex-free rubber 
stopper and capped with an a luminum flip-off seal. 
 10.1.3  Storage and Stability 
Guadecitabine for Injection, 100mg vial is stored at 2ºC to 8 º C in the original packaging until 
use. Guadecitabine Diluent for Reconstitution, 3mL is stored at  2ºC to 30 ºC, and 1.2 mL is 
stored at 2°C to 8°C, both in a n upright position until use. Bo th vials are preservative free and for 
single use only.  10.1.4  Handling and Disposal 
Occupational Safety and Health A dministration (OSHA) Guidelines  for handling cytotoxic drugs 
outlined in the American Journal of Hospital Pharmacy should be  followed. As with other 
potentially toxic anti-cancer agents, care should be exercised in the handling and preparation of 
guadecitabine. The use of gloves an d protective garments is rec ommended. Preparation should 
occur in a vertical laminar f low biological hood using proper a septic technique. Reconstituted 
drug product is intended for SC a dministration at a recommended  concentration of 100 mg/mL. 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 28 of 41 10.1.5  Dispensing 
Guadecitabine must be dispense d only from offici al study sites and to eligible subjects under the 
supervision of the site investig ator. Guadecitabine be stored i n a secure area according to local 
regulations. It is th e responsibility of the site investigator to ensure that study drug is only 
dispensed to subjects.  
 10.1.6  Adverse Events 
Please refer to the current vers ion of the Investigator’s Broch ure (IB) for additional information 
regarding this drug.  10.2 Carboplatin 
Please see product package insert  for complete details regardin g Carboplatin. 
 
10.2.1  Availability  
Carboplatin is commercially available.  
 
10.2.2  Chemical Name  
Carboplatin (carboplatin for inje ction or platinum diamine [1,1 -cyclobutane- decarbozxylate 
(2—0,0’)-,(SP-4-2)]) is a plati num compound used as a chemother apeutic agent. It will be 
supplied commercially.  
 
10.2.3  Formulation  
Carboplatin is available as a s terile lyophilize d powder in sin gle-dose vials containing 50 mg, 
150 mg, or 450 mg of carboplatin. Eac h vial contains equal part s by weight of carboplatin and 
mannitol. Commercial supplies of  carboplatin will be used in th is study.  
 
10.2.4  Preparation 
Immediately before use, the cont ents of a carbopl atin vial must  be reconstituted with either 
sterile water for injection, USP , 5% dextrose in water, or 0.9%  sodium chloride injection, USP. 
The following shows the proper diluent volumes to be used to ob tain a carboplatin concentration 
of 10 mg/mL. Carboplatin soluti on can be further diluted to con centrations as low as 0.5 mg/mL 
with D5W or 0.9% normal saline. Car boplatin reacts with aluminu m to form a precipitate and 
cause a loss of potency. Therefor e, needles or intravenous sets  containing aluminum parts that 
may come in contact with the dr ug must not be used for the prep aration or adm inistration of 
carboplatin.   10.2.5  Storage and Stability 
Intact vials of carboplatin are s table for the period indicated  on the package when stored at room 
temperature (15-30°C or 59-86°F)  and protected from light.  Whe n prepared as described above, 
carboplatin solutions are stable for 8 hours at room temperatur e if protected from light. The 
solution should be discarded aft er 8 hours since no antibacteri al preservative is contained in the 
formulation. 
 
10.2.6  Adverse Events Associated with Carboplatin 
Incidence rates of adverse eve nts associated with carboplatin a re provided in the  product package 
insert.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 29 of 41 11 ADVERSE EVENTS 
The descriptions and grading s cales found in the NCI CTCAE v5.0  will be utilized for AE 
assessment. A copy of the CTCAE  v5.0 can be downloaded from the  CTEP website at 
http://ctep.cancer.gov. All forms for AE/SAE recording and repo rting can be found in the EDC 
system (Documents a nd Information Tab). 
 11.1 Definitions 
 11.1.1  Adverse Event  
An AE is any untoward medical occu rrence whether or not conside red related to the study drug 
that appears to change in inte nsity during the course of the st udy. The following are examples of 
AEs:  
• Unintended or unfavorable sign or symptom 
• A disease temporally associate d with participa tion in the proto col 
• An intercurrent illnes s or injury that imp airs the well-being o f the subject 
 
Abnormal laboratory values or diag nostic test results constitut e AEs only if they induce clinical 
signs or symptoms or require tre atment or further diagnostic te sts   
 Hospitalization for elective surg ery or routine clinical proced ures that are not t he result of an AE 
(e.g., surgical insertion of cen tral line) should not be record ed as an AE.  
 Disease progression should not be  recorded as an AE, unless it is attributable to the study 
regimen by the site investigator.  11.1.2  Serious Adverse Event (SAE) 
A SAE is an adverse event that: 
• Results in death. NOTE:  Death due to disease progression should not be reported as a 
SAE, unless it is attributable  by the site investigator to the study drug(s) 
• Is life-threatening (defined as an event in which the subject w as at risk of death at the 
time of the event; it does not r efer to an event which hypothet ically might have caused 
death if it were more severe) 
• Requires inpatient hospitaliza tion for >24 hours or prolongatio n of existing 
hospitalization. NOTE:  Hospitalization for anticipate d or protocol specified procedur es 
such as administration of chemot herapy, central line insertion,  metastasis interventional 
therapy, resection of  primary tumor, or ele ctive surgery, will not be considered serious 
adverse events. 
• 
Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
• Is a congenital anom aly or birth defect 
• Is an important medical event ( defined as a medical event(s) th at may not be immediately 
life-threatening or r esult in death or ho spitalization but, bas ed upon appropriate medical 
and scientific judgment, may jeopa rdize the subject or may requ ire intervention (e.g., 
medical, surgical) to prevent  one of the other serious outcomes  listed in the definition 
above). Examples of such events include, but are not limited to , intensive treatment in an 
emergency room or at home for a llergic bronchospasm; blood dysc rasias or convulsions 
not resulting in hospitalization;  or the development of drug de pendency or drug abuse.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 30 of 41 11.1.3  Unexpected Adverse Event 
For this study, an AE is consider ed unexpected when it varies i n nature, intensity or frequency 
from information provided in the c urrent IB, prescribing inform ation or when it is not included in 
the informed consent document a s a potential risk. Unexpected a lso refers to AEs that are 
mentioned in the IB as occurri ng with a class of drugs or are a nticipated from the 
pharmacological properties of  the drug, but are not specificall y mentioned as occurring with the 
particular drug under investigation.    11.1.4  Relatedness 
AEs will be categorized according to the likelihood that they a re related to the study drug(s). 
Specifically, they will be categorized using the following term s:  
 
Unrelated Adverse Event is not related  to the study drug(s)  
Unlikely Adverse Event is doubtfully related  to the study drug(s)  
Possible Adverse Event may be related  to the study drug(s)  
Probable Adverse Event is  likely related  to the study drug(s)  
Definite Adverse Event is clearly related  to the study drug(s)  
 
11.2 Reporting 
 11.2.1  Adverse Events  
• AEs will be recorded from time  of signed informed consent until  30 days after 
discontinuation of study drug(s) or until a new anti-cancer tre atment starts, whichever 
occurs first.  
• AEs will be recorded regardless  of whether or not they are cons idered related to the study 
drug(s).   
• All AEs will be recorded in the s ubject’s medical record and on  the appropriate study 
specific eCRF form within the EDC system. 
• AEs considered related to st udy drug(s) will be followed until resolution to        
 ≤ Grade 1 or baseline, deemed clin ically insignificant, and/or  until a new anti-cancer 
treatment starts, whi chever occurs first. 
• Asymptomatic laboratory abnormal ities that do not require treat ment will not be collected 
as adverse events. 
 11.2.2  Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) 
 
11.2.2.1 Site Requirements for Repo rting SAEs and SUSAR’s to HC RN 
• SAEs will be reported from time  of signed informed consent unti l 30 days after 
discontinuation of study drug(s) or until a new anti-cancer tre atment starts, whichever 
occurs first.  
• SAEs will be reported on the SAE Submission Form within  1 business day  of discovery 
of the event.   
• SAEs include events related a nd unrelated to the study drug(s).   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 31 of 41 • All SAEs will be recorded in the s ubject’s medic al record and o n the appropriate study 
specific eCRF form within the EDC system.   
• All SAEs regardless of relat ion to study drug wil l be followed until resolution to ≤ Grade 
1 or baseline and/or deemed clini cally insignifi cant and/or unt il a new anti-cancer 
treatment starts, whi chever occurs first. 
 Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSARs) are SAE s that qualify for 
mandatory expedited reporting t o regulatory authorities where t he SAE is suspected to be caused 
by the study treatment and is c onsidered unexpected (ie, not de fined as expected in the current IB 
clinical study protocol, or appr oved labeling for marketed drug s). After sponsor-investigator 
assessment, HCRN will report to the relevant regulatory authori ties and forward a formal 
notification describing the SUS AR to investigators, according t o regulatory requirements. Each 
investigator must then notify h is or her IRB/IEC of the SUSAR a s required by local regulatory 
authorities and in accordan ce with IRB/IEC policy. 
 The site will submit the completed SAE Submission Form to HCRN within  1 business day of 
discovery of the event . The form may be submitted t o HCRN electronically to 
safety@hoosiercancer.org . The site investigator is res ponsible for informing the IRB an d/or other 
local regulatory bodies as per lo cal requirements.  The origina l copy of the SAE Submission 
Form and the email correspondence must be kept within the study  file at the study site. 
 Once the SAE has resolved (s ee resolution guidelines listed abo ve), sites must submit a follow-
up SAE Submission Form within a r easonable timeframe to HCRN el ectronically to 
safety@hoosiercancer.org .   
 
11.2.2.2 HCRN Requirements for Reporting SAEs and SUSARS to Ast ex   
HCRN will report all SAEs  to Astex Drug Safety at drugsafety@astx.com  within  1 business 
day of receipt of the SAE Submissio n Form from a site. If the even t is classified as a SUSAR, 
please clearly state in the notif ication to Astex as such, and include the date of SUSAR 
submission to regulatory agency. Follow-up information will be provided to Astex as it is 
received from site. Every quarter , Astex will provide a list of  all SAEs to HCRN that were 
reported to Astex. HCRN will be asked to reconcile this list wi th the site’s records, and report 
any discrepancies to Astex.  11.3 Sponsor-Investigator Responsibilities  HCRN will send a SAE summary to the sponsor-investigator within 1 business day  of receipt of 
SAE Submission Form from a site .  The sponsor-investigator will  promptly review the SAE 
summary and assess for expect edness and relatedness.   
 11.4 Overdose Record the actual dose of st udy drug administere d in the source  document and on the appropriate 
eCRF. Record any adverse clinical  signs and symptoms associated  with a potential overdose on 
the AE eCRFs. Report signs and sym ptoms of a potential overdose  that meet SAE criteria to 
HCRN on the SAE form within 1 business day . Treat any AE (including SAE) based on 
standard care for the specific  signs and symptoms. HCRN will re port to Astex within 1 business 
day. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 32 of 41 11.5 Pregnancy 
Report any pregnancy that occurs i n a subject or male subject's  female partner during the time 
between the first dose of study t reatment and 30 days after the  last dose of study treatment. 
Record any occurrence of pregna ncy on the Pregnancy Form and se nd information on the baby 
until the baby is 1 year old to HCRN who will report the inform ation to Astex.  
 A subject must immediately inform  the investigator if the subje ct or subject's partner becomes 
pregnant during the time betwee n the first dose of study treatm ent and 30 days after the last dose 
of study treatment. Any female s ubjects receiving (study treatm ent) who become pregnant must 
immediately discontinue study tr eatment. The investigator shoul d counsel the subject, discussing 
any risks of continuing the pr egnancy and any possible effects on the fetus. Report any abortion 
and the reason for it, whether t herapeutic, elective or spontan eous, to HCRN within 1 business 
day who will report to Astex within 1 business day.  
 11.6 HCRN Responsibilities to FDA HCRN will manage the Investigational New Drug Application (IND)  associated with this 
protocol on behalf of the sponsor-investigator. HCRN will cross -reference this s ubmission to the 
Astex’s parent IND at the time of submission. Additionally, HCR N will submit a copy of these 
documents to Astex and IU DSMC at the time of submission to FDA . 
 For protocols conducted under an IND, HCRN will be responsible for all communication with 
the FDA in accordance with 21CFR312 including but not limited t o the 7 and 15 Day Reports, as 
well as an Annual Progress Report. Additionally, HCRN will subm it a copy of these reports to 
Astex and IU DSMC at the t ime of submission to FDA. 
 
11.7 IND Safety Reports Unrelated to this Trial 
Astex will provide to HCRN IND safety reports from external stu dies that involve the study 
drug(s) per their guidelines.  H CRN will forward safety reports  to the sponsor-investigator who 
will review these reports and dete rmine if revisions are needed  to the protocol or consent. HCRN 
will forward these repor ts to participating sites within 1 business day  of receiving the sponsor-
investigator’s review.  Base d on the sponsor-investigator’s rev iew, applicable changes will be 
made to the protocol and infor med consent document (if required ).  All IND safety reports will 
also be made available to s ites via the EDC system.    
 Upon receipt from HCRN, site inves tigators (or designees) are r esponsible for submitting these 
safety reports to their respec tive IRBs, as per their IRB polic ies. 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 33 of 41 12 STATISTICAL METHODS 
Statistical analysis of this st udy will be the responsibility o f the Department of Biostatistics at 
Indiana University School of Med icine. Parameter estimates and relevant summary statistics will 
be reported for both efficacy a nd safety outcomes. Continuous v ariables will be summarized by 
means, medians, minima, maxima , and standard deviations. Catego rical variables will be 
summarized by frequencies and perc entages. Missing data will no t be imputed. Additional 
exploratory analysis will be  conducted when appropriate. Change s from the analysis plan will 
not require an amendment to the  protocol unless it changes a si gnificant feature in the protocol; 
however, all changes from the ori ginal analysis plan will be do cumented in the final study report. 
The statistical analysis methods are outlined below.  12.1 Study Design 
This is a Phase II study evaluating the efficacy and safety of Guadecitabine in combination with 
carboplatin in Extensive Stage S mall Cell Lung Cancer. The stat istical analyses will be primarily 
in the chemotherapy-sensitive group. Chemotherapy-resistant pat ients will also be enrolled but 
will be described separately. Chemo -sensitivity is defined as a  response to initial platinum 
therapy that lasts ≥ 90 days. Chemo -resistance is defined as re sponse to platinum therapy that 
lasts < 90 days.  12.2 Endpoints 
 12.2.1  Definition of Primary Endpoint 
PFS is defined as the time from Day 1 of treatment until the cr iteria for disease progression is 
met as defined by RECIST 1.1, MDA c riteria or death as a result  of any cause. 
 
12.2.2  Definition of Secondary Endpoints 
• Toxicities will be defined by the NCI Common Terminology Criter ia for Adverse Events 
(NCI CTCAE) v5. 
• Objective response rate (CR+PR ) will be assessed via RECIST 1.1  or MDA criteria. 
• Disease Control Rate (CR+PR+ SD > 8 weeks) will be assessed via RECIST 1.1 or MDA 
criteria. 
• Overall survival will be defin ed as the time from Day 1 of trea tment until death from any 
cause. 
 12.3 Sample Size and Accrual 
For the chemo-sensitive gr oup, when the sample size is 24, a no n-parametric tes t (single-group) 
with a one-sided 0.10 significance level will have 80% power to  detect the difference between a 
median survival of 3.0 months vs  6.0 months assuming an accrual  period of approximately 12 
months and maximum follow-up of 24 months (i.e. would allow for  up to 12 months of follow-
up after accrual ends).  With 24 in the chemo-sensitive group, we expect to enroll approximate 
34 subjects total, thus will have  approximately 10 chemo-resist
ant patients to gene rate pilot data.   
 12.4 Assessment of Safety 
The safety population will be com prised of all subjects who rec eive at least one dose of study 
drug.  Safety will be assessed by the  NCI CTCAE V5. Please refe r to the Study Calendar for the 
schedule of toxicity assessment. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 34 of 41 12.5 Assessment of Efficacy 
The efficacy evaluable population will be comprised of all subj ects who receive at least one dose 
of study drug and either undergo a t least one post- baseline ass essment or die before any 
evaluation.  Efficacy will be e valuated using RECIST 1.1 or MDA  criteria (for subjects with 
bone only disease).  12.6 Data Analysis Plans 
 12.6.1  Analysis Plans for Primary Objective 
In the efficacy evaluable populat ion, in the chemo-sensitive gr oup only the primary endpoint of 
PFS will be separately compared to the historical control rate of 3 months using a one-sided Sign 
Test for censored data (35).  In bot h the chemo-sensitive and - resistant groups, PFS overall will 
be estimated with a Kaplan-Meie r curve and median PFS with a 95 % confidence interval.   
 12.6.2  Analysis Plans for Secondary Objectives 
In the efficacy evaluable populat ion, Objective Response and Di sease Control Rate will be 
estimated with 95% confidence inte rvals.  Overall survival (OS)  will be estimated with a Kaplan-
Meier curve and median OS with a  95% confidence interval. Toxic ities will be tabulated in the 
Safety Population. All analyses wi ll be separate for the chemo- sensitive and chemo-resistant 
groups.  12.6.3  Analysis Plans for Exploratory Objectives 
Platinum induced DNA adducts i n PBMCs and tumor tissue on Cycle  2 Day 5 will be analyzed. 
These will be compared to plati num induced DNA lesions isolated  from PBMCs  of a control 
group of patients that have compl eted standard of care treatmen t with 4 cycles of  carboplatin (+ 
etoposide) enrolled under a separa te protocol using two-sample t-tests. LINE1 methylation levels 
in PBMCs and baseline tumor biops y for global DNA methylation s tatus and selected genes, 
IHC expression of EZH2 will be described with box plots and mea ns/standard deviations or 
median/quartiles, as appropriate , at each time point collected and with line plot s over-time if 
appropriate. Paired t-tests or W ilcoxon signed-rank tests will be used to compare baseline 
measures to post-trea tment measures (for LINE1 in PBMCs, IHC ex pression of EZH2).   
 12.6.4  Other Planned Analyses 
For the enrolled population (all subjects who are enrolled onto  the trial), descriptive statistics 
will be used to characterize subj ect demographic and clinical c haracteristics, disposition, and 
significant protocol violations . In the safety population, conc omitant medications and exposure 
will be described.    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 35 of 41 13 TRIAL MANAGEMENT 
 13.1 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) 
The study will be conducted in accordance with the Indiana Univ ersity Melvin and Bren Simon 
Cancer Center’s (IUSCC) DSMP fo r High Risk Safety Lead-In/Phase  II Trials.  
 HCRN oversight activities include: 
• Review and processing of all adve rse events requiring expedited  reporting as defined in 
the protocol 
• Provide trial accrual progress, s afety information and data sum mary reports to the 
sponsor-investigator , including a weekly upda te of aggregate AE  data. 
• Investigators will conduct cont inuous review of data and patien t safety. For any increase 
in frequency of grade 3 or above a dverse events ( above the rate  reported in the 
Investigator Brochure or package insert), the sponsor investiga tor will notify HCRN who 
will notify the DSMC Chair immed iately. The notification will i nclude the incidence of 
study adverse events, grades, and a ttributions, as well as inve stigator statements 
regarding comparison with risks pe r the IB/ package insert.    
• Notify participating sites of adve rse events pote ntially requir ing expedited reporting and 
subsequent DSMC recommendatio ns for study modifications. 
• Investigators will conduct cont inuous review of data and patien t safety.  
• Coordinate monthly meetings whi ch will include representation f rom each accruing site.  
o These meetings should include r eview of data, the number of sub jects and 
significant toxicities as describ ed in the protocol. HCRN shoul d maintain 
meeting minutes and attendance for submission to the DSMC upon request. 
• Conduct the trial acro ss all participating s ites in accordance with the requirements set 
forth in the IUSCC DSMP. 
 
13.2 Indiana University Melvin a nd Bren Simon Cancer Center’s D ata Safety 
Monitoring Committee The IUSCC Data and Safety Monito ring Committee (DSMC) is respon sible for oversight of 
subject safety, regulatory comp liance, and data integrity for t his trial. The DSMC will review 
this study to assess toxicity, c ompliance, data integrity, and accrual per the Institutional DSMP. 
Trials managed by HCRN are not  routinely audited or monitored b y IUSCC; however, the 
IUSCC DSMC retains the right t o audit HCRN trials on a for caus
e basis.  
 
The IUSCC DSMC will review stu dy data semi-annually during the active treatment and safety 
follow-up portion of the tria l per the IUSCC DSMP. 
 In preparation for the IUSCC DS MC review, HCRN will provide the  following: 
1. Monthly Summary Reports 
2. Reports of the following, if not a lready included in the Monthl y Summary Report: 
o Adverse event summary report (i ncluding serious adverse events)  
o Study accrual patterns  
o Protocol deviations 
• Audit and/or monitoring re sults, if applicable 
• Data related to stopping/decisi on rules described in study desi gn 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 36 of 41 3. HCRN weekly (Phase I) or mont hly (Phase II) study update meetin g minutes/ attendance  
 
Documentation of DSMC reviews will be provided to sponsor-inves tigator (SI) and HCRN.  The 
IUSCC DSMC will notify the spons or-investigator and other regul atory bodies, as appropriate, 
for issues of immediate concern. The sponsor-investigator will work with HCRN to address the 
DSMC’s concerns as appropriate.  
At any time during the  conduct of the trial , if it is the opini on of the sponsor-investigator that 
the risks (or benefits ) to the patient warrant early closure of  the study, this recommendation 
should be made in writing to the D SMC Chair and Compliance Offi cer. Alternatively, the 
DSMC may initiate suspension or early closure of the study at a ny time based on its review of 
the study reports.    13.2.1 IND Annual Reports For trials with an IND held loca lly by the IU pri ncipal investi gator or universit y, the IND Annual 
Report will be prepared and submitted to the Compliance Team. T his report will be reviewed by 
the DSMC at the time of FDA submission.  
13.3 Data Quality Oversight Activities 
Remote validation of the EDC sy stem data will be completed on a  continual basis throughout the 
life cycle of the study. Automated edit check listings will be used to generate queries in the EDC 
system and transmitted to the sit e to address in a timely fashi on. Corrections will be made by the 
study site personnel.   13.3.1 Onsite Monitoring Monitoring visits to the trial sites may be made periodically d uring the trial to e nsure key aspects 
of the protocol are followed. Additional for cause visits may o ccur as necessary. Selected source 
documents will be reviewed for ve rification of agreement with d ata entered into the EDC system.  
It is important for the site i nvestigator and their relevant pe rsonnel to be available for a sufficient 
amount of time during the monitori ng visits or audit, if applic able. The site investigator and 
institution guarantee access to s ource documents by HCRN or its  designee. 
 The trial site may also be subjec t to quality assurance audit b y Astex Pharmaceuticals or its 
designee as well as inspection by appropriate regulatory agenci es. 
 13.4 Compliance with Trial Registration and Results Posting Requirem ents 
Under the terms of the Food and D rug Administra tion Modernizati on Act (FDAMA) and the 
Food and Drug Administration Amend ments Act (FDAAA), the sponso r-investigator of the trial 
is solely responsible for determin ing whether th e trial and its  results are subject to the 
requirements for submission to t he Clinical Trials Data Bank, http://www.clinicaltrials.gov . All 
results of primary and secondar y objectives must  be posted to C T.gov within a year of 
completion.  The sponsor-investig ator has delegated responsibil ity to HCRN for registering the 
trial and posting the results  on clinicaltria ls.gov. Informatio n posted will allow subjects to 
identify potentially app ropriate trials for their disease condi tions and pursue pa rticipation by 
calling a central contact number for further in formation on app ropriate trial l ocations and study 
site contact information.   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 37 of 41 14. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING 
 14.1 Data Management 
HCRN will serve as the Clinical R esearch Organization for this trial. Data will be collected 
through a web based clinical resea rch platform (EDC system), a system compliant with Good 
Clinical Practices and Federal R ules and Regulations.  HCRN per sonnel will coordinate and 
manage data for quality control a ssurance and in tegrity. Select  data will be collected and entered 
into the EDC system by study sit e personnel from participating institutions.   
 14.2 Case Report Forms and Submission 
Generally, clinical data will be e lectronically captured in the  EDC system and correlative results 
will be captured in EDC system
 or other secure database(s). If  procedures on the study calenda r 
are performed for sta ndard of care, at min imum, that data will be captured in the source 
document. Select standard of care data will also be captured in  the EDC system, according to 
study-specific objectives.   The completed dataset is the sol e property of the sponsor-inves tigator’s institution and should 
not be exported to third parties, e xcept for authorized represe ntatives of appropriate 
Health/Regulatory Authorities, w ithout permissio n from the spon sor-investigator and HCRN. 
 14.3 Record Retention 
To enable evaluations and/or aud its from Health Authorities/HCR N, the site investigator agrees 
to keep records, including the i dentity of all subjects (suffic ient information t o link records; e.g., 
hospital records), all original s igned informed consent forms, copies of all source documents, and 
detailed records of drug disposi tion. All source documents are to remain in the subject’s file and 
retained by the site investigator  in compliance with the site c ontract with HCRN.  No records 
will be destroyed until HCRN confir ms destruction is permitted.  
 14.4 Confidentiality 
There is a slight risk of loss  of confidentiality of subject in formation. All record s identifying the 
subjects will be kept confidentia l and, to the extent permitted  by the applicable laws and/or 
regulations, will not b e made publicly available. Information c ollected will be maintained on 
secure, password protected electro nic systems. Paper files that  contain personal information will 
be kept in locked and secure lo cations only accessible to the s tudy site personnel.  
 Subjects will be informed in writi ng that some organizations in cluding the sponsor-investigator 
and his/her research associates , HCRN, Astex Pharmaceuticals, I RB, or government agencies, 
like the FDA, may inspect their  medical records to verify the i nformation collect ed, and that all 
personal information made avai lable for inspection will be hand led in strictest confidence and in 
accordance with local data protection laws.  If the results of the  study are published, t he subject’s identi ty will remain confidential. 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 38 of 41 15 ETHICS 
 15.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approval 
The final study protocol and the f inal version of the informed consent form must be approved in 
writing by an IRB. The site investig ator must submit written ap proval by the IRB to HCRN 
before he or she can enro ll subjects into the study.   
 The site investigator is respons ible for informi ng the IRB of a ny amendment to the protocol in 
accordance with local requirements. In addition, the IRB must a pprove all advertising used to 
recruit subjects for the study. T he protocol must be re-approve d by the IRB, as local regulations 
require.   Progress reports and notificati ons of serious and unexpected ad verse events will be provided to 
the IRB according to local re gulations and guidelines. 
 15.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study 
The study will be performed in acco rdance with ethical principl es originati ng from the 
Declaration of Helsinki.  Conduc t of the study will be in compl iance with ICH Good Clinical 
Practice, and with all applicab le federal (including 21 CFR par ts 56 & 50), state, or local laws. 
 15.3 Informed Consent Process 
The site investigator will ensure the subject is given full and  adequate oral and written 
information about the nature , purpose, possible risks and benef its of the study. Subjects must 
also be notified they are free to disconti nue from the study at  any time. The subject should be 
given the opportunity to ask quest ions and allowed time to cons ider the information provided. 
 
The subject’s signed and dated i nformed consent must be obtaine d before conducting any 
procedure specifically for the s tudy. The site investigator mus t store the original, signed 
informed consent form. A copy of t he signed informed consent fo rm must be given to the 
subject.     
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 39 of 41 16 REFERENCES 
 1. Bernhardt EB, Jalal SI. Small Cell Lung Cancer. Cancer Treat  Res. 2016;170:301-22. 
2. Fukuoka M, Furuse K, Saijo N, N ishiwaki Y, Ikegami H, Tamura  T, et al. Randomized trial 
of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine versus cispla tin and etoposide versus 
alternation of these regimens  in small-cell lung cancer. J Natl  Cancer Inst. 1991;83(12):855-
61. 
3. Chan BA, Coward JI. Chemother apy advances in small-cell lung  cancer. J Thorac Dis. 
2013;5 Suppl 5:S565-78. 
4. O'Brien ME, Ciuleanu TE, Tsekov H, Shparyk Y, Cucevia B, Juh asz G, et al. Phase III trial 
comparing supportive care alone  with supportive care with oral topotecan in patients with 
relapsed small-cell lung can cer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(34):5441 -7. 
5. Eckardt JR, von Pawel J, Pujol JL, Papai Z, Quoix E, Ardizzo ni A, et al. Phase III study of 
oral compared with intravenous topotecan as second-line therapy  in small-cell lung cancer. J 
Clin Oncol. 2007;25(15):2086-92. 
6. Allen J, Jahanzeb M. Extensive -stage small-cel l lung cancer:  evolution of systemic therapy 
and future directions. Cli n Lung Cancer. 2008;9(5):262-70. 
7. Mamdani H, Induru R, Jalal SI. N ovel therapies in small cell  lung cancer. Transl Lung 
Cancer Res. 2015;4(5):533-44. 
8. Dowell JE. Small cell lung can cer: are we making progress? A m J Med Sci. 2010;339(1):68-
76. 
9. Wozniak K, Blasiak J. Recogni tion and repair of DNA-cisplati n adducts. Acta Biochim Pol. 
2002;49(3):583-96. 
10. Pinto AL, Lippard SJ. Bindi ng of the antitumor drug cis-dia mminedichloroplatinum(II) 
(cisplatin) to DNA. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1985;780(3):167-80. 
11. Malinge JM, Giraud-Panis MJ , Leng M. Interstrand cross-link s of cisplatin induce striking 
distortions in DNA. Journal of  inorganic biochemistry. 1999;77( 1-2):23-9. 
12. Wermann H, Stoop H, Gillis AJ, Honecker F, van Gurp RJ, Amm erpohl O, et al. Global 
DNA methylation in fetal human germ  cells and germ  cell tumours : association with 
differentiation and cisplatin res istance. J Pathol. 2010;221(4) :433-42. 
13. Matei D, Fang F, Shen C, Schilder J, Arnold A, Zeng Y, et a l. Epigenetic resensitization to 
platinum in ovarian cancer. C ancer research. 2012;72(9):2197-20 5. 
14. Li M, Balch C, Montgomery JS , Jeong M, Chung JH, Yan P, et al. Integrated analysis of 
DNA methylation and gene expressi on reveals specific signaling pathways associated with 
platinum resistance in ovarian cancer. BMC  Med Genomics. 2009;2 :34. 
15. Vaz M, Hwang SY, Kagiampakis I , Phallen J, Patil A, O'Hagan  HM, et al. Chronic Cigarette 
Smoke-Induced Epigenomic Changes Precede Sensitization of Bronc hial Epithelial Cells to 
Single-Step Transformation by KRA S Mutations. Cancer Cell. 2017 ;32(3):360-76 e6. 
16. Foulks JM, Parnell KM, Nix R N, Chau S, Swierczek K, Saunder s M, et al. Epigenetic drug 
discovery: targeting DNA methyltr ansferases. J Biomol Screen. 2 012;17(1):2-17. 
17. Wang L, Aakre JA, Jiang R, Mar ks RS, Wu Y, Chen J, et al. M
ethylation markers for small 
cell lung cancer in peripheral blood leukocyte DNA. Journal of thoracic oncology : official 
publication of the Internationa l Association for the Study of L ung Cancer. 2010;5(6):778-85. 
18. Poirier JT, Gardner EE, Connis N, Moreira AL, de Stanchina E, Hann CL, et al. DNA 
methylation in small cell lung can cer defines distinct disease subtypes and correlates with 
high expression of EZH2. Onc ogene. 2015;34(48):5869-78. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 40 of 41 19. Chuang JC, Warner SL, Vollmer D , Vankayalapati H, Redkar S,  Bearss DJ, et al. S110, a 5-
Aza-2'-deoxycytidine-containing di nucleotide, is an effective D NA methylation inhibitor in 
vivo and can reduce tumor growth. Molecular cancer therapeutics . 2010;9(5):1443-50. 
20. Gotze K, Muller-Thomas C, Pesch el C. The role of azacitidin e in the management of 
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS ). Cancer Manag Res. 2009;1:119-3 0. 
21. Coral S, Parisi G, Nicolay HJ , Colizzi F, Danielli R, Fratt a E, et al. Immunomodulatory 
activity of SGI-110, a 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine-containing demeth ylating dinucleotide. Cancer 
Immunol Immunothe r. 2013;62(3):605-14. 
22. Griffiths EA, Choy G, Redkar S , Taverna P, Azab M, Karpf AR . SGI-110: DNA 
Methyltransferase Inhibitor On colytic. Drugs Future. 2013;38(8) :535-43. 
23. Issa JJ, Roboz G, Rizzieri D , Jabbour E, Stock W, O'Connell  C, et al. Safety and tolerability 
of guadecitabine (SGI-1 10) in patients with myelodysplastic syn drome and acute myeloid 
leukaemia: a multi centre, randomised, dos e-escalation phase 1 s tudy. Lancet Oncol. 
2015;16(9):1099-110. 
24. Fang F, Munck J, Tang J, Taverna P, Wang Y, Miller DF, et a l. The novel, small-molecule 
DNA methylation inhibitor SGI-110 as an ovarian cancer chemosen sitizer. Clin Cancer Res. 
2014;20(24):6504-16. 
25. Matei D, Ghamande S, Roman L, Alvarez Secord A, Nemunaitis J, Markham MJ, et al. A 
Phase I Clinical Trial of Guad ecitabine and Carboplatin in Plat inum-Resistant, Recurrent 
Ovarian Cancer: Clinical, Pharm acokinetic, and Pharmacodynamic Analyses. Clin Cancer 
Res. 2018;24(10):2285-93. 
26. Albany C, Hever-Jardine MP , von Herrmann KM, Yim CY, Tam J,  Warzecha JM, et al. 
Refractory testicular germ cell tumors are highly sensitive to the second generation DNA 
methylation inhibitor guadecita bine. Oncotarget. 2017;8(2):2949 -59. 
27. Oronsky B, Scicinski J, Reid T , Oronsky A, Carter C, Oronsk y N, et al. RRx-001, a novel 
clinical-stage chemosensitizer, radiosensitizer , and immunosens itizer, inhibits glucose 6-
phosphate dehydrogenase in human  tumor cells. Discov Med. 2016; 21(116):251-65. 
28. Kuang Y, El-Khoueiry A, Taverna  P, Ljungman M, Neamati N. G uadecitabine (SGI-110) 
priming sensitizes hepatocellula r carcinoma cells to oxaliplati n. Mol Oncol. 2015;9(9):1799-
814. 
29. Tellez CS, Grimes MJ, Picchi MA, Liu Y, March TH, Reed MD, et al. SGI-110 and 
entinostat therapy re duces lung tumor burden and reprograms the  epigenome. International 
journal of cancer Journal inte rnational du cancer. 2014;135(9): 2223-31. 
30. Hubaux R, Thu KL, Coe BP, MacA ulay C, Lam S, Lam WL. EZH2 p romotes E2F-driven 
SCLC tumorigenesis through modula tion of apoptosis and cell-cyc le regulation. Journal of 
thoracic oncology : official public ation of the International A ssociation for the Study of Lung 
Cancer. 2013;8(8):1102-6. 
31. Garassino MC, Torri V, Michetti G, Lo Dico M, La Verde N, A glione S, et al. Outcomes of 
small-cell lung cancer patients treated with second-line chemot herapy: a multi-institutional 
retrospective analysis . Lung Cancer. 2011;72(3):378-83. 
32. Goto K, Ohe Y, Shibata T, Seto T , Takahashi T, Nakagawa K, et al. Combined 
chemotherapy with cisplatin, et oposide, and irinotecan versus t opotecan alone as second-line 
treatment for patients with sen sitive relapse d small-cell lung cancer (JCOG0605): a 
multicentre, open-label, rando mised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol . 2016;17(8):1147-57. 
33. Inoue A, Sugawara S, Maemondo M, Mori Y, Oizumi S, Harada M , et al. Randomized phase 
II trial comparing amrubicin w ith re-challenge of platinum doub let in patients with sensitive-
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN LUN17-302 
Version Date: 18MAR2020 C onfidential Page 41 of 41 relapsed small-cell lung cancer : North Japan Lung Cancer Study Group trial 0702. Lung 
Cancer. 2015;89(1):61-5. 
34. Langer CJ, Gadgeel SM, Borgh aei H, Papadimitrakopoulou VA, Patnaik A, Powell SF, et al. 
Carboplatin and pemetrexed with or  without pembrolizumab for ad vanced, non-squamous 
non-small-cell lung cancer: a r andomised, phase 2 cohort of the  open-label KEYNOTE-021 
study. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(11):1497-508. 
35. Brookmeyer R and Crowley, JJ. A  confidence interval for the  median survival time. 
Biometrics, 38, 29-41, 1982. 
36. Hayashi N, Costelloe CM, Hamao ka T, et al. A prospective st udy of bone tumor response 
assessment in metastatic breast cancer. Clin Breast Cancer 2013 ;13(1):24–30. 
 