 
Discovery of Effects of Retinol on Human Skin Aging in 
Individuals of East Asian Descent  
Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
October 12, 2016  
 
Anne Lynn S. Change , MD , Principal Investigator  
Stanford University  School of Medicine  
Redwood City, California, 94063  
Confidential  
Stanford University School of Medicine  
 
Page 1  of 6  
  
    
Title of Proposal:  
    
Discover y of Rejuvenation Effects of Vitamin A (Retinol)  Lotion  
on Naturally Aged Skin in an East Asian  Cohort  
     
Version 101216  
         
Principal Investigator:  
 
Anne Lynn S. Chang, MD  
Stanford University School of Medicine  
Assistant Professor, Department of Dermatology  
450 Broadway Street  
Redwood City, CA 94063  
 
     

Confidential  
Stanford University School of Medicine  
 
Page 2  of 6  
 Introduction 
  Increasing evidence  from multiple organ systems  suggests that there are different 
rates  of natural aging in humans. One of the best organs to study human aging is the skin, 
due to its amenability to clinical inspection and serial biopsy. Recently, genome- wide 
analysis in an Ashkenazi population has provided the evidence that skin can age at different rates and that youthful appearing skin is associated with different gene variants 
(Chang et al.,  2014). The first studies to demonstrate anti -aging effects of a topical agent 
were  published in 1988 in which topical tretinoin was used to improve the appearance in 
photo- aged skin  (Weiss et al., 1988) . Subsequently,  topical retinol (vitamin A ) lotion was 
shown in a placebo- controlled study to decrease fine wrinkling in photo- protected skin in 
older individuals residing in nursing homes (Kafi et al ., 2007) .  
 Recent advances i n deep sequencing technology have  enabled the unbiased and 
detailed analysis of gene expression chang es in the skin  (Chang et al., 2013) . 
Furthermore, a type of deep sequencing technique called 3’ -end sequencing has 
demonstrated the ability to identify changes in a class of transcripts called long non-
coding RNAs (lnc RNAs) that are now understood to be a previously unrecognized way to 
regulate gene expression. Here, we propose to utilize this state- of –the-art technology to 
discover, in unbiased fashion, the rejuvenation effects of the most widely used class of topical anti -aging agents, retinoids. In thi s study, we will focus on topical retinol, as it is an 
over-the-counter agent that has minimal side effects.  
Furthermore, studies on retinol to date in humans have occurred largely in white 
population even though individuals of Asian descent represent the majority of the world population. The potential effects of retinol on individuals of Asian descent are uncharacterized and represent an untapped potential to explore differences in aging across ethnic groups.  
While prior studies have indicated an increase in  glycosaminoglycans  (GAGs)  and 
collagen after topical retinol usage (Kafi et al.,  2007), the true breadth of anti -aging effects 
including the mechanisms by which these effects are controlled has not been explored. It is possible that topical retinol has additional  
effects on major pathways of skin aging, such 
as NFkB related genes (Chang et al., 2013) as well as previously unknown aging 
pathways. This study aims to  discover the molecular basis of  rejuvenation effects of 
retinol so that new topical agents can be identified that might mimic aspects of the retinol rejuvenation effect. We aim to do this in a Han Chinese cohort, as this is the most populous ethnic group among the East Asian population.  Given the similarity in haplotype 
of Han Chinese with Korean and Japanese populations, these latter groups will be included as well.  
  
 
  
Objective:  
 To discover new pathways of rejuvenation using topical vitamin A application on naturally 
aged in East Asian  women .  
 Specific Aims:  
Confidential  
Stanford University School of Medicine  
 
Page 3  of 6  
  
Spec ific Aim 1 : To discover  molecular  pathways of skin rejuvenation by identification of 
gene expression profiles after topical vitamin A  in East Asian  women  
 Specific Aim 2: To identify changes in wrinkling and biometrics associated with skin rejuvenation after topical vitamin A application  in East Asian  women  
 Specific Aim 3: To identify type and severity of adverse events associated with topical retinol usage  
 
 
Materials and Methods  
Formulation of topical retinol  per Kafi et al.  by combining a 41% retinol solution in 55%  
polysorbate 20 in sufficient proportions with fragrance- free Norwegian Formula Neutrogena 
Body Moisturizer (Ortho- Neutrogena Co, Los Angeles, Calif ) to yield a 0.4% retinol lotion.  
The vehicle was similarly prepared with 55% polysorbate 20 solution in Norwegian Formula 
Neutrogena Body  Moisturizer. There were no discernable differences in color, odor,  
or consistency between the active lotion with retinol and the placebo lotion control. A stability 
study  using  high-performance liquid chromatography will be performed to demonstrate that 
more than 90% of 0.4% retinol remained in the moisturizer 3 months after preparation.  
Both 0.4% retinol lotion and its vehicle were placed  in dark glass containers covered with foil 
to eliminate transmission of UV radiation a nd stored at 4°C.  
 
After Stanford Human Subjects Panel approval and written informed consent, participants will be screened  for eligibility as follows:  
 
Inclusion Criteria   
Able to provide written informed consent  
Older group: Age between 50 and 75 years  
Young group: Age less than or equal to 25 years  
Female  
Fine wrinkling score at baseline =7 or greater  if in older group  
All 4 gra ndparents of Han Chinese, Korean or Japanese descent  
Willing and able to apply topical agents to inner arms  
Uncontrolled medical problems including diabetes , active chemotherapy  
Body mass index within normal or overweight range  No history of weight loss of >20 lbs. within past 5 years  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
Skin condition in the areas of skin biopsy that would obscure results of analysis  
Topical creams or treatment to arms 2 weeks prior to study baseline visit, includi ng 
sunscreens, topical moisturiz ers, sunless tanners  
Individuals with known hypersensitivity to retinoid class of agents  
Prior anti -aging treatments to arms including retinol, microdermabrasion within 2 weeks of 
baseline visit  
Confidential  
Stanford University School of Medicine  
 
Page 4  of 6  
 Prior laser therapy or surgical procedure to arms  
Prior radiation  or other trauma (extensive burns or abrasions) to arm skin 
Hormone- based therapy  within 4 weeks of enrollment  
 
Screening Visit  (VISIT 1 —older group only)  
Only individuals fulfilling eligibility criteria will be enrolled.  
As part of the screening process,  clinical histories, physical examinations including vital 
signs, and photography of sun exposed and non sun-exposed arm w ill be performed. 
Cutometry , Raman spectroscopy (Biophotonic scanning)  and transepidermal water loss will 
be measured.  
 
Enrollment  Visit  (VISIT 2 —subset of 30 participants from the older group above will be 
invited for this visit)  
Upon enrollment into the study, patients will be instructed on proper usage topical retinol 
versus vehicle placebo.  The placebo versus treatment arm will be clearly labeled on the 
subject ’s diary to minimize subject error.  Participants will apply treatment to one arm and 
placebo to the other arm based on computer generated randomized assignment  of left or 
right for the retinol. Participants are blinded to the treatment . Participants will be given a diary 
to record adherence to study procedures . Participants will be instructed to discontinue study 
if there is  any itching or burning sensation that is moderate or severe and to contact study 
personnel immediately should this occur.  
 
Week 12  visit (VISIT 3 —the 30 participants from VISIT 2 (older group) only)  
Adverse events and concomitant medication changes will be assessed and recorded. Study diary will be reviewed for adherence to study regimen. Photographs, cutometry and TEWL 
measurements will be taken. Two 4 mm skin biopsies will be taken at this time, one  from the 
side with the retinol exposure and one from the side without retinol exposure after injection of 
a small amount of lidocaine anesthetic. Skin biopsies will be bisected and placed in either formalin for hematoxylin and eosin staining  and mucin staining (for GAG) , or placed into RNA 
later for subsequent gene expression analysis by 3’ -end sequencing as described in Chang 
et al.,  2013.  Tissue will also be sent for microRNA analysis.  
 VISIT 1 —age<25 years group only  
As part of the screening process, clinical histories, physical examinations including vital signs, and photography of face, sun exposed and non sun- exposed arm skin will be 
performed. Cutometry, Raman spectroscopy (non invasive Biophotonic scanning) and transepidermal water loss will be measured. Photographs, cutometry and TEWL measurements will be taken. A 4 mm skin biopsies will be taken from the inner arm skin after injection of a small amount of lidocaine anesthetic. Skin biopsies will be bisected and placed in either formalin for hematox ylin and eosin staining and mucin staining (for GAG), or placed 
into RNA later for subsequent gene expression analysis by 3’ -end sequencing as described 
in Chang et al.,  2013. Tissue will also be sent for microRNA analysis.  
 Statistical Considerations  
This study is powered using data from Kafi et al . for the primary clinical endpoint of fine 
Confidential  
Stanford University School of Medicine  
 
Page 5  of 6  
 wrinkling score as measured by semi -quantitative scale of 0 to 9. A sample size of 36 
provides a power level of 0.80 in detecting  a difference of 1.00 unit on mean value before 
and after treatment for the fine wrinkling scale, with a type I error  rate of 0.05 for a 2- tailed 
hypothesis, assuming a standard deviation  of differences to be 1. 8. Assuming a dropout rate 
of 10%, the sample size needed is 28 subjects.  
  Anticipated Results 
 Results of photographs will be analyzed in blinded fashion by a board certified dermatologist 
for skin aging parameters including fine wrinkling  (tertiary  endpoint) , dyspigmentation, and 
surface texture with results graded on a 9  point Likert scale per Kafi et al. We anticipate that 
there will be statistically significant differences in mean score of these parameters between 
pre- and post - treatment groups for both vitamin A and placebo. 
 Results of histology will be evaluated in blinded fashion by a dermatopathologist. Parameters of skin aging will include measurement of epidermal thickness, and density of collagen and elastin. Results from the pre- and post - treatments groups for  topical vitamin A versus 
placebo will be compared.  
 Results of the cutometry and TEWL measurements will be grouped and mean and standard deviations for the older patients before and after topical vitamin A treatment will be calculated 
and compared to placebo. We a nticipate there will be statistically significant differences in the 
mean scores in cutometry and TEWL measurements between treated and placebo groups.  
 Whole transcriptome libraries will be created from the samples stored in RNA later and sent for 3’ -end sequencing at Stanford Functional Genomics Core Facility  after de- identification . 
We have utilized this Core facility for other projects in the past with high quality results. 
Results will be analyzed by our bioinformatician using the methods outlined in C hang ALS et 
al., 2013. Specifically, comparisons will be made in skin from older participants between the 
pre and post treatment compared to placebo. All results of interest from 3’ -end sequencing 
will be confirmed by RT -qPCR.  
 
We anticipate that the adverse event rate (deemed related to study agent by investig ator) for 
participants is less than 10% and may include mild (grade 1) itching or burning.   Significance  
 This study will be  the first broad based, unbiased investigation into the molecular basi s of the 
anti-aging effects of topical vitamin A . This study is a high qualit y, well- controlled study using 
state -of-the art technology  of 3-Seq and microRNA analysis. Our research group has 
established the workflow from previous larger studies  in skin agi ng (unpublished data) and 
can now leverage this experience for maximal efficiency and positive results. Specifically, we 
would be able to compare our results to inner arm skin from females younger than 30 years whose gene expression profiles are already contained in our database.  
 
Confidential  
Stanford University School of Medicine  
 
Page 6  of 6  
 This study will provide novel candidate gene pathways as well as confirm suspected/known 
genes important f or skin rejuvenation in humans. This information will aid in discovery of new 
topical agents that might have rejuvenative capacity due to their ability to mimic aspects of 
the vitamin A gene expression changes.  
 References  
 Chang ALS, Atzmon G, Bergman A, et al.  (2014) Identification of genes promoting skin 
youthfulness by genome- wide association study. J Invest Dermatol  134 (3): 651 -657. 
 
Chang ALS, Bitter PH, Qu K, et al.  (2013) Rejuvenation of Gene Expression Pattern of Aged 
Human Skin by Broadband Light Treatment: A Pilot Study . J Invest Dermatol  133 (2): 394-
402. 
 Kafi R, Kwak HR, Schumacher WE, et al. (2007) Improvement of naturally aged skin with 
vitamin A (retinol). Arch Dermatol  143: 666- 12. 
 
Weiss JS, Ellis CN, Headington JT, et al.  (1988) Topical tretinoin for photoaged skin: a  
double- blind vehic le-controlled study. JAMA  259:527- 532. 
 
 