Einstein IRB Consent FormPage 1 of 5QALBERT EINSTEIN COLLEGE OF MEDICINE OF YESHIVA UNIVERSITY
DOCUMENTATION OF INFORMED CONSENT AND HIPAA AUTHORIZATION
Introduction
You are being asked to participate in a research study called Self-Control and Adult Cigarette 
Smokers. Your participation is voluntary -- it is up to you whether you would like to participate. It 
is fine to say “no” now or at any time after you have started the study. If you say “no,” your 
decision will not affect any of your rights or benefits or your access to care.
The researcher in charge of this project is called the 
“Principal Investigator.” Her name is Dr. Andrea 
Weinberger. 
You can reach Dr. Weinberger at: 
1165 Morris Park Ave
Bronx, NY 10461
(718) 430-3946
For questions about the research study, or if you 
believe you have an injury, contact the Principal 
Investigator or the IRB.
Support for this research study is provided by 
department funds.The Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine and 
Montefiore Medical Center has approved 
this research study. The IRB # is in the 
stamp in the upper right hand corner. If you 
have questions regarding your rights as a 
research participant you may contact the 
IRB office at 718-430-2253 or by mail:
Einstein IRB 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
1300 Morris Park Ave., Belfer Bldg #1002
Bronx, New York 10461
Why is this study being done? 
The purpose of this study is to learn more about self-control and adults who smoke cigarettes. It 
has been suggested that people can improve self-control by practicing tasks that require the use 
of self-control (such as delaying cigarettes or sitting up as straight as possible). The goal of this 
study is to learn about whether scores on self-control and other measures will change after one 
week of practicing self-control tasks at home. We believe that adults who smoke cigarettes will 
show better self-control after practicing tasks for a week. 
Why am I being asked to participate? 
You are being asked to participate in this study because you are an adult who is 18 years old or 
older, you currently smoke cigarettes every day, and you are not currently trying to quit smoking 
and you are not using medications or other treatments to stop smoking. This is a single site 
study (meaning that the study takes place at one location) and we plan to include 150 people in 
the study.
How many people will take part in the research study?
You will be one of about 150 people who will be participating in this study.  
IRB NUMBER: 2015-5479
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/22/2019
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 01/21/2020
Einstein IRB Consent FormPage 2 of 5How long will I take part in this research?
It will take you about one week to complete this research study. During this time, we will ask you 
to make 2 study visits to Ferkauf Graduate School of Psychology.
What will happen if I participate in the study?  
The Screening Visit (Study Appointment 1) will take about 1 hour to complete. During this visit, 
we will ask some questions and go through some procedures to see if you are eligible to take 
part in this research study. The study staff or PI will review the results of these tests and 
procedures. If you are not eligible, the study staff will tell you why. If you are eligible, you will be 
asked to: 
Provide demographic information (such as gender and age).
Fill out some questionnaires about your general health and well-being, smoking, self-
control, personality, and mood. 
Give a breath sample as a measure of current smoking.
Go through a procedure that involves squeezing a hand-grip as long as you can twice.
At the end of the study visit, you will be scheduled to come back for the second study 
appointment one week later. During the week you will be asked to practice a task at home. You 
will be randomly assigned (like a coin toss) to a task. For example, you might be asked to delay 
smoking or to try to pay attention to your posture and sit or stand as straight as possible. You 
will also be asked to complete some questions each night about how much you practiced the 
task, how difficult the task was, and how many cigarettes you smoked that day.
Visit 2 (Study Appointment 2) will take approximately 30 minutes to complete. At this visit we will 
ask you to:
Fill out some questionnaires about your general health and well-being, smoking, self-
control, personality, and mood. 
Give a breath sample as a measure of current smoking.
Go through a procedure that involves squeezing a hand-grip as long as you can twice.
A description of this clinical trial will be available on www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S.
law. This website will not include information that can identify you. At most, the website will
include a summary of the results. You can search this website at any time.
This study will not involve genetic research or genetic testing. 
Will I be paid for being in this research study? 
You will receive $20 for completing the entire first study appointment and $30 for completing the 
entire second study appointment. This means you can receive a total of $50 for completing both 
of the 2 study visits. If you choose to withdraw from the study before all visits are completed, 
you will be paid only for the visits that you completed.
Will it cost me anything to participate in this study? 
There will be no cost to you to participate in the study.
IRB NUMBER: 2015-5479
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/22/2019
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 01/21/2020
Einstein IRB Consent FormPage 3 of 5What will happen if I am injured because I took part in this study?
If you are injured as a result of this research, only immediate, essential, short-term medical 
treatment, as determined by the participating hospital, will be available for the injury without 
charge to you personally. 
No monetary compensation will be offered. 
You are not waiving any of your legal rights by signing this informed consent document. 
If additional treatment is required as a result of a physical injury related to the research, 
necessary medical treatment will be provided to you and billed to your insurance 
company or to you as part of your medical expenses. 
Immediately report any discomforts, problems, or injuries that you experience during the course 
of your participation in the study to Dr. Weinberger at (718) 430-3946.
What else do I have to do?
You may carry out all your normal daily activities.
Are there any risks to me? 
Confidentiality
We will keep your information confidential, however, a risk of taking part in this study is that your 
confidential information might be shared accidentally with someone who is not on the study 
team and is not supposed to see or know about your information. This is very unlikely, because 
the study team takes confidentiality of your information seriously. Your research records will be 
kept confidential and your name will not be used in any written or verbal reports. Your 
information will be given a code number and separated from your name or any other information 
that could identify you. The form that links your name to the code number will be kept in a 
locked file cabinet and only the investigator and study staff will have access to the file. All 
information will be kept in a secure manner and computer records will be password-protected. 
Your study information will be kept as long as it is useful for this research.
The only people who can see your research records are:
the research team and staff who work with them.
the organization that funded the research.
groups that review research (the Einstein IRB and the Office for Human Research 
Protections).
These people who receive your health information may not be required by privacy laws to 
protect it and may share your information with others without your permission, if permitted by 
laws governing them.  All of these groups have been asked to keep your information 
confidential.
Are there any times you would not keep my data confidential? 
If you give us information that suggests that your child or any other child is being abused, we 
are required by law to report that information to the Administration for Children’s Services 
(ACS). Reporting this information may put you, your family, or others who are involved at risk of 
questioning and legal action by the authorities. 
IRB NUMBER: 2015-5479
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/22/2019
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 01/21/2020
Einstein IRB Consent FormPage 4 of 5If you give us information that suggests that you may hurt yourself or someone else, or if you 
report abuse of a child, elderly person, or person with a developmental disability, then members 
of the research team will make a report to the appropriate authorities.
Questionnaire
You may feel uncomfortable answering questions about your smoking behavior or your current 
mood.  You can choose not to answer questions that make you feel uncomfortable.
New Findings
If we learn any significant new findings during the study that might influence your decision to 
participate, we will contact you and explain them.
Are there possible benefits to me? 
You will not experience any direct benefit personally from participating in this study. We hope 
that you will participate because the study will generate important information about learning 
more about your smoking behavior. You will receive information about your smoking level from 
the breath sample and about your strength from the hand-grip test.
What choices do I have other than participating in this study?
You can refuse to participate in the study. 
Are there any consequences to me if I decide to stop participating in this study?
No. If you decide to take part in the study, you are free to stop participating at any time without 
giving a reason. However, some of the information may have already been entered into the 
study and that will not be removed. 
Can the study end my participation early?
We will not let you participate in the study anymore if you report that you are planning to hurt 
yourself or someone else. In addition, your participation will end if the investigator or study 
sponsor stops the study earlier than expected.
CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE
I have read the consent form and I understand that it is up to me whether or not I participate. I 
know enough about the purpose, methods, risks and benefits of the research study to decide 
that I want to take part in it. I understand that I am not waiving any of my legal rights by signing 
this informed consent document. I will be given a signed copy of this consent form.
Printed name of participant Signature of participant Date Time
Printed name of the person 
conducting the consent 
processSignature Date Time
IRB NUMBER: 2015-5479
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/22/2019
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 01/21/2020
Einstein IRB Consent FormPage 5 of 5
IRB NUMBER: 2015-5479
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/22/2019
IRB EXPIRATION DATE: 01/21/2020