The attached document is the informed consent form  included for the following study : 
Title: Patterns and Prevalence of FDG Extravasation in PET/CT Scans (Lucerno device)  
ClinicalTrials.gov [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: January 30 , 2017  
IRB Template Date: 3/2014 
 
   
SAINT LOUIS UNIVERSITY 
 
Research Study Consent Form  
 
 
STUDY TITLE:    Patterns and Prevalence of FDG extravasation in PET/CT scan 
 
 
  
This consent form contains important info rmation to help you decide whether to 
participate in a research study. 
 
 
The study staff will explain this study to you.  Ask questions about anything that is not clear 
at any time.  You may take hom e an unsigned copy of this consent form to think about and 
discuss with family or friends.   
 
  Being in a study is vo luntary – your choice. 
 If you join this study, you can still stop at any time. 
 No one can promise that a study will help you. 
 Do not join this study unless all of your questions are answered. 
  After reading and discussing the information in this consent form you should know: 
 
 Why this research study is being done; 
 What will happen during the study; 
 Any possible benefits to you; 
 The possible risks to you; 
 Other options you could choose in stead of being in this study;  
 How your personal health information will be treated during the study and after the study is 
over; 
 Whether being in this study coul d involve any cost to you; and 
 What to do if you have problem s or questions about this study. 
 
 
Please read this consent form carefully. 
 
Lucerno Dynamics Consent – Version 3   Version Date : January 30, 2017 
   
 
2 
 RESEARCH STUDY CONSENT FORM  
       
Participant:   IRB #: 26741 
 First Name / Last Name  
Principal Investigator 
(PI) Medhat Osman, MD Contact  
Phone # 314-577-8047 
 First Name / Last Name Credentials  
Title of Project: Patterns and Prevalence of FDG extravasation in PET/CT scans 
 
 
 
 
“You” refers to the person who takes part in the research study. 
 
You are being asked to take part in a res earch study conducted by Dr. Medhat Osman 
because you are scheduled for a standard of care PET/CT exam at SSM Saint Louis 
University Hospital.  
 
This consent document may contain words t hat you do not understand.  Please ask the 
research study doctor or res earch staff to explain anythi ng that you do not understand. 
  
 
1. WHY IS THIS RESEARCH STUDY BEING DONE? 
 
PET/CT scans play a vital role in imaging for the brain, heart, and in many types of 
cancer.  When physicians read the images, they  often obtain a value, called a Standard 
Uptake Value (SUV) from the images.  It  has been determined that SUV values can be 
influenced by the patient’s height and weight and also by the amou nt of radioactive 
tracer given to a patient. 
 For a PET/CT scan, the radioactive tracer is injected into a vein (usually in the hand, elbow, or lower arm).  If t he tracer does not all go into t he vein and some leaks out into 
the surrounding tissues, the tracer  will possibly not distribute correctly in the body.  It is 
suspected that leaking tracer could affect the SUV values and thus alter a physician’s 
ability to read the scan accurately.  This study hopes to look at the prevalenc e and pattern of tracer leaking around the 
injection site through the use of a non-invasive device made by Lucerno Dynamics, the study sponsor. This device has four passive sensors with the ability to detect radioactive 
counts from the PET tracer s that will be placed on separat e sites of the body to 
measure if the radioactive PET/CT tr acer is distributing as planned. 
 Saint Louis University aims to enroll 250 subjects into this study.  
    
Lucerno Dynamics Consent – Version 3   Version Date : January 30, 2017 
   
 
3 
 2. WHAT AM I BEING ASKED TO DO?  
 
If you choose to participate in this study, it should only add less than 5 minutes to the total 
time you are here for your PET/CT exam.  Once the technologist has asked all the 
questions to confirm your PET/CT exam, t he study procedures will begin.  The Lucerno 
device sensors will be placed on the skin in four separate locations: over the injection site, 
the same site on the opposite arm, over the subclavian area, and over the liver (right side 
of the abdomen below the rib cage).  These det ectors have the ability to count the 
radioactive tracer as it circulates through your  body and see if the tracer is distributing the 
way we think it should or if any  remains at the inject ion site.  After the dye is injected, it 
normally needs to circulate for a minimum of  60 minutes before imaging.  The dectors will 
be placed at the time you are given the dye and remain in place for the whole circulation 
time.  If the camera bed (imaging couch that  you lie upon to take PET/CT pictures) is 
available, you may be asked to spend the uptak e period resting comfortably on the camera 
bed.  This would allow us to take pictures of the injection site to compare to the counts the 
sensors are getting.  If the camera bed is not  available, the detectors will placed in the 
same way, they will just count the dye while you sit in a reclining chair and no comparison 
pictures will be obtained.  After the 60 minute uptake perio d, the four sens ors will be removed and you will proceed 
on with the normal PET/CT procedure your doc tor ordered.  Once the standard of care 
PET/CT scan is complete, you will be asked to complete a short questionnaire about how comfortable it was to wear the detectors for the circulation period. Your standard of care 
PET/CT scan will be reviewed by a physician and a report will be sent to the doctor who 
ordered it, which is where you fi nd out the results of the scan. 
 
3. HOW LONG WILL I BE IN THE RESEARCH STUDY? 
 
Your normal PET/CT scan process can take up to 2 hours. Your partici pation in this study 
will only be for the day of y our PET/CT exam and will only add an additional 5 minutes or 
less to the total time of your scan.  If you come back for repeated PET/CT exams, you may 
be asked to repeat this research study and you can participate every time you are 
scheduled for a PET/CT exam.  The research team expects it will take approximately 3 
years to recruit the expected 250 patients,  analyze the data, and publish our results. 
   
4. WHAT ARE THE RISKS?  
 
There are certain risks and discomf orts that may occur if you take part in this research 
study.  One risk is discomfor t from the detector’s adhesive pads when they are removed 
and discomfort while lying on the imaging table dur ing the circulation pe riod. If side effects 
or discomforts occur, Dr. M edhat Osman and his research team will try to help these by 
making you as comfortable as possible while the detectors are on and being sure to remove the adhesive pads to your comfort. There is also a risk of allergic type skin 
reactions to the adhesives on t he sensors. Study team member s will monitor you while they 
are in place and remove them should you menti on any signs of reaction such as redness, 
itchiness, burning, etc.. There is also a risk of loss of confidentiality with participation in this 
study. Our team works very har d to protect your private heal th information and only key 
Lucerno Dynamics Consent – Version 3   Version Date : January 30, 2017 
   
 
4 
 members will be able to access your identified data and any in formation shared outside the 
team will be coded, and thus not able to be traced back to you. The final risk is that of 
distress while filling out the questionnaire at the end of the study asking your comfort of 
wearing the detector devices. The study staff will be nearby and should you feel distressed, 
study team members will be available to answer questions or if necessary, discontinue research procedures.  
 The research team is willing to discuss any questions you might have about these risks and 
discomforts.
 
 
 
5. ARE THERE BENEFITS TO BEING IN THIS RESEARCH STUDY? 
 
You will not directly benefit from this research study. Your condition ma y get better, stay the 
same, or worsen. Even though you may not rece ive any immediate benefit, other people 
getting PET/CT scans may benefit in the future because of what the researchers learn from 
this research study. 
 
6. WHAT OTHER OPTIONS ARE THERE? 
 
You may choose not to be in this research study without affecting your PET/CT exam or 
your ordering doctor’s ability to get the results.   The only alternative to participating in the 
research study is to choose not to participate. 
  
7. WILL MY INFORMATION  BE KEPT PRIVATE? 
 
The results of the research study may be published but your name or identity will not be 
revealed and your record will remain private.   In order to prot ect your information,  Dr. 
Medhat Osman will never release any identifyi ng information and will group the data with all 
the other participants so you cannot be identified. 
 Your research record will contain identifiers su ch as your date of birth, date of exam, name, 
and gender.  Dr. Osman and his study team will keep  your research record protected by 
keeping any paper documents behind two locked doors.  Any identifiable data that is electronic will be held on a secure server behind a firewall that is only accessible by study 
team members.    Information collected for this research study will be shared with other researchers and our 
industry partner for this st udy, Lucerno Dynamics.  Lucerno Dynamics is the financial 
sponsor of our study and the group that provided the sensors for the study. Some of the 
information we capture will be shared with them , but it will be provided in a coded format 
(we keep any identified information at SLU and give them information only a study code – 
no name, date of birth, medical record number , etc. is shared). Lucerno Dynamics will only 
receive coded PET pictures the coded radi ative counts from the detectors and coded 
questionnaire data.   The Saint Louis University Institutional Revi ew Board (the Board that is responsible for 
protecting the welfare of persons  who take part in research) and other University officials 
Lucerno Dynamics Consent – Version 3   Version Date : January 30, 2017 
   
 
5 
 may review your research study records. Stat e laws or court orders may also require that 
information from your res earch records be released. 
 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov,  as 
required by U.S. Law. This W eb site will not include information that can identify you. At 
most, the Web site will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at 
any time. 
 
8. WHAT ARE THE COSTS AND PAYMENTS? 
 
Because this research involves standard treat ment (PET/CT exam) and follow-up tests for 
the disease or condition being studied, insuranc e carriers ordinarily cover the costs.  You 
should check with your insurance company to verify that they cover standard of care 
procedures.  You will be responsible for any co sts not covered by your health insurance 
company.   
 The Lucerno sensor device is provided by Lu cerno Dynamics and the use of the device will 
not be billed to insurance or cause you to incur any additional costs.  You will not be receiving an incentive or payment  for participation in this research study. 
 
9. WHAT HAPPENS IF I AM INJURED BE CAUSE I TOOK PART IN THIS RESEARCH 
STUDY? 
    
If you believe that you are injured as a result of your participation in the research study, 
please contact the research study doctor and/or the Chairperson of the Institutional Review 
Board as stated in section 10.  
 
You will receive necessary medical treatment in the event that an injury results because of 
your participation in this research. The Univ ersity will have the right to determine whether 
an injury is related to your participation in this study or happened because of your medical 
condition or other reasons which are not relat ed to this study. If the injury is due to 
participation in the research, y ou will not have to pay for the cost of this treatment unless 
your injury is due to your own failure to follo w the study doctor’s inst ructions. There are no 
plans for Saint Louis University to pay for t he costs of any additional care. You have not 
waived your legal rights by signing this fo rm. If you have questions, please call the Saint 
Louis University General Counsel's office at 314-977-5767 . 
 
10.  WHO CAN I CALL IF I HAVE QUESTIONS? 
 
If you have any questions or concerns about th is research study, or if you have any 
problems that occur from taking part in th is research study, you may call Dr. Medhat 
Osman at 314-977-8163. For afte r-hours concerns, please call t he hospital operator at 314-
577-8000 and ask them to page the Nuclear Medicine Resident on call.  
 
If you have any questions about your rights as a re search participant or if you believe you 
have suffered an injury as a result of taking part in the research, you may contact  the 
Chairperson of the Saint Louis University In stitutional Review Board (314-977-7744), who 
Lucerno Dynamics Consent – Version 3   Version Date : January 30, 2017 
   
 
6 
 will discuss your questions with you or will be able to refer you to someone else who will 
review the matter with you, identify other re sources that may be available to you, and 
provide further information as how to proceed. 
 
  
11.  WHAT ARE MY RIGHTS AND WHAT  ELSE SHOULD I KNOW AS A RESEARCH 
STUDY VOLUNTEER? 
 
 
Your participation in this research is volunt ary. You may choose not to be a part of this 
research.  There will be no penalty to you if you choose not to take part.  You may leave 
the research study at any time.  The research  study doctor or research study staff will let 
you know of any new information that may affect  whether you want to continue to take part 
in the research study.  
 
In this research study, a valuable mechanism  to uncover the occurrence and behavior of 
radioactive tracer leaking into surrounding tissues  may be developed.  Should the Lucerno 
ID device from Lucerno Dynamics be developed re sulting from the sensor counts obtained 
from this research, there are no present plans to share any m onies obtained from the sale 
of the product with you.    
 
12.  AM I SURE THAT I UNDERSTAND? 
 
I have read this consent document and have been able to ask questions and state any 
concerns. I have been asked if I wish to speak di rectly to the research er or research study 
doctor responsible for this re search study. The research team has responded to my 
questions and concerns.  I believe I underst and the research st udy and the potential 
benefits and risks that are involved.   
             
 
     
 
Lucerno Dynamics Consent – Version 3   Version Date : January 30, 2017 
   
 
7 
 Statement of Consent 
I give my informed and voluntary consent to take  part in this research  study. I will be given a 
copy of this consent document for my records.   
 
 
 
________________________ __________                           ________________  
Consent Signature of Research Part icipant (18 and over)     Date   
                                              
 
________________________ ___________ 
Print Name of Participant  
SAINT LOUIS UNIVERSITY – INSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW BOARD – APPROVAL STAMP 
 
This form is valid only if the IRB’s approval stamp is shown below. 
  
 I certify that I have explained to the above individual(s) the nature and purpose of the 
research study and the possible benefit and risks associated with partic ipation.   I have 
answered any questions that have been rai sed and the subject/patient has received a 
copy of this signed consent document.   
  
 
Signature of Consenting Research Team Member Date 
 
  
First Name / Last Name                                     Credentials 
Printed Name of Consenting Research Team Member 
 
IRB #: 26741 
Approved: 02-10-17 
Expires: 02-15-18 
Board #: 1 
Saint Louis University
 
 