MCC#  18633  
 
Expanding  the reach  of a validated  smoking- cessation intervention:  A Spanish -language trial.  
 
 
 
 
Sponsor: NIH &  Florida Department of Health: James and Esther King Biomedical Research Program 
 
Multiple  Principal  Investigators:  Vani Nath  Simmons, Ph.D.  
 
Thomas  H. Brandon,  Ph.D.  
 
 
Co-Investigators:  Cathy  Meade Ph.D .  
 
 
 
Statistician:  Steven  Sutton,  Ph.D.  
 
 
 
 
Protocol Version:  13 
Date:  10/30/201 8 
2 
 Tobacco  smoking  is the leading  preventable cause of cancer  mortality.  
Pharmacotherapy  and behavioral counseling  have demonstrated independent  and additive  effects  toward  
aiding  smoking  cessation;  however, counseling is rarely  chosen  by smokers. In contrast,  minimal  self-help 
interventions, such  as smoking  cessation  pamphlets  or booklets  have much  wider  potential  reach, yet their 
efficacy  has been  largely  disappointing, with  incremental abstinence rates  averaging  only 1%. Given  the 
high dissemination  potential,  any significant improvement in the efficacy  of self-help would  have  large 
public  health  impact  with respect to smoking  and smoking -related  illness  and mortality.  
 
A notable exception  to the historically  poor efficacy of self-help has been  the extended  self-help 
smoking interventions  developed by our research team.   Originally  developed to prevent  post-cessation  
relapse  to smoking, these  booklets  entitled,  Forever  Free, significantly  reduced  smoking  relapse through 
two years  of follow -up among  individuals  who had recently  quit smoking.   In addition, the intervention  was 
found  to be extremely  cost-effective.  Based  on its efficacy  and cost-effectiveness,  we expanded the 
intervention  to include  initial smoking  cessation  as well as relapse  prevention, 18  months  of contact,  and a 
written  social support  component.   Results  of a recently  completed National  Cancer Institute (NCI) funded  
trial of this intervention,  Forever Free:  Stop Smoking  for Good, revealed high efficacy  throughout the 24- 
month  follow -up period,  further  supporting  the utility  of extended self-help for promoting  and maintaining  
tobacco  abstinence.  We recognize,  however,  that wide-scale  implementation, and  therefore public  health 
impact,  would be enhanced the availability  of a Spanish -language version  to reach the largest  and fastest 
growing  ethnic  minority  population  of smokers.  
 
The current smoking  prevalence among  Hispanic/Latino  adults  varies  by cultural  subgroup, with  
highest  prevalence among  those  of Puerto  Rican  (35%, men;  33% women)  and Cuban origins  (31%, 30%) 
and lowest  among Dominicans  (11%, 12%).  Greater smoking  prevalence  is also associated  with lower  
income and education,  and greater  US acculturation.  Prior work by our research team  and others  has 
demonstrated that Hispanic/Latino  smokers  face unique  challenges  such  as lower  awareness  and 
acceptability  of nicotine  replacement  therapies  and receiving  less assistance  with smoking  cessation  from 
their health  providers. As  highlighted in the Clinical Practice  Guidelines  for Treating  Tobacco  Use and 
Dependence,  additional  research  is needed to develop and validate interventions  for racial  and ethnic  
minority  smokers.  
 
The goal of this study  is to address  this gap by testing  a Spanish- language  version  of the validated  
self-help smoking  cessation  intervention. If  demonstrated  effective, the proposed  intervention would  
represent  an easily  disseminable and low-cost intervention  with significant  public  health  impact for 
Hispanic/Latino smokers  throughout the United  States. The aims  of this project  are to test the efficacy  of a 
Spanish -language  version  of a validated,  extended  self-help intervention  for smoking  cessation  among  
Spanish -speaking  smokers  against  usual  care control.  Participants (N = 1400) recruited  nationally  will be 
randomized to the two arms.  
 
 
Specific  Aim 1:  To test the  efficacy  of a Spanish -language  extended  self-help intervention  
compared  to usual  care.  
 
Participants  in the first arm will receive  the Spanish- language version  of the Stop Smoking  for Good  (SS-
SP) intervention distributed over 18 months.   Those in the second arm, Usual  Care (UC),  will receive  a 
single,  credible,  NCI-produced  Spanish -language  self-help booklet.  Outcomes  will be assessed  through  24 
months.  
 
Hypothesis  1: The SS-SP booklets, compared  with UC, will produce higher  rates  of tobacco  abstinence  that 
3 
 will be maintained  through  the 24 -month  assessment.  
 
 
Secondary  Aim:  To evaluate  moderator variables  that may  aid in refining  and targeting  of the 
intervention to maximize  impact.  
 
Demographic  moderator variables  include  gender, age, income,  country  of origin , and generational  status.   
Psychological  moderators include  nicotine  dependence,  acculturation,  cessation  motivation, trait affect, and 
cessation self-efficacy .  Moderator  analyses  will be exploratory,  without  strong  a priori  hypotheses.  
 
 
Public Health  Significance:  This would be the first study  to test a Spanish- language adaptation of a 
validated  and easily  implemented self-help smoking  cessation intervention in a nation -wide RCT,  with the 
potential  to reduce ethnic  health disparities  associated  with tobacco  smoking.  
4 
 B. SIGNIFICANCE  
B1. Smoking  Burden and Cessation 
Tobacco  smoking  is responsible  for approximately  400,000  premature deaths  annually  in the United  
States,  and 5 million  worldwide,  with causal  links to cancers  at 18 different organ sites, as  well as coronary  
heart  disease, chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease, cardiovascular  disease,  and stroke  (CDC,  2008; 
Rostron,  2013;  USDHHS,  2014).   Despite  the well-known health  consequences  of smoking  and the benefits  
of quitting (Jha et al., 2013), 18% of American  adults  continue  to smoke  (CDC,  2014)  primarily  because they 
have developed dependence  to nicotine, the major  psychoactive  substance in tobacco.   Smoking -related 
mortality  is a distal  consequence of this substance  dependence.  Therefore, the treatment of tobacco  
(nicotine)  dependence remains  a public  health priority  of paramount  significance.   The U.S. Public  Health 
Service  (USPHS)  Clinical  Practice  Guidelines for  Treating  Tobacco  Use and Dependence (Fiore et al., 2008)  
and the CDC’s  Healthy  People 2020  (USDHHS,  2014) draw  greater  attention  to key risk factors  for tobacco  
use and associated  disease and mortality,  including  race/ethnicity  and socioeconomic  status.  There is need  
for the development  and delivery  of smoking  cessation interventions  for special  populations  of smokers,  
including  ethnic  and racial  minority  groups,  who incur  high mortality  rates  related  to smoking -related  
diseases.  
B2. Self-Help  Approaches to Smoking  Cessation 
Self-help refers  to v ery minimal  intensity types  of interventions,  such as print and electronic  media 
provided to smokers.   Because few smokers  seek  more  intensive interventions,  self-help materials  have  the 
potential  for high public  health  impact if they can reach large  numbers  of smokers  and aid them  in achieving  
cessation.  Their  ease of administration  and distribution  maximizes  the Adoption, Implementation, and 
Maintenance variables  within  the RE-AIM model  of implementation (Glasgow  et al., 1999;  Glasgow,  
Lichtenstein, & Marcus,  2003).   Curry  et al. (2003)  summarized the appealing  features  of self- help manuals, 
including:  (1) They  package  state- of-the-art, cognitive -behavioral  intervention  components  in a format that  
can be disseminated. (2) Distribution can occur through  a variety  of channels  at a relatively  low cost.  (3) 
Smokers  can customize  program recommendations  to their specific  needs  and interests. (4)  Written  
materials  are easy  to keep  so that smokers  can refer back  to them or use  them  again  in a future quit attempt.   
Unfortunately,  recent meta -analyses  indicate  little efficacy  for self-help interventions.  Both the Clinical 
Practice  Guidelines  (Fiore  et al., 2008)  and a Cochrane Review  (Hartmann- Boyce  et al., 2014)  concluded 
that self-help materials  have  at best marginal  efficacy, improving  cessation  rates  by about  1% compared  to 
no-treatment controls.  
In summary,  self-help interventions  have potential  for vast reach,  but their public  health  impact has  
been limited  by low efficacy.   This contrasts  with greater efficacy,  but much  poorer  reach, of intensive  
behavioral  interventions  (Fiore et al., 2008).   A logical  goal is to develop self- help interventions  with high 
reach  that draw  upon cognitive -behavioral  counseling to enhance their efficacy.  Toward this goal,  our team  
has developed several  efficacious  self-help tobacco  interventions  over the past decade,  as described  in 
section B3. 
B3. The “Forever  Fr ee” Self-Help Interventions 
B3.1.  Smoking Relapse Prevention.  To achieve the goal of increasing  the efficacy  of self-help, our 
research  team made two very significant  changes  to the typical  self-help approach.   First,  we initially  
focused  on the prevention  of smoking  relapse . Second, rather than  a single  brief self-help intervention (e.g., 
a pamphlet),  we developed an extended self-help intervention —specifically,  an evidence based,  eight  
booklet series  entitled, Forever  Free,  delivered  over the course of a year.  The content of these booklets  was 
based  on cognitive - behavioral  theory  (e.g., Bandura,  1977;  Marlatt, 1985)  and empirical  evidence regarding  
the nature of tobacco  dependence,  cessation,  and relapse  (e.g., Baker  et al., 2004).  The booklets  were  
conceptualized as a means  of translating  the cognitive- behavioral  counseling that occurs  in a clinic  into a 
written  format that would  be much  more accessible  to smokers.  The booklets  were  sent over an extended 
period  of time (12 months) to maintain  abstinence  motivation.  
Across  three  randomized  controlled  trials  (RCTs), this  intervention was found to be highly  efficacious  and 
cost-effective  among  self-quitting smokers  (Brandon  et al., 2000, 2004; Chirikos  et al., 2004), and  among 
low-income  pregnant and  postpartum  women,  using  a modified  version  (Brandon  et al., 2012).  Moreover,  a 
recent meta -analysis  found self-help to be the only efficacious  relapse- prevention  modality  (Agboola et al., 
5 
 2010).   Based  on the results  of our prior studies, the booklets  have been  adopted  by NCI (distributed  by the 
Cancer Information  Service,  available  for free download  at www.smokefree.gov,  and identified  as a 
Research Tested  Intervention Program on  cancercontrolplanet.cancer.gov),  as well as by hospit als and 
health  departments  throughout the country.   Additionally, an anglicized version of the booklets  is currently  
being tested  in Great  Britain  for possible  adoption  by the National  Health  Service.  
B3.2.  Smoking Cessation.  Based  on the success of extended  self-help for preventing  smoking  
relapse, we have  since  developed a version,  Forever  Free:  Stop Smoking  for Good,  to assist  current 
smokers  with both initial  cessation and maintenance of abstinence.  We recently  completed  an NCI-funded 
RCT testing  this English -language intervention (described further in D1.2.3 below ).  Compared to Usual  
Care,  our intervention produced  significantly  greater  smoking  abstinence rates  through  the 24  months  of 
follow -up.  Additional  details  regarding these studies  are presented in the Preliminary  Studies  section  (D1.2).  
In summary,  this line of research  supports  that extended  self-help is an efficacious  tool for 
promoting  and maintaining tobacco  abstinence.  
B4. Hispanic/Latino Smokers  
Hispanic/Latinos  are the largest  and fastest growing  minority  group  in the United  States  (Ennis,  
Rios-Vargas, & Albert, 2011). The current smoking  prevalence among Hispanic/Latino  adults  varies  by 
cultural  subgroup, with highest  prevalence among those  of Puerto  Rican  (35%,  men; 33% women)  and 
Cuban origins  (31%, 30%) and lowest  among  Dominicans  (11%, 12%)  (Kaplan et al., 2014).   Higher  
prevalence of smoking  is also observed within  medically  underserved communities  and low SES 
communities  (Báezconde -Garbanati  et al., 2007).  In addition  to language  limitations  due to scarce Spanish -
language smoking  resources  (Santisteban  et al., 2006), Hispanic/Latinos  are disproportionately  represented  
in the lower  SES groups. Low  income  and financial  strain  can operate  as distracters  from efforts  at self-
directed  health behavior  change  and are associated  with poorer success  rates  among  those  attempting  to 
quit smoking  (Barbeau  et al., 2004; Kendsor  et al., 2010;  Sheffer, 2012).   Low-income  smokers  may be 
hampered in their quitting  attempts  because of the practical  limitations  (e.g., cost and transportation) of 
attending smoking  cessation  programs  and lack of availability  of self- help interventions  that are salient  with 
respect to their everyday concerns  and realities.  
Hispanic/Latino smok ers also appear to have less access to the full range of smoking  cessation assistance.   
For example,  Hispanic/Latinos  are less likely  to receive tobacco  screening  and counseling from their 
physicians  (Lopez -Quintero  et al., 2006; Sonnenfeld  et al., 2009).   Access to evidence -based smoking  
cessation treatments  is further restricted  for individuals  with limited  or no English  proficiency  (Wetter et al., 
2007).  A recent  study  conducted  with bilingual Hispanic  smokers  demonstrated higher intended utilization  of 
smoking  cessation  intervention materials  if they were  received  in their preferred language, supporting  the 
need for the availability  of Spanish -language  materials for  bilingual smokers as  well (Rodriguez -Esquivel  et 
al., 2015).  
Among  underserved  populations, the absence  of readily  available  Spanish -language evidence - based 
materials  has been cited as a key barrier to primary  care providers  assisting with smoking  cessation  
(Blumenthal,  2007).   More generally,  there  is very little research  evaluating       smoking  cessation  
interventions  for Hispanic/Latinos  (Doolan  & Froelicher,  2006). In fact, only a handful  of randomized trials  
have been conducted testing  the efficacy  of targeted  interventions  for Hispanic/Latino smokers  (Webb  et al., 
2010).  Therefore, the USPHS  Clinical Practice  Guidelines  called for more  research  on the development  and 
validation  of interventions  for racial/ethnic  minority  smokers, with  attention  to appropriate  language  and 
sociocultural  factors  such  as acculturation  and socioeconomic  status  (Fiore  et al., 2008).  Moreover,  
extending the reach  of smoking cessation interventions  to Hispanic/Latino  smokers  aligns  with NCI priorities  
for reducing  health disparities.  In summary,  there  is a critical  need  for evidence- based smoking -
cessation  interventions for Hispanic/Latino smokers— interventions  that are culturally -sensitive, 
relevant  and responsive  to the sociocultural needs of diverse  subcultural  groups  of Hispanic/Latinos  
(Barrera et al., 2011).  
B5. Culture,  Language,  and Lin guistics:   Spanish  Transcreation 
Reducing  tobacco  use among minority  populations  is an essential  step for eliminating  
cancer  health disparities.  Toward this end, extending  the reach  of validated  smoking  cessation  
interventions  to the largest  and fastest growing  minority  population  is paramount.  
Direct translations  of health education  materials  from English  to Spanish,  without  appropriate 
linguistic,  literacy  and cultural  considerations, can  result in  the development of  interventions  that contain  
6 
 inaccuracies,  awkward language,  and mismatched cultural  content,  consequently reducing  acceptability  and 
impact (Solomon  et al., 2005). Because  simple  translation  is insufficient, we intend to “transcreate”  the 
existing  English -language  intervention  components (10  Stop Smoking  for Good  Booklets  and 9 supportive  
My Story  pamphlets) for  Hispanic/Latino smokers.  Transcreation  involves  both translating  and culturally 
adapting  materials  for a Spanish -speaking  Hispanic/Latino audience  (Marcario & Boyt,  2008; Solomon  et 
al., 2005;  Castro,  Barrera,  & Steiker,  2010).  With transcreation,  the text is  not merely  translated into another  
language,  but reconstructed  to meet  the informational  needs  and health literacy  of the target  audience  
(Quinn  et al., 2006).  Research suggests  that health education  efforts  focused  on encouraging  behavior  
change  are more  successful  when transcreated  and available  to the intended population in their native 
language  (Bender,  Harbour  et al.,  2001), and with message  content that is  relevant  and engaging  for 
members  of the targeted cultural  group.  
Importantly,  research indicates  that, when culturally  tailored,  cognitive -behavioral  interventions  are equally  
effective  for Hispanic/Latino populations  (e.g., Miranda et al.,  2005;  Muñoz & Mendelsen,  2005).  
Our research  team  has been successful in utilizing  transcreation  processes  to adapt  self-help 
relapse -prevention  interventions  that were linguistically  and culturally  suitable for heterogeneous 
Hispanic/Latino,  Spanish -language  preferring populations  (Simmons  et al., 2011a,  2011b;  Litvin  et al., 
2011).   Key findings  from our transcreation  work are summarized  in the Preliminary  Studies  section 
(D1.3.1).  
In summary,  the cr eation  of effective interventions for Hispanic/Latino populations requires  
not only  quality  translation, but systematic adaptation informed  by the unique  cultural  context and  
informational needs  of the target  audience,  followed  by empirical  validation  via an RCT.  
C. INNOVATION  
The proposed res earch has several  innovative features.  First, the study  continues  the team’s  
expansion of the definition  of self-help interventions  by increasing  the “dose”  of self-help in return  for 
potentially  large  gains  in efficacy,  while  obtaining  very favorable cost-effectiveness,  as seen  in our previous  
research  (Brandon  et al., 2000,  2004,  2012).  It adapts  a common  communication  channel  to deliver  a more  
intensive  and focused  intervention —one that is  highly  accessible to underserved populations.   Second,  by 
testing  a Spanish -language  smoking  cessation  resource, our intervention has the potential  to reach the 
largest and fastest growing  underserved population  of smokers, one for which  few evidence- based cessation  
resources  exist.   Moreover,  the US Census  data indicate  that 45.7% of Spanish -speaking  individuals  speak 
English  less than “very  well.” This  percentage is higher among the low SES individuals  most  likely  to smoke 
(Ryan,  2013).  Therefore, the need  is great  for novel  and efficacious  cessation  interventions  to reach  this 
sector of the Hispanic/Latino  population.  We will be the first to test the efficacy  of a “transcreated” and  
evidence -based  self-help intervention  for a diverse Hispanic/Latino  population.  Third, the study  represents  
an advance in translational  research  by increasing  the reach  of smoking  cessation  interventions  to an 
underserved  population  (Spoth  et al, 2013).  Importantly,  if shown to be efficacious, a writ ten self-help 
intervention  modality  would  be especially  beneficial  for low-income  and underserved populations  who 
experience unique  barriers  to obtaining  smoking  cessation  treatments  or medications  (e.g., cost, 
transportation issues), and  it would be ready  for immediate  dissemination.  
D. APPROACH  
D1. P
reliminary  Studies 
D1.1.  The Research  Team  (see biosketches  for relevant  citations)  D1.1.1.   The 
Investigators 
We have assembled  a team  of investigators  with significant expertise  and experience  in all aspects 
of the proposed:   study  conceptualization,  the development  and evaluation  of smoking  interventions  for 
special  populations  (Brandon,  Simmons), health  disparities,  health  communication  and literacy,  and 
development and adaptation  of multi- language  educational  interventions  (Meade,  Simmons), community -
engaged research  (Simmons, Meade),  health disparities  and tobacco (Simmons), and statistical  methods  
(Sutton).  The two PIs, Vani Nath Simmons, Ph.D., and Thomas  Brandon,  Ph.D., are longstanding  
collaborators  on the development  of self-help interventions  for tobacco  dependence, with  attention to the 
specific  needs  of special  populations  of smokers.   Cathy  Meade,  R.N., Ph.D.,  F.A.A.N., is  a nationally  
recognized  expert  in the areas  of health literacy  and communications,  and she has collaborated  on our 
7 
 previous  self-help interventions.   Drs. Brandon,  Simmons,  and Meade  are members  of the Outreach  
Research Program  for an NCI-funded  U54 Comprehensive Partnerships  to Reduce Cancer Health 
Disparities  grant  between  Moffitt Cancer Center  and the Ponce School  of Medicine in Puerto  Rico.   In 
addition, Dr. Meade leads  an NCI-funded U54 Community  Network  Program  Center,  of which  Dr. Simmons  
is the Community  Outreach co-director.  Thus,  they have substantial  experience working  with community  
stakeholders  and Spanish- speaking  populations.   Steven  Sutton,  Ph.D., has  expertise  in data management 
and statistical  analyses  of tobacco- intervention  trials.   Marina Unrod, Ph.D.,  has been  a co-investigator on 
our prior self- help tobacco studies  and has managed  RCTs at  TRIP  for the past 8 years.  
D1.1.2.   Cultural  Advisory  Board  
We have supplemented  and expanded the expertise and reach of the primary  investigators  by 
assembling  a Cultural  Advisory  Board  (CAB)  comprising  researchers  from our key focused recruitment 
areas.   Each  of these investigators  has relevant  experience developing  interventions  for the 
Hispanic/Latino community  and recruiting  Hispanic/Latino  participants  into research  protocols.   
Members  of the CAB include:  Dr. Maria  Fernandez  (University  of Houston),  Dr. Felipe  González Castro 
(University  of Texas,  El Paso), Dr. Monica Hooper (University  of Miami),  Dr. Julio  Jimenez  (Ponce  
School  of Medicine,  Puerto Rico),  Dr. Kristen  Wells  (University  of California, San  Diego),  and Dr. Anita  
Kinney  (University  of New Mexico). The CAB will use their local established  community  networks  to 
assist  in recruiting  participants  in their respective  regions  and will advise  and provide  feedback  
regarding  the language  and cultural  appropriateness  of the study instruments (See  Letters  of Support).  
D1.1.3.   Community  Adv isory Panel  
In addition  to our CAB  described  above, we will also seek  input from Hispanic  community  members  
on the proposed assessments, recruitment  strategies, and  clinical  trial procedures,  as needed.  We are 
fortunate  to have access  to two existing  partnerships  that will facilitate and  support  this process. Dr.  Meade  
leads  an NCI-funded  U54 Community  Network  Program Center (Tampa Bay Community  Cancer Network; 
TBCCN), of which  Dr. Simmons  is the Community Outreach  co-director.  TBCCN is comprises 20  
community -based  organizations  that serve medically  underserved  communities.  Importantly, we will be able 
to seek  feedback  from several  of the partners  included  within  TBCCN that represent  Hispanic -serving  
organizations  (e.g.,  Farmworkers  self-help,  Multicultural  Resource  Center,  Latinos  United  for New 
Beginnings).  
Additionally,  as noted  above,, Drs. Brandon,  Simmons, and  Meade are members  of the  Outreach 
Research Program  of the Ponce  School  of Medicine and Moffitt  Cancer  Center  U54 Partnership.  Within  the 
context of this partnership,  we will work  closely with our established  Hispanic  Community  Advisory  Panel  
(CAP).   The CAP has offered  their support of  our project  goals and will be able to provide  valuable input  on 
effective  recruitment strategies  for reaching  Hispanics  as well as our assessments.   The CAP currently  
comprises 10  members  with diverse  sub-ethnic  backgrounds  (Colombian,  Puerto  Rican,  
Venezuelan,Mexican).  (See  Letter of Support).  
D1.2.  Prior Research on Self-Help  Smoking Interventions 
Our team  has conducted  and published  descriptive,  intervention,  and laboratory -based  studies  
to investigate  the nature of smoking  cessation  and to develop intervention  strategies.  Most  relevant  to 
the current  proposal, three  RCTs  testing  the efficacy  of our self-help interventions  are described  below.  
D1.2.1.   Relapse Pr evention  I. The first of these studies  (Brandon  et al., 2000) involved  a 2 X 
2 factorial  design to test the independent  and combined  efficacy  of two types  of a minimal  intervention  
that had been identified  in an earlier  feasibility  study  (Brandon  & DeMichele,  1995):  
(1) access  to a year-long relapse prevention  hotline  and (2) a series  of eight  empirically  based  relapse -
prevention  booklets  mailed to participants  over the course  of a year.  We found that the repeated 
mailings  of booklets  significantly  reduced  12-month  relapse rates  of recent quitters  by two-thirds  (12% 
vs. 35%, p = .001).  
D1.2.2.   Relapse Prevention  II.  A second  clinical  trial (R01  CA80706; Brandon et al.,  2004)  
parsed  the effects  of repeated  contact  and booklet content,  and extended follow -up to 2 years.   The main  
findings  were  that the multiple  booklets  continued  to produce reductions  in smoking  relapse  through  2-year 
follow -up compared to a single -booklet  control  condition  (22%  vs. 32% relapsed,  p = .02), and  that booklet 
content  was more  potent  than contact.  The intervention  was also highly  cost-effective; cost per quality -
adjusted  life-year (QALY)  gained was estimated  as low as $83 in the sample  (Brandon et al., 2004; 
8 
 Chirikos  et al., 2004).  
D1.2.3.   Cessation.  The most relevant  study  (R01  CA134347)  ended  data- collection  in May,  2014.  
This study  was based  on preliminary  data suggesting  that the Forever Free booklets, although  developed to 
prevent relapse,  were  efficacious  for current  smokers.  This contrasts  with the general  finding  that self-help 
is minimally  effective  (1% additional  cessation)  for smoking  cessation  (Hartmann -Boyce  et al., 2014).  We 
modified  the original  Forever Free booklets  to include  instruction  on smoking  cessation,  per se, creating  a 
new version for  current  smokers  titled,  Stop Smoking for Good. We randomized 1874 current smokers  to 
three  conditions: (1) Usual  Care  (a standard  smoking  cessation  booklet, Clearing  the Air, published by NCI 
[NCI,  2008]); (2) Standard  booklets  (8 Stop Smoking For Good  booklets  mailed  over 12 months); or (3)  
Enhanced booklets.  
The Enhanced  intervention  comprised 10 Stop Smoking  for Good booklets  and 9 supportive  
pamphlets.  The Stop Smoking  for Good  booklets  were  sent separately  upon  enrollment and at 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 
9, 12, 15, and  18 months.  The first booklet  provided a general  overview  about quitting smoking, and each of 
the remaining  nine booklets  included more  extensive  information on a topic  related  to quitting smoking  
maintaining  abstinence: Smoking  Urges; Smoking  and Weight;  What  if You  Have  a Cigarette?;  Your Health; 
Smoking,  Stress, and  Mood;  Lifestyle  Balance; Life  without  Cigarettes,  The Benefits  of Quitting  Smoking,  
and The Road Ahead . 
In addition  to the  10 booklets, we also made contact  during  non-booklet months  to enhance 
perceived  social  support via 9 tri-fold color  pamphlets  (My Story:  How I Quit Smoking ) that reinforced  key 
messages  about  quitting  smoking (e.g., dealing  with stress, keeping weight  gain in perspective,  finding  
other forms  of positive  reinforcement).  To further  approximate  a sense  of social  support, the  message  was 
communicated  via a first-person  narrative  from a former smoker,  incorporating  photographs  of the 
purported speaker. All  materials  were  written  at the 5-6 grade  reading  level so as  to maximize  their 
accessibility to a wider  range of smokers  (Meade & Byrd,  1989). The  existing  English -language  10 Stop 
Smoking  for Good  booklets  and 9 supportive  pamphlets  are accessible  to reviewers  at www.moffitt.org/PQ . 
We recently  completed  analyses  of 7-day point -prevalence abstinence  rates  through  24 months  
following  multiple  imputation  to manage missing  data (Brandon et al., 2015).  As seen  in Table  1 below,  the 
Enhanced  Booklet condition produced  consistently  higher  abstinence  rates at  all follow -up points  compared  
to Usual  Care.  Even  at 24 months, the differential  abstinence rates  were  over 11%. Given  the low cost of 
the intervention, these  differences  represent  high clinical  and public  health  significance  and potential  impact.   
In terms  of cost per  quitter,  preliminary economic  analyses  indicate  that the  incremental  cost-effectiveness  
ratios  (i.e, the difference  in cost between  an intervention  and Usual  Care, divided by the difference  in 
abstinence at 24 months)  of the Standard and Enhanced  conditions  were $560  and $361,  respectively—both  
far lower  than most other smoking -cessation  interventions,  which  tend to yield cost per quitter  estimates  
between  $1000 and $10,000  (e.g., Cromwell et al., 1997;  Curry  et al., 1998;  Nohlert  et al., 2013; Ronckers  et 
al., 2005;  Smit et al., 2013;  Smith  et al, 2007;   Song  et al., 2002).  This study  demonstrates  that a minimal,  
but extended,  self-help intervention  can significantly,  and cost-effectively,  improve smoking  
cessation  rates, and it supports  our plan to increase the reach and impact  of this intervention  by 
creating  a Spanish -language version.  
 
 
Table 1: 7-Day Point  Prevalence Abstinence Rates  (%) at 6, 12, 18, and 24 Months  in Cessation Study  
   Percent  Abstinent      Follow -Up Usual  
Care  Standard  Condition  Enhanced  Condition   p 6 Months  
 11.54   13.85  16.09   .03 
 
12 Months  14.34  19.40  24.12  .0001  
18 Months  18.19  20.25  28.01  .0002  
24 Months  18.88  24.35  29.96  <.0001  
Note: .  p-values  are for comparison  of the  Enhanced  vs. Usual  Care  conditions.    
 
D1.3. Interventions  for Special  Populations 
Our team  has substantial  experience  creating  interventions  for special  populations  of smokers.   
Using  formative research, we adapted  the Forever  Free intervention for pregnant  women (Quinn et al., 
2006).  In an RCT (R01  CA94256), we compared the Forever  Free: For  Baby  and Me booklets  against 
standard,  booklets  (Brandon  et al., 2012).  We found  both main  effects  and moderation  by SES.   For 
9 
 example,  by 12 months  postpartum, low-income women were  particularly  likely  to benefit  from the new 
intervention  compared to standard  booklets  (72%  vs 51% abstinent  at 12 months  postpartum,  p = .003).  
Moreover,  based on an analysis  of predictors  of post-treatment smoking  among  cancer  patients  
(Simmons  et al., 2013),  we have adapted the Forever  Free intervention  for cancer  patients  by creating  a 
supplemental  informational  and motivational  video,  Surviving  Smokefree , and we are currently  testing  the 
combined  intervention in an RCT (R01  CA154596).   Also, in  an ongoing study,  we are collaborating  with 
Robert  Klesges,  Ph.D., to  test booklets  inspired by Forever Free  for preventing  smoking  relapse  among  US 
Air Force  recruits  following  involuntary  cessation  during  basic  military  training (R01  HL095785;  Brandon  et 
al., 2014).   Finally,  following  systematic  laboratory  research  (e.g., Simmons  et al., 2004), we have 
developed a highly - interactive web-based  intervention for college  student  smokers, who are loathe  to 
participate  in live, face- to-face counseling  (Simmons, Heckman  et al., 2013).  
D1.3.1. Interventions  for Hispanic/Latino  Smokers.  Our research team also  has prior experience 
adapting  and translating  (i.e., transcreating)  evidence -based  self-help interventions  for Hispanic/Latino  
smokers. Both  the original  relapse -prevention  and pregnancy -related  Forever Free booklets  were 
transcreated for Spanish -speaking  smokers.  Our work resulted  in a Spanish -language  series  titled,  Libres  
Para  Siempre  (Simmons  et al., 2011b)  for prevention of smoking  relapse  among recent  quitters  and a 
second  series  titled, Libres  Para Siempre..por mi bebé  y por mí, (Simmons  et al., 2011a)  for reducing  
relapse  among  pregnant  women.   Both series  of Spanish -language  booklets  have been  adopted  by NCI for  
dissemination  and are available  for free download at www.espanol.smokefree.gov.  
Findi n
gs from the formative  data we collected  (Simmons  et al., 2011a, 2011b)  were  used  to inform 
the transcreated  versions  based  on reported  cultural  experiences.   For example,  specific  stressors  
mentioned  by the Hispanic/Latino participants  included difficulties  with the immigration  experience, feelings  
of isolation,  lack of understanding  of the health care system, and the use of coping strategies  that often  
included prayer  or family -oriented  activities.  
Therefore, these  conc erns and barriers  were  integrated  into the content  of the booklets.   In addition,  our 
findings  were  consistent with the conceptualization  of cultural  sensitivity -guided  adaptations  made  at both 
deep and surface levels  as outlined by Resnicow  et al. (1999).  For example,  familismo , defined  as a strong  
identification  and attachment to the nuclear  and extended family  (Marin  & Marin,  1991), was evident  in our 
formative  work.  Specifically,  participants’  expressed  concerns  for how their smoking  behavior  negatively  
affects  family  members, and  how quitting  could be beneficial  for their family  (Simmons  et al., 2011a). This  
finding  was consistent with prior work revealing  “family’s  health”  as a primary motivator  for quitting among  
Hispanic/Latino smokers  (Sias  et al., 2008).  Thus, to enhance the cultural  salience  and relevance of the 
information presented,  emerging  themes  such as these  were  used  to modify  the personal stories/vignettes  
throughout the booklets.   Another  finding  that impacted  the visual  appeal  and acceptability  of the booklets  
was the suggestion  to include  graphics  that encompass  a diversity  of individuals  from different countries  of 
origin  (e.g., Puerto  Rico,  Columbia,  Mexico,  Cuba).  Overall,  the qualitative  research  revealed  great 
enthusiasm  and interest  in the Spanish -language  relapse  prevention  materials;  however, a common  theme  
emerged in our prior research, in  which  Hispanic/Latino  participants  expressed the value and need for 
personal  contact  (i.e., personalismo) to be made  part of the intervention d elivery  process  (Menzie,  Simmons  
et al., in  press;  Simmons  et al.,  2011b;  Litvin, Rojas, Simmons  et al., 2011;  Bejarano  et al., 2013).  
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
10 
 D2. Ongoing  Transcreation  Study  
Since  the original  submission, we have  received  research  funding  form the Florida 
Biomedical  Research Program  which  is allowing  us to conduct  our original  Aim 1: To  develop  
a culturally  appropriate self-help intervention for racially  and ethnically  diverse  Spanish -
speaking  smokers, based  on the successful  Stop Smoking for Good  intervention  described  
above  in 
D1.2.3.   Funding began  in May,  2015,  and the process  described  below  
should  be complete  by April,  2016  
The process  of taking  materials  originally  intended  for an English -
language  audience and translating  and adapting  them for  a Spanish -speaking  
Hispanic  audience  has been termed  “transcreation”  (Marcario  & Boyte,  2008;  
Card  et al., 2012; Soloman et al., 2006; Buki  et al., 2009).  In the development  
of the new Spanish- language  intervention, this  involves  translating  the existing  
English -language  Stop Smoking  for Good materials  into Spanish and 
adapting  the intervention  for a Hispanic/Latino  audience using  a series  of 
iterative  procedures.  
Importantly,  our ongoing  iterative  process  to transcreate  the intervention 
parallels  our previously  employed methods  used to develop the materials  
described  above,  and is guided  by NCI’s  Stages  in Health  Communication  
Model  (USDHSS,  2008)  and the ADAPT -ITT Model  (Wingood et  al. 2008).  We 
are further guided  by published recommendations  for the linguistic, literacy, 
and cultural  adaptation of evidence -based  interventions  (Marcario  & Boyte, 
2008;  Soloman  et al.,  2005;  Castro  et al., 2010;  Barrera  & Castro,  2006).   For 
example,  Resnicow  et al.’s (1999) conceptualization  of cultural  sensitivity  is 
guiding adaptations  made  at both  surface and deep levels.  
We are not devel oping  a de novo  intervention.   Rather, the 
Spanish -language  smoking  cessation  intervention that we are in the 
process  of transcreating  is building  upon content of  the existing  Figure  1 

11 
 efficacious  English -language intervention  (10 booklets  + 9 pamphlets),  which  is based on 
cognitive behavioral  theory.  We believe  that the success  of the existing  intervention  is largely  
due to its theoretical  and empirical  basis,  so we are maintaining that evidence base for the 
new booklets. However,  we recognize the importance of cultural  adaptation to enhance  
receptivity  and the likelihood  that the materials  will be used  (Barrera  et al.,  2013).To achieve 
this goal,  we are employing  a multi- phase process  to create a usable,  understandable,  and 
acceptable intervention  by engaging  users.   (See Figure 1.) 
Phase I involves formative  research  via focus  groups  to gather  data on culturally  
relevant  impediments  and facilitators  to achieving  smoking  abstinence among  a diverse group  
of Hispanic/Latino  individuals.  Findings  are then being  used  to improve  the saliency  of the 
intervention  among  a new group, Hispanic/Latino  smokers.  Consistent with  our prior work,  
and adapted from the Brislin  Model  of Translation (1970), the initial development  of the 
materials  involves  a bilingual/bicultural team  and CAP engaging  in an extensive iterative 
process  to identify  possible concepts  and words  that may not translate well, might  be 
misunderstood,  or be inappropriate.  This entails  translating  the documents  from the source  
language (English) to the target (Spanish)  language,  and having  a second  bilingual  expert  
blindly  back -translating  the documents. Next, the research  team and the investigators  meet to 
discuss any differences  or inconsistencies  identified  through  the translation  and back -
translation  processes. As a group,  changes  are made  to ensure  that the translated 
documents  reflect cultural  congruence and comparability  in terms  of meaning. The 
intervention  then begins  to take shape  and becomes  infused  with the thematic  findings  from 
our qualitative work as well as relevant  literature  on smoking  among  Hispanic/Latinos.  
Then,  in Phase  II, initial  drafts  of the Spanish -language  materials  undergo learner  
verification, a process  to assess suitability.  This approach, modeled  after the  work of Doak  et 
al., (1996)  strives to reduce miscommunication  of messages.   It involves  verifying  the newly  
translated  and revised  materials  with the intended  audience in relation  to acceptability,  
attraction, understanding,  self-efficacy,  and persuasion  via a series  of questions  relating  to the 
elements  to be verified.  This procedure  allows  us to obtain  reactions  to the developing  
intervention  materials  (booklets  and supportive stories)  in terms  of tone, character  
development  and messaging  design  style so that we can make suitable  adjustments.  In 
consideration of regional  variations  in language  and culture,  our sample will include 
individuals  from various  ethnic  backgrounds  and countries  of origin    (e.g., Puerto Rico, 
Guatemala,  Cuba, Dominican Republic, Mexico, and Columbia).  
Through  the booklets  and pamphlets, we will attend  to the diverse  cultural  backgrounds  
of our Hispanic/Latino  audience by conveying stories  and experiences  with proper  attention to 
diversity in age, generational  and acculturation status, gender,  and country  of origin.   For 
example, unique stressors  and relapse risk factors  that are revealed are incorporated  into the 
existing  content. In addition, the stories  conveyed in the booklets  and pamphlets  (i.e., first- 
person  narratives) develop around the cultural  relevant  content  and areas  discovered  during  
the focus  group  discussions. Revisions  are evaluated  by the team  and advisors  on importance 
(degree  it can enhance  effectiveness),  feasibility  (ease/burden  of suggestion), and  congruence 
(fit with core evidence- supported components)  (Chen,  2013).  In summary,  the transcreation  
process  helps  us achieve  a balance between  preservation  of essential,  evidence -based  
intervention  core elements  that are crucial  to the intervention’s  effectiveness  (e.g., cognitive - 
behavioral  coping  strategies)  while  infusing  cultural  relevance,  and thereby  enhancing  appeal  
for the intended  audience (Castro  et al., 2004).  The research  team  brings  extensive 
experience  and skill in these methods.  
As when  it was  an aim of the original  submission, the transcreation  process  is projected 
to take 12 months, with  a target  completion  date of April, 2016.   This coincides  perfectly  with the 
earliest funding  start date  of the present  proposal,  when  the new intervention  will be ready  for 
testing  in the RCT described  next.  
D3. Methods 
D3.1. D
esign  Overview.   A randomized 2- arm design, with 700 smokers  recruited  into each  of 
12 
 the conditions  will be used  to test the efficacy  of our Spanish -language  smoking  cessation  
intervention.  The 2 conditions  are: (1) Usual  care (UC), which  will comprise a single, Spanish - 
language,  smoking  cessation  booklet developed  by NCI; and (2) the  Stop Smoking  for Good  
Intervention  in Spanish (SS-SP), comprising  a series  of 11 booklets  distributed  over 18 months,  
plus additional  monthly  contacts  via 9 supportive  pamphlets.  Assessments  for both groups will 
occur  at six-month intervals,  through  24 months. An  overview  of the design  and the timing  of 
intervention components  and assessments  are depicted  in Table  2. All conversations  with 
participants,  informed  consent, intervention  materials,  and assessment  instruments  will be in 
Spanish.  
Table  2. Overview  of Study  Design:  Interventions  and Assessments  
 
Month  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 24 
Assessment  (Both  Groups)  A      A      A      A A 
Usual  Care  Condition  N                    
SS-SP Condition  C,X X X X O X O X O X O O X O O X O O X  
Legend: SS-SP  = Stop Smoking  for Good  Intervention in Spanish;  A = Time  of assessment;  N = NCI booklet;  C = 
Initial  Phone  Contact;  X = Stop Smoking  for Good  booklet;  O = Supportive  letter  and tri-fold pamphlet.  L = Monthly  
supportive  letter  in Contact  Control  condition.   Shaded  areas  indicate  the duration  of the intervention.  
D3.2.  Participants  and Recruitment Feasibility.   Participants  will be 1400  Spanish -speaking  
smokers  recruited throughout the mainland  United  States  and Puerto Rico.  To ensure  
recruitment goals  are met, we have  developed a broad and thoughtful  recruitment strategy  that 
will include local,  state,  and national  efforts. Our local and state  efforts  will be informed  by input  
from our community  advisory  panel  comprised of members  of the Hispanic  community,  as well 
as our existing community  and research  partnerships  in Central  and South  Florida.   At a  
national  level,  our recruitment efforts  will be guided by our cultural  advisory  board members, all 
of whom  have  experience in recruiting  Hispanic  individuals  for research  studies  and reside  in 
regions  of high  Hispanic/Latino  density  (South  Florida,  Texas, California,  New Mexico, and  
Puerto Rico). Our recruitment  strategies  will include,  but are not limited  to, national  ads (e.g.,  
on the Telemundo  network)  as well as local multimedia  advertisements  (Spanish  newspapers,  
radio,  and cable  TV; social  media, public  transportation  signage).   These  recruitment strategies  
mirror  potential  avenues for future  federal  or state dissemination  efforts  if the intervention  is 
deemed  efficacious.  To maximize  generalizability, we have  minimal  inclusion  criteria: (1)  
smoking  ≥ 5 tobacco  cigarettes/week  over the past year; (2)  age ≥ 18 years; (4)  not currently  
enrolled  in a face- to-face smoking  cessation  program; and  (5) monolingual  Spanish -speaking,  
or bilingual  Spanish- English  and prefer  receiving  educa t ional health  materials  in Spanish.  Initial 
screening will be conducted via telephone. Participants that are unable to provide a mailing 
address within the mainland United States or Puerto Rico, or are unable to provide a mailing 
address (i.e., do not have one), will be excluded from participating in the study. We will assess 
whether  partici pants  use any other  smoking  cessation  services (e.g., state  quitline,  websites)  
or pharmacotherapy  for analysis,  but will not exclude smokers  who utilize  these widely  
available smoking  cessation  tools.  
Inclusion criteria will be confirmed with data provided in the baseline assessment. 
Part
icipants who do not meet criteria based on baseline assessment will be withdrawn. Given that 
participants provided responses during the initial telephone contact that met the inclusion 
criteria, we created rules for 4 of the 5 inclusion criteria that required strong evidence from the baseline survey for exclusion. The rules acknowledge that participants may mark unintended 
responses.  
 
Exclusion criterion #1: Insufficient smoking (<5 cigs per week) or have recently quit.             Rule #1: Page 4, Item 1 response is ‘I have not smoked any in the past week’  
            Rule #2: Page 4, Drop if  2 of the following 3 items have the marked response.  
a) item 2 = ‘No use in p ast month’  
                        b) item 3 = ‘No use in past month’  
                        c) item 4 = ‘Do not smoke’  
13 
             Rule #3: Page 4, responses to items 2 & 3 show less than 5 cigs per week.  
Exclusion criterion #2: Less than 18 years old.  
            Rules #1: Page 1, Date of birth is less than 18 from date of survey completion. 
Exclusion criterion #3: Currently enrolled in an ‘in- person’ cessation program.  
            Rule #1: From Quit Aids section on page 10, marked ‘Currently Use’ for In-person counseling or 
support program.  
 
Participants  will be randomized  into the two arms  (700 each)  using  balanced -permuted block,  
stratified  by: sex, smoking  rate (daily  vs. non-daily smoking), and income  (household income  < $10,000).  We 
are stratifying  on income  based  on previously  observed  treatment  effects  for our self-help interventions  that 
were  moderated  by income.   Specifically, low-income participants  derived greater benefit  from the 
intervention  (Brandon  et al., 2012).  Our smoking  inclusion  and stratification  criterion  are based  on research  
demonstrating  higher rates  of non- daily and light smoking  (e.g., less than 10 cigarettes  per day) among 
Hispanic/Latinos  (e.g., Kaplan et al., 2014,  Okuyemi  et al., 2002)  and that different  reasons  for smoking  exist 
among  Hispanic/Latinos  based  on smoking  level (Pulvers  et al., 2014).  To minimize  treatment  
contamination,  participation will be limited  to one  participant per  household  address.  
We believe  that  it is feasible to accrue  the target  N of 1400 in the 20 months  allocated  for accrual.  In 
the previous  self-help cessation study  (D1.2.3),  we successfully  recruited  1874  smokers  over the course of 
16 months.   Although  the current  study  will be limited  to Spanish - speaking smokers,  which  is a smaller 
population base,  it is substantial  and growing.   Because all contact with participants  will be by telephone, 
internet,  and mail, we are not geographically  limited  and are thus able to recruit  participants  throughout the 
country.  The rate of accrual  is limited  only by the amount  of advertising, staffing  levels,  and logistic  
requirements  of screening callers  and processing  baseline  data.  We have a history  of meeting  our accrual  
goals  with high rates  of participant retention  in trials, even with particularly  hard-to-reach low-income 
populations  that required adjustments  to accrual  strategies.   Most  notably, we have recruited participants  
from a much smaller segment of the population:  700 women in months  4-8 of their pregnancy  who had 
already  quit smoking  and were  interested  in relapse- prevention  assistance  (Brandon et al., 2012; Lopez et 
al., 2008).  We also have  a history  of recruiting  Hispanic/Latino  smokers  (Simmons  et al., 2011a,  2011b). 
Moreover, as  noted  above,  recruitment  feasibility  will be boosted  by the assistance  of our CAB  members  
strategically  located  throughout the  country.  
D3.3.   Study  Arms 
In t
his section, we describe the rationale and form of the two intervention  conditions . 
Note that in  addition  to hard  copies of the intervention  materials, participants  in both conditions  will have the 
option  to also receive  electronic  versions  via a link to a website  managed  by Moffitt  Cancer  Center’s  Survey 
Methods  Core.  
D3.3.1.   Stop  Smoking for Good  Intervention  in Spanish  (SS-SP). This condition  will comprise  the 
11 Stop Smoking  for Good  booklets  and 9 supportive  My Story  pamphlets  transcreated  for Spanish speaking  
smokers  to be  delivered  over 18 months  (see Table  2). 
Consistent  with the recommendations  of the USPHS  Clinical Practice  Guidelines  (Fiore  et al., 2008),  our 
prior formative work with Hispanic/Latino smokers  and Hispanic/Latino health care providers  (Simmons  et 
al., 2011a; 2011b;  Bejarano  et al., 2013)  identified  high degrees  of interest and  enthusiasm for self-help 
smoking  intervention materials  to be  available in Spanish.  Additionally,  a reoccurring  emergent theme  
among Hispanic/Latino  participants  was a desire for some  form of personal  contact to be provided along 
with the booklets.  To satisfy  this identified  need,  while  maintaining dissemination  and reach  potential,  we 
have added  a single, brief  telephone  contact to this condition.  This telephone  contact will  be timed  to occur 
when the participant is  due to receive the first Stop Smoking for Good booklet.  The aim of this 10-minute  
call will be to build rapport and to provide a personal  connection  to garner  trust and credibility  in the 
intervention.   During  the call, we will briefly  present the rationale for the intervention  and offer suggestions  
for intended  use of the intervention materials.   If effective, this  intervention could blend  seamlessly into 
existing  telephone Quitline  services.  
D3.3.2 Usual  Car e (UC).  This condition  will comprise  a single, high -quality  booklet that  
is currently  in wide-dissemination  and was developed  by the National  Cancer Institute:  Viva de forma  más 
14 
 saludable  para usted y su familia, deje de fumar  hoy mismo (Live  Healthier for  You and Your  Family,  Quit 
Smoking Today;  NCI, 2011).  This is a comprehensive 40 page Spanish - language booklet  with high quality  
content and  visual  presentation.  We chose  to use credible usual  care as a comparison  condition rather than  
a no-treatment  control  for two reasons. First,  when  using  a reactive  recruitment strategy  that publicizes  an 
offer of cessation  assistance, we believe that there  is an ethical  obligation  to provide  at least high quality  
usual  care to all participants.  Second,  it is simply  more  meaningful  to evaluate  a novel  self-help intervention  
(our Stop Smoking  for Good booklets) against  an existing  credible  intervention.  To have any public  health 
significance, the new intervention  must demonstrate greater efficacy  than an existing,   less intensive  
intervention.   In summary,  the UC control condition  enhances the external  validity  of the study  by 
providing  a comparison  to an existing, credible  intervention that a smoker  could  receive  in a medical  
setting  or elsewhere.  
 
 
D3.4.  Assessments  
As Table  2 indicates, assessments  will occur  at baseline and at 6-month  intervals  thereafter, 
through 24 months.   Assessments  will be conducted as we have before  (Brandon  et al., 2000,  2004), via 
the mail,  with an internet option.   A tension  inherent  in clinical  trials,  particularly  trials  of minimal 
interventions  for behavior  change,  involves  balancing  the value of assessment  against the risk of reactance 
effects.  This is a concern  in the current  study  because we posit that contact contributes  to treatment  
effects.   Moreover,  assessment  of specific  domains  may influence  those  very domains.   For example,  
assessment of coping skill usage  is itself a reminder to use coping skills.  Finally,  participants  who enroll  in 
studies  of minimal  interventions  often  will reject the burden  of a heavy assessment load,  increasing  attrition  
and reducing  generalizability.   Therefore, in our self -help studies, we aim to keep  both the frequency  and 
magnitude of assessments  to the minimum required  to meet the specific  aims.   Compared  to our traditional  
treatment studies,  we must  be more  selective  in choosing  instruments  to administer  in our self-help studies, 
and we limit assessments  to 6-month  intervals.  
All assessments  will be conducted  in Spanish.  When existing  Spanish -language  versions  are 
unavailable,  they will be created  by a certified  translator, with  verification  via back - translation,  and then 
provided to a small  sample  (N = 6) of representative men and women from  Hispanic/Latino subgroups  for 
key informant cognitive interviews  to ensure  that the instruments  are “grounded”  in accord  with the 
capabilities  of our population  of interest (Jones  et al., 2001).  When  Spanish- language versions  of proposed  
measures  exist,  but they had not been developed and validated  with diverse  Hispanic/Latino  populations,  
we will engage in a similar  process  to verify  that the Spanish  is understandable  to individuals  from different  
countries  of origin.  
D3.4.1.  Assessment  Inst ruments.  
Initial  Telephone Contact . When smokers  call the toll-free phone  number in response to recruitment 
efforts,  the Spanish -speaking  telephone  operator will  collect  basic  demographic  information, a brief smoking  
history,  and screen  for the inclusion  criteria.  
Baseline  Assessment .  Smokers  who meet  inclusion  criteria  and provide  initial  verbal  consent  over 
the telephone will be sent a bound  set of baseline  Spanish -language questionnaires.  The following  
questionnaires  will be included:   (1) a demographic  (age, sex,  socioeconomic  status [measured by 
education,  household income, number  of members  in household  and debt level (Chiang  & Borrelli,  2014)] 
country  of origin, generational  status, years  living  in the US, etc.) and smoking  history  questionnaire,  
including electronic cigarette use and quit ting aids use.  The Spanish -validated  Fagerström  Test for  Nicotine  
Dependence  (Becoña & Vazquez,  1998)  will be administered.  The FTND  is the standard,  validated,  
instrument to assess  nicotine  dependence. (2)  an 11-point  measure of readiness  to quit, the Contemplation  
Ladder (Biener  & Abrams, 1991).  (3) the Stages  of Change  Algorithm (SOC) translated  in Spanish ( Becoña  
& Lorenzo, 2004).  Although this algorithm lacks  some  of the psychometric  advantages  of the Contemplation  
Ladder and  it produces  a different  distribution  of quitting motivation (Nath  et al., 2002), it  is widely used,  and 
its inclusion  allows  for comparisons  with other published studies.  We will also administer the brief measure 
of abstinence -related  motivational  engagement (Simmons  et al., 2010) and  two other motivation- related  
constructs: a situation -specific  abstinence self-efficacy  scale  (Velicer et al., 1990);  and a measure of 
smoking expectancies  that has  been validated  among  Spanish -speaking  Latino smokers, the Smoking  
Consequences  Questionnaire -Spanish (SCQ -Spanish;  Irvin Vidrine  et al., 2009 ; Reig -Ferrer & Cepeda-
15 
 Benito, 2007 ).  Four subscales  will be administered  (negative affect reduction,  craving/addiction,  health 
risks,  negative physical  feelings).  The Short Acculturation  Scale  for Hispanics  (SASH;  Marin  et al., 1987) 
will be administered  to assess  level of acculturation.  The SASH  has demonstrated  high reliability  across  
Hispanic/Latino subgroups  (Kaplan  et al., 2014).   In addition,  we will assess level of familism  using the 
Attitudinal  Familism  Scale  (Steidel  & Contreras, 2013).  Finally  we will administer the trait version  of the 
Spanish Positive  and Negative  Affect Schedule (SPANAS;  Joiner et  al., 1997;  from Watson et al., 1988),  
which  has been  validated  in younger  and older  populations  (Buz et al., 2015;  Ortuño- Sierra  et al., 2015).   
These  measures  of demographics,  motivation, mood,  acculturation,  and familism  will be tested  as potential  
moderator variables  (Secondary  Aim). 
Follow -Up Assessments.   Participants will be sent follow -up assessment packets (by mail or e -mail 
link, as per their preference) at six -month intervals through 24 months, as indicated in Table 2. This follow -
up duration provides for an assessment of smoking outcomes 6 months beyond the final mailing of the SS -
SP intervention materials. These brief assessments are intended to minimize participant burden and 
consequent attrition and will include a questionnaire assessing tobacco use since the previous contact, as 
well as any pharmacotherapy or other smoking cessation assistance. We also will assess participants' use and evaluation of the self -help materials, using the eight -item Client Satisfaction Questionnaire developed 
in Spanish (Roberts et al.,1984) plus additional items to distinguish the benefits of the content and the 
repeated contact.  To assess the impact of the smoking cessation intervention on health outcomes, we will 
use the Spanish version of the SF- 12 health survey ( Vilagut et al., 2008; Ware et al., 1995 ), which will be 
included in the 18 month and 24 month follow -up assessments. We will also administer the trait version of 
the SPANAS  at 18 month and 24 month follow -up. Research staff will attempt to contact participants to 
complete any missing data on the completed baseline and follow -up assessments. To biochemically 
confirm self -reported abstinence, we will travel to participants residing within 75 miles of our laboratory to 
collect  breath and saliva samples.  At the 12 and 24 month assessments, an alveolar carbon monoxide 
(CO) sample  will be collected , using a cut -off of 4 ppm ( Cropsey et al., 2014). (see D3.6.)  Due to higher 
than expected disconfirmation rates at the 12 month follow -up, we have elected to add an additional 
marker of smoking abstinence.   Cotinine measurements, collected via saliva, provides an approximation of 
nicotine over a more extended period of time and is less influenced by environmental exposures and other 
forms of smoking (i.e., marijuana smoking). At the 24 month assessment,  in addition to the breath sample,  
a saliva sample  will be collected, using a cut -off of 10ng/ml (Benowitz et al.,2002). To collect biosamples, a 
researcher will make an appointment to visit the participant at home, work, or other location for a face -to-
face interview.  Participants will be compensated $20 for completing the interview and providing a breath 
and saliva  samples.   Participants will also be provided with the option of coming to the lab to complete the 
face- to-face interview, and if they elect to do so, they will receive an additional $20. During the interview, 
the researcher will obtain consent to collect the breat h sample. The breath sample will be collected with a 
portable CO monitor (Micro CO™ by Micro Direct, Inc.), and the saliva sample will be collected in a 2ml 
tube for immediate cotinine analysis using the NicAlert™ dipstick by Nymox.  
 
Participant  Payment  and Retention Procedures . We have developed a series  of steps to minimize  
attrition  in our prior  longitudinal  self-help studies  (Brandon  et al., 2000,  2004).   As an incentive,  we will pay 
participants  a $20 gift card for completing  each assessment  packet , and also send  participants  a pre-
selected gift (e.g., stylus pen, nail file, etc.) valued at approximately $1 if they return  the forms within  one 
week .  In addition,  participants  will be told that they  will receive a bonus  payment of a $50  gift card if  they 
complete all 5 assessments.   Questionnaires  will also be constructed  in a manner to maximize  participation  
(Dillman, 1991).  Other  procedures  to reduce attrition  include  reminder phone calls, emails, text messages,  
and letters.  We will also ask participants  at baseline  to supply  the name  and telephone number  of a 
relative  or significant  other we can call if we lose contact  with the participant.  This will aid in reaching  
participants  who move  or change  phone numbers.   
If participants are unable to be reached using the retention procedures described above, additional 
methods of contact will be attempted:  
1. Internet databases: If mail has been returned to us, indicating that we have a wrong address 
or the participant has moved, several free and paid services will be used to locate participants. Websites 
will include whitepages.com, smartpages.com, and Yahoo! People (people.yahoo.com). These services will 
allow us to search for individuals by name, address, and phone number. We will be able to verify whether or 
16 
 not participants are in the armed forces, incarcerated, or have passed away by using Military.com and state 
websites like Florida.gov.  
2. Facebook: If all avenues of contact have been exhausted, we will utilize the social media 
platform ‘Facebook’ in an attempt to contact participants.  
 
Facebook Protocol   
A Facebook account will be opened under the study name ‘ Libre del Cigarrillo .’ The profile will 
contain the study and Moffitt Cancer Center logo, along with a paragraph briefly describing the study. Facebook searches will be initiated using the participant’s first and last names. If the first and last names 
result in a match, we w ill attempt to further verify we have identified the correct individual by confirming 
‘current city’, ‘age’, or ‘email address’. When we are confident that we have identified the right individual, we 
will use the internal messaging system of the Facebook platform. An initial message will be sent to the 
individual asking if they are participating in Libre del Cigarrillo . The message will emphasize that we have 
exhausted all other means of contact, provide our telephone number and email address, and request t hat 
the individual contact us or reply via the internal messaging system regarding their willingness to update 
their contact information and continue their participation in the study. The message will apologize in 
advance for possibly contacting the wrong individual. If this was the case, we will additionally request that 
they simply reply with this respect to ensure they are not to be contacted in the future. If the user does not 
reply, another message will be sent 14 days later.  
D3.4.2.  Outcome  Variables.   At each assessment  point we will calculate  7-day point - prevalence 
abstinence rates.   Point -prevalence measures  are best for capturing  the dynamic  nature of cessation, 
maintenance, and  relapse.  Continuous  abstinence is not feasible because quit dates  will be highly  
variable  across  participants,  and also because  one goal of the intervention is to encourage  lapsers  to quit 
again  (recycle).  We need  our outcome  measures  to reflect these  changes  in smoking  status  over time.  
We will also compare groups  on continuous  measures  such  as current  smoking  rate (cigarettes/day),  
months  of smoking  during  the follow - up period, length of current  abstinence period,  and latency  from quit 
date to relapse.   Data will be analyzed following  multiple  imputation  (see below).   Finally,  we will calculate  
the cost per participant of each  intervention,  and then incremental  cost- effectiveness  ratios,  using  Usual  
Care  as the reference, to determine  the cost per quitter.  These statistics  will facilitate  economic  
comparisons  with other cessation  interventions.  
 
D3.5.   Study  Timeline 
 
Month  Activity  
1 – 3 Hire and train staff;  build  database  program;  work  with CAB and CAP to develop  targeted  
recruitment  plan and create advertising copy;  translate assessment  instruments;  print 
intervention  materials.  
 
4 – 23 Accrue  sample  and begin  distribution  of interventions  and follow -up assessments.  
24 – 53 Continue  Follow -up Assessments  and prepare  mid-term reports.  
54 – 60 Complete  final data analysis  and prepare  reports.  
 
 
D3.6.  Design  Considerations 
In this section we briefly  address  our rationale  for a few important study -design  decisions.  
Should biochemical verification be employed? The decision  regarding  inclusion  of biochemical  
verification  (e.g., saliva,  serum,  or urine  cotinine; breath carbon monoxide)  of self- reported  smoking  status  
is complex  (Benowitz  et al., 2002).  Considering  the low-intensity  nature of the intervention, that 
assessments  will be done  by mail/internet,  and there  should be little differential  in social -desirability  
demand across  conditions,  we concluded,  consistent with Benowitz et  al. (2002) and Velicer  et al. (1992) 
that bio-verification  of the full sample is not warranted.  Moreover,  the cost of  bioverification  for a study  of 
this size and geographic  distribution would be prohibitive.   In two prior studies,  we conducted unannounced  
CO tests  of 64 participants  who self-reported  abstinence  at follow -up and who resided  within  50-75 miles  of 
our laboratory.  Findings were  consistent with self-reports  for all but one participant.  We will use this same  
17 
 strategy  to collect  CO and saliva from a sample  of participants  residing within  75 miles  at the 12 and 24 
month follow -up points.   In the unlikely  possibility  that we find nontrivial  disconfirmation  rates, we will use 
the data to adjust  our outcome estimates.   
 
Should pharmacotherapy use be an exclusion  criterion?  Excluding  smokers  who report  using  
any pharmacotherapy  would  allow  for a “cleaner” test  of the self-help interventions  per se. However,  we 
ultimately  decided against this  exclusion  criterion  for the following  reasons:  
(1) It would reduce  the ecological  validity  of the study,  because  pharmacotherapy  is readily  available to 
smokers  and is likely  to be used  by many  smokers  in the population  to which  we wish to generalize;  in 
fact, the Stop Smoking  for Good  booklets  and supportive  pamphlets  themselves  discuss pharmacotherapy  
options. (2) It  would cause us to reject  or drop a significant proportion  of participants,  necessitating  a much  
larger initial sample  size and a study  of longer duration. Instead,  we will assess pharmacotherapy  use (as 
well as electronic  nicotine  delivery  systems [i.e., e-cigarettes])  at each assessment  and we will examine 
their contribution statistically.  
C.7.1.  Should materials  be distributed only via the Internet or mobile  modality?  We propose  
to give participants  an option  to receive  intervention  materials  electronically  (via emailed  link) in  addition to 
printed  “hard copies”  delivered  by the US Postal  Service.   Internet - only distribution  would have  the 
advantage of reduced  cost and easier eventual  dissemination (c.f.,Marcus et al., 2007).   However,  there 
are also advantages  of tangible,  printed intervention  materials  (Curry  et al., 2003), and  this was the 
modality  that showed substantial  efficacy  in our prior studies, including the English -language  version  of the 
proposed intervention.   A written  intervention  is also particularly  useful  for low-income  individuals  who may 
experience barriers  to access  of technological  modalities.   Rather than  introducing  additional variation,  we 
feel that priority  should  be given  to testing  the booklets  in their present form.  Nevertheless,  we will track  
use of the Internet option  and include  it as an exploratory  moderator variable  in analyses.  We will collect  
metadata  regarding  use of the internet -based  documents , namely how many times the link was accessed, 
and whether the electronic booklet(s) were downloaded, which  will allow  us to document their  use and 
acceptability.  We will also collect  evaluations  and preferences regarding  internet  distribution  at follow- up 
to test as potential  moderators or  mediators of treatment effects. This information  should assist  us in 
deciding whether to transition fully to internet -based or mobile content (i.e., smart -phone/tablet  apps)  
distribution  in the future.  
 
D3.7. D
ata Management  and Analysis  
D3.7.1. Data Management .  Participant recruitment  and contact information  will be input  through  
screens  created by the Data  Systems  Team  within  Moffitt's  Research  Computing  Support Group 
(Research  IT) and will be subject to computerized  range  and consistency checks.  The data will then 
populate an Access database, which  will also be created  and maintained by Research IT. This process  will 
be supervised jointly  by the PI and Study  Data Manager/Biostatistician.   Paper -and-pencils  surveys  will be 
entered into database  files with computerized  range  and consistency checks. Online  surveys  will have  
range  checks  built into the survey items, as  appropriate.  The survey databases  will be converted  on a 
monthly  basis  to an analysis  database.  This analysis  database and SAS version  9.4 (SAS  Institute,  Cary,  
NC) will be used  by the statistician  who will provide the PIs  with reports  and summaries  on a regular  basis  
and perform the final analyses.  
D3.7.2. Sample  Size and Study  Power Analysis.  The primary  statistical  analyses  will assess  the efficacy  
of the full intervention  (SS-SP) in producing  smoking  cessation  compared to Usual  Care  (UC) in two ways:  
(1) across  all 4 follow -ups using  generalized  estimating  equations  (GEE),  and (2) at the 24-month follow -up 
using  logistic  regression.  The estimated  7-day point  prevalence  abstinence rates  for this study were  based  
on the cessation  study  (C1.2.3, Table 1) with an adjustment  of 0.625 standard error units to decrease  group 
differences.  For the four follow -ups, the estimated abstinent rates  are 12.3%, 15.2%, 19.1%, & 19.8%  in the 
UC condition  and 15.2%,  23.0%,  26.9%, & 28.8% in the SS-SP condition.  Power  was targeted  to be > .80 
with alpha=.05  and a 2-sided  test. Using  GEESIZE version  3.1 (Rochon,  1998; Dahmen 2004) with an AR(1)  
working  correlation  structure  and coefficient  of 0.7, sample  size was estimated  at 322/group for the GEE 
analyses.  For the logistic  regression at 24 months, sample  size was estimated  at 365/group.  All analyses  will 
be completed following  multiple  imputation  to manage  missing  data (below).  Therefore, no adjustments  of 
18 
 enrollment size will be needed  to account  for attrition. The final sample  size for analyses  was rounded up to 
370 per group.  An additional 500 participants will be recruited from the state of Florida.  
We initially planned to enroll 1240 individuals,  740 nationally and 500 in Florida. However,  due to 
higher -than-expected attrition, we are increasing our overall sample size to 1400 individuals, 850 nationally 
and 550 in Florida . 
 
D3.7.3. Data Analysis Overview.   Analyses  will be conducted  with SAS version  9.4 and Mplus  
Version  7 (Muthén & Muthén,  2008).   Frequency  distributions  and contingency  table analyses  will be used  
as a point  of departure  for more  advanced  analyses. Group  differences  in baseline  measures  will be 
assessed and any variable  that exhibits  a significant group difference will be incorporated into the primary  
analyses.  
To manage  missing  data, multiple  imputation under  the Missing  at Random  assumption  will be 
applied  using  a Markov  Chain Monte  Carlo  method  (Schafer, 1997)  via PROC  MI in SAS,  given  the expected  
large  number  of non-monotonic  missing  data patterns  and the expected  large  number  of auxiliary  variables  
(e.g., baseline  measures  that predict smoking  status  at follow -up) to be determined by preliminary  analyses.  
A post hoc  approach (Rubin,  1987)  will address  the influence of Missing Not at Random (MNAR)  on smoking  
status  (i.e., missing  is due to smoking).  Sensitivity  analyses  will be performed  by comparing  results  from 
different  multiple  imputation  data sets that were  generated  using  different levels  of MNAR  influence.  
D3.7.4.  Analytic  Plan  for Addressing Specific Aims.  All analyses  will be performed  on complete  
data sets following  multiple  imputation using  all 1400 participants.  
Specific  Aims  1 . All analyses  will be performed  on complete  data sets following  multiple  imputation.  
Generalized  estimating  equations  (GEE)  will be used to fit population- averaged  models  of the longitudinally  
measured  7-day point prevalence,  with the main  covariates  of intervention  condition (UC  vs. SS-SP), time 
(months  from baseline),  and the  interaction  of condition  and time.  The GEE analysis  will allow  for 
assessment  of changes  in abstinent rates  over time and group  differences  in changes. Logistic  regression  
will be used  to assess  condition  differences  at the 24-month  (final) follow -up, which  is 6 months  after the SS-
SP intervention.  In both the GEE  models  and logistic  regression, potential  confounding  variables  (e.g., group 
differences  on demographic  variable)  that appear  despite  randomization will be included.  
Secondary  Aim. The secondary  aim is to assess  prospective  moderators  of the expected  intervention  
effect (e.g.,  gender, SES, quitting  motivation,  nicotine dependence,  country  of origin , acculturation,  trait 
affect, self -efficacy). Each  moderator  will be assessed individually  within  a logistic  regression  for the 24-
month assessment and within  a GEE model  by adding  the moderator and the interaction term for the 
moderator and condition. The GEE models  will also include interaction terms  for the moderator  with time and 
with the time x condition  interaction.  
Significant interaction  terms  in a GEE model  will be further  explored using  time-specific  analyses.  
Significant interaction  terms  for the logistic  regression at 24  months  will be explored by assessing  condition  
differences for  each  level of categorical  moderators.  
D8.  Public  Health  Impact  
The proposed research will test the efficacy  a culturally -appropriate,  Spanish -language  version  of a 
previously  validated  self-help intervention  for tobacco  dependence— the leading  preventable  cause of death 
and disability.   If demonstrated efficacious, this  research will  improve the availability  and delivery  of smoking  
cessation assistance to a large underserved population  of Spanish -speaking  individuals  throughout the 
country.  This study  responds  to Healthy  People  2020 goal TU-5.2 (Increase  recent  smoking  cessation  
success  by adult smokers  using  evidence- based  strategies ; USDHHS,  2014)  and corresponds  to the HHS  
Action  Plan to Reduce Racial  and Ethnic  Health  Disparities (USDHHS,  2011)  Strategy  IV.B (Conduct  and 
support research  to inform  disparities  reduction initiatives ) and Action  III.A.4  (Reduce tobacco - related 
disparities  through targeted  evidence- based  interventions  in locations  serving racial  and ethnic  minority  
populations ).  Moreover,  the intervention corresponds  to the National  Standards  for Culturally  and 
Linguistically  Appropriate Services  in Health  and Health Care  (USDHHS,  2013).  The intervention  is expected 
to be efficacious,  cost-effective,  and easily  disseminated.  
As such, it woul d be attractive  to both public  and private stakeholders  and health  care services.  By 
expanding the reach of evidence- based  treatments  for tobacco dependence, this  line of research  contributes 
to reducing  the health  and economic  burden  of tobacco  at the individual  and societal  levels.  
19 
 Protection  of Human Subjects  
 
   
 
1.RISKS  TO HUMAN SUBJECTS  
  
 
a. Human  Subjects  Involvement,  Characteristics, Design 
 
 
 
 
 
Participants (N = 1400) will be randomized to one of two smoking  cessation  interventions, with 700 
participants  randomized to each condition.  The Stop Smoking  for Good intervention  in Spanish condition is 
comprised  of a series  of 10 booklets  distributed over 18 months, plus  additional  monthly  contacts  via 
supportive pamphlets. The  Usual  Care  condition  will comprise a single, Spanish- language,  smoking  
cessation booklet developed by the National  Cancer  Institute  (NCI). All  participants  will complete five 
assessments  comprised  of self-report  questionnaires: a baseline  assessment an d four follow -up 
assessments  occurring  at six-month  intervals,  through  24 months. Participants  will be paid a $20 gift card  
for completing  each  assessment  and a bonus  payment  of a $50 gift card if they complete  all 5 assessments.  
  
The subject population  for the study  will be comprised of male  and female  adult  smokers  recruited from the 
community  and throughout the country  via a variety  of advertising  methods.  
  
 
 
Inclusion  criteria  will include:  1)18+ years  of age; 2) monolingual  Spanish -speaking,  or bilingual  Spanish-
English  and prefer educational health materials  in Spanish; 3) have been smoking  at least 5 cigarettes  per 
week  over the past year; and 4) not currently  enrolled in a face- to-face smoking  cessation  program.  Initial 
screening will be conducted via telephone. Inclusion criteria will be confirmed  with data provided in  the baseline 
assessment . Participants who do not meet criteria based on baseline assessment will be withdrawn.  We will 
assess whether  participants  use any other smoking  cessation  services  (e.g., state  quitline,  websites)  or 
pharmacotherapy  so that we can examine their impacts  statistically, but we will not exclude smokers  who 
utilize  these  widely  available smoking  cessation  tools.  To minimize  treatment  contamination,  study  
participation  will be limited  to only  one participant  from each  household address.  
  
b. Sour 
ces of Research Material  (to be  used for research  purposes  only)  
 
 
Questionnaires  measuring  sociodemographic  characteristics, smoking  history,  current smoking  status, 
motivation to quit smoking,  acculturation, and  evaluation of the program.  Confidentiality  will be maintained  by 
using  participant ID numbers  on questionnaires, rather than  names. All assessment  instruments  will be in 
20 
 Spanish.  Breath  and saliva samples  to be analyzed for carbon monoxide  and nicotine from a subsample  (i.e., 
participants  residing  within  75 miles  of the laboratory) of participants  at follow -up. 
 
 
c.  Potential Risks 
 
 
Risks  are judged  to be extremely  minimal. The interventions  are minimal, self -help approaches,  and the 
assessment  is all self-report.  The only potential  risk involves  confidentiality  and loss of privacy  related  to the 
information provided during  telephone  screening  and written  assessments.  
  
 
 
 
 
2.ADEQUECY  OF PROTECTION  AGAINST RISKS  
 
 
 
a. Recruitment  and Informed  Consent  
 
 
 
These  studies  do not involve any deception.   Participants  will be recruited from the community  and 
throughout the country  through  multimedia  advertisements  (Spanish  newspapers,  radio,  cable TV, social  
media,  public  transportation  signage)  and community  partnerships.  
 
 
Eligibility  Screening:  
  
 
When  smokers  call the toll-free phone  number in  response to the advertisements  or other  recruitment 
efforts,  the telephone  operator  will collect  basic  demographic  information, a brief smoking  history,  and 
screen for the inclusion  criteria.  All conversations  will occur in Spanish . Eligible  participants  will be sent a 
baseline questionnaire. The baseline  questionnaire will include  an introductory  cover  letter that contains  a 
written  explanation  of the study  and includes  all the required  elements  of the informed  consent .  All written  
materials  will be in Spanish. 
 
 
Description  of Informed  Consent  Process:  
 
All participants  will have  the study  explained to them  in full by a member  of the research  team  including  an 
explanation  of risks and benefits  and confidentiality  of the collected  information,  including  that data will be 
shared  with investigators  and the Moffitt Cancer Center. They  will be informed  about all  of the procedures  
involved in the study  as well as participation  duration  and compensation.  Participants  will be informed  that 
they can freely  withdraw  from the study  at any time without  penalty.  All potential  participants  will be given  an 
opportunity  to ask questions  prior to providing  consent.  All conversations  will occur  in Spanish.  
21 
  
 
 
 
Data collection  will be conducted  entirely  via telephone, mail,  and/or internet, and  recruitment  will occur  
throughout the country, thus  we will request  a waiver  of written  informed  consent  documentation  (based on 
practicality  and minimal risk),  which  has been  granted  by the IRB for the previous  self-help intervention  
studies.  Initial  verbal  consent  will be obtained  over the telephone  after the telephone  operator describes  the 
study,  explains  that participation  is voluntary,  and that there  is no penalty  for non-completion of the study  
(i.e., for not returning  questionnaires). In addition,  operators  will describe  compensation, risks  and benefits  to 
participation, and confidentiality  of the collected  information. Callers  will be given  the opportunity  to ask  any 
questions  prior to giving  their verbal  informed  decision. In addition,  the baseline  questionnaire  will include  an 
introductory  cover  letter that contains  a written  explanation  of the study  and includes  all the required  
elements  of informed consent. The letter  will explain that returning  the completed  baseline questionnaire  will 
be considered their provision of informed  consent. Return of the baseline  questionnaire by participants  will 
signify  agreement to participate  and formal  enrollment  into the clinical trial. All conversations  and documents  
will be in Spanish.  
 
 
b. Protections Against  Risk  
 
 
 
Potential  risks involve  confidentiality  and loss of privacy because  participants  may provide personal  
information about  themselves  on questionnaires. To minimize  potential  risks all research  assistants  will 
receive training in research ethics.  Confidential ity will be maintained  by using  participant ID numbers  on 
data, rather than participants' names. Participant  data will be kept separate  from the identifying  information. 
Demographic  information with identifying  information  will be kept in a locked  file cabinet separate  from study  
data with ID numbers.  
Participant  data  will be available  only to research staff.  Data will be kept in locked  filing cabinets  in locked  
laboratory  rooms. Electronic  data will be stored  in a password- protected  database.  All results  from the study  
will be published in aggregate form, and individual  identifying  information will not be reported.  All participants  
will be fully informed  that participation is voluntary  and they may withdraw  from the study  at any time without 
penalty.  
 
 
3.POTENTIAL  BENEFITS  OF THE PROPOSED  RESEARCH TO HUMAN  SUBJECTS  AND OTHERS  
 
 
 
The potential  risks are judged  to be very minor.  The main  benefit to participants  is that it may increase the 
odds  of them quitting smoking  and remaining  abstinent.  In addition,  they are participating  in research  that 
may lead to the future dissemination  of interventions  to help Spanish -speaking  smokers  to stop smoking.  
 
4.IMPORTANCE  OF KNOWLEDGE  TO BE GAINED  
 
 
 
22 
 The goal of the proposed  research  is to increase the reach of smoking  cessation  treatment  to Hispanics,  the 
largest  and fastest  growing  minority  population  in the US. Currently,  few cessation  interventions  exist 
specifically for Spanish -speaking  smokers.  The proposed research  study  has the potential  to yield a cost-
effective  smoking  cessation  intervention designed  specifically for Spanish speaking  smokers. If  the Spanish -
language  intervention  is efficacious, it  has potential  to have significant  public  health  impact  with respect to 
reducing  smoking  rates  and smoking  related  illness  and mortality  among  a large  underserved  minority  
population  in the US. 
 
 
 
5.DATA  SAFETY  AND  MONITORING PLAN  
 
 
 
Overview  
 
 
 
This is an extremely  minimal  risk study.   Nevertheless, the principal  investigators,  Drs. Brandon and 
Simmons, will implement a DSMP  to ensure  that the  expected  risk/benefit ratio  is maintained  throughout the  
study  and that the confidentiality  and accuracy  of the data are preserved.  All members  of the study  team  will 
receive formal  training  in research  ethics  and HIPAA  procedures  through  the University  of South Florida  
IRB, as well as study -specific  training provided  during  research  team meetings. The study team  will meet  
weekly  to discuss  study  progress,  including  participant  recruitment and retention,  data management, any  
participant  complaints, and  confidentiality  issues.  In addition,  study  progress  will be tracked  by Moffitt 
Cancer  Center’s  Protocol  Review  and Monitoring  Committee  (PRMC). The probability  of an adverse  event  
occurring  in this study  is extremely  low, given  the nature  of the study.  However,  as per IRB policy,  any 
serious  or unexpected  adverse events  will be reported  promptly  (within  2- 5 business  days, depending  on 
the nature of the event)  to the IRB and the PRMC.  A summary  of the adverse  events  that occurred during  
the previous  year will be included  in the annual  progress  report to NIH. 
  
Description  of the Protocol  
 
 
 
We propose  a two-arm randomized design.   Participants  (N =1400 ) will be randomized to one of two 
smoking  cessation  interventions. The Stop Smoking  for Good  intervention in Spanish (SS- SP) condition  is 
comprised  of a series  of 10 booklets  distributed  over 18  months,  plus additional  monthly  contacts  via 
supportive pamphlets.  The Usual  Care (UC) condition will comprise  a single,  Spanish -language,  smoking  
cessation booklet  developed  by the National  Cancer  Institute  (NCI).   Specific Aim  1 will test the efficacy  of a 
Spanish -language  extended self-help intervention  compared to usual  care.  As a secondary  aim, we will 
evaluate moderator variables  that may  aid in refining  and targeting  of the intervention  to maximize  impact.  
 
Primary  and Secondary Outcome  Measures 
 
At each  assessment  point  we will calculate  7-day point -prevalence abstinence rates.  Point - prevalence 
measures  are best for capturing  the dynamic  nature of cessation, maintenance,  and relapse.   Continuous  
abstinence is not feasible  because  quit dates  will be highly  variable  across participants,  and also because 
one goal of the intervention  is to encourage  lapsers  to quit again  (recycle).  We need our outcome measures  
23 
 to reflect  these  changes  in smoking  status  over time.  We will also compare  groups  on continuous  measures  
such as current  smoking  rate (cigarettes/day), months  of smoking  during  the follow -up period,  length  of 
current  abstinence  period,  and latency  from quit date to relapse.  Finally,  we will calculate  the cost per 
participant of  each  intervention, and  then incremental  cost-effectiveness  ratios,  using  Usual  Care  as the 
reference, to determine  the cost per quitter.  These statistics  will facilitate  economic  comparisons  with other  
cessation interventions.  
 
 
Inclusion/exclusion Criteria  
 
 
 
1)18+ years  of age; 2) monolingual  Spanish -speaking, or bilingual  Spanish -English  and prefer  educational  
health materials  in Spanish;  3) have been smoking  at least 5 cigarettes  per week  over the past  year;  and 4) 
not currently  enrolled  in a face-to-face smoking  cessation program.  We will assess  whether  participants  use 
any other  smoking  cessation  services  (e.g., state quitline, websites)  or pharmacotherapy  so that we can 
examine  their impacts  statistically,  but we will not exclude smokers  who utilize  these widely  available 
smoking  cessation  tools.  To minimize  treatment  contamination, study  participation  will be limited  to only one 
participant  from each  household  address.  
  
List of Participating  Data  Collection Centers 
 
Tobacco  Research  and Intervention  Program at  the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer  Center  and Research  Institute,  
Tampa, Florida.  
 
 
Data A
cquisition  and Data  Entry 
 
Participants  will be randomized into the two arms  (700 each)  using  balanced- permuted block,  stratified  by: 
sex, smoking  rate (daily  vs. non-daily smoking), and  income  (household income < 
$10,000)  and data will be collected  via (1) paper  and pencil  measures  or (2) secure  internet  websites  
managed  by Moffitt’s  Survey  Core. Data  from paper and  pencil  measures  will be input  through screens  
created by the Data  Systems  Team  within  Moffitt's  Research  Computing  Support Group  (Research IT) and  
will be subject to  computerized  range  and consistency  checks.   The data will then populate  an Access  
database,  which  will also be created  and maintained by Research IT. This process will be supervised  
jointly  by the PI and Study  Data  Manager/Statistician.  The database  will be converted  on a monthly  basis  
to a SAS database  (SAS Institute, Cary,  NC). This database and SAS will be used  by the statistician  who 
will provide the PI with reports  and summaries  on a regular basis  and perform   the final analyses.  
 
To ensure  participant confidentiality,  baseline and follow- up assessment  data will not include any unique  
identifiers.  
 
 
 
 
Quality  Assurance Plan 
24 
  
Validity  checks of data values  and ranges  will be conducted  upon data entry and again  prior to analysis.   
Data entered  by staff will be double- entered and compared for inconsistencies.  
Online  surveys  will have range  checks built into  the survey  items,  as appropriate.  
 
 
 
Reporting  of AEs/SAEs  
 
This is an extremely minimal  risk study  and Adverse Events  as a direct result  of study  participation  are not 
anticipated.  Nevertheless,  the study  PIs and Project  Director will review  Adverse  Events.  Adverse Events  will 
be reported  in accordance  with the IRB and Sponsor  requirements.  Any serious, related  adverse  events  
(and unanticipated)  will be reported  within  two days (48 hours) to the IRB and to the designated  Project 
Officer at NCI using  the required  reporting  formats.   Given  the low-risk nature  of the proposed  research, this  
is considered an extremely  remote  possibility.   Any IRB actions in relation  to this protocol  will also be 
reported  to NIH/NCI.  We do not anticipate  any circumstances  that would  necessitate early  stopping  of this 
minimal- risk study.  
 
 
Report  of Changes  or Amendments to the Protocol  
 
All changes  to the protocols  will be submitted  and reviewed by the Moffitt  Cancer  Center  Scientific  Review  
Committee  and the Institutional  Review  Board  prior to implementation.   Major  changes  that affect the specific  
aims  will reported  to NCI for pre-approval.   Other significant  changes  will be reported  to NCI via the annual  
reports.  
  
Tria
l Stopping Rules  
 
Given  the nature  of the intervention  under study  (i.e., informational booklets  and pamphlets), we do not 
anticipate  any circumstances  that would  call for premature  stoppage  of the trial. 
 
 
Conflict  of Interest  
 
All key personnel  comply  with federal  and institutional  conflict  of interest reporting  requirements.  
 
 
 
Potential  Risks  and Benefits  for Participants 
 
The potential  risks are judged  to be extremely  minor.  The main  benefit  is that participants  may receive  
information  to help them  quit smoking  and maintain  abstinence.   In addition,  they are 
participating  in research  that may  lead to the future  dissemination  of interventions  to help Spanish -
speaking  smokers  to stop  smoking.  
 
 
 
 
25 
 Collection and Reporting of AEs and SAEs  Management  of 
SAEs  or other  study  risks  See “Reporting  of AEs/SAEs,”  
above.  
 
 
Plans  for Interim  Efficacy  Analysis  
 
We do not plan  interim  efficacy  analysis.  
 
 
 
Responsibility  for Data  and Safety  Monitoring 
 
The study  data manger/statistician will have  primary  responsibility  for data monitoring,  and the project  director  
will have  primary  responsibility  for safety  monitoring.  Both will report to the MPIs,  who will have  ultimate  
responsibility  over both areas.  
 
 
Frequency  of DSM Reviews  
 
DSM  reviews  will take place on an ongoing  basis  during  the weekly  project meetings.  
  
 
Content  of DSM  Report  
 
Any DSM -related  issues  will be included  in the minutes  of the weekly  project meetings.  
  
 
DSM  Board  
 
Not applicable  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
26 
 References Cited  
 
 
Agboola, S., McNeill,  A., Coleman, T., & Leonardi Bee, J.  (2010). A systematic review of the effectiveness of 
smoking relapse prevention interventions for abstinent smokers. Addiction,105,1362- 1380.  
 Báezconde- Garbanati, L., Beebe, L. A., & Pérez -Stable, E. J. (2007). Building capacity to address tobacco-
related disparities among American Indian and Hispanic/Latino communities: conceptual and systemic considerations. Addiction, 102, Suppl 2 :112- 22. 
 Baker, T. B., Brandon, T. H., & Chassin, L. (2004). Motivational influences on cigarette smoking. Annual  
Review of Psychology, 55,  463-491. 
 
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice- Hall. 
 
Barbeau, E. M., Krieger, N., & Soobader, M. J. (2004). Working class matters: Socioeconomic disadvantage, 
race/ethnicity, gender, and smoking in nhis 2000. American Journal of Public Health, 94 (2), 269 -278. 
  Barrera, M., Castro, F. G. (2006). A heuristic framework for the cultural adaptation of interventions. Clinical 
Psychology: Science and Practice, 13, 311-316. 
 
Barrera, M., Castro, F. G., & Steiker, L. K.  (2011). A critical analysis of approaches to the development of 
preventive interventions for subcultural groups.  American Journal of Community  Psychology , 48(3 -4), 
439-454. 
 
Barrera, M., Castro, F.G., Strycker, L.A., Toobert,  D.J. (2013).  Cultural adaptations of behavioral health 
interventions: a progress report. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81(2),  196-205.  
  
Becoña, E., & Lorenzo, C. (2004). Evaluación de la conducta de fumar. Addcciones, 16 (201- 226). [English 
title: Evaluation of smoking behavior ]. 
 
Becoña, E., & Vázquez, F.L. (1998). The Fagerström test for nicotine dependece in a Spanish sample. 
Psychologuc al Reports, 83, 1455 -1458.  
 Bejarano, A., Litvin, E. B., Quinn, G. P., Brandon, T. H., & Simmons, V. N. (2013). Distribution of smoking 
relapse prevention materials in the Hispanic community: Lessons learned. Journal of Cancer Education, 
28(1),  143-150. PMID: 23055134.  
 
Bender, D. E., Harbour, C., Thorp, J., & Morris, P. (2001). Tell me what you mean by "Si": perceptions of 
quality of prenatal care among immigrant Latina women. Qualitative Health Research,11(6) , 780- 794. 
 
Benowitz, N. L., Jacob, P, III, & Ahijevych, K. (2002). Biochemical verification of tobacco use and cessation. 
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 4,149 –159. 
 
Biener, L., & Abrams, D. B. (1991). Contemplation Ladder: Validation of a measure of readiness to consider  
smoking cessation. Health Psychology, 10, 360- 365. 
 Blumenthal, D. S. (2007). Barriers to the provision of smoking cessation services reported by clinicians in 
underserved communities. Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine, 20 , 272 -279. 
 Brandon, T. H., Collins, B. N., Juliano, L. M., & Lazev, A. B. (2000). Preventing relapse among former 
smokers: A comparison of minimal interventions through telephone and mail. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 68, 103- 113. PMID: 10710845  
27 
  
Brandon, T. H., & DeMichele, J. T.  (1995).  Expanding the target of relapse- prevention training to include self -
quit exsmokers: Is there a need?  Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 9,  114-122. 
 
Brandon, T. H., Klesges, R. C., Ebbert, J. O., Talcott, G. W., Thomas, F., Leroy, K., Richey, P.  A. & Colvin, L.  
(2014).   Preventing smoking initiation or relapse following 8.5 weeks of involuntary smoking abstinence in 
basic military training: Trial design, interventions, and baseline data. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 38,  
28-36. PMID: 24637237. PMCID: PMC4024360 
 Brandon, T. H., Meade, C. D., Herzog, T. A., Chirikos, T. N., Webb, M. S., & Cantor, A. B. (2004). Efficacy and 
cost- effectiveness of a minimal intervention to prevent smoking relapse: Dismantling the effects of amount 
of content versus c ontact. Journal of  Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 797 -808. PMID: 15482038 
  
Brandon, T. H., Simmons, V. N., Meade, C. D., Quinn, G. P., Khoury, E. L., Sutton, S. K.,  & Lee, J -H.  (2012).  
Self-help booklets for preventing postpartum smoking relapse: A randomized trial. American Journal of 
Public Health, 102, 2109 -2115. PMCID: PMC3477952 
 Brandon, T. H., Simmons, V. N., Sutton, S. K., Unrod, M., Harrell, P. T., Meade, C. D., Craig, B. M., & Meltzer, 
L. R. (2015).  Extended self -help for smoking cessation: A randomized controlled trial. Manuscript 
submitted for publication.  
 
Brislin, R. (1970).  Back -translation for cross -cultural research. Jouranl of Cross -Cultural Psychology, 1, 185-
216. 
  Buki, L.P., Salazar, S.I., Pitton V.O.  (2009).  Design elements for the development of cancer education print 
materials for a Latina/o audience.  Health Promotion Practice, 1, 564-572. 
 
Buz, J., Pérez -Arechaederra, D., Fernández -Pulido, R., & Urchaga, D. (2015). Factorial  
Structure and Measurement Invariance of the PANAS in Spanish Older Adults. The Spanish Journal Of 
Psychology , 18, 1-11. 
 
Card, J. J., Solomon, J., & Cunningham, S.D. (2011). How to adapt effective programs for use in new  contexts. 
Health Promotion Practice, 12 , 25-35. 
 
Castro, F. G., & Barrera, M. (2014). Cultural adaptation of empirically validated therapies for treating drug 
dependence: International considerations . In N. el -Guebaly et al., (eds.): Textbook of Addiction 
Treatment: International Perspectives , doi: 10.1007/978- 88-470-5322 -9_50, Springer -Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg.  
 
Castro, F.G., Barerra,  M, & Martinez,  C.R. (2004). The cultural adaptation of prevention interventions: 
Resolving tensions between fidelity and fit. Prevention Science, 5, 41-45. 
 
Castro, F. G., Barrera, M., & Steiker, L. K. (2010). Issues and challenges in the design of culturally adapted 
evidence- based interventions. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6, 213 -239. 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2008). S moking -attributable mortality, years of potential life lost,  
and productivity losses —United States, 2000–2004. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report; 57, 1226– 8. 
 
Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (2011, February 24). State Highlights . Retrieved August 
2,2014. http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/state_data/state_highlights/2010/states/florida/
 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014).  Current cigarette smoking among adults —United States, 
2005- 2012. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 63 , 29-34. 
 
28 
 Chen, E. K., Reid, M. C., Parker, S. J., & Pillemer, K. (2013). Tailoring evidence- based interventions for new 
popul ations: A method for program adaptation through community engagement. Evaluation and The  
Health Professions,  36(1) , 73–92. 
 
Chiang, K., & Borrelli, B. (2014). Income predictors of smoking cessation among Hispanics. Journal of health 
psychology,  19(7), 869- 876. 
 Chirikos, T. N., Herzog, T. A., Meade, C. D., Webb, M. S., & Brandon, T. H. (2004). Cost -effectiveness 
analysis of a complementary health intervention: The case of smoking relapse prevention. International 
Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care, 20 , 475 -480. 
 
Cromwell, J., Bartosch, W. J., Fiore, M. C., Baker, T., & Hasselblad, V. (1997).  Cost-effectiveness of the 
AHCPR guidelines for smoking.  Journal of the American Medical Association,  278, 1759 -1766.  
 
Cropsey , K. L., Trent, L. R., Clark, C.B., Stevens, E. N., Lahti, A. C., Hendricks, P. S. (2014).  
How low should you go? Determining the optimal cutoff for exhaled carbon monoxide to confirm smoking abstinence when using cotinine as reference. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 16 , 1348 -55. 
 
Curry, S. J., Ludman, E. J., & McClure, J. (2003). Self -administered treatment for smoking cessation. Journal 
of Clinical Psychology, 59, 305-319. 
 
Curry, S. J., Grothaus, L. C., McAfee, T., & Pabiniak,  C. (1998). Use and cost effectiveness of smoking -
cessation services under four insurance plans in a health maintenance organization. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 339, 673 -679. 
 
Dahmen, G., Rochon, J., König, I. R., & Ziegler, A. (2004). Sample size calculations for controlled clinical trials 
using generalized estimating equations (GEE).  Methods of information in medicine,  43(05), 451 -456. 
 Dillman, D. A. (1991). The design and administration of mail surveys.  Annual Review of Sociology, 17,   225-
249. 
 
Doak, L. G., Doak, C. C., & Meade C. D. (1996). Strategies to improve cancer education materials. Oncology  
Nursing Forum, 23, 1305 -1312.  
 
Doak C. C., Doak L. G, & Root J. H. (1996). Teaching patients with low literacy skills.  
Philadelphia, PA, J.B. Lippincott.  
 
Doolan, D. M., &  Froelicher, E. S.  (2006).  Efficacy of smoking cessation intervention among special 
populations: Review of the literature from 2000 to 2005. Nursing Research, 55(4 Suppl), S29-37. 
 Ennis, S. R., Rios -Vargas, M., & Albert, N. G.  (2011). The Hispanic population: 2010 - 2010  
Census Briefs .(US Census Report No. C2010BR -04). Washington, DC  
 
Fiore, M. C., Jaen, C. R., Baker, T. B., Bailey, W. C., Benowitz, N. L., Curry, S. J., et al. (2008). Treating 
Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Update . Clinical Practice Guideline. Rockville, MD: U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service. May 2008.  
 
Foraker, R. E., Patten, C. A., Lopez, K. N., Croghan, I.T., & Thomas, J. L. (2005). Beliefs and attitudes 
regarding smoking among young adult Latinos:  a pilot study. Preventive Medicine, 41, 126- 33.  
 Glasgow, R. E., Lichtenstein, E., & Marcus, A. C.  (2003).  Why don't we see more translation of health 
promotion research to practice? Rethinking the efficacy -to-effectiveness transition.  American Journal of 
Public Health, 93,  1261 -1267.  
 
29 
 Glasgow, R. E., Vogt, T. M., & Boles, S. M. (1999). Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion 
interventions: The RE- AIM framework. American Journal of Public Health, 89,1322- 1327.  
 
Hartmann -Boyce, J.,  Lancaster T., & Stead L. F. (2014). Print -based self -help interventions for  
smoking  cessation. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 6 Art. No.: CD001118.  
 Institute of Medicine. (2004). Health literacy: A prescription to end confusion. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press, 2004.  
 
Jha, P., Ramasundarahettige, C., Landsman, V., Rostron, B., Thun, M., Anderson, R. N., McAfee, T., & Peto, 
R. (2013). 21st -century hazards of smoking and benefits of cessation in the United States. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 368 , 341 -350. 
 
Joiner Jr., T. E., Sandin, B., Chorot, P., Lostao, L., & Marquina, G. (1997). Development and  
Factor Analytic  Validation of the SPANAS Among Women in Spain: (More) Cross -Cultural Convergence 
in the Structure of Mood. Journal Of Personality Assessment , 68, 600-615. 
 
Jones, P. S., Lee, J. W., Phillip, L. R., Zhang, Z. E., & Jaceldo, K. B. (2001).  An adaptation of Brislin's 
translational model for cross -cultural research. Nursing Research, 50, 300- 304. 
 Kagawa- Singer, M., Wellisch, D. K.,  & Durvasula, R. (1997).  Impact of breast cancer on Asian American and 
Anglo American women.  Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 21 , 449 -80. 
 Kaplan, R. C., Bangdiwala, S. I., Barnhart, J. M., Castañeda, S. F., Gellman, M. D., Lee, D. J., Pérez -Stable, E. 
J., Talavera, G. A., Youngblood, M. E., & Giachello, A. L. (2014). Smoking among U.S. Hispanic/Latino adults: The Hispanic community health study/study of Latinos. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 
46(5):496- 506. 
 
Kendzor, D. E., Businelle, M. S., Costello, T. J., Castro, Y., Reitzel, L. R., Cofta -Woerpel, L. M., & Wetter, D. 
W. (2010). Financial strain and smoking cessation among racially/ethnically diverse smokers. American 
Journal of Public Health, 100, 702 -706. 
 
Knodel, J. (1993). The design and analysis of focus group studies: A practical approach. Successful focus  
groups: Advancing the state of the art, 1 , 35-50. 
 Krueger, R. A., & Casey, M. A. (2008). Focus groups: a practical guide for applied research. 4th edition. 
California. 
 Litvin, E. B., Rojas, A., Simmons, V. N., Quinn, G .P.,  Vadaparampil, S. T.,  Gwede, C. K., Meade, C. D., 
Brandon, T. H., Jimenez, J. C., Castro, E., & Diaz, Z. (2011). Cultural acceptability of a smoking relapse prevention intervention for pregnant women in Puerto Rico: Providers’ feedback.  Hispanic Health Care 
International, 9,  117-126. 
 
Lopez, E., Simmons, V. N., Quinn, G. P., Meade, C. D., Chirikos, T. N., & Brandon, T. H. (2008). Clinical trials  
and tribulations: Lessons learned from recruiting pregnant ex -smokers for relapse prevention. Nicotine 
and Tobacco Research, 10, 87 -96. PMCID: PMC4056986 
 
Lopez -Quintero, C., Crum, R. M., & Neumark, Y. D. (2006). Racial/ethnic disparities in report of phys ician-
provided smoking cessation advice: analysis of the 2000 National Health Interview Survey, American 
Journal of Public Health, 96,  2235–2239.  
 Marcario, E., & Boyte, R. B. (2008). Translating health information effectively for Latino populations. Calif ornia 
Journal of Health Promotion, 6, 128- 137. 
 
30 
 Marcus, B. H., Lewis, B. A., Williams, D. M., Dunsiger, S., Jakicic, J. M., Whiteley, Albrecht, A.,  
E., Napolitano,  M. A., Bock, B. C. Tate, D. F., Sciamanna, C. N., & Parisi , A. F. (2007). A comparison of 
Internet and print -based physical activity interventions. Archives of Internal Medicine, 167, 944-949. 
Marin, G., Sabogal, F., Marin, B. V., Otero -Sabogal, R., & Perez -Stable, E. J. (1987). Development of a short 
acculturati on scale for Hispanics.  Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences,  9(2), 183-205. 
 
Marin, G., & Marin, B. V. (1991). Research with Hispanic populations. Applied Social Research  
Methods,  (Vol. 23). London: Sage.  
 
Marlatt, G. A. (1985). Relapse prevention: Theoretical rationale and overview of the model. In G. A. Marlatt, & 
J. R. Gordon (Eds.), Relapse prevention (pp. 3- 70). New York: Guilford.  
 Meade, C. D. (in press). Community Health Education. In M.A. Nies & M. McEwen (Eds). Community  
Health/Public Health Nursing: Promoting the Health of Populations (6th ed.). Elsevier: Philadelphia.  
 
Meade, C. D., & Byrd, J. C. (1989). Patient literacy and the readability of smoking education literature.  
American Journal of Public Health, 79 , 204 - 206. PMID: 2913844  
 
Menzie, N. S., Simmons, V. N., Quinn, G. P., Diaz, D. B., Piñeiro, B., Jimenez, J., Castro, E., &  
Brandon, T., H. (in press). Acceptability and cultural appropriateness of self -help booklets for smoking 
relapse prevention in Puerto Rico.  
 Miranda, J., Bernal, G., Lau, A., Kohn, L., Hwang, W. C., & LaFromboise, T. (2005). State of the  
science on psychosocial interventions for ethnic minorities. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology. 1,  113-
142. 
 
Morgan, D. L. (1996). Focus groups. Annual Review of Sociology, 22, 129-152. 
 
Muñoz, R. F., & Mendelson, T. (2005). Toward evidence- based interventions for diverse populations: The San 
Francisco General Hospital prevention and treatment manuals. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology,  73, 790-799. 
 Muthén, L.K., & Muthén, B.O. (2008- 2010). Mplus User’s Guide: Version 6 . Los Angeles, CA: Muthén &  
Muthén.  
 
Nath, V., Herzog, T. A., & Brandon, T. H. (2002, February).  A comparison of the contemplation ladder and the 
stages of change in a college student sample. Poster presented at the 8th annual meeting of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco, Savannah, GA. 
 
National Cancer Institute. (2008). Clearing the air: Quit smoking today . NIH Publication No. 08 -1647.  
   
National Cancer Institute. (2011). Guía: Viva de forma más saludable para usted y su familia. NIH Publication 
No. 11- 7780  
 
Nohlert, E., Helgason, A. R., Tillgren, P., Tegelberg, A., & Johansson, P. (2013). Comparison of  
the cost -effectiveness of a high - and a low-intensity smoking cessation intervention in Sweden: a 
randomized trial. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 5 , 1519 -27. 
 
Nutbeam, D. (2008). The evolving concept of health literacy, Social Science and Medicine, 67, 2072– 2078.  
 
Okuyemi , K. S., Harris, K. J., Scheibmeir, M., Choi, W. S., Powell, J., & Ahluwalia, J. S. (2002).  
Light smokers: Issues and recommendations. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 4(Suppl. 2), 103– 112. 
 
Ortuño- Sierra, J., Santarén- Rosell, M., Albéniz, A. d., &  Fonseca -Pedrero, E. (2015).  
31 
 Dimensional Structure of the Spanish Version of the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) in 
Adolescents and Young Adults. Psychological Assessment , doi:10.1037/pas0000107.   
 Oster, G., Colditz, G. A., &  Kelly, N. L. (1984). The economic costs of smoking and benefits of  
quitting for  individual smokers. Preventive Medicine, 13 , 377 -389. 
 Pulvers, K., Scheuermann, T. S. Emami, A. S., Basora B., Lou, X., Khariwala S. S., & Ahluwalia  
J. S. (2014).  Reasons f or smoking among tri -ethnic daily and nondaily smokers. Nicotine & tobacco 
Reasearch, 12, 1567- 1576.  
 Quinn, G., Ellison,  B.B., Meade,  C., Roach, C.N., Lopez,  E., Albrecht, T., Brandon, T.H.  
(2006). Adapting smoking relapse- prevention materials for pr egnant and postpartum women: formative 
research. Maternal  Child Health, J10, 235-45. 
 
Quinn, G. P., Hauser, K., Bell -Ellison, B. A., Rodriguez, N.Y., & Frías, J. L. (2006). Promoting pre- conceptional 
use of folic acid to Hispanic women: A social marketing approach. Maternal and Child Health Journal, 
10(5), 403–412. PMID: 16752094 
 
Reig-Ferrer. A., & Cepeda- Benito, A. (2007). Smoking expectancies in smokers and never smokers: An 
examination of the smoking Consequences Questionnaires – Spanish. Addictive Behaviors, 32 , 1405-
1415.  
 Resnicow, K., Baranowski, T., & Ahluwalia, J. S., & Braithwaite, R. L. (1999). Cultural sensitivity in public 
health: defined and demystified. Ethnicity and Disease. Winter; 9(1):10 –21. 
 
Roberts, R. E., Atrkisson, C. C., & Mendias, R. M. (1984). Assessing the client satisfaction  
questionnaire in English and Spanish. Hispanic Journal of Behaviorial Sciences, 6(4),  385-396. 
  
 
Rochon, J. (1998). Application of GEE procedures for sample size calculations in repeated measures 
experiments.  Statistics in medicine, 17(14), 1643- 1658.  
 
Rodriguez -Esquivel, D., Webb -Hooper, M., Baker E. A. & McNutt M. D. (2015). Culturally  
specific versus standard smoking cessation messages targeting Hispanics: An experiment. Psychology 
of Addictive  Behaviors 29, 283 -289.  
 
Ronckers,  E. T., Groot, W., & Ament, A .J. (2005). Systematic review of economic evaluations  
 of smoking  cessation: Standardizing the cost -effectiveness. Medical Decision Making,  
 25, 437 -48. 
 
Rostron, B. (2013). Smoking -Attributable Mortality by Cause in the United States: Revising the CDC's Data 
and Estimates. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 15, 238 -46. 
  
Rubin, D. B. (1987). Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys . Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 
Ryan, C.  Language Use in the United States: 2011: American Community Survey Reports,  
U.S. Census  Bureau, August 2013.  
 
Santisteban, D., Vega, R. R., & Suarez -Morales, L. (2006). Utilizing dissemination findings to help understand 
and bridge the research and practice gap in the treatment of substance abuse disorders in Hispanic 
populations. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 84, S94 -S101.  
 Schafer, J. L. (1997). Analysis of incomplete multivariate data. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall.  
 
32 
 Sheffer, C. E., Stitzer, M., Landes, R., Brackman, S. L., Munn, T. & Moore, P. (2012). Socioeconomic 
disparities in community -based treatment of tobacco dependence. American Journal of Public Health, 102 
(3) e8- e16.   
 
Sias J, Urquidi U, Bristow Z, Rodriguez J, & Ortiz M. (2008). Evaluation of smoking cessation  
behaviors and interventions among Latino smokers at low -income clinics in a US -Mexico border country. 
Addictive Behaviors,  33(2): 373–380.  
 
Simmons, V. N., Cruz, L. M., Brandon, T. H., & Quinn, G. P. (2011a). Translation and cultural adaptation of 
smoking relapse- prevention materials for pregnant and post -partum Hispanic women.  Journal of Health 
Communication International Perspectives, 16, 90- 107. PMID: 21120739  
 
Simmons, V. N., Quinn, G. P., Litvin, E. B., Rojas, A., Jiménez, J., Castro, E., Meade, C., D., & Brandon, T. H.  
(2011b).  Transcreation of validated smoking relapse- prevention booklets for use with Hispanic 
populations. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 22,  886-893. PMCID: PMC3804252 
 
Simmons, V. N., Heckman, B. W., Ditre, J. W., & Brandon, T. H. (2010). A measure of smoking abstinence 
related motivational engagement: Development and initial validation. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 12, 
432-437. PMCID: PMC2847080 
 
Simmons, V. N., Heckman, B. W., Fink, A. C., Small, B. J., & Brandon, T. H. (2013). Efficacy of an experiential,  
dissonance- based smoking intervention for college students delivered via the Internet. Journal of  
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81 , 810- 820. PMID: 23668667  
 
Simmons, V. N., Litvin, E. B., Jacobsen, P. B., Patel, R. D., McCaffrey, J. C., Oliver, J. A., Sutton, S. K., & 
Brandon, T. H. (2013). Predictors of smoking relapse in thoracic cancer and head and neck cancer  
patients. Cancer, 119, 1420- 1427. PMCID: PMC3604135 
 
Simmons, V. N., Webb, M. S., & Brandon, T. H. (2004). College student smoking: An initial test  
of an experiential dissonance- enhancing intervention. Addictive Behaviors, 29, 1129- 1136. PMID: 
15236813 
 
Smit, E. S., Evers, S. M., de Vries, H., & Hoving, C. (2013). Cost -effectiveness and cost -utility of  
 Internet -based computer tailoring for smoking cessation. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15(3) , 
e57. 
 
Smith, M. Y., Cromwell, J., DePue, J., Spring, B., Redd, W., & Unrod, M. (2007) Determining  
 the cost -effectiveness of a computer -based smoking cessation intervention in primary care. Managed 
Care, 16 ,48-55. 
 
Solomon, F .M., Eberl -Lefko, A. C., Michaels, M., Macario, E., Tesauro, G., & Rowland, J. H.   
 (2005). Development of a linguistically and culturally appropriate booklet for Latino cancer survivors: 
Lessons learned . Health Promotion Practice 6, 405-413. 
 
Solomon, J., Card, J.J., Malow, R.M. (2006). Adapting efficacious interventions: Advancing  
 translational  research in HIV prevention.  Evaluation and The  Health Professions, 29, 162-194. 
 
Song, F., Raftery, J., Aveyard, P., Hyde, C., Barton, P., & Woolacott, N. (2002). Cost - 
 effectiveness of  pharmacological interventions for smoking cessation: a literature review and a decision 
analytic  analysis. Medical Decision Making, 22(5 Suppl) , S26 -37. 
 
Sonnenfeld, N., Schappert S. M., & Lin, S. X. (2009). Racial and ethnic differences in delivery of  
tobacco- cessation services. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 36,  21-28. 
 
33 
 Spoth, R., Rohrback, L. A., Greenberg, M., Leaf, P., Brown, C. H., Fagan, A., Catalano, R. F.,  
Pentz, M. A ., Sloboda, Z., &  Hawkins, J. D. (2013). Addressing core challenges for the next generation of 
Type 2 translation research and systems: The translation science to population impact (TSci Impact) 
framework. Prevention Science, 14 (4): 319 -51. 
 Steidel, A.G., & Contreras, J. M. (2003). A new familism scale for use with Latino populations. Hispanic Journal 
of Behavioral Sciences, 25(3),  312-330. 
 U.S. Census Bureau  (2010). American community survey 1 -Year estimates:  Language spoken at 
home.  Retrieved January 19, 2012 from http://factfinder2.census.gov
 
   
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2011). HHS Action Plan to Reduce Racial  
and Ethnic Disparities: A Nation Free of Disparities in Health and Health Care.  Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services.  
 USDHHS. Healthy People 2020. http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx
 
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Disease Prevention and Health  
Promotion. Healthy  People 2020. Washington, DC. Available at 
www.healthypeople.gov/2020. 
Accessed 10/3/2014 . 
 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health. (2013).  
National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services in Health and Health Care:  A 
Blueprint for Advancing and sustaining CLAS Policy and Practice.  
Retrieved from https://www.thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/content/clas.asp  
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2008). Making health communication programs work: A  
Planner's Guide, Pink Book, Bethesda, MD: Office of Cancer Communications, National Cancer Institute.  
http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/cancerlibrary/pinkbook
 
 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2014).  The health consequences of smoking —50 years of 
progress: A report of the Surgeon General.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 
Disease Control, Center for Chronic Disease Prevention & Health Promotion, Office on Smoking & Health.  
 
Velicer, W. F., Diclemente, C. C., Rossi, J. S., & Prochaska, J. O. (1990). Relapse situations and self -efficacy: 
An integrative model. Addictive Behaviors, 15(3),  271-283. PMID: 2378287 
 
Velicer, W. F., Prochaska, J. O., Rossi, J. S., & Snow, M. G. (1992).  Assessing outcome in smoking cessation 
studies. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 23-41. 
 Vidrine, J. I., Vidrine, D. J., Costello, T. J., Mazas, C., Cofta -Woerpel, L., Mejia, L. M., & Wetter, D. W. (2009). 
The smoking consequences questionnaire: Factor structure and predictive validity among Spanish-speaking Latino smokers in the United States. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 11, 1280- 1288.  
 Vilagut G, Valderas JM, Ferrer M, Garin O, Lopez -Garcia E, Alonso J.  (2008)  Interpretation of SF -36 and SF-
12 questionnaires in Spain: physical and mental components. Med Clin ,130, 726-735. 
 Ware, J E, Kosinski, M, Keller, S D.  (1995).  A 12-item short -form health survey. Construction of scales and 
preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Medical Care, 34, 220–233. 
 Watson, D., Clark, L.A. &  Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and 
negative affect: the PANAS scales. Journal of  Personality and  Social  Psychology , 54, 1063- 1070.  
 
Webb Hooper, M., McNutt, M. D., & Baker, E. A. (in press). Psychosocial correlates of perceived stress and 
34 
 depressive symptoms among help- seeking Hispanic smokers. Journal of Health Disparities Research and 
Practice.  
 
Webb, M., Rodriguez -Esquivel, D., & Baker, E. (2010) Smoking cessation interventions among Hispanics in 
the United States: A systematic review and mini meta -analysis. American Journal of Health Promotion, 
25(2), 109-118. 
 
Wetter, D. W., Mazas, C., Daza, P., Nguyen, L., Fouladi, R. T, Li, Y., & Cofta- Woerpel , L. (2007). Reaching 
and treating Spanish -speaking smokers through the National Cancer Institute's Cancer Information 
Service. A randomized controlled trial. Cancer, 109(2 Suppl),  406-413. 
 
Wingood, G.M., DiClemente, R. J. (2008). The ADAPT -ITT model: A novel method of adapting evidence- based 
HIV interventions. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes,  47, S40-S46, 
 