[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Otteroo Case Series  
Uploaded September  28, 2021  
IRB approval date: 3/8/2018. University of Southern California Health Sciences Institutional 
Review Board (HS -17-00910)  
 
Protocol  
  
Significance  and justification for use   
  
The goal of this project is to  measure overall developmental status before and 
after Otteroo  experience in pre -locomotor infants and young children for whom a 
healthcare provider or caregiver has identified concerns about potential developmental 
delay.  We are proposing that the  Otteroo  may be a good “tool” to facilitate 
early  movement and exploration of  the ability to move and control one’s 
body.  The Otteroo  is a widely -available commercial  floatie  marketed to  families  as “a 
floatie for babies ages 8 weeks +”  (https://otteroo.com/).   
  
The Otteroo  is a floatie  which supports an infant o r young child with their head above and 
their body in water.  The Otteroo  allows them to move around in water under direct 
caregiver supervision  and within arm’s reach  without the need for the caregiver to 
physically support the infant or child. As water pr ovides a reduced -gravity environment, it 
allows infants and young children an opportunity to explore their ability to move  and 
control their bodies  more easily than when they are in a ‘typical gravity’ environment. 
Research has shown that infants are initi ally able to move their limbs against gravity in a 
stepping pattern, then go through a period of rapid weight gain that is not matched by a 
concurrent strength gain, and thus ‘lose’ the ability to step against gravity as they are not 
strong enough to lift their heavier limbs. Supporting them in water, however,  allows them 
to perform stepping movements during the period when they otherwise would not be 
strong enough  (1). While typically -developing infants move through this developmental 
progression, infants with motor delays can get ‘stuck’ in this period.  As a result  of their 
difficulty moving, they continue to  physically  grow  but may not gain the requisite strength 
and may not optimally explore their ability to move and control their bodies during this 
foundational early developmental period  (2). Children with developmental delays and 
disabilities are often recommended to participate in aquatic therapy  to supplement  clinic, 
early intervention, or school -based physical therapy or occupational therapy. One stu dy 
with 37 children ages 6 -30 months found that  the aquatic therapy plus standard early 
intervention  group demonstrated significantly greater gains in functional mobility than the 
comparison group  of children who received standard early intervention only  (3). Further, 
aquatic therapy has been explored as a useful intervention in  clinically stable newborns 
of gestational age less than 36 weeks who were hospitalized in a neonatal intensive care 
unit (4). We propose that using the  Otteroo  to allow  movement  practice in a reduced -
gravity environment  will allows infants to perform leg movements they otherwise would 
not be strong enough  to perform, and this  increased exploration and movement 
practice  may have a positive impact on their development.    
  
Approach   
  
A pilot study  sample  of up to  4 infants/young children  will participate.  A single -subject 
research design will be used: measures of infant development will be collected across a 
4-week baseline period (standard care), 4 weeks of intervention (standard care  
and Otteroo  use), and 4 weeks of reversal/retention period (standard care).   
  
Inclusion Criteria : Infants and young children who are pre -locomotor and for whom a 
healthcare provider or caregiver has identified concerns about potential developmental 
delay  (see appendix 1).     
  
Exclusion Criteria : Infants  younger than 8 weeks of age  or with body weight of more than 
35 lbs will be excluded per the specifications of use of the  Otteroo  floatie. Children who 
are able to locomote independentl y more than 4 feet will be excluded 
as prelocomotor  infants and young children are the target. Children  older than 66  months 
of age will be excluded  do to restrictions of the Ages and  Stages measurement tool. 
Infants or children with a  diagnosis of Down sy ndrome or  with a  clinical presentation of 
ligamentous laxity  will be excluded  due to concerns  about  atlanto -axial instability.  Infant 
or children without access to an appropriate water source (bathtub or pool depending on 
the size of the child) will be exc luded.  Infants or children with prior experience 
using  Otteroo  will be excluded.   
  
Participant Recruitment:     
  
The infants will be recruited  using  fliers distributed at Starfish Therapies, an early 
intervention therapy  provider  in San Mateo, CA.  Starfis h therapies may give handouts to 
potential participants they identify through looking  at their own  clinic’s  medical 
records  or by looking  at their own  clinic logs.  They are a pediatric clinic with  6 physical 
therapists,  and see approximately 10 patients pe r week who meet our inclusion 
criteria.  The caregivers  will be asked to contact the  research staff  by phone or email for 
further information about the research study, including  discussion of the exclusion 
criteria. When  caregivers  contact the  research staf f, the staff  will give more specific 
information about the study and answer any questions. If the  caregivers  choose to 
participate after the initial contact, a written consent form will be  provided  to them. This 
will allow them  to discuss their participati on with others before signing the written 
consent.  A parental consent form will be signed by a parent or legal guardian at the first 
visit, before any study procedures occur.   
  
Procedures:  Visits will take place at Starfish Therapies and last approximately  30 
minutes.   
  
At the first  visit (week 0),  the researcher  will measure the participant’s weight, overall 
development,  and motor development.  The researcher  will assess  and quantify  motor 
development by administering the  Alberta Infant Motor Scale, a  standardized, norm -
referenced observational scale of motor development  (5). The researchers  will assess 
and quantify  overall development using the Ages and Stages Questionnaire, 
a standardized, norm -referenced  caregiver -report  scale of development  (6). This is 
standard of care.   
   
At the second  visit, after a 4 -week baseline period  (week 4),  the researcher will  measure 
the participant’s weight  and administer  the Alberta Infant Motor Scale  and the Ages and 
Stages Questionnaire. This is standard of care. The researcher 
will provide  an Otteroo  floatie  to the family, along with an activity log to track  it use. 
Caregivers will report date of use, duration of use, activities performed, and child’s 
response. The researcher will refer the family to the  Otteroo website for some ideas of 
potential activities, as well as discuss  and determine  potential activities with the family. 
The researcher and family will use the Canadian Occupational Performance Measure  (7), 
a standardized method for setting an individua l goal, to set a goal relating 
to Otteroo  use. The researcher will document therapy services received, and briefly 
describe the amount and type of any therapy received.  This is for research purposes.   
  
After 4  weeks of  Otteroo  use (week 8), the researcher  will collect the Alberta Infant Motor 
Scale, the Ages and Stages Questionnaire  (all standard of care), and the Canadian 
Occupational Performance Measure  (research purposes). The researcher will collect the 
activity log  (research purposes).  The researcher will document  therapy 
services  received, and briefly describe the amount and type of any therapy 
received  (research purposes).  The family will answer survey questions about their 
experience with  Otteroo  (research purposes).  The family will keep the  Otteroo  floatie.   
  
After  4 weeks of reversal/retention period  (week 12), the researcher will administer  the 
Alberta Infant Motor Scale  and the Ages and Stages Questionnaire. This is standard of 
care.   
  
Data  Analysis . We  will calculate descriptive statistics (me an, range, coefficient of 
variation) for  all measures and  describe  the participants  over time.  The Alberta Infant 
Motor Scale is the primary outcome.  We will relate the participant’s performance at each 
time point to norm -referenced results for their age.  We will compare rate of change of 
Alberta Infant Motor Scale between weeks 0 and 4, 4 and 8, and 8 and 12. The 
Canadian  Occupational Performance Measure is a secondary outcome measure, and we 
will report whether or not goals are met between weeks 4 and 8.   
  
Potential risks   
The infant or young child may become distressed during data collection or  Otteroo  use. 
The caregiver may stop any activity at any time and soothe the infant or child.   
  
There is a small risk that the  Otteroo  will deflate  while the  child is using it (due to leaks or 
seams breaking), and being in water carries risk of drowning.  The caregiver must directly 
supervise and be within arm’s reach of the child while he or she uses the  floatie. If it starts 
to deflate, the c aregiver has been instructed in the consent form to stop using it and re -
inflate it before resuming use. If it deflates again, we will replace it.   
  
Protections   
Loss of confidentiality will be minimized by identifying all research data with the 
participa nt's study identification number, and allowing only those authorized to have 
access to the data.  REDCap, a university supported, secure data collection and storage 
site will be used for collecting and storing the participant's randomly generated study 
identification code number and identifying information and health information. All other 
files will be identified by code numbers only, not by name or by any other information 
which might identify the parent or participant. All data will be on secured, passwor d 
protected, backed up USC servers at all times.     
  
References   
  
1. Thelen E, Fisher DM. Newborn stepping: An explanation for a“ disappearing” reflex. 
Developmental Psychology. 1982;18(5):760.    
2. Kamm K, Thelen E, Jensen JL. A dynamical systems approa ch to motor 
development. Phys Ther. 1990 Dec;70(12):763 –75.   
3. McManus BM, Kotelchuck M. The Effect of Aquatic Therapy on Functional Mobility 
of Infants and Toddlers in Early Intervention. Pediatric Physical Therapy. 
2007;19(4):275 –82.   
4. Vignochi CM, Teixeira PP, Nader SS. Effect of aquatic physical therapy on pain 
and state of sleep and wakefulness among stable preterm newborns in neonatal 
intensive care units. Rev Bras Fisioter. 2010 May;14(3):214 –20.   
5. Piper MC, Darrah J.  Motor Asses sment of the Developing Infant . Philadelphia, PA: 
WB Saunders; 1994.    
6. Squires J, Twombly E, Bricker DD, Potter L. Ages and Stages Questionnaires 
User's Guide. Brookes Publishing Company; 2009. 1 p.    
7. Carswell A, McColl MA, Baptiste S, Law M, Polatajko H, Pollock N. The Canadian 
Occupational Performance Measure: a research and clinical literature review. Can 
J Occup Ther. 2004 Oct;71(4):210 –22.   
  
 