   
 
 
 
Clinical Investigation Plan (CIP)  
Zip® Surgical Skin Closure Device  
ZIPS  Study  - Zip Incision a Pproximation vs. Staple 
A prospective, randomized controlled post -market study to compare the use of the Zip® Surgical Skin 
Closure Device versus conventional staples for skin closure in subjects having underg one bilateral 
knee arthroplasty – Protocol No. 006  
Sponsor:  ZipLine  Medical, Inc.  
747 Camden Ave., Suite A,  
Campbell, CA 95008  
Phone : 1-888-326-8999  
Fax: 1-888-265-0669  
Email (non -study inquiry): customerservice@ziplinemedical.com  
Web: www.ziplinemedical.com  
 
Study 
Responsibility:  Christy Cowley, MPH  
747 Camden Ave., Suite A,  
Campbell, CA 95008  
 
Cell 408 -857-2083  
ccowley@ziplinemedical.com  
Principal 
Investigator:  Reference Section 7 .2 
Study Centers:  Reference Section 7 .2 
Date of Issue:  21Apr2015,  Version 1.0 
This protocol contains confidential information for use by the Investigators and their designated 
representatives participating in this clinical investigation. It should be held confidential and maintained in a 
secure location.  
Do not copy or distribute without written permission.  
 

 1 ZIPS Study -  Trial Protocol Synopsis  
Study Title  ZIPS  Study  - Zip Incision a Pproximation vs. Staple  
A prospective, randomized controlled post -market study to compare 
the use of the Zip® Surgical Skin Closure Device versus 
conventional staples for skin closure in subjects havi ng undergone 
bilateral knee arthroplasty – Protocol No. 006  
Overall 
Objective  The objective of this study is to evaluate the Zip Surgical Skin 
Closure device versus conventional steel staple placement when 
utilized for surgical wound closure after bi late ral unicompartmental 
(UNI) or bi lateral total knee replacement (TKA).  
Study Device  ZipLine Medical Inc., Zip Surgical Skin Closure Device  
Indication for 
Use The Zip Surgical Skin Closure Device is indicated for use during 
and after skin incision procedures to approximate skin and hold 
together the skin edges until healing can take place.  
Study Design  A prospective, non -blinded, randomized, within patient control 
study .  A total of up to 25 subjects ( targeted min. n=22) requiring 
bilateral knee arthroplasty (unicompartmental or total) will be 
enrolled.  Each subject will serve as their own control, since one 
knee closure will be  with staples, and  the other knee closure with 
Zip device. The order of patients will be randomized to receive Zip 
device on one knee and steel staples on the opposing knee.  
Number of 
Subjects  A total of up to 25 patients  (serving as their own control) will be 
enrolled.  There is anticipated patient fall out (screen failures) post 
procedure due to surgeon not knowing which procedure is required 
(total or unicompartmental) until time of surgery.  
Number of 
Sites  < 3 
Duration of 
Study  Each enrolled subject will be followed until 6  to 8 weeks post -
procedure.  
Primary 
Effectiveness 
Endpoints  Wound healing as judged by the CVAS (Cosmetic Visual Analogue 
Scale) wound healing scale  – From photos taken between 6 to 8 
weeks post op visit – to be judged by panel of Plastic Surgeon 
blinded to treatment assignments.  
 
 Secondary 
Effectiveness 
Endpoints  • Surgeon evaluation including:  
o Closure Method Satisfaction  
o  Scar Satisfaction   
o Wound Healing as judged by the surgeon using the WES 
(Wound Evaluation Scale ) at the 6 to 8 week final post op 
visit.  
• Physical Therapist  
o Range of Motion (ROM) Measurements  
• Patient  experience including:  
o Pain (General Post -Operative & Incision al) 
o Closure Method Comfort  
o Closure Method Satisfaction  
o Scar Satisfaction  
Primary 
Safety 
Endpoint  The incidence and severity of adverse  effects associated with Zip 
device  and standard steel staple  usage.  
Secondary 
Safety 
Endpoint  None  
Follow -Up 
Schedule  The study will be considered complete (with regard to the primary 
endpoint) after 22 subject s have completed the 6 to 8 - week  follow 
up visit.  
Inclusion 
Criteria  1. Patients 18 years of age and older ;  
2. Patients requiring epidermal closure after bi lateral  total or partial 
(unicompartmental) knee arthroplasty;  
3. Patients willing to be evaluated at discharge , 2 weeks,  and at the 6 to 8 
week post op.  
     
Exclusion 
Criteria  
 1. Known bleeding disorder not caused by medication  
2. Known personal or family history of keloid  formation or scar 
hypertrophy   
3. Known allergy or hypersensitivity to non -latex skin adhesives  
4. Atrophic skin deemed clinically prone to blistering  
5. Any skin disorder affecting wound healing  
6. Any other condition that in the opinion of the investigator would make a 
particular patient unsuitable for this study  
   
Study Administration  
Manager 
Clinical 
Affairs  Christy Cowley  
747 Camden Ave., Suite A,  
Campbell, CA 95008  
ccowley@ziplinemedical.com  
 408-857-2083 (cell)  
 2 Table of Contents  
 
3 ZIPS STUDY -  TRIAL PROTOCOL SYN OPSIS  2 
4 TABLE OF CONTENTS  5 
5 INTRODUCTION  7 
5.1 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  7 
5.2 SUMMARY OF FINDINGS FROM PREVIOUS STUDIES  7 
5.3 RISKS AND BENEFITS  10 
6 DEVICE DESCRIPTION  11 
6.1 DEVICE OVERVIEW  11 
6.2 REGULATORY STATUS  13 
6.3 INDICATION FOR USE 13 
6.4 DEVICE LABELING  13 
6.5 COMMERCIAL STATUS AND CLINICAL EXPERIENCE  13 
7 STUDY OBJECTIVE  14 
7.1 SAMPLE SIZE 14 
7.2 INVESTIGATIONAL SITES 14 
8 STUDY POPULATION  16 
8.1 SELECTION CRITERIA  16 
8.2 WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS  16 
9 WRITTEN INFORMED CON SENT  17 
10 STUDY PROCEDURES AND  ENROLLMENT  17 
10.1  DURATION OF SUBJECT PARTICIPATION  17 
10.2  ENROLLMENT  17 
10.3  VISIT SCHEDULE  17 
10.4  STUDY PROCEDURES  18 
10.5  FOLLOW -UP 19 
10.6  STUDY EXIT 20 
11 STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS  20 
11.1  ANALYSIS POPULATIONS AND DATA HANDLING CONVENTIONS  20 
11.2  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN 20 
11.3  SAMPLE SIZE JUSTIFICATION  21 
12 DATA MANAGEMENT – DATA COLLECTION AND PR OCESSING  21 
13 MONITORING PROCEDURE S 22 
13.1  MONITORING  22 
 14 QUALITY CONTROL AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  22 
14.1  SITE TRAINING  22 
14.2  AUDITS AND INSPECTIONS  22 
15 ADVERSE EVENTS  23 
15.1  GENERAL  23 
15.2  REPORTING OF SERIOUS AND NON-SERIOUS ADVERSE  EVENTS  24 
15.3  DEVICE FAILURES AND MALFUNCTIONS  25 
16 ETHICAL CONSID ERATIONS  25 
16.1  TRIAL CONDUCT  25 
16.2  INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  25 
16.3  INFORMED CONSENT FORM  26 
16.4  AMENDING THE PROTOCOL  26 
16.5  EMERGENCY ACTIONS  26 
16.6  PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS  26 
16.7  COVERAGE OF EXPENSES  27 
16.8  CONFIDENTIALITY  27 
17 STUDY ADMINISTRATION  27 
17.1  PRE-STUDY DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS  27 
17.2  SOURCE DOCUMENTATION  27 
17.3  RECORD RETENTION  28 
17.4  CRITERIA FOR TERMINATING STUDY  28 
17.5  CRITERIA FOR SUSPENDING /TERMINATING A STUDY CENTER  28 
17.6  INVESTIGATOR RESPONSIBILITIES  28 
18 PUBLICATION POLICY  29 
19 BIBLIOGRAPHY  29 
20 APPENDICES  30 
20.1  SAMPLE INFORMED CONSENT FORM  30 
20.2  INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE (IFU)  30 
 
 3 Introduction  
3.1 Background and Rationale  
Surgical site wound closure plays a vital role in post -operative success. This effect is magnified with 
commonly performed elective procedures such as knee arthroplasty [1].  Sutures and staples are most 
commonly used based on surgeon preference and wound location. Staples are frequently used due to their 
deployment speed advantage over sutures.  It has been suggested that the ideal method of wound/incision 
closure should be fast and non -traumatic, be associated with a low incidence  of dehiscence and infection, 
and should yield acceptable cosmetic results; and while sutures and staples are present ly the most co mmon 
method of surgical closure , they do not demonstrate many of these properties  [1,2]. Therefore, developing 
new methods to reduce overall treatment time while producing comp arable or potentially improved cosmetic 
scar results and maintaining low complication rates has obvious benefits.  
ZipLine Medical, Inc. has developed a novel, non -invasive skin closure device  called  “Zip Surgical Skin 
Closure”  to replace sutures, staples a nd glue for closure of the skin layer for surgical incisions or laceration 
repair.  The device is FDA Class I, 510(k) Exempt and began commercial use in the USA in April 2013.  
The device is designed to provide closure speed superior to sutures, while resu lting in a suture -like cosmetic 
outcome.  Both pre -clinical feasibility study data and feedback from over 2000  human cases during the 
device’s commercial use in the USA suggest that these design intentions  are correct.  This study will test 
these assertion s in a controlled clinical setting, with the goal of providing results with statistical significance.     
We anticipate this clinical study to be completed within 12 months  from site initiation/training to site 
closure.  
3.2 Summary of Findings from Previous Studies  
3.2.1  Pre-clinical Studies  
Preclinical feasibility testing of the ZipLine technology using a chronic porcine model was conducted in 
2010.  Surgical incisions were closed either with the ZipLine technology, or absorbable subcuticular 
sutures.  Devices were removed at two weeks post -operatively, and resulting scars were evaluated at 6 -
weeks by a blind ed panel of four board -certified plastic surgeons.  Results revealed excellent cosmesis when 
compared to subcuticular suture controls.  
Below is an ex ample of comparative outcomes at 2 weeks  post-op: 
  
ZipLine Closure  Subcuticular Suture Closure  
 
The Cosmetic Visual Analog Scale (CVAS) and ordinal Wound Evaluation Scale (WES) were used to 
evaluate photographs of each scar from the test subjects.  Evaluators were blinded to the type of closure 
method used for each wound.   
 

  Surgical Incision Closure  
  Closure Mechanism  Avg WES  Avg 
CVAS  
Subject 
1 Controls, n=2  5.25 83.5 
ZipLine 10cm, n=4  5.95 92.75  
Subject 
2 Controls, n=2  5.90 84.5 
ZipLine 10cm, n=4  5.95 93.0 
  
Skin Excision Closure  
  Closure Mechanism  Avg WES  Avg 
CVAS  
Subject 
1 Controls, n=2  5.55 89 
ZipLine excision, n=1  6.00 88 
Subject 
2 Controls, n=1  5.50 89 
ZipLine excision, n=1  6.00 88 
  
These results suggest that incisions and excisions closed using ZipLine technology can result in at least 
equivalent c osmesis when compared to suture closure.   
 
Histology  
Histological analysis was performed on sample scars from both test and control groups.  
Surgical Incision Closure  
  
Subcuticular Suture Closure  ZipLine Closure  
  

 Skin Excision Closure  
  
Subcuticular Suture Closure  ZipLine Closure  
  
H&E staining was performed on representative cross -sections of incisions closed with traditional suture 
techniques vs. the ZipLine device.  The width and depth of the resulting scars as well as the degree of local 
inflammatory response were evaluated by a pathologist  blinded to the closure method .  The degrees of 
scarring and inflammation were deemed to be qualitatively equivalent between the two groups.  
This was an internal feasibility study and the results have not been published.  
  
3.2.2  Clinical Studies  
Mt. Sinai School of Medicine - 
A randomized, controlled, prospective post -market study was recently completed  at Mt. Sinai School of 
Medicine’s Division of Mohs, Reconstructive, and Cosmetic Surgery .  The study compared  suture control to 
an earlier variant of the Zip Surgical Skin Closure device for skin cancer excision .  The manuscript has been 
completed and submitted to a peer -reviewed journal for publication.  
Preliminary clinical study results from this study were presented at the 16th Annual Moun t Sinai Winter 
Symposium on Advances in Medical and Surgical Dermatology which took place Dec. 6 -8, 2013 in New 
York.  
Hooman Khorasani, M.D.,  Chief of the Division of Mohs, Reconstructive, and Cosmetic Surgery at Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, and princip al investigator for the study presented the preliminary results to an 
audience of over 400 dermatological surgeons.  He is deeply involved in minimal scar wound repair research 
and has done extensive research in this area of scar -less wound healing. He is currently conducting two 
clinical trials addressing improved scarring after surgery.  

   
“In the study, the ZipLine  device produced similar cosmetic outcomes to a traditional suture closure while 
significantly reducing the treatment time, which can in turn reduce the overall cost of the procedure.  In 
addition, since with the ZipLine there are no sutures to remove, thi s limited the need for immediate patient 
return, which can benefit both the patient and clinic.  The patient can instead return later when the wound is 
more healed,” said Dr. Khorasani.  The preliminary data suggested a 57% reduction in wound closure 
proce dure time when using the ZipLine device instead of sutures.   
UC San Diego CIED (Pacemaker) Study  – 
A blinded, controlled and randomized study is currently underway at UC San Diego. Most cases have 
already been completed with promising results. A total of 40 patients underwent pacemaker or defibrillator 
insertions, and skin closure was randomly assigned to either subcuticular sutures or the Zip Surgical Skin 
Closure device. Primary endpoints for the study are closure time and cosmesis.  
The Zip Surgical Skin  Closure Device is an FDA Class I, 510(k) Exempt device, and no clinical studies 
were required  for regulatory clearance.  The aforementioned clinical studies are post -market studies  aimed at 
providing statistically significant performance data regarding th e Zip device.  
3.3 Risks and Benefits  
3.3.1  Risks  
Complications that may occur include:  
• Allergic response  
• Infection  
• Dehiscence requiring intervention  
• Device failure / malfunction  
• Edema  
• Wound site pain / discomfort  
• Excessive scarring  including:  
o Step-off 
o Contour irre gularities  
o Excessive distortion  
o Poor cosmetic appearance  
Previous evaluations have not shown any additional risks in comparison to those associated with existing 
wound closure methods.  
3.3.2  Benefits  
The potential benefits of the Zip Surgical Skin Closure device over staples  include: 
• Improved cosmetic outcome  

 • Equivalent adverse event (e.g., dehiscence, infection) occurrence  
• Greater patient satisfaction  
• Reduced risk of surgical site infection due to the ZIP device’s non-invasive application  
• Reduced number and expertise (MD vs. PA)  of resources required for  closure   
This study is intended to measure the result of some or all of these benefits . 
 
 
4 Device Description  
4.1  Device Overview  
ZipLine Medical, Inc. has developed a novel, non -invasive skin closure device called “Zip  Surgical Skin 
Closure” to replace sutures, staples and glue for closure of the skin layer for surgical incisions or laceration 
repair.  The device is designed to provide closure speed superior to sutures,  while resulting in a suture -like 
cosmetic outcome.  Both pre -clinical feasibility study data and feedback from over 2000  human cases during 
the device’s commercial use in the USA suggest that these design intentions  are correct.  This study will test 
these assertions in a controlled clinical setting, with the goal of providing results with statistical significance.     
The Zip device is a single use, sterile medical device.  
 
 
Figure 1. Zip Surgical Skin Closure Device  
 
The Zip Sur gical Skin Closure Device is applied to clean, dry skin after deeper tension -relieving (i.e., 
dermal or subcutaneous) sutures have been applied.  
The device adheres to the skin adjacent to an incision by use of pressure -sensitive skin adhesives.  A 
combinat ion of acrylic and hydrocolloid adhesives are used to provide a skin -friendly environment while 
providing the necessary tack to maintain skin adhesion during the recommended wear time of the device (7 -
14 days).  

  
Figure 2. Adjusting Incision Closure Tension  
 
The device remains o n the skin for the recommended 7 -14 days.  During this period, patients may shower 
(but not soak in a tub or pool) with the device on.  The device is removed by lifting the  edge of the device 
and gently peeling along the incision, taking care not to apply stress to the incision.  If there is a risk of skin 
stripping, an adhesive removal agent may be used during removal.  
 
 
Figure 3. Key Components of  the Zip Surgical Skin Closure Device  
In addition to the pressure -sensitive adhesives, the device’s closure and force distribution components are 
made up of polyurethane monofilm, polyethylene tape, polyester and nylon.  
Key Device Elements  
Company Proprietary Information 
 16 Adjustable Strap 
Releasable Lock 
Load Distributing Link 
Polyurethane Skirt 
Hydrocolloid Adhesive 
Release mark 
and strap 
tether 

 After application, the surgeon appro ximates the incision edges and tensions the wound by adjusting the 
ratcheting straps located along the device.  Once the desired tension is achieved, the excess strap ends are 
trimmed with scissors, and a conventional absorptive dressing may be applied.   
4.2 Regulatory Status  
The Zip Surgical Skin Closure is a FDA Class I, 510(k) Exempt device.  
In 2010, ZipLine Medical, Inc. submitted a “513(g)” request for product classification to the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA).  In July 2010, ZipLine Medical re ceived a letter from the FDA indicating that 
FDA reviewers “ believe the ZipLine 1 System falls within Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 
880.5240, Medical adhesive tape and adhesive bandage (Product Code - KGX).  A Medical adhesive tape 
and a dhesive bandage is a Class I type device, exempt from the premarket notification [510(k)] 
requirements of the Act, subject to the limitations of the exemption found in 21 CRF 880.9.”  
Quality System Regulations:  The Zip Surgical Skin Closure Devices have b een developed and are 
manufactured in full compliance with FDA Title 21 CFR Part 820 Quality System Regulations, including 
design controls, document controls, purchasing controls, identification and traceability, production and 
process controls, acceptance  activities, nonconforming product, corrective and preventive action, labeling 
and package control, handling, storage, distribution and installation, record keeping, servicing, and statistical 
techniques.  
Origin of Manufacture:  The Zip ® brand Surgical Ski n Closure Devices are manufactured in the USA.  
Company Registration:  ZipLine Medical, Inc. is registered with the FDA in compliance with Title 21 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 807, Subparts A -D. 
4.3 Indication For Use  
The Zip  Surgical Skin Closure De vice is indicated for use during and after skin incision procedures to 
approximate skin and hold together the skin edges until healing can take place.  
4.4 Device Labeling  
The Zip Surgical Skin Closure Devices are labeled  in full compliance with FDA Title 21 CF R Part 820 
Quality System Regulations .  Each device label includes the device name, part number, lot number and 
expiration (use by) date.  The devices are provided sterile, each in a sealed pouch designed for aseptic 
handoff into a sterile field.  The devices are provided in boxes of 10 individually packaged devices, and a 
copy of the device Instructions For Use (IFU) accompanies each box of 10 devices.    
4.5 Commercial Status and Clinical Experience  
The Zip device has  been commercially available since April 2013, with over 2000  clinical cases conducted 
in the USA, and  approximately 60% of these cases being orthopedic procedures .  Feedback fro m these cases 
includes the following:   
• Orthopedic surgeons generally  close in several layers, including a deep dermal layer.  
• Devices a re typically removed at 10 -14 days.   
• Orthopedic surgeons have indicated that they  are impressed with the ease of applicat ion 
at the end of a case; in some cases  surgeo ns delegated  skin closure with the Zip  to an 
assistant, such as a Physician’s Assistant in the sterile field.  They also felt that the 
outcomes were excellent at the time of removal.  
• Orthopedic surgeons  liked t he ability to cut the device to match the incision size  and to 
combine devices for longer incisions . 
 
 
 5 Study Objective  
The primary objective of this post -market study is to evaluate scar appearance / cosmesis 
associated with the use of the Zip Surgical Skin Closure versus conventional staples when utilized 
for surgical wound closure after bilateral knee arthroplasty ( unico mpartmental or total) .  For safety 
analysis, the rate of adverse events up to 8 weeks post-surgery  will be compared between the 
ZipLine Surgical Skin Closure and standard staples.  
5.1 Sample Size  
A total of up to 2 5 subjects  (targeted min. n=22)  requiring bilateral knee arthroplasty 
(unicompartmental or total)  will be enrolled.  There is anticipated patient fall out (screen 
failures) post procedure due to surgeon not knowing exactly which procedure is required 
(total or unicompartmental) until ti me of surgery. Subjects who are initially enrolled in the 
study and surgery results in  a total knee on one side and a unicompartmental on the other 
side will be exited from the study and not included in the final analysis. Each subject will 
serve as their own control since one knee closure will be with staples, and the other knee 
closure with Zip  device .  The order of patients will be randomized to receive Zip device 
on one knee and steel staples on the opposing knee.  
 
 
5.2 Investigational Sites  
 
NAME  ADDRESS  CONACT INFORMATION  
SITE 1  
 Shelbourne Knee Center  
1815 N. Capital Ave., Suite 600  
Indianapolis, IN 46202  
317 924 8636 (office phone)  
317 921 0230 (office fax)  Rodney Benner, MD  
Principal Investigator  
317 924 8636  
RBenner@fixknee.com  
 
Tinker Gray, MA, ELS  
Research Director/Medical Writer  
tgray@fixknee.com  
317 924 8655  
 
Heather Freeman, PT, DHS  
Research Coordinator  
hfreeman@fixknee.com  
317 624 8417  
 
Heather Garrison  
hgarrison@fixknee.com  
317 924 8676  
 
Diane Davidson  
ddavidson@fixknee.com  
317 924 8670  
  
Figure 4. Schematic of Study Design  

 6 Study Population  
6.1 Selection Criteria  
The following pages outline the specific inclusion and exclusion criteria for the study. Before the s tudy 
inclusion, a subject  must meet all of the inclusion and exclusio n criteria.   
6.1.1  Inclusion Criteria  
All subjects are required to meet the following inclusion criteria in order to be considered eligible for 
participation in this study:  
Inclusion 
Criteria  1. Patients 18 years of age and older;  
2. Patients requiring epidermal closure after bi lateral total or partial 
(unicompartmental) knee arthroplasty;  
3. Patients willing to be evaluated at discharge , 2 weeks  and 6  or 8 -weeks post 
op. 
6.1.2  Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects will be excluded from participating in this study if they meet any of the following exclusion criteria 
prior to initiation of the Zip Surgical Skin Closure Device . 
Exclusion 
Criteria  1. Known bleeding d isorders not caused by medication ; 
2. Known person al or family history of keloid  formation or scar hypertrophy ; 
3. Known allergy or hypersensitivity to non -latex skin adhesives ; 
4. Atrophic skin deemed clinically prone to blistering ; 
5. Any skin disorder affecting wound healing ; 
6. Any other condition that in the opinion of the investigator would make a particular 
subject  unsuitable for this study . 
 
6.2 Withdrawal of Subjects  
Subject s may withdraw from the study at any time, with or without reason and without prejudice to further 
treatment. In all cases of withdrawal, the reason(s) for withdrawal (if given) will be recorded upon study 
termination.  
In addition, the investigator may withdraw the subject due to any of the following situations:  
• adverse event ; 
• any other reason determine d by the investigator to be in the best interest of the subject.  
Subjects withdrawn due to an adverse event should be followed until the event has been resolved or is stable, 
if at all possible.  
  
  
7 Written Informed Consent  
Written Informed Consent must b e obtained for all subject s who are potential study candidates before any 
study -specific tests or procedures are performed.  
The medical records of patients who are scheduled in clinic may be screened to prio r to consent to assess 
eligibility for the study.  Patients who meet general entry criteria will be asked to sign the study -specific, 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) -approved Informed Consent form before any study -specific tes ts or 
procedures are performed.   
If the patient fails to meet study eligibility  criter ia or the patient’s eligibility changes prior to randomization, 
the patient will be considered a screen failure and their participation will not count toward enrollment for the 
study. A Screening/Enrollment Log will be maintained to document select information about candidates who 
fail to meet the entry criteria.  
 
8 Study Procedures and Enrollment  
8.1 Duration of Subject Participation  
Subjects enrolled in the study will participate until the Zip device  and staples are  removed from the subject  
and then continue participation until the final follow -up point  (between 6 and 8 weeks post op) .  
8.2 Enrollment  
Subjects that meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria will be invited to participate in the study and sign the 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) or Et hics Committee (EC) approved informed consent form.  All subjects 
must provide written informed consent before undergoing any study related activity.  
Subjects that meet all the eligibility criteria will be enrolled in the study and will serve as their own control. 
Subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive both the Zip device  treatment and the staples on each 
knee.  
8.3 Visit Schedule  
The following table outlines the required study assessments.  
Table 1.  Study Event Schedule  
 Before  
Procedure  Uni/TKA 
Procedure - 
Zip device 
or staple 
control   
Placement  Discharge  
0-3 days Post 
Procedure  14 days (+/ -1 
week)  post 
Procedure  6-8 weeks ** 
(+/-4 days ) post 
Procedure  
Study Initiation:  X     
Informed Consent  X     
Demographics/ Medical 
History  X     
Clinical Status 
evaluation/site evaluation 
prior to wound closure 
device placement  X     
Inclusion / Exclusion Criteria 
Assessment  X     
Left/Right Knee 
Randomization to Zip device  
or staples   X     
 Photographs Taken    X* X X 
Adverse 
Events/Complications   X X X X 
Physician Evaluations 
(Satisfaction )   X  X 
Physical Therapist 
Evaluations (ROM)  X   X X 
Patient Evaluations(Pain, 
Comfort, Satisfaction)  X  X X X 
Cosmetic outcome (CVAS , 
WES )    X X 
Study Exit Form -CRF      X 
*Optional  
**Final visit will take place between week 6 and week 8 post surgery depending on surgeons standard visit 
schedule.  
8.4 Study Procedures  
 
8.4.1  Pre-Procedure  
Prior to the subject’s scheduled procedure, obtain informed consent, a medical history , pain assessment, 
ROM  and record the subject’s demographic (age, race, sex and date of birth) and baseline information 
(height, weight ). Patient’s medical records may be  screened prior to obtainin g consent to assess eligibility 
for the study.  
(Please reference Figure 4 – Schematic of Study Design ) 
 
8.4.2  Randomization – Wound Closure Device Placement  
All subject s will be screened for inclusion/exclusion criteria by study site personnel .   
Once the screening and consent process is completed, subject s will be randomized to receive the Zip device 
(Treatment Group) on either the right or left knee by opening one of the sealed envelopes containing a 
randomization card.  The subject will receive the staples (Control Group) on the opposing knee.  The subject  
is considered enrolled into the study upon randomization and the subject  disposition will be accounted for in 
study reports.    
8.4.3  Procedure  
For consented subjects that meet the eligib ility criteria, record the relevant data regarding their procedure.  
Record the following procedure information:  
• Treatment and  control  sides  
• Length of incision s 
• Note: Subjects who require a total knee on one side and a unicompartmental on the other side wi ll not 
be included in the final analysis  and should be exited from the study.  
8.4.4  Wound Closure Procedure / Protocol  
The Zip device placement will be carried out following a standard protocol as described in the  Instructions 
for Use (IFU)  
8.4.5  Data to be collected at time of procedure  and/or prior to discharge:  
• Closure Method Satisfaction (Surgeon Rating)  
 • Pain (Subject Rating) - A 11  point Numerical Rating  Scale rating pain from No Pain (0)  to Worst  Pain  
Imaginable  (10) will be used to measure general pre and post -operative  pain and specific incision al pain.  
• Any complicati ons/adverse events  
• High resolution digital photographs of any preexisting scar or unusual skin appearance at the incision 
site and immediately after incision closure  (optional)  
8.4.6  Data to b e collected at follow up visits  
While perfor ming the 2 week follow up visit , record the following information:  
• Cosmetic Outcome (Surgeon Rating)  
o Wound Evaluation Scale (WES) – The surgeon will conduct a follow up evaluation of the 
wound using the WES assessment. The WES evaluates six clinical variables including 
incision edges, contour irregularity, width, edge inversion, inflammation and overall 
cosmesis.  
• Any complicati ons/adverse events  
• Range of Motion Measurements  
• High definition photos will be taken of the incision/scar area s. 
• Closure Method Comfort (Subject Rating)  
o A 5 point Likert Scale ranging from Very Comfortable  to Very Uncomfortable  
• Pain (Subject Rating)  
o A 11 point Numerical Rating  Scale rating pain from No Pain (0)  to Worst Pain Imaginable 
(10) will be used to measure general post - operative pain and specific incision al pain 
While performing the final  follow up visit  (between week 6 and week 8) , record the following information:  
• Range of Motion Measurements (Physical Therapist Ratings)  
• Pain (Subject Rating)  
o A 11 point Numerical Rating Scale rating pain from No Pain (0)  to Worst Pain Imaginable 
(10) will be used to measure general post - operative pain and specific incisional pain  
• Cosmetic Outcome  (Subject & Surgeon Ratings)  
o Scar Satisfaction - A  5 point Likert Scale ranging from Very Satisfied  to Very Dissatisfied   
o Scar Assessment - A 10 point Visual Analog Scale rating scar cosmesis from 0=Best 
Expected Scar  to 10=Worst Scar 
o Wound Evaluation Sca le (WES) – The surgeon will conduct a follow up evaluation of the 
wound using the WES assessment. The WES evaluates six clinical variables including 
incision edges, contour irregularity, width, edge inversion, inflammation and overall 
cosmesis.  
o Cosmetic Visual Analogue Scale (CVAS) – High definition photos will be taken of the 
incision/scar area at the final follow -up visit. Photos will be collected and evaluated using a 
VAS Scar Score by an objective independent panel (not affiliated with the st udy site) of up to 
5 plastic surgeons.  
8.5 Follow -up 
The subject should be queried before discharge regarding any discomfort experienced after Zip device  and 
staple  use.  After removal of  both the Zip device  and staples  the status of the wound s should be asses sed.  
Any Adverse Events  should be noted. These data will be captured on the Case Report Forms.   High 
resolution digital photographs should be taken after closure device removal (day 14) and at final 6 or 8 week  
follow -up visit.  A user survey will be prov ided and will be required to be filled out as part of the follow -up.  
 Scar / cosmetic appearance will be evaluated on a  visual analogue scales (CVAS). Physician and patient  
satisfaction with  the closure technique s and the scar appearance s will be evaluated . 
8.6 Study Exit  
Once the subject has completed the final follow -up visit or has withdrawn  early , they should be exited from 
the study .  The date of exit and subject status should be recorded on the Case Report Form.  
 
9 Statistical Considerations  
9.1  Analysis Populations and Data Handling Conventions    
9.1.1  Effectiveness Intent -to-Treat (ITT) Population  
All subjects will be included in effectivenes s ITT analyses according to the randomized  order of patients  
for treatment assignment s, including the dermal closure procedure, regardless of protocol deviations.   
9.1.2  Effectiveness  Per Protocol Population  
The effectiveness per protocol population includes a ll subjects completing Zip Surgical Skin Closure  and 
standard dermal closure ( Staple ) treatments per protocol.  The anal ysis will be p erformed according to the 
actual treatments received, including the dermal closure procedure.  
9.1.3  Safety  
All subjects who rece ive any portion of the Zip Surgical Skin Closure  treatment or control  (staple)  treatment 
will be included in safety analysis and analyzed by actual treatment received.  
9.1.4  Missing Data  
Missing or loss data will not be included in the analysis.  
9.2 Statistical Anal ysis Plan  
9.2.1  General Summary  
CVAS summary statistical results will include , averages  standard deviation, range, and Coefficient of 
Variation (CV s) will be reported for both the control and treatment .  Results will include s ignificance testing  
(t test) with calculated p value(s ).  Graphic representation of data  with distribution analysis of CVAS results  
will also be presented and summarize .  All variables of interest including subject demographics, baseline 
characteristics, effectiveness and safety endpo ints will be summarized . 
9.2.2  Effectiveness  
11.2.2.1. Primary Effectiveness Analyses  
There is one primary endpoint  for the study, i.e. Cosmetic Visual Analogue Scale (CVAS) for incision 
appearance at the final (6 to 8 week ) follow -up evaluation  for gathering C VAS scores .  The purpose is to 
reveal  superior cosmesis results of Zip device  in comparison to standard staple closure . The sample size 
determined , per Section  7, for this study is up to 25  patients . 
 
CVAS  
The hypothesis for cosmesis is that use of the Zip Surgical Skin Closure device  will result in CVAS  results  
that are significantly superior  to standard staples  administered .  A 1-sided  paired  “t” test will be performed 
to reject the H0 with >95% confidence . Alpha Error for the 1 -sided test = 0. 025.   
The assumption (hypothesis)  for CVAS is :    
H0:  Zipline CVAS scores  will not be superior to  CVAS scores for staples.  
HA: Zipline CVAS scores will be superior to CVAS s cores for s taples.  
 Since CVAS scores are measured on a 0 – 10 Likert scale for quality of closure, a distribution analysis will 
also be performed with summary statistics to show that the incisions closed with the Zip devices  result in a 
cosmetically superior  scar as compared to th e incisions closed with staples.  
 
11.2.2.2  Secondary “Effectiveness” Endpoints Analyses  
Secondary effectiveness endpoints include surgeon and patient closure method satisfaction, scar appearance 
satisfaction and patient pain and comfort surveys. All  results will be summarized by treatment.  
9.2.3  Safety  
Cumulative adverse events from time of closure to final visit ( 6 to 8 weeks  post op)  will be collected, 
analyzed and  summarized by  closure  treatment .   Separate tables will be constructed for (a) all reported 
adverse events, (b) adverse events reported as closure device related, and /or (d) serious adverse events.   
The primary safety analysis will be the overall comparison between Zip and staple  adverse events.  
 
9.3 Sample Size Justification  
 
Since this is a Bilateral Study, with CVAS scores (Scores:   0 – 10), a paired “t” significant test is the most 
appropriate test as there is only one variable changing with the patients, i.e., type of  closure device.    A 
paired “t” test has more statistical power as well, and is more appropriate since the results will be comparing 
the treatment and control in a paired fashion.  
The targeted  minimum sample size of  n=22 subjects (paired observations) was determined assuming  an 
average difference (∆)  > 1.0, an hypothesized standard deviation of ~1.5, with the Power of Test  set at 
90%.   Alpha Error for the test of differences = 0.025. 
 
10 Data Management – Data Collection and Processing  
Conventional paper -based CRFs will be used.   Investigators are responsible for the accurate completion and 
timely submission of the data collected during the study.  All data from the study will be entered into CRFs.  
Any data issues are to be promptly addressed with the investigator by the  sponsor  or designee .  Investigator 
and staff training will take place prior to subject enrollment  to ensure that complete, accurate and timely data 
are submitted, that protocol requirements are followed and that complications, adverse events and adverse 
device ef fects are correctly reported and investigated, as appropriate.  Investigators are to maintain all source 
documents as required by the protocol, including laboratory results, supporting medical records, and signed 
Informed Consent forms.  The source documen ts will be used during the regular monitoring visits to verify 
information from the database against data contained on the completed CRFs.  
The Principal Investigator must maintain detailed records on all subjects who sign the Informed Consent and 
begin th e pre -procedure evaluation.  Data for enrolled subjects will be entered into CRFs provided by the 
Sponsor.  All data should be entered completely, promptly and legibly.  For source documents, corrections 
should be made in a manner that does not obscure or eliminate the original error, by striking through the 
original data with one line, and initialing and dating the change, along with the reason for the change (if not 
obvious).   
Study Exit CRFs are completed for all enrolled subjects, regardless if they di d or did not complete the study 
(e.g., subject discontinuation, study termination).  
 
 
 11 Monitoring Procedures  
11.1 Monitoring  
Monitoring visits to the clinical sites will be made periodically during the study, to ensure that all aspects of 
the current, approved protocol/amendment(s) are followed. Original source documents will be reviewed for 
verification of data in the case repo rt forms . The Investigator/institution guarantees direct access to original 
source documents by ZipLine  Medical Inc. personnel  and their designees .  
It is important that the Investigator and relevant study personnel are available during the monitoring visi ts 
and that sufficient time is devoted to the process.  
Phone contacts and site visits will be conducted to ensure that the protocol is being followed and that any 
protocol deviations are properly documented.  Clinical monitoring will include a verification  that Informed 
Consent was properly obtained for all enrolled study participants, a review of clinical records for accuracy 
and completeness, resolution of missing or inconsistent results and a review of source documents.  The 
clinical monitor will verify that the Case Report Forms (CRFs) are in agreement with the source 
documentation and other records.  The investigator will make available to the clinical monitor for review all 
Informed Consent documents, access to completed CRFs, source documentation, ori ginal laboratory data 
and other relevant records for all enrolled subjects at the site.  It is important that the investigator and other 
relevant site personnel are available for consultation with the clinical monitors during the monitoring visits 
and that  sufficient time is devoted at the site to the monitoring process.  
Additionally, telephone and/or e -mail contact will be conducted on a regular basis with the investigator and 
the site staff to ensure that the protocol is being followed and to address any issues that may occur during the 
course of the study.  
If a deficiency is noted during an on -site visit (or at any other time during the course of the study), the 
clinical monitor is required to discuss the situation with the investigator and the Sponsor (i f required) to 
secure compliance.  Any protocol deviations will be reported to the IRB within the required timelines.  
 
 
12 Quality Control and Quality Assurance  
12.1 Site Training  
To ensure accurate, complete, and reliable data, the Sponsor or its representatives will provide instructional 
material to the study sites, as appropriate;  
• Instruct the Investigators and study personnel on the protocol, the completion of the CRFs, 
and stu dy procedures  
• Communicate regularly with site personnel via mail, email, telephone, and/or fax  
• Make periodic visits to the study site.  
During those visits, the Sponsor or its representatives will monitor the subject data recorded in the paper 
CRFs against source documents at the study site.  
   
12.2 Audits and Inspections  
The Principal Investigator for the site will also allow representatives of the governing IRB to inspect all 
study records, CRFs, and corresponding portions of the subject’s office and/or hospita l medical records at 
regular intervals throughout the study.  These inspections are for the purpose of verifying adherence to the 
protocol, and completeness and exactness of the data being transcribed onto the CRF . 
 The Principal Investigator for the site w ill inform the Sponsor or the Sponsor’s designee in advance if they 
are to be audited or inspected by any regulatory agencies.  The Sponsor or the Sponsor’s designee will also 
inform the site if they are made aware of a pending audit or inspection by a reg ulatory agency.  
 
 
13 Adverse Events   
13.1 General  
 
All adverse events (AE) and serious adverse events (SAE) will be monitored from the time of treatment 
through 3 months.  
An AE is defined as any undesirable clinical occurrence in a subject  whether or not it is c onsidered to be 
device related. In addition, the definition of AE applies to any event with an onset post study procedure or to 
any underlying diseases, present at baseline, that exacerbate in severity post study procedure. Therefore, an 
underlying disease  that was present at the time of enrollment is not reported as an AE, but any increase in 
the severity of the underlying disease is to be reported as an AE. This definition includes events occurring 
during the follow -up period.  
All reported AEs must be rec orded. A description of the event, including the start date, resolution date, 
action taken, and the outcome should be provided, along with the Investigator’s assessment of the 
relationship between the AE , the study treatment and the study procedure.  
  The following definitions for rating severity of adverse events will be used:  
Mild  Awareness of signs or symptoms, but easily tolerated; are of minor irritant type; 
causing no loss of time from normal activities; symptoms would not require 
medication or a medi cal evaluation; signs or symptoms are transient.  
Moderate  Interferes with the subject’s usual activity and/or requires symptomatic 
treatment.  
Severe  Symptom(s) causing severe discomfort and significant impact of the subject’s 
usual activity and requires treatment.  
 
The following definitions will be used to rate the relationship of the adverse event to the study treatment and 
the study procedure.  
Not Related  • not associated with device application  
• due to an underlying or concurrent illness or effe ct of another device or drug  
 
Possible  • temporal sequence between device application and event  is such that the 
relationship is not unlikely  or subject’s condition or concomitant therapy 
could have caused the adverse event  
 
Probable  • temporal sequence is relevant or 
• event abates upon device removal  
 
Definitely 
Related  • temporal sequence is relevant and  
• event abates upon device removal or 
 • reappearance of the event on repeat device re -application  
 
A serious adverse event (SAE) is defined as an event which leads to:   
• Death  due to any cause  
• Life-threatening condition  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• Requires in-patient hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization  
• Necessitates an intervention to prevent a permanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to 
a body structure  
 
All SAE’s will be reported.  
Device -Related Adverse Event : an adverse event is  considered to be device -related when, in the judgment of 
the Investigator, the clinical event has a reasonable time sequence associated with use of the device and is 
unlikely to be attributed to concurrent disease or other procedures or medications.  It i s reasonable to believe 
that the device directly caused or contributed to the adverse event.  
Procedure -Related Adverse Event : an adverse event is considered to be procedure -related when, in the 
judgment of the Investigator; it is reasonable to believe tha t the event is associated with the assigned study 
procedure and is not specific to the device used.  Other products, surgical techniques, or medications 
required specifically for the procedure are likely to have contributed to the occurrence of the event.  
Concomitant Medication -Related Adverse Event:  an adverse event is considered to be concomitant 
medication related when, in the judgment of the Investigator, it is reasonable to believe that the event is 
associated with concomitant medications used in conju nction with the device and is not otherwise specific to 
the device (e.g. bleeding associated with anticoagulation medication).  
Pre-Existing Condition -Related Adverse Event:  an adverse event is considered to be related to a pre -
existing condition when, in t he judgment of the Investigator, it is reasonable to believe that the event is 
associated with the subject’s pre -existing condition and is not specific to the device or procedure. Pre -
existing conditions that are aggravated or become more severe during or after the procedure should be 
evaluated on a case -by-case basis to determine if the event may be more appropriately classified as device -
related or procedure -related.  
ZipLine  Medical Inc. Inc., or its designee, in cooperation with the Investigator, will as sess all adverse events 
considered to be device -related for potential reportability to the FDA and other regulatory authorities as an 
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE).  
The Investigator should follow all unresolved serious adverse events until th e events are resolved, the 
subject is lost to follow -up, the subject has withdrawn consent, or the adverse event is otherwise explained.  
 
13.2 Reporting of Serious and Non -Serious Adverse Events  
13.2.1  General Reporting Requirements (Serious & Non -Serious Adverse Eve nts) 
All serious and potentially device  related  and/or procedure -related adverse events must be recorded on the 
Adverse Event CRF by the Investigator (or designee).  The report should include: severity, duration, action 
taken, treatment outcome and relatio nship of the adverse experience to the study device, procedure, 
concomitant medications, pre -existing condition, etc. (i.e., unrelated, related or relationship unknown).   
In the case of serious adverse events, procedure and/or device observations and malf unctions, medical record 
documentation (e.g. procedure notes, operative notes, discharge summary, relevant progress notes, imaging 
or lab studies) must be provided to ZipLine  Medical Inc. or its designee.  
 The following criteria must also be adhered to by the Investigator in the case of serious adverse events:  
• The Adverse Event CRF must be signed by the Investigator or Co -Investigator.  
• It is the responsibility of the Investigator to inform their IRB/EC of serious adverse events as required by their 
IRB/EC p rocedures and in conformance with FDA and local regulatory requirements.  
All serious adverse events must be reported by the Investigator (or designee) to the sponsor, within 48 hours 
of learning of the adverse event via CRF. The ZipLine  Medical Inc. contac t information for questions is:  
Sponsor:   
ZipLine  Medical , Inc. 
747 Camden Ave., Suite A,  
Campbell, CA 95008  
 
Contact:  
Christy Cowley  
Manager, Clinical Affairs  
Mobile: 408-857-2083  
13.3 Device Failures and Malfunctions  
All reported device observations, malfunctions or failures of the Zip device, ZipLine  Medical Inc., are 
required to be documented in the CRF.  In the event of a suspected observation or device problem, ZipLine 
Medical, Inc. Customer Service shall be notifi ed and the Zip device shall be returned to the Sponsor for 
analysis.  If the device has been in contact with the subject  or may have been in contact wi th the subjec t’s 
bodily fluids , proper biohazard controls  and labeling  shall be used when handling and tr ansporting the 
device.  Device failures and malfunctions should also be documented in the subject ’s medical record.  
NOTE: Device failures or malfunctions are NOT to be reported as adverse events. However, if there is an 
adverse event that results from a de vice failure or malfunction, that specific event would be recorded in the 
usual way.  
 
 
14 Ethical Considerations  
14.1 Trial Conduct  
The study will be performed in accordance with US FDA Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines . 
14.2 Institutional Review Board  
A copy of  the protocol, proposed Informed Consent form, other written subject  information and any 
proposed advertising material must be submitted to the IRB/IEC for written approval. A copy of the written 
IRB/IEC approval of the protocol and Informed Consent form m ust be received by ZipLine  Medical Inc. 
before recruitment of subject s into the study may begin . 
The Sponsor  must submit and, where necessary, obtain approval from the IRB , for all subsequent significant 
protocol amendments and significant changes to the Informed Consent form.  The Investigator should notif y 
the IRB  of deviations from the protocol or SAEs and UADEs occurring at the site and other SAE/UADE 
reports received from ZipLine  Medical Inc. in accordance with local procedures.  
The Investigator w ill be responsi ble for obtaining annual IRB  approval and renewal throughout the duration 
of the study. Copies of the Investi gator’s reports and the IRB continuance of approval must be sent to 
ZipLine  Medical Inc.  
 14.3 Informed Consent Form  
The written Informed Consent documents should be prepared in the language(s) of the potential patient 
population.  
The reviewing IRB  and the sponsor must first approve the Informed Consent forms that are used. The 
Informed Consent forms that are used should be in accordance wit h the current guidelines as outlined by the 
Good Clinical Practices (GCP) guidelines.  
Prior to participation in the clinical study, each subject  must give written Informed Consent after the context 
of the study has been fully explained to the subject  in language that is easily understood by the subject . The 
subject  must also be given the opportunity to ask questions and have those questions answered to their 
satisfaction.  
14.4 Amending the Protocol  
An Investigator may not make protocol changes without prior app roval by ZipLine  Medical Inc.  All 
significant protocol changes that may affect the following must be submitted and approved by the 
Sponsor  before initiating the change:  
 
• validity of the data or information resulting from the completion of the approved protocol;  
• relationship of the likely subject risk to benefit relied upon to approve the protocol;  
• scientific soundness of the investigational plan, or;  
• rights, safety, or welfare of the human subjects involved in the investigation.  
 
The change mus t be approved by ZipLine  Medical Inc and submitted and subsequently approved by the site 
IRB. The investigative sites must send ZipLine  Medical Inc. a copy of the IRB approval letter for the 
protocol amendment.  
 
ZipLine  Medical Inc. may make certain admini strative changes to the protocol without prior approval of the 
IRB.  ZipLine  Medical Inc. will notify the investigative site and the IRB of such changes to ensure the study 
continues to be conducted consistently .  
14.5 Emergency Actions  
ZipLine  Medical Inc. accepts the right of the Investigator to deviate from the protocol in an emergency when 
necessary to safeguard the life or the physical wellbeing of a study subject .  The Investigator must give 
notice of any emergency deviations and justifica tion for the deviation to ZipLine  Medical Inc.  and the IRB  
as quickly as possible after the episode, in any event no later than 24 hours after the emergency  to ZipLine 
Medical Inc. and 10 days to the IRB . 
14.6 Protocol Deviations  
A protocol deviation is defined  as an event where the Clinical Investigator or site personnel did not conduct 
the study according to the protocol.  
Investigators shall be required to obtain prior approval from ZipLine  Medical Inc. clinical study 
management and IRB before initiating devia tions from the protocol, except where necessary to protect the 
life or physical wellbeing of a subject in an emergency.  Such approval shall be documented in writing and 
maintained in clinical study management and Investigator files.  Prior approval is gen erally not expected in 
situations where unforeseen circumstances are beyond the Investigator’s control, (e.g. subject was not 
available for scheduled follow -up office visit, blood sample lost by laboratory, etc.); however, the event is 
still considered a d eviation and will be reported via the appropriate CRF.  
Deviations must be reported to ZipLine  Medical Inc. regardless of whether medically justifiable, pre -
approved by ZipLine  Medical Inc. or taken to protect the subject in an emergency.  Subject specific 
deviations will be reported on the Protoc ol Deviation case report form. Investigators will also adhere to 
 procedures for reporting study deviations to their IRB in accordance with their specific IRB reporting 
policies and procedures.  
Regulations require th at Investigators maintain accurate, complete and current records, including documents 
showing the dates of and reasons for each deviation from the protocol.   
14.7 Coverage of Expenses  
The treated subjects will not be reimbursed or compensated for participating  in the study.  
14.8 Confidentiality  
Confidentiality of subjects will be maintained throughout the study.  A unique identification code will be 
assigned to each subject participating in this study.  Any data that may be published in abstracts, scientific 
journa ls, or presented at medical meetings will reference a unique subject code and will not reveal the 
subject’s identity.  The Sponsor and their designee  will make every reasonable effort to protect the 
confidentiality of the subjects participating in the stud y. 
 
 
15 Study Administration  
ZipLine  Medical Inc., Inc will make necessary efforts to ensure that this study is conducted in compliance 
with GCPs and all applicable regulatory requirements.  
15.1 Pre-Study Documentation Requirements  
Prior to enrolling subjects into the study , the following documents must be provided to ZipLine  Medical 
Inc.: 
• Signed and dated Investigator Agreement  
• A copy of the written IRB/IEC approval of the protocol  
• A copy of the written IRB/IEC approval of the Informed Consent Form   
• A copy of the curriculum vitae of the Principal Investigator and Co -Principal Investigator (if 
applicable)  
15.2 Source Documentation  
The Principal Investigator must maintain detailed source documents on all study subjects who are enrolled in 
the study or who undergo scre ening.  Source documents include subject medical records, hospital charts, 
clinic charts, Investigator’s subject study files, as well as the results of diagnostic tests (e.g., laboratory 
tests).  
The following minimum information should be recorded in the s ubject’s medical records:  
• The date the subject entered the study and the subject number  
• The study protocol number and the name of the Sponsor  
• The date that informed consent was obtained  
• Evidence that the subject meets study eligibility requirements (e.g., medical history, study 
procedures and/or evaluations)  
• The dates of all study related subject visits  
• Evidence that required procedures and/or evaluations were completed  
• Documentation of specific device used, if any  
• Occurrence and status of any Adverse Events  
 • The date the subject exited the study, and a notation as to whether the subject completed the study 
or was discontinued, including the reason for discontinuation.  
15.3 Record Retention  
The Investigator will maintain all essential study documents and source documentation, in original format, 
that support the data collected on the study subject s in compliance with the ICH/GCP guidelines. Documents 
must be retained for at least 2 years after the last approval of marketing application or until at leas t 2 years 
have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of the clinical investigation of the product. These documents 
will be retained for a longer period of time by agreement with ZipLine  Medical Inc. or in compliance with 
other regulatory requirements. W hen these documents no longer need to be maintained, it is the 
responsibility of ZipLine  Medical Inc. to inform the Investigator. The Investigator will take measures to 
ensure that these essential documents are not accidentally damaged or destroyed. If for  any reason the 
Investigator withdraws responsibility for maintaining these essential documents, custody must be transferred 
to an individual who will assume responsibility.  ZipLine  Medical Inc. must receive written notification of 
this custodial change.  
15.4 Criteria for Terminating Study  
ZipLine  Medical Inc. reserves the right to terminate the study but intends only to exercise this right for valid 
scientific or administrative reasons and reasons related to protection of ZipLine s. Inve stigators and 
associate d IRB  will be notified in writing in the event of termination.  
Possible reasons for study termination include:  
• The discovery of an unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to the ZipLine s enrolled in the 
study;  
• A decision on the part of ZipLine  Medica l Inc. to suspend or discontinue use of the device.  
15.5 Criteria for Suspending/Terminating a Study Center  
ZipLine  Medical Inc. reserves the right to stop the enrollment of ZipLine s at a study center at any time after 
the study initiation visit if no ZipLine s have been enrolled or if the center has multiple or severe protocol 
violations without justification or fails to follow remedial actions.  
Possible reasons for suspending/terminating a study center include:  
• Repeated failure to complete case report forms prior  to scheduled monitoring visits;  
• Failure to obtain written Informed Consent;  
• Failure to report CEC Events/SAE/UADE to ZipLine  Medical Inc. within 48 hours of knowledge.  
15.6 Investigator Responsibilities  
• Agree to sign and adhere to the Investigator A greement ; 
• Agree to participate in Investigator meetings as scheduled by ZipLine  Medical Inc. ; 
• Be willing to provide required assessments for analysis ; 
• Be willing to perform and be capable of performing treatment procedures as outlined in this 
protocol ; 
• Comply with all required elements of this protocol (e.g., perform testing and follow -up as specified, 
especially during personnel transitions) and supply material suitable for quantitative analysis ; 
• Agree to obtain written Informed Consent before  any study specific procedures are performed in 
accordance with GCP . 
 
 
 16 Publication Policy  
The existence of this clinical study is confidential, and it should not be discussed with persons outside of the 
study.  Additionally, the information in this documen t and regarding this study contains trade secrets and 
commercially sensitive information that is confidential and may not be disclosed unless such disclosure is 
required by regional or national law or regulations.  Subject to the foregoing, this informatio n may be 
disclosed only to those persons involved in the study who have a need to know, but all such persons must be 
instructed not to further disseminate this information to others.  These restrictions of disclosure will apply 
equally to all future inform ation provided that is indicated as confidential.  
The data generated by this clinical study are the property of the Sponsor, ZipLine  Medical Inc., and should 
not be disclosed without their prior written permission.  These data may be used by the Sponsor no w and in 
the future for presentation or publication at Sponsor’s discretion or for submission to governmental 
regulatory agencies.  The Principal Investigators may publish or present the study results with prior consent 
of the Sponsor, but will not disclos e confidential information.  Prior to submission by a Principal 
Investigator for publication or presentation, the Sponsor will be provided with the opportunity to review the 
submission for confidential information and accuracy.  
 
17 Bibliography  
 
1. Newman  JT, et al.  Modality of Wound Closure After Total Knee Replacement : Are Staples as 
Safe as Sutures? A Retrospective Study of 181 Patients . Patient Safety in Surgery. 2011 ; 5:26. 
2. Smith TO , et. al. Sutures vs. Staples for Skin Closure in Or thopaedic Surgery: Meta Analysis.  
BMJ 2010;340;c1199 . 
 
 
 18 Appendices  
18.1 Sample Informed Consent Form  
[INSERT SAMPLE INFORMED CONSENT FORM HERE]  
18.2 Instructions for Use (IFU)  
The following is an example of a Zip Surgical Skin Closure Instructions For Use document:  
 
STERILERRx Only
LATEX
2!
REF
LOTECREPDescription
The Zip™ 16 Surgical Skin Closure Device is a single-use non-in-
vasive skin closure device that may be used to close up to 16cm 
of incision length. Multiple devices may be applied end-to-end as 
needed for longer incisions, and the device may be cut for shorter 
incisions. The device is applied to clean, dry skin prior to skin closure.  
The device remains on the skin during wound healing.  The device is 
removed by lifting one edge and peeling the device from the skin. The 
device is made of polymeric materials, utilizes a non-latex, pressure 
sensitive skin adhesive.  The device contents are provided sterile in 
an intact and unopened package.
Federal (USA) law restricts this device to use by or on the order of a 
physician.Caution
The Zip™ 16 Surgical Skin Closure Device is indicated for use during 
and after skin incision procedures to approximate skin and hold 
together the skin edges until healing can take place.  Intended Use
1. Do not use where adhesion cannot be obtained.  Potential causes 
of inadequate adhesion are presence of exudate, skin oils, 
moisture or hair.  
2. Do not use on infected wounds.
3. Do not use in high tension wounds which cannot be easily ap-Contraindications
1. The development of postoperative edema may cause skin shear-
ing, skin blistering or loss of adhesion to occur.  
2. Application of any surgical tape or adhesive skin closure may 
result in skin stripping upon removal.
3. As with all adhesive products applied to the skin, a small per-
centage of individuals may experience allergic reaction and/or 
hypopigmentation or hyperpigmentation following removal.  
4. The effect of petroleum-based ointments when used in conjunc-
tion with this device is unknown.
5. Do not use if device becomes damaged during the procedure.  
Risk of device failure if device is damaged.
6. Single use device.  Do not reuse.  Risk of device failure or infec-
tion if reused.Warnings
1. Skin should be clean, dry and free of exudate, skin oils, excess 
prep residue or hair for adequate adhesion.
2. If applied to regions such as joints where the skin surrounding the 
incision is substantially strained, carefully monitor wound closure 
integrity as mobility is increased.
3. In areas of high body contour, the ability of the device to conform 
and adhere to the application site should be assessed carefully 
prior to application.Precautions
ZipTM16Surgical Skin 
Closure Device
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE
PAGE 1 PAGE 6 PAGE 5DRESSING
Device may be covered with an absorbent or protective dressing if 
desired. Do not place dressing adhesive or tape in direct contact with 
the device.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CARE
As necessary the wound area may be rinsed and dried carefully. 
Patient should not swim, soak the device in a bath, allow direct, 
constant shower water pressure on the device or unnecessarily rub, 
adhesives or otherwise damage the device. If a dressing is not used, 
patients should avoid clothing edges catching or pulling on device.  
Provide patient or caregiver with the appropriate after procedure care 
instructions.
DEVICE REMOVAL
The device may remain on the patient for up to 14 days. Care should 
be used to not disrupt the incision during removal.  To remove 
device, begin at one end of the incision and gently peel device along 
the length of the incision.  Do not use excessive force or pull in a 
direction that is away from the incision.  To aid in the removal of the 
device, medical adhesive remover may be used.  Continuously wipe 
a soaked cotton ball or swab along the lifted edge of the device as it 
is gently pulled along the incision.  Adhesive residue may be removed 
with soap and water.Explanation of Symbols Used
Federal law (USA) restricts 
this device to sale by or on
order of a physician
See Instructions for Use
Sterilized Using Irradiation
Latex Free
Single Use Only
Do not use if package is damaged 
or open
Keep away from sunlight and heat
Keep dry
Expiration Date
EU Authorized Representative
Catalog Number
Lot Number
Legal Manufacturer
ZipLine Medical, Inc.
747 Camden Ave, Suite A
Campbell, CA 95008
1-888-326-8999
www.ziplinemedical.comEU Authorized Representative
Emergo Europe
Molenstraat 15, 2513 BH
The Hauge, The Netherlands
Tel: (31) (0) 70 345-8570
ZipLine and Zip are trademarks of ZipLine Medical, Inc.
© ZipLine Medical, Inc. 2013.  All rights reserved.  
Patents pending.
LA0013 Rev. C