1 
 STUDY PROTOCOL  
A RANDOMIZED SHAM -CONTROLLED STUDY OF HOME -DELIVE RED  
NON -INVAS IVE NEUROSTIMULATION  FOR MIGRAINE  
 
Principal Investigator:  Helena Knotkova PhD, PhilD  
              MJHS Institute for Innovation in Palliative Care  
                                      39 Broadway, 3rd fl 
New York, NY 10006  
212-440-1946  
HKnotkov@mjhs.org  
 
Protocol Number:  IRB 19008 -01 
Protocol Version Dated:  26FEB2019  
  
2 
 CONTENTS:  
SUMMARY           3 
PURPOSE AND RATIONALE         5 
OBJECTIVES  AND  AIMS         5 
BACKGROUND           5 
STUDY DESIGN  AND OVERVIEW        7 
STUDY SAMPLE          7 
OUTCOM E MEASURES AND ENDPOINTS       8 
STUDY POCEDURES AND METHODS       9 
ASSESSMENT TOOLS AND DATA COLLECTION      11 
SAMPLE  SIZE AND DATA ANALYSIS       12 
DATA MANAGEMENT AND CONFIDENTIALITY      13 
SAFETY MONITORING PLAN        13 
REGULATORY AND ETHICAL OBLIGATIONS      15 
ADMINISTRATIVE ISSUES         15 
REFERENCES           16 
  
3 
 SUMMARY  
Migraine affects 36 million Americans and more than 3 million suffer  from chronic migraine. 
Despite advances in medical treatments, t here is a need for better preventive and abortive therapies 
for this debilitating illness . Previous research has indicated that non -invasive neurostimulation 
may have prophylactic effects on m igraine and improv e symptoms and functional outcomes in 
migraineurs. One such method is a  non-invasive transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) . 
tDCS is delivered via a battery -powered device that painlessly transfers electrical current of low 
intensity (1 to 2 milliamperes, mA) to the surface of the head . tDCS is considered by the FDA a 
non-significant risk method, and several tDCS models are marketed to the public.  In previous pi lot 
studies tDCS delivered in multiple sessions had prophylactic effects on migraine and improv ed 
migraine -related symptoms such as pain. Limitation of previous studies was that tDCS was not 
available for at -home use and patients had to travel daily to the research facility to receive the 
stimulation. This caused excess ive burden t o patients and resulted in short term stimulation 
protocols, up to 20 sessions. Recently, tDCS has been developed for self -application by patients 
at home settings , which  enabled daily tDCS applications in longer stimulation protocols . The 
objective of this single -center double -blind randomized sham -controlled two -parallel -arm study  is 
to examine the prophy lactic effects of tDCS on migraine in a longer protocol in home settings.   
Specific Aims:  
1) To evaluate efficacy and safety of tDCS self -delivered in daily 20 -minute applications for 2 
months (60 days) by adult migraine patients at home for migraine prevention and migraine 
symptom management, as compared to sham tDCS application.   
2) To evaluate patients’ satisfaction with the procedure.  
The study will include 60 adults from general population of the New York metropolitan area, of 
age 18 -65 years , who experience 4  migraine days or more per month and fully meet the 
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria described in detail below in the study protocol . For each participant 
the study  will last about 90 days (30 days of the baseline followed by 60 days of the study 
intervention), and  involve 3  study visits. At Visit 1 , patients will provide written informed consent 
and undergo screening for the eligibil ity. This will be followed by 30 days  of baseline at home 
during which patients will keep daily records of migraine occurrence and provide answers to a set 
of symptom -related questionnaires . Patients with 4 or more  migraine days per month who fully 
meet th e study eligibility criteria at the end of the baseline period will be randomized in double -
blind manner into two groups : Group 1 will be randomized to receive active tDCS  in daily 20 -
minute applications for 60 days;  Group 2 will be randomized to receive sham tDCS in daily 20 -
minute applications for 60 days, self-applied at home . Following randomization, Visit #2 will be 
held either  in the patient’s home  or in the research facility, based on the patient’s preference.  tDCS 
device will be deployed to the pat ient and instruct ions on tDCS use  will be provided . The first 
tDCS/sham self -application by the patient will be done at Visit 2. Daily tDCS /sham  self-
application by the patient at home will c ontinue for the rest of the 60 -day period . Study staff will 
be in regular remote contact with the patient via phone and HIPAA -compliant videoconferencing. 
Upon conclusion of the intervention, tDCS device will be collected  from the patient at Visit 3  held 
either  in the patient’s home  or in the resear ch facility, based on the patient’s preference . Safety 
monitoring will continue bi -weekly by phone for 30 days after the last tDCS/sham application.  
Outcome assessment will be carried out at the end of the baseline, and at the end of month 1 (day 
30; secondary end -point) and month 2 (day 60, primary end -point) of the tDCS/sham intervention. 
4 
 The primary outcome measure will be Change in mean number of m igraine days per month . 
Secondary outcomes are: Percentage of responders , (having at least 50% reduction of monthly 
migraine days); Change in monthly migraine attack frequency ; Change in monthly acute 
antimigraine drug use ; Change in mean headache severity  per migraine day; Change in quality of 
life; Change in depressive symptoms; Tolerability; Satisfaction .  
  
5 
 PURPOSE AND RATIONAL E OF THE STUDY  
This project addresses a gap in available approaches to migraine prophyla xis and symptom 
management.  Migraine is a condition that affects 36 million Americans and more than 3 million 
suffer from chronic migraine. Despite advances in medical treatments, there is a clear need for 
better preventive and abortive therapies for this debilitating illness. Previous research has indicated 
that non-invasive neurostimulation, such as that using the non-invasive transcranial direct current 
stimulation (tDCS) , may have prophylactic effects on migraine and improv e symptoms and 
functional outcomes in migraineurs if delivered in mult iple sessions. Limitation of previous studies 
was that tDCS was not available for at -home use and patients had to travel daily to the research 
facility to receive the stimulation. This caused excessive burden t o patients and resulted in short 
term stimulat ion protocols, up to 20 sessions. Recently, tDCS has been developed for self -
application by patients at home settings , which  enabled daily tDCS applications in longer 
stimulation protocols .  
OBJECTIVES AND SPECIFIC AIMS  
The goal of this study  is to examine the effects of tDCS on migraine and related symptoms in a 
longer stimulation protocol in home settings.  
Specific Aims are:  
1) To evaluate efficacy and safety of tDCS self -delivered in daily 20 -minute applications for 2 
months (60 days) by adult migraine patients at home for migraine prevention and migraine 
symptom management, as compared to sham tDCS application.   
2) To evaluate patients’ satisfaction with the procedure.  
BACKGROUND  
The burden of living with migraine:  Migraine is a con dition that affects 36 million Americans 
with more than 3 million suffering from chronic migraine. Migraine is one of the top ten causes of 
years li ved with disability worldwide (Disease Incidence, 2017 ). Episodic and chronic migraine 
are not biologically distinct conditions and are differentiated by the frequency of attacks. When 
headaches occur on 15 or more days each month and when additional, also arbitrary conditions are 
met, the patient is considered to have chronic migraines. Episodic migraine attack s usually last 4 -
72 hours. Typical characteristics of the headache are unilateral location, pulsating quality, 
moderate or severe intensity, aggravation by routine physical activity and association with nausea 
and/or photophobia and phonophobia.  
The WHO c onsiders a day lived with severe migraine as disabling as a day lived with dementia, 
quadriplegia or acute psychosis and more disabling than blindness, paraplegia, angina or 
rheumatoid arthritis.  
Gaps in available treatments:  The drugs to treat migraines are divided into abortive and preventive 
categories. There are eight FDA -approved preventive treatments for migraine headaches. They 
include two antihypertensive drugs in the beta -blocker family and two epilepsy drugs for episo dic 
migraines, injections of onabotulinumtoxinA for chronic migraines, and three injectable CGRP 
monoclonal antibodies, for both episodic and chronic migraines. Drugs that are not approved by 
the FDA, but generally considered effective are several antidepr essants.  
6 
 A recent study (Ford et al., 2017 ) of 1487 patients (70% female), 91% with episodic migraineurs 
showed that acute treatment was prescribed for >90% of the patients, and >50% had a current 
prescription for preventive treatment. Despite taking acut e and/or preventive treatment, 29% of 
episodic migraineurs (including some patients with ≤3 headache days/month) had moderate -to-
severe headache -related disability. Preventive treatment was discontinued or switched at least once 
by 26% of episodic migraine urs. Of those patients who gave collective reasons for 
discontinuation/switching preventive treatment, over 70% selected lack of efficacy and 
tolerability/safety. Another study (Ifergane et al, 2006 ) looked at acute therapy of migraine with 
triptans. Of th e 1498 patients who filled a first triptan prescription, during a 1 ‐year follow ‐up 
period, 841 patients (56%) purchased triptans only once.  The reasons for such low adherence to 
treatment include lack of efficacy, side effects, cost, and other.  
There is a  clear need for better preventive and abortive therapies for this debilitating illness.   
Non-invasive neuromodulation using transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) : tDCS 
(Figure 1) is a novel non -pharmacological, non -invasive neurostimulation method delivered via a 
battery -powered device that painlessly transfers electrical current of 
low intensity (1 to 2 milliamperes, mA) to the surface of the head, 
typically via tw o large (20 -35cm2) saline-soaked sponge electrodes 
(Nitsche and Paulus, 2000; Woods et al., 2016) .  tDCS is considered 
by the FDA a non -significant risk method, and several tDCS models 
are marketed to the public.  Within the past 15 years, number of 
studies  using tDCS in humans have been published, and have 
demonstrated that tDCS has been successfully used in combination 
with other pharmacological and non -pharmacological treatments for 
various conditions and can be added to care as usual; the patients may co ntinue their medication 
regimen and treatment plan.   
Previous pilot research has indicated that tDCS delivered in multiple sessions can have 
prophylactic effects on migraine and improv e symptoms and functional outcomes in  migraine urs 
(Auvichayapat  et al., 2012; Antal et al., 2011 ). Overall, tDCS is a highly innovative approach 
which may result in a substantial improvement of quality of life improvement in patients with 
chronic migraine.  
A major limitation of previous studies was that tDCS was not available for at -home use and 
patients had to travel daily to the research facility to receive the stimulation. This caused excessive 
burden t o patients and resulted in short term stimulation protocol with limited the number of tDCS 
applications, for examp le delivering tDCS only twice or three time per week in total of 10 sessions,  
resulting in clinically insignificant or substantially delayed effects (DaSilva et al, 2012 ). Recently, 
tDCS has been developed for self -application by patients at home settings , and enabled daily tDCS 
applications in longer stimulation protocols without the burden of excessive travel to the research 
facility ( Knotkova et al., 2017; 2018; Riggs et al., 2017; 2018 ; Charvet et al., 2015 ; Chung et al, 
2019, under  editorial considera tion). To date, longer stimulation protocols involving daily tDCS 
applications for up to 6 months  in chronically ill patients reported good acceptability and safety 
profile of this method ( Imm et al., 2019; Bystad et al., 2017 ).  The tDCS device used in this study, 
Soterix mini -CT, was developed by Soterix Medical Inc. based in New York City, specifically for 
administration by patients at home, and has enhanced safety features  for dose control: The device 
can only deliver one stimu lation dose, 20 minutes of real tDCS or sham tDCS, each day .  Sessions 
are regularly monitored by study personnel via phone and HIPAA compliant videoconference.   

7 
  
DESIGN AND OVERVIEW  
This study will employ  a single -center double -blind randomized sham -controlled two -parallel -arm 
design and involve  60 adults with migraine.  For each participant , the study will involve 3 study 
visits and last about 90 days (30 days of the baseline followed by 60 days of th e tDCS/sham study 
intervention). A post -study safety monitoring will continue bi -weekly by phone for 30 days after 
the last tDCS/sham application.  
At Visit 1 , patients will provide written informed consent and undergo screening for the eligibilit y. 
This will be followed by 30 days  of baseline at home during which patients will keep daily records  
(Daily Diaries)  of migraine occurrence and provide answers to a set of symptom -related 
questionnaires.  Patients with 4 or more  migraine days per month who fully meet the study 
eligibility c riteria at the end of the baseline period will be randomized in double -blind manner into 
two groups: Group 1 will be randomized to receive active tDCS  in daily 20 -minute applications 
for 60 days;  Group 2 will be randomized to receive sham tDCS in daily 20 -minute applications for 
60 days, self-applied at home . Following randomization, patients will continue keeping the Daily 
Diaries and Visit #2 will be held  either  in the patient’s home  or in the research facility, based on 
the patient’s preference. tDCS dev ice will be deployed to the patient and instruct ions on tDCS use  
will be provided . The first tDCS/sham self -application by the patient will be done at Visit 2. Daily 
tDCS/sham self -application by the patient at home and records in the form of Daily Diaries  will 
continue for the rest of the 60 -day period . Study staff will be in regular remote contact with the 
patient via phone and HIPAA -compliant videoconferencing. Upon conclusion of the intervention, 
Visit 3 held either  in the patient’s home  or in the resea rch facility, based on the patient’s preference . 
tDCS device will be collected  from the patient.  Safety monitoring will continue bi -weekly by 
phone for 30 days after the last tDCS/sham application.  
Outcome assessment will be carried out at the end of the baseline, and at the end of month 1 (day 
30±2; the secondary end -point) and month 2 ( day 60 ±2, the primary end-point) of the tDCS/sham 
intervention.  
STUDY SAMPLE  
The study will include 60 adults from general population of the New York metropolitan area, of  
age 18 -65 years, who experience 4  or more migraine days per month  and fully meet the following 
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria.  
Inclusion Criteria  
• Age 18 - 65 years;  
• Has episodic or chronic migraine with or without aura, diagnosed according to the 
Internatio nal Classification of Headache Disorders 3rd edition (ICHD -3) criteria, for at 
least the past 12 months;  
• Migraine occurring on 4 or more  days per month , as documented through the 30 -day 
baseline;  
• No change in prophylactic therapy in 3 months preceding the baseline;  
8 
 • If on antidepressant, blood pressure or epilepsy medication for reason other than migraine, 
the medication regimen is stable for at least 3 months preceding the baseline;  Able to follow 
instructions in English;  
• Understand the informed consent pro cess and provide consent to participate in the study.  
Exclusion Criteria  
• History of severe head trauma, brain surgery, implants in the head or neck; history of 
seizures;  
• Skin disorder or skin defects which compromise the integrity or sensitivity of the skin at 
or near locations where tDCS will be applied;  
• Not able to prepare and operate the tDCS dev ice after being instructed in tDCS use ;  
• Not able to respond to questionna ires and rating scales;  
• Concurrent use of another neurostimulation device (such as spinal cord stimulator 
cardiostimulator, deep brain stimulator , vagus nerve, transcranial magneti c, or supraorbital 
transcutaneous electric nerve stimulators ); 
• Concurrent us e of Botox or CGRP monoclonal antibodies  treatments;  
• Unstable acute medical condition;  
• Any serious, malignant or non -malignant, acute or chronic medical condition or active 
psychiatric illness that, in the Investigator’s opinion, could compromise patient safety, limit 
the patient’s ability to complete the study, and/or compromise the objectives of the study;  
• Used any investigational drug, biologic, or device within 30 days prior to screening, or 5 
half-lives, whichever is longer;  
• Taking opioid analgesic s or barbiturates on more  than 2 days a week;  
• Taking medica tions acting as NMDA -antagonist . 
 
OUTCOME MEASURES AND ENDPOINTS  
Outcome assessment time -points  will be at the end of the 30 -day baseline  (±2 days) , at the end of 
month 1 ( day 30 ±2 days , the secondary  end-point) and month 2 ( day 60±2 days , the primary end -
point) of the tDCS/sham intervention.  
The primary comparison  will be the between -group comparison at the end of month 2 of the 
tDCS /sham  intervention .  
The primary outcome  measure  will be Change in mean number of migraine days per month .  
A note: A migraine day is defined as any calendar day on which the patient had onset, 
continuation, or recurrence of a migraine as recorded in the diary. A migraine is defined as a 
migraine (with or without aura) la sting at least 30 minutes.   Any calendar day on which acute 
migraine medication is used is counted as a migraine day.  
Secondary outcome measures  will be : 
1. Percentage of responders , determined as a number of patients having at least 50% 
reduction of monthly  migraine days between the one -month baseline  and post-intervention, 
in each of the two study groups;   
2. Change in monthly migraine attack frequency , 
3. Change in monthly acute antimigraine drug use ,  
9 
 all determined from the patients’ diaries;  
4. Change in mean headache severity per migraine day  determined from Pain NRS ratings 
on m igrain e days ; 
5. Change in quality of life  determined from ratings on the migraine -specific MSQ  
questionnaire ; 
6. Change in depressive symptoms determined from the Hamilton Depression Scale (HamD);  
7. Tolerability  determined from occurrence of side effects and adverse events related, 
probably related or possibly related to tDCS, through the study ;  
8. Satisfaction  - percentage of patients stating at the end of the tri al that they are very satisfied , 
moderately satisfied, or not satisfied with the treatment,  determined from the 8 -item tDCS 
User Sur vey at the end of the intervention ; 
 
STUDY PROCEDURES AND METHODS  
Procedural schema  
Event /Time  Procedures  
Visit 1   Consenting, Screening, Baseline Daily Diaries dispensed  
30-Day Baseline  Baseline Daily Diaries kept  
Study eligibility affirmed  
Randomization  In double -blind manner to active tDCS or  sham tDCS  
Visit 2 (within 3 days 
after randomization )  Questionnaires MSQ and HamD administered  
tDCS fami liarization, training, equipment dispensing  
First tDCS/sham self -application under in -person supervision of 
study personnel   
Daily tDCS/sham at 
home for 60 days  Daily Diaries kept   
Interim outcome assessment in remote on Day 30±2 of tDCS/sham: 
Questionnaires MSQ and HamD, Daily Diaries evaluation  
Visit 3 (within 3 days 
after tDCS/sham 
completion)  End-of-study outcome assessment: Questionnaires MSQ, HamD, 
tDCS User Survey, Daily Diar ies evaluation , AEs evaluation   
Equipment collected  
Monetary compensation for time and effort dispensed  
Post-study safety 
follow -up (for 30 days 
after last tDCS/sham)  Two bi -weekly phone calls  
 
 
Recruitment :  The study will include general  public  – adult men and women  living at home (not 
at an institution, such as nursing home etc)  in boroughs of New York City  and its suburbs . The 
study plans to randomize 60 patients. In order to account for screen failures and possible drop out 
during the baseline p eriod prior randomization, it is anticipated that about 75 patients will have to 
be consented and screened.   
The main source of referrals will be from staff o f the New York Headache Center (Sub -investigator 
Dr. Mauskop) . Other recruitment outreach will include patients ’ self-referrals through IRB -
approved flyers/ adverti sement material disseminate d in boroughs of New York City  and its 
suburbs .   
10 
 Upon the initial contact, patients  will be asked if they wish to receive information about the study. 
If yes, s tudy personnel wi ll provide detailed information and answers questions.  Patients will be 
given enough time to consider the study participation.  If a patient  expresses interest in participating 
in the study , the study personnel will schedule the initial vis it (Visit #1).  
Visit #1:  The visit will  take place at a designated room at the New York Headache Center . At the 
visit, t he study staff will guide the patient through the process of review and signing the Informed 
Consent  and HIPAA authorization to allow study staff to obtain necessary medical information 
from patient’s medical record . The patient  will receive a copy of the signed Informed Consent  and 
HIPAA authorization . Study staff will then collect profiling demographic  and clinical 
characteristics and review medical information for the purpose of eligibility screening . Patients 
who meet  the study Inclusion/Exclusion criteria  at screening will receive in structions on how to 
keep Participant’s Daily Diaries and will proce ed to the baseline .  
30-day Baseline  (at home) : Through the baseline, patients will keep daily diaries to document 
migraine occurrence, related symptoms and medication intake. The diaries will be sent once  a 
week via encrypted HIPAA -compliant email or by fax to the study personnel . Patients who report 
4 or more  migraine days per month at the end of the baseline period and fully meet the 
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria  will be eligible to undergo randomization and proceed to the 
interventional phase of t he study.  
Randomization.  Randomization list will be computer generated by study statistician using the 
block -of-six method. Both the patient and study personne l, except for statistician will be blinded 
to the sham vs active  tDCS treatment assignment.  tDCS device s will be programmed to sham or 
active tDCS mode  in accordance with the randomization list .  
tDCS stimulation protocol and device.  The active tDCS will involve 20 -minutes of direct current 
at intensity of 1.5 mA. Sham will include 30 seconds of stimulation at 1.5 mA, followed by 0 mA 
for the remaining time. The stimulation pads (electrodes) will be placed in a simple headband, as 
depicted in detail in the Patient tDCS Instructional Brochure. The tDCS device for this study  will 
be Soterix mini -CT (Soterix Medical Inc., New York, NY) . The tDCS mini -CT was developed for 
at home administration and has enhanced safety features: a unique keypad access system that 
allows the user to apply only the pre -determined dose each day. The device will be deployed to 
the patient at Visit #2.   
Visit #2  - Familiarization with tDCS and Device Deployment will be held either at the patient’s 
home or at a designated room at the MJHS Institute, whichever is more convenient for the patient. 
Familiariz ation will build on tDCS information provided to the patient via flyer and tDCS booklet 
prior consenting. The study personnel will demonstrate the equipment and function of the device, 
instruct the patient on the use of the device, and will review the IRB -approved instructional booklet  
with the patient. The patient will have an opportunity to experience the sensory sensation 
associated with tDCS procedure by applying 30 seconds of tDCS stimulation on the arm at the 
intensity 1.5 mA that is planned be used in the study. The study personn el will also instruct the 
patient how to establish  video connection for a remote contact with the tDCS supervising study 
personnel located at the MJHS Institute via a HIPAA -compli ant Zoom application via  the patient’s 
phone, tablet or personal computer. (Patients who do not possess any of these electronic devices 
will be given an electronic Tablet equipped with Zoom capability for the study duration ).  
At the end of Visit 2, the patient will carry -out the first tDCS/sham application under in -person 
supervis ion of study personnel.  
11 
 tDCS/Sham Application s in Home Settings.  After the  first 20-minute tDCS/sham  self-applied 
by the patient at Visit #2, the tDCS/sham self -applications will continue daily for the total of 60 
days. Reminders will be sent by the study personnel via email and text message daily. In addition, 
study staff will be in regular remote contact with the patient via phone  and/or HIPAA -compliant 
videoconferencing , at least three times per week during the first week and at least twice a week 
during  the remaining weeks .  
During the  intervention period of the study, patient s will continue keep ing daily d iaries , to 
document migraine occurrence, related symptoms and medication intake, as done at the baseline 
period.  Patients will receive reminders about the diaries via email and text messages. The diaries 
will be in electr onic form and patients will be sent the diaries to the study site once  a week via 
encrypted HIPAA -compliant email or by fax .  
Upon conclusion of the first and second month of the tDCS intervention, the patient will provide 
answers to the quality of life questionnaire ( MSQ ), Hamilton Depression Scale, and to the  8-item 
tDCS User Survey  (at the end of the second month only).  as well as his/her impressi on of having 
received either activ e or sham treatment,  in order to evaluate the blinding. Visit #3 – Device 
Return  will be  held either at the patient’s home or at a designated room at the MJHS Institute, 
whichever is more convenient for the patient, upon conclusion of the study intervention. At the 
visit, patients will answer to the questionnaire package including MSQ, HamD, and tDCS User 
Survey . tDCS device and remaining study materials and supplies will be collected , and the patient 
will receive mon etary compensatio n for time and effort associated with  the study intervention 
procedures (see in detail below, section Administrative Issues – Compensation).  
Safety Monitoring  will be carried out throughout the study in accordance with the Safety 
Monitorin g Plan (described in detail below) and will continue bi -weekly by phone for 30 days 
after the last tDCS/sham application.     
 
ASSESSMENT TOOLS AND  DATA COLLECTION  
Profiling/Characteristics of the Sample   
Demographic characteristics (age, gender, education level, marital/living status, employment 
status) will be determined from the patient’s self -report. Clinical characteristics (diagnosis, illness 
duration, medications and other treatments) will be determi ned from the patient’s self -report, 
review of medical record, and Karnofsky Performance Status.  
Outcome  Assessment  
Outcome assessment will utilize the following tools:  
• Patients’s Daily Diaries will be used to take notes of days on which a migraine attack 
occurs, duration of the attack, severity of migraine pain during the migraine attack, acute 
antimigraine drug use, and occurrence of any other (non-migraine) headache. Time needed 
to fill -in the diary is about 1 -3 minutes per day (filled -in only on days whe n headache or 
migraine medication intake occur).  
• Pain Numerical Rating Scale (Pain NRS) is an eleven point [0 -10] scale for rating of pain 
intensity, with the anchor points 0=no pain and 10=worst pain imaginable. Admini stration 
time is about 1 minute, rated only on migraine days.  
12 
 • Migraine -Specific Quality of Life Questionnaire (MSQ) is a validated 25 -item 
questionnaire evaluating impact of migraine on physical, emotional and social component 
of patients’ life. Recall period is four weeks. Administered a t the baseline, at the end of 
month 1 and month 2 of tDCS/sham application. Administration time is about 5 minutes 
(Rendas -Baum et al., 2013).  
• Hamilton Depression Scale (HamD) is a validated 17 -item instrument for assessment of 
depressive symptoms. Adminis tered at the baseline, at the end of month 1 and month 2 of 
tDCS/sham application. Administration time is about 20 minutes (Hamilton, 1960; 
Williams, 1988).   
• tDCS User Survey is an  8-item questionnaire on user’s satisfaction with the use of tDCS. 
Administe red at the end of tDCS use.  Administration time is about 5 minutes.  
• Occurrence of side effects and adverse events through the study. Tolerability  will be  
determined from occurrence of side effects and adverse events related, probably related or 
possibly r elated to tDCS, through the study.  
SAMPLE SIZE DETERMNA TION AND DATA ANALYSIS  
The sample size calculations are  based on responder rates from previous studies of non -invasive 
neurostimulation in migraine (Lipton et al., 2010; Saper et al., 2011). The number s used were 15% 
for sham, based on published trials and 55% for the supraorbital neurostimulation  inferred from 
the pilot study  (Gerardy et al., 2009; Lipton et al., 2010; Saper et al., 2011) and 12.1% for sham 
vs 38.1% for verum in the RCT (Schoenen  et al., 2013) . To detect a significant diff erence between 
the 2 treatments (5% significance level) with an 80% power, the minimum  size of each treatment 
group was estimated at 26 patients, 52 in total who get randomized and initiate the intervention. 
To account for possible dropouts in the category "randomized, but never started the intervention", 
we plan to randomize in total 60 patients. To account for patients who do not meet the eligibility 
criteria at screening, we anticipate we will need to consent a bout 75 patients.   
Statistical analysis will be carried out on an intention -to-treat basis, as well as per protocol for 
comparison.   For Aim 1, the primary comparison will be the between -group comparison at the 
end of month 2 of the tDCS/sham intervention for the primary and secondary outcomes measures 
(listed in detail on pgs 7,8). Secondary exploratory comparisons will include between -group 
comparisons at the month 1 (Day -30) of the 2 -month intervention, and within groups 
comparisons across the study time -points (the baseline, month 1, month 2) , as well as comparison 
of efficacy in patients with chronic and episodic migraines and comparison of efficacy in patient takin g 
abortive migraine medications on 10 or more days with those taking them on 9 or fewer days.  
For Aim 2, (Satisfaction with the device and procedure), the primary analysis will include the 
between -group comparison of at the end of month 2 of the tDCS /sham  intervention , evaluating  the 
percentage of patients stating at the end of the tri al that they are very satisfied, moderately satisfied, or not 
satisfied with the device use and procedure , determined from the 8 -item tDCS User Survey at the end 
of the inte rvention.  (We anticipate significant group differences in Survey items pertaining to 
being more confident in symptom management at home, but no significant group differences in 
items pertaining to satisfaction with tDCS training and ease of use of the device ). In addition, the 
13 
 process data - number of delivered applications and the protocol fidelity  in each study group will 
be analyzed, in order to support evidence on feasibility of the procedure.   
DATA MANAGEMENT AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
Each participant will be assigned a study ID consisting of the participant’s numerical code. 
Subjects name will not be recorded on study materials, except on the consent form. Signed Consent 
forms with the participant’s full name and signature will be kept by the study coo rdinator 
separately from other study files double -locked and secured at the research offices.  In the 
electronic database, the data will be saved and identified with an assigned study number; patient’s 
name or data that can potentially lead to identificati on of the patient will not appear in the database. 
The results of this study may be used for publication but will not include subjects’ name. The study 
materials and documentation will be kept for 3 years after closure of the study.  
 
SAFETY MONITORING PLAN   
tDCS safety data  
As per FDA determination, tDCS is considered a non -significant risk technique, and was exempt 
from the IDE requirement.  
The safety of this technique has been addressed and tested by multiple researchers. To date, more 
than 100 studies ha ve been reported in electronically accessible databases (MEDLINE, PUBMED) 
on effects of tDCS, underlying mechanisms, and safety in humans (Ardolino et al., 2005; Lang et 
al., 2005; Nitsche et al., 2003a,b; Liebetanz et al., 2006). Notably, tDCS has been sh own to comply 
with general safety considerations as delineated for all types of non -invasive transcranial electrical 
stimulation (Agnew and McCreery, 1987; Nitsche et al., 2003a,b). Beyond the general safety 
parameters of the tDCS technique, safety conside rations pertaining to tDCS stimulation parameters 
has been observed to ensure the safety of participants undergoing tDCS stimulation. Major safety 
parameters of electrical stimulation utilizing direct current (as opposed to devices producing 
alternating cu rrent), are Current Density [A / cm2] = stimulation strength [A] / electrode size 
[cm2], and Total Charge [C/cm2] = stimulation strength [A] / electrode size [cm2] x total 
stimulation duration [s]) (Nitsche et al., 2003a,b). Therefore, these major safety p arameters are 
determined by the size of the electrodes, the intensity of the current and the duration of the 
stimulation. A comprehensive review on safety of tDCS in human subjects by Sundaram et al. 
(2009) evaluated all existing tDCS protocols involving h uman participants for the aforementioned 
safety parameters, Current Density and Total Charge, as well as available data from animal studies 
identifying potentially damaging values for each parameter: the threshold for potentially damaging 
Current Density w as at 25 mA/cm2. The threshold for potentially damaging Total Charge was 216 
C/cm2. Notably, tDCS protocols involving human subjects typically apply tDCS at the intensity 
of 1-2mA, for 10 -30 minutes, with electrodes of size 25 -36 cm2. This translates into Current 
Density 0.03 -0.08 mA/cm2 and Total Charge 0.018 -0.096 C/cm2, thus orders of magnitude below 
the potential safety threshold. The parameters in our study will be: the current intensity 1.5 mA, 
for 20 minutes, with electrodes of size 25cm2. Thus, Curr ent Density will be 0.06 mA/cm2 and 
Total Charge 0.072 C/cm2, which is within the parameter range delivered in other tDCS studies 
and well within safety limits.  
14 
 Researchers at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) conducted a 
safety study on tDCS, investigating 20 -minute sessions of 1 mA and 2 mA current stimulation 
with healthy controls (n=103), and no negative effects were identified (Iyer et al., 2005).  
In a review of 567 tDCS sessions conducted over a period of two years, P oreisz et al. (2007) 
reported that during tDCS, a mild tingling sensation was reported by 70.6% subjects and a light 
itching sensation under the stimulation electrodes occurred in 30.4% cases (Poreisz et al., 2007). 
It is important to note that a mild ting ling/itching non -painful sensation during tDCS is a natural 
sensation pertaining to passing the electrical current through the skin, similarly as water -flow 
elicits non -painful sensation on the skin surface. Other events reported in Poreisz’ study were 
transient headache, and infrequently reported nausea and insomnia. Some subjects in Poreisz study 
also reported fatigue during and after tDCS, while subjects in another study experienced a fatigue 
improvement (Bocci et al., 2013).  
Overall, the most common sid e effects reported in tDCS studies were: headache, dizziness, 
nausea, itchy sensation as well as transient irritation under the area of the electrodes (Brunoni et 
al., 2011; Brunoni et al., 2012; Iyer et al., 2005; Poreisz et al., 2007). Thus, a growing bo dy of 
research from different laboratories support the notion that tDCS is a noninvasive technique for 
modulating neural excitability, with favorable safety profile.  
Monitoring of Subjects and Criteria for Withdrawal of Subjects  
Adverse Events (AEs): Study  personnel will monitor study participants for AEs thorough the 
course of the study, and in 30 -day post -study safety follow -up by phone.  
Any AE that is ongoing at the time of the participant’s study completion or withdrawal will be 
followed by the study ph ysician and PI until the event resolves or stabilizes.  
AEs will be captured, by the Investigator or designee, in the subject's source documents and on 
the case report form (CRF). AEs will be followed by the study physician and Principal 
Investigator and re ported to the IRB in accordance with regulatory requirements.  
Fluctuation of intensity and frequency of symptoms evaluated in the study is expected due to 
natural course of the chronic illness. If the patient reports significant worsening of any symptom 
during treatment, this will be conveyed to the study physician, who will assess the patient’s 
report and offer the patient appropriate follow -up. 
The participant may withdraw from the study at any point for any reason.  
Participants may be removed from the st udy for the following reasons:  
• Not following the study protocol or instructions from study personnel.  
• Participants who during familiarization (Visit 2) find the sensory sensation associated 
with the stimulation unacceptable.  
• Participants who after instruction are not able to perform tDCS in accordance with the 
procedure described in the patient’s instructional booklet.  
15 
 • If a serious adverse event related or potentially related to the study procedure occurs.  
• If the study closes.  
Provisions for Researc h Related Injury  
Because the risk profile of tDCS is very low, no research -related injury is anticipated. In the 
unlikely event that a patient reports clinically -relevant harm from the study, this information will 
be conveyed to one of the study physician s (R.K. Portenoy, MD ; A. Mauskop, MD ), who will 
evaluate the patient.   The physician will ensure that the patient has appropriate medical follow -
up.  The IRB guidelines for reporting will be followed.  
 
REGULATORY AND ETHIC AL OBLIGATIONS  
General  
This study will be conducted in accordance with the ethical principles that have their origin in the 
Declaration of Helsinki and under applicable regulatory requirements; the Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR), CFR Title 21, International Conference of Harm onisation (ICH) Good Clinical 
Practice (GCP) E6.  
 
Protocol  
 A copy of the protocol, proposed informed consent, research authorization and any further 
documentation will be submitted to the Institutional Review Board (IRB) for written approval.  All 
subsequ ent protocol amendments and changes to the informed consent document will be submitted 
to the IRB for written approval.  
 
Informed Consent  
Each qualified participant will voluntarily sign and date the informed consent and research 
authorization after the st udy purposes, procedures, and potential risks and benefits of the study and 
all other aspects have been fully explained to them.  The consent form must be signed prior to 
performance of any study -related activity.   
 
Confidentiality  
All medical information  collected from study participants, and documentation related to their 
participation in the study will be kept in a locked cabinet at MJHS Institute for Innovation in 
Palliative Care.  Unique patient identifiers will be used to label all data. Strict stand ards of 
confidentiality will be upheld at all times.  
 
Alternatives to Participatio n 
The alternative to participate in this study is not to participate.  Participants are free to withdraw 
at any time without penalty.  Participants may elect to discuss possible approaches to symptom 
management in chronic illness with their medical providers.  
 
Prompted Action  
If the score on the Hamilton Depression Scale (Ham -D) is 17 or higher [moderate or severe 
depression], the study personnel will ask the patient whether he/she would like to have study 
personnel contact the patient’s physician to inform him/her about this score.  
16 
 If the score on item #3 of the Ham -D scale is 3 or 4 [Suicidal ideas, gestures or attempts], the 
patient will be told that the study physi cian will be informed, and that the study physician will 
make a determination about whether to inform the patient’s physician that this score was elicited.  
 
ADMINISTRATIVE ISSUES  
Compensation  
Participants who undergo  the study intervention in accordance with the study protocol  (daily 
active/ sham tDCS with completed Daily Diaries and completed outcome assessment 
questionnaires) , will receive monetary compensation  for their time and effort  up to $150 in cash 
dispensed at Visit #3.  
Participants not adhering  to the study protocol will not receive the compensation.  
Participants who do not start the at -home stimulation phase will not be compensated.  This 
means that participants who complete the 30 -day Baseline phase and do not qualify will not be 
compensated for their time.  
 
Participants who start the at -home stimulation phase, but leave the study early, will receive 
prorated compensation as it follows:  
- If they leave the study before completing the first month of stimulation, they will receive $50, 
if they followed the study procedures (tDCS daily applications, Daily Diaries and 
questionnaires).  
- If they complete the first month of at -home stimulation , but not the second month of at -home 
stimulation, they will receive $100, if they followed the study procedures.  
- If they complete both the first and second month of at -home stimulation, you will receive $150, 
if they followed the study procedures.  
 
 
Study Registration  
The study will be registered at the publicly accessible website ClinicalTrials.gov. in accordance 
with the U.S. regulatory requirements.  
 
Study Documentation and S torage   
A list of all persons authorized to perform study procedures will be  maintained in the Regulatory 
Binder. All study related essential documentation will also be kept in the Regulatory Binder.  
Participant’s study files and source documentation will be maintained by the assigned study staff.  
Study files will be kept locked  in the research offices. Following completion or termination of the 
study, all study documents will be kept for a minimum of 3 years as required by the IRB.  
REFERENCES  
Antal A, Kriener N, Lang N, Boros K, Paulus W. Cathodal transcranial direct  current stimulation 
of the visual cortex in the prophylactic treatment of  migraine. Cephalalgia. 2011 
May;31(7):820 -8.  
17 
 Auvichayapat P, Janyacharoen T, Rotenberg A, Tiamkao S, Krisanaprakornkit T,  Sinawat S, 
Punjaruk W, Thinkhamrop B, Auvichayapat N. Migraine prop hylaxis by  anodal 
transcranial direct current stimulation, a randomized, placebo -controlled trial. J Med Assoc 
Thai. 2012 Aug;95(8):1003 -12. PubMed PMID: 23061303.  
Bystad M, Rasmussen ID, Gronli O, Aslaksen PM. Can 8 months of daily tDCS application slow 
the cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease? A case study. Neurocase. 2017; 23(2):146 -
148. 
Charvet L, Kasschau M, Datta A, Knotkova H, Stevens MC, Alonzo A, Loo C, Krull KR, Bikson 
M. Remotely -supervised transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for c linical trials: 
Guidelines for technology and protocols. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 2015; 9:1 -13.   
Im JJ, Jeong  H, Oh JK, Na S, Park JS, Knotkova H, Bikson M, Song IU, Chung YA. Effects of 
long-term transcranial direct current stimulation on cognitive function and cerebral glucose 
metabolism in Alzheimer's disease: a 6 -month prospective study. Brain Stimulation, 20 19, 
under editorial consideration.  
Dasilva AF, Mendonca ME, Zaghi S, Lopes M, Dossantos MF, Spierings EL, Bajwa  Z, Datta A, 
Bikson M, Fregni F. tDCS -induced analgesia and electrical fields in pain -related neural 
networks in chronic migraine. Headache. 2012  Sep;52(8):1283 -95. 
Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators. Global, regional, and national 
incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 328 diseases and injuries for 195 
countries, 1990 –2016: a systematic analysis for the G lobal Burden of Disease Study 2016. 
Lancet 2017;390:1211 -1259.  
Ford JH, et al. A Real -World Analysis of Migraine: A Cross -Sectional Study of Disease Burden 
and Treatment Patterns. Headache 2017;57(10):1532 -1544.  
Fregni F, Boggio PS, Nitsche MA, Marcolin  MA, Rigonatti SP, Pascual -Leone A. Treatment of 
major depression with transcranial direct current stimulation. Bipolar Disord. 2006; 
Apr;8(2):203 -4. PubMed PMID: 16542193.  
Ifergane G, Wirguin I, Shvartzman P. Triptans —Why Once? Headache 2006;46(8):1261 -1263. 
Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1960; 23:56 –62. 
Hasselman, D. Center for Health Care Strategies.  Super -Utilizer Summit: Common Themes from 
Innovation Complex Care Management Programs.  2013; pp.1-32. Available at : 
https://www.chcs.org/resource/super -utilizer -summit -common -themes -from -innovative -
complex -care-management -programs/ . 
Knotkova H, Riggs A, Portenoy RK.  A Patient -Tailored Protocol of tDCS Stimulation Paired with 
Telehealth Support for At -home Symptom Management in Seriously Ill Patients with 
Multiple Chronic Symptoms. Brain Simulation 2017; 10(4):e77 –e78.  
Knotkova H, Ri ggs A, Bernstein H, Patel V, Truong D, Unal G, Arce D, Datta A, Bikson M. 
Automatic M1 -SO montage headgear for transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) 
suitable for home and high -throughput in -clinic applications. Neuromodulation, 2018; 
10.1111/ner.1 2786. [Epub ahead of print].  
18 
 Lipton RB, Dodick DW, Silb erstein SD, et al. Single -pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation for 
acute treatment of  migraine with aura: a randomised, double -blind, parallelgroup,sham -
controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 2010;9:373 –380. 
Martelletti P, Jensen RH, Antal A, Arcioni R, Brighina F, de Tommaso M,  Franzini A, Fontaine 
D, Heiland M, Jürgens TP, Leone M, Magis D, Paemeleire K,  Palmisani S, Paulus W, May 
A; European Headache Federation. Neuromodulation of  chronic headaches: position 
statement from the European Headache Federation. J  Headache Pain. 2013 Oct 21;14:86. 
doi: 10.1186/1129 -2377 -14-86. PubMed PMID:  24144382; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC4231359.  
Nitsche MA, Paulus W. Excitability changes induced in the human motor cortex  by weak 
transcranial direct current stimulation. J Physiol. 2000 Sep 15;527 Pt3:633 -9. PubMed 
PMID: 10990547; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2270099.  
Rendas -Baum R, Bloudek LM, Maglinte GA, Varon SF. The psychometric properties of the 
Migraine -Specific Qu ality of Life Questionnaire version 2.1 (MSQ) in chronic migraine 
patients . Qual Life Res 2013, 22(5):1123 -1133.  
Riggs A, Patel V, Paneri B, Portenoy RK, Bikson M, Knotkova H. At -home transcranial direct 
current stimulation (tDCS) with telehealth support f or symptom control in chronically ill 
patients with multiple symptoms. Frontiers in Behavioral Science 2018,12:93.  
Riggs A, Patel V, Charvet L, Kassachau M, Harounian J, Knotkova H. Developing patient and 
caregiver instructional materials and training for at-home, remotely -supervised, transcranial 
Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) in seriously ill patients with multiple symptoms. Brain 
Simulation, 2017; 10(4)44.  
Rocha S, Melo L, Boudoux C, Foerster Á, Araújo D, Monte -Silva K. Transcranial direct current 
stimulation in the prophylactic treatment of migraine based on  interictal visual cortex 
excitability abnormalities: A pilot randomized  controlled trial. J Neurol Sci. 2015 Feb 
15;349(1 -2):33 -9. 
Saper JR, Dodick DW, Silberstein SD,McCarville S, Sun M, Goadsby  PJ. Occipital nerve 
stimulation for the treatment of  intractable chronic migraine headache: ONSTIM feasibility  
study. Cephalalgia 2011;31:271 –285. 
Gérardy PY, Fabry D, Fumal A, Schoenen J. A pilot study on supra -orbital surface 
electrotherapy in migraine.  Cephalalgia  2009;29:134.  
Sampaio -Junior B, Tortella G, Borrione L, Moffa AH, Machado -Vieira R, Cretaz E, Fernandes da 
Silva A, Fraguas R, Aparício LV, Klein I, Lafer B, Goerigk S, Benseñor IM, Lotufo PA, 
Gattaz WF, Brunoni AR. Efficacy and Safety of Trans cranial Direct Current Stimulation as 
an Add -on Treatment for Bipolar Depression: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 
Psychiatry. 2017; Dec 27. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.4040.  
Wickmann F, Stephani C, Czesnik D, Klinker F, Timäus C, Chaieb L, Paulus W,  Antal A. 
Prophylactic treatment in menstrual migraine: A proof -of-concept study. J Neurol Sci. 2015 
Jul 15;354(1 -2):103 -9. 
Williams JB. A structured interview guide for the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 1988; 45(8):742 –7. 
19 
 Woods AJ, Antal A, Bikson M, Boggio PS, Brunoni AR, Celnik P, Cohen LG, Fregni F, 
Herrmann CS, Kappenman ES, Knotkova H, Liebetanz D, Miniussi C, Miranda PC, Paulus 
W, Priori A, Reato D, Stagg C, Wenderoth N, Nitsche MA. A technical guide to tDCS, and 
related non -invasive brain stimulation tools. Clin Neurophysiol.  2016 Feb;127(2):1031 -
1048. PubMed PMID: 26652115; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4747791.  