Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
1 
   
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
2 
 IIR 15 -
085     Preferences for Open Vs. Endovascular 
Repair for Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm  
Document Date  4/10/2023  
NCT  3115346  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
3 
  
 
 
 
Protocol 16-16 HSRD (Goodney)   
Alignment of Treatment Preferences and Repair Type for Veterans with AAA  
Funding Agency: HSR&D  
Principal Investigator/Study Chair: Philip P. Goodney, MD  
[Version Number  1.2] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
4 
  
Abstract  
 
 
Nearly 5,000 Veterans undergo abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair each year in VA  hospitals. 
Randomized trials, including the VA -based Open Versus Endovascular Repair (OVER) Trial, have  found 
endovascular AAA repair (EVAR), is associated with lower perioperative morbidity and mortality, less pain,  
and shorter length of stay than open surgical repair (OSR) However, OSR is more durable, has fewer  long-
term complications such as late rupture, and Veterans treated with EVAR and OSR have similar survival 
within  two years following surgery. Given these tradeoffs, controversy remains as to which method is best 
suited for  an individual Veteran who AAA repair, and preliminary analyses needs have found broad 
variations across  VA hospitals in how Veterans are treated for AAA.  
 
Treatment decisions for AAA need to be aligned with  Veterans' preferences. For example, a Veteran for 
whom a rapid recovery is of primary importance and  long-term durability a lesser concern has a treatment 
preference  which aligns most closely with EVAR. Similarly,  a Veteran who wishes to avoid repeated follow -
up visits and late re -interventions has a treatment preference  that aligns most closely with OSR. However, 
while AAA treatment type varies across VA hospitals, i t is unknown  if these treatment variations occurs as 
a result of Veterans preferences, or independent of  Veterans'  preferences. Surgeon preferences for repair 
type have been poorly described, especially for surgeons  treating Veterans.  
 
In preliminary work, we have performed observational analyses, surveys, and cognitive interviews. This  
works has demonstrated variation in AAA repair type in VA and refined qualitative methods to better  
understand Veterans' and surgeons’ treatment decisions. In this proposal, in a cohort of Veterans who are 
candidates  for either repair type (OSR or EVAR), we will use a survey explore Veterans' knowledge and 
preferences for  AAA repair, and determine if Veterans who receive a decision aid as well as the survey a re 
more likely to  receive their treatment  choice.  
 
We describe a cluster -randomized trial comparing two ways to better align Veterans' preferences  and 
treatments for AAA: (1) a validated decision aid describing AAA repair types with a survey measuring  
Veterans' preference for repair type -- versus (2) the survey alone. Enrolled Veterans will be candidates for  
either endovascular or open repair, and be followed at VA hospitals by vascular surgery teams who 
regularly  perform both types of repair . In Aim 1, we will determine Veterans' preferences for endovascular 
or open repair  and identify domains associated with each repair type. In Aim 2, we will compare 
agreement between  Veterans' preferences and repair type between the decision aid+survey and  survey -
alone groups. We will identify  factors associated with agreement. Our findings will be reported to the 
National Surgery Office Vascular  Surgery Advisory Board to help ensure Veterans' preferences remain at 
the center of AAA treatment decisions.  We have recruited 20 VA Medical Centers and their vascular 
surgery teams who are anxious to participate in  this important trial to help Veterans make the best  
decisions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
5 
 List of Abbreviations  
 
 
AAA: Abdominal aortic aneurysm  
 
LSI: Local Site Invest igator  
 
NIH: National Institute of Health  
 
NHLBI: National Heart, Lung and  Blood Institute  
 
PHI: Protected Health Information  
 
TDI: The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy & Clinical Practice  
 
SVS: Society for Vascular Surgery  
 
VISN:  Veterans Integrated Service Network  
 
 
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
6 
   
 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Contents  
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  7 
2. Study Team  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  11 
3. Study Sites  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  14 
4. Study Desig n ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  16 
5. Study Committees  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 22 
6. Coding Guide and Data Management Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  22 
7. Data  Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 23 
8. References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  27 
 
 
Appendices  
1. Site Enrollment Guide  
2. Survey Instruments for Intervention and Control Groups  
3. International Patient Decision Aid Standards Criteria  Checklist  
4. Shared Decision Making Training Course  Summary  
5. Study Introduction Script  
 
  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
7 
 1. Introduction  
 
Background  
 
Abdominal aortic aneurysm is the 14th leading cause of 
death among men over age 60, and  a common 
condition among United States Veterans.4, 5 
Approximately 250,000 Veterans have  AAA,  and 
nearly 5,000 patients are treated for AAA annually to 
prevent rupture.1, 6-9 
 
Before the advent of endovascular devices in the late 
1990s, open surgical repair of AAA was  the only 
treatment option for patients with AAA. In open 
surgical repair, a large abdominal incision  is 
necessary, and clam ps are applied to the aorta - the 
largest blood vessel in the body.  Surgical  
reconstruction is performed as shown in Figure 1. The 
risk of perioperative death is 3 -5% for  open  AAA 
repair, even in hospitals skilled in this major operation. 
The chance of major  complications  such as bleeding, 
need for further surgery, or heart attack, can 
approach 20% within the  first year.10-13 
  
The development of endovascular AAA repair (called 
EVAR) in the 1990s changed the  treatment  options 
available for patients with AAA14. Stent -grafts could 
be placed through small incisions  in the groins to 
exclude the aneurysm from blood flow, without any 
need for a large  abdominal  incision or aortic clamping 
(Figure 2). Short  term recovery was now much 
simpler, and  vascular  surgeon s rapidly adopted this 
new technique.  
 
Equipoise between repair types for A AA: 
Endovascular repair and open surgery have  been  
compared extensively in a variety of settings, 
including large randomized trials within VA1-3, 9. In 
these studies, the less-invasive nature of endovascular repair demonstrated several  advantages:  lower 
rates of perioperative mortality (less than 2% versus 5%), shorter length of stay (2 versus  7 days), and 
better patient quality of life earlier after AAA treatment15. Howeve r, endovascular  repair  had clear 
disadvantages as well. For example, Veterans treated with EVAR commonly  develop  leaks around their 
graft called endoleaks, which can require secondary procedures, and can  result  in late aneurysm  rupture16-
21. 
 
These tradeof fs have made it difficult to find a clear “winner” between endovascular repair  and open 
surgery. While the randomized trials gave surgeons and Veterans important  information  about the 
short and long -term outcomes of each approach, they failed to identify a  single  AAA repair type that 
would be best for all Veterans with AAA. Because of these tradeoffs,  equipoise  still remains as to the 
optimal AAA repair  type.  
 
Variation in treatment type for AAA : This equipoise in AAA repair type has led to variation in AAA  
repair  type across VA hospitals (Figure 3). While many have studied changes in AAA repair type in  
Medicare  patients39-41, variation in repair type in VA hospitals has received less attention. Therefore, to 
explore  this variation, we perfor med preparatory -to-research analyses42. Our work demonstrated four -
fold variation  in repair type across different VISNs.  For example, in 2009, nearly 80% of AAAs were 
Figure 1: Open AAA Repair
Figure 2: Endovascular AAA Repair

Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
8 
 repaired with  open  surgery in VISN 8, and 20% 
underwent endovascular repair (Figure 3). 
However, in VISN 1, the opposite  wastrue – 
fewer than 20% of AAAs were  repaired  using 
open repair, and more than 80%  were  repaired 
with endovascular repair. The  results  seen at 
the VISN level were similar in a  recent  survey 
of the twenty sites in our  study.  Preliminary 
analyses also showed us  that measuring AAA 
repair within the VA itself  is necessary. For 
example, we measured  the proportion of AAA 
treated with open repair in  VA in the la st five 
years. We found that  the proportion of AAA 
repaired with open  repair  declined by 3% in 
absolute terms, from 36%  to 33%42. When 
compared to patients treated  at non-VA 
hospitals, using data from the  Society  for 
Vascular Surgery43, the decline in  open  repair was 19% in absolute terms (from 40%  21%). These data 
suggest that treatment preferences for Veterans differ from non -Veteran populations.  As such, using 
data from non -Veterans is unlikely to be a good substitution, and it would be best to learn  about  our 
Veterans’ preferences directly – from our Veterans  themselves.  
 
Why we need to understand Veterans’ preferences : After our preparatory -to-research analyses,  two 
findings were clear: (1) high -quality randomized trials have demonstrated that outcomes such as  aneurysm - 
related mortality and overall mortality are equivalent between endovascular and open repair, and (2)  
significant  variation in AAA repair type exists across VA. One might ask, why does it matter if there is 
variation in  AAA repair  type if the two repair types are similar, based on traditional procedure -related  
outcomes?  
 
The best answer to this question integrates three important concepts: the disparate nature of the two  
repair  types , the risks inherent to each repair t ype, and the need to align treatment for AAA with  Veterans’  
preferences . Open repair requires a large abdominal incision, a greater physiologic challenge during  
surgery,  and a more prolonged recovery when compared to endovascular repair, but is more durable tha n 
endovascular  repair. A Veteran who must travel long distances for appointments, for whom reliable follow -
up is not  possible,  or who has chronic worry and anxiety, has treatment preferences likely to align with 
open repair.  Conversely,  endovascular repair , while less invasive, requires close follow -up with multiple 
imaging tests for several  years  after repair, with the potential for late complications years following the 
initial treatment. A Veteran who  needs  to return to work quickly to ensure that his or  her job is not 
endangered by a prolonged recovery has  a treatment preferences likely to align with endovascular repair. 
Therefore, aligning Veteran preference  and repair type is necessary to achieve the best patient -centered  
outcomes.  
 
Have Veterans’ preferences for AAA repair type been examined befo re? Significant attention has  been  
dedicated towards determining the comparative effectiveness of endovascular and open repair. However,  
less attention has been given to understanding Veterans’ preferences for repair type. In fact, other than  
measuring  quality of life metrics in the context of VA randomized trials23, to the best of our knowledge,  
Veterans’  preferences for repair type remain undescribed. Three studies outside of VA – two surveys of 
National  Health  Service beneficiaries in England44, 45 and a report of six focus groups in Canadian 
patients46 – have begun  to study patient preferences for AAA repair type. However, these findings may, or 
may not, represent  the preferences seen in US Veterans. These preliminary analyses suggest studies 
within the VA are  necessary.  
 
Why would a Veteran receive an AAA repair type that is not aligned with his/her preference? To better  
understand why a Veteran might receive a repair that was not aligned with his or her preferences,  we 
performed two preliminary cognitive interviews with Veterans who underwent endovascular or open 
repair  in recent years. Findings from these interviews led us to develop a theoretical model built upon 
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
V08 V06 V09 V12 V04 V18 V15 V01Endovascular AAA repair 
(EVAR) 
Open Surgical Repair
VISNProportion 
of All AAA 
Repairs Figure 3: Variation in Repair Type in VA Hospitals in 2009
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
9 
 two well-known  theories outlined by experts in shared decision making: a lack of informed choice 
(described by Fowler9 and Weinstein 47, 48) and an overestimate or underestimate of risks (described by 
Barry and Elwyn5, 6, 8). 
 
Lack of informed choice: First, the Veteran may not have a preference because he or she was never  given  
the opportunity to clearly understand the options for treatment47, 48. If the Veteran has not been  fully 
apprised of the treatment options, he or she is  not capable of making a truly “informed”  decision.  
 
For example, during our interview, one Veteran at our center described his  interaction:  
 
The surgeon simply told me, “Your aneurysm needs to be repaired, and it is best for us to fix it  
using  the new way, endovascular.”  I never knew there was a choice, and they never gave me an  
option”  
 
Given the time constraints of current surgical practice, surgeons often use paternalistic care patterns to  
assign  patients with the treatment the surgeon feels is “bes t” – without reviewing other options with 
patients.  Surgical  decisions, especially those made in the context of cardiovascular diseases which 
require time tradeoffs  and competing risks, can be especially difficult for physicians to explain 6, 49, 50. 
There fore, this lack of  informed  choice does little to foster shared decision -making with Veterans about 
ways to repair AAA48, 49. 
 
• Overestimate or underestimate risks: Even if a physician actually attempts to engage a patient in  
sharing  knowledge about a health care decision, two tendencies can “derail” the process of shared  
decision  making. First, the description can be biased in a way that reflects the providers’ beliefs and  
assumptions,  rather than the patients51. Second, patients may not understand the  magnitude of the 
risks, as  patients  tend to overestimate benefits and underestimate risks 6, 49, 50. These tendencies can 
result in  providers  following the “letter of the law” in shared decision -making, but still ending up with a 
decision that is  unlikely  to be aligned with the Veterans’ preferences for  treatment.  
 
My surgeon explained, “Your aneurysm is now large enough that we should repair it. While there  
are two ways to fix the aneurysm, the better choice for you is an endovascular, because you will 
recover  more quickly.” But I ended up having to come back for many visits over the years, 
because of leaks.  I even needed a second procedure Maybe it would have been better to just fix 
it the old -fashioned  way.”  
 
How considering Veterans’ preferences will help to improve outcomes : Misalignment of  treatment  
preferences can result in poorer satisfaction with surgery52, 53. This dissatisfaction can have real effects  
for Veterans. For example, Veterans treated with open repair may have more com plications, more work  
loss, greater rates of depression, and more social isolation because of the longer recovery time32, 54 -56. 
Similarly,  for Veterans treated with endovascular repair, the need for continued surveillance with 
radiation -based CT  scans,  worries about complications, and the need for family support can have 
deleterious effects as well24, 25,  40. 
 
Shared decision -making is an approach where clinicians and patients share the best available evidence  
when  faced with th e task of making decisions, and where patients are supported to consider options to  
achieve  informed preferences57, 58. The Veterans Health Administration has urged the adoption of shared  
decision - making for decisions facing elderly Veterans, such as deci sions for long -term care59. These 
efforts in VA  were  developed along with the Informed Medical Decisions Foundation, which is led by Dr. 
Michael Barry. Dr.  Barry  is a Co -Investigator in this proposal, and represents an important link to the VA’s 
existing work in  shared - decision making10. Our proposal will help advance this science by determining 
how to best use  shared  decision -making models in the treatment of Veterans with vascular disease in 
VA. Poor decision  satisfaction  and limited shared dec ision-making are likely to result when treatment 
decisions are made without  considering  patient preferences60, 61. We hypothesize that overestimating or 
underestimating risk may result in  poor alignment between Veterans’ preferences and the repair type 
they receive for treatment of their  AAA.  
  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
10 
  
Specific Aims  
We describe a cluster -randomized trial comparing two ways to better align Veterans' preferences  
and treatments for AAA: (1) a validated decision aid describing AAA repair types with a survey 
measuring  Veterans' preference for repair type -- versus (2) the survey alone. Enrolled Veterans will 
be candidates for  either endovascular or open repair, and be followed at VA hospitals by vascular 
surgery teams who regularly  perform both types of repair . The conceptual framework for our study is 
illustrated in  Figure 4. 
Figure 4: Conceptual Model  
  
 
 
 
Aim 1: To identify Veteran and surgeon factors associated with preference for endovascular or  
open  repair. We will use validated survey instruments to determine repair type preference (endovascular 
or open)  for Veterans and surgeons, and identify domains in our survey associated with each repair  type.  
 
Hypothesis (H1): We hypothesize Veterans who prioritize concerns about pain or disabilit y will  prefer  
endovascular repair, and Veterans who prioritize concerns about durability will prefer open  repair.  
 
Aim 2: To determine the effect of the decision aid on agreement between preference and repair  
type.  AAA growth rate estimates suggest 85% of our cohort will undergo repair within our two – year 
study  period.  Among patients in the intervention and control groups who undergo repair, we will compare 
how commonly  Veterans receive the repair type they indicated as their preference. We will study 
potential  explanatory  variables from our survey, such as AAA knowledge, between the intervention and 
control groups.  Patient  satisfaction and shared decision making will be assessed in both the intervention 

Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
11 
 and control  groups.  
 
Hypothesis (H2): Our intervention will be associated with better agreement between preference and  
treatment  type for Veterans with AAA, as well as higher post -operative satisfaction and greater shared  
decision -making.  
 
2. Study Team  
 
Dr. Goodney, the Principal Investigator, is a VA vascular surgeon and Co -Director of the VA Outcomes Group 
in White River Junction.  A current NIH K08 awardee in health services research, he is experienced in 
conducting multicenter, cluster -randomized clinical trials61, 62. He is currently the Principal Investigator of a 
multicenter cluster -randomized trial of a smoking cessation quality improvement intervention funded by  the 
Society for Vascular Surgery62. Dr. Goodney has assembled a team (Table 1) with extensive expertise in 
survey research (Dr. Sirovich), shared decision - making (Dr. Barry), and analyzing outcomes in VA (Drs. West 
and Mackenzie).  Finally, Dr.Goodney an d his team members have worked together before in several 
projects63, 64 , many of which have studied physician practice64-66 , so they are well prepared to collaborate 
effectively in this study. Their team, including 20 site PIs, have collaborated on sever al projects which have 
studied physician practice71-73 and each has significant time dedicated towards the proposal.  
Table 1: Key Personnel  
 
 
   
 
Team  Member   
 
Role   
 
Skill Set  
Task  
Aims  
 
 
Philip Goodney, MD,  MS  
Principal  
Investigator   
Vascular  surgery,  
quantitative  analyses,  
cluster‐randomized  trials   
Overall project  execution  
1, 2 
 
 
Brenda Sirovich, MD,  MS  
Co‐ 
Investigator   
Assessing physician  practice,  
preference‐sensitive  care  
using  surveys  Interpret survey results  in 
Aim 1 
 
1 
 
 
Michael Barry,  MD  
Co‐ 
Investigator   
Shared  Decision‐Making,  
decision  aids Interpret survey results  in 
Aim 1 and Aim  2 
 
1,2 
 
 
Alan West,  PhD  
Co‐ 
Investigator   
Statistician  and 
Epidemiologic Support,  VA 
data  architecture  Implementation of pilot  trial,  
randomized trial  design,  
VINCI  data  
 
2 
 
 
Todd Mackenzie,  PhD  
Co‐ 
Investigator   
Biostatistics,  observational  
dataset analyses, cluster  trial 
design  Observational  analyses,  
cluster trial design,  statistical  
 
1,2 
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
12 
 KEY PERSONNEL  
Philip P. Goodney, MD, MS Principal Investigator . Dr. Goodney is an Associate Professor of  Vascula r 
Surgery and Co -Director of the VA Outcomes Group at the White River Junction VA. He is an affiliated  
faculty at The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy & Clinical Practice (TDI) at the Geisel School of 
Medicine  at Dartmouth. He received a Career Development Award in 2010 from the National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute (NHLBI) (K08HL05676) and the 2011 Lifeline Award from the Society for Vascular 
Surgery (SVS)  to study variation in treatment and intensity in vascular care. In 2012, he was appoint ed 
Director of  Surgical Outcomes Research at Dartmouth -Hitchcock Medical Center, and in 2013 he was 
named the Co -Director  of the VA Outcomes Group at the White River Junction VA. In 2014, he received 
the Multicenter Trials  Planning Grant from the SVS, and in 2015 he received funding from PCORI and 
FDA for patient -centered research.  He has experience in studying the delivery of vascular care, surgical 
quality improvement efforts, and  cluster - randomized trials in patients with va scular disease. In this study , 
Dr. Goodney will lead the team's efforts  in a cluster -randomized trial that will compare the effect of two 
different strategies (decision aid plus  survey versus survey alone) in helping determine the best ways to 
align Veterans’ preferences for repair ty pe in abdominal aortic aneurysm with their treatment.  Dr. 
Goodney will devote 3.6 calendar months of his time  to the project in each of the four  years.  
 
Brenda Sirovich, MD, MS Co-Investigator / Survey Research and Veterans’ Preferences . Dr. Sirovich is  
Co- Director of the VA Outcomes Group at the White River Junction VA Medical Center (in partnership 
with Dr. Goodney). She is also Associate Professor of Medicine and Community and Family Medicine at 
Geisel  School of Medicine at Dartmouth. With funding from HSR&D and the National Institutes on Aging, 
she is a  nationally recognized researcher studying clinical practice intensity – a measure of practice 
patterns of physicians, with  a focus on their thresholds to make invasive and no n-invasive treatment 
decisions. Her work examining  Pap smear screening practices and geographic variation in physician 
practice has been cited widely in the  medical and lay media, and has been included in CME training 
programs. She has led research teams c onducting  two large successful national physician surveys, and 
has served on the VISN1 Specialty Consult  Utilization  Council. Given her broad expertise in survey 
research, she will assist Drs. Goodney, Barry, West,  and MacKenzie in the development and exec ution of 
the cluster -randomized trial. She will devote 3.6  calendar months of her time in each of the four years of 
the project.  
 
Michael Barry, MD (IPA) Co-Investigator / Decision Aids and Shared Decision -Making . Dr. Barry is  the 
President of the Foundati on for Informed Medical Decisions, the Chief Scientific  Officer of Healthwise, 
and an internationally recognized expert on decision aids and shared decision -making.  He has extensive  
experience in the development, testing, and implementation of decision ai ds to foster shared decision -
making,  especially regarding treatments related to surgery.  He has collaborated with Dr. Goodney in prior 
work on  the Dartmouth Atlas of Healthcare, and will extend these collaborations to this work as well. 
Specifically , he will work closely with Dr. Goodney to implement the survey and decision aid. He will 
subsequently analyze  and interpret the results of the cluster -randomized trial. He will share his expertise 
in determining the domains  that influence patient preferences. He will also be instrumental in interpreting 
findings related to the  agreement between patient preferences and treatments and will help shape the 
recommendations that emanate  from these findings. He will not have access to PHI. Dr. Barry will 
dedicate .6 c alendar months in year 1, .3 calendar months in years 2 and 3,  and 1.2 calendar months in 
year 4 of the  project.  
 
Alan N. West, PhD Co-Investigator / Quantit ative Research . Dr. West is an experienced health  services 
researcher who has been awarded three HS R&D IIR awards examining practice patterns in VA and  non-
VA healthcare, especially in comparison to Medicare claims (HSR&D IR 11 -319, 07 -233, and 04 -306). Dr.  
West was Deputy Director of the Veterans Rural Health Resource Center (Eastern Region) and has 
published  widely on health care access and utilization among VA patients. Given his extensive knowledge 
of VA  administrative and clinical datasets, Dr. West will collaborate with Dr. Goodney to perform the 
cluster -randomized trial  as outlined in Aim 1 and Ai m 2, and will construct secure infrastructure for the 
conduct and receipt of  study -related datasets.  Dr. West will devote 1 calendar month of his time in all four 
years of the  project.  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
13 
 Todd A. MacKenzie, PhD Co-Investigator / Biostatistician (IPA) . Dr. MacKenzie, a Senior Biostatistician  at 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, has a long history of collaboration with Dr. Goodney, Dr. West,  
and other VA HSR&D investigators. He has extensive expertise in providing statistical collaboration in 
clinical  trials and multilevel hierarchical modeling. Further, he has previously collaborated with Dr. Goodney 
and his  team on analyses incorporating large observational datasets, including VA datasets, Medicare 
claims and  clinical registr y data.  Specifically, he has served as a biostatician on Dr. Goodney’s NHLBI 
career  development award, and they currently collaborate on a cluster -randomized trial funded by the 
Society for Vascular  Surgery. In this study , in collaboration with Dr. Goodne y and Dr. West, Dr. MacKenzie 
will oversee  the implementation of statistical analyses, especially in the multilevel models described in Aim 
1, as well as  any weighted kappa calculations that are necessary in Aim 2. Dr. MacKenzie will devote 1.2 
calendar months of  his time in all four years of the  project.  
 
OTHER  PERSONNEL  
 
Cory Gaudette Central Study Coordinator: Our cluster -randomized trial entails the need for  extensive 
coordination, oversight, and technical support for the study participants. To most effectively accomplish  
this goal, we will use a Central Study Coordinator. The Central Study Coordinator will be responsible  for 
maintaining IRB approval of the Study Protocol, coordinating training meetings for Site Study  
Coordinators, implementin g the randomization scheme, and overseeing enrollment and follow -up goals at 
each of the  study sites. Further, the Central Study Coordinator will work with each of the Site Study 
Coordinators to receive  and catalogue survey data forms and case report forms . As the survey data 
forms will contain the first initial of patients’ last name and last 4 digits of their SSN, Ms. Gaudette will 
have access to this PHI.  The Central Study Coordinator will also work with  Dr. Goodney in coordination of 
study processe s files between the study participants, assist in project  analyst supervision, and coordinate 
the editorial process for manuscripts and reports. Ms. Gaudette is ideal for  this role, having managed 
several large projects in her role as the Administrative Of ficer of the VA  Outcomes Group, and she 
coordinated the study sites for this proposal. Ms. Gaudette will devote 6 calendar months  of her time in all 
four years of the  project.  She will retain her VA appointment at the White River Junction VA Medical 
Center .  
 
Amy Voorhees, MS Programmer / Analyst .  Amy Rose is a program analyst at the White River Junction  
VA and currently works within the VA Outcomes Group. Ms. Rose has several years of experience  
designing research protocols and analyzing complex administr ative and clinical databases in the 
Department of  Veterans Affairs and in the private sector. Her analytic skills include proficiency in SAS 
programming, and she is  highly knowledgeable regarding VHA databases. Ms. Rose will access and 
construct the VA ana lytic files and  work with Dr. Goodney and Dr. West to construct analytic datasets from 
the study information within Aim 1 and  Aim 2. Ms. Rose will also be responsible for data analyses. Ms. 
Voorhees will devote 2.4 calendar months of  her time in all four y ears of the  project.  
 
Kayla Moore, MPH Research Project Director. Kayla Moore is a seasoned program manager with ten 
years’ experience coordinating federal and privately funded health programs at academic and 
nongovernmental organizations. She currently works with Dr. Goodney and other surgical investigators at 
The Dartm outh Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice to operationalize surgical health services 
research projects. For this study, she will be responsible for managing start -up and administrative 
operations and facilitating IRB approval. Ms. Moore is in the process of receiving a VA WOC appointment at 
the White River Junction VA Medical Center. She will not have access to PHI.  
 
To Be Named Central Research Nurse Coordinator . Our cluster -randomized trial will also require a  
Central Research Nurse Coordinator. The Central Research Nurse Coordinator will also help to support 
each of  the Site Study Coordinators for clinical support. Specifically, the Central Research Nurse 
Coordinator will  partner with the Central Study Coordinator to perform biweekly  support calls and assist 
Site Coordinators  with measuring study outcomes, especially measuring outcomes pertinent to Aim 2 
(i.e., determining  when Veterans undergo AAA repair). The Central Research Nurse Coordinator will 
dedicate 4.2 calendar months  of their time in all four years of the  project.  
 
 
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
14 
 OTHER PERSONNEL: LOCAL SITE INVESTIGATORS AND SITE STUDY COORDINATORS FOR  
TWENTY STUDY  SITES  
 
Each Local Site Investigator, named in Table 2 below,  is a vascular  surgeon in active practice at one 
of the 20 local VA hospitals participating in the study. Each Local Site Investigator  regularly performs the 
procedures studied in this trial in routine practice. They  will lead enrollment activities at the ir local site  and 
will provide  administrative support to the Site Study Coordinator in all four years of the project. Each Local 
Site Investigator will dedicate .6 calendar months  in years 1 and 2, and .3 calendar months in years 3 and 
4 of the  study.  
 
To Be Named The Site Study Coordinator is a role that will be filled by a portion of a research nurse,  
physician assistant, nurse, or nurse practitioner  at each site . The Site Study Coordinator will be 
responsible for IRB  submission, patient enrollment and consent, study intervention, and data submission 
from each site. Each Site  Study Coordinator will identify and follow twelve Veterans from each site and 
receive specific training and  biweekly oversight from the Principal Investigator and the study team.  The 
Site Study C oordinator will  dedicate  1.2 calendar months in each year of the  study.  
 
Who will have access to protected health information  
 
Local Site Investigators and Site Study Coordinators will have access to protected health information  (PHI)  
for participants only  at their sites  during recruitment for eligibility screening  and during follow -up data 
collection . They will also have access to patient’s records for care received while undergoing treatment for 
AAA that is not part of this research. Local Site Investigators and Site Study Coordinators will not have 
access to study data or PHI from any study sites  other than their own .  Ms. Cory Gaudette, t he Central Study 
Coordinator who receives and catalogues the surveys will also have access to PHI.  On the PI team, Dr. 
West will have access to PHI for the purpose of assigning unique study IDs  to code study data . . All VA 
protocols for maintaining privacy and confidentiality of PHI will be strictly adhered to  and the study key will be 
maintained behind VA firewalls and accessible only to VA credentialed personnel.   
 
CONSULTANTS  
Michael Barry, MD, Co-Investigator will be hired as a consultant. As described on page 10 above, his role 
is to provide expertise regarding the implementation of the survey and decision aid and interpretation of 
results. As stated on page 10, he will not have access to PHI.  
 
3. Study Sites  
 
We have recruit ed a nationally representative sample from twenty VA hospitals  across  the country (Table 
2). Our preparatory -to-research analyses indicate that hospital volumes in AAA repair  have  been constant 
(varied by <10% in the last five years), suggesting that our findings will be applicable  towards  treatment 
decisions for Veterans with AAA for several years in the future. In a pre -proposal survey, as well  as 
assessment using CDA data, we confirmed that each study site  perform s at least five aortic repairs and 
fifteen  endovascular  repairs (or similar) per year, ensuring adequate ability at these sites to perform either 
repair type for  Veterans.  Contact information on each of the sites is listed below.  
  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
15 
  
Table 2 Local Site s  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Surgery  Site  
 
 
 
 
City/State   
 
 
 
Complex/Interme  
diate   
 
 
 
 
Site Investigator   
 
 
 
Contact  
Information   
 
Annual  AAA  
Volume  
(Direct)  FY 
2014  Annua l 
AAA  
Volume  
(Endovasc  
ular)  FY 
2014  
VA Western New  York  
Healthcare System  at 
Buffalo   
 
Buffalo,  NY  
 
Complex   
 
Dr. Hasan  Dosluoglu   
 
(716)  862‐8937   
 
4  
 
39 
Valley Division  ‐ 
Sacramento VA  Medical  
Center   
 
Mather,  CA  
 
Complex   
 
Dr. Eugene  Lee  
 
(916)  843‐7202   
 
0  
 
21 
VA Boston  Healthcare  
System, West  Roxbury  
Campus   
 
West Roxbury,  MA  
 
Complex   
 
Dr. Joseph  Raffetto   
 
(857)  203‐6200   
 
27  
 
42 
VA Ann Arbor  Healthcare  
System   
Ann Arbor,  MI  
Complex   
Dr. Peter  Henke   
(734)  845‐5939   
21  
33 
VA Puget Sound  Health  
Care System,  Seattle  
Division   
 
Seattle,  WA  
 
Complex   
 
Dr. Gale  Tang   
 
(206)  764‐2245   
 
13  
 
18 
Durham VA  Medical  
Center   
Durham,  NC  
Complex   
Dr. Leila  Mureebee   
(919)  681‐2800   
9  
27 
Michael E. DeBakey  VA 
Medical  Center   
Houston,  TX  
Complex  Dr. Panagiotis  
Kougias   
(713)  791‐1414   
2  
49 
VA Palo Alto Health  Care  
System   
Palo Alto,  CA  
Complex   
Dr. Wei  Zhou   
(640)  849‐0507   
2  
27 
Omaha VA  Medical  
Center   
Omaha,  NE  
Complex   
Dr. Jason  Johanning   
(402)  995‐3607   
4  
14 
Atlanta VA  Medical  
Center   
Decatur,  GA  
Complex   
Dr. Shipra  Arya   
(404)  321‐6111   
4  
30 
Malcom Randall  VA 
Medical  Center   
Gainesville,  FL  
Complex   
Dr. Salvatore  Scali   
(352)  376‐1611   
19  
37 
White River Junction  VA 
Medical  Center  White River  Junction,  
VT  
Intermediate   
Dr. David  Stone   
(802)  295‐9363   
0  
11 
VA Connecticut  
Healthcare System,  West  
Haven  Campus   
 
West Haven,  CT  
 
Complex   
 
Dr. Alan  Dardik   
 
(203)  932‐5711   
 
2  
 
15 
Jesse Brown VA  Medical  
Center   
Chicago,  IL  
Complex   
Dr. Melina  Kibbe   
(312)  569‐8387   
3  
9 
VA Pittsburg  Healthcare  
System   
Pittsburg,  PA  
Complex   
Dr. Ulka  Sachdev   
(412)‐802‐3333   
7  
33 
Phoenix VA Health  Care  
System   
Phoenix,  AZ  
Complex   
Dr. Vivienne  Halpern   
(602)  277‐5551   
7  
36 
Minneapolis VA  Health  
Care  System   
Minneapolis,  MN  
Complex   
Dr. Steven  Levin   
(612)  725‐2000   
4  
94 
VA Greater Los  Angeles        
Healthcare System,  West        
Los Angeles  Medical        
Center  Los Angeles,  CA Complex  Dr. Jessica  O'Connell  (310)  268‐3445  3 14 
George E. Wahlen  VA 
Medical  Center   
Salt Lake City,  UT  
Complex   
Dr. Benjamin  Brooke   
(801)  582‐1565   
0  
15 
James A. Haley  Veterans  
Hospital   
Tampa,  FL  
Intermediate   
Dr. Peter  Nelson   
(813)  972‐2000   
11  
71 
 
  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
16 
  
4. Study Design  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Design : Our cluster -randomized trial has two Specific Aims.  First, we will test the effect  of an 
intervention (decision aid + survey) versus the survey alone on preferences for repair type  (Aim 1). We 
hypothesize that the intervention will be associated with a greater preference for  open  repair among 
Veterans who value long -term durability in their repair  type.  
 
In Aim 2, we will test the effect of the intervention (decision aid +survey) versus the survey  alone  on 
agreement between Veterans’ preference and actual treatment (Aim 2). We hypothesize  that the 
intervention will be associated with greater agreement between Veterans preferences and  the repair type 
they receive.  
 
Our instrument – both the decision aid and survey - was developed and validated by the  Picker  Institute 
in England28. We modified to use United States English language (Appendix 1).  In preparatory -to-
research work, we pilot -tested the instrument in two cognitiv e interviews at  White  River Junction and 
administered the instrument to five patients at three sites. We will test  the effect of our intervention 
(versus control) on the following outcomes: (1) Veteran preference  for repair type, and the domains 
associated  with preference for each repair type, (2) the  agreement  between Veterans’ preferences and 
their actual repair type, and (3) the Decision Regret  Scale,  administered 30 days after repair to assess 
decision  satisfaction.  
 
Definition  of “Usual  Care” : In both the intervention  and control  groups,  Veterans  will have  “usual  care”  for 
the treatment  of their AAA.  This is defined  as a routine  outpatient  consultation  with a VA vascular  surgeon  
for their AAA and AAA repair  at the discretion  of the surgeon  during  the study  period. Estimates from the 
MASS trial80 and RESCAN meta analyses 81, 82 suggest that 85%  of enrollees  will progress  to repair  
during  the study.  In this study, usual care will be provided by the study team.   
 
Study Location : Our study will  be based in the VA Outcomes Group in White River  Junction,  Vermont.  We 
Veterans with 
Existing AAA 
≥5.0 cm
Open/Endovasc
Candidate
Control:
1. Repair Preferences Survey*
2. Vascular Surgery Consultation
3. Surgeon Survey, Decision Process Score
When repair occurs: record if Preferred  Repair Type = Actual Repair Type
Thirty Days After Discharge from Repair: Record PDQ-18 Questionnaire 
Aim 1:
To identify factors associated with a 
preference for Endovascular and a 
preference for Open.Hypothesis 1:
Most veterans will prioritize concerns over pain or 
disability and have preferences for Endovascular; 
however, Veterans with concerns about durability 
will prefer Open Repair.
Aim 2:  
To determine how commonly preferences 
align with treatment for Veterans who 
undergo AAA repair.Hypothesis 2:
Intervention will result in better alignment of 
preferences and treatments, better treatment 
satisfaction, and more shared decision -making.
^= Picker AAA preference survey (Picker)
~= Among patients  in the cohort who undergo AAA repair
*= includes pre-survey of initial preferencesFigure 5: 
Study Design
Intervention:
1. Pre-Survey, Decision Aid, Repair Preferences Survey*
2. Vascular Surgery Consultation
3. Surgeon Survey, Decision Process Score
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
17 
 will use our secure  VA Research  Server  under  the direction  of Dr. West  as the Study  Data Core. All study 
related committees will meet at the offices of the VA Outcomes Group,  either  in person or using existing 
secure teleconference facilities. Web -based study team meetings  will be held every other week, and will 
use videoconference to minimize expense. Two study  meetings  will be held at the annual  meetings  of the 
Association  of VA Surgeons  and at the Society  for Vascular Surgery during each year of the study. This 
will serve as a cost -effective way for  our group  to meet  biannually  during  the study  period.  
 
Characteristics and selection of the study population : Our study population will be  Veterans  and vascular 
surgeons enrolled at the ten intervention sites and ten control sites in our cluster -randomized trial.  The 
inclusion criteria for patients will be V eterans with a >5.0 cm AAA that  are candidate s for endovascular 
and open r epair. Step C of the Study Procedures describe the recruitment procedures and inclusion 
criteria in detail.  
 
 
STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Step A: Recruitment of Surgeons Twenty VA hospitals that currently perform  both endovascular and 
open repair are the study sample.  Each local site investigator has been interviewed and their credentials 
vetted by the PI , and has accepted to participate in the study . Local site investigators may invite one or 
two additional surgeons whom they work with at their site to pa rticipate in the study.  Site Study 
Coordinators will provide surgeons the Study Invitation and Information Sheet at the start of the study 
period  and document the date . A waiver of documentation of informed consent for surgeons will be 
requested since the  surgeon’s participation involves no procedures other than completion of a survey 
and presents no more than minimal risk.   
 
Step B: Selection of Intervention C enters : In Aim 1, we will conduct the intervention  in 120 patients 
across 10 VA hospitals randomly assigned to the intervention arm. We will have  a 9:1 stratified 
randomization scheme, so that we have a similar proportion of Complex  and Intermediate Surgical VA 
hospitals in the intervention and control arms. These are the only  two types of VA hospitals that perform 
AAA repair. Sites will be randomized at IRB approval in  a rolling fashion. Site specific Study Coordinators 
will use the Study Protocol to facilitate  IRB approval.3, 15. 
 
Step C: Recruitment of Pa tients : We are requesting a waiver of informed consent for recruitment  since 
potential participants will be identified through the screening process described as follows.   
 
i. Potential candidate referred to VA vascular surgery clinic . The first contact with potential 
participants  will occur when a referring physician  indicates that they should be seen by a vascular 
surgeon for treatment of their AAA, and the patient is given an appointment for a consu ltation 
with a vascular surgeon  at a study site .  
 
ii. Identification of 12 Ve terans with a >5.0 cm AAA who are candidates for  endovascular  and open 
repair . The Site Study Coordinator will screen all new consultations made to  VA vascular surgery 
clinics for Veterans with AAA that meet size criteria of ≥ 5.0 cm. Baseline  audits at three clinics 
indicate ~15 new AAA referrals  per vascular surgeon per month, and 60% of Veterans have an 
AAA that meets size  criteria. Assuming a refusal rate of 50%, we anticipate we will enroll fully 
three months after  enrollment  begins, with a screening rate of 8 patients per  site per month and 
an enrollment rate of  four patients per site per  month.  
 
iii. Ensuring Veterans with AAA are candidates for both endovascular and open surgical repair . 
Radiologic reports for new AAA consultations will be re viewed by the Study Coordinator 
according to the Site Recruitment Guide (Appendix 1). If a patient has an AAA that meets these 
size criteria (≥5.0 cm in diameter, the Study Coordinator will contact the Site Principal 
Investigator.  The Site Principal Inves tigator will review imaging tests and the Veteran’s electronic 
health record to ensure the Veteran is a candidate for endovascular and open repair using 
anatomic and clinical criteria defined according the Instructions for Use for each individual aortic 
endoprosthesis. These criteria derive from the Instructions -For-Use protocols determined by the 
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
18 
 Food and Drug Administration83. Site Principal Investigators will have discretion in interpretation 
for placement of an endovascular prosthesis outside of IFU guidelines. If the Veterans meets 
criteria for both open and endovascular repair, the Site Principal Investigator will inform the Study 
Coordinator . 
 
iv. Inviting Veterans who are candidates to participate in the study:  Once a candidate has been 
identified, the Study Coordinator will note the time of the Veteran’s appointment. When the 
Veteran arrives for their appointment, they will check in as usual and proceed to the waiting room.  
The first contact with potential par ticipants will be made by The Study Coordinator or other Study 
Team member  who will take the Veteran to a consult room . Once in the consult room, the Study 
Coordinator or other Study Team Member  will use the Study Introduction Script (Appendix 5), to 
descr ibe the intervention to the Veteran (decision aid and survey)  and invite them to participate . 
Veterans will be offered  some  time to review the consent form . If they wish  to have more time  to 
discuss it with their family and friends , they may reschedule their appointment and return on a later 
day.  The Veteran will be informed that they will be  remunerated $50  at the completion of their first 
appointment for their time spent completing study documents and  surveys.  
 
v. Consent process:  Once a Veter an has expressed interest in the study, t he Study Coordinator or 
other Study Team Member will review the consent form with them , answer any questions, and 
obtain consent. For any Veterans who are unable to read, the study coordinator will read the 
consent form to them  in the presence of a witness . A witness is required to be  present during the 
entire  consenting process for illiterate participants and the witness will sign the informed consent 
to indicate he/she witnessed the participant “making their mark” consenting to be in the study.   
After consent has been obtained by the study coordinator, the Veteran will be taken through the 
survey process.   
  
Step D: Survey administration at intervention and control sites:  
 
Process at  the Intervention S ites:  
 
Step 1: The Pre -Survey will be administered with the Veteran by the  Study  Coordinator. (2  
minutes)  
Step 1a: The Study  Coordinator will review the Decision Aid  with the Veteran. (5 -10 minutes)  
Step 1b: The Study  Coordinator will administer the Survey.  (10 minutes)  
Step 2: The Study  Coordinator will escort the patient to the  visit with the vascular  surgeon.  
Step 3: After the Visit, the Study  Coordinator will complete  the Decision -Process Score with 
the Veteran. (5  minutes)  
Step 4: Thirty days after AAA repair, the Study  Coordinator  will complete the PSQ -18 with the 
Veteran. (5  minutes).  
 
The decision aid is available in English and  Spanish.  
 
The patient will be remunerated at completion of the  enrollment visit.  Data will be recorded 
securely by the Site Study  Coordinator.  
 
The Veteran will be thanked for their participation by the study team via a  formal  letter mailed 
from the Principal  Investigator.  
 
Process at the Control Sites:  
 
Step 1: The Study Coordinator  will administer the Survey.  (10 minutes)  
Step 2: The Study Coordinator  will escort the patient to the  visit with the vascular  surgeon.  
Step 3: After the Visit, the Site -Specific Research Coordinator will complete  the Decision -
Process Score with the Veteran. (5  minutes)  
Step 4: Thirty days after AAA repair, the Study Coordinator  will complete the PSQ -18 with the 
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
19 
 Veteran. (5  minutes)  
 
The patient will be remunerated at completion of the  enrollment visit.  Data  will be recorded 
securely by the Site Study  Coordinator.  
 
The Veteran will be thanked for their participation by the study team via a  formal  letter mailed from the Principal  
Investigator.  
 
Surgeon survey administration at both the intervention and control  sites:  
 
Step 1:  The Study  Coordinator will administer the  Pre-Visit  Survey to the surgeon (1 minute, 
according to pilot testing at four sites in the  trial,  and two sites outside the  trial).  
Step 2:  The surgeon will have the clinic visit with the  Veteran.  
 
Step 3: After the Visit, the Study  Coordinator will complete  the Post -Visit Survey with the 
surgeon (1  minute).  
 
Data will be recorded securely by the Study  Coordinator.  
 
Recruitment Target:  We will recruit 12 Veterans per site (4 Veterans per site per month for  3 months) at 10 
sites in the intervention arm for a total of 120 Veterans in the intervention arm.  We will recruit 12 Veterans 
per site (4 Veterans per site per month for 3 months) at 10 sites in  the control arm for a total of 120 
Veterans in the control arm. The unit of analysis will be the  Veteran.  Randomization will occur at the site 
level, in a stratified 9:1 randomization scheme, based on  the VA hospital’s Surgical Complexity 
designation. We will enroll 8 Complex and 2 I ntermediate  sites per arm.  Randomization will occur at the 
time of IRB  approval.  Weekly conference calls with Site Study Coordinators will assess study enrollment 
rates and help  with problem -solving.   
 
Exclusion C riteria : Veterans with AAA who are not a  candidate for both endovascular and  open  surgical 
repair will be excluded. Veterans who have already undergone AAA repair will  be excluded. We will 
include Veterans who speak English and Spanish, using a translated  survey  instrument (Appendix 2). 
Veterans  who cannot read will be offered participation by allowing  the Site Study Coordinator to 
administer the  survey.  
 
Time Frame : Our study timeline is shown in Figure 6. IRB approval and site randomization  will occur 
during the first 0 -3 months of Project Year  (PY1). Enrollment will begin at PY1 Month 3,  and will be 
completed by the end of PY1 at all sites (a conservative estimate). After two -year follow -up on all sites in 
our cohort during PGY2 -3, we will examine our final outcomes and complete  reports  and manuscripts in  
PY4.  
  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
20 
  
Figure 6: Timeline  Project Year  1 Project Year  2 Project Year  3 Project Year  4 
 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
Study  Milestones                  
IRB approval at Sites  1-20                 
Study Coordinator  Training                  
Enrollment Sites  1-20   25% 50% 75% 100%            
Aim 1 (Intervention,  Survey)      25% 50% 75% 100%          
Aim 2  (Follow -up)         25% 50% 75% 100%      
Training and Analytic  Milestones                  
IRB submissions                  
Dataset repository  construction                  
Accept initial  enrollees                  
Patient  Screening/Enrollment                  
Data Collection /  Assessment                  
DSMB  Auditing                  
Fidelity testing by  DSMB                  
Results testing by  DSMB                  
Manuscripts, reports, future  funding                  
 
 
Risk to Subjects (Veterans and Surgeon  Participants).  
 
Human Subjects Involvement and  Characteristics . 
Aim 1: Cluster -Randomized Trial of a Decision Aid and Survey (versus Survey alone)  for different types of 
AAA Repair  
In our study, we will identify Veterans presenting to Vascular Surgery Clinic with  abdominal aortic 
aneurysms who are candidates for endovascular or open repair.  
 
Sources of  Materials.  
Aim 1 and Aim 2 Survey Results  
The materials  for Aim 2 will be the results  from our survey  administered  as described  in Aim 1 and  Aim 2. 
In accordance  with our Data  Management  Plan,  all will be coded to protect PHI , with study entrants being 
assigned a study identifier throughout the data  management process.  The study key that allows identification 
between individual study patients and their p rotected health information (PHI) will remain behind VA firewalls 
and will  not be routinely used as part of the study analyses. We will create individual random identifiers for 
each study patient, and all study dates will be removed and replaced with  time-to-event variables to limit any 
potential PHI contained in study  datasets.  
Potential Risks for Veterans .  
Decision Aid and  Survey  
Our cluster -randomized  trial will compare  the effect  of a patient  educational  tool (the decision aid) on 
survey responses describing patients’ pref erences for different types of AAA repair. Both types of AAA repair 
are commonly performed across VA, and both are commonly  accepted alternatives for the treatment of  AAA.  
The intervention consists of provision of standardized information to patients, compared  to taking the survey 
alone. Given that the intervention consists only of a standardized delivery  of information th at is commonly 
shared with pati ents during a routine vascular surgery  clinic consultation, there are minimal risks to the 
Veterans who will participate in our survey. All  sites and surgeons will be assigned unique study IDs  in our 
dataset, and indexed only through  anonymous identifiers.  Further, our  data will be stored on VA servers, 
behind VA  firewalls.  
Potential Risks for Surgeons .  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
21 
 Surgeon Survey  
In both the intervention and control groups, we will examine surgeon preferences for repair  type for each 
Veteran. The surgeon’s name associated to a ran domly generated identifier, and a  key at each site will be 
kept to allow the surgeon to remain unidentifiable in research  datasets.  
 
All surgeons participating in the study will receive the Study Invitation and Information Sheet  from the Site 
Study Coordin ator at the time of study  initiation.  We anticipate IRB approval for a waiver of documentation of 
informed consent.  
 
For Veterans, there is an control arm (survey alone) and intervention  arm (survey +  decision aid). For 
surgeons, however, all will re ceive the same surgeon survey. T his is simply a  validated survey  which  records  
the factors  they use to make  their decisions.  Given  that the intervention  consists  only of a standardized  
delivery  of information  that is commonly  shared  with patients during  a routine  vascular  surgery  clinic  
consultation,  there  are minimal  risks to the surgeons who will participate in our survey. No identifiable data 
will be made available, placing no risk  on study  surgeons.  All sites and surgeons  will be assigned unique 
study IDs  in our dataset,  and indexed  only through  anonymous  identifiers.  Further,  our data will be stored  on 
VA servers,  behind  VA firewalls.  
 
 
Adequacy of Protection from  Risk.  
Recruitment and Informed  Consent . 
For our survey,  we will perform  recruitment  at the 20 sites, as described  in our study  procedures . Our Site 
Study  Coordinator  will obtain  consent  prior to administering the intervention. Explanation of the anonymous 
nature of the interviews will be provided to  the subjects.  Informed  consent  will be logged  electronically  and 
secured  at our central  server behind the VA  firewall.  
Protection Against Risk . 
The risk of a confidentiality breach is minimized by the fact that these data will be maintained  on the White 
River Junction VAMC’s dedicated research server, behind the VA firewall.  Only summary statistical 
analyses are ever exported from the server. Data analysts for this  project will use only the anonymous  
study IDs  to distinguish individual subjec ts; they will not have access  to any other personal identifiers, nor 
will they be able to convert Study IDs to SSNs.  The risk of a data breach that will compromise personal 
information is minimal.  
 
Potential Benefits of Research to Subjects and  Others.  
There are no direct benefits to Veterans or surgeons participating in this research. There is a potential 
benefit for  Veterans enrolled in the intervention  arm of this study , which is clearer pathway for 
communicating their preferences about their abdominal aortic aneurysm to the surgeon treating their 
aneurysm.  Further, the information to be derived will be of great value for the planning of future 
interventions and resource allocation to provide Veterans the best access to the highest quality care for 
high-risk surgical interventions such as AAA repair.  
 
Importance of Knowledge to be  Gained.  
This study  will yield new information  about  outcomes  for expensive  and high-risk conditions/ procedures 
to support the planning of optimal resource allocation. It will distinguish VA  facilities that achieve the best 
outcomes for further study, and it will identify the components of  inpatient services that yield the best 
outcomes for Veterans with AAA. The knowledge to be gained  will help VA planners i mprove access to care 
for patients with high -risk surgical conditions, and  the benefits will greatly outweigh the limited risks to 
confidentiality and patient  safety.  
  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
22 
  
Data and Safety Monitoring  Plan.  
As this study  involves  a survey only,  we do not anticipate any serious adverse event s related to the research, 
and that a ny adverse events which occur during the study period are likely to be related to underlying, pre -
existing medical conditions, and/or the surgery . Therefore, we will not routinely col lect any data to assess 
harms. The Data and Safety Monitoring Committee will be responsible for ensuring that data conduct is 
commensurate with any potential benefits or harms evident in quarterly analysis of study datasets . Any 
unanticipated problems whic h may arise involving risks to subjects or others, related to research 
(including data integrity/security issues) will be documented and reported to the IRB within 5 
business days after becoming aware of the event, in accordance with VHA Handbook 1058.01 
Paragraph 6.  This study will adhere  to the  VA Central IRB Table of Reportable Events . Data  accuracy  and 
integrity  will meet  the standards  for VA or Medicare administrative treatment  files.   
 
 
5. Study Committees  
 
We have established a study committee structure as outlined below, consisting of three  central  committees: 
A Steering Committee, A Data Safety Monitoring Board, and a  Publications  Committee.  The committees are 
staffed by Key Personnel and  six experienced, VA -funded surgical investigators (Zhou , Nelson, Johanning, 
Rafetto, Dardik, and Henke).  Each Committee will meet quarterly during the study period .  
 
AAA Survey Study Steering  Committee,  
 
Philip  Goodney,   
Brenda  Sirovich,  
Michael  Barry , 
Alan West , 
Wei Zhou , 
Peter  Nelson , 
Jason  Johanning , 
Joseph  Raffetto , 
Alan Dardik  
Peter  Henke  
 
AAA Survey Study Data Safety Monitoring  Board  
 
Alan West  
Todd  Mackenzie  
Richard Powell (external  auditor)  
 
AAA Survey Study Publications  Committee:  
 
Philip  Goodney 
Brenda  Sirovich  
Michael  Barry  
 
 
6. Coding Guide and Data Management Plan  
 
 
Procedures for managing the flow of information from participating sites is detailed below. Any deviation from 
these procedures that might be relevant to participant protection will be reported to the PI within 24 hours . The 
PI will have 24 hours to investigate the occurrence and convey the information to the VA Central IRB. All study 
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
23 
 team members must adhere to the VA Central IRB Table of Reportable Events  all docum ented VA security 
policies and protocol s. Removal of a ccess to research study data will be accomplished for study personnel 
when they are no longer part of the research team.  
 
Step 1: 
 
Each completed survey and consent form will be completed by the Veteran under the  supervision  of the 
site-specific Study  Coordinator.  
 
Step 2: 
 
A PDF of the survey document will be created and sent via secure email to a file maintained  on our 
Research Server by  the Data Coordinating Center (led by Dr. West and Dr. Goodney at  White  River  
Junction).   
 
Step 3: 
 
After confirming secure receipt and upload of the PDF onto our Research Server, the Site  Study  
Coordinator will store the original d ocuments in a locked fil e until study  conclusion.  Original documents will 
be destroyed in accordance with the VA Records Control schedule.  
 
Step 4: 
 
The survey data will be extracted by our Central  Study Coordinator  and imported into analytic software 
files (SAS) to allow for analysis by Drs. West and Mackenzie.  A Coordinating Center Research Nurse will 
facilitate this effort as well, and hold biweekly  technical  support calls with the Central Site Study 
Coordinator with all sites during the study  period.  All research datasets w ill be destroyed in accordance 
with the VA Records Control Schedule.  
 
 
Long term follow -up Data  Collection:  
 
To inform the agreement between preferences and repair type, we will compare  the preference identified 
for each Veteran in Aim 1 and the actual AAA  repair type the  Veteran  receives.  
 
This will be done at each site by the Site Study  Coordinator  who will have access to PHI of participants 
enrolled only at their site for the purpose of follow -up. They will not have access to study data or PHI from 
any other study sites.  
 
Every three months during the Study  Period, each site -specific Study Coordinator will  audit  CPRS for each 
enrolled Veteran at that  site.  
 
If no record of repair exists, the Site Coordinator will contact the enrolled patients  via phone to 
ensure repair has not been performed outside of  VA. 
 
Patients who do not undergo repair or who die prior to repair will be excluded from  this step in the  
analysis.  
 
 
7. Data  Analysis  
 
(Please note: The following sections are described separately for Aim 1 and Aim  2).  
Aim 1: To identify Veteran and surgeon factors associated with preference for endo vascular  or 
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
24 
 open  repair.  
Aim 1 . Dependent and Independent Variables: The main dependent variable in Aim 1 is the  preference  
for repair type (endovascular or open) as expressed by Veterans and surgeons in their respective  
survey  instruments. Each survey instrument has a validated coding algorithm which will be used to  
categorize  survey responses into preference for en dovascular or open repair (Appendix 2) 44. 
Independent  variables,  such as age, gender, race, ethnicity, and other descriptive variables are 
recorded as part of the  survey  instrument by the Site Study Coordinator. Hospital and surgeon 
characteristics such a s annual  hospital and surgeon volume of endovascular and open repair for each 
participating site will be collected  via VINCI by Dr. West. These variables will be measured at the 
hospital level, as in prior analyses.65, 97-100 
 
 
Aim 1: .Data analytic strategy: tests, strengths, limitations, and alternative approaches : In Aim 1, our 
main outcome variable will be Veteran and surgeon preference for repair type (endovascular or open 
repair). The preference will be defined as either preference for endovascu lar or preference for open 
repair. Repair type preference will be categorized from several questions in our survey instruments. 
Several questions allow for differing degrees of choice (e.g., strongly/slightly favor open repair).  For 
these responses, we wi ll use variables that allow this category. We will us e a coding algorithm 
(Appendix 2 ) which deconstructs survey questions into components that generate binary outcomes 
(i.e., preference for open or endovascular repair) and allows sensitivity analyses usin g the gradients. 
We will compare the proportion choosing each repair type in the intervention and control groups to test 
the effect of the decision aid on repair type preference. The proportions preferring each repair type will 
be compared between the two groups accounting for clustering of patients within center and/or 
surgeon; in particular, we will used the Mantel -Haenszel test (for stratified contingency tables, 
equivalent to partial likelihood ratio test from fixed effects logistic regression) or a mix ed effects logistic 
regression with fixed effect of group, and random intercept for center effects.  
 
Aim 1 Data Collection Strategy: potential problems and solutions  Refer to Section 6  of this Protocol  
Coding Guide and Data Management  Plan. 
 
To identify patient characteristics (such as survey responses) associated with preference for 
endovascular  or open repair we will use multivariable mixed effects logistic regression. The use of 
mixed effects is to  account  for clustering within individual VA centers using a random intercept, e.g. 
logit Pr[Y_ij=1]=X_ij β+μ_i where  Y_ij is the binary preference variable in subject j from cluster i, X_ij is 
a vector of characteristics, μ_i is a  random  intercept from a zero mean distribution with sta ndard 
deviation to be estimated (e.g. normal), and β is a  vector  of coefficient(s). We will explore the feasibility 
(e.g. convergence) and sensitivity of findings of  patient  characteristics of using ether a random 
intercept for surgeon, or for center, or f or surgeon nested within  center.  We will report both unadjusted 
and adjusted estimates, after identifying one or more models to adjust for  using  for instance stepwise 
regression or LASSO. Stata (e.g.,xtmelogit) and/or R (library lme4 or nlme) software  will be used.  Dr. 
MacKenzie has extensive experience in these  strategies.  
Missing Data: To accommodate missing data where justified (e.g. the variable with missing data is  
predictive  and deserves to be adjusted for, and furthermore the data is believed to be missing at 
random) we shall  use multiple imputation methods, such as implemented in the Stata mi routine.  
Power Analysis: Comparing the effect of the decision aid on repair type preference . Because the 
decision  aid will inform Veterans more fully about the  long-term disadvantages of endovascular repair, 
we hypothesize  that the decision aid will reduce the proportion of Veterans who prefer endovascular 
repair by 25%, based  on similar decision aids studied in surgical settings in breast cancer and back  
pain16-18. 
 
Table  3 Sample  size and power  calculations  (assuming  a 90% baseline  rate of EVAR  preference)  
 
Number  of 
clusters   
Number  of 
patients  per 
cluster   
Total Number  of 
Patients   
 
Proportion 
Choosing 
Endovascular 
Repair  At Decision  Aid 
Effect Size  
(in relative 
decline  in 
preference Proportion  
Choosing  
Endovasc  
Repair  at  
Power  To 
detect  
significant 
difference   
Power  To 
detect  
significant 
difference   
Power  To 
detect  
significant 
difference  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
25 
 Intervention  Control  Intervention  Control  Intervention  Control  Control Sites  for 
endovascular 
repair)  Intervention  
Sites  (ICC 0.01)  (ICC 0.05)  (ICC 0.10)  
10 10 12 12 120 120 0.9 0.25 0.68 0.96 0.86 0.81 
10 10 12 12 120 120 0.9 0.20 0.73 0.88 0.75 0.62 
10 10 12 12 120 120 0.9 0.15 0.78 0.71 0.50 0.39 
 
 
We adjusted our sample size calculations for our cluster -randomized trial to account for intra -cluster 
correlation, and allow for variable enrollment size within each cluster. As shown in Table 8, we 
anticipate that we will have 96% likelihood of detecting a 25% effect size, assuming an ICC of 0.01. 
Sensitivity analyses around our ICC assumption of 0.01 demonstrate that even if our ICC is ten times 
higher (ICC=0.10), our sample size would still yield an 81% likelihood of detecting a 2 5% effect size 
between intervention/control.  
Aim 2:  To determine the effect of the decision aid on agreement between preferences and repair  
type.  
Aim 2 Dependent and Independent V ariables: After identifying Veterans’ preference for endovascular or 
open repair, we will determine the agreement between their preferences and the repair types they 
receive.  The dependent variable will be the kappa statistic (ĸ), measuring agreement between the 
preferred repair type and the repair type the Veteran ultimately receives. Cohen’s kappa will be 
compared between the intervention and control groups. Kappa will be calculated overall and by hospital 
(using a weighted sum of the kappa s for each hospital in that arm . As a secondary outcome, Site Study 
Coordinators will administer two surveys to the Veteran. These two surveys will examine patient 
satisfaction (PDQ -18) and shared decision making (Decision Process Score, or DPS)87, 104. Our group 
has used these or similar instruments in prior work 104, 105 . A survey administration training guide for 
each Site Study Coordinator has been developed.  The DPS will be administered at the end of the visit, 
and the PDQ -18 will be completed at  30-day follow -up visits which are already standard practice after 
AAA rep air for both repair types. Completing the surveys in this context will not require any extra visits 
by Veterans, an important strength given the elderly population of patients involved in our proposal.  
Aim 2 Data Collection Strategy: potential problems and  solutions: To inform the agreement  between  
preference and repair type, we will compare the preference identified for each Veteran and the actual  
AAA repair type the Veteran receives  at each site . We anticipate that 85% of Veterans will undergo 
repair with in three months after the study visit in which  they are enrolled . However, we estimate that 15% 
of patients will not undergo repair within 3 months of  enrollment.  Therefore, to ensure we capture the 
repair type for these patients, each Site Study Coordinator will audit  CPRS  every three month s during the 
study period.  At the end of the two years of audits, the site specific Site Study  Coordinator  will contact the 
enrolled patients via phone to ensure repair has not been performed outside of VA.  Patients who do not 
undergo repair or who die prior to repair will be excluded. Sample size calculations incorporate  a dropout 
rate of 10% for this effect. Re -survey will occur for a delay in repair greater than 3 months, if the  pre- 
survey shows a change in V eteran repair preference from the original enrollment  survey.  
Aim 2 Data analytic s trategy : After we have measured the necessary elements for  agreement  
(preferences for repair type and the actual repair type), we will then calculate Cohen’s kappa. We will  
stratify  these analyses for surgeon agreement with the actual repair type (surgeon -preferred repair type 
matches  the actual repair type, surgeon -preferred repair type does not match the actual repair type, and 
surgeon has  no preference in repair type). Of note, Question #8 in the Decision Process Score allows us 
to measure  incidents  where discussion with the surgeon changed the Veteran’s preference after the 
survey. We will  perform  sensitivity analyses including and excluding Veterans who changed preferences. 
To account for  possible  agreement of preference and choice with age, gender and race, we will estimate 
the association of choice  with preference in a multivariable binary regression model that includes age, 
gender and race, and report the  odds  ratio (via logistic link) and rate ratio (via Poisson link). The fitted 
value from the logistic regression model will  be used to calculate the four proportions used in the 
calculation of Kappa agreement using the method of  average  predictions (fitted valu es). Bootstrapping 
methods, as described by Efron and Tibshirani106, will be performed  if individual hospital samples are  
small.  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
26 
 Power analysis in Aim 2 : We hypothesized that Veterans who receive the decision aid will be 25% more  
likely  to have a treatment that aligns with their preferences, based on effect sizes seen in similar 
decision  aids16-18. This would increase kappa from a baseline of ĸ=0.7 in the control group to ĸ=0.88 in 
the treatment  group.  Using a nomogram by Sim and Wright107, we assumed a 2 -tailed test for a null 
value of ĸ=0.7 in the  control  group, and ĸ=0.88 in the intervention group. We would have 80% power to 
detect a difference assuming  a 50% positive response rate at 101 patients in each arm. Our sample of 
120 patients is po wered to detect  a difference in kappa, accounting for dropout (10%) and patients who 
do not undergo repair  (15%).  
  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
27 
  
8. References  
 
1. Faggioli G, Scalone L, Mantovani LG, et al. Preferences of Patients, Their Family Caregivers  and 
Vascular Surgeons in the Choice of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms Treatment Options: The Prefer Study. 
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2011;42(1):26 -34. PMID: 21334928.  
2. Elwyn G, O'Connor A, Stacey D, et al. Developing a Quality Criteria Framework for Patient  
Decision  Aids: Online Internatio nal Delphi Consensus Process. BMJ. 2006;333(7565):417. PMID:  
16908462;  
3. Volk RJ, Llewellyn -Thomas H, Stacey D, et al. Ten Years of the International Patient Decision  Aid 
Standards Collaboration: Evolution of the Core Dimensions for Assessing the Quality of Patient Decision  
Aids.  BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2013;13 Suppl 2:S1. PMID: 24624947; PMCID:  4044280.  
4. Elwyn G, O'Connor AM, Bennett C, et al. Assessing the Quality of Decision Support Using  the 
International Patient Decision Aid Standards.PLoS One. 2009;4(3 ):e4705. PMID: 19259269; PMCID:  
2649534.  
5. Elwyn G, Frosch D, Thomson R, et al. Shared Decision Making: A Model for Clinical Practice. J  
Gen Intern Med. 2012;27(10):1361 -7. PMID: 22618581; PMCID:  3445676.  
6. Barry MJ, Edgman -Levitan S. Shared Decision Making --Pinnacle of Patient -Centered Care. N 
Engl J Med. 2012;366(9):780 -1. PMID:  22375967.  
7. Barry M, Levin C, MacCuaig M, et al. Shared Decision Making: Vision to Reality. Health  
Expect.  2011;14 Suppl 1:1 -5. PMID:  21323818.  
8. Barry MJ. Health Decision Aids to Facilitate Shared Decision Making in Office Practice. Ann Intern  
Med.  2002;136(2):127 -35. PMID:  11790064.  
9. Wagner EH, Barrett P, Barry MJ, et al. The Effect of a Shared Decisionmaking Program on 
Rates  of Surgery for Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia. Pilot Resul ts. Med Care. 1995;33(8):765 -70. PMID:  
7543638.  
10. The Veterans Administration Makes Shared Decision Making Resources Available to Help with  
Long  Term Care Choices: The Informed Medical Decisions Foundation; [cited 2014]. Available  from:  
http://www.informedmedicaldecisions.org/2013/03/28/the -veterans -administration -makes -shared -
decision - making -resources -availableto -help-with-long-term-care-choices/ . 
11. Veterans' Adminstration Website for Shared Decision Making 2015. Available  
from:  (http://www.va.gov/geriatrics/guide/longtermcare/Shared_Decision_Making .asp. 
12. Legare F, Thompson -Leduc P. Twelve Myths About Shared Decision Making. Patient Educ  
Couns.  2014;96(3):281 -6. PMID:  25034637.  
13. Legare F, Politi MC, Drolet R, et al. Training Health Professionals in Shared Decision -
Making:  An International Environmental Scan. Patient Educ Couns. 2012;88(2):159 -69. PMID:  
22305195.  
14. Wexler R, Editor. Providers Benefit from Online Shared Decision Making Skills Course.  
ISDM/ISEHC  Conference in Sydney, 2015; 2015; Syndey,  Austrailia.  
15. Volk RJ, Shokar NK, Leal VB, et al. Development and Pilot Testing of an Online Case -Based  
Approach  to Shared Decision Making Skills Training for Clinicians. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak.  
2014;14:95.  
16. Weinstein JN, Lurie JD, Tosteson TD, et al. Surgical Vs Nonoperative Treatment for Lum bar 
Disk Herniation: The Spine Patient Outcomes Research Trial (SPORT) Observational Cohort.  
JAMA.  2006;296(20):2451 -9. PMID: 17119141; PMCID:  2562254.  
17. Weinstein JN, Tosteson TD, Lurie JD, et al. Surgical Vs Nonoperative Treatment for Lumbar  
Disk Herniatio n. JAMA. 2006;296(20):2441 -50. PMID: 17119140; PMCID:  2553805.  
18. Whelan T, Levine M, Willan A, et al. Effect of a Decision Aid on Knowledge and Treatment  
Decision  Making for Breast Cancer Surgery: A Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2004;292(4):435 -41. PMID:  
15280341.  
19. Birkmeyer NJ. Improving Patient Decisions About Bariatric Surgery. PCORI Grant for Decision  
Support  in Bariatric Surgery  (https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT023641 28). 
20. Goodney  PP, Newhall KA, Farber A, et al. Characteristics of Patients Enrolled in a  
Cluster - Randomized Trial of a Smoking Cessation Intervention. J Vasc Surg. 2015;(in  press).  
21. Newhall KA, Farber A, Goodney PP. Smoking Cessation Counseling in Vascular Surgical  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
28 
 Practice Using the Results of Interviews and Focus Groups in the VAPORTrial. J Vasc Surg. 
2015;(in  press).  
22. O'Malley J, Goodney PP, Mackenzie TA, et al. Advancing Patient Centered Outcomes Research  
in Survival Data with Unmeasured Confounding. Patient Centered  Outcomes Research Institute 
(PCORI);  2015.  
23. Lederle FA, Freischlag JA, Kyriakides TC, et al. Long -Term Comparison of Endovascular and  
Open  Repair of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(21):1988 -97. PMID:  23171095.  
24. Lederle FA, Freischlag JA, Kyriakides TC, et al. Outcomes Following Endovascular Vs Open 
Repair  of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm: A Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2009;302(14):1535 -42. PMID:  
19826022.  
25. Lederle FA, Johnson GR, Wilson SE, et al. The Aneurysm Detection and Managemen t Study  
Screening Program: Validation Cohort and Final Results. Aneurysm Detection and Management  
Veterans  Affairs Cooperative Study Investigators. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160(10):1425 -30. PMID:  
10826454.  
26. Eliason JL, Upchurch GR, Jr. Endovascular Abdominal A ortic Aneurysm Repair.  
Circulation.  2008;117(13):1738 -44. PMID:  18378627.  
27. Ailawadi G, Eliason JL, Upchurch GR, Jr. Current Concepts in the Pathogenesis of Abdominal  
Aortic  Aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2003;38(3):584 -8. PMID: 12947280.  
28. De Martino RR, Goodney PP, Nolan BW, et al. Optimal Selection of Patients for Elective  
Abdominal  Aortic Aneurysm Repair Based on Life Expectancy. J Vasc Surg. 2013;58(3):589 -95. 
PMID:  23642927.  
29. Newton WB, 3rd, Shukla M, Andrews JS, et al. Outcomes of Acute Intraoperative  Surgical  
Conversion  During Endovascular Aortic Aneurysm Repair. J Vasc Surg. 2011;54(5):1244 -50; discussion  
50. 
30. Beck AW, Goodney PP, Nolan BW, et al. Predicting 1 -Year Mortality after Elective Abdominal  
Aortic  Aneurysm Repair. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49(4):838 -43; discussion 43 -4. PMID:  19341875.  
31. Parodi JC, Criado FJ, Barone HD, et al. Endoluminal Aortic Aneurysm Repair Using a  
Balloon - Expandable Stent -Graft Device: A Progress Report. Ann Vasc Surg. 1994;8(6):523 -9. 
PMID:  7865389.  
32. Lederle FA, Wilson SE, Johnson GR, et al. Design of the Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Detection  
and Management Study. ADAM VA Cooperative Study Group. J Vasc Surg. 1994;20(2):296 -303. PMID:  
8040955.  
33. Aljabri B, Al Wahaibi K, Abner D, et al. Patient -Reported Quality of Life after Abdo minal  
Aortic  Aneurysm Surgery: A Prospective Comparison of Endovascular and Open Repair. J Vasc  
Surg.  2006;44(6):1182 -7. PMID:  17145419.  
34. Jackson RS, Chang DC, Freischlag JA. Comparison of Long -Term Survival after Open  
Vs Endovascular Repair of Intact Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm among Medicare Beneficiaries.  
JAMA.  2012;307(15):1621 -8. PMID:  22511690.  
35. Schermerhorn ML, O'Malley AJ, Jhaveri A, et al. Endovascular Vs. Open Repair of Abdominal  
Aortic  Aneurysms in the Medicare Population. N Engl J Med. 2008;358 (5):464 -74. PMID:  18234751.  
36. Goodney PP, Tavris D, Lucas FL, et al. Causes of Late Mortality after Endovascular and Open  
Surgical  Repair of Infrarenal Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2010;51(6):1340 -7 e1. PMID:  
20385469.  
37. Park BD, Azefor NM, Huang C C, et al. Elective Endovascular Aneurysm Repair in the Elderly:  
Trends  and Outcomes from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample. Ann Vasc Surg. 2013. PMID:  24189191.  
38. Chadi SA, Rowe BW, Vogt KN, et al. Trends in Management of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms. J  
Vasc  Surg. 2012;55(4):924 -8. PMID:  22226189.  
39. Sethi RK, Henry AJ, Hevelone ND, et al. Impact of Hospital Market Competition on  
Endovascular  Aneurysm Repair Adoption and Outcomes. J Vasc Surg. 2013;58(3):596 -606. PMID:  
23684424.  
40. Ng TT, Mirocha J, Magner D, et al. Variations in the Utilization of Endovascular Aneurysm  
Repair  Reflect Population Risk Factors and Disease Prevalence. J Vasc Surg. 2010;51(4):801 -9, 9 
e1. 
41. Shah H, Kumar SR, Major K, et al. Technology Penetration of Endovascular Aortic Aneurysm 
Repair  in Southern California. Ann Vasc Surg. 2006;20(6):796 -802. PMID:  17136631.  
42. Goodney PP, West A. Prepatory to Research Analyses (Personal Communication)  2014.  
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
29 
 43. The Vascular Quality Initiative (VQI) 2013. Available from:  www.vascularqualityinitiative.org . 
44. The Picker Institute. Survey of Patient Preference for Method of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm  
Repair.  
45. Winterborn RJ, Amin I, Lyratzopoulos G, et al. Preferences for EVAR or Open repair among  
Patients  with Ab dominal Aortic Aneurysms under Surveillance. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49(3):576 -81 e3. 
PMID:  19268761.  
46. Dubois L, Novick TV, Power AH, et al. Identification of Patient -Derived Outcomes after Aortic  
Aneurysm  Repair. J Vasc Surg. 2014;59(6):1528 -34. PMID:  24447539.  
47. Weinstein JN, Clay K, Morgan TS. Informed Patient Choice: Patient -Centered Valuing of Surgical  
Risks  and Benefits. Health Aff (Millwood). 2007;26(3):726 -30. PMID: 17485750; PMCID:  2918374.  
48. Weinstein JN. Partnership: Doctor and Patient: Advocacy for Informed Choice Vs. Informed  
Consent.  Spine (Philadelphia, PA 1976). 2005;30(3):269 -72. PMID:  15682004.  
49. Barry MJ. Shared Decision Making: Informing and Involving Patients to Do the Right Thing in  
Health  Care. J Ambul Care Manage. 2012;35(2):90 -8. PMID:  22415282.  
50. Barry MJ, Roberts WC. Michael John Barry, Md: A Conversation with the Editor on Shared  
Decision  Making. Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent). 2012;25(4):383 -8. PMID: 23077396; PMCID:  3448587.  
51. Barry M. Six Steps of Shared Decision -Making: The Foundation For Inf ormed Decision  
Making.  Available from:  http://www.slideshare.net/fimdm/six -steps -of-shared -decision -making . 
52. Lantz PM, Janz NK, Fagerlin A, et al. Satisfaction with Surge ry Outcomes and the Decision 
Process  in a Population -Based Sample of Women with Breast Cancer. Health Serv Res.  2005;40(3):745 -
67. 
53. Katz SJ, Lantz PM, Janz NK, et al. Patient Involvement in Surgery Treatment Decisions for  
Breast  Cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005;2 3(24):5526 -33. PMID:  16110013.  
54. Malas MB, Freischlag JA. Interpretation of the Results of over in the Context of Evar Trial, Dream,  
and the Eurostar Registry. Semin Vasc Surg. 2010;23(3):165 -9. PMID:  20826293.  
55. Parodi JC. Endoluminal Stent Grafts: Overview. J Invasive Cardiol. 1997;9(3):227 -9. PMID:  
10762904.  
56. Lederle FA, Stroupe KT, Open Versus Endovascular Repair Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study  
G. Cost-Effectiveness at Two Years in the Va Open Versus Endovascular Repair Trial. Eur J Vasc  
Endovasc  Surg. 2012;44(6):543 -8. PMID:  23116986.  
57. Elwyn G, Laitner S, Coulter A, et al. Implementing Shared Decision Making in the NHS.  
BMJ.  2010;341:c5146. PMID: 20947577.  
58. O'Connor AM, Wennberg JE, Legare F, et al. Toward the 'Tipping Point': Decision Aids  and 
Informed  Patient Choice. Health Aff (Millwood). 2007;26(3):716 -25. PMID:  17485749.  
59. Guihan M, Hedrick S, Miller S, et al. Improving the Long -Term Care Referral Process: Insights  
from Patients and Caregivers. Gerontol Geriatr Educ. 2011;32(2):135 -51. PM ID: 21598147.  
60. Brehaut JC, O'Connor AM, Wood TJ, et al. Validation of a Decision Regret Scale. Med Decis  
Making.  2003;23(4):281 -92. PMID:  12926578.  
61. O'Connor AM. Validation of a Decisional Conflict Scale. Med Decis Making.  1995;15(1):25 -30. 
62. Powell JT, Sweeting MJ, et al. Endovascular or Open Repair Strategy for Ruptured Abdominal  
Aortic  Aneurysm: 30 Day Outcomes from Improve Randomised Trial. BMJ.  2014;348:f7661.  
63. Becquemin JP. The Ace Trial: A Randomized Comparison of Open Versus Endovascular 
Repair  in Good Risk Patients with Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2009;50(1):222 -4; 
discussion  4. 
64. Sheldon H, Garratt E. Patient Preferences for Alternative Surgical Techniques for Abdominal  
Aortic  Aneurysm Repair: Report of a Patient Survey2008.  
65. Nallamothu BK, Gurm HS, Ting HH, et al. Operator Experience and Carotid Stenting 
Outcomes  in Medicare Beneficiaries. JAMA. 2011;306(12):1338 -43. PMID: 21954477; PMCID:  
3208144.  
66. Goodney PP, Lucas FL, Birkmeyer JD. Should Volume Standards for Cardiovascular Surgery  
Focus  Only on High -Risk Patients? Circulation. 2003;107(3):384 -7. PMID:  12551859.  
67. Goodney PP, Lucas FL, Stukel TA, et al. Surgeon Specialty and Operative Mortality with  
Lung  Resection. Ann Surg. 2005;241(1):179 -84. PMID: 15622006; PMCID:  1356861.  
68. Goodney PP, Travis LL, Malenka D, et al. Regional Variation in Carotid Artery Stenting  
and Endarterectomy in the Medicare Population. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes.  
2010;3(1):15 -24. 
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
30 
 69. Eslami MH, Doros G, Goodney PP, et al. Using Vascular Quality Initiative (Vqi) as a 
Platform  for Organizing Multicenter, Prospective, Randomized Clinical Trials: Overpar Trial. Ann 
Vasc Surg.  2014.  
70. SVS Multicenter Clinical Trials Planning Grant 2013. Available  from:  
http://www.vascularweb.org/about/SVSFoundation/Pages/Grant -
recipients.aspx . 
71. Goodney PP, Goodman DC, Barry M. Variation in the Care of Surgical Conditions: A Dartmouth  
Atlas  Report. Hanover, NH: 2014 June 1,  2014.  
72. Goodney PP, Woloshin S, Schwartz LM. Fractional Flow Reserve -Guided Pci in Stable  
Coronary  Disease. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(24):2355; author reply 6. PMID:  23234520.  
73. Birkmeyer JD, Stukel TA, Siewers AE, et al. Surgeon Volume and Operative Mortality in the  
United  States. N Engl J Med. 2003;349(22):2117 -27. PMID:  14645640.  
74. Lederle FA, Johnson GR, Wilson SE, et al. Rupture Rate of Large Abdominal Aortic 
Aneurysms  in Patients Refusing or Unfit for Elective Repair. JAMA. 2002;287(22):2968 -72. PMID:  
12052126.  
75. Lederle FA, Kane RL, MacDonald R, et al. Systematic Review: Repair of Unruptured Abdominal  
Aortic  Aneurysm. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146(10):735 -41. PMID: 17502634.  
76. Rigberg DA, Zingmond DS, McGory ML, et al. Age Stratified, Perioperative, and One -Year  
Mortalit y after Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Repair: A Statewide Experience. J Vasc Surg.  
2006;43(2):224 -9. 
77. Cowan JA, Jr., Dimick JB, Henke PK, et al. Epidemiology of Aortic Aneurysm Repair in the  
United  States from 1993 to 2003. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006;1085:1 -10. PMI D: 17182917.  
78. VA Health Services Research and Development Website. Available  from:  
http://www.hsrd.research.va.gov/research/abstracts.cfm?Projec t_ID=2141698717#.UoaZP9Qo6M8
. 
79. Bush RL, DePalma RG, Itani KM, et al. Outcomes of Care of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm in  
Veterans  Health Administration Facilities:. Am J Surg. 2009;198(5 Suppl):S41 -8. PMID:  19874934.  
80. Westvik TS, Krause LK, Pradhan S, et al. Malnutrition after Vascular Surgery: Are Patients with  
Chronic  Renal Failure at Increased Risk? Am J Surg. 2006;192(5):e22 -7. PMID:  17071176.  
81. Elwyn G, Tsulukidze M, Edwards A, et al. Using a 'Talk' Model of Shared Decision Making to  
Propose  an Observation -Based Measure: Observer Option 5 Item. Patient Educ Couns.  2013;93(2):265 -
71. 
82. Elwyn G, Lloyd A, Joseph -Williams N, et al. Option Grids: Shared Decision Making Made  
Easier.  Patient Educ Couns. 2013;90(2):207 -12. PMID: 22854227.  
83. Couet N, Desroche s S, Robitaille H, et al. Assessments of the Extent to Which Providers  
Involve  Patients in Decisions: A Systematic Review Using the Option Instrument. Health Expect.  
2013.  
84. Schwartz LM, Woloshin S, Birkmeyer JD. How Do Elderly Patients Decide Where to Go fo r 
Major  Surgery? Telephone Interview Survey. BMJ. 2005;331(7520):821. PMID: 16192286; PMCID:  
1246083.  
85. Suckow B, Goodney PP, Nolan B, et al. Domains That Determine Quality of Life in Vascular  
Amputees.  J Vasc Surg. 2015;(in  press).  
86. Elwyn G, Edwards A, Wensi ng M, et al. Shared Decision Making: Developing the Option Scale  
for Measuring Patient Involvement. Qual Saf Health Care. 2003;12(2):93 -9. PMID: 12679504; PMCID:  
1743691.  
87. Vrijhoef HJ, Berbee R, Wagner EH, et al. Quality of Integrated Chronic Care Measured by  
Patient  Survey: Identification, Selection and Application of Most Appropriate Instruments. Health  
Expect.  2009;12(4):417 -29. PMID:  19709315.  
88. Schnurr PP. The Rocks and Hard Places in Psychotherapy Outcome Research. J Trauma  
Stress.  2007;20(5):779 -92. PMID:  17955539.  
89. Watts BV, Schnurr PP, Zayed M, et al. A Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial of a Patient 
Decision  Aid for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Psychiatr Serv. 2014. PMID:  25322473.  
90. Ronconi JM, Shiner B, Watts BV. Inclusion and  Exclusion Criteria in Randomized Controlled 
Trials  of Psychotherapy for Ptsd. J Psychiatr Pract. 2014;20(1):25 -37. PMID:  24419308.  
91. Hoagland TV. The Principles in Psychotherapy with Veterans. J Mich State Med Soc.  
1952;51(1):62 -4. 
Contact  PD/PI:  Goodney,  Philip   
31 
 92. Littlewood C, et al. A St udy to Evaluate the Clinical and Cost -Effectiveness of a Self -Managed  
Exercise  Programme Versus Usual Physiotherapy. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2012;13:62. PMID:  
22545990;  
93. Thompson SG, Ashton HA, Gao L, et al. Final Follow -up of the Multicentre Aneurysm Screening  
Study  (MASS) Randomized Trial of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Screening. Br J Surg.  2012;99(12):1649 -
56. 
94. Thompson SG, Brown LC, Sweeting MJ, et al. Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis of the  
Growth  and Rupture Rates of Small Abdominal Aorti c Aneurysms: Implications for Surveillance Intervals 
and Their  Cost-Effectiveness. Health Technol Assess. 2013;17(41):1 -118. PMID:  24067626.  
95. Collaborators R, Bown MJ, Sweeting MJ, et al. Surveillance Intervals for Small Abdominal  
Aortic  Aneurysms: A Meta -Analysis. JAMA. 2013;309(8):806 -13. PMID:  23443444.  
96. Schanzer A, Greenberg RK, Hevelone N, et al. Predictors of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm  
Sac Enlargement after Endovascular Repair. Circulation. 2011;123(24):2848 -55. PMID:  
21478500.  
97. Goodney PP, Lucas FL, Travis LL, et al. Changes in the Use of Carotid Revascularization 
among  the Medicare Population. Arch Surg. 2008;143(2):170 -3. PMID:  18283142.  
98. Goodney PP, Holman K, Henke PK, et al. Regional Intensity of Vascular Care and Lower  
Extremity  Amputation Rates. J Vasc Surg. 2013;57(6):1471 -79, 80 e1 -3; discussion 9 -80. PMID:  
23375611;  
99. Stone DH, Goodney PP, Kalish J, et al. Severity of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease  Is Associated with Adverse Outcomes in Patients Undergoing EVAR. J Vasc Surg.  
2013;57(6):1531 -6. 
100. Goodney PP, Beck AW, Nagle J, et al. National Trends in Lower Extremity Bypass  
Surgery,  Endovascular Interventions, and Major Amputations. J Vasc Surg. 2009;50(1):54 -60. 
PMID:  19481407.  
101. West AN, Lee PW. Associations between Childbirth an d Women Veterans' VAa and  
Non-VA Hospitalizations for Major Diagnostic Categories. Mil Med. 2013;178(11):1250 -5. 
PMID:  24183775.  
102. Lee PW, Markle PS, West AN, et al. Use and Quality of Care at a Va Outreach Clinic in  
Northern  Maine. J Prim Care Community Hea lth. 2012;3(3):159 -63. PMID:  23803775.  
103. West AN, Weeks WB, Wright SM, et al. When Va Patients Have Non -Va Hospitalizations, Who 
Pays  for What Services, and What Are the Research Implications? A New York Case Study. Med Care.  
2008;46(8):872  
104. Fowler FJ, Jr., Gallagher PM, Bynum JP, et al. Decision -Making Process Reported by  
Medicare  Patients Who Had Coronary Artery Stenting or Surgery for Prostate Cancer. J Gen 
Intern  Med.  2012;27(8):911 -6. PMID: 22370767; PMCID:  3403150.  
105. Faerber AE, Horvath R, Stillman C , et al. Development of a Health Information Technology 
Tool for Patients with carotid stenosis. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2015;15(1):20. PMID:  25890090;  
106. Efron B, Tibshirani R. Improvements on Cross -Validation: The .632+ Bootstrap Method. J Am  
Stat Assoc.  1997;92(438):548 -60. 
107. Sim J, Wright CC. The Kappa Statistic in Reliability Studies: Use, Interpretation, and Sampl e 
Size Requirements. Phys Ther. 2005;85(3):257 -68. PMID : 15733050 . 