 1  MC1635  
 
Mayo Clinic Radiation Oncology 
 
A phase III trial of hypofractionated radiotherapy to the whole breast alone after breast conserving 
surgery 
 
 Study Chair Arizona:   
   
   
   
   
 
 Study Co-Chair Minnesota:  
 
 
 
 
 
Study Co-Chair Surgery:       
   
   
   
   
  
 Study Co-Chair Health outcomes:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Study Co-Investigators:  
   
   
   
     
    
   
   
   
   
   
  
 Statistician: 
  
 
                                      Physics Chair Arizona:         
                                           
 
                                       
 
Study contributor(s) not responsible for patient care. 

 2  MC1635  
 
 
12/5/18  
 
Document History   
(Effective Date)  
Active  9/13/17 
Modification 1  11/06/17  
Modification 2  1/4/18  
Modification 3  
Modification 4  
Modification 5  
Modification 6  
Modification 7  
Modification 8  2/21/18 
8/22/18  
12/5/18  
01/16/19  
4/22/19  
10/09/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3  MC1635  
 
Protocol Resources  
 
Questions:  Contact Name:  
Patient eligibility *, test schedule,  
treatment delays/interruptions/adjustments,  
dose modifications, adverse events,  
protocol document, consent form, 
regulatory issues,  
forms completion and submission  Rad Onc  Study Coordinator  
 
 4  MC1635  
 
 
Index  
Schema  
  1.0 Background   
  2.0 Goals  
  3.0 Patient Eligibility  
  4.0 Test Schedule  
  5.0  Stratification Factors  
  6.0 Registration/Randomization Procedures  
  7.0 Protocol Treatment  
  8.0 Radiotherapy Dos e Modification s Based on Ad verse Events  
  9.0 Ancillary Treatment/Supportive Care  
10.0 Adverse Event (AE) Reporting and Monitoring  
11.0 Treatment Evaluation  
12.0 Descriptive Factors  
13.0 Treatment/Follow -up Decision at Evaluation of Patient  
14.0 Body Fluid Biospecimens  
15.0 Drug  Information  
16.0 Statistical Considerations and Methodology  
17.0 Pathology Considerations  
18.0 Records and Data Collection Procedures  
19.0 Study Finances  
20.0 Publication Plan  
21.0 References  
Appendix I  - ECOG Performance Status  
Appendix II  – Mayo Breast Patient Survey  
Appendix III  - Mayo Patient Survey PRO -CTCAE Mayo 10  
Appendix IV  – Mayo Patient Survey  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5  MC1635  
 
 
List of Abbreviations  
3DCRT  3-D Conformal Radiation Therapy  
AE Adverse Event/Adverse Experience  
CBCT  Cone Bean CT  
CFR  Code of Federal Regulat ions 
CRF  Case Report Form  
CTV  Clinical Target Volume  
DSMB  Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
IBTR  Ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence  
IMRT  Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
MRI  Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
PHI Protected Health Information  
PI Principal Investigator  
PTV  Planning Target Volume  
QOL  Quality of Life  
RBE  Relative biologic effectiveness  
RT Radiation Therapy  
SAE  Serious Adverse Event/Serious Adverse Experience  
SOP Standard Operating Procedure  
XRT  X-ray Radiation Therapy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6  MC1635  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  pStage T0 -T3N0 -N1M0 or  
ypStage T0 -3N0-N1micM0 and  
indications for whole breast irradiation  
without regional nodal irradiation, 
after breast conserving surgery.  
ARM 2: 5 Fraction  
Hypofractionat ion 
25 Gy (RBE) / Gy in 5 
daily fractions with 
optional concurrent boost 
to a total dose of 30 Gy 
(RBE) / Gy in 5 fractions 
(n=55) RANDOMIZE  
Treatment  
Observation  
(Section 4.0 Test Schedule ) 
 
Cancer Recurrence  
 
Event Monitoring  
(Section 18 .0 –5 years total 
follo w-up) 
 SCHEMA  
ARM 1: Conventional 
hypofractionatio n  
40 Gy (RBE) / Gy in 15  
daily fractions with 
optional 10 Gy (RBE) / 
Gy in 4 fractions 
sequential boost to a 
total dose of 50 Gy in 19 
fractions;  or a 
concomitant boost  to 
total dose of 48Gy in 15 
daily fractions.(n= 55) 
 7  MC1635  
 
N=110 patients  
 
Study Design:  This is an open label phase II I randomized controlled trial to determine the safety of 5 
fraction vs 15 fraction pencil beam scanning proton radiotherap y to the whole breast alone after breast 
conserving surgery . Proton therapy is recognized as a standard option  for the delivery of radiotherapy for 
breast cancer.  
 
1.0 Background  
 
1.1 Benefits and Risks of Adjuvant Radiotherapy  
Breast conserving therapy (BCT), consisting of partial mastectomy, followed by whole 
breast radiotherapy , is a w idely accepted standard of care and the preferred  local 
treatment  approach for many women with breast cancer.  Women opting for breast 
conserving therapy have improved body image, quality of life, and sexual function1,2.  
 
Six randomized studies with long term follow up have established the equivalent overall 
survival of breast conserving therapy to mastectomy3-8 . The breast radiotherapy 
component of BCT  has been shown to  improve rates of local control , reduce distant 
recurrence,  and improve survival 9,10.  Despite the strong evidence for breast conserving 
therapy , there is underutilization of both breast conserving surgery 11 and adjuvant 
radiotherapy12 .  While many factors likely cont ribute, convenience of therapy, access to 
treatment  facilities13, cost, and perce ived toxicity of therapy may all represent barriers to 
radiation therapy14.   
 
Survival rates for breast cancer are high, as most women diagnosed  will not die of their 
disease15. As such, recent oncologic emphasis has high lighted  survivorship, with 
strategies aimed to improve treatments, treatment -related adverse effects, and long term 
quality of life  16,17.  These improvement strategies aim to improve the therapeutic ratio, 
with enh anced benefits of therapy, reduced toxicity, or both.  
 
Careful study of photon breast radiotherapy techniques has highlighted potential long 
term toxicities and opportunities to enhance the therapeutic ratio. Data demonstrating late 
cardiovascular toxicit y, particularly for women with left -sided tumors,  and risk of 
secondary malignancy have garnered particular attention in recent years,18 and these 
toxicities have been shown to partially offset the cause -specific su rvival benefit of 
adjuvant radiotherapy9,19.   
 
Cardiovascular toxicity has been studied in great detail and appears to be primarily 
mediated by a vascular etiology, likely with macro - and microvascular contribution s. 
Amongst women undergoing adjuvant radiotherapy for breast cancer, Correa and 
colleagues20 demonstrated a likelihood of left anterior descending artery (LAD) stenosis 
in excess of what would be expected, providing  indirect evidence of radiation -mediated 
coronary artery disease. Darby and co -authors19 found that the risk of major coronary 
events (myocardial infarction, coronary revascularization, or death from ischemic heart 
disease) was related to the mean heart dose and not the LAD, suggesting a microvascular 
etiology.  Radiation related c ardiovascular toxicity is likely multifactorial, and multiple 
dose-volume relationships are  likely  important  risk factors of subsequent c ardiac disease, 
including dose to the LAD, heart (mean heart dose and volumetric parameters such as 
V25) and left ventricle21.  Efforts to minimize cardiac exposure to radiotherapy, while 
studying the potential dose  relationships are of utmost importance, particularly in the 
 8  MC1635  
 
modern systemic therapy era, w hich now includes more agents with known cardiac 
effects, including anthracyclines and trastuzumab.  
 
Adjuvant radiotherapy for breast cancer has also been associate d with an elevated risk of 
developing a secondary malignancy9. Specifically, radiotherapy is associated with 
increased risk of developing and dying from ipsilateral lung cancer9,22. Radiotherapy is 
also associated with increased risk of contralateral breast carcinoma9. This is a result of 
inadvertent and unnecessary dose delivered to normal organs adjacent to disease targets.  
 
Radiothe rapy to the breast may also result in  breast fibrosis, breast shrinkage, worsening 
of cosmesis, and arm and shoulder pain.23,24.25  There is evidence that these late effects 
are potentially dose dependent.   
 
In summary, breast conserving therapy is a standard of care and offers many advantages 
to women, and radiotherapy is necessary  to achieve optimal oncolog ic outcomes.  
However, in the modern era of enhanced technology and improved emphasis on 
survivorship, there is strong rati onale for the  development and  evaluation of novel 
strategies t hat reduce unnecessary radiation exposure to normal tissue , as well as  novel 
dose and fractionation regimens which may  improve the therapeu tic ratio , while reducing 
costs and increasing convenience of delivery . We propose a prospective phase II I trial 
that will evaluate the use of hypo -fractionation with either x -rays or proton therapy  
 
1.2 Rationale for Proton Therapy in Breast Cancer  
 
Enhan ced radiotherapy  delivery  techniques may enable better treatment delivery with 
reduced toxicity.   Proton therapy, in particular, may reduce treatment toxicity, as there is 
less non -target tissue exposed to radiation therapy.  Relative to photons, protons have 
fundamental physical advantages in the treatment of tumors adjacent to radiosensitive 
normal structures.  By exploiting the Bragg peak of proton beams, target tissues may be 
covered with  a similar or better  dose distribution s as with photons,  with red uced  
unintended dose to other  tissues, including reduced integral dose 26,27.  Thus, interest in 
the possible benefits of breast cancer radiotherapy with protons is emerging, with hopes 
of being able to maintain or improve the locoregional control and cause -specific survival, 
with potential to reduce toxicity.  
 
Clinical experience with proton beam radiotherapy (PBT) in the treatment of breast 
cancer patients remains limited, though increased institutional experience s are reported, 
and a multi -center randomized study in node positive patients has been init iated (CITE 
PCORI) . A recent review examined published experience  with PBT for breast cancer28. 
This report highlights the limited published clinical experience with proton beam for 
breast cancer,  in particular demonstrating very little data for whole breast radiotherapy 
without regional nodal treatment.  The t wo such cited studies were retrospectively 
planned proton versus  plan comparisons, rather than clinical experience, yet each 
supported a dosimetric advantage to PBT for left sided breast cancer patients undergoing 
BCT, with a reduction in mean heart dose, coronary artery dose, and ipsilateral lung 
dose29,30.   
 
Clinical experience in the node positive setting is published.  MacDonald et  al 31 recently 
published early out comes for a small cohort of 12 patients treated with proton 
radiotherapy following mastectomy.  All patients received chest wall irradiation and 
eleven received radiotherapy to the supraclavicular, level 3, and internal mammary lymph 
 9  MC1635  
 
node chains. Nine pati ents had grade 2 skin toxicity and 3 patients had grad e 1 skin 
toxicity. There was no ≥ grade 3 skin toxicity reported. During treatment 6 patients 
experienced grade 1 fatigue, 5 patients experienced grade 2 fatigue, and there was one 
incident of grade 3 f atigue. By 4 weeks follow -up fatigue had completed resolved in all 
but 1 patient who continued to have grade 1 fatigue. There were no reported cases of 
pneumonitis. The average mean dose to the heart was 0.44 Gy and the average mean V20 
of the lung was 12. 7%.   Cuaron et al. recently reported the results of treatment of the 
largest cohort of patients treated with proton therapy for breast cancer.32 Four patients 
were treated after lumpectomy, 24 after mastectomy (including 14 patients with implant 
reconstruction and 1 patient with autologous reconstruc tion) and 2 patients received 
proton therapy after wide local excision of a chest wall recurrence. Grade 2 dermatitis 
occurred in 20 patients (71.4%), 8 of whom (28.6%) also experienced moist 
desquamation. Grad 2 esophagitis was observed in 8 patients (28. 6%). There was 1 grade 
3 reconstructive complication. The median mean heart dose was 0.88Gy and the median 
V20 of the ipsilateral lung was 16.5%. This early data suggests that post -mastectomy and 
post-lumpectomy proton therapy  is feasible and well tolerate d with reduced dose to the 
heart and lung , warranting further study.  
 
In addition to the clinical experience in the locally advanced setting, several institutions 
have examined PBT for partial breast radiotherapy.  One such initial report showed high 
rates of acute skin toxicity, pigmentation changes, and worse physician reported cosm esis 
33.  However, the planning techniques reported therein, including passive scatter and a 
single beam treated per day for many, pos sibly contributed to these outcomes.  A larger 
series from Loma Linda with 60 month follow  up and 100 patients reported good to 
excellent cosmetic outcome in >90% throughout  5 years of follow up34. No patient had 
acute grade 3 or higher skin toxicity.   Ispilateral tumor recurrence rates at 5 years were 
3%.  In addition to differences in dose and technique, once daily treatments were used.     
 
Much of the published PBT experience is with passively scattered protons.  A concern 
with this technique is the high entrance skin dose which may be associated with higher 
skin toxicity and adverse cosmesis.33 This higher skin dose may be of particular concern 
in patients who undergo brea st conserving surgery. Scanning beam proton therapy, the 
technique proposed in this study, offers potential advantages over passively scattered 
protons including increased conformality with even less unintended dose to normal 
tissues , including the skin.35 However, this technique is also potentially more sensitive to 
uncertainties including inter -fractional as well as intra -fractional motion which must be 
taken into account in treatment delivery. Rigorous clinical st udies of scanning beam 
proton therapy are needed to determine the disease control and toxici ty outcomes with 
this technique and to determine whether the physical dose advantages of proton therapy 
translate to substantial and lasting improvements in patient  outcome.  
 
In summary, there is s trong interest in prospectively designing and understanding proton 
therapy in  breast cancer.  Data for proton therapy in breast cancer are limited , particularly  
in the intact breast setting , yet there  is compelling rational e for study of proto n beam 
therapy for breast cancer to reduce radiation dose to non -target tissue and potentially 
improve outcomes for breast cancer survivors . In view of the need to gain experience, a 
clinical study is supported.  
 
 
 
1.3 Rationale  for Hypofractionation  in Breast  Cancer  
 10  MC1635  
 
 
            Hypofractionated, or shorter course, radiotherapy presents an opportunity to enhance 
access to care, increase convenience and acceptability of therapy, while reducing cost and 
potentially improving toxicity.  Although the use of proton therapy for breast cancer is 
still in early development, concerns regarding proton therapy have primarily been related 
to costs, rather than technical feasibility in the clinic. Proton therapy departments are 
more expensive to bui ld as they require huge accelerators to deliver the beam.  While  
proton  therapy is  considered more expensive than conventional forms of radiation, cost -
benefit studies have suggested cost -effectiveness in the long term due to decreased long 
term toxicity . 36-38 An important driver of cost of both photon and proton radiotherapy is 
the number of treatments delivered to individual patients , with shorter courses resulting 
in lower expenditures39. Studies are needed to evaluate whether equivalent or improved 
outcomes can be achieved with shorter courses of therapy.  
 
Furthermore, t he optimal dose and fractionation regimen for whole breast irradiation , 
whole breast and regional nod al irradiation , and  postmastectomy radiotherapy remains 
unknown.  While there is widespread clinical experience with standard fractionation, 
newer preclinical and clinical data support a shorter course of radiotherapy.  
 
For fraction sizes up to  approximately  8 Gy , The linear -quadratic formula model is the 
preferred method of predicting the relationship between fraction size and tissue response 
of varying radiotherapy regimens. Its origins stem from what has been described as a 
two-component survival curve for  mammalian cells represented by the curvilinear dose -
response curve for the log of cell survival.40 In it, the biologically effective dose (BED) of 
a given fractionation regimen is related to the α/β ratio in the following equation, where α 
represents the log e of the cells killed per gray and β is the log e of the cells killed per gray 
squared:  
 
BED = nd (1 + d/α/β)  
d = dose per fraction  
n = # of identical fractions  
 
The ratio of α/β is the dose at which the linear and quadratic components of cell killing 
are the same. In general, early -responding tissues such as skin desquamation have a high 
ratio whereas  late-responding tissues such as dermal contraction have a low ratio and are 
very sensitive to increases in fraction size.41   
 
Emerging evidence  suggest s that the α/β rati o of breast cancer may be low and more in 
line with that  of late responding tissues  and therefore breast cancer patients may not 
benefit from prolonged fractionation regimens .42,43 Indeed, the most robust data to da te 
suggesting this relationship has come from the UK Standardization of Breast 
Radiotherapy (START) trials, two modern breast cancer randomized controlled trials 
examining various fractionation regimens that have recently been reported with 10 -year 
follow -up. In START -A, a regimen of 50Gy in 25 fractions to the whole breast over 5 
weeks was compared with 41.6Gy or 39 Gy in 13 fractions over 5 weeks. There was no 
significant difference in local -regional relapse between the 41.6Gy and 50Gy regimens 
(6.3% vs 7 .4%, p=0.65) or the 39Gy and 50Gy regimens (8.8 vs 7.4%, p=0.41).24 
Moderate or marked breast induration, telangiectasia, and breast edema was less common 
in the 39Gy group compared with the 50Gy group, and rates of  these toxicities were no 
different between the 41.6Gy and 50Gy groups. The treatments in each arm were given 
over the same time period, enabling an estimate of sensitivity of breast cancer to changes 
 11  MC1635  
 
in fraction size that was not confounded by differences  in treatment time. An α/β ratio for 
local -regional relapse of breast cancer was determined from a meta -analysis of START -A 
and the START pilot trial (349 events, 3646 women) as 3.5 Gy (95% CI 1.2 -5.7).  The 
α/β ratio for normal tissue toxicity endpoints i ncluded 3.5Gy (95% CI 0.7 -6.4) for breast 
shrinkage, 4Gy (2.3 -5.6) for breast induration, 3.8Gy (1.8 -5.7) for telangiectasia, and 4.7 
Gy (2.4 -7.0) for breast edema, suggesting that normal tissue toxicity may not be reduced 
and may even be increased when br east cancer radiotherapy fract ionation regimens are 
prolonged with small daily fractions.  
 
Further evidence supporting hypofractionated regimens for breast cancer came from the  
START -B clinical trial , in which 50Gy in 25 fractions over 5 weeks was compared  with 
40Gy in 15 fractions over 3 weeks. There was no difference in local -regional relapse at 
10 years between 40Gy and 50Gy groups, (4.3% vs 5.5%, p=0.2) but breast shrinkage, 
telangiectasia, and breast edema were significantly less common with the shorte r 
fractionation regimen. These data are consistent with the results of the Canadian 
hypofractionation trial which compared 42.5Gy in 16 fractions in 3.2 weeks to 50Gy in 
25 fractions over 5 weeks and suggest that the use of smaller fractions is of no benef it in 
terms of tumor control or reduction in toxicity, at least in the doses used in these studies, 
and may potentially be deleterious.24,44. Interestingly, if one applies an α/β ratio for both 
normal tissue toxicit y and tumor control of 3.5 from START -A, the 40Gy regimen from 
START -B is equivalent to 44.9Gy in 2 Gy fractions. This may imply that differences in 
overall treatment time of a course of radiation therapy may be more important than 
originally thought, pote ntially allowing further dose reduction when fractionation 
regimens are shortened, as we propose here.45,46. 
 
Other moderate hypofractionated radiotherapy treatments support excellent local control 
and comparable to xicity outcomes. Ahlawat el al, reported on 83 women treated after 
breast conserving surgery 36.63 Gy in 11 fractions of 3.33 Gy per day, with a 4 fraction 
boost of an addition 3.33 Gy47.  Three year local recurrenc e free survival was 95.9%, and 
breast cosmesis was good or excellent in 94% of evaluable patients.  
 
In the FAST trial, 915 women aged ≥ 50 years with node negative early breast cancer 
after wide local excision were randomly assigned to receive 50 Gy in 25  fractions of 2.0 
Gy over 5 weeks versus 28.5 Gy or 30Gy in 5 fractions once weekly fractions of 5.7 Gy 
or 6.0 Gy. Three -year rates of physician -assessed moderate/marked adverse effects in the 
breast were 17.3% (13.3 -22.3%, p<0.001) for 30Gy and 11.1% (7.9 -15.6%, p=0.18) for 
28.5Gy compared with 9.5% (6.5 -13.7%) after 50Gy.48 Further follow -up is needed to 
determine local control of these three regimens but promisingly at a median follow -up of 
37.3 months in survivor s, only 2 ipsilateral breast recur rences were noted.  
 
 
Rovea, et al reported outcomes with 5  fractions of 6 to 6.5 Gy delivered once weekly for 
291 elderly patients49. 5 year Local control was excellent at 98%.  Lat e skin fibrosis was 
Grade 2 in 4.2% and grade 3 in 1.4%. Breast edema was low, at 7%, 4.2%, and 1.4% for 
Grade 1, 2, and 3, respectively.  Good to excellent cosmetic outcome was reported in 
86.4%.   Similarly, favorable acute toxicity results were reported  among 42 women with 
early stage breast cancer, treated to the whole breast with 30 Gy in 5 weekly fractions, 
with or without a boost, despite the majority of women having an obese BMI50.    
 
Min reported a modern c ohort of patients treated according to an older French trial51.  82 
patients were treated to 23 Gy over 4 fractions, delivered on days 1 and 3 and 15 and 17.  
 12  MC1635  
 
Five year local control was 99%, with low rates of acute  toxicity.  63 of 74 (86%) 
reported good or excellent cosmesis at last follow up.  An included cost analysis 
supported substantial cost savings, compared with both standard fractionated and 
moderate hypofractionated schemes52.  
 
 
Despite strong interest and rationale for study of hypofractionated radiotherapy in breast 
cancer, there are no data available presently on the role of hypofractionation for breast 
cancer with scanning beam proton therapy .31 
 
The overlying hypothesis of this study is that the  low α/β of breast cancer can be 
exploited with carefully designed hypofractionated proton  therapy regimens to further 
optimize the therapeutic ratio, improve patient convenience, and reduce cost . The goal of 
this phase II I randomized controlled trial is t o determine whether the hypofractionated 
proton  regimens proposed are n on-inferior compared with standard fractionated proton 
radiotherapy and therefore worthy of further investigation.  
 
1.4 Rationale for Doses Selected  
As described above, a linear 
quad ratic model can be used 
to define the alpha -beta of 
the normal structures and 
tumor as well biologic 
effective doses. Plausible 
population averaged 
radiobiologic parameters for 
breast cancer (95% 
confidence level) are α/β = 
2.88 (0.75 –5.01) Gy; a = 0.08 ± 0.02 Gy_1; potential doubling time Td = 14.4 ± 7.8 
day.43 The fractionation regimens in  table  1 (modified from Qi et al.)43 is based on the 
fitting of clinical data including the hypofractionated ra ndomized trials mentioned above  
and justifies the five fraction regimen  proposed for arm 2 . The concurrent boost dose of 6 
Gy x 5 is  also based in part on the  work of Formenti et al. who recently reported the 5 -
year results of a prospective trial of 3D -CRT APBI of 100 patients treated in the prone 
position to a total dose of 30Gy in 6Gy fractions. At a median follow -up of 64 months, 
there has been just one local recurrence and one contralateral recurrence and cosmesis 
was rated as good/excellent in 89% of patients with at least 36 months follow -up.53 Livi 
et al has also shown excellent 5 -year toxicity, cosmetic outcome and local failure resul ts 
employing a dose of 30Gy in 5 treatments.54The cont rol arm for this study will be 1 5 
fractions based on the favorabl e long term follow -up of the UK START B55. More 
recentl y the initial toxicity results of the fast forward trial have been published.  Very low 
rates of grade 3 toxicity were seen using either the 40 Gy over 3 weeks, or 26 Gy or 27 
Gy over one week.56  It is possible tha t the spot proton RBE may be different than 1.1 for 
hypo -fractionated treatments. Trials like the currently proposed would be critical to 
define differences in RBE with spot scanned hypofractionated radiation as well as the 
cancer and normal tissue alpha/b eta.   
 
 
 
2.0 Goals  
Table 1  
 13  MC1635  
 
 
2.1 Primary  Objectives  
 
2.1.1  To determine the 24 -month complication rate of 5 fraction whole radiotherapy 
+/- concurrent boost as compared to 15 fraction radiotherapy  +/- sequential 
boost.  Complications will be defined as one or mor e of the following events:  1) 
grade 3 or higher late adverse event, 2) deterioration of cosmesis from 
excellent/good to fair/poor or from fair to poor.  
 
2.2 Secondary Objectives  
 
2.21 To evaluate acute and late toxicity  
2.22 To estimate the 5 -year locor egional control, invasive disease-free survival and 
overall  survival . 
 
 
2.3 Correlative and Exploratory  
 
2.31  To evaluate fatigue,  and other patient -reported outcomes . 
 
2.32  To evaluate clinical features, treatment technique, dose -volume parameters, 
histologic and genetic variants associated with fair and poor cosmetic outcome s 
or unplanned surgical intervention .  
 
2.32 To evaluate the costs and comparative effectiveness of treatment  
 
2.33 Compare the use of photon  therapy with spot scanning proton ther apy in two 
different hypo -fractionated whole breast schemas.  
 
 
 
3.0 Patient Eligibility    
 
3.1 Inclusion Criteria    
 
3.12 Age ≥ 18 years.  
 
3.13  Histological confirmation of breast cancer .  
 
3.14 Pathologic S tage T0 -T3N0 -N1M0 . (8th edition)  
  
3.15 ECOG Performance  Status (PS) 0 to 2 . (Appendix I). 
 
3.16 Able to and provides IRB approved study specific written informed consent . 
 
3.17a Study entry (randomization) must be within 12 weeks  of last surgery (breast or 
axilla) or last chemotherapy  (if applicable) . 
  
  
 
 14  MC1635  
 
3.17b Willing to return to enrolling institution for follow -up (during the active 
monitoring phase of the study) . 
 
3.18 Fair, g ood or excellent cosmesis, as determined by trained nurse assessment 
using the Harvard Cosmetic Scale . 
 
3.19 Radiotherapy must begin within 12 weeks of the last breast cancer surgery or the 
last dose of adjuvant chemotherapy.  
 
3.20 Breast conserv ing surgery and indications for whole breast radiotherapy.  
 
 
  
 
 3.3 Exclusion Criteria  
 
3.31 Medical contraindication to receipt of radiotherapy.  
3.32 Severe active co -morbid systemic illnesses or o ther severe concurrent disease 
which, in the judgment of  the investigator, would make the patient inappropriate 
for entry into this study or interfere significantly with the proper assessment of 
safety and toxicity of the prescribed regimens.  
 
3.33 Uncontrolled intercurrent illness including, but not limited to , ongoing or active 
infection, symptomatic congestive heart failure, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac 
arrhythmia, or psychiatric illness/social situations that would limit compliance 
with study requirements or providing informed consent.  
3.34 Active syste mic lupus or scleroderma.  
 
3.35 Women of childbearing potential who are sexually active and not willing/able to 
use medically acceptable forms of contraception . 
 
3.36 Prior receipt of ipsilateral breast or chest wall radiation .  
 
3.37 Positive margins on ink after definitive surgery  either for DCIS or invasive 
cancer.  
 
3.38 History of non -breast malignancies (except for in situ cancers treated only by 
local excision and basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas of the skin) within 5 
years prior study entry . 
 
3.39 Recurrent breast c ancer . 
 
3.40  Indications for comprehensive regional nodal irradiation.  
 
3.41 Male subjects.  
 
3.42 Patient requires bilateral breast  radiation  treatment.  
 
 
        
 15  MC1635  
 
 
4.0 Test Schedule   
 
 
 
 
1. A general history & physical exam should include height  and weight (optional at Rochester 
site)  
2. Review of pathology at failure if obtained clinically  
3. Photographs can be done at any time before or after treatment at the discretion of the 
physician  
4. Last day of treatment +/ -2 days per discretion of treating physician  
5. Outside pathology must be reviewed at treating institution to confirm eligibility  within 365 
days.  
6. Blood pregnancy test to be completed prior to start of treat ment on day 1 (for women of 
childbearing potential only).  
7. PET Scan at failure optional  
8. Per discretion of treating physician for Arm 2 (5 days)  
 9.  These tests can be done before or up 3 days into treatment  
 10. Limited physical exam to include ECOG; weig ht (optional for Rochester site)  
11.  As collected clinically  
12.  Patient s that cannot come back to Mayo within the time constraints of the follow -up 
schedule; efforts to obtain outside records and  complete QOL’s will occur , however the 
required items ma y not be captured .  
13. If follow up visit occurred at an outside institution, Cosmetic Assessment will not be 
required.  
 
 
*Failure defined as recurrent disease 5.0 Stratification Factors  
5.1  Treatment modality:  Photons  vs. spot scanned proton therapy.  
 Of the total 110 patients in this study , fifty-five would be treated in each arm. We will  Baseline  Pre-treatment  EOT  
Observation 12 
 ≤120 days 
prior to start of 
treatment  ≤45 days prior 
to start of 
treatment6 Last day of 
Treatment (+/ - 
5 days)  12 weeks 
(+/- 4 weeks) 
post-
treatment  6 months 
(+/- 2 
months)  12 months (+/ - 3 months), 24 months 
(+/- 6 months), 36 months (+/ - 6 
months), 48 m onths (+/ - 6 months) and 
5 years (+/ - 6 months) post completion 
of treatment  Failure*  
Procedures         
Obtain Informed Consent  X       
History and Physical exam1 X       
Limited physical exam/ECOG 
performance status (see Appendix 
1)10 X  X8 X  X X 
Cosmetic Assessment (see Section 
11.3.1, 11.3.3)  X9 X8 X  X13 X 
Digital Photographs3  X X X  X  
QOL (see Appendices 2,3,4)11  X9 X X X X X 
Adverse Event Evaluation (see 
section 10.0)  X9 X X  X X 
Tumor Assessments         
Review of surgical specimen  X5       X2 
PET scan        X7 
 16  MC1635  
 
allow a maximum of 28 patients per arm per treatment modality (photons /x-ray or 
protons).  
  
  
6.0  Registration  / Randomization Procedures  
6.1 Registration Procedure s 
6.1 Patient will be registered to the study when they have consented, met eligibility 
criteria, and have been logged into Research Participant Tracking (Ptrax).  
6.2 Screening tests/procedures (see section 4.0) will be completed within the guidelines 
specified o n the assessment schedule.  
 
6.2 Randomization Procedures  
 
6.21 The factors defined in Section 5.0, together with the registering membership, will be used 
as stratification factors.  
 
6.22  After the patient has been registered into the study, the values of  the stratification factors 
will be recorded, and the patient will be assigned to one of the following treatment groups 
using the Pocock and Simon dynamic allocation procedure which balances the marginal 
distributions of the stratification factors between the treatment groups . 57 
 
 
7.0 Protocol Treatment  
 
Doses throughout will be prescribed in Gy (RBE) / Gy or Gy . One Gy will be the equivalent of 
one Gy (RBE) / Gy  for proton therapy for the purposes of the descriptions below. Radiation 
therapy must begin within 12 weeks of the last breast cancer surgery or the last dose of adjuvant 
chemotherapy  and no soon er than 14 days since the last chemotherapy . The dose, schedule, and 
timing (neoadjuvant vs adjuvant)  of chemotherapy and endocrine therapy  are at the discretion of  
the treating oncologists . Concurrent cytotoxic chemotherapy with radiotherapy is not allowe d. 
Use of anti -HER2 therapy during radiotherapy is permitted.  
 
The treatment  technique  (photon/x -ray vs. proton ) utilized will be at the physician’s discretion 
and will be based on technical considerations, availability at the radiation oncology facility, 
insurance coverage considerations, and patient preference. See section 7.4.  
 
7.1       Radiation Therapy,  Arm 1   
 Patients who had breast conserving surgery and are randomized to arm 1 (standard 
fractionation) will receive whole breast radiotherapy delivered t o the breast CTV  with or 
without a sequential boost to the lumpectomy cavity CTV . Boost indications will be left 
to physician discretion. Potential risk factors suggesting increased absolute benefit from a 
boost include but are not limited to age < 40, clo se margins, extensive DCIS adjacent to 
the invasive tumor.58,59 
 
7.2 Radiation Therapy , Arm 2  
 17  MC1635  
 
Patients who had breast conserving surgery  and are randomized to arm 2 ( 5 fraction 
hypo fractionation) will receive whole brea st radiotherapy in 5 daily fractions delivered to 
the breast CTV  with or without a  concurrent boost to the lumpectomy cavity CTV.   
Boost indications will be left to physician discretion.  Potential risk factors suggesting 
increased absolute benefit from a boost include but are not limited to age < 40, close 
margins, extensive DCIS adjacent to the invasive tumor .58,59  
 
7.3 Dose Specific ations  
7.31 Arm 1 Post -lumpectomy whole breast irradiation +/ - sequential boost  
7.311  Breast: 40. 05Gy (RBE) / Gy/Gy in 15 fractions of 2.67 Gy (RBE) / 
Gy/Gy  
7.312  Lumpectomy cavity (optional): Sequential boost dose will be 10 Gy 
(RBE) / Gy  in 2.5 Gy (RBE) / Gy  fractions for a t otal dose of 50.05 Gy 
(RBE) / Gy / Gy . Simultaneously integrated boost is allowed to a total 
dose of 48 Gy (RBE) / Gy  over 15 fractions.   
7.32 Arm 2 Post -lumpectomy whole breast irradiation +/ - concurrent boost  
7.321  Breast: 25 Gy (RBE) / Gy  in 5 fractions of 5 Gy (RBE) / Gy   
7.322  Lumpectomy cavity (optional): Dose to the lumpectomy cavity 
(concurrent boost dose) will be 30 Gy (RBE) / Gy  in 5 fractions  of 6 Gy 
(RBE) / Gy  
 
7.4 Treatment Technique  
7.41 Radiation will be delivered using available photon ( x-ray) or scanning beam 
proton equipment at the treatin g institution.  
7.42 Only one breast will be treated on the pr otocol.  
7.43 While planning the scanning target volumes, care must be taken to not put Bragg 
Peaks either in the Chest Wall or in the first 5 mm from the external surface of 
the body.  
 
7.5 Localization, Simulation, Immobilization  
7.51 Simulation should be performed with  the patient in the supine  or prone  position  
7.52 Patients should be optimally positioned with a custom immobilization device at 
the discretion of the treating physician.  
7.53 Arm position may be up or down.  
7.54 The CT should extend cephalad to at least the level of the  mandible to include 
both elbows and extend caudally to encompass the entire lung volume. The CT 
scan thickness will be 2mm . 
7.55 External skin markers, which may include permanent tattoos, are recommended 
for daily set -up. 
7.56 KV image guidance will be performed d aily. Other imaging modalities, such as 
CBCT and Vision RT, real time tracking or others should be performed based on 
institutional guidelines.  
7.57 Volumetric imaging may be performed with re -planning at the physician’s 
discretion.  
 
7.6 Treatment Planning  
7.61 For pro ton planning, 1 or more en face or oblique fields are recommended.  
 
 18  MC1635  
 
7.7 Target Volumes 
The definitions for the CTV and normal structures for this protocol will generally follow the 
RTOG (Radiation Therapy Oncologic Group)-endorsed consensus guidelines for delineation 
for breast cancer with 
exceptions described below. 
7.71 Post-lumpectomy breast target volumes (Arms 1 and 2) 
7.711  High tangents volume:  Alternatively, breast target volume can be 
defined by traditionally treated volume. All palpable breast tissue and all 
tissue encompassed by a standard tangent fields would be considered 
breast tissue.  A medial tangent would be placed at the costo-condral 
junction and a lateral tangent would be placed at the mid axillary line or 
more posterior as necessary to cover all breast tissue laterally. The caudal 
border would be 1 cm below all breast tissue. The superior border would 
be placed at the second intercostal space. Position would be verified on 
CT and in general it should not be closer than 1.5 cm from the inferior 
border of the humeral head and no more than 2 cm distal ly.  
7.712  Low tangents volume: would be defined in the same manner; with the 
exception that the superior border should be between 2-4 cm from the 
inferior border of the humeral head. 
7.713  Manual modifications:  alternatively, volumes can be defined using the 
RTOG breast atlas as above. However, for uniformity of the posterior 
margin the breast volume would include muscle tissue as needed to 
maintain a uniform distal edge. Please see breast CTV (section 7.7.1.4.2). 
7.714  Lumpectomy Cavity: Contour using the excision cavity volume, 
architectural distortion, lumpectomy scar, seroma and/or extent of 
surgical clips (clips and/or fiducials are strongly recommended). 
7.7.1.4.1  Lumpectomy Cavity CTV :  Lumpectomy Cavity + 5mm 3 
D expansion. Limit the CTV 5 mm from skin.   
7.7.1.4.2  Breast CTV: the breast would be the same as the CTV high 
tangents or low tangents without further expansions. The 
lumpectomy CTV is also included. The breast CTV volume 
is limited 5mm from the skin.  The breast CTV posteriorly, 
would be limited 5mm from the lung excluding the chest 
wall. 
7.715  Photon therapy 
7.7.1.5.1  PTV -eval (PTV evaluation): PTV evaluation would be used 
for photon patients. PTV eval would equal to the breast CTV 
as defined above. The breast CTV as defined above matches 
the definition of the RTOG 1005 “ This Breast PTV Eval is 
limited anteriorly to exclude the part outside the patient and 
the first 5 mm of tissue under the skin (in order to remove 
most of the buildup region for the DVH analysis) and 
posteriorly is limited no deeper to the anterior surface of the 
ribs (excludes boney thorax and lung). ” 
 
7.8  Critical Structures 
7.81 Breast skin eval: Will be defined as the first 3 mm of tissue under the body 
surface anterior to the Breast CTV.   

 19  MC1635  
 
 
7.82 Heart:  To be contoured on all cases. The contour should begin just inferior to the 
level in which the pulmonary trunk branches into the left and  right pulmonary 
arteries (PA) and should extend to its most inferior extent near the diaphragm. 
The esophagus, ascending and descending aorta and inferior vena cava should be 
excluded from the heart contour.  
 
7.83 Left anterior descending (LAD) interventricul ar branch : To be contoured on 
left sided cases . “Originates from the left coronary artery and runs in the 
interventricular groove between the right and left ventricles. If it is difficult to 
see, raising the level and lowering the window may help (e.g. lev el 50, window 
150)”.60  
 
7.84 Right coronary artery (RCA).  To be contoured on all right -sided cases . 
“Originates from the right side of the ascending aorta. Due to the native heart 
position in the chest, on axilla CT, it  appears to start inferior to the left coronary 
artery. It moves significantly with cardiac motion, so often the location can seem 
noncontiguous from axial CT slice to slice, as the position of the AV groove 
changes.”60 
 
7.85 Ipsilateral lung : To be contoured on all cases, auto -segmentation with manual 
verification is permitted  
 
7.86 Contralateral lung:  To be contoured on all cases, auto -segmentation with 
manual verification is permitted  
 
7.87 Total lung:  To be contoured on all cas es, auto -segmentation with manual 
verification is permitted  
 
7.88 Contralateral breast:  Dose to the contralateral breast will not be constrained in 
treatment planning and therefore contouring of the contralateral breast is not 
required in this protocol. However , efforts should be made to limit inadvertent 
dosing of the contralateral breast.  
 
7.89 Chest wall:  from patient’s  midline, at  the mid plane of the sternum , to the 
patient’s  posterior axillary line. The thickness would be defined by measuring the 
distance from the lung -chest wall interface to the posterior edge of the pectoralis 
muscle and creating virtual structure. It can be manually modified to exclude the 
pectoralis muscle at the discretion of the treating physician. No breast tissue 
should be included in th is structure . The CTV should not be included in this 
structure plus 2mm.  
  
7.9  Prescription and  Normal Tissue Constraints  
 
7.91 Arms 1 and 2  (protons and photons/ x-rays)  
7.911  Breast CTV:  
 20  MC1635  
 
7.9.1.1.1  Per protocol ≥ D95% will receive ≥95% of prescription; 
Variation acceptable ≥ D90%  receives ≥ 90% of 
prescription  
7.912  Tumor  CTV  
7.9.1.2.1  Per protocol   D95% receives ≥95% of dose; variation 
acceptable  D90% receives ≥90% of the boost dose  
7.913  Robustness analysis for Prot ons 
7.9.1.3.1  Breast CTV coverage would be evaluated for 5mm 
movements or 3% range changes. Per protocol Breast CTV  
V90% receives ≥95% of the prescription dose; variation 
acceptable ≥ V90% receives ≥90% of the prescription dose.  
7.9.1.3.2  Under the same robustness evaluation  criteria, plans will be 
evaluated for D max.  V ariation acceptable D0.01cc  % 
≤120 % 
 
 
   
   
 Protons DVH summary table  
 
  Goal  Major violation1 
Breast CTV   ≥ V95% will receive 
≥95% of 
prescription  V90% <90% of 
prescription  
  Dmax <107 % Dmax >115 % 
Tumor  Bed CTV   ≥ V95% will receive 
≥95% of 
prescription  V90% <90% of 
prescription  
  Dmax <107 % Dmax >115 % 
Breast CTV 
robustness   V90% > 90% of 
prescription  V90% <90% of 
prescription  
    
Heart  Max dose  ≤25% of 
prescription  >33% of 
prescription  
 Mean  <0.1Gy >1Gy 
Breast Skin  Max dose  ≤105 % of 
prescription  >110 % of 
prescription  
    
Lung Ipsilateral  V50% of prescription  ≤10%  >15%  
 V20 record   
Lung contralateral  V50%  ≤7%   >10%  
Lung Total  Mean dose  record   
 V20Gy  record   
 V50%  record   
LAD (optional)  Mean  dose record   
 Max dose  record   
RCA  (optional)  Mean dose  record   
 Max dose  record   
 21  MC1635  
 
 
1. Major violations do not exclude patients from the protocol as it is an intent to treat analysis  
 
Photons (x -rays)  DVH summary table  
 
  Goal  Major violation  
PTV Eval   ≥ V95% will receive 
≥95% of 
prescription  V90% <90% of 
prescription  
  Dmax <107 % Dmax >115 % 
Tumor Bed CTV   ≥ V95% will receive 
≥95% of 
prescription  V90% <90% of 
prescription  
  Dmax <107 % Dmax >115 % 
Breast CTV 
robustness   V90% > 90% of 
prescription  V90% < 90% of 
prescription  
    
Heart  Max dose  ≤33% of 
prescription  >50% of 
prescription  
 Mean  <1Gy >2Gy 
Breast Skin  Max dose  ≤107 % of 
prescription  >115 % of 
prescription  
    
Lung Ipsilateral  V50% of prescription  ≤10%  >15%  
 V20 record   
Lung contralateral  V50% ≤7%   >10%  
Lung Total  Mean dose  record   
 V20Gy  record   
 V50%  record   
LAD (optional)  Mean dose  record   
 Max dose  record   
RCA  (optional)  Mean dose  record   
 Max dose  record   
1. Major violations do not exclude patients from the protocol as it is an  intent to treat 
analysis  
 
Quality Assurance Documentation  
7.92 At a minimum, the initial 2treatment plans per institution will be centrally 
reviewed by the principal investigator or designee prior to the start of treatment.  
 
 
8.0 Radiotherapy Dose Modification s Based on Adverse Events   
 
This study has no pre -specified interruptions due to adverse events. Treatment interruptions are 
discouraged. No dose modifications should be done for treatment interruptions.  
 
9.0 Ancillary Treatment/Supportive Care  
 
Skin changes are c ommon complications of breast cancer radiation therap y. Usual care will be 
 22  MC1635  
 
provided as per the treating institution’s standard of practice. If the skin becomes erythematous 
and/or there is pruritus , topical steroid cream may  be prescribed. The  addition of antihistamines 
may be used for severe pruritus . Patients experiencing pain will be prescribed pain medication.  
 
10.0 Adverse Event (AE) Reporting and Monitoring  
 
10.1 Definitions  
Adverse Event - An untoward or undesirable experience associated with the use of a 
medical product (i.e. drug, device, biologic) in a patient or research subject.  
Serious Adverse Event  – Any grade 4 or 5 adverse event as defined by CTC AE v4.0. 
Adverse events are classified as serious or non -serious.  Serious problems/events can be 
well defined and include in general:  
 Death 
 Life threatening adverse experience  where emergent lifesaving treatment is 
necessary.  
 
 
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others (UPIRTSO ) - Any 
unanticipated problem or adverse event that meets the  following three criteria:  
Serious : Serious problems or events that results in significant harm, (which may be 
physical, psychological, financial, social, economic, or legal) or increased risk for the 
subject or others (including individuals who are not r esearch subjects). These include: (1) 
death; (2) life threatening adverse experience; (3) hospitalization - inpatient, new, or 
prolonged; (4) disability/incapacity - persistent or significant; (5) birth defect/anomaly; (6) 
breach of confidentiality and (7)  other problems, events, or new information (i.e. 
publications, DSMB reports, interim findings, product labeling change) that in the opinion 
of the local investigator may adversely affect the rights, safety, or welfare of the subjects 
or others, or substan tially compromise the research data, AND  
Unanticipated : (i.e. unexpected) problems or events are those that are not already 
described as potential risks in the protocol, consent document, not listed in the 
Investigator’s Brochure, or not part of an underly ing disease. A problem or event is 
"unanticipated" when it was unforeseeable at the time of its occurrence. A problem or 
event is "unanticipated" when it occurs at an increased frequency or at an increased 
severity than expected, AND  
Related : A problem or event is "related" if it is possibly related to the research procedures.  
 
Preexisting Condition - A preexisting condition is one that is present at the start of the 
study.  A preexisting condition should be recorded as an adverse event if the frequency, 
intensity, or the character of the condition worsens during the study period. At screening, 
any clinically significant abnormality should be recorded as a preexisting condition.  At 
the end of the study, any new clinically significant findings/abnormalities t hat meet the 
definition of an adverse event must also be recorded and documented as an adverse event.   
 
 10.2 Recording Adverse Events  
 
  CTCAE term (AE description) and grade:  The descriptions and grading scales  
found in the revised NCI Common Terminology  Criteria for Adverse Events  
(CTCAE) version 4.0 will be utilized for AE reporting  unless as otherwise stated in the 
table below.  
 23  MC1635  
 
 
All appropriate treatment  areas should have access to a copy of the CTCAE version 4.0. 
A copy of the  CTCAE version 4.0 can be  downloaded from the CTEP web site:  
(http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm ) 
 
10.21  Adverse event monitoring and reporting is a r outine part of every clinical  
trial. First, identify and grade the severity of the event using the CTCAE  
version 4.0. Next, determine whether the event is expected or unexpected  
and if the adverse event is related to the medical treatment or procedure. Wit h 
this information, determine whether the event must be reported as an ex pedited 
report (see Section 10.3 ). 
 
  10.22  Assessment of Attribution  
Only G4 or G5 adverse events will require an attribution. Any change in the 
grade of an adverse event within the list of monitored AEs will be recorded and 
considered to be related to treatment. Any new adverse not listed occurring 
within the Radiated area or in close proximity will be graded and attribution 
defined by the study PI.  
Events determined to be possibly, probably or definitely attributed to a 
medical treatment suggest there is evidence to indicate a causal relationship 
between the treatment  and the adverse event.  
 
  
10.3 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events and Unanticipated Problems  
 
When an adverse event has been identified, the study team will take appropriated action 
necessary to protect the study participant and then complete the Study Adverse Event 
Worksheet and log.  The sponsor -investigator will evaluate the event and determine the 
necessary follow -up and reporting required.  
 
a. Serious Adverse Events will be reported as part of regular adverse event 
reporting mechanisms via the data capture system and lo gged for review 
reporting.  
 
10.31 Investigator Reporting: Notifying the Mayo IRB:  
 
The IRB requiremen ts reflect the guidance documents released by the Office of 
Human Research Protections (OHRP), and the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) in early 2007 and are respectively entitled “Guidance on Reviewing and 
Reporting Unanticipated Problems Involving Risk s to Subjects or Others and 
Adverse Events” and “Guidance for Clinical Investigators, Sponsors, and IRBs: 
Adverse Event Reporting – Improving Human Subject Protection.”  
 
10.311 According to Mayo IRB Policy any serious adverse event (SAE) 
which the Principa l Investigator has determined to be a 
UPIRTSO must be reported to the Mayo IRB as soon as possible 
but no later than 5 working days after the investigator first learns 
of the problem/event.  
10.312  Non-UPIRTSO – the investigator reports problems or events t hat 
do NOT meet criteria of an UPIRTSO in summary format at the 
 24  MC1635  
 
time of the next continuing review. The investigator monitors the 
severity and frequency of subsequent non -UPIRTSOs.  
 
Consider the following information to collect when developing any forms fo r 
documentation of adverse events.  
Example  
Information collected on the adverse event worksheet (and entered in the 
research database):  
 Subject’s name:  
 Medical record number:  
 Disease/histology (if applicable):  
 The date the adverse event occurred:  
 Desc ription of the adverse event:  
 Relationship of the adverse event to the research (drug, procedure, or 
intervention):  
 If the adverse event was expected:  
 The severity of the adverse event: (use a table to define severity scale 1 -
5) 
 If any intervention was necessary:  
 Resolution: (was the incident resolved spontaneously, or after 
discontinuing treatment)  
 Date of Resolution:  
 
The investigator will review all adverse event reports to determine if specific 
reports need to be made to the IRB and FDA.  The inves tigator will sign and date 
the adverse event report when it is reviewed.  For this protocol, only directly 
related SAEs/UPIRTSOs will be reported to the IRB.  
 
10.4 Adverse events to be graded at each evaluation and pretreatment symptoms/conditions to 
be ev aluated at baseline per the CTCAE v 5.0 grading unless otherwise stated in the table 
below . Version 4 is allowed if v5 is not available, however, AEs will have to be updated 
to V5 once is available : 
 
 
System Organ Class 
(SOC)   
Adverse 
event/Symptoms   
Basel ine Each  
evaluation  Grading scale  
(if not CTCAE)  
General  Pain X X CTCAE  
Skin and s ubcutaneous 
tissue disorders  
 Dermatitis Radiation  X X CTCAE  
Skin 
hyperpigmentation  X X CTCAE  
Skin 
hypopigmentation  X X CTCAE  
Superficial Soft 
Tissue Fibrosis  X X CTCAE  
Breast edema 
(lymphedema)  X X CTCAE  
 25  MC1635  
 
Vascular  Lymphedema  -arms  X X CTCAE  
Respiratory, thoracic and 
mediastinal disorders  Pneumonitis  X X CTCAE  
  
10.5 Submit via appropriate  reporting mechanisms  the following AEs experienced by a patient 
and not sp ecified in Section 10.4:  
 
   
10.52  Grade  3, 4, and 5  AEs regardless of attribution to the study 
treatment or procedure.  
 
10.53   Grade 5 AEs (Death)  
  
10.531  Any death within 30 days of the patient’s last 
study treatment or procedure regardless of 
attributi on to the study treatment or procedure  
 
10.532  Any death more than 30 days after the patients 
last study treatment or procedure that is felt to be 
at least possibly treatment related must also be 
submitted as a Grade 5 AE, with a CTCAE type 
and attribution  assigned.  
 
 
11.0 Treatment Evaluation  
 
11.1 Patients will be evaluated at baseline, then according to the Assessment Schedule 
(Section 4.0)  
 
11.2 At the time of reevaluation, patients will be classified in the following manner : 
 
11.2.1  No evidence of disease (NED).  
 
11.2.2  Recurren ce of disease (REC). Consider biopsy of the site and PET scan.  
 
11.2.3  The site of recurrence (or failure) will also be collected and classified as local vs. 
regional vs. distant recurrence.   
 
11.2.4  Secondary Treatment. The date of the first retreatment and extent of  retreatment 
post-recurrence (i.e. secondary resection or re -irradiation for primary disease), 
will be collected. Pathology, if available, and operative reports are required to be 
submitted per Section 18.0.  
 
11.3 Cosmesis evaluation and Patient Reported Outcom es 
 
11.3.1  The Harvard/NSABP/ RTOG Cosmesis Scale  will be used to score cosmesis by 
trained nurses for the primary endpoint according to the schedule outlined in 
section 4.0.   
 26  MC1635  
 
 Excellent : Treated breast nearly identical to untreated breast  
  
Good : Treated breast s lightly different than untreated (minimal but 
identifiable effects of the treated breast) . Mild reddening or darkening of 
the breast may be present. Thickening or scar tissue causes only a mild 
change in the shape or size.  
  
Fair: Obvious difference in the  size and shape of the treated breast. The 
change involves one -quarter or less of the breast .  Severe thickening 
or scarring can be present.   
  
Poor :  Marked change in appearance or shape involving more than  
one-quarter or less of the breast.  Treated bre ast seriously distorted 
(severe sequelae of breast tissue)  
 
11.3.2  Digital photographs  should be performed according to the schedule outlined in 
section 4.0 and should include three poses: from the front with hands on hips , 
both oblique and  lateral views  with ha nds behind the back . Recommended 
framing should go from the sternal notch to the umbilicus. If possible, patients 
should be photographed against a solid colored background  such as a white sheet . 
 
 
11.3.3  The Quality of Life (QOL) questionnaires are adapted from t he Breast Cancer 
Treatment Outcome Scale (BCTOS). PRO -CTCAE will also be used for QOL  
questionnaires.  
 
11.4 Quality of life questionnaires are being done as part of the standard of care for all 
patients. We will correlate results of this standard of care questi onnaires with clinical 
outcomes.   
 
11.4.1  The Quality of Life (QOL) questionnaires are adapted from the Breast Cancer 
Treatment Outcome Scale (BCTOS). PRO -CTCAE will also be used for QOL 
questionnaires.  
 
 
Unplanned surgical intervention  will be adjudicated by a p lastic surgeon and a general 
surgeon.  
 
 
 
12.0 Descriptive Factors  
 
 Breast : left vs. right  
 AJCC S tage: 0 vs IA vs IB vs IIA vs IIB vs IIIA  
 Tumor S ize: 0-2cm vs  > 2-5cm vs > 5cm  
 Lymph Nodes: N0 vs N1  
 
13.0 Treatment/Follow –up Decision at Evaluation of Patient    
 
 27  MC1635  
 
Follow -up data will collected and entered after the observation phase outlined in section 4.0. If 
the patient is still alive after 5 years have elapsed from the on-study date, no further follow -up is 
required by this protocol.  
 
13.1 Patients who have a  recurrence while receiving therapy or during observation will go to 
the event -monitoring phase  and be followed   
13.2 Patients who discontinue  treatment or observation for reasons other than recurrence will 
go to the event -monitoring phase and be followed   
 
13.3 Patients who will not receive any radiation treatment or who will receive radiation 
treatment elsewhere will move to event monitoring phase.  
 
13.4      A patient is deemed ineligible  if after registration, it is determined that at the time of 
regis tration, the patient did not satisfy each and every eligibility criteria for study entry.  
The patient may continue treatment off -protocol at the discretion of the physician as long 
as there are no safety concerns, and the patient was properly registered. The patient will 
go directly to the event -monitoring phase of the study (or off study, if applicable).  
 
If the patient received treatment, all data up until the point of confirmation of ineligibility 
must be submitted.  Event monitoring will be required p er Section 18.0 of the protocol.  
 
If the patient  never received  treatment, on-study material and the End of Active 
Treatment/Cancel Notification Form must be submitted.  No further data submission is 
necessary . 
 
13.5 A patient is deemed withdrawn if she i s removed from the study for any reason before 
any study treatment is given.  On -study material and the End of Active Treatment/Cancel 
Notification Form must be submitted.  No further data submission is necessary.  
 
14.0 Body Fluid Bio -specimens   
 
14.1 N/A 
 
 15.0 Drug Information   
 
 Not Applicable  
 
 
16.0  Statistical Considerations and Methodology  
16.1  Overview:  This is an open label phase II I randomized controlled tr ial to determine the 
safety of 5 fraction vs 1 5 fraction radiotherapy aft er breast conserving  surgery.  The goal 
is to determine whether the difference in 24 -month complication rates between the 
experimental arm and the control arm is acceptable. Of interest is whether the 
experimental arm results in an unacceptable increase in the 24 -month compli cation rate. 
If it does not, then the experimental arm will be recommended for further study. If the 24 -
month complication rate is found to be unacceptable, then the recommendation would be 
to do no further studies of the experimental arm . 
 
16.2 Primary an d Secondary Endpoints  
 
 28  MC1635  
 
16.21  Primary Endpoint:  The 24 -month complicat ion rate, defined as the percentage of 
women evaluable at 24 months who develop one or more of the following events:  
 
1) grade 3 or higher  late adverse event   OR 
 
2) deterioration of  cosmesis from excellent/good to fair/poor or from fair to 
poor at the 24 -month evaluation  (using the Harvard/NSABP/RTOG 
Cosmesis Scale )  
 
16.22 Secondary Endpoints:  
16.221  Acute and late adverse events including grade ≥2 pneumonitis.  
16.223  Locoregional control, invasive disease -free, distant recurrence, disease - 
free survival, cause -specific survival, overall survival.  
The following definitions are used for the se condary endpoints of interest:  
 Acute adverse events : any adverse event, regardless of attribution, that 
occurs in the first 90 days post-RT. 
 Late adverse events (up to 5 years post RT): any adverse event that 
occur red after the first 90 days post-RT and up  to 5 years  post-RT. 
 Ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence  (IBTR ): this is defined as  local 
recurrence  from trial registration as a first event  at 5 years . IBTR is 
defined as both invasive and non -invasive breast cancer involving the 
same breast parenchyma a s the original tumor.   
 Regional recurrence:  invasive breast cancer in the axilla, regional lymph 
nodes, chest wall, and skin of the ipsilateral breast  at 5 years . 
 Distant recurrence:  metastatic cancer that has either been biopsy 
confirmed or clinically dia gnosed as recurrent invasive breast cancer  at 5 
years . 
 Invasive diseas e- free survival:  this is defined as the time from study 
registration until the occurrence of one of the events in a composite 
endpoint. This endpoint includes invasive IBTR, regional in vasive breast 
cancer recurrence, distant breast cancer recurrence, death due to any 
cause .  
 Disease - free survival:  this is defined as the time from study registration 
until the occurrence of one of the events in a composite endpoint. This 
endpoint include s any IBTR, regional invasive breast cancer recurrence, 
distant breast cancer recurrence, death due to any cause,  
 Cause specific survival:   is defined as the time from registration to death 
due to breast cancer . If the cause of death is unkonw or difficul t to 
stablish patients with a distant failure at the time of death would be 
censored as dying from breast cancer  
 Overall survival:  is defined as the time from registration to death due to 
any cause.  
 
 
16.3  Exploratory endpoints:   
 29  MC1635  
 
16.31  Patient self -repor ted cosmesis  evaluate fatigue, breast pain, arm function and 
other patient reported outcomes.  
The following definitions are used for the exploratory endpoints of interest:  
 Patient Reported Outcomes/Quality of life: Elements of the Patient -
Reported Outcome s Version of the Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (PRO -CTCAE)  will be used for patient self -reporting of 
toxicities. The Breast Cancer Treatment Outcomes Scale (BCTOS) will 
be used to measure patient reported functional status (pain, mobility ). 
Other measures of fatigue, pain, and arm function are listed in the 
appendix.  
 Patient self -reported cosmetic outcomes:  the patient self -reported 
outcome will be assessed using a modified Harvard Cosmesis Scale and 
the BCTOS at baseline, 2 years, and 5 years.   
 Panel assessed cosmetic outcome:  in addition to patient self -reported and 
physician reported outcomes, cosmesis will be assessed by a panel of 
breast cancer medical providers using digital photographs from baseline 
and at 2 years.  The Panel will be blinded to treatment allocation.  
 
16.4 Sample Size Determination  
This study requires 100 evaluable women for the primary endpoint ana lysis (50 evaluable 
patients per arm) . 
Ninety -two percent of expected patients completed a 3 -year assessment of cosmesis  in 
the randomized phase III study reported by Olivotto et al.61 Expected was defined as 
patients who were projected to have had their 3 -year follow -up visit based on the date of 
random assignment and who did not ex perience recurrence, undergo mastectomy, or die. 
Therefore to be conservative we will  anticipate enrolling 10 (5 per arm)  additional 
patients to account  for ineligibility, cancellation, major treatment violations, or other 
reason s. The maximum projected en rollment is therefore 110 women . 
 
In a large randomized controlled trial Whelan and colleagues compared cosmetic 
outcomes between conventional and hypofractionated whole breast  radiotherapy after 
lumpectomy. At baseline, 84% of patients in the hypofraction ated arm were rated as 
having good or excellent cosmesis by trained nursing assessment. At 3 years, the 
percentage was 77%, or an absolute change of 7%.62 In the study proposed here, a subset 
of patients may receive  a boost to the lumpectomy cavity which has been associated with 
a slightly higher risk of fibrosis and adverse cosmesis.63,64 Therefore, the sample size 
proposed for arms 1 -2 is b ased on an assumed value of a  10% complication rate in the 
control arm.  The rate of grade 3 or higher  late toxicity in this population is expected to be 
≤1 %  (Whelan ASCO 2011) .  Since the local failure  rate and death rate at 2 -years in the 
UK start B trial24 was less than 3% we assume that an additional 10% to account for 
patients lost to follow, failures, dea ths and others should be adequate  (Total enrollment of 
110 patients) .  
16.5 Study Decision Rule and Operating Characteristics  
 
 30  MC1635  
 
  The primary endpoint for this t rial is the 24 -month complication rate. Complications will 
be defined as at least one of the fol lowing events:  1) grade 3 or higher late adverse event  
OR 2) deterioration of cosmesis from excellent/good to fair/poor or from fair to poor 
(using the Harvard/NSABP/RTOG Cosmesis Scale )  
 
The proposed analysis would be to compute the difference in the 24 -month complication 
rate between the experimental arm and the control arm. A one -sided 90% confidence 
interval (with the upper  bound of the interval) was computed  by assuming a 10% 
complication rate in the control arm a nd a 15% “non -inferiority margin” of the difference 
(i.e. the maximum the difference can be between the experimental arm and control arm , 
the largest difference we’re willing to accept ). The decision rule would be of the 
following:  
 Upper  bound of the one-sided confidence interval (CI) for the  difference 
(experimental arm 24 -month complication rate minus control arm 24 -month 
complication rate) lies above 15% then recommend that the experimental arm is 
not investigated further . The 24 -month complication rate of the experimental arm is 
unacceptab ly high.  
 Upper  bound of the one-sided confidence interval (CI) for the difference 
(experimental arm 24 -month complication rate minus control arm 24-month 
complication rate) is less than 15% then recommend that the experimental arm 
undergo further investiga tion. The 24 -month complication rate of the experimental 
arm is potentially acceptable.  
 
With 100 evaluable patients, this study has 80% power with a 1 -sided alpha of 0. 05 to 
test a null hypothesis that the control arm complication rate is10% and experimen tal arm 
control rate is 25% versus an alternate hypothesis that the complication rate in both arms 
is 10%.  Sample size was computed using PASS v.15  software . 
 
Other considerations:  Adverse events, quality/duration of response, and patterns of 
treatment f ailure observed in this study, as well as scientific discoveries or changes in 
standard care will be taken into account in any decision to terminate the study.  
 
16.6  Analysis Plan  
 
 The analysis for this trial will commence at the planned time  points and at the time the 
 patients have become evaluable for the primary endpoint.  
 
16.61 Primary Analysis : The primary analysis will be to estimate the difference 
in the complication rate (adverse cosmesis  and grade 3+ toxicities) which 
is defined as the 24 -month  complication rate in experimental arm minus 
that in the control arm. All patients meeting the eligibility criteria who 
have signed a consent form and started treatment will be in the primary 
analysis.  The complication rate will include all women evaluabl e at 24 
months.  Those who have recurrent disease or die before 24 months will 
not be included in this calculation.  We expect that <3% of patients will 
not be found eligible based on failure or death.24 The complication rate 
will be estimated using a bino mial estimator in both experimental arm 
 31  MC1635  
 
and control arm, and a one -sided 90% confidence interval of the 
difference will be computed with normal approximation.  As mentioned 
above, the following decisions will be made based on the 90% CI:  
 The upper bound of the 1 -sided 90% CI of the difference lies below 
15%: The experimental arm regimen is acceptable.  
 The upper  bound of the 1-sided 90% CI of the difference lies above 
15%: The experimental arm regimen is unacceptable.  
 
16.62  Secondary  Analyses  
 
16.621  Acute a dverse events : All patients who were registered to the study and 
started treatment will be included in the acute adverse event analysis. An 
acute adverse event is an AE, regardless of attribution, that  occurs up to 
90 days post-RT. The maximum grade for ea ch type of acute AE will be 
recorded for each patient. Data will be summarized as frequencies and 
relative frequencies  by treatment arm . Additionally, the relationship of 
the adverse event(s) to the study treatment will be taken into 
consideration.  Rates w ill be compared between arms using chi -squared 
tests.  
   
16.622  Late adverse events : All patients who were registered to the study and 
started treatment will be included in the late adverse event analysis. A 
late adverse event is an AE, regardless of attri bution, that appears or 
persists after 90 days  post-RT and up to 5 years post -RT. The maximum 
grade for each type of late AE will be recorded for each patient. Data 
will be summarized as frequencies and relative frequencies  by treatment 
arm. Additionally,  the relationship of the adverse event(s) to the study 
treatment will be taken into consideration.  Rates will be compared 
between arms using chi -squared tests.  
 
16.623  Locoregional control : The cumulative incidence of locoregional 
recurrence will be estima ted using a competing risks method (Gooley et 
al.) by treatment arm . The competing risks will be distant breast cancer 
recurrence and death.  Comparison between arms will employ Fine -Gray 
regression.  
 
16.624  Invasive disease -free survival : i-DFS is defined  as the time from 
registration until the time of invasive disease recurrence (not includ ing 
DCIS) or death due to any cause. The i-DFS will be estimated with a 
Kaplan -Meier estimator and curve  by treatment arm . Estimates will be 
given for specific time poi nts along with 95% CIs.  Comparison between 
arms will employ a log -rank test.  
 
16.62 5  Disease -free survival : DFS is defined as the time from registration until 
the time of disease recurrence or death due to any cause. The DFS will 
be estimated with a Kapla n-Meier estimator and curve by treatment arm. 
Estimates will be given for specific time points along with 95% CIs. 
Comparison between arms will employ a log -rank test.  
 
16.626   Cause specific survival: The CSS will be estimated with a Kaplan -Meier 
estimato r and curve by treatment arm. Estimates will be given for specific time 
 32  MC1635  
 
points along with 95% CIs. Comparison between arms will employ a log -rank 
test. 
16.627 Overall survival : The OS will be estimated with a Kaplan -Meier 
estimator and curve  by treatment a rm. Estimates will be given for 
specific time points along with 95% CIs.  Comparison between arms will 
employ a log -rank test.  
 
 
16.631  Quality of life : The subscales of the BCTOS, elements from CTCAE -
PRO, and other patient reported measures such as fatigue , breast pain, 
breast shape, and arm related morbidity outlined in the appendix will be 
summarized as the mean ± SD and median (minimum value, maximum 
value). Mixed models will be used to estimate changes at fixed time 
points as well as compare outcomes be tween arms.  
 
16.632  Cosmesis : The values of the cosmesis instruments (patient self -reported 
and panel -assessed) will be summarized with the frequencies and 
confidence intervals of fair or poor cosmesis events at baseline, 2 year s, 
and 5 years by treatment arm.   Comparisons between arms will employ 
chi-squared tests.  
 
 
16.7            Data & Safety Monitoring  
 
16.71   The study chair(s) and the study statistician will review the study at least twice a 
year to identify accrual, adverse event, and any endpoint prob lems that might be 
developing. The Mayo Clinic Cancer Center (MCCC) Data Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB) is responsible for reviewing accrual and safety data for this trial 
at least twice a year, based on reports provided by the MCCC Statistical Office.    
 
16.72  Adverse Event Stopping Rules: The stopping rules specified below are based on  
knowledge available at study development.  We note that the Adverse Event 
Stopping Rule may be adjusted in the event of either (1) the study re -opening to 
accrual or (2) a t any time during the conduct of the trial and in consideration of 
newly acquired information regarding the adverse event profile of the 
treatment(s) under investigation.  The study team may choose to suspend accrual 
because of unexpected adverse event pro files that have not crossed the specified 
rule below.  
 
Accrual will be temporarily suspended if at any time we observe events 
considered at least possibly related to study treatment (i.e. an adverse event with 
attribute specified as  “possible,” “probable, ” or “definite”) that satisfy one of the 
following:   
 If 4 or more patients in the first 10 treated patients (per treatment arm ) 
experience a grade 3 or higher adverse event , besides acute dermatitis,  at 
least possibly related to treatment at any time follo wing  completion of 
the protocol treatment  within 90 days post -treatment .   
 After the first 10 patients have been treated  (per treatment  arm) : if ≥ 20% 
of all patients experience a grade 3 or higher adverse event , besides acute 
 33  MC1635  
 
dermatitis,  at least possibly related to treatment at any time following 
the completion of protocol treatment  within 90 days post -treatment . 
 
We note that we will revie w grade 4 and 5 adverse events deemed “unrelated” or 
“unlikely to be related”, to verify their attribution and to monitor the emergence 
of a previously unrecognized treatment -related adverse event.  
 
16.8  Results Reporting on ClinicalTrials.gov: At study a ctivation, this study will have  been 
registered within the “ClincialTrails.gov” website. The Primary and  Secondary Endpoints 
(i.e., “Outcome Measures”) along with other required  information for this study will be 
reported on ClinicalTrials.gov. For purpose s of timing of the Results Reporting, the 
initial estimated completion date for the  Primary Endpoint of this study is 48 months after 
the study opens to accrual. The  definition of “Primary Endpoint Completion Date” 
(PECD) for this study is at the  time the last patient registered has been observed for 24 
months.  
 
 
16.9 Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 
16.91  This study will be available to all eligible patients, regardless of race,  or ethnic 
origin.  
 
16.92  There is no information currently available rega rding differential effects of this 
regimen in subsets defined by race, or ethnicity, and there is no reason to expect 
such differences to exist. Although the planned analysis will, as always, look for 
differences in treatment effect based on racial groupin gs, the sample size is not 
increased in order to provide additional power for subset analyses.  
 
16.93   The geographical region served by the Mayo Clinic, has a population which 
includes approxi mately 5% minorities.  We expect about 5% of patients will be  
classified as minorities by race and about 100% of patients will be women.  
 
 
Accrual Estimates by Gender/Ethnicity/Race  
 
Accrual Targets  
Ethnic Category  Sex/Gender  
Females  Males  Total  
Hispanic or Latino  3 0 3 
    
Not Hispanic or Latino  105 0 105 
Hispanic or Latino  5 0 5 
Ethnic Category: Total of all subjects  110 0 110 
 
American Indian or Alaskan Native  1 0 1 
Asian  1 0 1 
Black or African American  1 0 1 
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 
 34  MC1635  
 
Accrual Targets  
Ethnic Category  Sex/Gender  
Females  Males  Total  
White  (Hispanic and non -Hispanic)  107 0 107 
Racial Category: Total of all subjects  110 0 110 
 
Ethnic 
Categories:  Hispanic or Latino – a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central 
American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race. The term “Spanish 
origin” can also be used in addition to “Hispanic or Latino.”  
Not Hispanic or Latino  
Racial 
Categories:  American Indian or Alaskan Native – a person having origins in any of the orig inal 
peoples of North, Central, or South America, and who maintains tribal affili ations or 
community attachment.  
Asian – a person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, 
Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including, for example, Cambodia, China, 
India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailan d, and 
Vietnam. (Note: Individuals from the Philippine Islands have been recorded as Pacific 
Islanders in previous data collection strategies.)  
Black or African American – a person having origins in any of the black racial 
groups of Africa. Terms such as “Haitian” or “Negro” can be used in addition to 
“Black or African American.”  
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander – a person having origins in any of the 
original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.  
White – a person having origin s in any of the original peoples of Europe, the Middle 
East, or North Africa.  
 35  MC1635  
 
17.0  Pathology Considerations/Tissue Biospecimens   
 
17.1  Summary Table of Research Tissue Specimens to be Collected for this Protocol  
  None  
 
18.0 Records and Data Collectio n Procedures   
 
18.1 Submission Timetable  
Initial Material(s)  -  
CRF  Treatment  
(Compliance with Test Schedule Section 4.0)  
 
Institutional Contacts   
 
 
2 weeks after registration  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*6 months after accrual  
  Patient Eligibility  
Demographics  
On-Study  
On Study: Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy  
Surgery  
Pathology of Ipsilateral Breast  
Adjuvant Therapy  
Adverse Events - Baseline  
Patient Status: Baseline  
Patient Assessment  
 
 
 
Off Treatment Submit 2 weeks after registration if withdrawal/refusal 
occurs prior to beginning protocol therapy  
 
 
Test Schedule Material(s)  
CRF   
End of Treatment  12 weeks 
post/ Observation  
Phase4  Event Monitoring5 
Radiation Therapy  X   
Radiation Lumpectomy Therapy  X   
Patient Assessment  X X  
Adverse Events Solicited  X X  
Adverse Events: Other  X2 X2  
Off Treatment  X2 X2  
Patient Status Form  X X X 
 36  MC1635  
 
CRF   
End of Treatment  12 weeks 
post/ Observation  
Phase4  Event Monitoring5 
Specimen Submission: Pathology Report  
(Recurrence)  X2  
Consent Withdrawal  X2 X2  
Lost to Follow -up X2 X2  
Breast Radiotherapy Questionnaire3 X X  
1. Complete at each ev aluation during Active Treatment (see Section 4.0).  
2. When applicable  
3. Survey will need to be entered manually if has not alternately been  scanned or entered electronically  
4.  Refer to test schedule in section 4.0 If patient has a recurrence prior to being off radiation therapy 
for 5 years, continue to follow yearly.  
 
 
18.3 Data Handling and Record Keeping  
 
18.31 Confidentiality  
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according 
to the requirements of the Health Insurance Portabilit y and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA).  Those regulations require a signed subject authorization informing 
the subject of the following:  
 What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in 
this study  
 Who will have access to that information and why  
 Who will use or disclose that information  
 The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of 
their PHI.  
(This information is contained within the Mayo IRB Informed Consent Template 
Section 14)  
In the event that a  subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the 
investigator, by regulation, retains the ability to use all information collected 
prior to the revocation of subject authorization.  For subjects that have revoked 
authorization to collect or use PH I, attempts should be made to obtain permission 
to collect at least vital status (long term survival status that the subject is alive) at 
the end of their scheduled study period.  
 
18.32 Source Documents  
Source data is all information, original records of c linical findings, observations, 
or other activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and 
evaluation of the trial.  Source data are contained in source documents.  
Examples of these original documents, and data records include: hospital records, 
clinical and office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, subjects’ diaries or 
evaluation checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, recorded data from 
automated instruments, copies or transcriptions certified after verification as 
 37  MC1635  
 
being accurate and complete, microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or 
magnetic media, x-rays, subject files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at the 
laboratories, and at medico-technical departments involved in the clinical trial. 
Source documents are kept in a secure location that is locked and requires 
approved access.  
 
18.33 Case Report Forms  
The study case report form (CRF) is the primary data collection instrument for 
the study.  All data requested on the CRF must be recorded.  All missing data 
must be explained.  If a space on the CRF is left blank because the procedure was 
not done or the question was not asked, write “N/D”.  If the item is not applicable 
to the individual case, write “N/A”.  All entries should be printed legibly in black 
ink.  If any entry error has been made, to correct such an error, draw a single 
straight line through the incorrect entry and enter the correct data above it.  All 
such changes must be initialed and dated.  Do not erase or use “white -out” for 
errors.  For clarification of illegible or uncertain entries, print the clarification 
above the item, then initial and date it.  If the reason for the correction is not clear 
or needs additional explanation, neatly include the details to justify the 
correction.  
 
  18.37 Records Retention 
 
The investigator will maintain records and essential documents related to the 
conduct of the study.  These will include subject case histories and regulatory 
documents. 
 
The investigator will retain the specified records and reports for; 
1. As outlined in the Mayo Clinic Research Policy Manual –“Retention of and 
Access to Research Data Policy”
   
 
 
19.0  Study Finances  
 
 19.1 Costs charged to patient:  routine clinical care 
 
 
 19.2 Other budget concerns: The Mayo Clinic Radiation Oncology Unit is funding the study 
 and will cover costs related to running the study 
 
20.0 Publication Plan 
The principal investigators hold primary responsibility for publication of the results of this study 
and approval from the principal investigators must be obtained before any information can be 
used or passed on to a third party.   
 
 
21.0 References 
 
1. ngel J, Kerr J, Schlesinger-Ra ab A, Sauer H, Holzel D. Quality of life following breast-
conserving therapy or mastectomy: results of a 5-year prospective study. Breast J 2004;10:223- 31. 

 38  MC1635  
 
2. Arndt V, Stegmaier C, Ziegler H, Brenner H. Quality of life over 5 years in women with breast 
cancer after breast -conserving therapy versus mastectomy: a population -based study. J Cancer Res Clin 
Oncol 2008;134:1311 -8. 
3. Fisher B, Anderson S, Bryant J, et al. Twenty -year follow -up of a randomized trial comparing 
total mastectomy, lumpectomy, and lump ectomy plus irradiation for the treatment of invasive breast 
cancer. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1233 -41. 
4. Veronesi U, Cascinelli N, Mariani L, et al. Twenty -year follow -up of a randomized study 
comparing breast -conserving surgery with radical mastectomy for e arly breast cancer. N Engl J Med 
2002;347:1227 -32. 
5. van Dongen JA, Voogd AC, Fentiman IS, et al. Long -term results of a randomized trial 
comparing breast -conserving therapy with mastectomy: European Organization for Research and 
Treatment of Cancer 10801  trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92:1143 -50. 
6. Poggi MM, Danforth DN, Sciuto LC, et al. Eighteen -year results in the treatment of early breast 
carcinoma with mastectomy versus breast conservation therapy: the National Cancer Institute 
Randomized Trial. Can cer 2003;98:697 -702. 
7. Arriagada R, Le MG, Rochard F, Contesso G. Conservative treatment versus mastectomy in early 
breast cancer: patterns of failure with 15 years of follow -up data. Institut Gustave -Roussy Breast Cancer 
Group. J Clin Oncol 1996;14:1558 -64. 
8. Blichert -Toft M, Rose C, Andersen JA, et al. Danish randomized trial comparing breast 
conservation therapy with mastectomy: six years of life -table analysis. Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative 
Group. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 1992:19 -25. 
9. Clarke M, Collins R, Darby S, et al. Effects of radiotherapy and of differences in the extent of 
surgery for early breast cancer on local recurrence and 15 -year survival: an overview of the randomised 
trials. Lancet 2005;366:2087 -106. 
10. Darby S, McGale P, Correa C , et al. Effect of radiotherapy after breast -conserving surgery on 10 -
year recurrence and 15 -year breast cancer death: meta -analysis of individual patient data for 10,801 
women in 17 randomised trials. Lancet 2011;378:1707 -16. 
11. Kummerow KL, Du L, Penson  DF, Shyr Y, Hooks MA. Nationwide trends in mastectomy for 
early -stage breast cancer. JAMA Surg 2015;150:9 -16. 
12. Daroui P, Gabel M, Khan AJ, Haffty BG, Goyal S. Utilization of breast conserving therapy in 
stages 0, I, and II breast cancer patients in New  Jersey: an American College of Surgeons National Cancer 
Data Base (NCDB) analysis. Am J Clin Oncol 2012;35:130 -5. 
13. Acharya S, Hsieh S, Michalski JM, Shinohara ET, Perkins SM. Distance to Radiation Facility and 
Treatment Choice in Early -Stage Breast Can cer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2016;94:691 -9. 
14. Lautner M, Lin H, Shen Y, et al. Disparities in the Use of Breast -Conserving Therapy Among 
Patients With Early -Stage Breast Cancer. JAMA Surg 2015;150:778 -86. 
15. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975 -2013 . based on Novemeber 2015 SEER data submission, 
posted to SEER web site, April 2016. at http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2013 .) 
16. Runowicz CD, Leach CR, Henry NL, et al. American Cancer Society/America n Society of 
Clinical Oncology Breast Cancer Survivorship Care Guideline. J Clin Oncol 2016;34:611 -35. 
17. Fallowfield L, Jenkins V. Psychosocial/survivorship issues in breast cancer: are we doing better? 
J Natl Cancer Inst 2015;107:335.  
18. Darby SC, McGa le P, Taylor CW, Peto R. Long -term mortality from heart disease and lung 
cancer after radiotherapy for early breast cancer: prospective cohort study of about 300,000 women in US 
SEER cancer registries. Lancet Oncol 2005;6:557 -65. 
19. Darby SC, Ewertz M, Mc Gale P, et al. Risk of ischemic heart disease in women after 
radiotherapy for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2013;368:987 -98. 
20. Correa CR, Litt HI, Hwang WT, Ferrari VA, Solin LJ, Harris EE. Coronary artery findings after 
left-sided compared with right -sided radiation treatment for early -stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 
2007;25:3031 -7. 
 39  MC1635  
 
21. Gagliardi G, Constine LS, Moiseenko V, et al. Radiation dose -volume effects in the heart. Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2010;76:S77 -85. 
22. Deutsch M, Land SR, Begovic M, Wieand HS, Wolmark N, Fisher B. The incidence of lung 
carcinoma after surgery for breast carcinoma with and without postoperative radiotherapy. Results of 
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) clinical trials B -04 and B -06. Cancer 
2003;98:1362 -8. 
23. Hopwood P, Haviland JS, Sumo G, Mills J, Bliss JM, Yarnold JR. Comparison of patient -
reported breast, arm, and shoulder symptoms and body image after radiotherapy for early breast cancer: 
5-year follow -up in the randomised Standardisation of Breast Radiotherapy (START) trials. Lancet Oncol 
2010;11:231 -40. 
24. Haviland JS, Owen JR, Dewar JA, et al. The UK Standardisation of Breast Radiotherapy 
(START) trials of radiotherapy hypofractionation for treatment of early breast cancer: 10 -year foll ow-up 
results of two randomised controlled trials. Lancet Oncol 2013;14:1086 -94. 
25. Eriksson M, Anveden L, Celebioglu F, et al. Radiotherapy in implant -based immediate breast 
reconstruction: risk factors, surgical outcomes, and patient -reported outcome me asures in a large Swedish 
multicenter cohort. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2013;142:591 -601. 
26. Ares C, Khan S, Macartain AM, et al. Postoperative proton radiotherapy for localized and 
locoregional breast cancer: potential for clinically relevant improvements?  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 
2010;76:685 -97. 
27. Johansson J, Isacsson U, Lindman H, Montelius A, Glimelius B. Node -positive left -sided breast 
cancer patients after breast -conserving surgery: potential outcomes of radiotherapy modalities and 
techniques. R adiother Oncol 2002;65:89 -98. 
28. Verma V, Shah C, Mehta MP. Clinical Outcomes and Toxicity of Proton Radiotherapy for Breast 
Cancer. Clin Breast Cancer 2016;16:145 -54. 
29. Lin LL, Vennarini S, Dimofte A, et al. Proton beam versus photon beam dose to the h eart and left 
anterior descending artery for left -sided breast cancer. Acta Oncol 2015;54:1032 -9. 
30. Mast ME, Vredeveld EJ, Credoe HM, et al. Whole breast proton irradiation for maximal 
reduction of heart dose in breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2014;148:33 -9. 
31. Macdonald SM, Patel SA, Hickey S, et al. Proton therapy for breast cancer after mastectomy: 
early outcomes of a prospective clinical trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2013;86:484 -90. 
32. Cuaron JJ, Chon B, Tsai H, et al. Early to xicity in patients treated with postoperative proton 
therapy for locally advanced breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2015;92:284 -91. 
33. Galland -Girodet S, Pashtan I, MacDonald SM, et al. Long -term cosmetic outcomes and toxicities 
of proton beam t herapy compared with photon -based 3 -dimensional conformal accelerated partial -breast 
irradiation: a phase 1 trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2014;90:493 -500. 
34. Bush DA, Do S, Lum S, et al. Partial breast radiation therapy with proton beam: 5 -year resu lts 
with cosmetic outcomes. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2014;90:501 -5. 
35. Wang X, Zhang X, Li X, et al. Accelerated partial -breast irradiation using intensity -modulated 
proton radiotherapy: do uncertainties outweigh potential benefits? Br J Radiol 2013;8 6:20130176.  
36. Verma V, Mishra MV, Mehta MP. A systematic review of the cost and cost -effectiveness studies 
of proton radiotherapy. Cancer 2016;122:1483 -501. 
37. Lundkvist J, Ekman M, Ericsson SR, Jonsson B, Glimelius B. Cost -effectiveness of proton 
radia tion in the treatment of childhood medulloblastoma. Cancer 2005;103:793 -801. 
38. Lundkvist J, Ekman M, Ericsson SR, Jonsson B, Glimelius B. Proton therapy of cancer: potential 
clinical advantages and cost -effectiveness. Acta Oncol 2005;44:850 -61. 
39. Bekel man JE, Sylwestrzak G, Barron J, et al. Uptake and costs of hypofractionated vs 
conventional whole breast irradiation after breast conserving surgery in the United States, 2008 -2013. 
Jama 2014;312:2542 -50. 
40. Brenner DJ, Hlatky LR, Hahnfeldt PJ, Huang Y, Sachs RK. The linear -quadratic model and most 
other common radiobiological models result in similar predictions of time -dose relationships. Radiat Res 
1998;150:83 -91. 
 40  MC1635  
 
41. Withers HR. Biologic basis for altered fractionation schemes. Cancer 1985;55:2086 -95. 
42. Fowler JF. The linear -quadratic formula and progress in fractionated radiotherapy. Br J Radiol 
1989;62:679 -94. 
43. Qi XS, White J, Li XA. Is alpha/beta for breast cancer really low? Radiother Oncol 
2011;100:282 -8. 
44. Whelan TJ, Pignol JP, Levine MN, et al. Long -term results of hypofractionated radiation therapy 
for breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2010;362:513 -20. 
45. Wyatt RM, Jones BJ, Dale RG. Radiotherapy treatment delays and their influence on tumour 
control achieved by various fractionation schedules . Br J Radiol 2008;81:549 -63. 
46. Rosenstein BS, Lymberis SC, Formenti SC. Biologic comparison of partial breast irradiation 
protocols. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2004;60:1393 -404. 
47. Ahlawat S, Haffty BG, Goyal S, et al. Short -Course Hypofractionated R adiation Therapy With 
Boost in Women With Stages 0 to IIIa Breast Cancer: A Phase 2 Trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 
2016;94:118 -25. 
48. Agrawal RK, Alhasso A, Barrett -Lee PJ, et al. First results of the randomised UK FAST Trial of 
radiotherapy hypofrac tionation for treatment of early breast cancer (CRUKE/04/015). Radiother Oncol 
2011;100:93 -100. 
49. Rovea P, Fozza A, Franco P, et al. Once -Weekly Hypofractionated Whole -Breast Radiotherapy 
After Breast -Conserving Surgery in Older Patients: A Potential Alt ernative Treatment Schedule to Daily 
3-Week Hypofractionation. Clin Breast Cancer 2015;15:270 -6. 
50. Dragun AE, Quillo AR, Riley EC, et al. A phase 2 trial of once -weekly hypofractionated breast 
irradiation: first report of acute toxicity, feasibility, and  patient satisfaction. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 
2013;85:e123 -8. 
51. Baillet F, Housset M, Maylin C, et al. The use of a specific hypofractionated radiation therapy 
regimen versus classical fractionation in the treatment of breast cancer: a randomized s tudy of 230 
patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;19:1131 -3. 
52. Min C, Connolly E, Chen T, Jozsef G, Formenti SC. Hypofractionated radiation therapy for early 
stage breast cancer: outcomes, toxicities, and cost analysis. Breast J 2014;20:267 -73. 
53. Formenti SC, Hsu H, Fenton -Kerimian M, et al. Prone accelerated partial breast irradiation after 
breast -conserving surgery: five -year results of 100 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2012;84:606 -11. 
54. Livi L, Meattini I, Marrazzo L, et al. Accelera ted partial breast irradiation using intensity -
modulated radiotherapy versus whole breast irradiation: 5 -year survival analysis of a phase 3 randomised 
controlled trial. Eur J Cancer 2015;51:451 -63. 
55. Haviland JS, Owen JR, Dewar JA, et al. The UK Standar disation of Breast Radiotherapy 
(START) trials of radiotherapy hypofractionation for treatment of early breast cancer: 10 -year follow -up 
results of two randomised controlled trials. Lancet Oncol 2013;14:1086 -94. 
56. Brunt AM, Wheatley D, Yarnold J, et al. Acute skin toxicity associated with a 1 -week schedule of 
whole breast radiotherapy compared with a standard 3 -week regimen delivered in the UK FAST -Forward 
Trial. Radiother Oncol 2016;120:114 -8. 
57. Pocock SJ, Simon R. Sequential treatment assignment with balancing for prognostic factors in the 
controlled clinical trial. Biometrics 1975;31:103 -15. 
58. Werkhoven E, Hart G, Tinteren H, et al. Nomogram to predict ipsilateral breast relapse based on 
pathology review from the EORTC 22881 -10882 boost versus no bo ost trial. Radiother Oncol 
2011;100:101 -7. 
59. MacDonald S, Taghian AG. Prognostic factors for local control after breast conservation: does 
margin status still matter? J Clin Oncol 2009;27:4929 -30. 
60. Feng M, Moran JM, Koelling T, et al. Development and validation of a heart atlas to study 
cardiac exposure to radiation following treatment for breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 
2011;79:10 -8. 
 41  MC1635  
 
61. Olivotto IA, Whelan TJ, Parpia S, et al. Interim cosmetic and toxicity results from RAPID: a 
randomized  trial of accelerated partial breast irradiation using three -dimensional conformal external beam 
radiation therapy. J Clin Oncol 2013;31:4038 -45. 
62. Whelan T, MacKenzie R, Julian J, et al. Randomized trial of breast irradiation schedules after 
lumpectomy for women with lymph node -negative breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2002;94:1143 -50. 
63. Bartelink H, Horiot JC, Poortmans PM, et al. Impact of a higher radiation dose on local control 
and survival in breast -conserving therapy of early breast cancer: 10 -year results of the randomized boost 
versus no boost EORTC 22881 -10882 trial. J Clin Oncol 2007;25:3259 -65. 
64. Harris JR, Levene MB, Svensson G, Hellman S. Analysis of cosmetic results following primary 
radiation therapy for stages I and II carcinoma of th e breast. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1979;5:257 -61. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42  MC1635  
 
Appendix I  
 
ECOG PERFORMANCE STATUS  
 
Grade  
0  Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease activities without restriction 
(Karnofsky 90 -100).  
 
1  Restricted in physically strenu ous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out 
work of a light or sedentary nature, e.g., light housework, office work (Karnofsky 
70-80). 
 
2  Ambulatory and capable of all self -care, but unable to carry out any work 
activities.  Up and about more than 5 0 percent of waking hours   (Karnofsky 50 -
60). 
 
3  Capable of only limited self -care, confined to bed or chair 50 percent or more of 
waking hours (Karnofsky 30 -40). 
 
4  Completely disabled.  Cannot carry on any self -care.  Totally confined to bed or 
chair (Karnofsky 10 -20). 
 
5  Dead  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43  MC1635  
 
Appendix II 
Mayo Breast Patient Survey  
 
Mayo Breast Patient Survey  
 
Survey Date (mm/dd/yyyy):  
 
DIRECTIONS: For each question below, please mark one response that describes how you would rate 
your sympt oms DURING THE PAST DAY.  
 
1. How you would describe…  
  
Your overall quality of life? Response scale 1 to 10, with 1 = as bad as it could be; 10 = 
as good as it could be  
  
The severity of your pain, on average? Response scale 1 to 10, with 1 = no pain ; 10 = 
Pain as bad as it could be  
 
Your level of fatigue, on average?  Response scale 1 to 10, with 1 = no fatigue ; 10 = 
fatigue as bad as it could be  
 
 
DIRECTIONS: For each question below, please mark one response that describes how you would rate 
your symptoms IN THE LAST 7 DAYS.  
 
2. In the last 7 days , how much did anxiety interfere with your usual or daily activities?  
 Not at all  
 A little bit  
 Somewhat  
 Quite a bit  
 Very much  
 
3. In the last 7 days , how much did insomnia, including falling asleep, staying asleep,  or  
 waki ng up early INTERFERE with your usual or daily activities?  
 Not at all  
 A little bit  
 Somewhat  
 Quite a bit  
 Very much  
 
4. In the last 7 days , what was the SEVERITY of your shortness of breath at its WORST?  
 Not at all  
 A little bit  
 Somewha t 
 Quite a bit  
 Very much  
 
5. In the last 7 days , what was the SEVERITY of your cough at its WORST?  
 Not at all  
 A little bit  
 Somewhat  
 Quite a bit  
 Very much  
 44  MC1635  
 
 
6. In the last 7 days , how much did problems with concentration INTERFERE with your  
 usual or  daily activities?  
 Not at all  
 A little bit  
 Somewhat  
 Quite a bit  
 Very much  
 
7. In the last 7 days , how much did sad or unhappy feelings INTERFERE with your usual  
 or daily activities?  
 Not at all  
 A little bit  
 Somewhat  
 Quite a bit  
 Very much  
 
8. In the last 7 days , what was the SEVERITY of your skin burns from radiation at their  
 worst?  
 Not at all  
 A little bit  
 Somewhat  
 Quite a bit  
 Very much  
 
9. In the last 7 days , what was the SEVERITY of your difficulty swallowing at its  
 WORST?  
 Not a t all 
 A little bit  
 Somewhat  
 Quite a bit  
 Very much  
 
10. In the last 7 days , how SEVERE have the following problems been (at their WORST)?  
 
Flaking or peeling of the treated breast or chest wall; response options 0 to 10, 0 = not at all, 10 = 
flaking as much as could be  
 
Bleeding of or leaking fluid from the treatment breast or chest wall; response options 0 to 10, 0 = not 
at all, 10 = bleeding  as much as could be  
 
Blistering of the treated breast or chest wall; response options 0 to 10, 0 = not at all, 1 0 = blistering  
as much as could be  
 
Itching of the treated breast or chest wall; response options  0 to 10, 0 = not at all, 10 = as itchy as it 
could be  
 
Skin burns from radiation on your back; response options 0 to 10, 0 = not at all, 10 = as itchy  as it 
could be  
 
11. If you had to do it all over again, would you have this RADIATION  treatment again?  
 Yes 
 No 
 45  MC1635  
 
 
12. Have you been diagnosed with an infection at your breast cancer surgical site that 
required treatment with antibiotics or surgery?  
 Yes 
 No 
 
We ar e interested in your evaluation of your physical appearance and functioning. Please rate the 
following items from 0 to 10, according to how you feel AT THIS POINT IN TIME . 
 
Is the color of your treated breast/chest wall skin different than the other side ( red, tan, or lighter)?  
response options 0 to 10, 0 = not at all, 10 = as different as it could be  
 
 
Do you have visible small blood vessels (spider veins) on your treated breast/chest wall?  response 
options 0 to 10, 0 = not at all, 10 = as many as it could  be 
 
Do you have pain with swallowing?  response options 0 to 10, 0 = not at all, 10 = as painful  as could 
be 
 
Do you have numbness or a tingling sensation in the arm on the side that was treated?  response 
options 0 to 10, 0 = not at all, 10 = as much as it could be  
 
Do you have tightness, pulling, or stretching in the arm, breast, or chest area (in the side that was treated?)  response  
options 0 to 10, 0 = not at all, 10 = as much as it could be  
 
Do you have tenderness or discomfort on the treated breast/che st wall?  response options 0 to 10, 0 = 
not at all, 10 = as much as it could be  
 
Overall, how would you rate the cosmetic results of your breast treatment?  
 Excellent  Good Fair Poor  
 
Please rate the following items according to your evaluation at this point in time : 
 
     
Breast/chest wall texture (hardening)   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Arm heaviness   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Shoulder movement   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Arm movement   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Breast/chest wa ll pain   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Ability to lift objects   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Fit of shirt sleeve   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Breast/chest  wall tenderness   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Shoulder stiffness   None   Slight  Mod erate  Large  
Scar tissue   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Shoulder pain   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Arm pain   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Arm swelling   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Breast/chest wall swelling   None   Slight  Moderate  Larg e 
Arm stiffness   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Breast/chest wall sensitivity   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Fit of clothing   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Axillary (arm pit) fullness or numbness   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
 
 46  MC1635  
 
Please complete the following questions if you had breast conserving therapy or mastectomy with 
reconstruction.  
 
Please rate the following items according to your evaluation at this point in time  
 
Breast size   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Nipple appearance   None   Slight Moderate  Large  
Breast shape   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Breast elevation (how 
high the breast is)   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Fit of bra   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
Breast heaviness   None   Slight  Moderate  Large  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 47  MC1635  
 
Appendix III 
Mayo Patient Survey PRO -CTCAE Mayo 10  
 
Survey Date (mm/dd/yyyy):  
 
Please answer the following questions about your symptoms.  
 
 Not at 
all A little 
bit Somewhat  Quite a bit  Very much  
In the last 7 days, how much did anxiety 
INTERFERE with your usual or daily 
activities:       
In the last 7 days, how much did insomnia 
including difficulty falling asleep, staying 
asleep, or waking up early INTERFERE 
with your usual or daily activities:       
In the last 7 days , how much did decreased 
appetite INTERFERE with your usual or 
daily activities:       
 Never  Rarely  Occasionally  Frequently  Almost 
Constantly  
In the last 7 days, how OFTEN did you 
have nausea:       
 Not at 
all A little 
bit Somewhat  Quite a bit  Very much  
In the last 7 days, how much did shortness 
of breath INTERFERE with your usual or 
daily activities:       
In the last 7 days, how much did problems 
with concentration INTERFERE with your 
usual or daily activities:       
In the last 7 days, how much did sad or 
unhappy feelings INTERFERE with your 
usual or daily activities:       
 None  Mild  Moderate  Quite a bit  Very severe  
In the last 7 days, what was the 
SEVERITY of your constipation at its 
WORST:       
 Not at 
all A little 
bit Somewhat   Quite a 
bit Very much  
In the last 7 days, how much did numbness 
or tingling in your hands or feet 
INTERFERE with your usual or daily 
activities:       
 Never  Rarely  Occasionally  Frequently  Almost 
Constantly  
In the last 7 days, how OFTEN  did you 
have loose or watery stools (diarrhea):       
 
 
 
 
 48  MC1635  
 
Appendix IV  
Mayo Patient Survey  
 
Survey Date (mm/dd/yyyy):  
 
Please respond to each item by choosing one number per row.  
 
 Excellent  Very 
Good  Good  Fair Poor  
In general, would you say your health is:  
5  
4  
3  
2  
1 
In general, would you say your quality of life  
is:  
5  
4  
3  
2  
1 
In general, how would you rate your physical 
health ?  
5  
4  
3  
2  
1 
In general, how would you rate your mental 
health, including your mood and your a bility 
to think ?  
5  
4  
3  
2  
1 
In general, how would you rate your satisfaction 
with your social activities and relationships ?  
5  
4  
3  
2  
1 
In general, please rate how well you carry out 
your usual social activities and roles  (Includes 
activ ities at home, work, community, parenting, 
marriage, friends.)   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1 
 Completely  Mostly  Moderately  A 
little Not at 
all 
To what extent are you able to carry out your 
everyday physical activities such as walking, 
climbing stairs, carrying gro ceries, or moving 
a chair ?  
5  
4  
3  
2  
1 
 Never  Rarely  Sometimes  Often  Always  
In the past 7 days…  
How often have you been bothered by 
emotional problems such as feeling anxious, 
depressed, or irritable ?  
1  
2  
3  
4  
5 
 
 
How would you rate your fatigue  on average?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How would you rate your fatigue  on average?  
 
  
1  
2  
3  
4  
5 
    Worst pain 
imaginable  
 
0  
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  
8  
9  
10 
No 
pain          Worst pain 
imaginable  