Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
Measuring comfort and clarity with low gain 
feature in pediatric hearing aid users  
 
 
Version  1 
11/09/2021  
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Title  
Balancing Comfort and Clarity with an Adaptive Situation Gain  (ASG)  Feature  in Pediatric Hearing 
Aid Users  
1 Background  
Children with hearing loss have expressed clear preferences regarding  the function of their 
hearing aids in noise and low -level (quiet) listening  environments (Scollie et al., 2010). 
Generally, environment al noise reduces  listening comfort while distance from the talker or 
low-level conversations  reduce listening clarity. Both situations can be addressed  with noise 
management features and remote microphones, however  management of the full landscape 
of liste ning environments is currently  beyond the reach of these technologies. For example, 
neither feature  provides auditory access to low -level input from multiple talkers at a  
distance which is known to be the source of most vocabulary learning  in young childre n. 
 
Among the hearing -aid prescriptions available to audiologists, two prescriptions  are used 
most frequently with children. The Desired Sensation  Level (DSL) prescription (Scollie et al., 
2005) emphasizes audibility  so that children have as much access as possible to the speech 
around  them. The National Acoustic Laboratory NAL -NL2 prescription (Keidser,  Dillon, Flax, 
Ching, & Brewer, 2011) emphasizes listening comfort.  The output prescribed by these two 
approaches can differ as much as  5 to 15 dB,  across frequency. In a field study with grade -
school children,  DSL (more gain) was preferred when listening to soft or distant  speech while 
NAL (less gain) was preferred when listening to loud  speech or in a noisy environment 
(Scollie et al., 2010a). Put simply,  NAL was comfortable but not clear while DSL was clear 
but not comfortable.  The results suggest that the hearing devices used at that time  could not 
accommodate the wide range of input levels experienced by  the children and therefore allow 
the fitti ng prescriptions to provide listening  comfort and clarity.  
 
The opportunity exists to extend the auditory field of children with hearing  loss with a soft 
speech enhancer  feature. Specifically, this feature  has the potential to improve perception of 
low-level speech in  quiet environments while preventing excessive amplification for louder  
inputs. Previous studies of adults with hearing loss have suggested a  benefit of speech 
enhancement  for perception of low -level speech. It is not  uncommon for benefits observe d in 
adults to be the same or larger in  children. If so, this fe ature  may provide audiologists with an 
additional  tool to balance clarity and comfort for children.  This document refers to th is feature 
as ASG (Adaptive Situation Gain).  
2 Objectives  
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the contribution of a soft speech enhancer 
feature  (ASG)  on auditory perception/memory and listener experience using the amplification 
strateg ies that are most common for pediatric fittings (NAL and DSL),  in children with mild to 
moderately -severe sensorineural hearing loss.  
 
There is no secondary objective.  
3 Description of the investigational device  
The investigational device is a commercially available  receiver -in-canal (RIC) hearing aid. 
Hearing  aids are  intended to amplify and transmit sound to the ears and to hereby 
compensate for  impaired hearing. The device is worn behind the ear for a duration of up to 
16 hours per day,  while the receiver is placed in the ear canal up to the ear drum. A qualified 
hearing care professional  programs the device with the aid of Phonak Target to the patient’s 
individual hear ing loss.  
4 Design of the clinical investigation  
This clinical investigation is a single -site, interventional study with a  exploratory design. 
Participants but not experimenters are blinded to the intervention (DSL vs. NAL, ASG  on vs. 
AGS  off) as the experimenters are responsible for programming and fitting the study devices. 
No control group is used for this investigation due to budget limitations.  
5 Risks and benefits of the investigational device and clinical  
investigation  
The purpose of this study is to determine if the unique benefits of the NAL and DSL 
prescriptive algorithms for children with hearing loss can be optimized f urther with ASG , an 
adaptive amplification feature designed to improve audibility for speech at low -level input 
levels.  
 
Previous studies have shown that hearing loss slows the rate of language learning in 
children, relative to their normal hea ring peers (e.g., Blamey et al., 2001). Outcome 
measures assessing how children with hearing loss perform on tasks involving both familiar 
and unfamiliar (i.e., new words) were chosen in order to determine if the unique benefits of 
the NAL (listening comfo rt) and DSL (speech clarity) prescriptive algorithms can be optimized 
further with Speech Enhancer for speech at low -level input levels. Optimizing the listening 
experience of children with hearing loss may support learning by improving audibility for new 
words as well as familiar ones (particularly when presented at low levels) w ithout exceeding 
the children’s tolerance for high -level input.  
 
Identified risks are no greater than those associated with the participants personal hearing 
aids.  
6 Endpoints  
The primary study objective will be assessed by examining listening performance for stimuli  
presented at low - and high -presentation levels across a broad range of endpoints drawn from  
three categories of device benefit:  
 
1) Familiar words: Perception (word rec ognition) and memory (familiar word recall)  
2) New words: Non -word detection, identification, learning, and recall  
3) User Experience: vocal level, ampclusion, and preferred hearing aid settings  
 
7 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion criteria  are as follows:  
1. Hearing impaired children between 8 and 15 years of  age [Revised: 12 to 17 years of age]  
2. Hearing loss is symmetric (no more than a 15 dB difference  between the right and left ears 
at three contiguous  frequencies) and mild to moderately -severe in  degree (N2 -N4 standard 
audiogram)  
3. Oral mode of communication  
4. Good written and spoken English language skills  
5. Healthy outer ear (confirmed by otoscopy)   
6. Informed assent (child) and consent (parent/guardian)  as documented by signature  
 
 
Exclusionary criteria are as follows:  
1.Contraindications to the medical device noted upon  otoscopy (e.g., ear canal drainage)  
2. Known hypersensitivity or allergy to materials of the investigational  device or comparator  
3. Inability to produce  reliable test results  
4. Known psychological problems  
5. Reported symptoms of vertigo and dizziness by participant  
8 Measurements  and procedures  
Study tasks and other relevant measures (audiometry, Real Ear measures) will be completed  
in the following order:  
1) Pure -tone audiometry will be completed at the beginning of Session 1, after informed 
consent/assent has been obtained, in a double -walled, sound -treated booth.  
2) Real Ear Measurement (REM) : Real -Ear Measurement (REM) is a tool used to 
object ively measure the hearing instrument’s frequency response in a participant’s 
ear. In this clinical investigation, on -ear REM will be completed using the Verifit2.  
Real ear measurement will be completed after hearing aid fitting and before the 
administratio n of study tasks.  
 
3) After the fitting is complete and while the hearing aids and probe mics are still in the 
ears (after Real Ear Measures), physical and acoustic occlusion will be measured 
using the On -Ear Occlusion test option on the Verifit 2.  
 
4) Binaural soundfield audiometric thresholds will be obtained  but instead of being 
presented through headphones or insert earphones, tones will be presented through 
a loudspeaker positioned 1 m away from the participant at 0° azimuth. This will be 
completed in the he aring aid program with ASG  activated.  Additionally, a binaural 
speech reception threshold (SRT) will be obtained in each hearing aid program.  
 
Nonword Detection Threshold  
Speech reception threshold will be obtained. However, instead of only familiar words, 
participants will be presented with a mix of familiar and unfamiliar two -syllable words and 
asked to repeat each word they hear.  The first words will be presented at a comfortable 
listening level. If the listener repeats the word correctly, presentation le vel will be reduced 10 
dB and the next word will be presented. If the wrong word is given, presentation level will be 
increased 5 dB before the next word is presented. This will be continued until the lowest level 
has been identified corresponding to two o ut of three correct repetitions. This level is the 
nonword detection threshold. This task will be completed in each hearing aid program ( ASG  
on, ASG  off), and at both test sessions (DSL, NAL).  
 
Word Recognition  
Participants will hear lists of 20 monosyllabic  words (10 per presentation level [40 dB, 70 dB],  
randomized) drawn from the Northwestern University word lists, presented one at a time. The  
listener will be instructed to repeat each word after they hear it. One 20 -word list will be 
presented in each hea ring aid program ( ASG  on, ASG  off). A digital audio recorder (Zoom 
H2n), placed on the desk between the participant and the loudspeaker,  will capture 
participants’ verbal responses, which will be scored offline later by independent examiners. 
Scores will reflect the proportion of words repeated correctly.  This task will be completed at 
both test sessions (DSL, NAL).  
 
Auditory Verbal Learning Task  
Participants will be instructed to listen to a list of 14 words (7 per presentation level [40 dB, 
70 dB], randomized) and then repeat as many words aloud as they can remember at the end 
of the list. After each repetition of the list, the experimenter will select the correctly repeated  
words using the customized computer software. This will be repeated using the same words  
four more times, for a total of five trials.  This task will be completed in each hearing aid 
program ( ASG  on, ASG  off), and at both test  sessions (DSL, NAL).  
 
Nonword Identification  
The nonword identification task will involve a mix of monosyllabic familiar and novel 
(nonsense) words presented together in three -word phrases. Following the presentation of 
each phrase, participants will indicat e which words (if any) in each phrase were nonsense 
words by selecting the corresponding numbered button(s) on a computer screen. Visual 
reinforcement will be provided via an interactive computer game for correct responses, but 
not for incorrect responses.  Performance is represented as the proportion of correct 
responses for whole phrases or individual words.  One list of 20 phrases will be presented in 
each hearing aid program ( ASG  on, ASG  off). Each  list contains five phrases containing 3 
real words and 0 no nsense words, five phrases containing 2 real words and 1 nonsense 
word, five phrases containing 1 real word and 2 nonsense words, and five phrases 
containing 0 real words and 3 nonsense words.  Presentation level (40, 70) will be 
randomized across phrases. This task will be completed at  both test sessions (DSL, NAL).  
 
Novel Word Learning  
Participants will learn novel words through a process of trial and error using an interactive  
computer game. Participants will hear five nonsense words, presented randomly one at a 
time.  Each nonsense word is paired with one of five nonsense objects/characters. A picture 
of each  nonsense image is displayed on one of five buttons arranged across the bottom of a 
computer  screen. Listeners select one of the five images  after presentation of each 
nonsense word.  Visual reinforcement for correct selections is provided by a computer game 
located above the  response buttons. The game advances following each correct response 
(e.g., one piece of a  puzzle appears), while no rein forcement is provided for incorrect 
selections. Participants use  the reinforcement to associate each nonsense word with the 
correct image.  Each nonsense word will be presented 20 times (10 per presentation level [40 
dB, 70 dB],  randomized), for a total of 90 randomized trials. Trial -by-trial performance is 
calculated in 10  trial bins and fitted with an exponential function to determine the number of 
trials needed to  reach 71%. Overall learning speed is calculated as the number of trials 
required to reach th e criterion level of performance. Fewer trials indicate faster learning.  
This task will be completed in each hearing aid program ( ASG  on, ASG  off), and at both test  
sessions (DSL, NAL).  
 
Novel Word Learning Posttest  
Each participant will complete a post -test 1 day after each word -learning session to 
determine the number of words retained for each hearing aid condition. This task will be 
conducted remotely.  The child will be shown the 10 images learned the day before and a 
word bank from  which to choose the co rrect response. The word bank will include links to 
audio files that the  child may listen to as they make their decision. The word bank will contain 
an equal number  of target - and nonsense -words. The images learned in the two hearing -aid 
conditions for the  session will be presented randomly one at a time. No feedback is provided 
for either correct  or incorrect responses. Performance is quantified as the number of words 
correctly identified  in each experimental condition ( ASG  on, ASG  off; DSL, NAL).  
 
Hearing aid program preference  
At the end of the second lab session, the participant will listen to a continuous audio file 
presented in the sound field while toggling between the hearing aid programs at their own 
pace. The audio file will contain speech s amples (sentences) containing real and nonsense 
words in common environmental noise backgrounds. This will be repeated with the hearing 
aids used during the hearing aids used by the participant during Session 1. After the child 
has had an adequate amount o f time to listen to the sound scene in each program, they will 
be asked to indicate which of the hearing aid programs they most prefer. The experimenter 
will note which fitting formula was preferred and whether ASG  was on or off. Overall results 
are quantif ied as the proportion of children who prefer each hearing aid condition.  
 
9 Statistical design and analysis  
Datasets to be analyze d, analysis population:  
 
Outcome Measures  Fitting Formula  Hearing Aid 
Programs  Presentation 
Levels  
•   Ampclusion  
•   Word Recognition  
•   Vocal Le vel 
•   Familiar Word Recall  
•   Non-word Detection      
Threshold  
•   Non-word Identification  
•   Rapid Word Learning  
•   Learned Word Recall  
•   Listener Pref erence  
  •   DSL v5a 
Pediatric  
•    NAL-NL2 •   ASG on at default  
•   ASG disabled  •   40 dBA  
•   70 dBA  
 
 
 
Primary analysis will compare results of study tasks completed with ASG  on compared to 
ASG off, and with hearing aids programmed using DSL compared to NAL. Where applicable, 
separate analyses will be completed for each presentation level. The principal investigator 
(PI) will complete this analysis.  
 
All safety related events will be constantly monitored by the investigators and will 
immediately reported to the Principal Investigator. Evaluation of any SAE, SADE, or UADE 
will be conducted promptly using Sonova’s standard medical device referral protoco l. 
Confirmed UADEs will be reported to the IRB within 10 days after receiving notice of the 
event. If it is determined that an event or effect presents an unreasonable risk to subjects, 
this study, or those parts of the study presenting that risk, will be terminated no later than 5 
working days after the determination is made and no later than 15 working days after Sonova 
USA first received notice of the event.  
 
A safety analysis of the relevant data will be done after the data collection is finished.  

10 Inves tigation Duration   
The investigation is expected to last 4 -6 months.  Each participant is scheduled for two 
appointments, each lasting approximately 2 hours.  
11 Data Handling and Management  
Study data is recorded both with paper and with electronic Case Report Forms (p/eCRF). For  
each enrolled study participant, a CRF is maintained. All CRFs are kept current to reflect the  
subject’s status at each phase during the course of study . Participants cannot be identified in  
the CRF by name or initials and birth date but an appropriate coded identification is used. All  
study team members are authorized for the CRF entries and it is assured that any authorized  
person can be identified both for pCRFs and eCRFs. If pCRFs are used, the investigator’s  
identifier as wel l as the subject ID is filled in and data are entered into an electronic file for  
analysis by the respective investigator and data get monitored by the assigned monitor. 
Participants are allowed to self -correct. Investigators do not make any corrections wi thout 
documentation (i.e., from vocal recordings and electronic records from software output).  
 
All paper data will be stored in a binder in a locked lab. All electronic data files will be 
encrypted and stored on secure network server. All identifying data will be stored at the study 
site. 
 
The identifiable data kept at the study site is secured indefinitely. The de -identified data will  
be kept indefinitely after the publication of results. When the data are destroyed, paper 
records will be shredded by services provided at the study site. Electronic data will be 
encrypted as de -identified. Digital records of anonymized data will be stored on a secured 
university network drive.  
12 Amendments to the CIP  
Amendments to the CIP, if necessary, will be  updated with justification in this document.  
13 Deviations from clinical investigation plan  
Deviations from the CIP to protect the rights, safety and well -being of human participants 
under emergency circumstances may proceed without prior approval of the spo nsor and the 
EC – such deviations will be documented and reported to the sponsor representative (Study 
Manager) and the EC as soon as possible. Apart from that the investigator is not allowed to 
deviate from this CIP unless that deviation does not influenc e the investigation data.  
14 Device accountability  
The PI or authorized designee keep records documenting the following:  
• Names of participants who received, used, returned, or disposed of device  
• Date of receipt, identification, and quantity of each investigational device (batch/serial  
number or unique code)  
• Expiry date (if applicable)  
• Date(s) of use  
• Participant identification  
The PI or authorized designee keep records documenting the following:  
• Date on which the device was returned (if applic able)  
• Date of return of unused, expired, or malfunctioning investigational devices (if applicable)  
• Date and documentation of disposal of devices as per sponsor instructions (if applicable)  
15 Informed consent process  
Because the participants in this study  are minors (<18 years of age), written consent for 
study participation will be obtained from a parent or legal guardian. Written assent for study 
participation will be obtained from the participants.  
 
At the beginning of the first appointment, investigato rs will describe the content of the written  
assent form to the participant in a private setting, with the consenting parent or guardian 
present.  
 
The assent form contains detailed information about general study procedures and tasks,  
potential risks and benefits of study participation, reimbursement, confidentiality, and 
withdrawal procedures. Any questions will be answered and the participant will be given 
sufficient time to decide whether or not they want to participate in the study.  After assent is 
obtained, investigators will describe the content of the written consent form to  the 
participant ’s parent or guardian in a private setting. The consent form contains the same  
information as the assent form, with the addition of information regarding how to contact the  
principal investigator and the Investigational Review Board (Ethics Committee). Any 
questions will be answered and the participant ’s parent or guardian will be given sufficient 
time to decide whether or not they want their child to participate in the study.  
 
After the assent and consent forms have been signed by the participant and their parent/  
guardian, the investigator will sign both forms and will provide copies to the participant ’s 
parent/guardian.  
 
In case of changes to the procedures desc ribed in the consent form, the participant and their  
parent/guardian will be informed at the beginning of an appointment.  
Informed assent/consent will only be obtained by investigation participants who can provide 
informed assent/consent themselves before enrollment.  
16 Adverse events, adverse device effects and device deficiencies  
Device deficiencies and all adverse events (AE) including all serious adverse events 
(SAE) are collected, fully investigated and documented in the source document and 
appropriate ca se report form (CRF) during the entire investigation period, i.e. from 
participant’ s informed consent until the last protocol -specific procedure, including a safety 
follow -up period (ISO_14155, 2020). Documentation includes dates of event, treatment, 
resol ution, assessment of seriousness and causal relationship to device and/or investigation 
procedure.  
 
Information on AEs is systematically collected during the regular investigation visits, and  
phone calls (if applicable).  
The causality assessment of the SAE will be conducted according to MDCG 2020 -10/1 
Safety Reporting in Clinical Investigations of Medical Devices under Regulation (EU) 
2017/745.  
The reporting of Serious Adverse Events and Device Deficiencies follows the Regulation 
(EU) 2017/745 and the MD CG 2020 -10/1 Safety Reporting in Clinical Investigations of 
Medical Devices under Regulation (EU) 2017/745.  
17 Vulnerable Populations  
Clinical investigation includes minors (i.e., children under the age of 18). See section 15 for 
the specific informed consent  process for this population. The  Ethics Committee approves 
the assent/consent process and monitors any adverse events. No medical care will be 
provided for participants after the clinical investigation has been completed.  
18 Suspension or premature terminat ion of the clinical  investigation  
The clinical investigation will be suspended or prematurely terminated if the feature and/or  
investigative device malfunctions or if the participants or researchers are exposed to safety  
risks other than those outlined in this document. These events may include but are not 
limited to – natural disaster, widespread outbreak of illness, compromised structure of the 
investigation site, etc. The trial will be suspended within 5 days of determination that the 
study or device puts subjects at an unreasonable risk (per 21 CFR 812).  
 
There are no criteria for access to and breaking the blinding code because the investigation 
does not involve a blinding or masking technique.  
 
According to the  FDA, follow -up is required for participants who experience serious adverse  
events. Follow -up will be conducted by the study manager until the nature of the event is 
resolved.  
19 Publication policy  
The clinical investigation will be registered in ClinicalTria ls.gov, a publicly accessible 
database, as required by US law.  
The results of the clinical investigation will be documented internally in a study report, 
authored by the PI and study manager.  
The results of the clinical investigation will be submitted for publication in a peer -reviewed  
journal by the PI (planned date of submission: January 2022). Results will also be presented  
at professional conferences by the PI.  