 
1 
 Effect of Ethanol Intoxication on the Anti -hypoglycemic Action of Glucagon  
 
Protocol #2015P001323  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Principal Investigator:  
STEVEN J. RUSSELL, M.D., Ph.D.1  
 
Co-Investigators:  
Manasi Sinha, M.D., M.P.H. 1, Laya Ekhlaspour, M.D 1  
 
1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts  
 
 
Address correspondence to STEVEN J. RUSSELL, M.D., Ph.D., MGH Diabetes Center, 50 Staniford 
Street, Suite 340, Boston, MA 02214, email: sjrussell@mgh.harvard.edu, phone: 617 -726-8722, fax: 617 -
726-8524, page: 617 -726-2066  
 
 
 
 
 
Version 11, May 17  , 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
I. Background and Significance  
I.a. Background  
I.c=b. Rationale and Potential Benefits  
II. Hypothesis and Specific Aims  
III. Subject Selection  
III.a. Inclusion Criteria  
III.b. Exclusion Criteria  
III.c. Source of Subjects  
IV. Subject Enrollment  
IV.a. Number of Subjects  
IV.b.Enrollment Procedures  
IV.c. Consent Procedures  
V. Study Procedures  
V.a. Screening Data  
V.b. Drugs  
V.c. Devices  
V.d. Experimental Procedures and Data Collection  
V.e. Response t o Adverse Events  
V.f. Supervision by Study Staff  
VI. Biostatistical  Analysis  
VI.a. Data Collection  
VI.b. Study Endpoints  
VI.c. Power Analysis  
VII. Risk and Discomforts  
VIII. Potential Benefits  
IX. Data and Safety Monitoring  
IX.a. Monitoring of Source Data  
IX.b. Safety Moni toring  
IX.c. Adverse Events Reporting Guidelines  
X. Subject Compensation  
XI. References  
XII. Appendices  
 Appendix A.  QT Prolongation Medication List  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
  
 
I. a. Background  
 
Glucagon is used clinically in the treatment for life -threatening hypoglycemia when the patient cannot take 
oral carbohydrates. In this context it is given by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection. It is also being 
delivered experimentally along with ins ulin by a bi -hormonal bionic pancreas for the automated control of 
blood glucose [1 -4]. Glucagon antagonizes the effects of insulin in the liver by inhibiting glucose uptake 
from the blood and promoting glycogenolysis.  
 
It is well known that the use of al cohol is associated with an increased risk of hypoglycemia [5]. It  is 
proposed that ethanol impairs gluconeogenesis. This might be due to alcohol dehydrogenase increasing 
NADH production. A decrease in NAD/ NADH ratio decreases pyruvate concentration, whic h is one of the 
primary paths to gluconeogenesis [5,6]. There is a higher risk of hypoglycemia when hepatic glycogen 
deposits are depleted (during the fasting state or food deprivation) because glycogenolysis then plays a 
reduced role in glucose level regu lation [7]. There is a risk of hypoglycemia with large dose alcohol intake 
and even with occasional drinking and low blood alcohol level in those who have missed or delayed food 
intake [8].  
 
There is a paucity of data on the effects of alcohol on glucagon effectiveness in patients with type 1 
diabetes.  However, it is known that alcohol intake increases the risk of hypoglycemia [9].  This might be 
due to multiple factors including: inhibition of gluconeogenesis, which has the main role in glucose 
production during hypoglycemia in patients with diabetes, impairment of rapid and slow glucose counter 
regulatory hormones including epinephrine, glucagon, cortisol and growth hormone and hypoglycemia 
unawareness because of the central effects of alcohol  
 
Because som e people with type 1 diabetes drink alcohol  and because the bihormonal bionic pancreas uses 
glucagon for management, it is essential to determine whether  alcohol will impair the effectiveness of 
glucagon and subsequently impair the effectiveness of the bih ormonal bionic pancreas in preventing 
hypoglycemia.  
   
 
I. b. Rationale and Potential Benefits  
 
Alcohol reduces the production of glucose from the liver, mostly by reducing the rate of gluconeogenesis 
[6] Glucagon is thought to raise blood glucose primarily through glycogenolysis. Whether alcohol will 
reduce the ability of glucagon to prevent and treat hypoglycemia is not known. Since many people with 
diabetes drink alcohol, and because alcohol can reduce attentiveness to diabetes management, it is very 
important to know whether alcohol will impair the effectiveness of a bihormonal bionic pancreas in 
preventing hypoglycemia.  
 
We will test the effectiveness of glucagon in raising blood sugar in the absence of ethanol and in the 
presence of defined blo od alcohol content (BAC) levels in a random -order crossover design. An established 
alcohol infusion algorithm for a clamp study will be used (10).  If there is a significant reduction in 
glucagon effectiveness in the presence of alcohol, this will be impor tant information to give users. If 
glucagon remains equally effective in the presence of alcohol, this means that the bionic pancreas will 
provide an even larger margin of safety over usual care when people with type 1 diabetes chose to use 
alcohol because  of the increased risk associated with the use of alcohol in usual care. Since the alcohol 
levels to be tested are relatively high, if there is no effect at these levels we can be confident that the lower 
alcohol levels associated with healthy consumption of alcohol (2 drinks a day or less) will have no effect on 
the effectiveness of the bihormonal bionic pancreas.  
 
 
II. Hypothesis and Specific Aims   
 
 
4 
 We hypothesize that a BAC of 0.1 will not significantly alter the anti -hypoglycemic effect of micro -dose 
glucagon.  
 
The specific aim of this study is:  
 
Aim 1. To quantify the effect of a blood alcohol content on the anti -hypoglycemic efficacy of glucagon 
using a hyperinsulinemic -normoglycemic clamp technique in volunteers with type 1 diabetes in a random -
order crossover trial.  
 
 
III. Subject Selection  
 
III. a. Inclusion Criteria   
 
 Age 21 to 80 years old with type 1 diabetes for at least one year.  
 Diabetes managed using an insulin infusion pump using rapid -acting insulin such as insulin aspart 
(NovoLog), insul in lispro (Humalog), or insulin glulisine (Apidra) for at least one week prior to 
enrollment.  
 Alcohol exposure on at least one occasion in the last year consisting of at least 4 drinks in one 
sitting.  
  
 III. b. Exclusion Criteria  
 
 Unable to provide informed consent.  
 Unable to comply with study procedures.  
 Unable to refrain from the consumption of alcohol at least 24 hours prior to study start  
 Current participation in another diabetes -related clinical trial that, in the judgment of the principle 
inves tigator, will compromise the results of the clamp study or the safety of the subject.  
 Pregnancy (positive urine HCG), breast feeding, plan to become pregnant in the immediate future, 
or sexually active without use of contraception.  
 Aldehyde dehycrogenase deficiency as determined by a screening questionnaire  
 End stage renal disease on dialysis (hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis).  
 History of pheochromocytoma (because glucagon has been reported to precipitate hypertensive 
crisis in the setting of pheochrom ocytoma).  Fractionated metanephrines will be tested in patients 
with a history increasing the risk for a catecholamine secreting tumor:  
o Paroxysms of tachycardia, pallor, or headache.  Personal or family history of MEN 2A, 
MEN 2B, neurofibromatosis, or vo n Hippel -Lindau disease  
o Episodic or treatment of refractory (requiring 4 or more medications to achieve 
normotension) hypertension.  
 History of adverse reaction to glucagon (including allergy) besides nausea, vomiting, or headache.  
 Inadequate venous access  as determined by study nurse or physician at time of screening.  
 Liver failure or cirrhosis  
 Hemoglobin < 12 gm/dl.  
 History of problem drinking or alcoholism, regardless of whether active or in remission.  
 Use of benzodiazepines or barbituates or opiates or  other central nervous system depressant drugs 
that could act synergistically with ethanol to lower the level of consciousness  
 Any other factors that, in the judgment of the principal investigator, would interfere with the safe 
completion of the study proc edures.  
 Use of medications that are known to cause QT interval prolongation (See Appendix A)  
 
No volunteers will be excluded on the basis of gender or race. The requirement that volunteers manage 
their diabetes using subcutaneous insulin infusion pump the rapy is imposed because multiple daily 
injection therapy involves the use of medium -acting basal insulin (such as NPH insulin) or long -acting 
insulin (such as glargine) that would either require an extended washout period or would result in unwanted 
variat ion in the GIR due to the pharmacokinetics of longer acting insulins. The requirement significant 
 
5 
 ethanol use in the last year is to reduce the likelihood that the subject will experience an adverse reaction to 
the blood alcohol content levels that will be  reached in the study. The exclusion of potential subjects with a 
history of alcoholism is to avoid the risk of relapse associated with ethanol exposure in the study.   
 
III. c. Source of Subjects  
  
Volunteers who fit the selection criteria will be conside red as candidates for this study. Advertisements for 
the study will be posted at the MGH Diabetes Center and will be distributed in the weekly broadcast email 
of research studies seeking volunteers. We will post basic information about the trial along with  contact 
information on our website www.artificialpancreas.org  and the study will be posted on 
www.clinicaltrials.gov. We will also post information regarding the trial at online venues for people with 
type 1 diabetes, such as Glu (online community of the Type 1 Diabetes Exchange).We will also contact 
individuals who have previously inquired about participation in our studies and have asked us to have their 
contact information kept on file.  
 
IV. Subject Enrollment  
   
IV. a. Number of Subjects  
 
It is expected that we will have 20 volunteers  complete two full -length clamp experiments  with 15 of those 
volunteer’s  using a consistent protocol The experiments  are expected to be completed over a  time period of 
4-6 months.  
  
Up to 35 volunteers with type 1 diabetes will be enrolled. The upper bound is based on the expectation that 
some volunteers will be excluded after the screening visit and blood tests, the possibility that some 
qualified volunteers will not b e able to complete an experiment for scheduling reasons, the possibility that 
some experiments may have to be discontinued before completion (e.g. due to inability to maintain IV 
access or subject withdrawal), and the likelihood that minor modifications to  the protocol for adjustment of 
the GIR, alcohol infusion rate,  or the insulin infusion rate may be required during the first 2 -3 experiments.  
 
IV. b. Enrollment Procedures  
 
Prospective participants may be briefed by a study staff member by phone regardi ng the study procedure 
and the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Potential volunteers may be sent an informed consent document to 
review by email or post.  
 
 
IV. c. Consent Procedures  
  
Potential volunteers will meet with a study physician or nurse practit ioner who will explain the study and 
answer questions. Informed consent will be administered by an MD or NP.  In the event that a volunteer is 
a patient of one of the study MDs or NPs, another staff MD or NP will answer questions and administer 
consent. If  a nurse practitioner is administering the consent, a physician will be available as back -up for 
additional support if needed and subjects will be offered the chance to speak with a study physician if they 
wish.    
 
The study physician or nurse will also an swer any questions that the volunteer may have during their 
participation. They will share any new information in a timely manner that may be relevant to the 
volunteer's willingness to continue participating in the trial. The volunteers may choose to disco ntinue their 
participation at any time.  
 
Documentation of the informed consent process will be noted using the Documentation of Informed 
Consent Form in each volunteer’s research record, including documentation of the option to speak with a 
study physician  
 
 
 
6 
 V. Study Procedures  
  
V. a. Screening data  
 
 Age 
 Sex 
 Race and ethnicity  
 Urine HCG for female volunteers  
 Date of diabetes diagnosis  
 Medical, surgical, and social history, allergies, and review of systems relevant to inclusion and 
exclusion criteria  
 Subject’s customary drinking history  
 Date of last menstrual period in female volunteers  
 Medications (prescription and non -prescription) and date of last change in medication regimen  
 Duration of insulin pump use  
 Insulin regimen (basal rate, sensitivity fac tor, and carbohydrate ratio)  
 Average total daily dose of insulin in the last 30 days (from pump history)  
 Height and weight  
 Blood pressure  
 Hemoglobin  
 Fractionated metanephrines (in patients with history increasing the risk for a catecholamine 
secreting tumo r) 
 
 
V. b. Drugs  
  
The study involves subcutaneous administration of Eli Lilly glucagon . Lilly glucagon is commercially 
available by prescription and is indicated for patients with type 1 diabetes.  
 
The clamp procedure involves intravenous administration of regular human  insulin , which is commercially 
available indicated for patients with type 1 diabetes. The insulin infusion includes 2% human serum 
albumin , which is added to the solution to prevent inactivation of insulin or loss of insulin on the walls o f 
the administering syringe and IV tubing (10).  
 
The clamp procedure also includes ethanol infusion solution (6 % v/v ethanol in ½ normal saline). Sterile 
pyrogen free IV ethanol 98% is diluted to 6 % v/v with ½ normal saline prior to use.  
 
Intravenous i nfusion of dextrose 20% solution will also be administered.  
 
Per MGH hypoglycemia procedures, one ampule of 50% dextrose will be given in the event of a 
hypoglycemic episode . Some side effects associated with taking dextrose include: dehydration, mental 
confusion, hyperglycemia and possible hyperosmolar syndrome which may result from too rapid 
administration.  
 
In the event of any nausea, subjects will be given a small dose o f ondansetron to alleviate symptoms of 
nausea. Ondansetron will only be administered upon the subject’s request.  Pain medications such as 
acetaminophen and ibuprofen will also be offered for pain and administered upon the subject’s request.   
Adverse effe cts associated with taking acetaminophen include: rash, hives, redness of skin, itching, 
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs.  Common side effects 
associated with taking ibuprofen include: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, bloating and abdominal pain.  
 
V. c. Devices  
 
Ethanol clamp algorithm:  Alcohol Infusion System Software. This is the software system, developed by 
the Indiana Alcohol Research Center (Dr. Sean O’Connor) that runs the PBPK ( Physiologically Based 
 
7 
 PharmacoKinetic) model, integrates breath alcohol measurements, computes the ethanol infusion rate 
profile to achieve the desired result, converts the profile into computer -controlled infusion pump 
instructions, runs the pump, and displays the results throug hout the experiment (10, 11). The algorithm will 
be run on a laptop computer that will directly control the ethanol infusion pump.  
 
Ethanol infusion pump: The Alaris Imed Gemini PC -2TX Infusion Pump is a computer controllable 2 
channel pump that can be con trolled by a computer using a serial connection.  
 
Saline, and glucoseinfusion pumps: S tandard hospital infusion pumps.  
 
Breathalyzer:  The handheld Alco -Sensor FST (Intoximeter, Inc) Breath alcohol analyzer will be used to 
measure Breath Alcohol Content (B rAC) at an accuracy of ± 0.005% BAC at 0.100% BAC. Each subject 
will use a disposable mouth piece. A push on the ejection tab on the mouthpiece hygienically expels it from 
the Breathalyzer without any contact between the subject's saliva and the meter or t he operator's hand. The 
meter will be professionally calibrated at least annually.  
 
Intravenous catheters:  Each volunteer will have two intravenous catheters introduced. One will be 
dedicated to withdrawal of samples and the other for infusion of insulin,  ethanol and dextrose.  
 
Nova Biomedical StatStrip Xpress Glucose Meter:  The StatStrip Xpress glucose meter is FDA approved 
for outpatient and inpatient use and is commercially available. The meter will be cleaned between subjects 
according to the manufact urer’s instruction.  
 
HemoCue Hb 201 + Analyzer:  The HemoCue is an FDA approved meter used to measure hemoglobin 
through blood obtained via finger stick.  
 
Hot box:  A hot box will use warm air to warm the forearm and hand of the subject in which the samplin g 
IV catheter is placed for the purpose of arterializing venous blood.  
 
V. d. Experimental Procedures and Data Collection  
Screening Visit  
 All volunteers will have a screening visit to confirm eligibility  
 Female volunteers will have urine tested for HCG. If the test is positive, the volunteer will be 
informed of the result and the visit will be ended.  
 The volunteer will be interviewed and the case report form will be completed by a study nurse or 
study physician to establish whether the volunteer is eligib le to continue with the screening.   
 A finger stick will be performed to test hemoglobin using the HemoCue Hb 201+ Analyzer. A 
blood draw will be performed in the event that the Hemocue measurement is out of range and, if 
indicated, plasma for metanephrine s.  
 A study physician or nurse practitioner will review the case report form and laboratory results to 
determine volunteer eligibility. If volunteers are not eligible to continue in the study, the results of 
abnormal tests will be reported to the volunteer s and to a health care provider of their choosing.  
 
Hyperinsulinemic -normoglycemic Clamp  
We will test the effect of glucagon in the absence and presence of ethanol in a random -order crossover 
design. We will give each volunteer two identical injections of  glucagon, one with a blood alcohol content 
of approximately 0 at one visit and another with a BAC of approximately 0.1 at another separate visit.  
 
In Both Visits  
 Subjects will report to the Clinical Research Center (CRC) by approximately 7:00 AM in the 
fasted state from 10pm the previous night. Subjects will be asked not to take any bolus insulin 
after 4 am, but to keep their basal insulin running.  
 A urine HCG test will be performed for all female subject who are able to become pregnant. If the 
test is pos itive, the PI will inform the subject of the test result and the visit will be cancelled.  
 
8 
  A dipstick drug test will be performed to ensure that subjects are not under the influence of 
benzodiazepines or barbiturates or opiates that could synergize with eth anol to cause central 
nervous system depression.  
 A Breathlyzer measurement will be obtained prior to the start of the visit to ensure the subject is 
not under the influence of alcohol.  
 Two intravenous (IV) catheter lines will be placed, one in each arm. T he sampling IV will be 
placed on the dorsal surface of the hand or the forearm. The catheters will typically be 20 gauge or 
smaller.  
 Blood will be drawn for measurement of hemoglobin A1c, creatinine and estimated GFR, alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT), aspar tate aminotransferase (AST), serum albumin, and free fatty acids.   
 Regular human insulin will be added to the solution of 2% human serum albumin in normal saline 
to allow an infusion rate of 5 -20 ml/hr based on the desired hourly insulin dose. Mixing of t he 
insulin infusate will be performed by the research pharmacy and the final desired insulin 
concentration will be communicated to the research pharmacy in advance of the visit. The range of 
insulin concentrations in the infusate are expected be from 0.2 -1.2 u/ml, depending on the mean 
basal insulin rate of the subject.  
 The subject will remove their own insulin pump and a primed continuous insulin infusion will be 
started using the insulin/saline/albumin mixture. The continuous rate will be between one -fold and 
four-fold higher than the mean basal insulin rate of the subject with the goal to use a minimum 
rate of 0.02 units/kg/hour. The insulin infusion may be used to give insulin boluses if the subject is 
hyperglycemic at arrival to reduce the time necessa ry to reach steady state. Once the appropriate 
rate is established (with a dextrose infusion rate that is neither too low nor too high), it will remain 
stable throughout the experiment. For a 70 kg, 5’10” tall man with a usual basal rate of 1 u/hr, an 
infusion at two -fold the usual basal rate would be 17 mU/m2/min. Therefore, for a 5 ml/hr 
infusion 19.88 units of insulin would be added to 50 ml of saline/albumin solution (~0.4 u/ml). A 
bolus of insulin that is three times the subject’s mean basal rate  will be given at the start of the 
clamp  to accelerate the rise of insulin levels in the blood.  
 An infusion of 20% dextrose in water will be started. BG values will be measured every 5 minutes 
using arterialized blood measured with the StatStrip Xpress . The dext rose infusion will be 
adjusted so that the blood glucose is stabilized at 90 ± 5 mg/dl. If the dextrose infusion rate is less 
than 2 mg/kg/min or greater than 8 mg/kg/min (for the 70 kg, 5’10” tall man, 42 -168 ml/hr) then 
the insulin infusion rate may be a djusted.  Initial stabilization is expected to take less than 3 hours.  
 Blood samples (5ml) will be processed for plasma for later insulin and glucagon measurement 
every 20 minutes throughout the experiment.  
 
During the Ethanol Infusion Visit Only  
 Once the  insulin infusion rate is established and the dextrose infusion rate has been stable for 15 -
20 minutes with the BG in the target range, the ethanol infusion will be started.  
 The ethanol loading dose will be infused over 30 minutes, followed by a maintenanc e infusion. 
The target BAC is achieved by a specific dose and rate of alcohol infusion that is computed for 
each subject by estimating physiological parameters that include subject’s alcohol elimination rate. 
An established computer model will be used (10)  which is physiologically based on alcohol 
pharmacokinetic modeling. The parameters are based on height, weight and gender.  
 We will use a breathalyzer  to estimate BAC and will adjust the maintenance infusion accordingly 
to reach and maintain a BAC of 0.1 ± 0.01. This is expected to take 30 to 45 minutes. Breathalyzer 
readings will be collected every 5 minutes until the BAC of 0.1 is reached, and then th e levels will 
be checked every 10 minutes.  
 The ethanol in fusion will be continued for a maximum of up to 4 hours  
 A mock ethanol infusion will be delivered during the non ethanol visits, consisting of the half -
normal saline vehicle that the ethanol is norm ally delivered in. This will be done in order to keep 
the total amount of fluid infused the same. This will be started at approximately the same time, 
when the insulin infusion rate has been established and the dextrose infusion rate has been stable 
for 15 -20 minutes. The computer model will run a standard profile based on the subject’s height, 
weight and gender without any BAC measurements needed. When the computer model predictes 
that the BAC has reaches the desired value,  and the GIR remains stable for 15-20 minutes, the 
 
9 
 injection will be given. Note that BAC measurements in the ethanol visits will modify the standard 
profile to achieve a true BAC of 0.1%, but the deviations from the standard profile are usually not 
large, so that the volume of half -norm al saline delivered will be approximately the same during 
ethanol and non -ethanol visits.  
  
In Both Visits  
 Once the GIR has been stable for 15 -20 min (and the BAC has been stable at 0.1 ± 0.01 for at least 
10 minutes in the Ethanol Infusion Visit or the pr edicted BAC has been stable for at least 10 
minutes in the non -ethanol visits) two baseline plasma samples will be obtained 5 minutes apart 
and the glucagon injection will be given.  
 A bolus of 50 mcg of Lillyglucagon will be administered by subcutaneous in jection using a 
syringe and a small gauge needle at a depth of less than 1 cm.  
 In the 60 minute period after the glucagon injection, the frequency of BG checks will be increased 
to every 2 minutes and blood samples will be processed for plasma at every ot her check (every 4 
minutes).  
 The dextrose infusion rate will be adjusted to maintain the BG in the target range. Since glucagon 
antagonizes the effects of insulin in the liver, the dextrose infusion rate will be reduced and then 
increased again to baselin e as the glucagon effect waxes and wanes. Given what is known about 
the pharmacokinetics of glucagon given by the subcutaneous route, it is expected that it will take 
60-90 minutes for the dextrose infusion rate to stabilize again.  
 After the initial 60 min ute period, the sampling interval for BG measurements will return to 5 
minutes and the sampling interval for blood samples to be processed for plasma will be extended 
to every 10 minutes.  
 At 90 minutes after the injection, the experiment will be ended and  the insulin infusion  will be 
stopped. The dextrose infusion will either be stopped or titrated down by the provider.  
 In the ethanol infusion visit the ethanol infusion will be stopped. The BAC will be monitored until 
it falls below 0.04%. In the non -ethanol infusion visit the mock ethanol infusion will be ended .  
 The subject’s insulin pump will be replaced and restarted at the end of the experiment. The subject 
will be given a small meal. The provider will help the patient determine how much of their own 
insulin (from their i nsulin pump) they should bolus, if any. Both IV lines will now be removed.  
 The total clamp time is expected to be up to 8 hours and total experiment time is expected to be up 
to 11 hours  
 The total blood obtained is expected to vary fro m 150 - 200 ml per visit. In no case will more than 
400 ml of blood be taken total.  
 Subjects will not be allowed to sleep during the clamp visit, as sleep can affect glucose 
metabolism. Ambulating to the bathroom will not be permitted. A urinal and a bedsi de commode 
will also be made available to subjects should they need it.  
 If the subject’s BG is >250 mg/dL for two consecutive measurements and no correctable fault is 
found the clamp procedure will be stopped. The subject will be treated and return to the ir usual 
care per PI discretion.  
 If the subject’s BG is < 60mg/dL for two consecutive measurements and no correctable fault is 
found the clamp procedure will be stopped. Hypoglycemia will be treated using either oral or IV 
carbohydrates and the subject wil l return to their usual care per PI discretion.  
 Subjects will not be released until their BAC falls below 0.04% and someone is available to 
accompany the subject.  
 Subject will instructed upon discharge to monitor their blood glucose values closely for 
approximately 24 hours post discharge. The contact information for the covering provider will be 
given to the subject.  
 
V. e. Response to adverse events  
 
Euphoria, sedation, ataxia, nausea, vomiting, delayed reactions, impaired memory, blurred vision, impaired  
fine muscles and dizziness might occur with blood alcohol content (BAC) of 0.1. If patient wants to stop 
receiving the ethanol infusion they can withdraw at any time.  
 
 
10 
 Nausea is a potential side effect of glucagon administration. Minimal nausea was noted in clinical trials of 
the bi -hormonal closed -loop system in which up to 80 mcg of glucagon was given at intervals of as little as 
5 minutes. The mean glucagon dose in these trials was ~1 mg over 24 hours. Therefore, we do not 
anticipate significant nausea associated with one 50 mcg doses of glucagon. However, if nausea is 
experienced by subjects, they are allowed up to 8 mg of ondansetron every 8 hours.  
 
If vomiting occurs, a study physician or nurse practitioner will be notified. If the glucagon dose has already 
been given at the time of vomiting, then the experiment will be completed if the subject is willing since 
completing the experiment will not invo lve administration of more glucagon. If the vomiting occurred prior 
to glucagon injection, and may therefore be related to pre -existing illness or to ethanol, a study physician or 
nurse practitioner will assess if the study needs to be stopped prior to the  glucagon administration. The 
subject may withdraw at any point of the study.  
 
V. f. Supervision by Study Staff  
 
A study physician or nurse practitioner will order all changes to the insulin infusion and glucose infusion 
rates and to the ethanol infusion, and will be on site at all times once the clamp has begun and until it is 
ended.  
 
VI. Biostatistical Analysis  
 
VI. a. Data Collected  
 
At the time of enrollment:  
 Age 
 Sex 
 Race and ethnicity  
 Urine HCG for female volunteers  
 Date of diabetes diagnosis  
 Medical, surgical, and social history, allergies, and review of systems relevant to inclusion and 
exclusion criteria  
 Date  of last menstrual period in female volunteers  
 Medications (prescription and non -prescription) and date of last change in medication regimen  
 Duration of insulin pump use  
 Insulin regimen (basal rate, sensitivity factor, and carbohydrate ratio)  
 Average to tal daily dose of insulin in the last 30 days (from pump history)  
 Height and weight  
 Blood pressure  
 Hemoglobin A1c  
 Hemoglobin  
 Creatinine and estimated GFR  
 Serum Albumin  
 Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)  
 Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)  
 Fractionated metanephrines (in subjects with history increasing the risk for a catecholamine 
secreting tumor)  
 Free fatty acids  
 
During the hyperinsulinemic -normoglycemic clamp:  
 
 Venous BG measurements  
 Timing and size of glucagon dose  
 Insulin infusion rat e 
 Glucose infusion rates  
 
11 
  Ethanol infusion rate  
 BAC according to breath alcohol meter  
 BAC according to blood alcohol measurement  
 Plasma insulin levels during the hyperinsulinemic -normoglycemic clamp  
 Plasma glucagon levels during the hyperinsulinemic -normogl ycemic clamp  
 Any adverse events  
 
VI. b. Study Endpoints  
 
Primary endpoint analysis:  
 
 Area over the curve for the glucose infusion rate in the hour following a subcutaneous glucagon 
dose (AOC GIR) with a blood alcohol content of 0 vs.  approximately 0.1%  
 
Secondary endpoint analyses:  
 
 Maximum change in GIR from baseline after glucagon injection in the presence and absence of 
ethanol  
 
We will calculate means, median, percentages, standard deviations, standard errors, inter -quartile ranges, 
and 95% confidence intervals in descriptive  analyses. We will use paired t -test for comparison of means. 
We will use multivariate regression models with repeated measurements to compare means and percentages 
while adjusting for patient demographics characteristics such as ag e, gender, body mass index, and body 
surface area.  
 
VI. c. Power Analysis  
Assuming that the standard deviation in each arm is 20% of the mean, and a within -patient correlation of 
0.5, a sample size of 15 achieves 95% power to detect equivalence when the ma rgin of equivalence is from 
-20% to 20% assuming the actual mean difference is zero. The significance level (alpha) is 0.05 using two 
one-sided paired t -tests. These results are based on 2000 Monte Carlo samples.  
 
VII. Risks and Discomforts  
  
There is a po tential risk of nausea or vomiting in volunteers due to the administration of exogenous 
glucagon. The experiments, however, involve small subcutaneous glucagon doses. The recommended dose 
of glucagon for treatment of severe hypoglycemia in an adult with di abetes is 1000 mcg, given as a single 
subcutaneous or intramuscular injection. In practice, a smaller dose of 500 mcg is sometimes used initially 
to reduce the risk of nausea and vomiting. The total dose to be administered in our study is 50 mcg.  
 
There i s a risk of euphoria, sedation, ataxia, vomiting, delayed reactions, impaired memory, blurred vision, 
impaired fine muscles and dizziness with infusion of ethanol to achieve  a blood alcohol content (BAC) of 
0.1. We will exclude without previous alcohol exp osure comparable to the study amount to avoid severe 
reactions. If patient wants to stop receiving the ethanol infusion they can withdraw at any time.  
 
There is a risk of headaches, fatigue, malaise, and constipation with adminstration of  ondansetron. Sub jects 
will only be given this medication upon their request for nausea or vomiting.  
 
There is a potential risk of hypoglycemia, since exogenous insulin will be administered. Given frequent BG 
monitoring (every two to five minutes), corresponding adjustmen t of a continuous dextrose infusion, and 
direct supervision by an NP or MD at all times, the risk of a hypoglycemic episode leading to significant 
harm to volunteers is expected to be very low. We do not expect to see a wide range of BGs. If two 
consecutiv e measurements are more than 250 mg /dL or less than 60 mg/dL the study provider will be 
informed and the clamp infusions will be checked. A small meal will be provided to subjects after 
completion of the study.  
 
 
12 
 There is a theoretical risk of infection as sociated with the use of albumin, a protein purified from donated 
blood, The risk of transmitting disease is reduced by testing blood donors for infections, and by heat 
treating and purifying the albumin. Because of these measures, the risk is considered t o be very small; no 
cases of disease transmission have ever been identified for albumin.  
 
Subjects may experience mild discomfort associated with the insertion of the infusion into the SC tissue. 
Any discomfort is expected to be similar to that associated with injection of insulin. Once the infusion set is 
in place, there should be no significant discomfort. The risk for developing inflammation in the SC tissue at 
the insertion site is expected to be extremely low.  
 
Subjects may experience discomfort with i nsertion of the peripheral intravenous line and the risks of 
intravenous lines remaining in place for about 10 hours include thrombosis and phlebitis of the peripheral 
vein.  
 
Subjects may also experience mild discomfort associated with the subcutaneous in jection of glucagon.  
 
There is a risk of risk of dizziness or lightheadedness from blood loss. However, typical blood loss will be 
~200 ml and loss of blood will be limited to no more than 400 ml.    
 
VIII. Potential Benefits  
  
The data derived from this study will allow us to determine if there is a significant reduction in glucagon 
effectiveness in the presence of alcohol or not. This will be important information to give to users of the 
bionic pancreas. If glucagon effectivene ss does decrease, this information will be important for users of the 
bionic pancreas. If it does not, this means that the bionic pancreas will provide an even larger margin of 
safety over usual care when people with type 1 diabetes chose to consume alcoho l. There is no direct 
benefit for the subject participating in this study.  
 
IX. Data and Safety Monitoring  
 
IX. a. Monitoring of Source Data  
 
The principal investigator (PI), a study clinical research fellow (physician), or a study nurse practitioner 
will review the eligibility of each volunteer based on the case report from the screening visit.  
 
All data from study visits will be combined in a single database that will be compared against the primary 
data files for integrity. The computer database will b e backed up at least monthly and the backup media 
stored in a secure location.  
 
The study will be conducted by the staff of the MGH Diabetes Research Center (DRC) in cooperation with 
the staff of the CRC. The PI will conduct meetings with study staff at l east twice a month to review study 
progress, discuss any issues in study conduct, and review procedures. Study staff will be encouraged to 
raise any concerns they may have or problems they have identified at these meetings. The PI will decide a 
course of c orrective action, and resolution or progress will be assessed no later than the next bimonthly 
meeting. An audit of procedures, regulatory documentation, and a sample of volunteer files will be 
performed by a member of the DRC at least biannually. The audi t will be conducted by a DRC staff 
member not directly involved in the conduct of the study. This audit will include a review of regulatory 
documentation, such as IRB correspondence, and a review of files, including a review of consents, case 
report forms,  and other data from study visits.  
 
A numeric code will be substituted for the volunteers personal identifying information in the study 
database, which will be password protected. The key linking the medical record number of the volunteer 
with the numeric  code, along with case report forms, and all information that is personally identifiable, will 
be kept in a locked filing cabinet in an investigator’s locked office. All electronic records will be kept in a 
password protected computer database.  All printe d computer data will be disposed of confidentially when 
no longer needed. Only the study staff will have access to the study database. Subjects may not withdraw 
 
13 
 from the de -identified database, but they may elect to have the key linking their medical recor d to the de -
identified database destroyed.  
 
The study data may be shared with collaborators outside of Partners, but only in a form in which all 
personally identifiable information has been removed. Shared data will be in the form of a database in 
which on ly a number identifies volunteers.   
 
IX. b. Safety Monitoring  
 
A study physician or nurse practitioner will directly supervise each experiment. The PI will be informed of 
any adverse events immediately and will make any adjustments to the study protocol a s needed to maintain 
subject safety.  
 
The Research Pharmacy will mix the insulin and ethanol solution. The calculations for the insulin infusion 
rate and the mixing of the insulin solution will be done in advance and checked by another physician or 
nurse practitioner. The calculations for the alcohol infusion rate will be done in advance and checked by 
another physician or nurse practitioner.  
 
This study will be conducted under an Investigational New Drug application sponsored by the PI.  
 
This study is considered moderate risk. The Principal Investigator and co -investigators will evaluate each 
experiment. Unanticipated problems, including adverse events, will be reported to the Partner’s IRB in 
accordance with the PHRC policy on Unanticipat ed Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others 
including adverse events. An external Data and Safety Monitoring Board will oversee the conduct of the 
study and review its results on a regular basis. Additionally, the DSMB will be informed after any 
expe riment that has to be discontinued due to hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, or any unexpected adverse 
event. DSMB review will occur before any further experiments are performed. The DSMB will be 
informed if there are any changes to the study protocol that could  significantly impact the safety or 
scientific validity of the study. A final DSMB meeting will convene after the completion of the study.  
After the first DSMB meeting, subsequent meetings may be convened via e -mail or conference call. Safety 
and efficacy  data will also be reported to the FDA in compliance with applicable regulations.  
 
IX. c. Adverse Event Reporting Guidelines  
 
The PI will review any adverse events after each experiment. Adverse events will be reported to the 
Partner’s IRB, the DSMB, and t o the FDA.  
 
X.  Subject Compensation  
 
Financial compensation of $50 will be provided to all subjects who complete a screening visit. Subjects 
will be compensated $200 after completion of each visit for a total of $450 for the entire study.  
 
XI. Reference s  
1. El -Khatib, FH, Russell, SJ, Nathan, DM, Sutherlin, RG, Damiano, ER. A Bi -Hormonal Closed -Loop 
Blood Glucose Control Device for Type 1 Diabetes. Science Translational Medicine. 2010;  27ra27.  
 
2. Russell, SJ, El -Khatib, FH,  Nathan, DM, Magyar, KL, Jiang, J, Damiano, ER.  Blood Glucose Control 
in Type 1 Diabetes with a Bihormonal Bionic Endocrine Pancreas. Diabetes Care. 2012; 35: 2148 -55. 
 
3. El-Khatib FH, Russell SJ, Magyar KL, Sinha  M, McKeon K, Nathan, D M, Damia no, ER. Autonomous 
and Continuous Adaptation of a Bihormonal Bionic Pancreas in Adults and Adolescents With Type 1 
Diabetes.  Journal of  Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2014 May; 99(5): 1701 -1711  
 
4. Russell SJ, El -Khatib FH, Sinha M, Magyar KL, McKeon, K, Go ergen L, Balliro C, Hillard M, Nathan 
DM, Damiano ER. Outpatient Glycemic Control with a Bionic Pancreas in Type 1 Diabetes. New England 
Journal of Medicine 2014; 371 (4), 313 -325. 
 
14 
  
 
5.. Shelmet JJ, Reichard GA, Skutches CL, Hoeldtke RD, Owen OE, Boden G. Ethanol causes acute 
inhibition of carbohydrate, fat, and protein oxidation and insulin resistance. J Clin Invest. 1988 Apr; 
81(4):1137 -45. 
 
6.. Krebs HA, Freedland RA, Hems R, Stubbs M. Inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenesis by ethanol. 
Biochem J. 1969; Ma r;112(1):117 -24.  
 
7 Christiansen C, Thomsen C, Rasmussen O, Hansen C, Hermansen K. The acute impact of ethanol on 
glucose, insulin, triacylglycerol,and free fatty acid responses and insulin sensitivity in type 2 diabetes. Br J 
Nutr. 1996 Nov; 76(5):669 -75. 
 
8 Marks V. Alcohol and carbohydrate metabolism. Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1978 Jul;7(2):333 -49. 
 
9 Turner BC, Jenkins E, Kerr D, Sherwin RS, Cavan DA. The effect of evening alcohol consumption on 
next-morning glucose control in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2001 Nov;24(11):1888 -93. 
 
 
 
10 Ramchandani VA1, Bolane J, Li TK, O'Connor S.  A Physiologically -based Pharmacokinetic (PBPK) 
Model for Alcohol Facilitates Rapid BrAC Clamping. Alcohol Clin Exp Re. 1999. 23(4):617 -23. 
 
11 Ramchandani VA1, O'Connor S. Studying Alcohol Elimination Using the Alcohol Clamp 
Method.Alcohol Res Health. 2006;29(4):286 -90. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. Appendices  
 
 
16 
 Appendix A. 
 
 
 
