  
 
 
 
 
Pain  Outcomes  Following  Intralesional  Corticosteroid   
Injections  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
8/1/2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Table  of Contents:  
 
1. Background  
2. Rationale  and Specific  Aims  
3. Animal  Studies  and Previous  Human  Studies  
4. Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
5. Enrollment/Randomization  
6. Study  Procedures  
7. Risks  of Investigational  Agents/Devices  (side  effects)  
8. Reporting  of Adverse  Events  or Unanticipated  Problems  involving  Risk to 
Participants  or Others  
9. Study  Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
10. Statistical  Considerations  
11. Privacy/Confidentiality  Issues  
12. Follow -up and Record  Retention  
13. References  
 
 
Appendices  
 
Appendix  A Visual  Analog  Scale   
  
 1. Background  
 
 Corticosteroid  therapy,  including  intralesional  and topical  applicat ions, has many  
indications  within  the fields of Dermatology,  Plastic  Surgery,  and Orthopedics.  However,  
these  injections  can be quite painful,  which  leads many  patients  to discontinue  
treatment.  
 Often,  the injection  involves  a mixture  of local anesthetic  and corticosteroids  
despite  a lack of evidence  that the use of lidocaine  improves  pain.1,2  Due to the acidic  
pH, the lidocaine  component  of the injection  can actually  cause  a significant  burning  
sensation  during  the procedure.  Lidocaine  does not have anti-inflammatory  properties  
and does not treat the underlying  pathology.  By including  another  medication,  lidocaine  
also adds cost and risk to the procedure.   
 In a double  blind,  randomized  control  trial, Osanakornkul  and Burusapat  studied  
the benefit  of applying topical  anesthetics  or a 1:1 mixture  of 1% lidocaine  and 
triamcinolone  acetonide  at the injection  site to alleviate  pain during  keloid  treatment.2 
While  the use of a topical  anesthetic  1 hour prior to the injection  was able to alleviate  
the pain from needle  stick, the study  did not show a statistical  difference  in pain 
outcomes  with the use of lidocaine.  However,  this study  was limited  to the use of 
intralesional  corticosteroid  injections  for the treatment  of keloids.  In addition,  the study  
only focuse d on 3 locations:  the shoulder,  sternum,  and ear. Keloid  injections  are often 
more painful  than other injections  because  the horizontal  penetration  of the needle  can 
pierce  a large number  of nerve  endings.  In routine  injections,  the entry of the needle  is 
either  vertical  or angled  and thus pierces  a small number  of nerve  endings.3  In addition,  
the injected  material  stretches  nerve  endings  and compresses  them against  unyielding  
keloid  tissue,  causing  substantial  pain that can persist  up to several  hours  after the 
procedure.3 This study  will examine  intralesional  corticosteroid  injections  for keloids,  
alopecia  areata,  and other indications  while including  a wider  variety  of injection  sites.  
 
 
2. Rationale  and Specific  Aims  
 
The purpose  of this study  is to see if removing  lidocaine  from intralesional  injections  
decreases  pain of the injection.  We hypothesize  there will be no difference  in pain 
outcomes  if lidocaine  is removed  from intralesional  corticosteroid  injections.  
 
3. Animal  Studies  and Previous  Human  Studies  
 
A similar  study  was conducted  in plastic  surgery  with intraarticular  injections  for trigger  
finger.  The project  examined  pain outcomes  for injections  containing  steroid  + normal  
saline  vs steroid  + local anesthetic.  The results  indicated  that injections  containing  local 
anesthetic  were significantly  more painful.  Thus,  including  a mixed  local anesthetic  in 
the injection  adds unnecessary  cost and risk to the procedure.  Because  steroid  injections  
in dermatology  are also commonly  mixed  with a local anestheti c, this study  design  can 
be applied  to these  intralesional  injections  as well. 
 
 
 
 
  
4. Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
 
Inclusion  Criteria:  
• >12 years  old presenting  with an indication  for intralesional  steroid  injection  
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  
• Not a candidate  for corticosteroid  injection  
• Contraindication  to lidocaine  
 
5. Enrollment/Randomization  
 
All patients  meeting  inclusion/exclusion  criteria  will be offered  enrollment.  Using  a coin 
flip, patients  will have a 50% chance  of receiving  one of the followi ng treatments:  
1. Corticosteroid  + lidocaine  
2. Corticosteroid  + normal  saline    
 
 
6. Study  Procedures  
 
Day 1 (In clinic):  After diagnosing  the need for an intralesional  injection,  patients  will be 
screened  for enrollment.  The consent  form will be reviewed  in depth  to describe  the 
purpose  and procedures  associated  with the study.  If they agree  to be part of the study,  
we will collect  the following  demographic  information:  
• MRN 
• Age 
• Gender  
• Comorbidities  (chronic  opioid  use, smoking,  diabetes,  neuropathy,  fibromyalgia)  
• Phone  number  
• Site of injection  (scalp,  face, neck, and trunk)   
• Indication  for injection  
 
The patient  will then be randomized  to receive  one of the following  injections:  
 1. Corticosteroid  with normal  saline  
 2. Corticosteroid  with lidocaine  
 
A co-investigator  will prepare  the syringe  to ensure  blinding.  The injection  site will be 
prepped  in sterile  fashion  with an alcohol  wipe. The physician  will then administer  the 
injection.  Immediately  following  the injection,  the patient  will be asked  to rate the pain 
of the injection  based  on the visual  analog  scale (appendix  A). Specifically,  the co-
investigator  will say “Rate  the injection  experience  on a scale of 0 to 10, 0 being  no pain 
and 10 being  the worst  pain of your life”. A bandaid  will be placed over the injection  site 
and the patient  will be reminded  to expect  a phone  call that afternoon  and the next day.  
 
Day 1 (after  clinic):  Approximately  6 hours  after the injection,  a different  study  
investigator  will call the patient  by phone  to assess  their current  pain level with the 
visual  analog  scale.  Using  a different  investigator  who is unaware  of the treatment  arm 
for follow -up will further  ensure  blinding.  Specifically,  the investigator  will say “Rate  your 
 current  pain level from the injection  on a scale of 0 to 10, 0 being  no pain and 10 being  
the worst  pain of your life”. Patients  will be called  up to three times  before  being  
considered  lost to follow -up.  
 
Day 2: Approximately  24 hours  after the injection,  the study  investigator  will again  call 
the patient  by phone  to assess  their current  pain level with the visual  analog  scale.  
Specifically,  the investigator  will say “Rate  your current  pain level from the injection  on a 
scale of 0 to 10, 0 being  no pain and 10 being  the worst  pain of your life”. Patients  will 
then be thanked  for their involvement  in the study  and encouraged  to reach  out to the 
principle  investigator  or clinic should  any problems  arise.  Patients  will be called  up to 
three times  before  being  considered  lost to follow -up. 
 
7. Risks  
 
This study  is categorized  as less than minimal  risk.  We are comparing  two treatment  
methods  that are accepted  as standard  of care, and are already  used on the clinic 
population  being  studied  on a daily basis.   There  is no new experimental  intervention  
that would  put patients  at greater  than minimal  risk. Although  rare, the risks of a 
corticosteroid  injection  include  hypopigmentation,  skin atrophy,  and hyperglycemia  in 
patients  with diabetes.  There  is also a small risk of an allergic  reaction  to the lidocaine  
component.  There  may be unknown  or unanticipated  adverse  effects.   
 
 
8. Reporting  of Adverse  Events  or Unanticipated  Problems  involving  Risk 
to Participants  or Others  
 
Adverse  events  will be reported  to the IRB immediately  through  standard  reporting  
mechanisms.   
 
9. Study  Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
 
There  are no anticipated  circumstances  under  which  subjects  would  be withdrawn  from 
research  without  their consent.  If subjects  withdraw,  there will be no penalty  or 
consequences.    
 
 
10. Statistical  Plan  
 
We are planning  a study  of a continuous  response  varia ble from independent  control  
and experimental  subjects  with 1.1538  control(s)  per experimental  subject.   In a previous  
study  the response  within  each  subject  group  was normally  distributed  with standard  
deviation  0.3.  If the true difference  in the experim ental  and control  means  is 0.2, we will 
need  to study  34 experimental  subjects  and 39 control  subjects  to be able to reject  the 
null hypothesis  that the population  means  of the experimental  and control  groups  are 
equal  with probability  (power)  0.8.  The Type I error  probability  associated  with this test 
of this null hypothesis  is 0.05.  
  
 
11. Privacy/Confidentiality  Issues  
 
Private  health  information  (PHI)  will used in the study,  but not disclosed.  All PHI will be 
stored  on a secure,  password -locked  server.  All participants  in the study  have obtained  
Human  Research  certification  to have the necessary  authorization  to PHI. When  
collecting  patient  data, only medical  record  numbers  will be used to identify  patients.   
 
12. Follow -up and Record  Retention  
 
The study  will last for approximately  1 year after initiation  or until the enrollment  goal is 
met. At the study  conclusion,  all identifiable  data will be destroyed  and de-identified  
data will be kept for analysis.   
 
13. References:   
 
1. Osterne  RL, Araújo  PM, de Souza -Carvalho  AC, Cavalcante  RB, Sant’Ana  E, Nongueira  
RL. Intralesional  corticosteroid  injections  in the treatment  of central  giant cell lesions  of 
the jaws: A meta-analytic  study.  Medicina  Oral, Patología  Oral y Cirugía  Bucal.  
2013;18(2):e226 -e232.  doi:10.4317/m edoral.18345.  
 
2. Usanakornkul,  A., & Burusapat,  C. (2017).  A Topical  Anesthetic  and Lidocaine  Mixture  
for Pain Relief  During  Keloid  Treatment.  Dermatologic  Surgery,  43(1),  66-73. 
doi:10.1097/dss.0000000000000932  
 
3. Mishra  S Safe and less painful  injectio n of triamcinolone  acetonide  into a keloid—a 
technique.  J Plast Reconstr  Aesthet  Surg 63:e205  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendices:  
 
Appendix  A 
