 
 
Pilot Evalua Ɵon of FAMCOPE -ICU (Family Coping and Emo Ɵon RegulaƟon Tool in the ICU) 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
January 11, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ObjecƟves 
Aim 1: We will use probing qualita Ɵve quesƟons and validated self -report scales to determine the 
acceptability of FAMCOPE- ICU. We hypothesize that family members of the cri Ɵcally ill will ﬁnd 
FAMCOPE-ICU acceptable.  
 
Aim 2: We will conduct a pilot, before-and- aŌer clinical trial to generate evidence of FAMCOPE -ICU’s 
preliminary eﬃcacy. We hypothesize that recipients of FAMCOPE-ICU will report less severe 
psychological symptoms (i.e., post- traumaƟc stress disorder, anxiety, depression), higher sa ƟsfacƟon, and 
less sleep disturbance than non-recipients) 
 
Background 
Each year, more than 6 million American families will endure a loved one’s admission to an intensive care 
unit (ICU).1 Consequently, most of these family members will report distressing psychological symptoms 
(stress, anxiety, and depression), which can compromise their involvement in surrogate decision-making, 
impair social func Ɵoning, and persist for months a Ōer the paƟent’s ICU discharge.2 Over the last three 
decades, there have been varied a Ʃempts to support these family members; unfortunately, thes e 
supporƟve interven Ɵons have largely been ineﬀec Ɵve in reducing the intensity of family member 
psychological symptoms. Notably, these interven Ɵons have largely focused on enhancing knowledge and 
improving communica Ɵon, with li Ʃle aƩenƟon given to  empowering family members with the skills 
needed to cope during these stressful, and o Ōen trauma Ɵc, circumstances.3 Consistent with models of 
family-centered cri Ɵcal care endorsed by numerous mul Ɵdisciplinary professional socie Ɵes, there is a 
signiﬁcant need to develop novel and scalable interven Ɵons that mi Ɵgate distressing psychological 
symptoms reported by family members of the cri Ɵcally ill.4 
 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Number of Research Par Ɵcipants 
 
We will recruit 60 par Ɵcipants (30/group).  
 
Recruitment Methods 
 
Each day, a research assistant (RA) will screen the admission orders and nursing admission ﬂowsheet 
documenta Ɵon within the electronic medical records (EMR) of pa Ɵents in the CTICU, NSU, MICU, and 
TSICU (SICU pa Ɵents only ). Using this process, the RA will document the month, day of month, and Ɵme 
of the paƟent’s ICU admission in our electronic screening log. They will use this informa Ɵon to iden Ɵfy 
paƟents on day 1 or 2 of their ICU stay who meet pa Ɵent inclusion criteria #1 (age). It is possible  that we 
will screen pa Ɵents who have been in the ICU for more than two days (e.g., weekend admissions), in that 
case, we will follow the same procedures described below. 
 
On ICU day 1 (0- 24 hours). The RA will confer with the pa Ɵent’s nurse and/or provider to iden Ɵfy the 
paƟent’s legally authorized representa Ɵve. If there is uncertainty, the RA will examine the pa Ɵent’s 
bedside chart for a pa Ɵent informa Ɵon sheet (i.e., face page), family informa Ɵon sheet (usually collected 
at admission), or signed consent document as means of iden Ɵfying the pa Ɵent’s LAR.  
- If the LAR is at the bedside, a RA will introduce the study (see “pre-recruitment script” 
document), emphasizing that they may be eligible for our study in two days. If interested in 
learning more about the study upon eligibility, the research assistant will collect the LAR’s name 
and phone number, which will transferred directly into the screening log, and give them the 
recruitment le Ʃer. The RA will tell the LAR that if the pa Ɵent eligibility criteria are met, our team 
will reach out to them to coordinate their possible enrollment in the study. 
- If the LAR is NOT at the bedside, the RA will leave the recruitment le Ʃer at the pa Ɵent’s 
bedside or with the bedside nurse, who will be asked to give the le Ʃer to the LAR should they 
visit the pa Ɵent. 
 
On ICU day 2 (24- 48 hours) of the pa Ɵent’s ICU stay, the RA will a Ʃempt the locate the LARs at the 
paƟent’s bedside if they were unable to establish contact with them on day 1. They will also confer with 
the bedside RN about if the LAR has visited since we ﬁrst tried to establish contact, and if the le Ʃer was 
given to the family member. (Family involvement is a key element of the ICU RN handoﬀ; therefore, this 
informaƟon should be easy to obtain given there will only have been 1 RN (nightshi Ō) that the RA would 

not be in contact with since their last bedside visit). - If the leƩer was NOT given to the family member 
and is sƟll at the bedside, the RA will once again ask the RN to give the le Ʃer to the family member 
should they visit.  
- If the leƩer was NOT given to the family member and is NOT at the bedside, the RA will leave 
another le Ʃer, following the same process used on ICU day 1.  
- If the family is at the bedside, the RA will give the family member the recruitment le Ʃer, 
following the process described for ICU day 1. 
 
On or AŌer ICU Day 3 (48 -72 Hours), The RA will iden Ɵfy paƟents who meet Pa Ɵent Inclusion Criterion 
#2 by comparing admission informa Ɵon in the screening log to the EMR documenta Ɵon screening 
process described on ICU day 1. Pa Ɵent’s mee Ɵng this criterion will be screen for Pa Ɵent Inclusion 
Criterion #3.  
 
If PaƟent Criterion #2 is met, the RA will confer with the nurse/provider to verify if the pa Ɵent’s current 
plan of care involves discharge within the next 24 hours by asking “To your knowledge, does the 
paƟent’s plan of care involve discharging from the ICU by this Ɵme tomorrow?”  
 
If the nurse/provider answers Yes, the pa Ɵent does not meet Criterion #3. The RA will reevaluate on the 
next screening day if the pa Ɵent is not discharged.  
 
If the nurse/provider answers No, the pa Ɵent meets Criterion #3. The RA will obtain permission from the 
RN/Provider to evaluate Pa Ɵent Criterion #4.  
 
Consistent with recommenda Ɵons from the UH IRB Inves Ɵgator Manual, a RA will conduct a global 
cogniƟve assessment by assessing the pa Ɵent with the following ques Ɵons:  
1) Is the pa Ɵent alert and able to communicate?  
2) Is the pa Ɵent comfortable enough to communicate?  
3) Is the pa Ɵent medically stable enough to have an informed consent discussion?  
 
The RA will evaluate the poten Ɵal paƟent parƟcipant for eligibility and will confer with the CWRU PI 
(PignaƟello) if there is a ques Ɵon. This conversa Ɵon will be documented in the electronic screening log.  
 
If the LAR is not at the bedside, the RA will confer with the screening logs and/or nurse to confer the 
delivery status of the opt out le Ʃer:  
- If the leƩer has been delivered AND the opt out period has lapsed. The RA will call the LAR to 
ascertain interest (see phone script) and conﬁrm eligibility criteria. If criteria are met, the RA will 
aƩempt to schedule a face -to-face meeƟng to discuss  their parƟcipaƟon (see recruitment script).  
- If the leƩer has delivered, BUT the opt out period has NOT lapsed. The RA will make a note in 
the screening log about the date that we can call the LAR, assuming the pa Ɵent remains eligible. 
- If the leƩer has NOT been delivered and is at the bedside. T he RA ask the nurse about their 
knowledge of the LAR’s visi Ɵng habits and request that the RN deliver the le Ʃer should the 
family visit.  
- If the leƩer has NOT been delivered and is NOT at the bedside. The RA will provide the RN with 
another le Ʃer to give to the LAR and update the screening log to reﬂect the new delivery 
aƩempt. 
 
If the LAR is at the bedside, the RA will conﬁrm the family inclusion criteria with the LAR face-toface. - If 
the family member is ineligible, the RA will thank the LAR for their Ɵme and document this ﬁnding in the 
screening log.  
- If the family member is eligible, the RA will ini Ɵate the recruitment discussion (See a Ʃached 
“Recruitment Script”). 
 
*RaƟonale for calling par Ɵcipants* - Due to COVID-19 related delays with the US mail, mailing an opt 
out leƩer/ﬂyer would likely reduce the opportunity the par Ɵcipant has to par Ɵcipate in this research 
study. Also, given our understanding of this popula Ɵon, it is very possible that par Ɵcipants may not be 
returning to home regularly to check their mail. Furthermore, it is very likely that, unless the LAR is the 
spouse/living with the pa Ɵent, an address for the LAR will not available, further limi Ɵng the opportunity 
to parƟcipate in this study. In addi Ɵon, due to the contextual nature of this study and work of our prior 
team, the need to contact family members early on the pa Ɵent’s ICU stay may poten Ɵate the poten Ɵal 
beneﬁt of being in this study, as their psychological response to the ﬁrst few days of their loved one’s 
criƟcal illness is a signiﬁcant predictor of their well -being throughout the rest of the pa Ɵent’s hospital 
stay and post- discharge period. To reduce par Ɵcipant burden, we will only call par Ɵcipants during nor mal 
business hours (0900- 1700), and will only call them a second Ɵme if they return our call or leave a 
voicemail expressing interest in the study. 
 
Seƫng 
 
1) We will be recrui Ɵng from UHCMC CTICU, NSU, and TSICU (SICU pa Ɵents only)  
2) PaƟent inclusion criteria will be par Ɵally veriﬁed in the private oﬃce of the CWRU PI using remote 
EMR capacity. The remaining criteria will be veriﬁed in person at the bedside, or over the phone.  
3) We will conduct the interview in a private family conference room as designated by the respec Ɵve 
medical directors of each ICU, a private loca Ɵon approved by the par Ɵcipant (including the pa Ɵent’s 
bedside), or the CWRU PI’s Oﬃce (Nursing Research HRC 302E). 
 
Consent Process 
 
Once in a loca Ɵon with the LAR’s desired privacy, the RA will formally ini Ɵate the informed consent 
process. The RA will provide a copy of the informed consent document to the LAR, giving them an opƟon 
to review it independently ﬁrst. Next, the RA will review each sec Ɵon of the informed consent document 
with the LAR. Consistent with the 2018 Common Rule, the RA will emphasize: 
1) A statement that the study involves research, an explana Ɵon of the purposes of the research 
and the expected dura Ɵon of the subject’s par ƟcipaƟon, a descrip Ɵon of the procedures to be 
followed, and iden ƟﬁcaƟon of any procedures that are experime ntal  
2) A descrip Ɵon of any reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts to the subject;  
3) A descrip Ɵon of any beneﬁts to the subject or to others that may reasonably be expected 
from the research;  
4) A disclosure of appropriate alterna Ɵve procedures or courses of treatment, if any, that might 
be advantageous to the subject;  
5) A statement describing the extent, if any, to which conﬁden Ɵality of records iden Ɵfying the 
subject will be maintained;  
6) For research involving more than minimal risk, an explana Ɵon as to whether any 
compensa Ɵon and an explana Ɵon as to whether any medical treatments are available if injury 
occurs and, if so, what they consist of, or where further informa Ɵon may be obt ained;  
7) An explana Ɵon of whom to contact for answers to per Ɵnent ques Ɵons about the research and 
research subjects’ rights, and whom to contact in the event of a research-related injury to the 
subject;  
8) A statement that par ƟcipaƟon is voluntary, refusal to par Ɵcipate will involve no penalty or loss 
of beneﬁts to which the subject is otherwise en Ɵtled, and the subject may discon Ɵnue 
parƟcipaƟon at any Ɵme without penalty or loss of beneﬁts to which the subject is otherwise 
enƟtled; and  
9) A statement that iden Ɵﬁers might be removed from the iden Ɵﬁable private informa Ɵon or 
idenƟﬁable biospecimens and that, a Ōer such removal, the informa Ɵon or biospecimens could 
be used for future research studies or distributed to another inves Ɵgator for future research 
studies without addi Ɵonal informed consent from the subject or the legally authorized 
representa Ɵve, if this might be a possibility  
 
AŌer, the RA will give the LAR the opportunity to ask any addi Ɵonal ques Ɵons about the study. Then, the 
RA will conﬁrm their understanding with a post-consent quiz:  
1) In a few sentences, tell me what you think the purpose of our study is?  
2) Just to make sure you understand, can you tell me what we’re asking you to do?  
3) What are the risks of being a part of our study?  
4) If you decide not to par Ɵcipate, what other op Ɵons do you have?  
5) What else would you like to know? 
 
If the LAR is unsure or incorrect in their responses, the RA will re- review the relevant informa Ɵon in the 
consent document. The RA will then use a teach-back method to ensure understanding. 
 
Next, the RA will ask the LAR to sign and date the wri Ʃen informed consent document. A Ōer which the 
RA will provide the LAR a copy of the consent document that they signed and dated. The RA will 
complete the a Ʃached “informed consent documenta Ɵon” form and proceed with the T1 interview. 
 
Reassessing the Pa Ɵent for Decision -Making Capacity 
 
Consistent with recommenda Ɵons from the UH IRB, we will use the process described in the recruitment 
process to reassess the pa Ɵent for decision -making capacity at the T4 interview (face-to-face) and T5 
interviews (unless the pa Ɵent died in the period between T1 and T4, or T4 and T5). For the reassessment 
process, the RA will ask the LAR the global assessment ques Ɵons.  
- If the LAR answers NO to any of the ques Ɵons, the RA will NOT perform a telephone assent 
conversaƟon with the pa Ɵent.  
- If the LAR’s answers are a combina Ɵon of Yes and/or Unsure, the RA will seek permission to 
perform their own global assessment. If there is s Ɵll uncertainty, the RA will confer with the 
CWRU PI (Pigna Ɵello) to determine the best course of ac Ɵon. This conversaƟon and any ﬁrm 
determina Ɵons of paƟent capacity will be documented in the electronic enrollment log.  
- If the LAR answers YES to any of the ques Ɵons, the RA will perform a telephone assent 
conversaƟon with the pa Ɵent (see a Ʃached “Phone Assent”)  
 
When comple Ɵng the assent (either on the phone or in person), the RA will perform their own global 
assessment. If the pa Ɵent passes the RA’s global assent, the RA will begin the formal assent process. At 
the end of the conversa Ɵon, the RA will ask the f ollowing as a post-assent quiz: 
1) In a few sentences, tell me what you think the purpose of our study is?  
2) Just to make sure you understand, can you tell me what we’re asking you to do?  
3) What are the risks of being a part of our study?  
4) If you decide not to par Ɵcipate, what other op Ɵons do you have?  
5) What else would you like to know? 
 
Based on the answers to these ques Ɵons, the RA will correct or expand upon informa Ɵon as needed 
using a teach-back method. If the RA:  
- Thinks the pa Ɵent is able to provide assent, the RA will ask the ques Ɵon at the bo Ʃom of the 
“Phone Assent” document: “Do we have your permission to use de- idenƟﬁed data from your 
medical record for our study?” The RA will thank the pa Ɵent for their Ɵme, end the conversa Ɵon, 
ﬁll out the “Phone Assent” document, and document the outcome of the interview/assent 
conversaƟon in the enrollment log.  
- Thinks the pa Ɵent is unable to provide assent, the RA will thank the pa Ɵent for their Ɵme and 
request to speak to the LAR. They will then seek a verbal assent from the LAR on behalf of the 
paƟent.  
 
*If the pa Ɵent parƟcipant regains capacity and refuses consent/assent to par ƟcipaƟon, no pa Ɵent 
data will not be used for research* 
 
Sharing of Results with Research Par Ɵcipants 
 
This study uses surveys to measure symptoms of anxiety, depression, and stress. As part of the 
FAMCOPE-ICU’s design, individuals will be made aware of the severity of their symptoms based on their 
responses. We have a mi ƟgaƟon plan, see “Study Procedures” 2b below and a Ʃached “Suicide Screening 
Script”.  
 
Study Design 
 
The study design is a pilot before and a Ōer clinical trial of FAMCOPE -ICU, a tablet-based coping and 
emoƟon regula Ɵon tool. The ﬁrst 20 par Ɵcipants will be enrolled in the control group, and the next 40 
parƟcipants will be included in the interven Ɵon group. 
 
 
Study Procedures 
 
*These study procedures reﬂect the interview of the “family par Ɵcipant” (i.e., LAR).*  
 
1) This study has 5 interviews (T1- T5). The T1 (~35 minutes) will occur in person immediately a Ōer 
informed consent. The T2-T4 interviews will occur 24- 48 hours a Ōer the comple Ɵon of the preceding 
interview, depending on the par Ɵcipants availability. T2 -T4 (~15-20 minutes) will occur in person for 
parƟcipants in the FAMCOPE condi Ɵon; in the control condi Ɵon (usual clinical care) will have the op Ɵon 
of comple Ɵng the study in person or on the phone. For all par Ɵcipants, the T5 interview will occur over  
the phone one month a Ōer their T1 interview. Following the T5 interview, an RA will complete the chart 
review instrument if they obtained assent. The ﬁrst 20 par Ɵcipants will be enrolled in the control group 
(UC), and the next 40 par Ɵcipants will be included in the interven Ɵon group (FAMCOPE -ICU). 
- Study groups:   
o FAMCOPE-ICU : The FAMCOPE- ICU interven Ɵon design is grounded in Gross’s Extended 
Process Model of Emo Ɵon Regula Ɵon. Consistent with this model, there are three 
disƟnct doses, which will be administered at T2, T3, and T4. via a tablet device (See 
“FAMCOPE Modules” aƩachment). The content of the interven Ɵon is tailored to 
parƟcipant responses to the T2 -T4 surveys, which are built into the interven Ɵonal 
interface. The informa Ɵonal content will be administered via pre -recorded audio with 
accompanying summary text and visuals. We an Ɵcipate each module will require 15 -20 
minutes to complete. Notably, its design interface is rooted in Cogni Ɵve Load Theory, 
which provides guidance on designing and delivering informa Ɵonal content in a way that 
reduces cogni Ɵve burden for the user.  
o Usual Care (UC) : The UC condi Ɵon represents the standard support aﬀorded to all 
family members in the ICU. Idividuals in the UC group have the op Ɵon of comple Ɵng T2-
T4 over the phone because they are not assigned to the interven Ɵonal group.  
- In the case of the pa Ɵent’s death :  
o We will contact the family member on the day of their scheduled T5 oﬀer our 
condolences and see if they would be willing to complete the T5 interview. We will 
remind them their con Ɵnued parƟcipaƟon is completely voluntary. We will then seek 
their verbal assent to perform our chart review. We will document the outcome of this 
conversaƟon in our enrollment log and complete the chart -review if assent was 
obtained. 
- In the case of a missed   
o T2-T4 Interview , the RA will call the LAR to determine if the interview needs to be 
rescheduled. If the RA is unable to make contact, they will leave a brief voicemail sta Ɵng 
the reason of the call and provide a call- back number. The next day, the RA will a Ʃempt 
to make contact in person with the family member and make one more phone call if 
unable to locate the LAR. If the LAR does not answer, the RA will not a Ʃempt to call the 
LAR again, un Ɵl face to face contact is made or the T5 interview, whichever comes ﬁrst. If 
the LAR does not answer, the RA will leave a voicemail. No further contact eﬀorts will be 
made.  
o T5 Interview , the RA will leave a brief voicemail sta Ɵng the purpose of the call and 
provide a call-back number. If the family member does not call back within one week, 
we will make a ﬁnal a Ʃempt at phone contact and leave one ﬁnal voicemail if they do 
not answer. 
 
2) Procedures to monitor research par Ɵcipants for safety/minimize risk include:  
a. Breach of Privacy/Conﬁden Ɵality (Very Low Risk): Other than informa Ɵon used for screening 
and coordina Ɵon of study interviews (Pa Ɵent Name, MRN, bedspace; Par Ɵcipant name, address, 
and phone number), our study aims require no addi Ɵonal PHI. PHI w ill be stored with the other 
screening/enrollment/refusal tracking sheets in the REDCap server. Data collected for research 
purposes will be linked to a deiden Ɵﬁed study ID # in REDCap. The REDCap mobile app will be 
used to collect baseline data for all T1 and T5 interviews, as well as the T2-T4 data for 
parƟcipants in the control group. T2 -T4 research data (no PHI) will be collected by FAMCOPEICU 
for those in interven Ɵon condiƟon. Upon comple Ɵon of the indicated module, a RA will export 
data from FAMCOPE-ICU and upload it immediately to the REDCap server. To protect 
parƟcipant’s privacy/conﬁden Ɵality during the data collec Ɵon process, we will give the 
parƟcipant the op Ɵon of comple Ɵng the T1 -T4 interviews in a private conference room at the 
hospital. For any phone interviews (T2- T5 for control & T5 for interven Ɵon group), we will 
encourage par Ɵcipants to ensure they are in a loca Ɵon that they feel comfortable comple Ɵng 
the interview, and will accommodate reasonable requests to reschedule interviews to a 
convenient Ɵme for the par Ɵcipant.  
b. Psychological Well- Being (small risk): Given the popula Ɵon, we would expect the majority of 
parƟcipants to report mild or moderate symptoms of stress, anxiety, and/or depression. For 
parƟcipants who report severe levels of depression, anxiety, or str ess (using previously validated 
and widely used PROMIS Instruments – see table below), The RA will follow the “Suicide 
Screening Script”.  
c. Risks from FAMCOPE- ICU (very low risk): While we an Ɵcipate the risks posed by delivery of 
FAMCOPE- ICU to be low, it is possible that the emo Ɵonal focus of the interven Ɵon may in of 
itself be a subsequent trigger for psychological distress. However, the FAMCOPE- ICU interven Ɵon 
will screen for symptoms of stress, anxiety, and depression in each of the three modules, and 
will automa Ɵcally provide resources discussed in 2b for those with severe symptoms. To this 
point, the purpose of the interven Ɵon is to empower users with evidence-based strategies they 
can use to cope with stress and regulate symptoms of anxiety and depression. Furthermore, to 
our knowledge of the extant literature in this popula Ɵon, suppor Ɵve interven Ɵons have not 
been associated with deteriora Ɵons in psychological outcomes, except for the use proac Ɵve 
palliaƟve care services in one isolated study which evaluated symptoms of PTSD over a six -
month period. Furthermore, the interven Ɵon was designed to be succinct and contain neces sary 
informaƟon consistent with the underlying theore Ɵcal framework and empirical evidence.  
3) We will be using standard tablet devices to collect study data and deliver the FAMCOPE-ICU 
intervenƟonal components.  
 
4) We will be collec Ɵng non-PHI source documenta Ɵon from the EMR (See “Chart Review” instrument) 
that will be examined as poten Ɵal covariates to include in the analysis for this study, as well as tailoring 
variables for future versions of FAMCOPE-ICU. 
 
Study Timeline 
 
 
Data to be Collected for your study 
 
 

Data Analysis Plan 
Aim 1: We will use thema Ɵc analysis to code qualita Ɵve acceptability data, and interpret descrip Ɵve 
staƟsƟcs for quan ƟtaƟve data  
Aim 2: We will interpret associa Ɵons between T1 data and T5 data to iden Ɵfy relevant covariates to 
include in our main analysis. For our main analysis, we will use analysis of covariance to determine if 
there are sta ƟsƟcally signiﬁcant diﬀerences in T5 variables between the control and interven Ɵon groups.  
An a priori sensi Ɵvity analysis was conducted using G*Power. With a signiﬁcance criterion ( α) of .05 and 
power of .80, a sample of 120 will allow for sta ƟsƟcal detecƟon of medium eﬀects (d = .52).  
 
Risks to Research Par Ɵcipants 
Breach of Conﬁden Ɵality/Privacy: Low risk, low magnitude, poten Ɵally reversible  
Physical Risks: n/a  
Psychological: Low risk, mild to moderate magnitude, reversible, variable dura Ɵon.  
Social Risks: Low risk (e.g., conﬂict caused between family members via par ƟcipaƟng in study). Variable 
duraƟon.  
Legal: n/a  
Economic: n/a 
 
Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Research Par Ɵcipants 
1) All data (except for that selected by FAMCOPE-ICU will be collected and/or stored directly into 
UH REDCap. Data collected by FAMCOPE-ICU will be temporarily stored on the device (no PHI), 
and transferred to REDCap following the study interview.  
2) We will have an available private space to conduct all in-person study procedures  
3) We will provide individuals in the FAMCOPE- ICU study condi Ɵon a headset to listen to the 
provided informa Ɵon  
4) All data will be deiden Ɵﬁed and referenced by only a study ID number 5) All phone interviews 
will be conducted in the CWRU PIs research oﬃce. 
 
PotenƟal Beneﬁt to Research Par Ɵcipants 
Consistent with our prior experience in this popula Ɵon, parƟcipants may experience catharsis by 
parƟcipaƟng and sharing of their experiences through the study’s course. Given the study’s purpose, it is 
possible that those in the interven Ɵon group may beneﬁt from the FAMCOPE- ICU Interven Ɵon, and 
report improvements in psychological symptoms. Should this occur, it is possible that this may also 
promote psychological well-being in the long term. 
 
Withdrawal of Research Par Ɵcipants 
Subjects can choose to withdraw from the study at any Ɵme. We an Ɵcipate the most common cause of 
study withdrawal to be due to the discomfort of sharing their experiences serving as a surrogate decision 
maker or related, the inconvenience of the study pr ocedures, or if the pa Ɵent is unexpectedly discharge 
(e.g., dies). If a par Ɵcipant decides to withdraw from the study, we will use any data already collected for 
analysis, but will not a Ʃempt to collect more data nor contact the par Ɵcipant. 
 
AlternaƟves to Par ƟcipaƟon 
If an individual decides that they do not want to par Ɵcipate, their alterna Ɵve is to not par Ɵcipate in this 
study. 
 
Costs to Research Par Ɵcipants 
All tablet devices that are used for FAMCOPE-ICU will be provided by the research team. We will not 
provide compensa Ɵon for ensued costs related to transporta Ɵon or telephone bills.  
 
Research Par Ɵcipant Compensa Ɵon 
ParƟcipants who complete all ﬁve study interviews will be mailed a $25.00 Amazon gi Ō card. 
 
Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Research Par Ɵcipants 
A data and safety monitoring plan will be put in place to ensure regulatory compliance of the research, 
address the ﬁdelity of the procedures, and iden Ɵfy emerging issues associated with recruitment or 
concerns about the study. All safety-related risks w ill be monitored rou Ɵnely by the PI. Informed consent 
forms and data collected during this study will be monitored for completeness and accuracy on a weekly 
basis by the PI. Adherence to the study protocol will be also assessed at every monthly team mee Ɵng 
and randomly monitored by the PI through direct observa Ɵon of the RA. Emerging issues associated with 
screening and recruitment or study concerns will be regularly discussed with the study team. The 
security of conﬁden Ɵal informa Ɵon will be monitore d regularly by the PI and the RA will report any 
breaches of conﬁden Ɵality to the PI. The PI will also evaluate the data for any nega Ɵve outcomes that 
would require modiﬁca Ɵon of the project or protocol. The PI will be responsible for regularly monito ring 
any adverse events or unan Ɵcipated problems. An adverse -event form will be developed detailing the 
incident, ac Ɵons taken, supervisor notes, and follow -up steps. The PI will immediately report any serious 
or life-threatening incidents to the IRB. The research team will be also consulted as appropriate. The PI 
will take appropriate ac Ɵon to stop the study, release a subject from the study, or modify procedures to 
reduce and/or eliminate the study-related risks if they occur. 
 
References 
1. CriƟcal Care Sta ƟsƟcs. Society of Cri Ɵcal Care Medicine. 
(hƩps://www.sccm.org/Communica Ɵons/CriƟcal-Care-StaƟsƟcs). 
2. Johnson CC, Suchyta MR, Darowski ES, et al. Psychological sequelae in family caregivers of cri Ɵcally iII 
intensive care unit pa Ɵents. A systema Ɵc review. Annals of the American Thoracic Society 
2019;16(7):894-909.  
3. Bibas L, Peretz- Larochelle M, Adhikari NK, et al. Associa Ɵon of surrogate decision -making interven Ɵons 
for criƟcally ill adults with pa Ɵent, family, and resource use outcomes: a systema Ɵc review and meta -
analysis. JAMA network open 2019;2(7):e197229-e197229.  
4. Kon AA, Davidson JE, Morrison W, Danis M, White DB. Shared decision-making in intensive care units. 
ExecuƟve summary of the American College of Cri Ɵcal Care Medicine and American Thoracic Society 
policy statement. American Thoracic Society; 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 