IRB Approval Period: 
1/15/2019 - 1/14/2020  
IRB Approval Period  
HRPP Revision Date: Oct 12, 2015   
 Validation of a Computed Tomography (CT) based Fractional Flow Reserve 
(FFR) software using the 320 Detectors Aquilion ONE CT Scanner  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
September 24, 2019  
 
Research Team  
 
Dr. Ciprian N Ionita (Principal Investigator)  
 
Kelsey Sommer BS (Study Coordinator / Investigator)  
 
Dr. Erin Angel (Investigator)  
 
Dr. Vijay Iyer (Investigator)  
 
Dr. Kanako Kunishima Kumamaru (Investigator)  
 
Dr. Dimitris Mitsouras (Investigator)  
 
Dr. Frank Rybicki (Investigator)  
 
Dr. Michael F Wilson (Investigator)  
  
IRB Approval Period: 
1/15/2019 - 1/14/2020  
IRB Approval Period  
HRPP Revision Date: Oct 12, 2015   
 Permission to Take Part in a Human  Research  Study  Page 1 of  6 
University at Buffalo Institutional Review Board (UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018 
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 14203  
UB Federalwide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
 
Title of research study:  
Validation of a Computed Tomography (CT) based Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR) software using the 
320 Detector Aquilion ONE CT Scanner. Only adults able to consent are included  
 
Version Date : 1/7/19  
Investigator(s):  
Kenneth Snyder MD 
Ciprian N Ionita  PhD 
Michael Wilson MD 
Vijay Iyer MD 
Umesh Sharma MD  
Why am I being invited to take part in a research study?  
You are being invited to take part in a research study because we believe that the inf ormation 
acquired during your clinical evaluations could help with improvement and validation of a software 
measurement tool that would aid in the diagnosis of certain vascular disease.  
 
What should I know about a research study?  
 Someone will explain this research study to  you. 
 Whether or not you take part is up to  you. 
 You can choose not to take  part. 
 You can agree to take part and later change your  mind.  
 Your decision will not be held against  you. 
 You can ask all the questions you want before you  decide.  
 No clinical procedure will be changed as a result of your  participation  
Who can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the research 
team at:  
Principal Investigator: Kenneth Snyder MD at 716 -218-1000  

IRB Approval Period: 
1/15/2019 - 1/14/2020  
IRB Approval Period  
HRPP Revision Date: Oct 12, 2015   
 Permission to Take Part in a Human  Research  Study  Page 2 of 6 
OR 
Co-Investigator: Ciprian Ionita, Toshiba Stroke and Vascular Research Center (716) 829 -5413 
cnionita@buffalo.edu  
 
  You may also contact the research participant advocate at 716 -888-4845  or 
researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .
  This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”).  You 
may t alk to them at (716) 888 -4888 or email  ub-irb@buffalo.edu 
 Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research  team.  
 You cannot reach the research  team.  
 You want to talk to someone besides the research  team.  
 You have questions about your rights as a research  subject.  
 You want to get information or provide input about this  research.  
Why is this research being done?  
Dr. Ciprian N Ionita and colleagues from t he Department of Neurosurgery and Cardiology are 
collecting data to validate and develop new software for vascular disease severity diagnosis. Such 
software could improve the efficacy of cardiologist diagnosis while reducing the need for additional 
procedu res to acquire physiological information.  
In the long term such software could help reduce the radiation dose due to reduced number of 
interventions.  
 
How long will the research last?  
We expect that you will be in this research study until 30 day follow -up done after the angio 
Fractional Flow Reserve evaluation .  
 
How many people will be studied?  
We expect 50 people to be in this research study.  
 
What happens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?  
The research team will acquire data from the CT scanning and angio -lab evaluation. No clinical 
procedures or protocols will be changed. CT data will be de -identified and used post -procedure in the 
University at Buffalo computer labs to estimate blood flow in the heart arteries. The computer results 
will be compared with the angiography lab results and 30 day follow -up, for software validation.  
If CT scan procedure is not clinically driven the investigators will cover the expenses 
associated with the Coronar y CT Angiography.  
 
 
What happens if I do not want to be in this research?  
You can leave the research at any time and it will not be held against you.  
IRB Approval Period: 
1/15/2019 - 1/14/2020  
IRB Approval Period  
HRPP Revision Date: Oct 12, 2015   
 Permission to Take Part in a Human  Research  Study  Page 3 of  6 
What happens if I say yes, but  I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at any time it will not be held against you.  
 
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?  
 
During CT procedure patients will receive standard doses of Nitrates, Beta blockers and up to 
70ml of iodine contrast. The radiation dose associated with the study is ~4.9mSv, which is within the 
nationally reported averages for coronary CT scanning. In very rare cases, the contrast agents used in 
CT can cause allergic recations. Some people experience mild itching or hives (small bumps on the 
skin). Symptoms of a more serious allergic reaction include shortness of breath and swelling of the 
throat or other parts of the body. Tell your study doctor if you experience any of these symptoms.  
The risk of a b reach in medical data confidentiality will be minimized by removing any 
personal information from the images and lab results. Only the Principal Investigator will be in the 
possession of the relation between the patient ID and the study identifier. We will  destroy the 
identifiable data as soon as possible, but not greater than 3 years after the completion of the study.  
 
Will being in this study help me in any way?  
There is no direct benefit to you for your participation in this study. However, your willingness 
to take part may help doctors improve your medical care. The use of software to estimate blood flow 
based on CT data only could be beneficial for future patie nts by reducing the radiation dose associated 
with additional lab procedures.  
 
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including 
research study and medic al or education records, to people who have a need to review this information. 
We cannot promise complete secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information 
include the IRB and other representatives of this organization.  
Federal law provides  additional protections of your medical records and related health 
information. These are described in the HIPAA section of this document.  
 
What else do I need to  know?  
You will be notified of any significant new developments that may cause you to change y our mind 
about participating in the research  study.  
It is important that you tell your study doctor if you feel that you have been injured because of taking 
part in this study. You can tell the doctor in person or call.  
You will get medical treatment if yo u are injured as a result of taking part in this study. Your study 
doctor will explain the treatment options to you and tell you where you can get treatment.  
Generally, this care would be billed to you, your insurance or other third party. University at Bu ffalo 
has no program to pay for medical care for research -related injury.  
IRB Approval Period: 
1/15/2019 - 1/14/2020  
IRB Approval Period  
HRPP Revision Date: Oct 12, 2015   
 Permission to Take Part in a Human  Research  Study  Page 4 of  6 
HIPAA: Authorization for the Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health 
Information for Research Purposes  
 
This section describes information about you and about your health that will be obtained by the 
researchers when you participate in the research study. Health information is considered 
"protected health information" when it may directly identify you as an individual. By signing this 
form you are agreeing to permit the researchers and/or other parties (described in detail below) to 
have access to this information. If there are any parts of this form that you do not understand, 
please be sure to ask us for fu rther clarification.  
 
A. What  protected  health  information  will be collected  about  you as part of this research 
study?  
 
    X  Information from your full medical records: CT imaging data and Fractional  flow 
Reserve measurements from the catheterization  labs 
 
    X   New Health Information created from study related tests, procedures, visits,  and/or 
questionnaires as described in this consent  form.  
 
 
B. Who is authorized to provide or collect this  information?  
 
    X   KALEIDA Health, Buffalo  NY 
    X_ Principal Investigator or  designee  
    X   Buffalo General Medical Center/ Gates Vascular  Institute  
 
C. With whom may your protected health information be  shared?  
 
Your health information may be shared with others outside of the research group for purposes 
directly related to the conduct of this research study or as required by law, including but not 
limited to:  
 
    X  Clinical staff not involved in this research st udy who may become involved in your 
care if it is potentially relevant to your  treatment  
    X  The organization(s) responsible for administering this research: UB Medical  School  
 
Your information may also be shared with individuals or entities responsible  for general 
administration, oversight and compliance of research activities. Examples of this include the 
institution's Privacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, Safety Monitoring 
Boards, an Institutional Review Board, The Research Foundation of the State University of 
New York, University at Buffalo Foundation Services, and accrediting bodies, or with certain 
government oversight agencies that have authority over the research including the Department 
of Health and Human Services (HH S), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP). Your  
IRB Approval Period: 
1/15/2019 - 1/14/2020  
IRB Approval Period  
HRPP Revision Date: Oct 12, 2015   
 Permission to Take Part in a Human  Research  Study  Page 5 of  6 
information may also be shared with o ther entities as permitted or required by law. All 
reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your individually identifiable 
health information that may be shared with others as described above.  
 
All reasonable efforts will be used t o protect the confidentiality of your protected health 
information. There is the potential for individually identifiable information and the associated 
health information obtained with this authorization to be re -disclosed by the recipient(s). After 
such a  disclosure, the information may no longer be protected by the terms of this authorization 
against further re -disclosure.  
 
D. How long will this information be kept by the Principal  Investigator?  
This authorization has no expiration date. The researchers may continue to rely on this 
authorization to obtain and use protected health information about you unless you revoke this 
authorization in writing.  
 
E. What are your rights after signing this  authori zation?  
 
You have the right to revoke this authorization at any time. If you withdraw your authorization, 
no additional efforts to collect individually identifiable health information about you will be 
made. You should know, however, that protected health information acquired using this 
authorization prior to its withdrawal may continue to be used to the extent that the 
investigator(s) have already relied on your permission to conduct the research. If you chose to 
withdraw this authorization, you must do so  in writing to the following individual(s):  
 
Research Coordinator, Department of Neurosurgery, Kaleida Health 100 High Street, Suite B - 
4, Buffalo, NY 14203 (716)218 -1000  
 
If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that reques t to the 
institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individually identifiable health 
information.  
 
F. What will happen if you decide not to sign this  authorization?  
 
Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future c are you receive at this 
institution and will not cause any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise 
entitled. If you decide not to sign this authorization, you will not be able to participate in the 
research study.  
IRB Approval Period: 
1/15/2019 - 1/14/2020  
IRB Approval Period  
HRPP Revision Date: Oct 12, 2015   
 Permission to  Take Part in a Human  Research  Study  Page 6 of  6 
 
 
 
Signature Block for Capable Adult  
Your signature documents your permission to take part in this research. By signing this form you are  
not waiving any of your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to  
negligence or misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
 
 
 
 
Signature  of subject  Date  
 
 
 
Printed name of subject  
 
 
 
Signature of person  obtaining  consent  Date 
Printed name of person obtaining  consent  