PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  1 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019PROTOCOL TITLE:
Transcranial direct current  stimulation for treatment of deficits after traumatic brain 
injury. 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
Davin Quinn,  MD
Department of Psychiatry
SPONSOR:
Davin  Quinn, MD
FUNDING SOURCE:
National Institutes of Health (NIH)/NIGMS
VERSION NUMBER:
#9
DATE:
01/09/2019
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK:
Please indicate all  that apply:
DOD (Department of Defense)
DOE (Department of  Energy)
DOJ (Department of Justice)
ED (Department of  Education)
EPA (Environmental  Protection  Agency)
x FDA (Food  and Drug Administration)
x HHS (Department  of Health and Human Services)
VA
Other:      
Is this a clinical trial  under  ICH-GCP  E6?    Yes   X No
If yes, please confirm that the research team is familiar with  and agrees  to comply  
with the investigator  requirements cited in  ICH-GCP E6.    Yes    No 
ICH-GCP E6 can be  accessed by copying and  pasting this URL into your 
browser: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidances/ucm073122.pdf
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  2 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  3 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Table of Contents
1.Objectives ..................................................................................................................... 4
2.Background .................................................................................................................. 4
3.Study Design ................................................................................................................ 7
4.Inclusion and  Exclusion Criteria .................................................................................. 7
5.Number of Subjects .................................................... Error! Bookmark  not defined.
6.Study Timelines ............................................................................................................ 9
7.Study Endpoints ......................................................................................................... 10
8.Research Setting ......................................................................................................... 11
9.Resources Available ................................................................................................... 11
10. Prior Approvals ....................................................................................................... 13
11. Multi-Site Research ................................................................................................ 13
12. Study Procedures .................................................................................................... 14
13. Data Analysis .......................................................................................................... 18
14. Provisions to Monitor  the Data  to Ensure the Safety of Subjects ........................... 18
15. Withdrawal  of Subjects ........................................................................................... 19
16. Data Management/Confidentiality .......................................................................... 19
17. Data and Specimen Banking ................................................................................... 21
18. Risks to Subjects ..................................................................................................... 21
19. Potential Benefits  to Subjects ................................................................................. 22
20. Recruitment  Methods .............................................................................................. 22
21. Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects .......................................... 23
22. Economic Burden to Subjects ................................................................................. 24
23. Compensation ......................................................................................................... 25
24. Compensation for Research-Related  Injury ............................................................ 25
25. Consent Process ...................................................................................................... 25
26. Documentation of  Consent ..................................................................................... 26
27. Study Test Results/Incidental  Findings .................................................................. 26
28. Sharing Study Progress or Results with Subjects ................................................... 26
29. Inclusion of  Vulnerable Populations ...................................................................... 26
30. Community-Based Participatory Research ............................................................. 27
31. Research Involving American Indian/Native  Populations ..................................... 27
32. Transnational Research ........................................................................................... 27
33. Drugs or Devices .................................................................................................... 27
Checklist Section ............................................................................................................... 29
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  4 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 20191.Objectives
Our long-term goal is to develop safe and effective  treatments for symptoms of mild  to moderate TBI 
(mmTBI) that restore patients to higher levels of functioning, decrease disability, and promote  brain  
healing.  The objective of this application is to investigate the use of transcranial direct  current 
stimulation (tDCS) to treat symptoms of executive dysfunction and depression  in patients with 
mmTBI. Our central hypotheses are (1) tDCS paired with relevant  cognitive  training facilitates 
improves executive function  on NIH-approved  neuropsychological measures, (2) tDCS reduces 
depression scores on NIH Common Data Elements  for TBI, (3) that these improvements in emotion 
and cognition will be detectable up to one year after stimulation, (4) (4) certain  clinical  variables will 
reliably predict response to tDCS,  such as age, education level, injury severity, and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) evidence  of structural/functional/metabolic abnormalities and (5) 
quantitative electroencephalography (EEG)  will demonstrate changes  in frontal  midline  theta  band 
power and theta band synchrony, markers  of cognitive control, in responders. These objectives were  
formulated based on our clinical experience with Dr. Ronald Yeo (project mentor)  characterizing  
symptomatic patients  with  mmTBI in the post-acute setting, groundbreaking  research led by Dr. 
Vincent Clark  (project mentor) that has demonstrated robust  increases in attention and learning 
with tDCS,  and extensive evidence accumulated  by co-junior investigator on the grant application Dr. 
James Cavanagh on EEG measures of executive dysfunction.
Specific Aim 1: tDCS for executive dysfunction in mmTBI
Experiments in this aim will test the hypothesis  that in patients with mmTBI,  left prefrontal anodal  
tDCS concurrent with cognitive training for up to ten consecutive  weekdays will result in significantly 
more improvement in executive function compared  to sham stimulation.  Patients with  cognitive 
complaints 3 months to 15 years after  mmTBI  will be recruited from local emergency departments 
and brain injury clinics.   Healthy controls  will also be recruited  through flyers, advertisements  and 
word of mouth.  Aim  1.1: tDCS will be paired with computer-based cognitive training tasks of 
response inhibition, set shifting, and working memory, while executive function will be measured 
with the NIH Examiner battery before, immediately after, and one month after stimulation. Pre-and  
post-stimulation EEG and MRI may be obtained.  During EEG and MRI  participants may  be asked to 
rest quietly or perform simple tasks.  Aim 1.2: Persistence of post-traumatic symptom reduction and 
quality of life improvement will be assessed with Common Data Elements instruments via telephone 
interview at 6 months  and one year.  Aim  1.3: Clinical predictors of tDCS response  including EEG 
frontal theta synchrony,  injury severity,  presence of neuroimaging abnormalities, premorbid 
intelligence, and post-traumatic symptom burden will be determined with linear mixed-models 
analysis.
Specific Aim 2: tDCS for depressive symptoms in mmTBI
Experiments in this aim will test the hypothesis that left prefrontal anodal  tDCS in patients with 
mmTBI will significantly  reduce depressive symptoms compared to sham stimulation. Aim 2.1: 
Patients will be assessed for symptoms of depression via self-report instruments and clinician-
administered scales from NIH Common Data Elements before, immediately after, and one month  
after the stimulation protocol.  Aim  2.2: Persistence of antidepressant benefit will be assessed  via 
telephone interview at 6 months and one year.  Aim 2.3: clinical predictors  of tDCS response such as 
EEG frontal theta synchrony, injury severity, premorbid intelligence,  neuroimaging  abnormalities, 
and symptom burden will be determined.
2.Background
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  5 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Traumatic brain injury  (TBI) is a significant public  health problem.  An estimated 1.7 million TBI-
related deaths,  hospitalizations,  and emergency  department (ED) visits occur in the United States  
each year,1 costing an estimated $76.5 billion in 2000 alone.2 Among  34 states in a 2004 survey New 
Mexico had the 2nd highest  TBI fatality rate, with approximately 10,000 ED visits  and 1400  
admissions for TBI, making this an important  regional  problem to be addressed for our 
communities.3 Even after mild TBI, up to 22%  of patients  will report  functional  impairment at one 
year post-injury.4 Much  of this loss of function is due to the fact that the majority of TBIs affect the 
frontal lobes and cause damage to the frontal-subcortical circuits  that are responsible  for the 
complex thought processes  required  to navigate  contemporary life,5,6 including comportment  and 
social behavior, mood  and motivation, and especially cognitive  control.7 
These deficits  in cognition and emotion compound  one another, as the neural circuits  mediating 
them are closely interconnected.8,9 Within the first year after TBI 33%  of patients will suffer a major 
depressive disorder,10 which may exacerbate any separate post-traumatic cognitive  deficits and 
effectively render a “double-hit” to patients’ abilities  to manage their lives’ daily activities.9 
Conversely, deficits in the domain of cognitive control can be seen even after  only mild TBIs,11 
affecting executive  functions such as response inhibition,  working memory impairment, and set 
shifting and leading to further depression as patients  spend long periods functionally disabled.7,8 
Unfortunately, few effective treatments exist for the post-acute neurobehavioral sequelae of TBI.  
Current strategies for cognitive rehabilitation  are both time-  and resource intensive but yield only 
small effect sizes.12 Non-FDA approved treatments such as methylphenidate are coarse  in their 
mechanism of action and carry adverse consequences such as irritability, addiction, and 
cardiovascular effects.13 Dopamine agonists  have had mixed results  in improving function after 
TBI,14,15 and little evidence currently exists to recommend  any other class of medication.16 Treatment 
approaches for mood  symptoms in TBI are understudied, nonspecific, and have even been shown to 
worsen cognition.17,18 Novel rehabilitation approaches that simultaneously  and holistically address  
both the cognitive and emotional post-traumatic deficits of TBI are needed.
The current proposal  represents a major  step towards  a solution for post-TBI  symptoms that 
harnesses the intact brain’s neuroplastic potential  to overcome a variety of deficits.   Transcranial  
direct current stimulation (tDCS) is a non-invasive form of brain stimulation utilizing  low amounts of 
current to modulate neuronal activity and improve neuropsychiatric symptoms across diverse  
disorders, including  post-stroke aphasia  and motor learning, working memory in dementia,  and 
major depression.19,20 –22 We will attempt to demonstrate that tDCS produces similar gains in 
cognitive symptoms among  mmTBI patients as we have seen in our lab,23 as well as improvements in 
depressive symptoms  others have found in depressed patients.19 We will then correlate  response  to 
tDCS with EEG measures of cognitive control and brain connectivity so as to better identify patients 
likely to benefit from tDCS, as well as clarify the mechanism of therapeutic action of tDCS. Due to its 
low cost, minimal  side effects, and the ease with which it can be integrated with  existing 
rehabilitation approaches,  empirical support  for tDCS would  be a “game-changer” in the field of TBI.  
Successful completion  of our specific aims will have a major impact on research and clinical practice 
regarding the management of debilitating TBI symptoms. Toxic effects  of medications could  be 
avoided; visits  to rehabilitation facilities  could be reduced;  and treatment could be provided in 
diverse settings.  Future studies would  elucidate optimal electrode  placements and stimulation  
parameters for specific cognitive symptoms and in specific  types of brain  injury,  as well as provide a 
rational mechanism of therapeutic action in terms of improved  functional brain connectivity.  
Integration with emerging  multimodal neuroimaging techniques may reveal  exactly which  type of 
patient benefits from which type of tDCS,  personalizing clinical interventions.
Review of relevant literature
tDCS can improve brain  function. Anodal tDCS typically has an excitatory neuronal effect due to a shift 
toward depolarization, while cathodal stimulation  elicits  a hyperpolarization.24 tDCS-induced  
changes last from minutes to hours, and multiple  stimulation  sessions over  the course of days  to 
weeks can lead to cumulative long-lasting effects.25–27 This powerful neuroplastic effect of tDCS has 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  6 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019already been applied to injured brain in patients recovering  from  stroke, with  observed benefits in 
motor control, neglect, vision, and aphasia,  without adverse consequences such as seizures or 
worsening of deficits.27,28,29,30 Anodal  stimulation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  (DLPFC) has 
become a standard  protocol in the cognitive  tDCS literature because of its ability to improve multiple 
dimensions of cognitive functioning,31–33 including cognitive  control and working memory,31,32 ,34, 
attention,35 improved  decision making,36 and enhanced memory.37 Reduction of impulsivity  has been  
demonstrated with  anode over right DLPFC.38,39
 tDCS is understudied in TBI.  Application of this therapy to TBI is a logical next step, but tDCS has not 
been extensively studied in this disorder as it has for stroke  rehabilitation and depression.19,40 
Several animal studies have  shown that anodal tDCS is potentially neuroprotective  after  brain 
injury.41,42 Only  three studies  have attempted  tDCS for cognition in TBI, all utilizing left prefrontal 
anodal stimulation. Angelakis et al. treated 5 severe TBI patients with 5 days of anodal 1 mA tDCS for 
20 minutes then 5 days  of 2 mA.   Age of injury ranged from 6 months  to 10 years, and electrode 
positioning was  at left DLPFC or left sensorimotor cortex (C3)  in alternating  order.   There were no 
adverse events, and no clear advantage from either electrode position.  Three patients of the five 
experienced benefit by 1 year  followup.  
Kang et al, in a one-session protocol43 involving 9 patients with moderate-severe TBI 2-18  months 
from date  of injury, administered 2mA tDCS for 20 minutes while they  performed a computerized 
cognitive rehabilitation program.  Significant  benefits in set-switching and reaction  time  were  
detected immediately after  and up to 24 hours later.   There were  no adverse  events and the 
treatment was well  tolerated, despite all subjects having known left frontal lobe pathology. In 
contrast, Lesniak et al. administered tDCS  at 1 mA for 10 minutes  to 23 TBI patients for fifteen 
sessions over a 3-week  protocol.  All patients had severe  TBI between 4 and 92 months from date of 
injury, 16 of whom had known left frontal  pathology. Their group found the treatments safe and well 
tolerated, but failed to find  any significant benefit in a multitude of attentional  domains.44 Our 
correspondence with studies registered in clinicaltrials.gov for tDCS in TBI (Spaulding, NYU, U. Leige) 
did not discover any occurrence of seizures or serious adverse events.
We conclude  the following  from these studies:  (1) anodal tDCS over  left DLPFC  at various current 
densities, durations, and over multiple sessions in TBI patients of moderate and severe degree is 
safe; (2) the presence of pre-treatment brain abnormalities, even  at the site of anodal electrode,  does 
not necessarily increase risk nor impede benefit,  and (3) the severity  of injury and current 
density/stimulation protocol used may influence the efficacy  of tDCS. 
Choice of study population.  Our research strategy  is focused on the mild to moderate range  of TBI 
severity. Importantly, this range of severity captures  the vast majority of TBI patients.  Though  we 
believe patients with severe  injuries may also benefit from tDCS, we are concerned that their  greater 
burden of neuropathology may compromise  plasticity.44 Our research strategy calls for patients to be 
beyond the acute  phase of injury with a minimum of a three-month  period since  injury. Our clinical 
experience suggests that patients are medically stable at this time but often struggling with  
persisting cognitive and emotional sequelae of mmTBI.  By applying the technique in patients with 
mild to moderate severity the likelihood of intact  neural  circuits  undergoing  a robust adaptive 
neuroplastic change  is maximized. An ongoing controversy in the TBI literature is the high rate of 
postconcussive symptoms that occur in healthy non-TBI populations, calling into question the 
validity of these symptoms.   By simultaneously recruiting  healthy controls as a comparator group,  we 
will be able  to demonstrate that there are clear cognitive control deficits in mmTBI patients, and 
whether tDCS  is more or less efficacious in a clinical versus nonclinical population.
tDCS is effective in clinical studies at UNM.  Our group  at UNM has experimented with a number of 
different variables regarding tDCS to determine  optimal effects on attention and learning.23 Using a 
paradigm of a threat detection task for learning, Clark  and colleagues  found activation on fMRI  in 
right inferior frontal cortex and right parietal  cortex,  which were then used as targets for stimulation.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  7 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Higher current densities, up to 2 mA for 30 minutes, applied to these localized networks produced 
greater increases in learning  on the threat  detection task in a dose-response  manner that were still 
detectable one hour later (Figure 2). Using the same  paradigm, we then demonstrated a prolonged 
effect on alerting attention  with the Attention Network Task  after  just one 30 minute session  of 
anodal tDCS to right  inferior frontal cortex.45 Variables that most enhanced task  performance were 
exposure to task  stimuli  during stimulation and repetition of the various  stimulus response  
contingencies. Therefore there  is ample experience at our center to conduct intensive studies of tDCS 
for mmTBI and to determine  optimal stimulation  paradigms and patient characteristics. In addition, 
the PI of the current project  has written  several  reviews of safety of neuromodulation therapies  in 
various patient populations  and treated hundreds of clinical patients with electrical stimulation.46,47 
Established expertise in neuroimaging of TBI.   Our group has also been very active in the longitudinal 
study of TBI patients, utilizing multimodal neuroimaging and neuropsychological testing  to assess 
biomarkers of injury and recovery.48,49 In adult and pediatric mTBI populations we have  documented 
deficits in attention,50 post-traumatic symptoms,48 diffusion tensor abnormalities,51 
neurometabolites,49 and fMRI  differences,52 both in the semi-acute  phase and in the chronic phase (4 
months post-injury). We have  used fMRI  to examine  attentional dysfunction in patients with  TBI,  
observing decreased activation in both sub-cortical  and cortical networks. The PI of this project  has 
been providing  clinical care for brain injured  patients on an inpatient neurosurgical service and in an 
outpatient neuropsychiatry clinic for the past five years, and has ample experience with retention, 
characterization, and treatment of this clinical population.53,54 MRI sequences  for characterization of 
TBI may be obtained  as part  of baseline and post-stimulation assessment in a subgroup of mmTBI  
subjects.  The advantage  of obtaining neuroimaging  in this study is three-fold: 1) structural 
abnormalities may affect  current flow  and alter  the effectiveness of TDCS; 2) TDCS  has been shown  
by our group  to increase glutamate under the anodal electrode,  and use of MRS to characterize 
neurometabolite flux before and after stimulation could add important evidence to this theory; 3) 
mmTBI may cause functional brain  activation  abnormalities independent of structural lesions that 
can be correlated and localized with EEG.   
EEG is a candidate biomarker  for tDCS effect in TBI.  Co-Junior investigator Cavanagh has extensive 
experience analyzing EEG measures of frontal midline theta band  synchrony in various populations 
as a phenomenon underlying cognitive control.55,56 Task-related EEG abnormalities have been found  
to distinguish patients  with mmTBI from healthy controls, and correlate  with executive 
dysfunction.57,58  PI Cavanagh’s  co-occurring study will investigate whether functional  EEG variables 
such as theta band phase synchrony  will correlate with  the common disturbances of cognitive  control 
during the semi-acute  stage  of recovery  from mmTBI.  We will apply this technique to investigate 
whether chronic post-concussive symptoms are associated with these same EEG abnormalities, and 
what effect tDCS may  have to increase frontal theta synchrony. 
3.Study Design
This study is a randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial.  Investigators  will be blinded  to the type 
of stimulation given (sham versus  active) through use of a computer-assisted  pre-programmed tDCS 
stimulator. Subjects will be blinded to sham versus active through the use of low-current (up to 0.2 
mA) sham  stimulation, which provides a tactile sensation similar  to active 2.0 mA stimulation.  
Ramping up and down the current at the beginning  of stimulation  also prevents subjects from  
distinguishing sham from active.   The duration  of an individual subject’s participation  in the 
research may range up to 1 year. The duration  anticipated to enroll all subjects is 3 to 4 years. The 
expected duration for the investigators to complete the study (complete  analysis)  is 5 years.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  8 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Inclusion and Exclusion  Criteria 
Human participants who have suffered mmTBI (ages 18-55) will be recruited from  the UNM Hospital 
ED and from other local  Emergency Departments via CTSC  patient recruitment services.  Healthy 
controls will be recruited from  the greater Albuquerque area via flyers and online ads.  If a participant  
shows interest in participating in our study, a brief prescreening will be done  over  the telephone 
prior to initiating informed  consent procedures.   The prescreening procedures will assure that each 
potential participant meets study inclusion and exclusion  criteria.   If, after  prescreening, the patient 
remains interested and eligible, the project  will be described in great  details  and the potential 
participant and their caregivers will be invited to come  to the investigation site to ask questions prior 
to providing  consent.  Consent forms  will be provided, as well as forms  that again describe the study 
procedures and potential risks in detail.  If potential participants  are unsure  about participation, they 
will be given  a copy of the consent form with  our contact information and be invited to call if they 
decide to participate.  Once informed consent is obtained and the appropriate forms  signed, the 
complete procedures  of the study, as described in the consent forms, are provided to prospective 
subjects.  We  review the forms, and file them away in a locked  file cabinet  in a locked  office,  away  
from any material with  personal or sensitive study  data.
Inclusion Criteria
Patients seen  the emergency  department  (ED) will be enrolled  in this study if they 1) are aged 18-55, 
2) have suffered a TBI with documented evidence of loss of consciousness (LOC) which  was  less than 
24 hours, 3) were injured between 3 months and 15 years ago, 4) received a Glasgow  coma  scale 
(GCS) score of between  9 and 15 upon ED admission,  5) experienced less than 1 week of post-
traumatic amnesia  (PTA), and 6) have post-traumatic cognitive  symptoms as evidenced by endorsing 
at least 1 out of 4 cognitive symptoms  on the Neurobehavioral  Symptom  Inventory  (NSI), a measure 
of post-traumatic symptoms from the NIH Common  Data Elements, and 7) have  been on stable doses 
of any psychotropic medications for the past 2 months..  Healthy controls will be between the ages  of 
18-55.   
Exclusion Criteria
Potential participants will be excluded  from participation in this study if there is 1) a prior history of 
other neurological disease or any history of seizures,  2) history  of psychosis  3) history of current or 
recent (within two years)  substance/alcohol  dependence, 4) any discontinuity in skull electrical 
conductivity (i.e., unhealed burr holes in scalp) or artificially constructed (metal or plastic)  
craniotomy cover; 5) presence of any implanted electrical device (e.g. pacemaker), 6) recent  medical 
instability (within three weeks), 7) any condition that would prevent the subject from completing the 
protocol, 8) appointment  of a legal representative,  as assessed via direct inquiry  of the subject and a 
designated trusted other. Because our population will have only mild  to moderate TBIs,  and be well  
beyond the subacute phase of injury (> 3 months), ongoing complications from  the injury  itself such 
as skin infection, bleeding, ischemia, swelling,  increased intracranial pressure,  seizures, and 
hyponatremia will be extremely unlikely.   However,  these would be considered exclusionary  criteria  
if present over the previous  three weeks prior to enrollment.  Adults unable to consent,  individuals  
who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers),  pregnant women,  and prisoners  are specifically  
excluded from the study.  Persons  not fluent in English will be excluded, as the neuropsychological 
test batteries are administered in English.
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  9 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Total Planned Enrollment:TARGETED/PLANNED  ENROLLMENT: Number of Subjects
Sex/GenderEthnic CategoryFemales Males Total
Hispanic or Latino 26 38 64
Not Hispanic or Latino 38 58 96
Ethnic Category:  Total of All Subjects  * 64 96 160
Racial Categories
American Indian/Alaska Native 4 4 8
Asian 2 2 4
Pacific Islander 2 2 4
Black or African American 2 2 4
White 46 66 112
Other races 10 16 26
Two or more races 2 4 6
Racial Categories: Total  of All Subjects  * 64 96 160
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  10 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 20194.Study Timelines
 
GOAL YEAR  1 YEAR  2 YEAR 3 YEAR 4 YEAR  5
Project Progress
Human Subjects  Review 
Board approval  
completed
Equipment purchased 
Biostatistical training 
completed
Clinical Supervisor and 
Research Assistant 
training completed
Begin participant 
recruitment (targeted  
enrollment of 10
active tDCS patients  
and 10 controls)
Progress reported  to 
Human Research 
Protections Office 
(HRPO), PI, and NIH.Recruited 20 active 
tDCS patients and 20
controls
Preliminary data
analyses on tDCS 
effects completed,  in 
preparation for NIH 
grant submission
Progress reports  
submitted to
to HRPO,  PI and NIHRecruited 10 active 
tDCS patients and 10 
controls
Completed  preliminary data 
analyses of group 
differences in tDCS 
effects across  groups
Progress reports  
submitted to
to HRPO,  PI and NIHProgress reports  
submitted to
to HRPO,  PI and 
NIH
Complete all data 
analysisProgress reports  
submitted to
to HRPO,  PI and 
NIH
Closure Report 
submitted to HRPO
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  11 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 20195.Study Endpoints
Primary endpoint:  change in scores on the EXAMINER battery from before  to after stimulation.
Secondary endpoints:   change in score  on the Neurobehavioral  Symptom Inventory, Beck Depression 
Inventory-II, Hamilton  Rating Scale for Depression,  change in frontal  midline theta synchrony  on 
EEG, change  in MRI abnormalities, and quality  of life measure from time 0 to 1 year.
6.Research Setting
All testing,  analytical, and research activities will take  place at the Clinical Core, UNM Center for Brain 
Injury Recovery and Repair, located in Domenici  Hall, MIND Research  Network.
Subjects will be identified  and recruited from the UNM  ED and other local EDs via the CTSC patient 
recruitment service,  as well as coordination with ED providers and posted advertisements.  Healthy 
controls will be recruited through online  advertisements,  word of mouth and flyers.  As the only  
Level 1 trauma center for the state of New Mexico  and the community hospital  for Bernalillo County 
and the city of Albuquerque, which is the most populous city in the state, UNM treats the majority of 
TBIs presenting in the state.  Approximately 10,000 New Mexicans receive treatment for a TBI in 
hospitals annually, and the majority of these injuries  (~9000)  are mild in nature; therefore,  
recruiting 80 TBI subjects and 80 healthy controls over 3 years is felt to be a feasible goal.  
7.Resources  Available
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  12 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Principal Investigator
As a junior PI in the UNM  Center for Brain Recovery and Repair, Dr. Quinn’s  goal is to establish  an 
independent NIH-funded research program in neurorehabilitative and neurostimulatory therapies 
for affective, behavioral, and cognitive sequelae of traumatic brain  injury  (TBI).  The current proposal 
will study the administration of transcranial direct current stimulation to patients with mild to 
moderate traumatic brain injury (TBI) to ameliorate chronic cognitive and emotional deficits,  and 
represents an exciting opportunity for him to bring together several  of his academic  interests in one 
scientific endeavor. Dr. Quinn  has made the treatment of TBI the focus of his clinical work for the past 
several years,  achieving  board-certification in neuropsychiatry and behavioral  neurology  in 2012, 
and establishing a neuropsychiatry  clinic  in the UNM Clinical Neurosciences Center  in 2013 to better 
serve the undertreated population of TBI patients in New Mexico.  Serving as the consultant  
psychiatrist for the University  of New Mexico Hospital since 2009, Dr. Quinn evaluates patients 
admitted to the hospital  to the neurological and neurosurgical services.  As UNMH is the only Level 1 
trauma center  in the state, the vast majority of TBIs  receive care at this institution,  and Dr. Quinn 
treats many  patients with post-traumatic amotivational, dysexecutive,  disinhibition,  and 
psychomotor syndromes resulting from damage  to cortical-subcortical circuits.   He has followed 
these patients  after their hospitalizations as well, and published several case reports highlighting 
theoretical and practical dilemmas  in treating TBI. 
During this same period Dr. Quinn has become involved in brain  stimulation therapies, at 
first through their  important role in the treatment of the catatonic  syndrome, on which he has 
published several  reviews and case  reports.  Dr. Quinn joined the UNM Electroconvulsive Therapy 
(ECT) Service in 2012 after becoming  certified in ECT, and in 2013 became  the consultant 
psychiatrist for the UNM Movement Disorders Clinic and their associated  deep brain  stimulation 
(DBS) team.  He has co-authored a review of longitudinal neuroimaging studies of ECT, a review of 
psychiatric symptoms after DBS, and reported the first successful use of right unilateral  ECT for 
catatonia in a patient with  a deep  brain  stimulator.   
To assist him in carrying out the proposed research Dr. Quinn has assembled an experienced  
team of advisors.  Of his mentors, Dr. Vince  Clark  is an expert in transcranial direct  current 
stimulation, its mechanisms of action, and its use to enhance cognition, and will provide key guidance  
regarding the application of this neurostimulatory technology. Dr. Ronald Yeo is a prolific  researcher 
in the neuropsychology  and neuroimaging  of TBI, and will provide methodological and research 
design expertise.  Additional  guidance will be provided by Dr. Richard Campbell, who as part of the 
Clinical Core  will be a resource for pragmatics of neuropsychological assessment, and Dr. Andrew 
Mayer, who  is also expert  in neuroimaging of TBI and methodological issues.  
Facilities/Resources of the UNM  Center for Brain Recovery  and Repair
Traumatic brain  injuries  are a common clinical disorder treated at UNM. Approximately 10,000 New  
Mexicans seek treatment for a TBI each year.  As UNM is the only Level 1 trauma  center  in the region 
and is situated in the largest city in the state  with  a metropolitan catchment area population  of 1 
million, a large percentage of the TBIs sustained in New Mexico are treated at UNM.  The majority of 
TBIs are mTBI,  with  approximately 1000 New Mexicans each year hospitalized with TBI and 9000 
mild enough to be treated in the outpatient setting.  Therefore, we expect that if 1/10  of New 
Mexicans with mTBIs present to UNM each year, that equates to 900 mTBIs eligible for screening.  
We plan to screen these patients and recruit  approximately 25-30 annually for the study, meaning 
that we are aiming to enroll 3% of eligible patients, which  we believe is feasible.
Clinical Study Coordinator—In Year 1, a clinical study coordinator will be hired to support junior 
principal investigators’ research projects. The study coordinator will be responsible for the 
coordination and administration  of clinical studies  under the direction of the Core  co-directors.  The 
clinical study coordinator will help develop, implement,  and coordinate research and administrative 
procedures for the successful management of clinical studies; be responsible for scheduling 
neuropsychological assessments,  neuroimaging appointments, and treatment appointments;  and will 
also be responsible for scheduling regular  Core group  meetings. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  13 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Research Technician—In year 1, two technicians will be hired to assist in the junior PI’s projects. 
We will assign one research  technician to each of the initial junior PI projects. Their effort will be 
dedicated to assist in recruitment/screening, neuropsychological assessment administration, scoring  
and summary report preparation,  scheduling of treatments and neuroimaging procedures,  as well as 
data entry of collected data. Research technicians will be made available to assist  with other future 
junior PI projects and pilot projects.  
Technicians, research coordinators, and the investigators  will undergo standard  training in human 
research standards, ethics, conflict of interest, and also participate  in weekly research group 
meetings regarding the specific protocol  being  studied, methodological  and analytical  issues, and 
subject recruitment, participation, and safety.
Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS)—A tDCS  system (neuroConn: DC-Stimulator PLUS)  
will be purchased in Year 1, with a second added in Year 2.  These are CE-certified medical devices 
for conducting  non-invasive transcranial direct  current stimulation  (tDCS),  alternating  (tACS) or 
random noise (tRNS) current stimulation  on subjects. Transcranial stimulation  using weak electric 
currents over a period of several minutes  is demonstrated  to modify neuronal excitability  and circuit 
function and can serve  to provide long-lasting promotion  of brain recovery and repair.  
Neuropsychological Assessment Measures. The Core will establish a library of advanced 
neuropsychological tools,  applicable to assessment  of different aspects  of recovery and repair 
following stroke or TBI.  The library will be useful for subjects of different ages and severity of injury.   
This library will include  novel, computer-based neuropsychological measures as well as traditional 
neuropsychological measures long utilized  in neuropsychological research projects and 
recommended for specific clinical populations (e.g., TBI NINDS Common Data  Elements). The Core  
will also develop and maintain an instrument bank of health-outcome measures, including state-of-
the-art, computer-administered measures. 
1) National  Institutes of Health Executive  Abilities:  Measures and Instruments for Neurobehavioral 
Evaluation and Research  (EXAMINER). EXAMINER is battery  of reliable and valid tests of executive 
function developed  under the auspices of the NINDS for clinical investigations  and is adaptable 
across a wide  range of ages and disorders  (www.examiner.ucsf.edu). 
2) NIH Toolbox: Assessment  of Neurological and Behavioral  Function.  The NIH Toolbox is a state-of-
the-art set of standardized  instruments developed by NIH to enhance data collection and advance 
and accelerate the pace of discovery in neuroscience research. The NIH Toolbox is a recently 
developed set of brief, computerized  measures of key neuropsychological functions appropriate for 
use throughout the lifespan (i.e., 3+ years  old) and across  diverse study designs and settings. 
3) Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information  System (PROMIS®).  The PROMIS®, is a 
system of highly reliable,  precise measures of patient–reported (both  child  and adult) health status 
for physical, mental, and social well–being and can be useful in measuring effectiveness of treatment 
in clinical  intervention studies. 
Data and sample collection.  The Core will provide expert  neuropsychological and 
electrophysiological assessment technical support.  This  will include providing  testing rooms, 
neuropsychological tests and supplies,  laptop computers, electroencephalography, and 
neuropsychology technicians/ psychometricians, as well as data  entry and storage.  Core  staff will 
assist investigators with  scheduling of assessments, neuroimaging, and treatment appointments.  The 
Core will provide space for interventions being studied as part of research projects. 
Neuropsychological assessment batteries  will be administered by Core  psychometricians  under the 
supervision of the Core co-directors.  Neuropsychological test data  will be scored  by the 
psychometricians, with  scoring reviewed  for accuracy  by the supervisors. A neuropsychological test 
summary prepared by technicians and reviewed by the supervisors will be provided to investigators, 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  14 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019participants, and referral  sources if indicated. If requested, Core co-directors will also provide 
feedback to participants  regarding neuropsychological assessment results. Participant  hardcopy data  
will be stored  in locked file cabinets in locked rooms within a locked, security-patrolled  building. For 
analysis, participant data  will be entered  and stored  in REDCap, a web-based electronic data  capture 
program that is secure  and HIPAA compliant  available  through  the UNM CTSC Biomedical 
Informatics (http://hsc.unm.edu/research/ctsc/BMI/REDCap.shtml). Neuropsychological data will 
be entered by psychometrists into study databases with accuracy verified by double using UNM 
Health Sciences Center Library Services  to create a data management  plan to manage  and provide  
access of research data collected in line with  current NIH policies.  
3T MRI is housed immediately proximal  to the neuropsychological  testing rooms, as part of the 
MIND Research Network (MRN) advanced  biomedical  imaging core.  The imaging facilities  
have private changing rooms with lockers for  personal items.
Should patients require any medical or psychological care as a consequence of participation in 
research, UNM Health Sciences  Center  is located immediately proximal  to the MIND Research 
Network and can provide basic to advanced care 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
8.Prior Approvals
Departmental Approval form included.
9.Multi-Site Research   NA
10.Study Procedures  
Specific Aim 1.1: Acute  effectiveness of tDCS in mmTBI
Experimental Design  and Methods
     Participants :  Eighty  TBI subjects will be recruited for this study, all having suffered mild or 
moderate TBI (mmTBI, as defined  before)  at least 3 months  prior to study enrollment,  but not more 
than 15 years prior to enrollment. 80 age-  and sex-matched healthy controls will be recruited. All 
participants will be 18-55 years of age.   We will expect to screen approximately  120  patients  with 
mmTBI in order to reach  our goal  of 80 TBI subjects. The experimental pre-post, double-blind design 
is graphically displayed. It includes randomization  of TBI patients to either a left-sided active 
transcranial direct current  stimulation (tDCS) protocol, or sham treatment group to foster isolation 
and identification of any tDCS treatment effects.  To enhance our statistical power  to identify 
predictors of treatment  response in mmTBI patients,  40 TBI subjects and 40 controls will be assigned 
to each group: left-sham and left-active.  
Recruitment:   Recruitment primarily will be through the UNM Hospital  Emergency Department (ED) 
(the only Level 1 trauma center  in New Mexico). The UNM Health Sciences Center (HSC)  Clinical and 
Translational Science  Center (CTSC) Participant  Recruitment Service  (PRS) for Clinical  Research will 
monitor ED intake records for patients who meet criteria once released from the hospital, then  notify 
the study team of these  cases.  A second means of recruitment will involve direct referrals from UNM 
and non-UNM  ED physicians and/or referrals  from any clinic in the Albuquerque metropolitan  area, 
via the distribution  of flyers  and calls to clinical directors to publicize the study. A third means  of 
recruitment will involve information listed on the UNM CBRR and MRN websites, and posted  flyers.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  15 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Subjects who  meet  initial criteria for inclusion will be contacted by a member  of the research team 
and invited  to enroll  in the study. Interested patients  will be invited to the offices  of the Center  for 
Brain Recovery and Repair clinical core for formal screening procedures. A brief structured interview 
will be administered along with the NSI. If potential participants do not meet study criteria,  they will 
be thanked for their time and identifying information recorded for future reference.  Subjects with a 
legally authorized representative (LAR) will be excluded from  the study, and all participants will be 
screened for LAR. All participants  will be adults  (ages 18-55), and all participants will consent for 
themselves. Although participants will be recruited from referral or from  emergency  department (or 
other) records,  no participant  will be enrolled in the study  without being given sufficient opportunity  
to consider whether or not to participate.  In most cases, they will undergo multiple  interactions with 
study personnel over the course of days, and during  each they will have the opportunity  to ask 
questions and discuss their decision  to participate. They will have  multiple opportunities to 
reconsider any decisions  during the screening and consent process,  minimizing the possibility of 
coercion or undue  influence  by the researchers.  If potential participants successfully meet basic 
study criteria,  they will be invited to undergo  consent procedures and enrolled in the study. All 
participants will be fluent in English, and the information  contained in the consent form will be 
discussed with  them in addition  to their having a written description  of the study in the form, to 
assure that they truly understand the study  procedures.  
Randomization will occur  at time of consenting.  The study coordinator who consented the patient 
will use a coin-tossing  procedure  to determine  whether  the subject is assigned to the active group  
(group 1) or control  group (group 2).  Modifications will be made as necessary toward the end of 
enrollment to ensure equal  group size and balanced distribution of demographic  variables such as 
age and gender.  The  study coordinator  will not be blinded to group assignment, and with the 
assistance of the Clinical Core, will program the TDCS devices to deliver active or sham  stimulation  
depending on which  group the subject has been assigned.   However, the coordinator will not be 
involved in performing any stimulation procedures.   The study technician and principle  investigator,  
who will be responsible for administering  the stimulation, will not be aware of which group receives 
active versus control, and will thus be blinded,  as the TDCS  device will only display the group number  
(1 or 2). 
Once group membership is determined, individual participants may undergo demographic  data  
collection, neuropsychological assessments and tDCS  treatment sessions. They may also undergo 
EEG and/or MRI. Direct identifiers of participants will be maintained on a separate  database that will 
be stored behind locked  doors, in a locked filing cabinet  in a secure area of the Clinical Core.     
     Demographic  Data: As part of the initial assessment, basic demographic  data  regarding  the subject 
may be noted down, including age, gender,  socioeconomic status, educational attainment,  
handedness, use of common  stimulants such as caffeine, and brain injury  severity. They may also be 
asked if they are willing to allow their medical  record to be accessed, for the purposes of confirming  
details about any TBI as well as obtaining results of neuroimaging studies done  at the time  of injury  
or afterward.   This will include  medical,  surgical, neurological and psychiatric history, results of lab 
tests, brain scans, electroencephalography tests,  medication lists, information from doctor’s visits 
and hospital visits.  
     Neuropsychological testing procedures: All 
neuropsychological testing will be 
administered in the Center for Brain 
Recovery and Repair Core by trained study 
personnel under direct  supervision of core 
directors, clinical neuropsychologists Drs. 
Yeo, Campbell, or the PI. The primary 
dependent outcome variables  to be studied  
are the three composite  scores generated by !5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Time,(in,min),
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  16 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019the Examiner  battery (e.g. Cognitive Control, Fluency, and Working  Memory).  The following domains 
and tests will be administered:  Executive Abilities: Measures and Instruments  for Neurobehavioral  
Evaluation and Research (Examiner); Digit Span; Delis-Kaplan Executive  Function Systems (DKEFS) 
Trailmaking Test  Conditions  2 and 4; Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (HVLT);  Frontal Systems  
Behavior Scale (FrSBe); Test  of Memory Malingering (TOMM); Wechsler Test  of Adult Reading 
(WTAR); Digit  Symbol Coding; Handedness;  Socioeconomic Status (SES); Neurobehavioral Symptom 
Inventory (NSI);  PROMIS-29 profile;  Glasgow Outcome Scale-Extended (GOSE).
     Resting and task-related electroencephalography: Electroencephalograph (EEG) may be done after 
neuropsychological testing in a subset of subjects.  The participant will wear a cap during  the EEG to 
record brain waves. EEG setup takes between 10 and 30 minutes, and subsequent recording takes  
one to two hours.  During  EEG assessments  participants will complete numerous active tasks.   Each 
task is designed  to parse  different  cognitive mechanisms that  contribute to adaptive performance.  In 
perceptual tasks,  participants will discriminate  tone  pitches amongst  novel distracting tones.  In 
decision making tasks,  participants are required  to classify stimuli based on pre-determined types of 
rules.  For learning tasks, participants are asked to select among  two or more pictures on the screen  
by pressing  a button on the keyboard or gamepad, they  are then  presented  with a reward (‘+1’) or 
not (‘0) following their choice.  For memory tasks, participants will view stimuli  one at a time on the 
computer screen,  and will be probed on their memory of these stimuli  after a short delay. Some tasks 
alter the fidelity of the stimuli  to make decisions more difficult, others alter  the perceptual-motor 
mappings to make response  selection more difficult, and others  simply probe risk and reward 
preferences.
Magnetic resonance imaging:  MRI scan(s) will involve simultaneous functional or cognitive 
tasks, including  sequences assessing diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), magnetic  resonance  
spectroscopy (MRS),  functional MRI (fMRI),  and structural sequences. Total  scan  time, 
including participant setup and removal,  is expected  to take 1.5 hours. Based on the study by 
Gasparovic et al in 2009 examining MR spectroscopy in mild TBI,  utilizing an effect  size of 1.27, a 
planned sample  size of 30 subjects receiving MRI will achieve 80% power to detect  a difference 
between groups. Participants may lie down on a table and be placed into a  long donut-shaped  
magnet. During the scan,  participants will be shown pictures and/or  words and will be asked to 
make decisions about  the information presented in them.  No contrast will be used. Any female 
over 18 who thinks  she may be pregnant will complete a urine pregnancy screen before the MRI 
scan. Results  of pregnancy  screens will be  kept strictly  confidential as per MRN policy. Urine  
samples will be disposed of immediately  after testing. 
     Left DLPFC anodal tDCS Intervention : On the same day as assessment  or the next day, participants  
will receive either active  left anodal  tDCS  for a total of 30 minutes or sham for an equivalent duration, 
each day for up to ten consecutive  weekdays.  Current will be ramped  up over 1 minute  at initiation 
and ramped  down over 1 minute with termination. 
      A NeuroConn tDCS (investigational) machine will be used to administer tDCS current. Targeting of 
the left DLPFC (F3 position,  International 10-20 system  of EEG coordinates) may be done by (1) 
locating the vertex (Cz) at the midpoint of the nasion-inion  line and the midpoint of the preauricular-
preauricular line;  (2) locating M1 at 20% of the Cz-preauricular distance, measured from Cz; (3) 
locating F3 5 centimeters anterior  to M1 in the horizontal plane. This method has been shown  to be 
suitable for tDCS electrode  targeting of left DLPFC.59 The Beam F3 method may also be used, which  
yields equivalent or better accuracy. Square-shaped solution-soaked or gel-soaked sponge  
electrodes, held by a rubber casing, are applied to the scalp using elastic bandage  material. The anode 
will be placed on the scalp  over  the F3 target location  and the cathode placed  on the right upper arm 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  17 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019below the deltoid. Current for the treatment condition will be applied  at 2.0 mA for a total delivered 
charge of 60 mA-min.
     Safety of stimulation. During tDCS application, subjects will describe physical  sensations such as 
tingling or itching using  a 10-point anchored Likert scale.   Administration  of tDCS will be stopped  
immediately if subjects report a 7 or above for discomfort, or if subjects wish to stop at any time.  
Subjects will also  have their mood, energy, pain, and arousal levels assessed using visual  analog 10-
point scales. These checks will occur every ten minutes during the stimulation session. 
     Double blind design and sham treatment: The sham stimulation  (control)  group will receive up to 
0.2 mA current  for 30 minutes each  session,  with  an initial ramping up and down of stimulation to 
mimic active stimulation.  The sham current  is used as a control  condition, rather than  the absence of 
stimulation, to equate aspects  of the procedure (preparation and application of electrodes, 
attachment with adhesive strips,  etc.), and to give  the participant a degree of physical  sensation  that 
is somewhat similar to that of the 2.0 mA stimulation  group while remaining  well below  the level 
sufficient to affect  brain function and behavior.60 To accomplish a double blind, the tDCS machine  is 
programmed to randomize sham versus active stimulation  and keeps track of the stimulation  
protocol for later downloading. 
     Cognitive  control Tasks : Participants may  be administered the cognitive training  battery for 30 
minutes, during treatment  and sham. Session procedures will begin with  tDCS electrode placement 
while seated in a comfortable chair. After initiation of tDCS, the cognitive training  will be 
administered on a laboratory computer. The two tasks will be presented  for 15 minutes  each, in 
counterbalanced alternating  order over the ten sessions. The tasks to be coupled with  tDCS are the 
AX-CPT (set shifting/response inhibition) and a dual auditory/visual N-back task (working memory),  
and were selected based  on their activation of the critical neural networks associated with the three 
executive functions of interest.61–64 AX-CPT  is a continuous performance task in which  subjects must 
respond to specific paired letter combinations  (A followed by X) with a button press while inhibiting 
response to non-target combinations (AY, BY, BX) (Figure 8).  The dual N-back task is a continuous 
performance test in which  subjects respond to simultaneous sequences  of visuospatial and auditory 
stimuli being  presented that match preceding  stimuli n-steps earlier  in the sequence.65 
Specific Aim 1.2:  Persistence of tDCS effects and quality  of life
Experimental Design  and Methods
     Participants:  TBI subjects enrolled in Aim 1.1 will be entered into a data registry with 
comprehensive contact  information, including contact  information (phone, email, fax, mail address) 
not just on participants, but also on multiple  collaterals we can contact for 6 month and 1 year 
assessments. 
     Assessments:  Initial screening will be done prior  to tDCS  intervention, and will be performed 
verbally to resemble subsequent  phone interviews.   These assessments  will include the 
Neurobehavioral Symptom  Inventory (NSI), and the PROMIS-29 quality of life profile.   Dimensions  
queried by the PROMIS-29  survey will include physical  function, anxiety, depression, fatigue,  pain,  
sleep, and social roles.  At 6 months and 1 year after the end of stimulation, subjects will be contacted 
by phone  by the research  team for a brief assessment  of their post-traumatic symptoms and quality 
of life. Subjects not able to be contacted by phone will be sent a letter  with the surveys  in paper form 
to be returned  via mail, fax, or email.
Specific Aim 1.3:  Clinical  predictors  of tDCS response
Experimental Design  and Methods
     Participants :  TBI subjects  from  Aim  1.1 will be carried forward for study in Aim 1.3. Key clinical 
variables in the study group will be analyzed for association with tDCS effect, namely, lesser post-
traumatic symptom  burden as measured by the NSI, mild versus moderate severity of TBI,  lack  of 
neuroimaging abnormalities  on MRI, and higher premorbid level of intelligence as measured by the 
WTAR, as these are factors shown to predict  better recovery from  TBI.44,66,67
Specific Aim 2.1:  Effectiveness  of tDCS for depression after mmTBI
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  18 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019We will undertake an investigation  of tDCS for depressed mood after  mmTBI.  The same  protocol as 
for Aim 1 will be employed to investigate Aim 2, with a focus  on depressive symptoms.  The 
stimulation paradigm is similar to the regimen used by Brunoni et al. in their  study comparing tDCS 
to sertraline for depression (10 sessions, 30 minutes/session).  However, their paradigm is limited in 
its power to identify the therapeutic element of tDCS for depression, because it does not separate  the 
effects of simultaneous anodal/cathodal influences.   Our configuration with  the cathode placed on 
the contralateral arm, developed and tested  in our lab,68 thereby ensures that only one type of 
neuromodulation is delivered to the brain, rather than  two. Subjects receiving active  anodal left 
prefrontal tDCS for ten days will experience  significantly greater improvement in depressive 
symptoms compared to sham stimulation,  as assessed with NIH Common Data Elements depression  
instruments, that  will be detectable immediately  after stimulation and at 1 month post-stimulation.  
Experimental Design  and Methods
     Recruitment:   Recruitment, enrollment, and data collection for Aim 2 will be identical to the 
experimental design  of Aim 1.  Subjects will be randomly assigned to active stimulation or sham 
stimulation groups.
     Depression Assessments:   As part  of the neuropsychological test battery administered to the 
participants before,  immediately after,  and at 1 month after tDCS, subjects will be assessed  for 
depressive symptoms using NIH Common  Data Elements instruments as well as reliable and valid 
instruments for detecting mood  disturbances  in TBI populations.  These tests are the Beck  
Depression Inventory  (BDI-II),69  and the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression  (HAM-D).70 Post-
traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD)  symptoms, which often predispose to depression after  TBI,  will be 
assessed using the PTSD  Checklist (PCL).71 These will be conducted verbally,  so as to ensure 
similarity of delivery  with  the long-term assessments.  Any patient who reports thoughts of death  or 
suicidal ideation at any point during  the stimulation protocol or assessments will be immediately 
evaluated by the PI and given appropriate emergency medical care at the UNM Psychiatric 
Emergency Service.  
     Stimulation Protocol:  The protocol will be identical to the stimulation regimen described in Aim 1.  
During the procedure for each stimulation session,  participants will be asked to rate their mood  
according to a 10-point  visual  analog scale before  and after each stimulation  session (10 sessions 
total).  This will monitor  for daily fluctuations  in mood as well as any rare  stimulation-related severe 
mood changes.   
Specific Aim 2.2: 
The subjects from  Aim  2.1 will be automatically  included.  At 6 months  and 1 year after stimulation, 
subjects will be contacted via telephone and administered  the depression assessment  tools  utilized 
before, immediately after,  and 1 month after stimulation.   
Specific Aim  2.3:  Subjects from  Aim 2.1 will be carried forward for study in Aim  2.3. Patient and 
injury characteristics will predict positive response to tDCS, namely,  higher premorbid intellectual  
function (WTAR),  lesser severity of injury (mild versus moderate), lack of neuroimaging 
abnormalities on MRI, and more severe pre-stimulation depressive symptoms (BDI, HAM-D).  
Understanding which of the clinical variables described  above moderate the efficacy of tDCS in 
mmTBI will allow for more  precise patient  selection and better overall efficacy  in future applications.
Each of the 80 participants will receive $20/hr in the form of cash  cards for taking part in the 
study..  This  is felt to be a fair amount that is not coercive and will help decrease attrition for 
this study  which  involves many  visits.
11.Data Analysis
All data will undergo standard preprocessing (e.g. motion correction, spatial  normalization) and 
quality control prior to statistical modeling. Depending on the  specific  question  of the study, data  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  19 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019may be analyzed using the  general linear model, independent components analysis,  machine 
learning techniques, or  a variety  of other  standard  approaches for neuroimaging data. Drs. Yeo, 
and Hunter  are skilled  in analysis of the various MRI sequences and will assist the PI in analysis 
of the neuroimaging data.
Statistical analyses will utilize the CTSC Biostatistics  core.  Power analyses and statistical analysis 
strategy were determined with our statistician Dr. Ronald  Schrader, who will continue to provide 
recommendations and support throughout the project.  Sufficient  group sizes were  determined on 
the basis of data  derived from preliminary studies. Clark and colleagues found an effect size of 
Cohen’s d = 1.2 for tDCS to induce improvements in cognition.21 For our power calculations we will 
assume a more conservative  effect size of d = 0.7 which is consistent with a recent  meta-analysis of 
tDCS effect sizes.22 With 40 tDCS treatment patients compared to 40 sham patients and an effect size 
of 0.7, we have 80%  power to detect effects of active  versus  sham treatment in a two-sample  t-test. 
Power in the linear mixed  model analysis should  be superior that that of the t-test. For Aim  1.1, the 
central analyses evaluate group (active vs. sham) differences in the EEG data  and on the three 
Examiner composite  variables  across the three initial  time points (before, immediately after, and 1 
month after  tDCS stimulation protocol). To test this hypothesis, three separate  linear mixed models 
analyses will be performed using the three Examiner composite scores (Fluency, Cognitive Control, 
Working Memory) as dependent variables.  In each analysis,  we will incorporate three covariates  that 
may predict variation in learning (severity: mild vs. moderate, premorbid intelligence: WTAR score, 
and symptom burden: NSI). This will allow us to determine predictors of treatment  response 
(Specific Aim 1.3). Sex, ethnicity, and age will also  be entered into the statistical  model.  The effects of 
these covariates will be estimated by constructing appropriate contrasts in model effects. A similar 
set of analyses will evaluate group differences on the variables assessed in our long-term oral/phone 
follow-up (five data points: (1) before tDCS,  (2) immediately after  tDCS, (3) 1 month post-tDCS,  (4) 6 
months, and (5) 1 year) for Aim 1.2. For these  analyses  dependent variables will be the total 
cognitive items score of the NSI and the PROMIS-29  profile total score). Significant effects will be 
followed up with more fine-grained analysis of the components of composite scores. The use of linear 
mixed-models minimizes the adverse impact of a missing data point, which  may well occur  in a 
longitudinal clinical study such as this.  Expected attrition will be taken into  account with  an 
intention-to-treat analysis.  Missing data patterns will be analyzed to assess  the extent to which they 
are informative (in contrast  to missing at random), and analyses adjusted accordingly.  All EEG data  
will undergo  standard preprocessing  (e.g. motion correction, spatial normalization) and quality  
control prior to statistical modeling. Depending on the specific question  of the study, data may be 
analyzed using  the general linear model, independent components  analysis,  machine  learning  
techniques, or a variety of other  standard approaches  for neuroimaging data. 
12.Provisions to Monitor the  Data to Ensure the  Safety  of Subjects
Data safety  and monitoring will be carried out to ensure and maintain the scientific integrity of this 
project and to protect the safety of our participants.   Safety monitoring is the process during the 
study that  involves review of accumulated outcome data for groups of subjects  to determine  if any of 
the procedures practiced  should be altered or stopped.  Ultimately, the PI (Quinn) will be responsible  
for monitoring  the safety  of the study and complying with  the reporting requirements.  An 
independent Data Safety  and Monitoring Board  (DSMB) will review  the study data on a quarterly 
basis with the PI to ensure participant safety.  The DSMB for this study will be composed  of Dr. 
Christopher Abbott, the medical director of the Electroconvulsive Therapy  Service at UNM,  and Dr. 
Jose Padin-Rosado, staff epileptologist of the Epilepsy Monitoring Unit at UNM.  Their experience in 
assuring safety  of brain stimulation therapies and seizure monitoring  protocols make them ideally 
suited to serving on this project’s DSMB.  Continuous, close  monitoring of participant  safety will 
include prompt and frequent reporting of safety data (i.e., adverse/serious adverse  events) to the 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  20 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019DMSB, the University  of New Mexico Health Sciences  Center Institutional Review Board (UNMHSC 
IRB) and/or appropriate  NIH staff with oversight responsibility.  The PI will provide a summary of 
the safe  conduct of the study  to NIH on an annual basis as part of the progress report.  All AEs 
occurring during the course of the study will be collected, documented, and reported  to the UNMHSC 
IRB.
    
The review  of data  may  result in early  termination of the study, amendment to the protocol,  or 
changes to the data collection  plan  or study forms if it appears that there are adverse events 
occurring at a rate significantly greater than that found in similar  tDCS studies involving  subjects 
with neurological disorders (ie. stroke).   Should the protocol or data collection plans or study forms 
be amended as a result of data review, the IRB will be notified and the amendment approved prior to 
study amendment implementation.  In addition, the participants will be notified of any significant 
new findings  that develop  during the course of research that  may affect their wish to continue 
participation in the study. 
13.Withdrawal of Subjects
During tDCS application, subjects will describe physical sensations such  as tingling or itching 
using a 10-point anchored  Likert scale. Administration of tDCS will be stopped immediately 
if subjects report a 7 or above for discomfort, or if subjects wish to stop at any time.   Subjects 
will also have their  mood, energy, pain, and arousal levels assessed using visual  analog  10-
point scales. These checks will occur  every ten minutes during the stimulation session.  Any 
report of pain or decreased level of arousal by the patient will result  in stopping of 
stimulation.
If at any time a participant wishes to withdraw from the study, they will be debriefed by the 
study coordinator or principal  investigator as to the reason for their withdrawal. They will 
be offered the chance to partially withdraw from the stimulation protocol and continue  in 
the data  collection aspect if they so wish.  Otherwise the participant will then  be thanked for 
their time, and they will be compensated for the extent of their participation.   
If the participant  wishes to withdraw, they  will be asked  if they will allow data  already 
collected on them to be used in the study analysis.   If not, the data  associated to their 
identifying code will be purged from the study database.
14.Data Management/Confidentiality
Neuropsychological testing and questions regarding depression,  post-concussive  symptoms,  and 
quality of life will be collected  from all participants.  All forms of data described above will be 
recorded on to paper  and pencil or computerized  data forms that do not contain identifying  
information. A separate file contains  contact information for the purpose of mailing the radiology 
review letter and future contact, in needed, but has no personal data  or protected  health information 
that is collected as part of the study.
No personally identifying information will be coded  on the questionnaires, neuropsychological 
measures, brain imaging data, or any other data recording instruments,  assuring confidentiality to 
the best of our ability.  Subject identification numbers are assigned  to each  participant.  Only  the PI 
and HIPAA-trained project coordinator  have access to the file that links names with  subject numbers.  
All data are stored in locked  file cabinets  in a locked office,  on password-protected computers  located 
behind a secure and maintained  firewall. Data will also  be collected and stored  on a drive  only 
accessible by the research team on a secure MRN server, and/or in the COINS database on an Amazon 
Web Services  (AWS) HIPAA compliant cloud server. The cloud based  server  and any other electronic 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  21 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019storage is accessible only by the research team, and data  is coded  with the unique  subject 
identification numbers.
All data are collected  by the PI, or trained research assistants who have completed on-line  training in 
human subjects’ research, HIPAA and research integrity;  who  are trained  in our lab on research data  
management and confidentiality; and who are trained  to criterion on project protocol.  Data  will be 
collected specifically  for this proposed research project.
Participants will be assured  that all records  will be kept confidential in research files located  in a 
locked office and entered into a password-protected computer located behind a secure and 
maintained firewall. Breach of confidentiality is highly  unlikely because all personally identifying  
information will be kept  separate from data collected, and will be linked only by a master subject 
identification list maintained  by the project  coordinator  and PI.  MRN  retains  the link between 
identifiers and URSI  indefinitely for the  potential  future benefit to the research  participant. 
Specifically, it may  become  medically advantageous in the future  for a  former  participant to have  
access to the clinical information that is present in most radiological scans. For example, if a participant is diagnosed with a neurological condition (e.g. multiple sclerosis,  glioblastoma, TBI, 
etc.) it  may be clinically beneficial for the  participant’s physician to have access to a research  
scan that was  performed at  an earlier time-point to determine disease  course and severity.
In order to address any concerns  regarding coercion,  participants will be informed  that they are free 
to choose not to participate and may withdraw at any time (this is included in the consent form). 
Finally, because  any information gathered as part of this study is confidential, we cannot intervene 
on an individual  level unless it is discovered that there is imminent threat to the life of the 
participant, to others, or if there is any indication of child or elder abuse.  In  these  rare cases, we 
would consider the risk to self and others and intervene as we would if the individual endorsed other 
intent to harm  themselves (i.e., talk with the participant and express concern, present the participant 
with local options for treatment, encourage him/her to disclose the issue to authorities, and if 
unwilling, inform them that we must disclose  the information  to authorities for their (or others’) 
safety.
We will also provide all participants and their  families with a referral list of community support,  
treatment, and educational resources  about  TBI.  This information will also be explained during  the 
consent process.  In addition, if a participant’s  status with respect to any of the study criteria  change 
during the experiment (i.e., initiation of substance abuse),  the participant’s participation in the study 
may be terminated without their consent.   Our consent form  will include a statement regarding 
anticipated circumstances  under which the subject’s participation may be terminated  by the 
investigator without  regard to the subject’s consent and a statement indicating that significant  new 
findings developed during  the course  of the research which  may relate to the subject’s willingness to 
continue participation will be provided.
Statistical analyses will utilize the CTSC Biostatistics  core.  Power analyses and statistical analysis 
strategy were determined with our statistician Dr. Ronald  Schrader, who will continue to provide 
recommendations and support throughout the project.  For Aim 1.1, the central analyses  evaluate  
group (active vs. sham) differences on the three Examiner composite variables across  the three initial 
time points (before,  immediately after,  and 1 month after tDCS stimulation protocol).  To test this 
hypothesis, three separate linear mixed models analyses will be performed  using  the three Examiner  
composite scores (Fluency, Cognitive Control, Working Memory) as dependent  variables. In each  
analysis, we will incorporate three  covariates that may predict variation  in learning  (severity: mild  
vs. moderate, premorbid intelligence: WTAR score, and symptom  burden: NSI). This  will allow us to 
determine predictors of treatment response (Specific Aim  1.3). Sex,  ethnicity, and age will also be 
entered into  the statistical  model.  The effects of these covariates will be estimated by constructing 
appropriate contrasts  in model effects.  A similar set of analyses will evaluate group differences  on 
the variables assessed in our long-term  oral/phone follow-up (five  data  points: (1) before tDCS, (2) 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  22 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019immediately after tDCS, (3) 1 month post-tDCS, (4) 6 months, and (5) 1 year) for Aim 1.2. For these 
analyses dependent  variables will be the total cognitive items score of the NSI and the PROMIS-29 
profile total score). Significant effects  will be followed  up with more fine-grained analysis of the 
components of composite  scores. The use of linear mixed-models minimizes the adverse impact of a 
missing data point, which may well occur in a longitudinal clinical study such as this.  Expected 
attrition will be taken into account with  an intention-to-treat analysis.  Missing data  patterns will be 
analyzed to assess the extent to which they  are informative (in contrast  to missing at random), and 
analyses adjusted accordingly. Data will be stored  in Excel spreadsheet form as well as on hard  
copies.  
Digital data will be stored on secure encrypted  drives located  behind a secure firewall.  Data 
will be reviewed by the PI for quality control.
Human subjects  in the proposed protocol may receive screening and diagnostic  interviews,  
phenotypic assessment (including emotional, cognitive and behavioral functioning), 
including interview and questionnaire queries  regarding their mental health  history,  
substance use history, and history  of prior  brain  injuries and other  neurological  disease or 
injury. A link between identifiers and data be created; It will be stored  separately in a locked 
file cabinet behind locked doors in a secure area of the Clinical Core for the duration  of the 
study (5 years). It will be disposed of and shredded after the conclusion  of the final  data  
analysis.  Only the PI and trained research personnel will have access to the data, and will be 
solely responsible for receipt or transmission of the data.  No data will be collected, 
transmitted, and/or stored via the internet.  No data will be collected  via audio/digital 
recordings. No data will be collected on video recordings  or via photographs. Data will be 
stored for the duration of the study and will be destroyed after the final data  analysis is 
complete.  It will be stored at the Clinical Core on secured encrypted drives  (digital) and in 
locked file cabinets behind locked doors in a secure  area of the Clinical  Core.
 A Certificate of Confidentiality (CoC) has been received from the NIH once IRB approval is in 
place.  The CoC helps the researchers to protect the privacy of the subjects enrolled in the 
study from  compulsory legal demands, such as court orders  and subpoenas, for identifying  
information or identifying characteristics of a subject.  This  study is eligible  for a CoC  
because it will collect personally identifiable, sensitive  information about subjects, and will 
be federally  funded.  Sensitive  information in this study  includes information about a 
subject’s neuropsychological performance and emotional states.  This is information that if 
released could  be damaging to a subject’s  financial standing, employability,  or reputation 
within the community; pertains to a subject’s psychological well-being  or mental  health;  and 
might lead to social  stigmatization or discrimination  if it were  disclosed.   
15.Data and Specimen Banking  (see  section on  Data Management)
16.Risks to Subjects 
Participation in this study for both  healthy  controls and mmTBI subjects  may involve  minor  risks 
and/or discomforts associated with possible breach of confidentiality risk,  neuropsychological 
testing, MRI, EEG, and tDCS.  
MRI: Radio and magnetic waves associated with MRI scans are not associated with any known 
adverse effects. MRI  is non-invasive and considered minimal risk by the FDA and OHRP.  
However, the scanner is a large magnet, so it could move objects containing ferrous metal in the 
room during the scan.   All control and mmTBI  participants are screened using the MRI safety  
screening form prior to be being scanned.  Participants with any MRI scanning  contraindications 
will be excluded from  study participation.  Participants may be bothered by feelings of 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  23 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019claustrophobia (uncommon). The MRI  also makes loud ‘drum’ beating noises during the study.  
Headphones are provided  for protection.  Rarely, large  or recent tattoos can heat up during an 
MRI scan and cause skin irritation like a sunburn (uncommon). No long-term  harmful effects 
from MRI are known. However, since the effect of MRI on early development of the fetus is 
unknown, participants  who are pregnant  will not be allowed to go in the MRI. Females  18 years 
of age or older who suspect they may be pregnant  will be asked  to take a urine  pregnancy test 
before being allowed to participate in the study. The test results  will only be shared with 
participant. 
Neuropsychological tests.   The neuropsychological tasks involved in the protocol entail  no foreseeable  
risk, besides perhaps fatigue or mild to moderate demands  on attention and cognition.  These are 
typically very  marginally significant risks, mitigated  by the fact that if a patient fatigues during 
testing they are given  a rest break or are rescheduled.  There is also mild  psychological  risk inherent 
in testing participants for cognitive abilities.
One potential risk is breach of confidentiality  related to collection of sensitive information.  
Confidentiality issues are significant since this study collects a variety of sensitive data, in particular 
with respect to substance use. Because personal information  is gathered, there exists the risk of 
possible invasion of privacy. However, our hard copy data is stored in locked cabinets in locked 
rooms within a locked, security-patrolled building; and there has never been a breach of 
confidentiality in our lab. Hence we believe that the likelihood of invasion of privacy is minimal. 
EEG: There  is a very  small possibility that participants with  sensitive skin (e.g., contact dermatitis) 
may experience some skin irritation from the EEG gel or metal sensor (uncommon).  
tDCS.   There are several  risks associated  with tDCS treatment and sham procedures, however, based 
on our experience with  this technology (>500 research  subjects  run to date), we believe that these  
risks are minimal. Common  expectable side effects during  tDCS include skin redness, itching 
sensation, mild fatigue  or drowsiness,  nausea, and headache.72  All patients undergoing  stimulation 
with tDCS  will be asked to rate  their discomfort with these symptoms  every ten minutes, and the 
treatment will be terminated if discomfort  rises  above 7 on a 10-point  anchored Likert scale, or at 
any time  the patient wishes to stop. All efforts will be made to reduce subject discomfort  and avoid 
the rare occurrence of skin  burns, including evidence-based  techniques such as using saline-soaked 
sponges with lower concentrations  (~15mM) of solution;  offering emollient  cream  for reddened 
areas following  stimulation;  preventing electrodes from drying out during stimulation; disinfecting 
all treatment sponges regularly; not stimulating over skin  with lesions or dermatologic  conditions; 
checking skin impedance before stimulation.59,7374 When these precautions are followed  with  
conventional tDCS protocols  (i.e., 1-2 mA stimulation for up to 30 minutes), using optimized  safety 
protocols, significant adverse  effects, such as burns on the skin near electrode affixation or heating  of 
the electrodes affecting  nearby scalp surface have not been reported.75 
Rare mood changes with  tDCS have been observed in studies  of depressed patients, resulting in 
several cases of hypomania.76,77 Most of these patients were taking concurrent antidepressants.  
Precautions taken in this study include excluding patients on psychotropic medications, and 
monitoring mood with visual analog  scales  during stimulation, and pre/post-treatment  depressive 
symptom questionnaires.  There has not been a reported  instance of suicidality caused  by tDCS.  
In healthy controls  there have  been  no reported  adverse events of TDCS, other than  the physical 
sensations and skin irritation above. Of critical importance is the safety of tDCS in patients with 
neurological illnesses that may carry some  increased vulnerability  to either brain damage or 
seizures.  The experimental threshold  at which tDCS causes brain injury  was found  to be two orders 
of magnitude  above the current densities used in humans, making stimulation at the scalp with 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  24 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019contemporary protocols causing brain damage  extremely unlikely.78 tDCS is widely used  in post-
stroke patients in protocols that place the stimulating  electrodes ipsilateral to the lesion  and very 
often close to perilesional  areas, without any increased side effects or adverse  consequences.2040 
Even more reassuring,  tDCS at 1.0-2.0  mA has been performed over  damaged left frontal  cortex in 37 
patients with moderate to severe TBIs, who are at the highest risk of post-traumatic seizures and 
demonstrate the greatest levels of structural damage, without adverse events, seizures, or 
decrements in neurologic status.43,44,79  A review of and contact with studies registered in 
clinicaltrials.gov for tDCS in TBI (Spaulding,  NYU,  U. Leige)  did not discover any occurrence of 
seizures or adverse events.
Safeguard exclusions that the study will have in place are enumerated above, and will ensure  that 
neurologically unstable  patients are screened out of the study, or those who might be at higher  risk 
from cranial electrical stimulation.  A Data Safety and Monitoring  Board composed of Dr. Christopher 
Abbott and Dr. Jose Padin-Rosado,  specialists  in neurostimulation  and seizures respectively, will be 
meeting with the PI quarterly  to review  outcome data to ensure rigorous protection  of patients, as 
described below. 
17.Potential Benefits to Subjects
This study has the potential for providing mild transient benefits in cognition and mood for 
individual subjects.   The probability for these improvements is moderate, given  that multiple 
prospective blinded  controlled studies have demonstrated transient improvements in cognition and 
mood for patients with  strokes, neurodegenerative diseases, and in healthy controls. This study has 
the potential to increase scientific understanding of the extent to which TBI-related cognitive  deficits 
can be remediated with  tDCS  using a longitudinal design.  Participants will receive  a radiology 
review and report of their  MRI scan and will be compensated  for their time and  inconvenience. 
No other  direct benefit to participants is anticipated.
18.Recruitment Methods
Recruitment primarily will be through the UNM Hospital Emergency Department  (ED) (the only  
Level 1 trauma center in New Mexico). The UNM Health Sciences  Center  (HSC)  Clinical and 
Translational Science  Center (CTSC) Participant  Recruitment Service  (PRS) for Clinical  Research will 
monitor ED intake records for patients who meet criteria once released from the hospital, then  notify 
the study team of these  cases.  A second means of recruitment will involve direct referrals from UNM 
and non-UNM  ED physicians and/or referrals  from any clinic in the Albuquerque metropolitan  area, 
via the distribution of flyers and calls  to clinical  directors to publicize  the study.   This will include 
referrals from  the New Mexico VA Health  Care  System.  Flyers  for VA clinics will include disclaimer  
language required  by the Veterans Administration and we will obtain a facility approval letter from 
the New  Mexico VA. A third means  of recruitment will involve information  listed on the UNM CBRR  
and MRN websites. Patients who meet  initial criteria for inclusion  will be contacted by a member of 
the research  team and invited to enroll in the study. Interested patients will be invited  to the offices  
of the Center for Brain Recovery and Repair clinical core for formal screening procedures. A brief 
structured interview will be administered along  with the NSI. If potential  participants do not meet 
study criteria,  they  will be thanked for their  time and identifying information  recorded for future 
reference. Subjects with a legally authorized  representative  (LAR) will be excluded  from the study, 
and all participants  will be screened for LAR. All participants will be adults  (ages  18-55), and all 
participants will consent for themselves. Although participants will be recruited from  referral or 
from emergency department  (or other) records, no participant will be enrolled  in the study without 
being given  sufficient opportunity to consider whether or not to participate. In most cases, they  will 
undergo multiple  interactions with study personnel over the course of days, and during each they 
will have the opportunity to ask questions and discuss  their  decision to participate.  They will have 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  25 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019multiple opportunities  to reconsider  any decisions during  the screening and consent  process, 
minimizing the possibility  of coercion or undue  influence by the researchers. If potential participants  
successfully meet basic study criteria, they will be invited  to undergo consent  procedures and 
enrolled in the study.  All participants will be fluent in English,  and the information contained in the 
consent form will be discussed with them  in addition to their having  a written  description  of the 
study in the form, to assure that they  truly understand the study procedures.  
A modified  repeated fair coin-tossing randomization procedure will determine group assignment,  
and modifications will be made as necessary toward  the end of enrollment  to ensure equal group 
size. Randomization will occur at time of consenting.  The study coordinator who consented the 
patient will use a coin-tossing  procedure to determine whether the subject is assigned to the active 
group (group 1) or control  group (group 2).  Modifications  will be made  as necessary toward the end 
of enrollment  to ensure equal group  size and balanced distribution of demographic variables such as 
age and gender.  The  study coordinator  will not be blinded to group assignment, and with the 
assistance of the Clinical Core, will program the TDCS devices to deliver active or sham  stimulation  
depending on which  group the subject has been assigned.   However, the coordinator will not be 
involved in performing any stimulation procedures.   The study technician and principle  investigator,  
who will be responsible for administering  the stimulation, will not be aware of which group receives 
active versus control, and will thus be blinded,  as the TDCS  device will only display the group number  
(1 or 2).  
Once group membership is determined, individual participants will be scheduled for demographic 
data collection, neuropsychological  assessments, EEG, and tDCS  treatment sessions. Direct  identifiers  
of participants will be maintained on a separate database that will be stored  behind  locked  doors, in 
a locked filing cabinet in a secure area  of the Clinical  Core.
19.Provisions to Protect the Privacy  Interests of Subjects
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  26 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Neuropsychological testing and questions regarding depression, post-concussive symptoms, and 
quality of life will be collected from  all participants. All forms of data described  above will be 
recorded on to paper and pencil or computerized data forms  that do not contain  identifying 
information. A separate  file contains  contact information but has no personal data  or protected  
health information that is collected as part of the study.
   
No personally  identifying  information will be coded on the questionnaires, neuropsychological 
measures, brain imaging data, or any other  data  recording instruments, assuring confidentiality to 
the best of our ability.  Subject identification numbers are assigned to each participant.   Only  the PI 
and HIPAA-trained project  coordinator have access to the file that links names with  subject numbers.  
All data are stored in locked  file cabinets in a locked office, and on password-protected  computers 
located behind a secure and maintained  firewall until  the time of study completion,  or as long as the 
participant has agreed to have  identifying information held for the purposes  of future studies.
    
All data  are collected  by the PI, or trained  research assistants who have  completed on-line training  in 
human subjects’ research, HIPAA and research integrity;  who are trained  in our lab on research data 
management and confidentiality; and who are trained to criteria on project  protocol.  Data will be 
collected specifically  for this proposed research project.
Specially designated interview  rooms will be used for the purposes of obtaining consent, conducting 
research, and debriefing subjects.  These rooms will be behind locked  facility  doors to which only the 
PI and trained  research  assistants  will have access, ensuring privacy  of the study participants.   
20.Economic  Burden to Subjects
Responsible  Party
Research ProceduresNumber of 
Samples/ProceduresStudy 3rd Party  Payer 
or Participant
tDCS 1-10 x
Neuropsychological Testing 3 x
Telephone Interviews 2 x
EEG testing 2 x
MRI 2
          
          
          
Responsible  Party
Standard of Care ProceduresNumber of 
Samples/ProceduresStudy 3rd Party  Payer 
or Participant
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
Participants will be responsible for travel to and from the testing site. Participants  will not 
be charged for the costs of an investigational  drug or device  or intervention.  Participants  
will be responsible for paying for treatment of adverse events.  As tDCS employs extremely 
low currents  and numerous studies have documented  minimal risk of adverse  events, any 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  27 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019adverse events requiring medical care will be extremely unlikely.  Participants  will not be 
charged for any of the experimental  study procedures,  including MRI scans. If incidental 
findings from  the study result in the need for further evaluation/treatment, the participant  
or their insurance  company will be responsible  for additional clinical evaluation/treatment 
that may be needed.  Also, incidental finding information is disclosed only to the individual 
participant. However, if a participant  chooses to disclose such information also to their 
personal physician, this may  become part of their medical record which  may  or may not 
have an effect in the future on getting health or life insurance.
21. Compensation
Each of the 80 participants will receive$20/hr in the form of cash cards  for taking  part  in the 
study.  This is felt to be a fair amount  that  is not coercive and will help decrease attrition  for 
this study  which  involves many  visits.
22.Compensation for Research-Related  Injury
Any medical care required by participants for injuries incurred during  the research study will be 
performed at cost to the participant.  All participants will be given  information during the consent 
interview and provided at any time during the study regarding how to access urgent  and emergency 
care at UNM, including emergency psychiatric care at UNM PES. These  facilities  are within 5-10 
minute walk to the MIND Research Network Domenici  Hall  where the study facilities  are located,  and 
may also be accessed easily  via emergency medical rescue (ie. 911 EMS).   
23.Consent Process
Consent will be obtained by the PI, the research coordinator, or a research assistant.  All persons 
obtaining consent will be trained and certified  in the ethical treatment of human participants  in 
research studies as taught  in IRB-required courses.  
Human participants who have suffered mmTBI (ages 18-55) will be recruited from the UNM Hospital 
ED and from other local Emergency Departments via phone call.  If a patient shows interest in 
participating in our study, a brief prescreening  will be done  prior to initiating informed consent 
procedures.  The prescreening procedures will assure that each  potential participant  meets  study 
inclusion and exclusion criteria.  
In regards to screening for pregnancy,  female subjects will be asked if they are pregnant, not 
pregnant, or not sure.   If a subject answers  she is pregnant, she will be excluded from  the study.  If 
she answers not pregnant, she will be enrolled and advised to use two forms of birth control during 
the time of the stimulation phase  of the study.   If she answers that she is unsure, she will be offered a 
screening urine pregnancy test.  If she is not able or willing to take the pregnancy  test, she will be 
excluded from the study.   
If, after prescreening,  the patient remains interested  and eligible, the project will be described in 
great details and the potential  participant and their  caregivers will be invited to ask questions  prior 
to providing consent.   If the participant is willing, they  will be invited to schedule  an appointment to 
undergo informed consent prior to study initiation.  Appointments will be held at the Clinical Core  in 
designed interview  rooms  behind  secure  facility  doors  so as to ensure privacy. Consent  forms will be 
provided, as well as forms that again describe the study procedures and potential  risks in detail.   If 
potential participants are unsure about participation, they will be given  a copy of the consent form 
with our contact information and be invited to call if they decide to participate.   Once informed 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  28 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019consent is obtained and the appropriate forms signed, the complete procedures of the study, as 
described in the consent  forms,  are provided  to prospective subjects.  We review the forms, and file 
them away in a locked file cabinet  in a locked office,  away from any material  with  personal or 
sensitive study data.   Participants may withdraw their consent  at any time  during the study.  At each 
study encounter participants are reminded  that they  have the ability to withdraw consent at any 
time.  
All subjects will be asked whether they have the ability to consent themselves, or whether 
they have  a legally authorized representative (LAR) available to make decisions with regard 
to informed  consent for them.  In such cases,  patients with a LAR will be excluded  from 
participation.
The process  of determining whether  an individual  is capable of consent will take  place after the study 
has been explained, but before the subject is asked to sign the consent form.  A short list of questions 
regarding the purpose  of the research, the research intervention, the clinical trial structure,  the risks 
and benefits  of the study,  and the voluntary nature of it will be given  to the subject before signing the 
consent form, to ensure capacity to understand and comprehend the study.  Each  subject must  
answer 100% of the questions correctly; if answers are ambiguous or unclear the research team 
member will prompt  the subject  to clarify their meaning.  If any questions are not answered  
correctly, the research team member will remind the subject of the pertinent information, and then  
ask the question(s) again.   This will be repeated up to 2 times.  If  the subject still fails to answer  the 
questions 100% appropriately  after the third attempt, they may be invited  back to undergo the 
consent process again on a different  day.  If after a second consent process the subject still cannot 
answer the questions 100%  correctly, that subject will be excluded from  the study.
The participants will be reminded at each study encounter that  they  have the ability to withdraw 
consent at any time  to protect  against loss of capacity to consent.  Given  the safety of tDCS to 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  has been shown in numerous large  controlled  studies, it is highly 
unlikely that there to be any deterioration in decisional capacity as a result  of the tDCS itself.   
24.Documentation of  Consent   (see  attached forms)
25.Study Test Results/Incidental Findings  (see next section)
26.Sharing  Study Progress or Results  with  Subjects
As the neuropsychological and EEG tests employed in the study are for research purposes 
and not diagnostic purposes, these results will not be shared with  the participants, unless 
their physician requests to see a report. In this instance  the Clinical  Core  will obtain  the 
participant’s permission  to generate a summary report  of the neuropsychological test results 
and send this to the participant’s primary care physician. Subjects will not be provided with 
summaries of trial progress, or summaries  of study  results.
All research MRI  scans are read  for incidental findings by a radiologist.  An e-mail 
notification is sent to the participant letting them know new results are available. The 
participant can securely log in to the COINS  Homepage to access their MRI radiology  
report. No sensitive or identifying information is sent via e-mail.  If an abnormality  that 
requires follow-up is identified,  such as a Doctor Referral recommendation,  a hard copy 
of the report may be mailed to the participant in addition to the e-mail  notification.  In 
these cases, the MRN  Medical Director may also attempt to contact the participant by 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  29 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019phone to explain the information and help answer  questions. If the participant does not 
need an email and/or  does not have an email address and does not want  an email account, 
the email info@mrn.org will be added as the study  record email. This will notify the RO 
team when  the participant’s  scan has been read,  and that a letter will need  to be mailed to 
the participant’s address on file.
  
27.Inclusion of Vulnerable Populations
There will be no gender restrictions with regard to sample inclusion.  It is expected  that our sample 
will reflect national  sample characteristics of TBI populations; approximately 59% male and 41% 
female (CDC 2006).  It is expected that our unselected sample, drawn  from the ED at a large  state-
funded hospital, will result in TBI-group  gender rations reflecting those of the CDC epidemiological 
sample.  The age range of 18-55 years was selected because  we did not want to include 
developmental processes  in our analyses  and by 18 years old, many major  neurodevelopmental  
changes in the brain will have taken place.  Using  similar logic, we chose to include participants up to 
the age of 55 because we do not want to include advancing age-related changes in our analyses.   It is 
expected that the sample included in this study will reflect the demographics  of the greater  
Albuquerque metropolitan community. The racial composition of the community is 69.7%  White, 
2.47% African American,  5.53% Native  American, 1.64% Asian, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 16.37% from 
other races,  and 4.15% from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino  people of any race were  41.48% 
of the population.  Through  randomization,  we will ensure that the sample obtained represents the 
study population.  Adults unable to consent,  individuals who are not yet adults  (infants, children, 
teenagers), pregnant  women,  and prisoners will be excluded from the study.
The compensation for participation in the study is calibrated so as not to exert undue influence on 
economically disadvantaged participants.  The materials, instructions, consents,  and scripts involved  
in the study will be geared toward a low-enough educational level that the majority of educationally  
disadvantaged participants will be able  to understand  them.
    
Recruitment will be unrestricted with  regard to minorities,  with  the exception that  non-English  
reading/speaking-only individuals will not be eligible.  Albuquerque’s  population is multicultural, 
with a particularly large representation of Hispanic (mostly  Mexican American) people.  Ethnicity,  
Hispanic or other, will be determined through  self-identification.  In compliance  with NIH policy 
participants will be asked to self identify as to Hispanic or Non-Hispanic as well as American Indian 
or Alaska Native,  Asian, Black or African American, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific  Islander, and 
White.  All possible  combinations of the multiple responses  will be reported.
28.Community-Based Participatory Research  NA
29.Research Involving American Indian/Native Populations  NA
30.Transnational Research  NA
31.Drugs or  Devices
A NeuroConn  (www.neuroconn.de)  tDCS machine will be used to administer  tDCS current.  Square-
shaped, 11 cm2 saline water  (15mM) solution-soaked sponge electrodes, held by a rubber casing, are 
applied to the scalp using elastic bandage material. The anode  will be placed  on the scalp over  the F3 
target location and the cathode placed  on the right upper  arm below the deltoid. Current for the 
treatment condition will be applied at 2.0 mA for a total  delivered  charge of 60 mA-min.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  30 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Dr. Quinn as well as the research coordinator and technician who will be applying tDCS will undergo 
training with Dr. Vincent Clark, who is a national expert in tDCS and has published extensively on the 
safe and efficacious use of tDCS for cognitive enhancement.  Dr. Quinn will also undergo training  with  
his external mentor Dr. Marom Bikson,  who is also a national expert on tDCS safety and mechanisms 
of action.  
We have extensive experience using 11 cm2 sponges  with  2.0 mA for 30 minute sessions,  with  
excellent tolerability of skin sensation, and effective blinding of stimulation.23 The use of 35 cm2  
sponges spreads stimulation  over  a significantly larger  area and reduces efficacy  to achieve cortical 
excitability.80,81 Given  that our patient population is an outpatient, ambulatory, mild to moderate TBI 
population and that these current strengths and amounts have already  been administered safely  to 
patients with stroke and TBI lesions ipsilateral and proximal to the site of stimulation, we feel these  
parameters are extremely  safe.  Our group is currently studying tDCS in subjects with tobacco use 
disorder, alcohol use disorder, and schizophrenia and are finding the stimulation to be very safe and 
well tolerated. To date, 138 subjects have undergone published tDCS protocols  with  our group and 
only two subjects withdrew because of intolerable sensations.  We find  that about 1% of subjects on 
the average can't tolerate  the skin stimulation  caused by tDCS  (heat,  itching or burning sensations)  
and so we stop  for them.  The other 99%  tolerate it well.  We had one case of a system with a small 
piece of bare wire  that touched the skin  and caused a skin  burn, which was small but needed  
attention.  This can be avoided by having  a tDCS setup with  fully insulated wiring.
A Data  Safety and Monitoring  Board will review study data with the PI quarterly for any side effects 
or adverse  events. The device will be kept behind locked doors at all times at the Clinical  Core of the 
Center when not being used  expressly for the current study.  The principal  investigator and trained  
research personnel  will be the only  persons with access  to the device. 
There are no long term neuropsychiatric effects from tDCS.  With  repeated stimulation, some subjects 
get dry skin.  Applying  lotion helps to ameliorate this.   Using  EEG gel rather  than saline  for the 
electrode conductor helps reduce this occurrence as well.
The TDCS device is determined  to be a Non-Significant Risk  device by the sponsor-investigator 
(Davin Quinn, MD) for the following reasons:
1) It is not intended as an implant
2) It does not present a potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare  of the subjects
3) It is not proposed to be for a use in supporting or sustaining human life
4) It is not for a use of substantial importance in diagnosing,  curing,  mitigating,  or treating 
disease, or preventing impairment of human health
According to the FDA, serious  adverse events are those  in which the outcome is death, life-
threatening, hospitalization, disability/permanent damage, congenital anomaly, requiring 
intervention to prevent permanent impairment,  or other  serious events  such  as refractory seizures,  
cardiorespiratory arrest, or anaphylactic reaction.  No serious adverse  events  attributable to TDCS 
have been reported in the more than  10,000 subjects investigated in the contemporary TDCS 
literature since 1998.  This literature  includes studies in patients  with  severe brain  injury,  stroke, 
epilepsy, and neurodegenerative disorders, none of whom have been  reported to experience  serious 
adverse events.  Specifically,  there have been no reports  or evidence presented of damage to the 
brain, seizures, or cardiorespiratory arrest.  Animal studies of charge  densities necessary to induce 
brain damage in rats  were found  to be 100  times higher than the charge  density used in TDCS trials 
with standard parameters (< 2.5 mA, no more than 2 sessions daily, < 60 min  per session, use of 
electrodes that minimize skin burns) as determined  by world-wide expert  consensus.   The commonly 
reported side effects of TDCS are itching, burning, tingling,  headache, and discomfort (10-40%),  all of 
which are mild and transient.  As this trial will be operating within standard  parameters  as defined 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  31 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019above, we believe  our use of TDCS in subjects  with mild-moderate traumatic  brain injury represent  a 
Non-Significant Risk.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  32 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019Checklist Section
This section contains checklists to provide information  on a variety of  topics that  require special  
determinations by the IRB.  Please complete all checklists relevant to  your research.
I.Waivers or  Alterations of Consent, Assent, and HIPAA  Authorization
A.Partial Waiver of Consent for Screening/Recruitment
Complete this checklist  if you are requesting a partial waiver  of consent so  that you  
can review private information to identify  potential  subjects  and/or determine 
eligibility prior to approaching potential subjects  for consent or parental permission.
1.Describe the data source  that you need to review (e.g., medical records):
Medical records
2.Describe the purpose for the review (e.g., screening):
Screening
3.Describe who  will conducting the reviews  (e.g., investigators, research staff):
Research staff
4.Do all persons who will be  conducting the reviews already have permitted 
access to the data source?
x Yes
 No. Explain: 
5.Verify that each of the  following  are true or provide an  alternate justification 
for the underlined regulatory criteria:
a)The activity involves no more than  minimal risk to  the subjects  
because the records  review itself is non-invasive and the results  of the 
records review will not be  used for any purposes other than those 
described above.
x True
 Other  justification:       
b)The waiver or alteration  will not adversely  affect the rights and  
welfare of  the subjects because eligible subjects will be approached for 
consent to  participate  in the research and are free to decline.  Further, 
the information  accessed during the  records  review will not be 
disclosed to anyone without a legitimate purpose (e.g., verification of eligibility).
x True
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  33 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019 Other  justification:       
c)The research could  not practicably  be carried out without  the waiver  or 
alteration because there is no other  reasonably efficient and effective 
way to identify who to approach for possible participation in the research.  
x True
 Other  justification:       
d)Whenever  appropriate, potentially eligible subjects will be presented 
with information about  the research and asked to consider 
participation.  (Regulatory criteria: Whenever appropriate,  the 
subjects will be  provided  with additional pertinent  information  after 
participation.)
x True
 Other  justification:       
Partial Waiver of HIPAA Authorization for  Screening/Recruitment
Complete the following  additional  questions/attestations  if the records  you will 
review to identify potential subjects and/or determine eligibility include Protected Health Information (PHI).
6.Will you be recording  any PHI when conducting the records review to identify 
potential subjects  and/or determine eligibility?
 Yes. Describe:      
x No
7.If you answered “Yes”  to question 6 above, please describe when you will 
destroy identifiers (must be the earliest opportunity consistent with the conduct of  the research)  or provide  justification  for why they must  be 
retained:
     
8.The PHI  accessed or recorded for identification/screening purposes will not be 
reused or  disclosed to (shared with) any other person or entity, except as 
required by law,  for authorized oversight of  the research study, or for other 
research for which the  use or disclosure  of the  PHI would  be permitted  under  
the Privacy  Rule.
x True
 False
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  34 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019B.Waiver of Documentation  of Consent
Complete this checklist  if you intend to obtain consent verbally but will  not be 
obtaining signatures from  subjects on a consent form to  document consent.   Waivers  
of documentation of consent are commonly  requested when  using scripts, information 
sheets, or  email or survey introductions to present the elements of  consent  instead of  
using a  traditional consent form.
1.Are you requesting a waiver of documentation of consent for some or all subjects?
 All
 Some. Explain:      
2.Provide justification for one of the following:
a)That the only record linking the subject and  the research would be the 
consent document and the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a  breach of confidentiality.  Each  subject will be  asked 
whether the subject  wants  documentation linking the  subject  with the 
research, and the subject's wishes will govern.
     
b)That the research  presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects and involves no procedures  for which  written consent is 
normally required  outside of  the research context.
     
3.Do you intend to provide subjects with a written statement regarding the research in lieu of a  traditional consent form?
 Yes. Please attach a  copy to your submission  in Click.
x No
C.Alteration of Consent
Complete this checklist  if you intend to obtain consent but  will be eliminating or 
altering one or more  of the required elements of  consent. Alterations of consent  are 
commonly requested for research involving deception or for minimal  risk research 
when an abbreviated consent is desired and one  or more of  the required element are 
not relevant to the research.
Note: FDA-regulated  research is not eligible  for an alteration of consent.
1.Which element(s) of consent do you wish to eliminate and why?
     
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  35 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 20192.Which element(s) of consent do you wish to alter and why?
     
3.Provide justification for each of the following  regulatory criteria:
a)The research involves no more  than minimal risk to  the subjects:
     
b)The waiver or alteration  will not adversely  affect the rights and  
welfare of  the subjects:
     
c)The research could  not practicably  be carried out without  the waiver  or 
alteration:
     
d)Whenever  appropriate, the subjects  will be provided with  additional 
pertinent information after  participation:
     
D.Full Waiver  of Consent/Parental Permission
Complete this checklist  if you are requesting a full waiver of consent for all subjects 
or certain  subject groups  (e.g., retrospective cohort).  Full waivers of consent are 
commonly requested when the research does not include any  opportunity for 
interaction with subjects  (e.g., chart review).
Note: FDA-regulated  research is not eligible  for a full waiver of consent using these 
criteria.  If you believe  that your FDA-regulated research may  be eligible for  a waiver 
under another mechanism, such as planned emergency  research, contact the HRPO 
for assistance in determining  what  information to provide to the HRRC.
1.Are you requesting a waiver for some or all  subjects?
 All
 Some. Explain:      
2.Provide justification for each of the following  regulatory criteria:
a)The research involves no more  than minimal risk to  the subjects:
     
b)The waiver or alteration  will not adversely  affect the rights and  
welfare of  the subjects:
     
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  36 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019c)The research could  not practicably  be carried out without  the waiver  or 
alteration:
     
d)Whenever  appropriate, the subjects  will be provided with  additional 
pertinent information after  participation:
     
E.Full Waiver  of Consent/Parental Permission (Public  Benefit  or Service  
Programs)
Complete this checklist  if you are requesting a full waiver of consent for all subjects 
or certain  subject groups  (e.g., retrospective cohort) and the research  involves the 
evaluation of a public  benefit or service program.  
1.Are you requesting a waiver for some or all  subjects?
 All
 Some. Explain:      
2.Provide justification for each of the following  regulatory criteria:
a)The research or demonstration  project  is to be conducted by or subject 
to the approval of state or local  government officials and is designed to  
study, evaluate,  or otherwise examine: (i) public benefit or service 
programs; (ii)  procedures for obtaining  benefits or services under those 
programs; (iii)  possible changes in or alternatives  to those  programs or 
procedures; or (iv) possible changes  in methods  or levels of payment 
for benefits or services  under  those programs:
     
b)The research could  not practicably  be carried out without  the waiver  or 
alteration.
     
F.Full Waiver  of HIPAA Authorization
Complete this checklist  if you are requesting a full waiver of the requirement to 
obtain HIPAA authorization for all subjects or certain subject groups (e.g.,  
retrospective cohort).   Full waivers of HIPAA  authorization are  commonly  requested  
when the  research does not include  any opportunity for interaction  with subjects 
(e.g., chart review).
1.Are you requesting a waiver of authorization for  some or all subjects?
 All
 Some. Explain:      
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  37 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 20192.Describe your plan  to protect health information  identifiers from improper use 
and disclosure:
     
3.Describe your plan  to destroy identifiers at the earliest opportunity consistent 
with conduct of the research (absent a health or research justification for retaining them or a legal requirement to do so):
     
4.Describe why  the research could not practicably  be conducted  without the 
waiver or  alteration:
     
5.The PHI  accessed or recorded for identification/screening purposes will not be 
reused or  disclosed to (shared with) any other person or entity, except as 
required by law,  for authorized oversight of  the research study, or for other 
research for which the  use or disclosure  of the  PHI would  be permitted  under  
the Privacy  Rule.
 True
 False
G.Other Waiver Types
If you are seeking another  waiver  type  (e.g., Planned  Emergency Research,  Waiver of  
Parental Permission to Protect  Child  Participants,  Enforcement Discretion for In 
Vitro Diagnostics, etc. contact the HRPO office  for assistance in  determining what  
information to submit  for the HRRC’s consideration.
II.Vulnerable Populations
A.Adults with Cognitive Impairments
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include adults with cognitive 
impairments.  
This checklist does not need to be completed if the research doesn’t  involve 
interactions or interventions  with  subjects  and will  be conducted  under a waiver of  
consent.
1.Describe why  the objectives of the  study  cannot be met  without inclusion of 
adults with cognitive impairments.
.  
2.Describe how  capacity to consent  will be evaluated.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  38 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019     
3.If subjects may regain capacity to consent,  or if  subjects  may have  fluctuating 
capacity to consent, describe your plans to evaluate capacity to  consent 
throughout the  research and to obtain consent  to continue participation if  
capacity is  regained.
     
4.Describe your plans, if any, to provide information about the research to  
subjects and the  steps you will take  to assess understanding.
     
5.Describe your plans to obtain assent, including whether assent will be obtained from  none, some, or all subjects.
     
6.Describe why  risks  to subjects are reasonable  in relation to  anticipated 
benefits to the  subjects.
     
7.If this study involves a  health  or behavioral intervention, describe why the 
relation of  the anticipated benefit to the risk of the research is at least as 
favorable to the  subjects as that presented  by alternative procedures.
     
8.Describe your plans for monitoring the well-being of subjects including any plans to withdraw subjects from the research if they appear to be unduly  
distressed.
     
B.Children
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include children.
1.Select the  category of research that you believe this research  falls within and  
provide justification for any associated criteria.  If there are different assessments for different groups of children or arms (e.g.,  placebo  vs. drug), 
include a memo to provide an  assessment for each group.  
 Research not involving greater  than minimal risk. (Minimal  risk means  
that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort  anticipated 
in the research  are not greater in and of themselves than  those  
ordinarily encountered in  daily  life or during  the performance of  
routine physical  or psychological examinations or tests.)
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  39 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019 Research involving greater than minimal risk but presenting the 
prospect of  direct benefit to the individual subjects.
Provide justification for each of the following  criteria:
(1)The risk is  justified  by the  anticipated benefit  to the subjects:
     
(2)The relation of the  anticipated benefit to the  risk is at least as 
favorable to the  subjects as that presented  by available 
alternative approaches:
     
 Research involving greater than minimal risk and no prospect of direct 
benefit to individual subjects, but likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the subject's disorder or condition.
Provide justification for each of the following  criteria:
(1)The risk represents  a minor increase  over minimal risk:
     
(2)The intervention or procedure presents  experiences to  subjects  
that are reasonably commensurate with those inherent in  their  
actual or expected medical, dental, psychological,  social, or 
educational situations:
     
(3)The intervention or procedure is likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the subjects' disorder or condition which is of vital importance for the understanding or amelioration  of the 
subjects' disorder or condition
     
C.Pregnant  Women  and Fetuses
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include pregnant women and 
fetuses.
This checklist does not need to be completed if the research is both minimal risk and 
is not conducted, funded, or otherwise subject to regulation by DHHS,  DOD, EPA,  or 
VA.
Provide justification for each of the following:
1.Where  scientifically  appropriate,  preclinical  studies,  including  studies  on 
pregnant  animals,  and clinical  studies,  including  studies  on non-pregnant  
women,  have been conducted  and provide  data for assessing  potential  risks to 
pregnant  women  and fetuses.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  40 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019     
2.The risk to the  fetus is  caused solely by interventions or  procedures  that hold 
out the prospect  of direct  benefit  for the  woman or the fetus; or, if there is no 
such prospect of  benefit, the risk to the fetus is not greater than minimal and 
the purpose of the research is  the development  of important  biomedical 
knowledge which cannot be obtained  by any other  means.
     
3.Any risk is the least possible  for achieving  the objectives of the research.
     
D.Neonates  of Uncertain Viability or Nonviable Neonates
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include neonates of  uncertain 
viability.
Provide justification for each of the following:
1.Where scientifically appropriate,  preclinical  and clinical studies have  been 
conducted and provide data for assessing potential risks to neonates.
     
2.Each  individual providing consent  is fully informed regarding  the reasonably 
foreseeable impact of the research  on the  neonate.
     
3.Individuals engaged  in the  research  will have no part in  determining the 
viability of  a neonate.
     
4.The research holds out the prospect  of enhancing the probability of survival of 
the neonate to the point of viability, and  any risk is  the least  possible for 
achieving that objective, or, the purpose of the research is the development of  
important biomedical knowledge which cannot be obtained by other means and there will be no added risk to the neonate resulting from the research
     
E.Nonviable  Neonates
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include nonviable neonates.
Provide justification for each of the following:
1.Where scientifically appropriate,  preclinical  and clinical studies have  been 
conducted and provide data for assessing potential risks to neonates.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  41 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019     
2.Each  individual providing consent  is fully informed regarding  the reasonably 
foreseeable impact of the research  on the  neonate.
     
3.Individuals engaged  in the  research  will have no part in  determining the 
viability of  a neonate.
     
4.The purpose  of the research is the development of  important biomedical 
knowledge that  cannot be obtained  by other means.
     
Verify each of the following:
5.Vital functions of the neonate will not be artificially maintained
 True
 False
6.The research will not terminate the  heartbeat or respiration of  the neonate
 True
 False
7.There will be  no added risk to the neonate resulting from  the research
 True
 False
F.Biomedical and Behavioral  Research  Involving Prisoners
Complete this checklist  if the subject population will include prisoners.
Note: Minimal  risk for  research  involving prisoners is the probability and magnitude 
of physical or psychological  harm that is normally encountered in the daily lives,  or 
in the routine  medical, dental, or psychological  examination  of healthy persons.
1.Select and  justify which allowable category of research involving prisoners 
this research  falls within:
 Study of the possible causes,  effects, and processes of incarceration, and of 
criminal behavior, provided  that the study presents no more than minimal 
risk and no more than inconvenience  to the subjects
     
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  42 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019 Study of prisons as institutional  structures  or of prisoners as incarcerated 
persons, provided  that the study presents no more  than  minimal  risk and  
no more than  inconvenience to the  subjects
     
 Research on conditions particularly  affecting  prisoners as a  class (for 
example, vaccine  trials  and other research on hepatitis which  is much 
more prevalent  in prisons than  elsewhere; and  research on social and  
psychological problems such as alcoholism, drug  addiction, and  sexual 
assaults)
     
 Research on practices, both  innovative and accepted,  which  have the  intent 
and reasonable probability of improving the  health or well-being of the  
subject
     
 Epidemiologic  studies  in which the  sole purpose is to describe  the 
prevalence or incidence of a disease  by identifying all cases or to  study 
potential risk factor  associations for a  disease, the research  presents  no 
more than  Minimal Risk and  no more than inconvenience  to the subjects, 
and Prisoners  are not a particular  focus of the research.
     
2.Provide justification for each of the following  regulatory criteria:
a)Any possible advantages  accruing  to the prisoner  through  his or her 
participation in  the research, when compared  to the general living 
conditions, medical care, quality of  food, amenities  and opportunity 
for earnings in the prison, are not of such a magnitude that his or her ability to weigh the  risks of  the research against the value  of such 
advantages in the  limited  choice  environment  of the prison is impaired
     
b)The risks  involved  in the research  are commensurate with  risks that 
would be accepted by nonprisoner volunteers
     
c)Procedures  for the selection of subjects within the prison are  fair to all 
prisoners and  immune  from arbitrary intervention by prison authorities 
or prisoners. Unless justification is provided,  control subjects must  be 
selected randomly from the group of  available prisoners who meet the 
characteristics needed  for that particular  research project
     
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  43 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019d)The information is  presented in language which is understandable  to 
the subject population
     
e)Adequate assurance  exists  that parole boards will not take into account 
a prisoner's participation in the research in making decisions regarding parole, and each prisoner is clearly  informed in advance that 
participation in  the research will have no effect  on his  or her  parole
     
f)When appropriate, adequate provision  has been  made for follow up 
examination or care  after research participation, taking into account 
the varying  lengths of  individual prisoners'  sentences, and for 
informing participants of this fact
     
III.Medical Devices
Complete this checklist  if the research evaluates  the safety or  effectiveness  of a medical device.  
If more than one medical device  is being  evaluated,  provide the requested  information for each.
A.Device Name: Transcranial Direct Current  Stimulator
B.Manufacturer: NeuroConn
C.Does  the research involve a  Significant Risk Device under an  IDE?
 Yes. Include  documentation of the  FDA  approval of the IDE with your submission.  
Acceptable methods  of documentation include:  (1) FDA  letter noting IDE number 
and approval status; (2)  Industry  sponsor letter noting IDE number and FDA 
approval status; or (3)  FDA-approved  industry sponsor  protocol with  IDE  number  
noted 
x No
D.Is the research IDE-exempt?
x Yes. Include  a FDA  letter with your submission noting the determination that  the 
research is IDE-exempt or a letter from the sponsor (or sponsor-investigator) justifying why they believe the research is IDE-exempt*.  
 No
E.Does  the research involve a  Non-Significant  Risk (NSR) Device?
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  44 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 2019x Yes. Include  a FDA  letter with your submission noting the determination that  the 
research is NSR or  a letter from the  sponsor (or sponsor-investigator) justifying  why  
they believe the research is NSR**.  
 No
* This FDA guidance includes a description for when a device study is exempt from the IDE requirements:  
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM127067.pdf 
**This FDA guidance includes information  on how to  differentiate between Significant  
Risk and Non-Significant Risk device studies: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM126418.pdf 
References
1. Faul M, Xu L, Wald MM, Coronado VG. Traumatic Brain Injury in  the United  States: Emergency  
Department Visits,  Hospitalizations  and Deaths 2002-2006. Atlanta,  GA; 2010.
2. Coronado VG,  McGuire LC, Sarmiento K, et al.  Trends in Traumatic Brain Injury in  the U.S.  and the public 
health response: 1995-2009.  J Safety  Res. 2012;43(4):299–307. doi:10.1016/j.jsr.2012.08.011.
3. Overpeck  M, Hubbard  G, Cotner  J. Traumatic and Acquired Brain  Injury in New Mexico.;  2010.
4. McMahon P, Hricik A, Yue JK, et al. Symptomatology and  Functional  Outcome in Mild Traumatic Brain 
Injury: Results from the Prospective TRACK-TBI  Study.  J Neurotrauma. 2013;8:1–8. 
doi:10.1089/neu.2013.2984.
5. Stuss DT. Traumatic  brain injury: relation  to executive  dysfunction and  the frontal lobes. Curr Opin Neurol . 
2011;24(6):584– 9. doi:10.1097/WCO.0b013e32834c7eb9.
6. Mayberg HS.  Modulating dysfunctional  limbic-cortical circuits in depression. Br Med  Bull. 2003;65:193–
207. doi:10.1093/bmb/ldg65.193.
7. Dimoska-Di Marco A, McDonald S, Kelly  M, Tate  R, Johnstone S. A meta-analysis of response  inhibition 
and Stroop interference control deficits in adults with traumatic brain injury (TBI).  J Clin Exp 
Neuropsychol. 2011;33(4):471 –85. doi:10.1080/13803395.2010.533158.
8. Homaifar BY, Brenner LA, Forster JE, Nagamoto H. Traumatic Brain  Injury  , Executive  Functioning  , and 
Suicidal Behavior:  A Brief Report. Rehabil Psychol. 2012;57(4):337–341. doi:10.1037/a0030480.
9. Schiehser D, Delis D, Filoteo JV,  et al.  Are self-reported symptoms  of executive dysfunction  associated with  
objective executive function  performance  following mild to moderate  traumatic brain injury?  J Clin Exp 
Neuropsychol. 2011;33(6):704 –714. doi:10.1080/13803395.2011.553587.Are.
10. Jorge RE, Robinson RG, Moser D, Tateno  A, Crespo-Facorro B, Arndt S. Major depression following 
traumatic brain injury. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004;61(1):42–50. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.61.1.42.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  45 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 201911. Larson  MJ, Farrer TJ, Clayson PE. Cognitive  control  in mild traumatic brain injury: conflict monitoring and  
conflict adaptation. Int J Psychophysiol . 2011;82(1):69–78. doi:10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2011.02.018.
12. Cicerone KD, Langenbahn DM, Braden C, et al. Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: updated review of  
the literature from 2003 through 2008. Arch  Phys Med Rehabil . 2011;92(4):519 –30. 
doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2010.11.015.
13. Willmott C, Ponsford J, Olver J, Ponsford M. Safety of methylphenidate  following  traumatic brain injury:  
impact on  vital  signs and side-effects during inpatient rehabilitation. J  Rehabil  Med. 2009;41(7):585–7. 
doi:10.2340/16501977-0369.
14. Giacino JT, Whyte J,  Bagiella E, et al. Placebo-controlled trial of amantadine  for severe  traumatic brain 
injury. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(9):819 –26. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1102609.
15. McAllister TW,  Flashman L a,  McDonald  BC, et al.  Dopaminergic  challenge with  bromocriptine one month 
after mild traumatic brain injury: altered working memory and  BOLD response. J  Neuropsychiatry Clin 
Neurosci. 2011;23(3):277–86. doi:10.1176/appi.neuropsych.23.3.277.
16. Diaz-Arrastia R, Kochanek PM, Bergold P, et  al. Pharmacotherapy of  Traumatic Brain Injury:  State of  the 
Science and the Road Forward. J Neurotrauma. 2014;31(2):135–158.
17. Fann JR, Hart  T, Schomer  KG.  Treatment for  Depression after Traumatic Brain Injury: A  systematic review. 
J Neurotrauma. 2009;2402(December):2383 –2402.
18. Wheaton P,  Mathias JL, Vink R. Impact of  pharmacological treatments on cognitive and behavioral outcome  
in the  postacute stages  of adult traumatic brain injury:  a meta-analysis. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 
2011;31(6):745– 57. doi:10.1097/JCP.0b013e318235f4ac.
19. Kalu UG, Sexton CE, Loo CK, Ebmeier  KP. Transcranial direct current stimulation in  the treatment of  
major depression: a  meta-analysis. Psychol  Med. 2012;42(9):1791–800. doi:10.1017/S0033291711003059.
20. Baker JM,  Rorden  C, Fridriksson J. Using transcranial direct-current stimulation to  treat stroke  patients  with 
aphasia. Stroke. 2010;41(6):1229–36. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.576785.
21. Reis J, Schambra HM, Cohen  LG, et al. Noninvasive cortical stimulation enhances motor  skill acquisition 
over multiple days through an effect on consolidation.  PNAS. 2009;106(5):1590–1595.
22. Freitas C, Mondragón-Llorca  H, Pascual-Leone A. Noninvasive brain stimulation in Alzheimer’s disease: 
systematic review  and perspectives for  the future. Exp Gerontol. 2011;46(8):611–27. 
doi:10.1016/j.exger.2011.04.001.
23. Clark VP, Coffman B  a, Mayer AR, et  al. TDCS guided using  fMRI  significantly accelerates learning to  
identify concealed  objects. Neuroimage. 2012;59(1):117–28. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.11.036.
24. Nitsche MA,  Paulus W.  Excitability changes induced in the human motor cortex  by weak transcranial  direct  
current stimulation. 2000:633–639.
25. Olma MC, Dargie R a, Behrens JR, et al. Long-Term Effects of Serial Anodal tDCS  on Motion Perception  
in Subjects with Occipital Stroke Measured in the Unaffected Visual Hemifield. Front  Hum Neurosci. 
2013;7(June):314. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00314.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  46 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 201926. Monte-Silva  K, Kuo M-F, Hessenthaler S, et  al. Induction of  late LTP-like plasticity in the human  motor  
cortex by repeated non-invasive brain stimulation. Brain Stimul. 2013;6(3):424–32. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2012.04.011.
27. Boggio  PS, Nunes A, Rigonatti SP, Nitsche M a, Pascual-Leone  A, Fregni F. Repeated sessions of 
noninvasive brain  DC stimulation is associated  with motor function improvement in  stroke patients. Restor 
Neurol Neurosci. 2007;25(2):123–9. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17726271.
28. Ko M, Han S, Park S, Seo J, Kim Y. Neuroscience Letters Improvement of visual scanning after DC brain polarization of parietal cortex in stroke patients  with spatial neglect. 2008;448:171–174. 
doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2008.10.050.
29. Hummel  F, Celnik P, Giraux P,  et al. Effects of non-invasive cortical stimulation on skilled  motor  function  
in chronic stroke.  Brain. 2005;128(Pt 3):490–499. doi:10.1093/brain/awh369.
30. Monti  A, Cogiamanian F, Marceglia S, et  al. Improved naming after transcranial direct current stimulation 
in aphasia. J Neurol  Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008;79:451–453. doi:10.1136/jnnp.2007.135277.
31. Dockery CA, Hueckel-weng R, Birbaumer N, Plewnia C. Enhancement  of Planning Ability by Transcranial 
Direct Current Stimulation. J Neurosci. 2009;29(22):7271–7277. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0065-09.2009.
32. Fregni F, Boggio PS, Nitsche M, et  al. Anodal transcranial direct current stimulation of prefrontal cortex 
enhances working memory. Exp  Brain Res . 2005;166:23–30. doi:10.1007/s00221-005-2334-6.
33. Boggio  PS, Bermpohl  F, Vergara  AO, et al. Go-no-go task performance improvement after anodal 
transcranial DC  stimulation of  the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in major  depression. J Affect Disord. 
2007;101(1-3):91–98. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2006.10.026.
34. Metuki N, Sela  T, Lavidor M. Enhancing cognitive control components  of insight problems solving by 
anodal tDCS of the  left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Brain Stimul. 2012;5(2):110 –5. 
doi:10.1016/j.brs.2012.03.002.
35. Falcone B, Coffman  BA, Clark VP, Parasuraman R. Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation Augments 
Perceptual Sensitivity and 24-Hour  Retention in a Complex Threat Detection Task. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):1–
10. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0034993.
36. Boggio  PS, Zaghi  S, Beatriz A, Fecteau S, Pascual-leone A,  Fregni F.  Modulation of  risk-taking  in 
marijuana users by transcranial direct  current stimulation ( tDCS )  of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  ( 
DLPFC ). Drug Alcohol Depend. 2010;112(3):220–225. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.06.019.
37. Floel a, Cohen  LG. Contribution  of noninvasive cortical stimulation to  the study of memory functions.  Brain  
Res Rev. 2007;53(2):250–9. doi:10.1016/j.brainresrev.2006.08.006.
38. Beeli G,  Casutt  G, Baumgartner T,  Jäncke L. Behavioral and  Brain  Functions Modulating presence and 
impulsiveness by external stimulation of the brain. Behav brain Funct. 2008;7:1 –7. doi:10.1186/1744-9081-
4-33.
39. Fecteau S,  Knoch  D, Fregni F, Sultani N, Boggio P, Pascual-leone A. Diminishing Risk-Taking Behavior by 
Modulating Activity in the Prefrontal Cortex : A Direct Current Stimulation Study. J  Neurosci. 
2007;27(46):12500–12505. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3283-07.2007.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  47 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 201940. Flöel A. tDCS-enhanced motor  and cognitive  function in neurological  diseases. Neuroimage. 2014;85  Pt 
3:934–47. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.098.
41. Kim SJ, Kim BK, Ko YJ,  Bang MS, Kim MH, Han TR. Functional  and histologic changes after repeated 
transcranial direct current stimulation in rat stroke model. J  Korean  Med Sci. 2010;25(10):1499 –505. 
doi:10.3346/jkms.2010.25.10.1499.
42. Yoon KJ, Oh B-M, Kim  D-Y. Functional improvement  and neuroplastic effects of anodal transcranial direct 
current stimulation (tDCS) delivered 1 day vs. 1 week after  cerebral  ischemia in  rats. Brain  Res. 
2012;1452:61–72. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2012.02.062.
43. Kang E, Kim D, Paik N. Transcranial  Direct Current Stimulation  of the Left Prefrontal Cortex Improves 
Attention in Patients  with Traumatic  Brain  Injury : A Pilot  Study.  J Rehabil Med . 2012;44:346–350. 
doi:10.2340/16501977-0947.
44. Leśniak M, Polanowska K, Seniów J, Członkowska A. Effects of Repeated Anodal  tDCS Coupled With  
Cognitive Training for Patients With  Severe Traumatic  Brain  Injury:  A Pilot  Randomized Controlled  Trial.  J 
Head Trauma Rehabil . 2013. doi:10.1097/HTR.0b013e318292a4c2.
45. Coffman B  a, Trumbo  MC, Clark VP. Enhancement of object detection with  transcranial direct current 
stimulation is associated with  increased  attention.  BMC Neurosci . 2012;13:108.  doi:10.1186/1471-2202-13-
108.
46. Quinn DK, Rees C,  Brodsky A, et  al. Catatonia After Deep Brain Stimulation  Successfully Treated With 
Lorazepam and Right  Unilateral Electroconvulsive  Therapy:  A Case Report. J ECT . 2013;00(00):1 –3. 
doi:10.1097/YCT.0b013e31829e0afa.
47. Quinn DK, Deligtisch A, Rees C, et al.  Differential Diagnosis of  Psychiatric Symptoms After Deep Brain 
Stimulation for Movement Disorders. Neuromodulation. 2014;2013. doi:10.1111/ner.12153.
48. Ling JM, Peña A, Yeo  R a, et al. Biomarkers of increased diffusion anisotropy in  semi-acute mild traumatic 
brain injury: a  longitudinal perspective.  Brain. 2012;135(Pt 4):1281–92. doi:10.1093/brain/aws073.
49. Yeo R a,  Gasparovic  C, Merideth F, Ruhl D, Doezema D, Mayer AR. A  longitudinal  proton magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy study of mild traumatic  brain  injury. J Neurotrauma. 2011;28(1):1–11. 
doi:10.1089/neu.2010.1578.
50. Mayer AR, Ling JM,  Yang Z, Pena A, Yeo  R a, Klimaj  S. Diffusion  abnormalities in pediatric mild 
traumatic brain injury. J Neurosci. 2012;32(50):17961–9. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3379-12.2012.
51. Mayer a R, Ling J, Mannell M V, et al. A prospective  diffusion  tensor  imaging  study in  mild  traumatic brain 
injury. Neurology . 2010;74(8):643–50. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181d0ccdd.
52. Mayer AR, Yang Z, Yeo R a,  et al. A functional MRI study  of multimodal selective  attention  following mild 
traumatic brain injury. Brain Imaging  Behav. 2012;6(2):343–54. doi:10.1007/s11682-012-9178-z.
53. Quinn DK, Flaherty  AW, Herman JB,  Kleinschmidt  TL. Over  the rainbow: a  case of traumatic brain injury. 
Harv Rev Psychiatry. 18(1):56–66. doi:10.3109/10673220903523953.
54. Yarns BC, Quinn DK. Telephone effect in akinetic mutism from  traumatic brain injury. Psychosomatics. 
2013;54(6):609– 10. doi:10.1016/j.psym.2013.06.006.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  48 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 201955. Cavanagh JF, Shackman AJ.  Frontal  midline theta  reflects anxiety  and cognitive control: Meta-analytic  
evidence. J Physiol . 2015;109(1-3):3–15. doi:10.1016/j.jphysparis.2014.04.003.
56. Cavanagh JF, Frank  MJ. Frontal  theta  as a mechanism for cognitive  control. Trends Cogn Sci. 
2014;18(8):414– 421. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2014.04.012.
57. Larson  MJ, Perlstein WM, Demery J a, Stigge-Kaufman D  a. Cognitive control impairments in  traumatic 
brain injury. J Clin Exp  Neuropsychol. 2006;28(6):968 –86. doi:10.1080/13803390600646860.
58. Larson  MJ, Fair JE, Farrer TJ, Perlstein WM. Predictors of performance monitoring  abilities  following  
traumatic brain injury: the influence of negative  affect and cognitive sequelae. Int J Psychophysiol. 
2011;82(1):61–8.  doi:10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2011.02.001.
59. DaSilva  AF, Volz MS,  Bikson M, Fregni F. Electrode positioning and montage in  transcranial direct current 
stimulation. J Vis Exp. 2011;(51):e2744, doi:10.3791/2744. doi:10.3791/2744.
60. Miranda PC, Lomarev M,  Hallett M. Modeling  the current distribution during transcranial direct current 
stimulation. Clin Neurophysiol. 2006;117(7):1623–1629. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2006.04.009.
61. Seignourel PJ, Robins DL, Larson MJ, Demery J a, Cole M, Perlstein WM. Cognitive  control  in closed head  
injury: context maintenance dysfunction or prepotent  response inhibition deficit? Neuropsychology. 
2005;19(5):578– 90. doi:10.1037/0894-4105.19.5.578.
62. Munakata Y, Herd S  a, Chatham CH, Depue  BE, Banich  MT, O’Reilly  RC. A  unified framework for  
inhibitory control.  Trends Cogn  Sci. 2011;15(10):453–9. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2011.07.011.
63. Braver TS, Cohen JD. Working Memory  , Cognitive Control , and the Prefrontal  Cortex  : Computational 
and Empirical Studies.
64. Pontifex MB,  O’Connor  PM,  Broglio  SP, Hillman CH. The association between mild traumatic brain injury 
history and cognitive  control.  Neuropsychologia . 2009;47(14):3210–6. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.07.021.
65. Jaeggi SM, Seewer R, Nirkko AC, et al.  Does excessive memory  load attenuate activation in  the prefrontal 
cortex? Load-dependent  processing  in single and dual tasks: functional magnetic  resonance  imaging study.  
Neuroimage. 2003;19(2):210–225. doi:10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00098-3.
66. Sterr A, Herron K a,  Hayward  C, Montaldi D. Are mild head injuries as mild  as we think? Neurobehavioral 
concomitants of chronic post-concussion  syndrome. BMC  Neurol . 2006;6:7. doi:10.1186/1471-2377-6-7.
67. Harman-Smith YE, Mathias JL, Bowden SC, Rosenfeld J V, Bigler ED.  Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-
Third Edition profiles and  their  relationship to self-reported outcome following traumatic brain injury.  J Clin 
Exp Neuropsychol. 2013;35(8):785–98. doi:10.1080/13803395.2013.824554.
68. Clark VP, Coffman B  a, Trumbo MC,  Gasparovic  C. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) 
produces localized and  specific alterations in neurochemistry: a 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy study.  
Neurosci Lett. 2011;500(1):67–71. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2011.05.244.
69. McCauley SR, Pedroza C, Brown S a, et al.  Confirmatory factor structure of the Center for Epidemiologic  
Studies-Depression scale (CES-D) in mild-to-moderate traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj. 2006;20(5):519 –
27. doi:10.1080/02699050600676651.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Transcranial direct current stimulation for treatment of deficits  after 
traumatic brain injury.  
Page  49 of 49 Version Date: January 29, 201970. Ashman T a,  Cantor JB, Gordon W a,  et al. A randomized controlled trial of sertraline for the treatment of 
depression in persons with traumatic brain injury.  Arch  Phys Med Rehabil. 2009;90(5):733–40. 
doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2008.11.005.
71. Vasterling JJ,  Brailey K, Proctor SP, Kane R, Heeren T, Franz M. Neuropsychological  outcomes  of mild 
traumatic brain injury, post-traumatic stress disorder and depression in  Iraq-deployed  US Army soldiers. Br 
J Psychiatry. 2012;201(3):186–92. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.111.096461.
72. Poreisz C, Antal A, Paulus W. Safety aspects of transcranial direct current stimulation concerning healthy subjects and patients. Brain Res Bull . 2007;72:208 –214. doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.01.004.
73. Schiller C, Reisinger E, Nitsche M. Skin lesions  after  treatment  with  transcranial direct current stimulation 
(tDCS). Brain Stimul. 2008;1(4):386–387. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2008.04.003.
74. Dundas  JE, Thickbroom GW, Mastaglia  FL. Perception of comfort during transcranial DC  stimulation  : 
Effect of NaCl solution  concentration applied to sponge electrodes. Clin Neurophys . 2007;118:1166–1170. 
doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2007.01.010.
75. Bikson M, Datta A, Elwassif M. Establishing  safety limits for transcranial direct current stimulation. Clin 
Neurophysiol. 2009;120(6):1033–1034. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2009.03.018.
76. Gálvez  V, Alonzo  A, Martin D, Mitchell PB,  Sachdev  P, Loo CK. Hypomania induction in  a patient with  
bipolar II disorder by transcranial  direct current stimulation (tDCS). J ECT . 2011;27(3):256 –8. 
doi:10.1097/YCT.0b013e3182012b89.
77. Brunoni AR, Valiengo L, Baccaro A, et  al. The sertraline vs. electrical current therapy  for treating  
depression clinical study: results from a factorial,  randomized, controlled trial. JAMA psychiatry. 
2013;70(4):383– 91. doi:10.1001/2013.jamapsychiatry.32.
78. Liebetanz D, Koch  R, Mayenfels  S, König F, Paulus W, Nitsche M a. Safety  limits of cathodal transcranial 
direct current  stimulation  in rats. Clin Neurophysiol. 2009;120(6):1161–7. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2009.01.022.
79. Angelakis E, Liouta E,  Andreadis N, et al. Transcranial  Direct Current Stimulation  Effects  in Disorders of  
Consciousness. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2013. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2013.09.002.
80. Bastani  a., Jaberzadeh S. a-tDCS Differential  Modulation of  Corticospinal Excitability: The Effects of  
Electrode Size. Brain Stimul. 2013;6(6):932–937. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2013.04.005.
81. Faria P, Hallett M, Miranda PC. A finite element analysis of the effect of electrode  area and inter-electrode 
distance on the spatial  distribution of the current density  in tDCS. J  Neural Eng. 2011;8(6):066017. 
doi:10.1088/1741-2560/8/6/066017. 