Signed copy on file at IRB                v. 11/15/13  New York State Psychiatric Institute  
Institutional Review Board  
 
November 1 6, 2018  
 
 
To:  Dr. Daniel Javitt  
From :  Dr. Edward Nunes, Co -Chair  
  Dr. Agnes Whitaker, Co -Chair  
      
Subject : Approval Notice : Continuation Expedited per 45CFR46.110(b)(1 )(f)Category 8(c)  
 
    
Your protocol # 6662  entitled:  TDCS  FOR AUDITORY HALLUCINATIONS IN  
SCHIZOPHRENIA Protocol version date 11/16/2018 has been approved by the New York State 
Psychiatric Institute - Columbia University Department of Psychiatry Institutional Review Board 
from December  17, 2018 to December 1 6, 201 9.  
 
Consent requirements:  
      √  Not applicable: Data Analysis  Only  
    45CFR46.11 6 (d) waiver  of consent for secondary data analysis  
       Signature by the person(s) obtaining consent is required to document the consent process  
      Documentation of an independent assessment of the participant’s capacity to consent is als o 
required.  
Approved for recruitment of subjects who lack capacity to consent :  No  Yes     
 
Field Monitoring Requirements:   Routine  Special: ___________________  
 
 
  Only copies of consent documents that are currently approved by the IRB may be used to obtain 
consent for participation in this study.  
  A progress report and application for continuing review is required 2 months prior to the 
expiration date of IRB app roval.  
  Changes to this research may not be initiated without the review and approval of the IRB except 
when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to participants.  
  All serious and/or unanticipated problems or events involving risks to subjects or others must be 
reported immediately to the IRB.  Please refer to the PI -IRB website at http://irb.nyspi.org  for 
Adverse Event Reporting Procedures and additional reporting requirements.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
EN/AW /kpz4alw 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 1 of 29
Protocol Title:
tDCS for Auditory Hallucinations  in 
Schizophrenia
Protocol Number:
6662
First Approval:
03/04/2013
Expiration Date:
12/16/2019Version Date:
11/16/2018
Clinic:
Brain and Behavior  Clinic
Contact Principal Investigator:
Daniel Javitt, MD,  PHD
Email: javitt@nki.rfmh.org
Telephone: 6467745404Co-Investigator(s):
Stefan Rowny, MD
Joshua Kantrowitz, MD
Research Chief:
Daniel Javitt, MD,  PHD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
I am submitting an  annual continuation  without modifications 
Division & Personnel
Division
What Division/Department does the  PI belong  to?
Experimental Therapeutics/PsychiatryWithin the division/department, what Center  or group are you affiliated with, if  any? 
Silvio O.  Conte Center for  Schizophrenia  Research
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 2 of 29
Oded Meiron, Ph.D.
Application for Continuation of Research
Status
Current Status  of Study: 
All research interventions were completed. Only data analysis is ongoing.
Summary of  Experiences  to Date
Please provide a summary  of scientific progress of  the study and the experience of research participants,  to 
date. This requirement is designed to allow for  the investigator and  the IRB to  reassess the study’s  risks  and 
benefits in terms  of developments in the  field, changing practice patterns, and  new  IRB policies and  
procedures.Study has  been  completed. Data analysis continues for an  R61-R33 application.A  manuscript has been 
submitted to Biological  Psychiatry and will be presented at ACNP  2018.
Funding
Have there  been  any changes in funding status since the prior  approval? 
NoHave the principal  investigator and other investigators made all required disclosures of financial  interest  in 
the study sponsor/product?Yes
Summary
Have there  been  any study findings, recent literature, or untoward events occuring here or at other sites in  
the past  year which  might  affect the analysis of the  safety, risks or benefits of study participation? 
NoHave there  been  any serious adverse events  (serious and/or unanticipated  problems  involving risks to  
subjects or others  at this  site which occured in the  past year)?  
NoHave all study staff with a  significant role in the design or implementation  of the human subject components 
of this study  received required training in human research subject protections?
NoIs the study covered by a certificate of confidentiality? YesCertificate expiration date (mm/dd/yyyy) 
12/31/2021
Overall Progress
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 3 of 29
Approved sample size120Total number  of participants enrolled to date
75Number of participants  who  have completed the study to date 
56Have there  been  any significant deviations  from the anticipated study recruitment, retention or completion 
estimates? NoComments / additional information Study enrollment  is ended.
Sample Demographics
Specify populationschizophreniaTotal number  of participants enrolled from this population to  date  
65Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown 
Caucasian: 26African-American: 36Hispanic: 9Asian: 1
Other: 3
 
Male: 56
Female: 19
 
Summary of  Current Year's Enrollment and  Drop-out  
Number of participants  who  signed consent  in the past year
0Did the investigator  withdraw participants from the study? 
NoDid participants  decide  to discontinue study involvement? 
No
Procedures
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 4 of 29
To create the protocol summary form,  first indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Psychiatric Assessment
   Neuropsychological Evaluation
   Collection of Biological  Specimens
   Use of Placebo or Sham Treatment
   MRI
   Use of Investigational Drug or Device
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Adults  who may have impaired  decision-making ability
   Medically and Psychiatrically  Healthy  Subjects
   Adults
   Adults  over 50
   Individuals with Psychosis
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?NoIs the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
YesSelect the number of external  sources of funding that  will be applicable to  this study
2
Funding Source #1
Is the PI  of the grant/contract the same  as the PI of the IRB protocol? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract is currently fundedSource of FundingFoundationSponsorStanley Medical Research  Institute (SMRI)
Select one of the followingMulticenter(NYSPI is the  lead site)
Business OfficeCUDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 5 of 29
No
Funding Source  #2
Is the PI  of the grant/contract the same  as the PI of the IRB protocol? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract is currently fundedSource of FundingFederalInstitute/AgencyNIMHGrant NameColumbia Conte CenterGrant NumberP50 MH086385  
Select one of the followingMulticenter(NYSPI is the  lead site)
Business OfficeCUDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
No
Study Location
Indicate if the  research  is/will be conducted at any  of the  following
   NYSPI
This protocol  describes research conducted  by the  PI at other facilities/locations
No
Lay Summary of Proposed  Research 
Lay Summary of Proposed ResearchThe purpose  of the present research  is to test a potential new  treatment for auditory verbal  hallucinations in 
schizophrenia that  uses transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS),  a neurostimulation technique that  
passes an extremely weak electric current through the brain. During the treatment, two electrodes  are 
positioned on the  scalp  above regions of  the brain implicated in abnormal cortical activity associated  with 
auditory verbal hallucinations  in schizophrenia (1-3). Due to  the directional flow of current, one electrode, 
termed “cathodal”,  inhibits cortical activity, and the other, termed “anodal”, increases  cortical  activity.  
These electrodes will be placed such that cathodal stimulation is applied to an  area  associated with 
hyperactivity and anodal stimulation to an area  associated with hypoactivity. One preliminary study has 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 6 of 29
revealed that  this form of neurostimulation can alleviate auditory  verbal hallucination  symptoms both 
immediately following  five days of treatment  and up to three months  after the final treatment(4). The goal of 
this study is to replicate these effects  and explore the mechanisms that may underpin them.
 
45 patients with  persistent  auditory verbal hallucinations will be  recruited to  this study. Each individual will   
participate in behavioral assessments lasting up to 3 hours each and and  will then  be randomized to receive a 
series of active  vs. sham  tDCS treatments. For  active treatment, patients will have the inhibitory (cathodal) 
tDCS electrode placed over left  auditory cortex relative to  an anodal placed over frontal cortex on the right 
side. tDCS treatments will take place for 20 min per day for 5 consecutive days.  For  sham,  procedures will 
be similar except that  sham (inactive) tDCS treatment  will be used. Assessment  batteries will then be  
repeated following  completion of treatment  and at 1 and 3 mo following treatment. In addition, patients will 
be offered the possibility  to participate in a concurrent magnetic resonance  imaging (MRI)  study aimed at  
evaluating the effects of tDCS on activation of auditory cortex  during a auditory  discrimination task as well  
as on other imaging  parameters related  to resting brain activity and metabolism. Patients  who agree to 
participate in this MRI study will be scanned before and after active or sham tDCS.
 
In addition  to hallucinating patients, we  will recruit  up to  20 healthy controls  and 20 non-hallucinating 
patients, who will have similar assessments to the patients, but will not  receive tDCS. Overall, we 
hypothesize that tDCS treatment will lead to reduction in hallucinations, improvement in auditory function, and change in MRI measurements so that patients more closely resemble healthy  volunteers  and non-
hallucinating patients.  
Background, Significance  and Rationale
Background, Significance and RationaleThe term “hallucination”  refers to a sensory experience  that is not in  accordance with  reality.  For example, 
many individuals  who suffer from schizophrenia have the experience that people are speaking to them  
(“auditory verbal hallucinations”) even when  this is not, in fact,  the case. Moreover, the voices experienced 
by these individuals often include  derogatory  content, leading to significant  emotional  distress. In the worst 
case, hallucinations may  “command” individuals to perform acts that are harmful to themselves of  others.  In 
some cases,  voices are perceived coming  from inside the head, although  in others they are experienced as 
coming from outside. Although hallucinations  respond adequately  to antipsychotic medications in most 
patients with schizophrenia, for some patients  the hallucinations persist  and remain a significant source  of 
distress. The present project is  directed  toward  development of a new treatment for persistent auditory  
verbal hallucinations in individual with schizophrenia. 
 
One theory  regarding the etiology of  auditory hallucinations is that they reflect overactivity of the auditory  
region of brain (auditory cortex), especially left temporo-parietal cortex(1), and hypoactivity in the prefrontal cortex, especially dorsolateral  and anterior cingulate  regions(2,  5). In individuals with  persistent 
hallucinations, these abnormalities persist despite treatment with antipsychotic medication. Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) is a relatively new technique in which  small electrodes are placed  over  
specific regions of the  scalp and extremely low currents (1-2 mA) are  applied to  specific  brain regions for 
up to 20 minutes. Depending  upon the direction of  current  flow, these  currents may either increase 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 7 of 29
(stimulate) or decrease  (inhibit) activity  in underlying brain regions. It  has been reported  that applying 
inhibitory currents  over left auditory  regions for 20 min per day over  5 consecutive days leads  to significant, 
long-lasting reductions  in auditory hallucinations (6). The present study seeks to replicate this  finding and  
will utilize MRI measures of brain activity  and metabolism and behavioral assessments to  understand the 
underlying mechanisms.  
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
The aim of  this study is to evaluate  the effects on schizophrenia symptoms of tDCS  applied with  cathodal 
(inhibitory) electrode over the left temporo-parietal junction and anodal  (excitatory) electrode over the left  
dorsolateral prefrontal  cortex.
Our specific hypotheses are:
1.In comparison to sham, active  tDCS treatment will decrease the severity of refractory auditory 
hallucinations in patients with schizophrenia
2.In comparison to sham, active  tDCS treatment will decrease the severity of negative schizophrenia 
symptoms
3.In comparison to sham, active  tDCS treatment will normalize auditory function  as reflected in 
stronger prediction error  signals  in the auditory cortex during the auditory  discrimination task and  
decreased baseline activity in this region.  
4.In comparison to sham, active  tDCS treatment will normalize auditory function  as reflected in 
reduced cerebral blood flow in auditory  cortex  and normalized  metabolism.
5.Symptom alleviation following active tDCS treatment will be  maintained over the course of 3 
months
The two control  groups  (AVH- and healthy controls) will serve as comparison groups  for specific  AIM 3 
and 4 only.
Description of Subject Population
Sample #1
Specify subject  population
Schizophrenia patients  with auditory hallucinations
Number of completers  required to accomplish study aims
60Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain  required number  of completers
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 8 of 29
75Age range of subject  population
18-55
Sample #2
Specify subject  population
Schizophrenia patients  without  auditory hallucinations
Number of completers  required to accomplish study aims
20Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain  required number  of completers
30Age range of subject  population
18-55
Sample #3
Specify subject  population
Non-clinical control participantsNumber of completers  required to accomplish study aims
20Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain  required number  of completers
30Age range of subject  population
18-55
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
Expected racial breakdown is approximately  50% Caucasian, 16% African-American, 16% Hispanic, 16% 
Asian, and 2% other. Expected gender ratio is 50% male and 50% female.
Description of subject population60 patients between the ages of 18 and  55 with a SCID diagnosis  of schizophrenia  or schizoaffective 
disorder will  be enrolled in the study. All participants will exhibit refractory auditory verbal  hallucinations,  
defined as  the persistence of daily hallucinations without remission despite antipsychotic medication at 
adequate dosage for  at least 3 months. 
In addition  to the primary intervention group, two comparison groups  will be studied:
1. A group  of patients  with  minimal or no auditory hallucinations (AH-) (n=20); and
2. A group  of non-clinical  healthy volunteers (n=20)
These subjects will  be tested using a subset of  the baseline assessment  battery  used with AH+ patients,  but 
will not receive  tDCS or  repeat assessments.
All patients will  be receiving antipsychotic  medication  at the time of study entry. Patients  will remain on 
their present dose of antipsychotic  medication  throughout the treatment  interval.  
All participants  will receive a  physical examination and medical history  evaluation in order  to rule out  
disorders that might increase risks associated with tDCS, a  urine toxicology  screen  to rule out  illicit drug 
abuse, and a pregnancy test  for women of childbearing capacity.  After passing all screening criteria, 
participants may be removed from the study if they  do not comply  with  study procedures, if  there is a  
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 9 of 29
change in their medical  status, or if  an adverse event has occurred.
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Patients with schizophrenia  will be recruited through the Lieber Schizophrenia Research Clinic 
and the community  by our staff, all of whom will have undergone  CITI and  HIPAA training. 
Healthy controls will be recruited from the community.
 
How and by whom  will subjects be approached  and/or recruited? 
Patients will be recruited from the Lieber  Schizophrenia  Research Clinic  as follows:
1.      Clinical psychiatrists  and psychologists of each service will be informed about  the study.
2.      The clinic psychiatrist will ask patients  that they feel are clinically appropriate to see if he 
or she would agree to be contacted about this research protocol.
3.      If the patient agrees, then a study  psychiatrist or psychologist  would meet with the patient  
to describe  the study and ask if the patient would be interested in participating.
4.      If the patient is interested in the study and appears to meet  general eligibility criteria, the 
patient would  be evaluated for capacity to give informed consent,  and if they have adequate 
capacity, then provide written informed consent.  
 
Control subjects and  patients from the community  will be approached after they answer advertisements.
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
The study will be publicized to patients with schizophrenia via contact with the Lieber  
Schizophrenia Research clinic. Non-clinical control participants will be recruited by word of mouth, 
fliers, through our division's website and Craigslist.  Advertisements will be submitted to the IRB  
prior to initiation of studies.
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
NoDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
YesPlease provide the NCT Registration Number[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
Yes
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 10 of 29
Describe concurrent research  involvement
#4158  Lieber  Schizophrenia Research Clinic (LSRC)  Umbrella  Protocol
6691: MOSAIC: The Management Of Schizophrenia In Clinical  Practice
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name the subject group/sub sampleSchizophrenia patients  with auditory hallucinations
Create or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them
CriterionMethod of  
Ascertainment
1. Age between 18-55 Self report
2. SCID primary  diagnosis of DSM-IV 
schizophrenia or schizoaffective  disorderSCID
3. Persistent auditory  verbal hallucinationsAuditory Hallucinations Rating Scale mean item  
score >2 and stable mean score >2 or within 25% of screening score at baseline
4. Right handed  Edinburgh Handedness Questionnaire 
5. Stable antipsychotic medication  for >4 weeksPhysician evaluation/Psychiatric history 
6. Normal hearing Physician evaluation 
7. If female  and not infertile, must  agree  to use one 
of the following forms of  contraception  for the 
duration of study participation: systemic hormonal treatment, an IUD which was implanted  at least 2 
months prior to screening,  or “double-barrier”  
contraception.Physician evaluation
8. Willing/capacity to provide informed consent Physician evaluation 
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them
CriterionMethod of  
Ascertainment
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 11 of 29
1. Substance dependence or abuse  (excluding  nicotine) 
in the past  90 daysPhysician evaluation
2.Current significant laboratory abnormality*  screening labs 
 3. History of  seizure,  epilepsy in self or first degree  
relatives, stroke, brain surgery, head injury with loss of consciousness >  1 hour  or clear cognitive sequelae,  
intracranial metal implants, known structural  brain 
lesion, devices  that may be affected by tDCS 
(pacemaker, medication  pump,  cochlear  implant,  
implanted brain stimulator) Physician evaluation/Medical history
4. Frequent and  persistent migrainesPhysician evaluation/Medical history 
5. History of  adverse reaction to neurostimulation or 
open skin wounds that would preclude safe  placement of 
tDCS electrodesSelf report  
6. Participation in study of investigational  
medication/device within 4 weeksSelf report  
7. Current use of medications known to lowerseizure threshold (Lithium, Theophylline, Tricyclic  
antidepressants, Buproprion >450 mg/day and  Clozapine 
>600 mg/day, brand name and  generic  
methylphenidate/mixed amphetamine salts)Physician evaluation/Medical history 
8.If female,  pregnant or breast feeding at the time of 
screeningUrine pregnancy test and  self report
9. For MRI study only: Claustrophobia or metal implants or  paramagnetic objects contained within the 
body which may interfere with the MRI scan,  as 
determined according  to the guidelines set forth  in the 
following reference  book: “Guide to MR procedures and 
metallic objects”  Shellock, PhD,  Lippincott-Raven 
press, NY  1998.History, interview
*Note: Clinically significant laboratory abnormality refers to patient lab results  that fall  significantly  outside  
the established  ranges,  may be indicative  of the presence of a medical condition, and are not  thought to  
reflect an artifact or  routine lab error (e.g., hemolysis). Results  of laboratory tests are  reviewed by the study 
physician prior to any treatment. Abnormal lab results  of clinical  significance that cannot  be resolved (e.g.,  
by repeating the test to rule out laboratory error  or poor quality of the original sample) will lead to  exclusion 
from the study. Abnormal  laboratory  values associated with known,  chronic, stable  medical  conditions  will 
not be considered exclusionary unless the  condition would increase risk of study participation.  
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 12 of 29
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria #2
Name the subject group/sub sampleSchizophrenia patients  without  auditory hallucinations
Create or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them 
Criterion Method of  Ascertainment
1. Age between 18-55 Self report
2. SCID primary  diagnosis of DSM-IV 
schizophrenia or schizoaffectiveSCID
3. Right handedEdinburgh Handedness Questionnaire 
4. Normal hearing Physician evaluation 
5. Stable course of antipsychotic  medication for 
>1 monthPhysician evaluation/Psychiatric history 
6. Use of effective method  of birth  control for 
women of childbearing  capacityPhysician evaluation 
7. Willing/capacity to provide informed consent Physician evaluation 
8. Signed HIPAA authorization Physician evaluation 
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them 
CriteriaMethod of  
Ascertainmment
1. Current persistent  auditory verbal hallucinationsAuditory Hallucinations Rating Scale mean item score >0
2. Current or past history of substance  dependence 
(excluding nicotine)Physician evaluation
3. Substance abuse (excluding nicotine) within last 90 daysPhysician evaluation/Urine toxicology screen 
4. Current diagnosis of any other Axis I disorderSCID/Psychiatric history 
5. History of  seizure, epilepsy in self or first degree  
relatives, stroke, brain surgery, head injury, intracranial metal implants, known structural brain  lesion, devices 
that may be affected by tDCS (pacemaker, medication pump, cochlear  implant, implanted  brain  stimulator)
Physician evaluation/Medical history 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 13 of 29
6. Frequent and  persistent migrainesPhysician evaluation/Medical history 
7. Participation in study of investigational  
medication/device within 6 weeksSelf report  
8. Current use of medications known to lower  seizure  
threshold (benzodiazepines, mood stabilizers)Physician evaluation/Medical history 
9. PregnancyUrine pregnancy test 
10. Women who are breast-feeding Self report  
11. For MRI  study only: Claustrophobia or metal 
implants or  paramagnetic objects contained within the 
body which may interfere with the MRI scan,  as 
determined according  to the guidelines set forth  in the 
following reference  book: “Guide to MR procedures and 
metallic objects”  Shellock, PhD,  Lippincott-Raven 
press, NY  1998. History, interview
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria #3
Name the subject group/sub sampleNon-clinical control participantsCreate or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them 
CriterionMethod of  
Ascertainment
1. Age between 18-55 Self report
2. Right handedEdinburgh Handedness Questionnaire
3. Normal hearing Physician evaluation 
4. Use of effective method  of birth  control for 
women of childbearing  capacityPhysician evaluation 
5. Willing to provide  informed consent Physician evaluation 
6. Signed HIPAA authorization Physician evaluation 
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them 
CriterionMethod of  
Ascertainment
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 14 of 29
1. Current or past history of substance  dependence 
(excluding nicotine)Physician evaluation
2. Substance abuse (excluding nicotine) within last 90 daysPhysician evaluation/Urine toxicology screen
3. Current diagnosis of any Axis I disorderSCID-NP/Psychiatric history 
4. History of  seizure, epilepsy in self or first degree  
relatives, stroke brain surgery, head injury, intracranial metal implants, known structural brain  lesion, devices 
that may be affected by tDCS (pacemaker, medication pump, cochlear  implant, implanted  brain  stimulator)
Physician evaluation/Medical history 
5. Frequent or persistent migrainesPhysician evaluation/Medical history 
6. Participation in study of investigational  
medication/device within 6 weeksSelf report  
7. Current use of medications known to lower  the 
seizure thresholdPhysician evaluation/Medical history 
8. PregnancyUrine pregnancy test 
9. Women who are breast-feeding Self report  
10. For MRI study only: Claustrophobia or metal  
implants or paramagnetic objects  contained within 
the body which  may interfere with the MRI scan, as  
determined according to the guidelines set forth in the following reference book: “Guide  to MR 
procedures and metallic  objects” Shellock, PhD, 
Lippincott-Raven press,  NY 1998. History, interview
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) NoWaiver or alteration of consentNoWaiver of documentation of consent 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 15 of 29
NoWaiver of parental consent No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
NoDescribe procedures  used  to obtain consent  during  the screening  process 
All staff members involved in screening participants will have undergone HIPAA and CITI  training.  Prior to 
screening, potential  participants will be  asked whether they are  willing to answer questions about their  
medical and psychiatric  history.  Screening  will only proceed once consent has been  given.
Describe Study Consent ProceduresStudy consent will be  obtained by investigators only. All  investigators will have undergone  HIPAA and  
CITI training, and will be familiar with tDCS.  The investigator will explain all study procedures and  
associated risks prior to requesting  consent. When recruiting patients with schizophrenia, an M.D. who  is 
not affiliated with the  study will ask  the patient questions about the study procedures and  risks  in order to 
determine whether the patient understands  the study and has the capacity to provide consent.
Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Consent Form
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Girgis, Ragy, MDJavitt, Daniel, MDKantrowitz, Joshua,  MD
Type in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Independent Assessment of Capacity
You have indicated  that your study  involves  subjects who  MAY  LACK capacity to  consent.
Does this study require an  independent assessment of capacity?
YesMethods/procedures for  capacity assessment
An M.D. who is unaffiliated but familiar with the study  will ask potential participants who have been 
diagnosed with schizophrenia questions about the study  procedures  and associated risks  in order to 
determine whether the patient understands  the study and has the capacity to provide consent.
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 16 of 29
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this studyOverview
 
AH + Sample
 
The treatment portion  of this study will follow a double-blind parallel arm design in which patients, raters 
and investigators will be blinded with respect to condition assignment. All  personnel  will have undergone 
HIPAA and CITI training. Following a clinical  evaluation  to determine eligibility, patients will be assigned 
to either the active or the sham condition. In the  active condition, patients will receive cathodal stimulation 
to the left temporo-parietal  junction  and anodal stimulation to  the left  dorsolateral  prefrontal  cortex at 2mA  
X 20 min in each session. In the sham  condition, electrodes will be  placed  over  the same  regions,  but current  
will be applied  under a  “sham” approach in which  currents are initially  ramped  up over 30 s  as in  the active 
condition, but then  immediately ramped down. Prior experience has shown that  subjects  do not  distinguish 
the active and sham  conditions.  Patients  will participate in two daily  sessions of 20 minutes each for 5 
consecutive weekdays. Auditory hallucinations  as determined by the Auditory Hallucinations Rating Scale 
(AHRS) and the five dimensions of schizophrenia  symptoms assessed in the Positive and Negative 
Syndrome Scale (PANSS) will be assessed  at baseline, immediately following the final treatment, and at 1-  
and 3-month follow-up timepoints. AHRS  will be  repeated prior to first treatment session.  All subjects will 
be assessed prior to and following initiation of 5-d  treatment period using a neurophysiological battery 
sensitive to auditory dysfunction in schizophrenia,  and neuropsychological tests  of auditory  and general 
neurocognitive impairment. The neurophysiological impact of tDCS will be assessed  by MRI  procedures 
described below at baseline and  immediately  following the final  treatment.  MRI sessions are optional for  
AVH+ patients.
 
Comparison Samples
 
AH- patients and non-clinical control participants will first undergo  clinical evaluation  to determine 
eligibility according to their sample’s respective  inclusion/exclusion criteria before  participating in a  
baseline assessment session. Baseline  assessments for the AH- patients will include the  same 
neurophysiological battery sensitive  to auditory dysfunction, neuropsychological  tests auditory  and general 
neurocognitive impairment, MRI  procedures  that the AH+  patient  sample receives. Non-clinical  control 
participants will  only take part  in the assessment of auditory function  and MRI  procedure.
 
Evaluation
 
After the patient signs the informed consent form and the HIPAA authorization,  he/she will undergo  clinical 
evaluation to determine study eligibility. All participants will receive  medical assessments from an  MD 
(medical history,  physical  examination, urine  pregnancy test and toxicology) and either the SCID 
(schizophrenia patients) from an  RN or SCID-NP  (non-clinical controls)  from  an MA level psychologist. 
All patients with  schizophrenia will also undergo  a psychiatric history  assessment  with an  MD. Patients  in 
the AH+  sample will undergo  additional medical assessments  including blood  draw, urinalysis and ECG to 
ensure tDCS  safety.  A urine pregnancy will be  done during screening and prior  to the first tDCS session (on 
Day 1). 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 17 of 29
 
Assessments
 
Baseline assessment  will consist  of behavioral assessments of auditory  function as described below. All  
assessments will be  performed by a rater blind to condition assignment. Symptoms will be assessed  by an 
MA level psychologist. Neuropsychological testing will be conducted by a trained, BA level  research 
assistant.
 
Behavioral Measures
 
Behavioral assessments will consist of ratings scales for both AH+  and AH- patients,  and a hearing test for 
all participants including both patients and  non-clinical controls. Ratings scales will include the Positive and 
Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), Auditory Hallucinations Rating  Scale (AHRS), the Measurement  and 
Treatment Research to Improve Cognition in Schizophrenia (MATRICS) neuropsychological battery, and the Self-report Quality  of Life  Scale  (SQLS) (7). The hearing test completed by all patients and  non-clinical 
controls will consist of  a computerized tone matching task (TMT) which  will assess their ability to match 
tones following brief delay (8, 9)
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)Subjects who  consent for the optional MRI component will undergo MRI scanning, which  includes 
structural 3-Tesla  MRI  scans and  task-based  fMRI scans and may include resting-state fMRI,  resting-state 
ASL, magnetic resonance spectroscopy,  and diffusion tensor  imaging. None of  the imaging modalities used  
in the study will include exogenous contrasts.  Total  scanning time will typically be around 2 hours and will  
not exceed 3 hours.    MRI scans will be  performed immediately  before  and after  the treatment period with active  or sham  tDCS 
in AVH+ patients.  Comparison  AVH- patients and  healthy participants will also undergo MRI scanning 
despite not receiving tDCS. On the  day of MRI scanning, subjects will be  accompanied  to the MRI  suite at 
the NYSPI or Neurological Institute  (depending  on availability). The subject will be placed in a  supine 
position on the camera  table. Head  will be positioned and  a plastic head-holder will be  used to  decrease 
head movement during the scan.  A bite bar (a  soft but  firm  mouthpiece)  will also be  offered to  the subjects  
to prevent  excessive movement. Participants may or may not bite  down  on the bite bar.  A new disposable 
cover for the bite  bar will be used for every new participant. The  participants will be given foam earplugs to 
reduce the noise of the MRI as well as  a MRI-compatible hand  held  response pad  for responding  to the task 
(multi-button response units or  mouse or a similar device). The tasks will be projected from  an Insight liquid 
crystal display (LCD) projector zoomed to a screen  inside the MR suite or viewed  through dual channel  
binocular goggles (Silent  Vision SV-2600; Avotec, Inc.). All subjects will undergo a structural MRI scan at 
the beginning of the session to allow for anatomical co-registration. Women  will have  urine pregnancy 
testing on each  MRI  scan day.
MRI Screening 
Before inclusion  in the MRI experiment, all subjects  will be screened to ensure  their eligibility for MRI  
scanning. The screening questionnaire  includes questions regarding inclusion/exclusion  criteria, including 
the presence of ferromagnetic implants, pubertal status, and  pregnancy.  Questions will be  asked to  
determine if girls/women  are post-menarche  or pre-menopausal. Menarche will be defined as the onset  of 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 18 of 29
menstruation, and  menopause will be  defined  as the  offset of menstruation.  Females will be asked  during the 
screening process  if they are currently  pregnant. Questions regarding ferromagnetic  implants will determine 
whether or  not the subject  will be at any risk being in the scanner.  If the subject  has any metallic implants 
(i.e. metal  heart valve, aortic clips, etc.)  that are unsuitable for the scanner, the subject  will not  be included 
in our study. Inclusion and exclusion  in our study will be determined by the PI and co-PIs  in this study.  
Further screening will be  done via the New  York State Psychiatric Institute – Dept. of Psychiatry MRI  
Metal Screening Questionnaire. A 38-item questionnaire that was developed by the MRI  Unit will be 
administered to every  subject before they enter the MRI scanner. This  questionnaire asks specifically about  
metallic implants  and past experiences with metal to further ascertain any possible risks  the person may 
incur by entering the scanner.  Again, if any metallic implants are  detected that  are unsuitable  for the 
scanner, the subject will not be included in our study. All  precautions will be taken  for the safety of the 
participants.fMRI Task Description (auditory  discrimination  task)
Participants will perform an auditory  discrimination task during  the fMRI scans. This  task is designed to  
detect activation in the  auditory cortex and other language-related areas, without interference  from the 
scanner noise, regardless  whether the  activation  is induced by external acoustic stimulation or by internally 
generated or  spontaneous processes.  Subjects will be explained that  they  will hear recordings of spoken 
sentences through  headphones at random  intervals  while in  the scanner. Each stimulus will be  presented 
over an  otherwise silent  epoch, which will be followed by a  short noisy imaging acquisition period. Right 
when the latter finishes, they will be  asked if they heard any voices immediately before  the scanner noise 
started and they would need press a button to indicate so. They will be instructed that the content of the sentences will be  explicit in some cases and they will listen  to the recordings before the scanning session.  
Before each of the  two sessions in the scanner,  participants will have a training session  in a computer 
outside of  the scanner. The training session will last about 30 minutes.
Although our MRI Scans are for research purposes (and not  clinical purposes),  a credentialed, board-
certified radiologist  will perform a  clinical  reading for gross structural abnormalities on every MRI within 1 
month of scanning. If anything clinically significant is found, Dr. Javitt  will be notified immediately, and  an 
appropriate clinical referral will be provided to the participant. In the case that an  MRI  technician or other 
member of  the research  team suspects that  an MRI scan suggests evidence of a significant lesion, the PI will  
be notified immediately. If  the reading  yields  a finding  of immediate clinical concern, the radiologist will 
provide an oral report followed by a written  note to the PI and Director of the MRI unit. A  written report 
will be provided  within two weeks of the oral  report.  Results of the MRI  will be  provided to  the volunteers 
by a study physician.  Volunteers can opt to  receive a letter  regarding  the results  of the MRI  on the consent 
forms. Participants  requesting a letter will receive one using the language provided  by the IRB.
 
 
Treatment
 
Only patients  in the  AH+ sample will receive tDCS  treatment. Prior to the first treatment, all  female  subjects  
will receive  a pregnancy test.  Stimulation will be performed using a  battery-driven BrainStim SYS 
(Brainvision LLC, Germany), and transferred through two 7x5 cm sponge electrodes soaked in a saline solution (0.9% NaCl).  In accordance with a recent tDCS study (21) showing beneficial  effects of tDCS 
stimulation in reducing  AVH in hallucinating  schizophrenia patients, we will use a similar stimulation 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 19 of 29
montage. In the active  tDCS condition the  cathodal  electrode will be placed over the left temporoparietal 
junction, and the  anodal electrode  will be placed over right DLPFC. In accordance with  recent  studies  of 
tDCS in other psychiatric  or neurological illnesses(22-24), the stimulation level will be set  at 2 mA for  20 
minutes. Stimulation sessions will be conducted twice a day  on 5 consecutive  weekdays.  Each daily session 
will be separated  by at least 3 hours. In  sham stimulation,  electrodes  are located in the same  positions as in 
active stimulation  and the same  fade  in/fade  out ramp will be applied and the constant  current  will last only 
30 s. Small current pulses will also occur infrequently (every  550 ms, 110 mA over 15 ms) through  the 
remainder of  the 20-minute session to produce similar stimulation sensation between conditions.  During the  
treatment sessions, subjects will be  allowed  to watch  a silent  movie or read material  of their  choice.  
Treatments will  be administered by a  trained,  BA-level research  assistant under  supervision of an MD.  The  
RA will  undergo a  progression of graduating  steps consisting of observation, implementation under 
supervision, and  implementation with guidance. 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 20 of 29
Safety:
We will monitor for potential adverse  events of tDCS with the Wong-Baker Faces Pain Rating Scale  
(WBFPRS, Figure).  The WBFPRS is readily  understood by patients and  provides general evaluation of discomfort.  
Additionally, we will monitor discomfort  and potential objective adverse effects of tDCS (e.g. skin 
redness) as  suggested by "Brunoni AR,  Amadera J, Berbel  B, Volz  MS,  Rizzerio BG, Fregni F. A systematic  
review on reporting and assessment of adverse effects associated with transcranial direct current stimulation. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011;14:1133-45: (Figure 2).  Any  score  rated at a 3 or greater in  severity will 
require immediate evaluation by a qual ified member  of the clinical team (Dr. Stefan Rowny).  Both are 
familiar with Brain stimulation procedures.    
In these cases, the  psychiatrist will check in via phone with the subject the following day, and  then  as 
clinically indicated. 
 
Additionally, subjects  will receive the CGI-I  scale  prior to  each treatment session  to evaluate clinical 
stability. Additionally, at  baseline and  after the final treatment, patients will undergo pure tone 
audiometry testing for safety  screening.  If a change  in auditory threshold is discovered, the treating 
physician will  inform  the patient  and discuss  whether or not  to continue with treatment. Furthermore, if  a 
change is discovered,  the patient’s hearing will be tested again  periodically  until either it returns baseline or 
the clinician determines  that the change is permanent. 
 
Post-treatment Assessments
 
Immediately following  completion of last treatment, patients in  the AH+ sample will have 1 tube of blood  
drawn for BDNF levels.  Within 1 week following  completion  of treatment, patients will have repeat of 
baseline behavioral and ERP methods. Behavioral assessments will also be  repeated at  1- and  3-month 
follow-up timepoints.  Response  to treatment  will be defined as >15%  reduction in  AHRS  score. After the 
completion of the 3 month visit, subjects will be offered the opportunity to do  one week of optional, 
open label active treatment using identical procedures to the blinded treatment. Subjects will be seen once after the week of open treatment  for a follow-up visit 
 
Schedule of  Events
 
Please see  attached  table.
 
Comparison Samples
Participants in the  AH- and non-clinical control  samples will take part in  a baseline assessment session  only. 
AH- patients will be  assessed via the  SCID,  AHRS, PANSS/SQLS, MATRICS/TMT, and ERP procedure. 
Non-clinical control participants will be  assessed via the SCID-NP procedure. 
 
 
 Genetics Blood draw:
Only AVH+ subjects  will be asked to participate  in the genetics blood draw. 
 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 21 of 29
tDCS is thought to work in part by stimulation of BDNF( Fritsch B, Reis J,  Martinowich K,  Schambra HM, 
Ji Y, Cohen LG, Lu  B. Direct current stimulation promotes BDNF-dependent  synaptic plasticity: potential 
implications for motor learning. Neuron.  2010;66:198-204. PM#2864780). Furthermore, plasma BDNF is 
known to correlate with  CSF BDNF (Pillai A, Kale A, Joshi S, Naphade N, Raju MS,  Nasrallah  H, Mahadik 
SP. Decreased  BDNF levels in CSF  of drug-naive first-episode psychotic subjects: correlation  with plasma 
BDNF and psychopathology.  Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2010;13:535-9) and so represents an appropriate 
reflection of potential effects of  tDCS  on CNS plasticity. We predict that an  increase in  plasma  BDNF  may 
serve as  a marker of  "adequate" tDCS.  D-serine is an endogenous  modulator of NMDAR function that is 
known to modulate dendritic architecture in brain (Balu DT, Coyle JT. Neuronal  D-serine regulates 
dendritic architecture in the somatosensory cortex. Neurosci Lett. 2012;517:77-81. PM#3400345). D-serine synthesis is  dynamically regulated by compounds (e.g. nitric oxide)  that also affect  brain  plasticity (1. Darra  
E, Ebner  FH, Shoji K, Suzuki H, Mariotto S. Dual cross-talk between  nitric oxide and  D-serine in  astrocytes 
and neurons in the brain.  Cent Nerv  Syst  Agents Med Chem. 2009;9:289-94) . Although there is less 
literature regarding  effects of tDCS on D-serine regulation, nevetheless addition of this  measurement  (which 
is done by the  Cooper  lab) adds little expense to the study  and does not require additional phlebotomy. We 
postulate that successful tDCS will be accompanied by increased D-serine  release and possibly dendritic  
rearrangement in brain, and will be reflected in peripheral (plasma) D-serine concentrations.
 
 
In reviewing  the literature, we  note that there is also evidence that  BDNF  gene polymorphisms affect 
response to tDCS (Antal A,  Chaieb  L, Moliadze  V, Monte-Silva  K, Poreisz C,  
Thirugnanasambandam N, Nitsche  MA, Shoukier M, Ludwig H,  Paulus W.  Brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene polymorphisms shape cortical plasticity in humans.  Brain Stimul. 
2010;3:230-7). It  has also been demonstrated  that individuals with common  polymorphisms of the 
BDNF gene may show differential response to tDCS enhancement of brain  plasticity. Thus, for both  
facilitatory tDCS (24 subjects, 10 heterozygotes)  and inhibitory tDCS (19  subjects, 8 heterozygotes), 
carriers of  the Val66Met allele displayed enhanced  plasticity. In the present study, we will perform a 
secondary analysis to evaluate whether Val66 Met carriers show preferential response to  tDCS 
treatment.
 
 
 
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Criteria for Early Discontinuation  
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation
Treatment Termination
 
Study participation for patients in the AH+ sample  will be terminated for subjects with a  CGI-I worsening 
of 2 or greater for  two consecutive days,  or a CGI-S of 6 or 7 at anytime.
 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 22 of 29
Participants in all samples may choose to terminate their involvement at any time.  
Blood and other Biological Samples
Please create or insert  a table describing  the proposed collection  of blood or other biological specimens
Blood samples will be  drawn for patients in the  AH+ sample only. No blood or biological samples will be 
collected from  participants in the  AH- or non-clinical control samples.
 
12 cc at screening will be drawn  for blood work-up (Chem 20, Thyroid function) to  determine tDCS 
treatment safety.
30 cc tube of blood will be collected for  D-serine  and BDNF  assessment and genetics (optional).
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the  instruments  that will be used for assessment
SCID: 60 minSCID-NP: 30  min
AHRS: 20 minPANSS: 30 minMATRICS battery (without SC): 1 hrTone Matching Test: 20 min SQLS: 15 min
EEG for ERP  procedures:  3 hrs 
Wong-Baker Faces Pain Rating  Scale 1 minute
CGI-S  and CGI-I 5 minutes
Brunoni safety scale 5 minutes
Please attach copies, unless  standard  instruments are used
Off label and investigational use of drugs/devices
Choose from the following that will be applicable to your study 
   Device
Off label and investigational use of devices
Device #1
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 23 of 29
Name of  the device
BrainStim SYSManufacturer and other informationBrain Vision LLCApproval StatusIDE is approved
IDE#CE Reg#MED30003 Who holds the  IDE/IDE sponsor?
OtherEnter NameBrain Vision LLC
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?NoTreatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
None. This treatment will be added  to standard-of-care treatment for persistent auditory  hallucinations 
which consists of  use of antipsychotic medications.
Clinical Treatment Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternativesStandard-of-care treatment  for persistent auditory  hallucinations consists of use of antipsychotic 
medications.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
MRI
 
There are no known risks to the use of MRI per  se. However, three areas  of concern are  addressed in  the 
next section. The first is the safety risk posed by the attraction of ferromagnetic  metal  objects by high 
strength magnetic fields. The  second  is the discomfort some subjects experience during  confinement within  
the bore  of the MRI system. The third is the loud noise made by the gradients during  imaging.  These risks 
occur for all clinical MRI exams and are not increased by the proposed research. The  images  obtained  from 
structural and functional scanning are automatically transferred from the scanner to  a workstation that strips 
potentially identifying  data from the  image headers, writes the data as image  volumes identified by study 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 24 of 29
number only,  and stores  the data  on our password-protected server in  a directory only  accessible by the 
study investigators.  All MRI studies follow guidelines set by the FDA with  regard  to specific absorption 
ratio (SAR),  limits on gradient slew rate  (dB/dt),  and noise. Having ascertained  the absence of implanted 
metal foreign objects  using the aforementioned screening form, subjects and staff  remove all other metal 
objects, including clothing  with metal clasps, before  entering the magnet room. The magnetic properties of 
unknown material  are tested outside the  magnet room with  a strong permanent magnet. Participants and 
staff are also  instructed to enter the  magnet  room slowly and to  pause at the entrance to determine if  any 
items on their person  may be pulling toward  the magnet. Participants  wear insert earplugs  during  scanning 
to reduce noise levels below FDA limits. General Electric engineers have  recently measured the sound  
levels within  our scanners and have  determined that it  is compliant with FDA  guidelines.
    Some people have reported sensations during  MRI  scans, such as "tingling" or "twitching" (or,  very  
rarely, a painful sensation),  which  are caused by changes in the magnetic field that can stimulate nerves in  
the body. In our experience, no one  has had sensations from the MRI that did not stop when the scanning 
stopped. An  acute risk of burns to the skin is presented by medicinal  skin patches, and participants will be 
asked to remove patches  before entering the scanner. Some  participants may  feel uncomfortable or confined 
once positioned within the bore of the  MRI  system and it may cause  some  subjects to feel anxious.
 
 
Evaluation
 
Patients with schizophrenia  may experience some discomfort as a  result of questions asked during  the 
psychiatric evaluation, but this should be comparable  to their experiences in standard care. For participants 
recruited for the AH+ sample who receive  a blood draw: occasionally, redness or a bruise  may develop at 
the site  where blood was drawn.  If this occurs,  it will usually disappear in a few days. Some people  become 
dizzy and faint when  their blood is drawn.
 
tDCS (AH+  Sample Only)
 
Since the development of  tDCS in the 1960’s, hundreds of subjects have  participated  in studies and received 
tDCS without any adverse effects.  There  has been no evidence of  neuronal  damage  induced  by tDCS: in two 
evaluations, Nitsche and colleagues  (25, 26) found no elevation of neurone-specific enolase (sensitive 
marker of neuronal damage).  McCreery  et al.,(27)  demonstrated  that current densities below 25mA/cm2  do 
not induce brain tissue damage even  by applying high-frequency stimulation over several hours. In our 
protocol, we  stimulate with a maximum current  density of 0.057 mA/cm2, a  thousand  fold below this limit. 
Duration of stimulation is an additional factor contributing to  potential  tissue damage, which has been 
detected at a minimum total charge of  216 C/cm2 (28). (Total charge=current density  x stimulation 
duration.) This protocol exposes subjects to maximum total charges of 0.022 C/cm2, which  is far below the  
established safety threshold. Iyer  et al. (29)  demonstrated the safety of tDCS applied  at 1mA and  2mA for  
20 minutes to normal  subjects and noted some enhancement  of verbal  fluency after 2mA of stimulation, but 
no adverse events.  A recent study (30) has demonstrated the safety of  1mA of cathodal  tDCS  for 20 min in 
patients with refractory epilepsy. The  authors concluded that tDCS does not  induce seizures and may have 
an anti-epileptic effect. Fregni  et al, in May 2006 (31), report that patients suffering  from central pain 
secondary to traumatic spinal cord injury safely  tolerated tDCS at 2mA for  5 consecutive days, 20 min 
daily, with significant  pain improvement but no significant influence  on cognitive  performance  before  and 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 25 of 29
after treatment.Some participants  reported redness, itching,  and mild scabbing  of the skin under  the electrodes during  and 
after tDCS.  Some subjects have  reported a sunburn like sensation under the electrodes while current  was 
turned on. This has sometimes persisted for an  hour or more after the current  was turned off. Mild  scabbing 
has also been observed under an electrode, which resolved after a  few days. Both of these events  (sunburn  
like sensation and  scabbing) appear  to be related to drying out  of the sponge electrodes, which we learned 
from another investigator working with  tDCS. Since then we have  kept the sponges  sufficiently moist, and 
irritation has been minimal or absent, while scabbing has not recurred.Some subjects may  also experience mild nausea during or after the stimulation. In a study involving one-
hundred and two  subjects, 2.9% of the participants reported feeling  nauseous after receiving tDCS (32).
Reported side effects of tDCS include reddening of the skin under the electrodes (reported in two subjects with recently shaved  heads) and  itching under the electrode  sites  while the current was turned on. 
 
Genetics: there  are potential  dangers  in releasing DNA information, such as jeopardy to  insurability (risk to  
ability to obtain insurance), discrimination  against  employers, landlords and others.  
 
 
Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
tDCS
 
Routine safety procedures are in place  to screen  subjects prior to  scanning, maintain security of the 
restricted access areas, and ensure that system security features are in  good working order.
To minimize chemical reactions at the electrode-skin interface, non-metallic,  conductive rubber electrodes, 
covered completely with saline-soaked sponges will be used, as recommended by Nitsche and Paulus, 2000 (33).Electrode sponges will be  kept moist in order to avoid skin irritation.
A research physician will be present  at all times to monitor patient  safety.
Operation of  cellular (wireless) devices,  telephones,  or two-way radios  may  produce changes in device 
output, and thus should not be used in close  proximity  (< 1m).  
We do not apply  electrodes over  broken  or irritated skin. 
The use of  other stimulation electrodes during the treatment period will be  avoided. 
Lead wires are configured so that they cannot  be plugged into power outlets such as wall sockets and  line 
cord receptacles. 
 
 
MRI
 
In order  to minimize risks and discomforts to participants, we will:
- Screen  for metallic devices,  implants and  other contraindications to scanning by using a screening 
questionnaire.
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 26 of 29
- Exclude pregnant subjects and conduct  a urine pregnancy test prior  to scanning.
- We will also exclude  subjects with claustrophobia.  We will reduce this  potential adverse  reaction  by 
discussing the procedure prior to entry into the magnet room, by providing the subject  with  a mirror  through 
which they can look out into the room, and  by communicating with  the subject over the intercom. If a  
subject continues to feel  uncomfortable, the imaging procedure is terminated and the subject  is removed 
from the magnet.- Staff will  provide  adequate medical, safety  monitoring  and observation during scanning.
- Our staff  will be available to provide support, reduce anxiety, optimize  the comfort  of the  subject  and 
remove the subject from  the machine  if requested.
 
 
Evaluation
 
Psychiatric evaluations will be performed by a trained clinical rater with patient experience. Blood draws will be performed  by a trained phlebotomist.
 
Genetics: blood samples will be coded.  No personal  identification will link subjects with the blood  sample, 
and the genetic information  will not be made available to  anyone (including the subject and their  physician). 
We will apply  for a  certificate  of confidentiality as an additional protection.
 
 
 
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect confidentiality
All data (written and electronic) will be coded by number. Personal identifying  information will be sorted  in 
an electronically secure  database at New York Psychiatric Institute.  A master list matching  subjects  with 
codes will  be kept under lock and key, separate  from any research records or the computer database, with 
access restricted to research staff,  to the extent permitted by law. Only staff directly involved  in this project 
will have access to  the master list linking subject  names  to code numbers. In the informed consent form, 
subjects are told that the  information they provide and all  findings  of testing will be  kept strictly 
confidential, with  access  limited to the research staff, and possibly  state or federal regulatory personnel.  
Subject data will  be kept in a computer,  but the subject’s name will not appear in this  database.  The 
information will only be  linked to a code number assigned for the purpose of maintaining privacy. Only 
members of  the research  team will have access to the computer.
Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
Yes, we have already received a Certificate  of Confidentiality
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 27 of 29
Direct Benefits to Subjects
Participants may  experience no direct  benefits from their involvement in  this study.
For schizophrenia patients  receiving treatment, in one prior study using this procedure , a 30% reduction in 
hallucination severity was  observed  along with a significant reduction  in Positive and Negative Symptoms.
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
YesPlease describe  and indicate total amount and schedule of  payment(s).  
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
AVH+ subjects  will be paid $50 for Baseline, Post  Treatment, 1 month, and 3 month visits and $100 for 5 
TDCS/EEG visits.  If they complete the optional ERP sessions,  they  will be  paid an additional 15 dollars an 
hour (for approximately 3 hours per session for two sessions), an additional $20 for optional genetic/biomarker blood draws, and  an additional  $200 if  they complete  all optional MRI  procedures.  Total 
payment will be   $1040 if  they complete the entire study and the optional ERP and MRI components.  
Reasonable transportation  costs (such  as subway/bus fare or local taxi  fare) will be reimbursed.
 
Control subjects (both  patients and healthy  control  groups) will be paid $15 an  hour, and approximately $90 
for the entire  study. They will  additionally  receive  $200 if  they participate in the MRI study.
 
References
References1. Silbersweig DA,  Stern E, Frith  C, Cahill C, Holmes A, Grootoonk S, et al. A functional neuroanatomy of 
hallucinations in schizophrenia. Nature. 1995;378(6553):176-9. Epub 1995/11/09.2. Lawrie SM. Reduced  frontotemporal functional connectivity in  schizophrenia associated with auditory  
hallucinations. Biological psychiatry.  2002;51(12):1008.
3. Sanfilipo M. Volumetric measure of the frontal and  temporal lobe regions in schizophrenia:  Relationship 
to negative symptoms. Archives of general psychiatry. 2000;57(5):471-80.4. Brunelin J. Efficacy  and safety  of bifocal  tDCS as an interventional  treatment for  refractory  
schizophrenia. Brain  stimulation.  2011.
5. Sanfilipo M, Lafargue  T, Rusinek H, Arena  L, Loneragan C,  Lautin  A, et al. Volumetric measure of the  
frontal and temporal  lobe  regions in schizophrenia: Relationship to  negative symptoms. 2000;57(5):471-80.
6. Brunelin J. Theta burst stimulation  in the negative symptoms of schizophrenia  and striatal dopamine 
release. Schizophrenia research. 2011;131(1-3):264-5.7. Wilkinson G, Hesdon  B, Wild D, Cookson R, Farina C, Sharma V,  et al. Self-report quality of life 
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 28 of 29
measure for people with schizophrenia: the  SQLS. The British journal of psychiatry : the journal of mental 
science. 2000;177:42-6. Epub 2000/08/17.8. Leitman DI, Sehatpour P, Higgins BA, Foxe JJ,  Silipo  G, Javitt DC. Sensory  deficits and  distributed 
hierarchical dysfunction in schizophrenia. The American journal  of psychiatry. 2010;167(7):818-27. Epub 
2010/05/19.9. Strous RD, Cowan N, Ritter W, Javitt DC. Auditory  sensory  ("echoic") memory dysfunction in 
schizophrenia. The American journal  of psychiatry.  1995;152(10):1517-9. Epub  1995/10/01.
10. Javitt DC, Steinschneider M, Schroeder CE, Arezzo JC. Role  of cortical  N-methyl-D-aspartate  receptors 
in auditory sensory memory and mismatch negativity generation: implications  for schizophrenia.  
Proceedings of the National  Academy  of Sciences  of the United States of America. 1996;93(21):11962-7. 
Epub 1996/10/15.11. Umbricht D, Schmid L,  Koller  R, Vollenweider  FX, Hell  D, Javitt DC. Ketamine-induced deficits in 
auditory and visual context-dependent  processing in healthy volunteers: implications for models of 
cognitive deficits in schizophrenia.  Arch  Gen Psychiatry. 2000;57(12):1139-47. Epub 2000/12/15.
12. Javitt DC, Jayachandra M, Lindsley RW, Specht CM, Schroeder CE.  Schizophrenia-like deficits in  
auditory P1 and  N1 refractoriness induced by the psychomimetic agent  phencyclidine  (PCP). Clinical 
neurophysiology : official journal of the  International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. 
2000;111(5):833-6. Epub 2000/05/10.13. Roth  W, Cannon E.  Some  features of the auditory evoked response in schizophrenics.  Arch  Gen 
Psychiatry. 1972;27:466-71.14. Umbricht D, Krljes  S. Mismatch negativity in schizophrenia: a meta-analysis. Schizophr Res. 
2005;76(1):1-23. Epub 2005/06/02.15. Friedman T, Sehatpour P, Dias E, Perrin M, Javitt DC. Differential relationships of  mismatch  negativity 
and visual  p1 deficits to premorbid characteristics and functional outcome in schizophrenia.  Biological 
psychiatry. 2012;71(6):521-9. Epub 2011/12/24.16. Light GA, Swerdlow  NR, Rissling AJ, Radant A, Sugar CA,  Sprock J, et al. Characterization of 
neurophysiologic and  neurocognitive biomarkers for use in genomic and clinical outcome studies  of 
schizophrenia. PloS one. 2012;7(7):e39434. Epub 2012/07/18.17. Gonzalez-Burgos G, Lewis DA. NMDA Receptor Hypofunction, Parvalbumin-Positive Neurons and  
Cortical Gamma Oscillations in Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia bulletin. 2012. Epub 2012/02/23.18. Mulert C, Kirsch  V, Pascual-Marqui R, McCarley RW,  Spencer KM. Long-range  synchrony of gamma 
oscillations and auditory hallucination  symptoms in schizophrenia. International  journal  of 
psychophysiology : official journal of the International Organization of Psychophysiology. 2011;79(1):55-63. Epub 2010/08/18.19. Spencer KM, Niznikiewicz MA, Nestor PG, Shenton  ME, McCarley RW. Left auditory  cortex gamma 
synchronization and auditory hallucination symptoms in schizophrenia.  BMC neuroscience. 2009;10:85. 
Epub 2009/07/22.20. Ford JM, Roach BJ, Mathalon DH. Assessing corollary discharge in  humans using  noninvasive 
neurophysiological methods.  Nature  protocols.  2010;5(6):1160-8. Epub 2010/06/12.
21. Brunelin J, Mondino M, Gassab L, Haesebaert F, Gaha L,  Suaud-Chagny MF, et al. Examining 
Transcranial Direct-Current Stimulation (tDCS) as a  Treatment  for Hallucinations in Schizophrenia.  The 
American journal  of psychiatry. 2012. Epub  2012/05/15.
22. Nitsche MA. Treatment of depression with transcranial direct  current stimulation (tDCS): a  review.  
Experimental neurology. 2009;219(1):14.23. Boggio PS,  Rigonatti SP, Ribeiro RB, Myczkowski ML, Nitsche MA, Pascual-Leone A, et al. A  
Protocol Summary  Form
6662
Javitt,  Daniel
Page 29 of 29
randomized, double-blind clinical trial  on the efficacy of cortical direct current stimulation for the treatment 
of major depression. The international journal of neuropsychopharmacology / official scientific  journal  of 
the Collegium  Internationale Neuropsychopharmacologicum.  2008;11(2):249-54. Epub  2007/06/15.
24. Brunelin J, Mondino M, Haesebaert F,  Saoud M, Suaud-Chagny MF, Poulet E.  Efficacy and safety of 
bifocal tDCS  as an interventional treatment for refractory schizophrenia. Brain  Stimul. 2012;5(3):431-2. 
Epub 2011/11/01.25. Nitsche MA, Paulus W. Sustained  excitability  elevations induced by transcranial DC motor cortex 
stimulation in humans. Neurology. 2001;57(10):1899-901. Epub 2001/11/28.26. Nitsche MA, Liebetanz D, Lang N, Antal  A, Tergau  F, Paulus W.  Safety  criteria  for transcranial direct  
current stimulation  (tDCS)  in humans. Clinical  neurophysiology : official journal of the International 
Federation of  Clinical Neurophysiology. 2003;114(11):2220-2; author reply 2-3. Epub 2003/10/29.
27. McCreery  DB,  Agnew  WF, Yuen  TG, Bullara L.  Charge density and charge per phase  as cofactors  in 
neural injury  induced by electrical stimulation. IEEE transactions on bio-medical engineering. 
1990;37(10):996-1001. Epub 1990/10/01.28. Yuen TG, Agnew  WF, Bullara LA, Jacques S, McCreery DB. Histological evaluation of neural damage 
from electrical stimulation: considerations for the selection of parameters for clinical application. Neurosurgery. 1981;9(3):292-9. Epub 1981/09/01.29. Iyer MB, Mattu U, Grafman J, Lomarev  M, Sato S, Wassermann  EM. Safety and  cognitive effect of 
frontal DC brain polarization in healthy  individuals. Neurology. 2005;64(5):872-5. Epub 2005/03/09.
30. Fregni F, Thome-Souza S,  Nitsche MA, Freedman SD, Valente KD, Pascual-Leone A.  A controlled 
clinical trial of cathodal DC polarization in patients with refractory epilepsy.  Epilepsia. 2006;47(2):335-42. 
Epub 2006/02/28.31. Fregni F, Boggio  PS, Lima MC, Ferreira MJ,  Wagner T,  Rigonatti SP, et al. A  sham-controlled, phase II 
trial of transcranial direct current stimulation for the  treatment of central pain in traumatic spinal cord 
injury. Pain. 2006;122(1-2):197-209. Epub 2006/03/28.32. Poreisz C, Boros K, Antal A, Paulus W. Safety  aspects of transcranial direct current stimulation 
concerning healthy subjects and patients.  Brain research bulletin. 2007;72(4-6):208-14. Epub 2007/04/25.
33. Nitsche MA, Paulus W. Excitability  changes induced in the human motor cortex by weak transcranial 
direct current stimulation. The Journal  of physiology. 2000;527 Pt 3:633-9.  Epub  2000/09/16.
Uploads
Upload the entire grant application(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)Upload a copy of Certificate of ConfidentialityUpload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
HIPAA revised.pdfUpload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study
Form #PP2: HIPAA Authorization for Research 4.14.14 New York State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI)  
Authorization to Use or Disclose Health Information  during a Research Study  
Protocol Number:  Principal Investigator:  
Name o
f Study:  
Bef
ore researchers can use or share any identifiable health information  (“Health Information ”) about you  as part of the 
above stud
y (t
he “Research”), the New York State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) is required to obtain your authorization. Y ou agree  
to allow the following individuals and entities to use and disclose H ealth Information  about you as described below:  
• New York S
tate
 Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) , your doctors and other health care providers,  if any, and
• The Prin
cipal Inv
estigator and  his/her staff (together “Researchers”).   Researchers may include staff of NYSPI, the New  York
State Office of Mental Health (OMH), Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene, Inc. (RFMH), and Columbia University (CU) ,
provided such staff is a part of  the study, and
• Providers of service s for the Research at CU, NYSPI and/or RFMH,  such as MRI or PET,  or  Central  Reference Laboratories 
(NKI), if indicated in the consent form.
1. The Hea
lth Information that may be used and /or disclosed for this Research includes:
All i
nformation collected during the Research as told to you in the Informed Consent Form .   
Health  Information in your  clinical research record which include s the resul ts of  physical exam s, medical and 
psychiatric hi
story, laboratory or diagnostic tests, or H ealth Information relating to a particular condition that is related  to 
the Research.  
Additional information may include:  
2. The Hea
lth Information listed above may be  disclosed to:
Researchers  and their staff at the following organizations involved wi th this Research : 
The S
ponsor of t
he Research , 
and it
s agents and contractors (together, “Sponsor”); and  
Repr esentatives of regulatory and government  agencies, institutional review boards, representatives of the Researchers 
and their institutions to the level needed  to carry out their responsibilities  related to the conduct of the research .   
Private laboratories and other persons and organizations that analyze your health information in connection with 
this study 
Othe
r (family members or significant others, study buddies,  outside agencies  etc.)  Specify:  
3. By giv
ing permission to release your  Health Information as described  above, you  unders tan d that your  Health
Information may be
 disclosed to individuals or entities which  are not required to comply with the federal and state privacy laws
which govern the use and disclosure of personal Health Information  by NYSPI.    This means that on ce your  Health
Nathan Kline Institute
✔
✔
Stanley Foundation and the NIMH
✔
your treating psychiatrist
✔
✔
✔
tDCS for Auditory Hallucinations in Schizophrenia
Daniel Javitt MD, PhD
6662
Form #PP2: HIPAA Authorization for Research 4.1.14  Information  has been disclosed to a third party which does not have to  follow these laws (e.g., a drug company or the Sponsor  
of the Research), it may no longer be protected  under the HIPAA or NYS Mental Hygiene Law requirements but is  subject to the 
terms of the consent form and may be subject to other state or federal privacy laws or regulations .  
4. P
lease note that:
• You do not have to sign this Authorization  form, but if you do not, you may not be able to participate in the study or
receive study related care .  You may change your mind at any time and for any reason. If you do so, you  may  no
l
onger be
 all
owed to participate in the study.  I f you withdraw  this Authorization the  research staff and  the Sponsor, if this
is sponsored research, may still use or disclose Health  Information  containing identifying information they already have
collected about  you as needed  to maintain the reliability of the research.   Any reques t to withdraw this  Authorization
must  be made in writ
ing to  (enter name and contact inf ormation  below):
• W
hile the Research is going on , you may not be allowed to review the Health Information in your clinical research
record that has been created or collected by NYSPI .   When this research has been completed  you may be allowed to  see
t
his information.  If it is needed  for your care, your H ealth Inform ation will be given  to you or your  Doctor .
5. T
hi
s Authori
zation does not have an end date.
6. Y
ou will be given a copy of this form after you have signed it.
I
 agree to the use and disc losure of Health Information about me as described above:  
__
________________________________________                _____________________  
Signature of Participant / Legal Representative    Date  
________
____________
__________________  
Printed Name of Participant  
__
____________________________________  
Relationship of Legal Representative to Participant (if applicable) 
We also ask you or your legal representative to initial the statements below:  
I
 have received a copy of the NYSPI/OMH  Notice of Privacy Practices. 
Daniel Javitt, M.D, Ph.D, 1051 Riverside Dr-Unit 42, New York, NY 10032