Study Name: Bifocal Lenses In Nearsighted Kids (BLINK) Study 
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Date of consent – University of Houston clinical site 08/01/2014  
 
Version 1.1 Page 1 of 6  UNIVERSITY OF HOUSTON  
P
ARENTAL PERMISSION FOR CHILD’S PARTICIPATION IN RESEARCH  
 
 
S
tudy Title : Bifocal Lenses In Nearsighted Kids (BLINK) Study  
 
S
ponsor:   National Eye Institute 
 
P
rincipal Investigator: David A. Berntsen, OD PhD 
College of Optometry  
University of Houston 
505 J. Davis Armistead Building 
Houston, TX 77204-2020 
713-743-5836 
 
• This is a parental permission form for research participation.  It contains important 
information about this study and what to expect if you permit your child to participate. Please 
consider the information carefully. Feel free to discuss the study with your friends and family 
and to ask questions before making your decision whether or not to permit your child to 
participate. 
• Your child’s participation is voluntary. You or your child may refuse participation in this 
study. If your child takes part in the study, you or your child may decide to leave the study at 
any time. No matter what decision you make, there will be no penalty to your child and 
neither you nor your child will lose any of your usual benefits. Your decision will not affect 
your future relationship with the University of Houston. If you or your child is a student or 
employee at the University of Houston, your decision will not affect your grades or 
employment status. 
 
 
1. Why is this study being done? 
 
This study is being done to determine whether soft bifocal contact lenses (contact lenses 
typically used to help people older than 40 see up close) slow the progression of 
nearsightedness (difficulty seeing far away) and to see how they work in order to better be able 
to slow the progression of nearsightedness in the future. 
 
2. How many people will take part in this study? 
 
A total of 294 children ages 7-11 are expected to participate.  Two clinical centers – the 
University of Houston College of Optometry and The Ohio State University College of 
Optometry – are each expected to enroll approximately 147 children. 
 
 
3. What will happen if my child takes part in this s t udy? 
 
Your child will be randomly assigned to wear one of three contact lenses. Neither you nor the 
study team determines which lenses your child will wear; a computer basically flips a coin to 
determine which lenses your child wears. One contact lens has no reading power (a regular 
contact lens), one has medium reading power, and one has high reading power. (The lenses 
with reading power are the bifocal contact lenses.) If you or your child were to look at the 
 
Version 1.1 Page 2 of 6  c
ontact lenses, you would not be able to tell the difference. All three are made of the same 
material, and the care is exactly the same for each of them. We ask your child to wear the 
contact lenses as often as comfort allows, but the study contact lenses must be removed 
nightly, cleaned, and stored in solution.  Your child should never sleep in these lenses. 
 
We will examine your child for a minimum of three years (please see the description of each 
visit below). Measurements include things that are involved in routine eye exams, plus the 
following additional measures. We will measure where light focuses and eye shape throughout 
the back of the eye by having your child look in various directions while we measure the 
prescription and eye length with instruments that do not touch the eye. We will use clinical 
instruments that do not touch the eye to take pictures inside of the eye and will measure the 
images.  
 
At the first visit and at each annual visit, we will dilate your child’s pupils. When we do that, we 
put drops in each eye. For about four hours, lights will seem brighter than usual and things close 
to the eyes will be blurry. We will give your child sunglasses to help the brightness, and your 
child can remove eye glasses to see clearly up close. 
 
If either birthparent wears glasses or contact lenses, we would like to be given a copy of that 
parent’s spectacle prescription.  If this is not available, and the birthparent can bring the eye 
glasses to the clinic, we can obtain the prescription from a machine that “reads” the eye 
glasses.  If this information cannot be obtained please let us know.  It will not affect your child’s 
participation in the study. 
 
 
4. How long will my child be in the study? 
 
There are at least nine visits over a minimum of three years. Below is a brief description of each 
visit. 
 
Visit When Time  Dilate? Description 
1 1 Day 2:30 Yes Full eye exam, read eye charts, measure eye shape and 
where light focuses, surveys, fit with contact lenses 
2 1 week 1:00 No Dispense contact lenses and teach care 
3 3 weeks 0:45 No Check eye health, read eye charts, surveys 
4 6 months 0:45 No Check eye health, read eye charts, surveys 
5 1 year 2:00 Yes Full eye exam, read eye charts, measure eye shape and 
where light focuses, surveys 
6 18 months 0:45 No Check eye health, read eye charts, surveys 
7 2 years 2:00 Yes Full eye exam, read eye charts, measure eye shape and 
where light focuses, surveys 
8 30 months 0:45 No Check eye health, read eye charts, surveys 
9 3 years 2:00 Yes Full eye exam, read eye charts, measure eye shape and 
where light focuses, surveys 
 
If your child has any problems with his/her eyes, you may need to bring him/her to the clinic for 
an unscheduled visit so we can determine if it is safe to continue contact lens wear. 
 
We expect all children will participate in the study for three years, but it is possible the study 
could be stopped early or continue beyond this time period.   
 
 
Version 1.1 Page 3 of 6  5
. Can my child stop being in the study? 
 
Your child may leave the study at any time. If you or your child decides to stop participating in 
the study, there will be no penalty and neither you nor your child will lose any benefits to which 
you are otherwise entitled. Your decision will not affect your future relationship with the 
University of Houston. 
 
6. What risks, side effects or discomforts can my child expect from being in the study? 
 
The risks are similar to any contact lens wear outside the study. Your child may not see as 
clearly with contact lenses as s/he does with eye glasses. Your child may experience red, 
uncomfortable eyes. Although it is very rare, your child could get an eye infection, which could 
lead to permanent vision loss. If your child gets red, uncomfortable eyes, has excessive tearing, 
or experiences vision changes, he or she should remove the contact lenses, and you should call 
the clinic. 
 
We will put drops in your child’s eyes to dilate the pupils. For about four hours, your child will 
notice brighter lights and blurry vision up close. We will provide sunglasses to help with bright 
lights, and your child can remove his or her glasses to see clearly up close. 
 
Below is a list of additional problems that may occur while wearing contact lenses: 
• Burning, stinging, and or itching of the eyes 
• Less comfort after all day wear 
• A feeling like there is something in the eye 
• Inflammation of the cornea (clear window on the front of the eye) and/or scratch of the 
cornea 
• Swelling of the cornea 
• Small blood vessels growing into the cornea 
• Small defects in the corneal surface (corneal staining) 
• Redness 
• Bumps on the inside of the eye lid (tarsal abnormalities) 
• Inflammation of the inner eye (iritis) 
• Excessive watering, unusual eye secretions, or redness of the eye 
• Blurred vision 
• Rainbows or halos around objects 
• Sensitivity to light 
• Dry Eyes 
  
 
Version 1.1 Page 4 of 6   
7
. What benefits can my child expect from being in the study? 
 
Your child may or may not benefit from participating in this study.  The study contact lenses 
might help correct your child’s vision while s/he is wearing them, but there is no guarantee that 
this study will help your child.  Your child’s participation might help him/her become less 
nearsighted in the future. 
 
8. What other choices does my child have if he/she does not take part in the study? 
 
You or your child may choose not to participate without penalty or loss of benefits to which you 
are otherwise entitled. If you don’t want your child to participate, you can ask your primary eye 
doctor to prescribe glasses or contact lenses for your child. 
 
9. Will my child’s study-related information be kept private? 
 
Efforts will be made to keep your child’s study-related information confidential. However, there 
may be circumstances where this information must be released. For example, personal 
information regarding your child’s participation in this study may be disclosed if required by state 
law.  
 
Also, your child’s records may be reviewed by the following groups: 
• Office for Human Research Protections or other federal, state, or international regulatory 
a
gencies; 
• U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 
• The University of Houston Committees for the Protection of Human Subjects; and 
• The sponsor supporting the study, their agents or study monitors. 
 
 
1
0. What are the costs of taking part in this study? 
 
There are no costs to you for your child taking part in this study.  
 
 
11. Will I or my child be paid for taking part in this study? 
 
Neither you nor your child will be paid for study participation. However, your child will receive, at 
no cost to you, study-related eye care, contact lenses, contact lens solutions, and contact lens 
cases during his/her study participation. The visits include a free complete eye examination for 
your child each year. If a contact lens is lost or damaged during the study, it will be replaced at 
no cost to you. Your child will also receive free or very discounted eye glasses, depending on 
the frames you choose (we will provide a $150 frame allowance for the purchase of glasses at 
the University of Houston Optical Services). Your child will also receive a small toy or gift 
(roughly $10 in value) at each of the three annual visits after being enrolled in the study. 
  
 
Version 1.1 Page 5 of 6   
1
2. What happens if my child is injured because he/she took part in this study? 
 
If your child suffers an injury while participating in this study, you should notify the study doctor 
immediately, who will determine if your child should be seen by a study doctor or should obtain 
medical treatment at a nearby clinic, hospital, or emergency center.  
 
If a referral to a doctor outside of the study is needed for treatment, the cost for this treatment 
will be billed to you or your medical or hospital insurance.  
 
13. What are my child’s rights if he/she takes part in this study? 
 
If you and your child choose to participate in the study, you may discontinue participation at any 
time without penalty or loss of benefits. By signing this form, you do not give up any personal 
legal rights your child may have as a participant in this study. 
 
You and your child will be provided with any new information that develops during the course of 
the research that may affect your decision whether or not to continue participation in the study. 
 
You or your child may refuse to participate in this study without penalty or loss of benefits to 
which you are otherwise entitled. 
 
An Institutional Review Board responsible for human subjects research at the University of 
Houston reviewed this research project and found it to be acceptable, according to applicable 
state and federal regulations and University policies designed to protect the rights and welfare 
of participants in research. 
 
The study doctor or sponsor can withdraw your child from the study at any time, even if your 
child wants to continue to be in the study.  This could happen if:  
• The study doctor believes it is best for your child to stop being in the study. 
• Your child does not follow directions about the study. 
 
14. Who can answer my questions about the study? 
 
For questions, concerns, or complaints about the study you may contact  one of the following 
individuals: UH Clinic Coordinator, Laura Cardenas, at 713-743-1994 or blink@uh.edu or UH 
Clinic Site Principal Investigator, Dr. David A. Berntsen, at 713-743-5836 or dberntsen@uh.edu.  
 
This study was reviewed by the Insitutional Review Board (IRB) at the University of Houston 
called the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects (CPHS).  CPHS at the University of 
Houston is a group of people who review the risks and benefits of a study.  If your child wants to 
asks questions about what it means to be in a research study or if you have questions about 
your child’s rights as a research participant, you or your child can contact CPHS at 713-743-
9204.  
 
  
 
Version 1.1 Page 6 of 6  S
UBJECT RIGHTS 
 
1. I understand that parental consent is required of all persons under the age of 18 
participating in this project.  I understand that my child (student) will also be asked to agree 
to participate. 
 
2. All procedures have been explained to me and I have been provided an opportunity to ask 
a
ny questions I might have regarding my child’s (student’s) participation. 
 
3. Any risks and/or discomforts have been explained to me. 
4. Any benefits have been explained to me. 
 
5
. I understand that, if I have any questions, I may contact Dr. David Berntsen at 713-743-
5
836.  
 
6
. I have been told that my child or I may refuse to participate or to stop his/her participation in 
t
his project at any time before or during the project.  My child may also refuse to answer any 
question. 
 
7. ANY QUESTIONS REGARDING MY CHILD’S RIGHTS AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT MAY 
B
E ADDRESSED TO THE UNIVERSITY OF HOUSTON COMMITTEE FOR THE 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS (713-743-9204).   
 
8. All information that is obtained in connection with this project and that can be identified with 
m
y child (student) will remain confidential as far as possible within legal limits. The results 
may be published in scientific journals, professional publications, or educational 
presentations without identifying my child (student) by name. 
 
 
NAME OF CHILD:  _________________________________________________ 
 
I agree to allow my child to participate in this research project:     
 
           YES__________    NO__________ 
 
 
  
Printed Name of Parent/Legal Guardian 
 
    
Signature of of Parent/Legal Guardian   Date 
 
I attest that the participant had enough time to consider this information, had an opportunity to 
ask questions, and voluntarily agreed to be in this study. 
 
  
Printed Name of Study Personnel Obtaining Consent  
 
    
Signature of Study Personnel Obtaining Consent  Date 