Version 3 – 12FEB2017 IRB #2016-6966 Page 1 of 9IRB # 2016- 6966 
Title: A program  of enhanced recovery after cesarean birth to improve postoperative 
recovery and reduce hospital  length of stay
Study Contact Information
Principal Investigator  
Peter S. Bernstein,  MD, MPH
Professor of Clinical Obstetrics & Gynecology  and Women's Health
Montefiore Medical Center
Jack D. Weiler  Hospital
1825 Eastchester Road
Bronx, NY 10461 USA
 
Telephone: 718-904-2767
email: pbernste@montefiore.org
Co-Investigator
Nickolas Teigen, MD                    
Maternal Fetal Medicine  Fellow
Department of Obstetrics  & Gynecology and Women’s Health
Montefiore Medical Center
Jack D. Weiler  Hospital
1825 Eastchester Road
Bronx, NY 10461 USA
 
Telephone: 617-835-1032
Email: nteigen@montefiore.org
Background: Enhanced recovery  after surgery (ERAS) involves changes to multiple  aspects of 
perioperative care with the aim of standardizing postoperative patient care, improving  patient  
outcomes, reducing  postoperative  length  of stay,  and optimizing patient satisfaction.  Enhanced 
recovery pathways have  been widely implemented in many  different areas  of surgery.  Initially,  
these pathways  were introduced in colorectal surgery nearly 15 years  ago, but have found more  
widespread usage in specialties  including  urology,  orthopedics,  breast surgery and gynecologic  
surgery. Initiation of enhanced recovery programs  have consistently  resulted in reduced hospital  
length of stay, financial savings and improved  patient satisfaction.1
To date, only one observational study in obstetrics  has been performed looking at the 
introduction of an enhanced recovery pathway  in the United  Kingdom.  In that study the 
investigators were able to successfully introduce an enhanced recovery  program to their 
obstetrics unit and noted a greater proportion of patients discharged  earlier with improved 
patient satisfaction, without a concomitant  increase  in readmission rates.2  
IRB NUMBER: 2016-6966
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/05/2017
Version 3 – 12FEB2017 IRB #2016-6966 Page 2 of 9The components of enhanced recovery pathways  vary significantly, though all seek to provide 
benefit to the patient by optimizing the postoperative recovery  course through the combination 
of multiple evidence-based practices.  In previous studies  aimed  at post-cesarean  birth 
discharge timing, comparing early versus usual  discharge time,  there  was no difference 
observed in the number  of maternal readmissions, maternal antibiotic  use, maternal well-being  
and anxiety or depression.3 
Components of enhanced  recovery pathways can include  standardizing the use of prophylactic 
antibiotics, venous thromboembolism prophylaxis, minimizing  starvation times, use of 
antiemetics, earlier  resumption of feeding postoperatively,  use of chewing  gum postoperatively, 
early removal of dressings and urinary catheters,  and standing postoperative pain medication 
orders. Prophylactic antibiotics and venous thromboembolism prophylaxis are routinely 
recommended at the time of cesarean  deliveries by the American Congress of Obstetricians 
and Gynecologists.4-5 In addition, the American Society of Anesthesiologists recommends 
minimizing preoperative starvation times with moderate amounts of clear liquids up to 2 hours 
prior to induction of anesthesia and solid foods up to 6-8 hours  preoperatively.6 Routine  
administration of antiemetics at the time of cesarean  to reduce early  postoperative  nausea  and 
vomiting may allow earlier resumption of feeding after cesarean.7 Several studies have 
determined that early resumption of feeding after cesarean resulted in early ambulation, greater 
maternal satisfaction,  and reduced  length  of hospital stay,  with no detrimental  outcomes.8-12 
Moreover, the introduction of chewing gum postoperatively has resulted in a reduction in 
postoperative ileus after cesarean.13-15
A recent randomized controlled trial evaluating  the early  removal  of wound  dressings at 6 hours  
postoperatively, noted there was no detrimental effect on incision healing  with early removal  
permitting earlier attention to personal  hygiene with greater patient  satisfaction.16 Additionally, a 
randomized controlled  trial of Ketorolac  use at cesarean birth resulted in reduced  postoperative 
pain and narcotic use.17 Early removal of urinary catheters  postoperatively were  also associated  
with a lower risk of infection and earlier postoperative ambulation.18
Currently, no randomized studies exist in the literature specifically addressing  the potential 
impact of an enhanced  recovery pathway in among women undergoing cesarean  births on 
postoperative outcomes and postoperative length of stay in the United States. We aim to 
implement an enhanced recovery pathway  at the time of cesarean birth to expedite the 
postoperative recovery process, thereby  reducing  postoperative hospital  length of stay.
Hypothesis: We hypothesize  that an enhanced recovery program at the time of cesarean birth 
in obstetrics will promote  early ambulation, resumption of diet and initiation of breastfeeding, 
and reduce postoperative hospital length  of stay.
Currently, patients are encouraged to ambulate on the first post-operative day, but it is largely 
left up to the patient when  to actually begin  to ambulate.  They are similarly offered a diet on the 
first postoperative day but are not encouraged to eat.  Breastfeeding is more  systematically 
encouraged early as part of Montefiore’s effort to get baby friendly  designation.  And finally, 
patients are typically discharged on postoperative day number three  unless complications arise  
in the newborn  or the mother.
IRB NUMBER: 2016-6966
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/05/2017
Version 3 – 12FEB2017 IRB #2016-6966 Page 3 of 9As part of this study, patients in both the enhanced recovery and usual care group will be 
offered the opportunity to be discharged from the hospital on postoperative day number 2 if their 
recovery is going well and if they choose not to leave then, they will be encouraged to return  
home on postoperative day number 3 according to the current standard of care.
Null hypothesis: An enhanced recovery program at the time of cesarean birth will have no 
impact on postoperative  hospital length  of stay (our primary outcome variable).
Objective: To determine whether women randomized  to an enhanced  recovery  program will 
have improved postoperative outcomes, improved  breastfeeding initiation and continuation, 
reduction in hospital length of stay without compromising  patient satisfaction in comparison to 
standard of care postoperative recovery interventions. 
Materials and Methods:  This will be a prospective non-blinded randomized controlled  study  of 
women presenting  for care to the Montefiore Medical Center. All patients will undergo  routine  
obstetrical care and preparation for cesarean  birth as if they were not participating in the 
research study.  Women participating in the study  will be greater than 37 0/7 weeks gestation 
based on their estimated  due date calculated from last menstrual period or early ultrasound. 
The women participating in the study  will be undergoing either: 1. Scheduled cesarean birth or 
2. Non-emergent cesarean birth.  Non-emergent  cesarean birth will be defined  as an indicated  
cesarean birth based on obstetrical criteria without significant fetal heart tracing abnormalities. 
This would include  women diagnosed with a labor  dystocia or arrest of labor, failed labor 
induction, fetal malpresentation in labor  (i.e. breech presentation) or any other non-emergent 
indication for cesarean birth in which there  is no immediate danger to mother or fetus. Patient 
consent will occur  on admission to the obstetrical labor and delivery  unit for elective cesarean 
births. Because patients presenting to our units may be in pain and pain may compromise 
cognition and judgment, at the time of actual enrollment, the principal investigator or his or her 
designee will assess the capacity of the patient to provide ethically  and legally adequate 
informed consent  and will document  that finding  in the research record. If at the time they are 
approached for actual  involvement in the protocol, they are in too much pain to have the 
informed consent  discussion and provide consent,  they will not be considered for participation. 
Women that accept participation will be randomly assigned to an enhanced recovery program  or 
routine perioperative care. Using a random  sequence number table, we will generate block  
randomization. Allocations will be placed  in sequentially numbered opaque sealed envelopes.
Postoperative recovery will follow the usual service protocols as if the patient were not in the 
study with the exception  of components of the enhanced  recovery  protocol, which will include 
several evidence  based recommendations (see Enhanced Recovery  Protocol components, 
below) including early ambulation, early diet initiation, early  removal of urinary catheter, early 
removal of postoperative  dressing and standing  ketorolac for 24 hours postoperatively.
Maternal demographics  to be obtained  will include body mass index (BMI), gestational age, pre-
operative and post-operative day #1 complete blood  count, estimated blood loss, surgical time 
from skin incision to closure, skin closure  method, birth weight, Apgar scores, newborn 
outcomes, indication for cesarean birth, medical history and any antenatal complications, past 
surgical history, postoperative course and intra-operative and post-operative complications.
All patients will be followed until the routine postpartum visit occurs  at 6-8 weeks following 
cesarean birth. Postpartum visit information will be extracted  from the medical record. The 
IRB NUMBER: 2016-6966
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/05/2017
Version 3 – 12FEB2017 IRB #2016-6966 Page 4 of 9patient will then be contacted by telephone at 8 weeks after cesarean  birth and asked about her 
postoperative course regarding her overall satisfaction with her postoperative care and if any 
postoperative complications arose  during the postpartum period.
A description  of this clinical  trial is available on www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S.
law. The clinicaltrials.gov  identifier for the study is [STUDY_ID_REMOVED].
Enhanced Recovery Protocol Components:
1.Provide preoperative  education about  the perioperative recovery experience  including  
postoperative analgesia, thromboprophylaxis and breastfeeding education - Patients will 
be provided with standardized printed instructions  for the perioperative experience
2.Minimize preoperative starvation times
a.Moderate amount  of clears up to 2 hours prior to anesthesia - patients will be 
encouraged to consume a moderate amount  of clear liquid diet up to 2 hours  
prior to anesthesia.
b.Solid foods up to 6-8 hours prior to anesthesia - solid foods will be encouraged 
up to 6-8 hours preoperatively,  in contrast to the current  practice of all patients 
limiting food intake  after midnight the day of surgery.
3.Prophylactic antibiotics - currently offered as the standard of care to all patients 
undergoing cesarean birth, based on recommendations  from the American Congress of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists
4.Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis (mechanical) initiated at the time of cesarean 
birth and continued postoperatively - currently offered  as the standard  of care at our 
institution with sequential compression devices at the time of cesarean birth and 
immediately postoperatively with provision  of chemoprophylaxis with subcutaneous 
heparin after 24 hours from the time of the procedure
5.Chewing gum (Xylitol)  to reduce  postoperative ileus - Xylitol chewing gum will be 
provided to patients immediately  after the procedure and will be provided 3 times per 
day for a duration of 30 minutes at each time,  based on a metanalysis  and systematic  
review. Patient’s will be encouraged on its use for return  of bowel function.
6.Routine administration of Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory  drug,  Ketorolac  (toradol), 
Intravenous 15mg every 6 hours for 24 hours postoperatively to minimize  postoperative 
narcotic use. First dose will be provided  6 hours after procedure  with 3 subsequent 
doses every 6 hours for a total of 4 doses  over 24 hours.
7.Early initiation of feeding after cesarean, immediately for clears,  30 minutes for regular 
diet as tolerated  - This is in contrast  to the current practice of limiting postoperative 
feeding until a minimum of 2 hours after cesarean birth once the patient  has left the 
PACU
8.Early removal of urinary catheter (12 hours  postoperatively) - An order will be placed at 
the completion of the procedure to discontinue  the urinary catheter 12 hours 
postoperatively
9.Early removal of dressing (6 hours postoperatively) - An order will be placed at the 
completion of the procedure  to instruct removal of the postoperative dressing at 6 hours 
postoperatively
IRB NUMBER: 2016-6966
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/05/2017
Version 3 – 12FEB2017 IRB #2016-6966 Page 5 of 910.Early mobilization  at 12 hours after cesarean birth - An order  will be placed  at the 
completion of the procedure  to encourage patients  to begin ambulating 12 hours after 
the cesarean birth
11.Early skin-to-skin/breastfeeding initiation - this is the standard  of care at our institution  in 
which skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding are initiated as soon as possible in the 
operating room or PACU
12.Early incentive spirometry  - An order will be placed at the completion of the procedure  to 
provide an incentive  spirometer and patients  will be encouraged immediately following 
the surgical procedure in the postoperative anesthesia care unit
Routine Recovery Protocol Components (control group):
1.Oral intake prior to procedure – patients  will be required to limit food intake to at least  8 
hours prior to the cesarean birth or after midnight  the day of the procedure as is current 
standard of practice
2.Prophylactic antibiotics - currently offered as the standard of care to all patients 
undergoing cesarean birth, based on recommendations  from the American Congress of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists
3.Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis (mechanical) initiated at the time of cesarean 
birth and continued postoperatively - currently offered  as the standard  of care at our 
institution with sequential compression devices at the time of cesarean birth and 
immediately postoperatively with provision  of chemoprophylaxis with subcutaneous 
heparin after 24 hours from the time of the procedure
4.Patients will be provided with routine regional  anesthetic per current anesthesia protocol
5.Patients are currently offered non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (Ibuprofen)  and Percocet 
on an as needed  basis for pain control  postoperatively
6.Patients will be provided with a meal  as early as 2 hours postoperatively once the patient  
has been transferred  from the postoperative anesthesia care unit
7.Urinary catheter will be removed on postoperative day #1 as is the current standard of 
practice in our institution
8.Wound dressings will be removed  on postoperative day #1 as is the current standard  of 
practice in our institution
9.Patients will mobilize once sensation and motor  function of the lower  extremities  returns
10.Early skin-to-skin/breastfeeding initiation  - this is the standard of care at our institution in 
which skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding are initiated as soon as possible in the 
operating room or PACU
11.Patients will be provided with an incentive spirometer  once they arrive on the postpartum  
unit which is the current standard of practice in our institution.
12.Control group participants may receive IV ketorolac for pain control
Primary Outcome:
1.Postoperative length of hospital  stay
IRB NUMBER: 2016-6966
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/05/2017
Version 3 – 12FEB2017 IRB #2016-6966 Page 6 of 9Secondary Outcomes:
1.Postoperative pain medication requirements
2.Breastfeeding initiation and continuation  rates
3.Patient satisfaction
4.Maternal-neonatal bonding
5.Time to ambulation
6.Time to resumption  of normal activity
7.Time to attempting  oral feeding
8.Total length of hospital stay
9.Postoperative infections from expedited removal of catheter versus removal of wound 
dressing
10.Readmission rates
11.Postpartum  depression/anxiety
Inclusion criteria:
1.Women undergoing a non-urgent or elective  cesarean birth >37 weeks gestation
Exclusion criteria:
1.Women undergoing an urgent or emergent  cesarean birth
2.Women less than 18 years old
3.Patients receiving general anesthesia
4.Abnormally  adherent placenta (Placenta Accreta)  or expected excessive blood  loss 
(Placenta accrete)
5.Pre-existing essential hypertension  or hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 
(preeclampsia, eclampsia,  HELLP)
6.Chronic or acute  renal impairment
7.Bleeding disorders or platelet dysfunction
8.Peptic ulcer disease or gastrointestinal bleeding  
9.Known hypersensitivity to ketorolac  (toradol)
10.Active infection at the time of cesarean
11.Cesarean birth prior to 37 weeks
12.Women in significant pain in labor
Sites: Montefiore Medical Center (Both Weiler and Wakefield on their labor  floors)
Study size and Power: Patients are routinely discharged on postoperative day number 3 or 
approximately 72 hours postoperatively  at Montefiore Medical Center following cesarean birth. 
Our primary  outcome variable will be postoperative length of hospital stay.  Patients in the 
routine perioperative care group and the enhanced recovery protocol group will be offered the 
opportunity to be discharged on postoperative day number 2 or approximately  48 hours 
postoperatively at the discretion of the obstetric attending physician. Our experience is that no 
more than 10% of patients are discharged home on postoperative  day number 2 or 
approximately 48 hours postoperatively.  We therefore have calculated that if we anticipate  an 
increase in the rate of early discharges  on postoperative day number 2 from 10% to 30% with 
IRB NUMBER: 2016-6966
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/05/2017
Version 3 – 12FEB2017 IRB #2016-6966 Page 7 of 9the enhanced recovery pathway  will require 59 subjects in each group,  and 118 total 
participants,  with an alpha error of 0.05 and a power of 80%.  Patients in the control group will 
continue to be offered  Ketorolac for postoperative analgesia which  is considered standard of 
care in our institution. Approximately 65 percent of patients after cesarean deliveries from a 
recent chart review receive  ketorolac of at least one dose. Given that our primary outcome 
measure is postoperative  length of stay, and patients receiving ketorolac at present still routinely 
are discharged on postoperative day number 3, we do not anticipate that this will produce a 
contamination factor with respect  to our primary outcome measure which is postoperative length 
of stay. As a result, our power calculation would  therefore still remain  valid for our primary 
outcome measure.
Risks/Benefits:
 
Ketorolac tromethamine, including Toradol can cause peptic ulcers,  gastrointestinal bleeding  
and/or perforation of the stomach  or intestines,  which can be fatal. These events can occur at 
any time during  use and without warning symptoms. Ketorolac  is contraindicated in patients with 
active peptic ulcer  disease, in patients  with recent gastrointestinal  bleeding  or perforation,  and in 
patients with a history  of peptic ulcer disease or gastrointestinal bleeding. NSAIDs  may cause 
an increased risk of serious  cardiovascular thrombotic events, myocardial infarction, and stroke,  
which can be fatal. This risk may increase with duration of use. Patients with cardiovascular 
disease or risk factors for cardiovascular disease  may be at greater risk Ketorolac  is 
contraindicated for the treatment of peri-operative pain in the setting of coronary artery bypass 
graft surgery. Ketorolac is contraindicated  in patients with advanced renal impairment and in 
patients at risk for renal failure due to volume depletion. Toradol inhibits platelet function and is, 
therefore, contraindicated in patients with suspected or confirmed cerebrovascular bleeding, 
patients with hemorrhagic diathesis, incomplete  hemostasis  and those at high risk of bleeding  
 
Limited data from one published  study involving 10 breastfeeding women 2-6 days postpartum  
showed low levels of ketorolac in breast milk. Levels  were  undetectable (less than 5 ng/mL) in 4 
of the patients.  After  a single administration of 10 mg of Ketorolac, the maximum milk 
concentration observed was 7.3 ng/mL, and the maximum  milk-to-plasma  ratio was 0.037. After 
1 day of dosing (10 mg every 6 hours), the maximum milk concentration was 7.9 ng/mL, and the 
maximum milk-to-plasma ratio was 0.025.  Assuming a daily intake of 400-1,000  mL of human 
milk per day and a maternal body  weight of 60 kg, the calculated maximum daily infant 
exposure was 0.00263  mg/kg/day, which is 0.4% of the maternal weight-adjusted dose. 
Exercise caution when  ketorolac is administered  to a nursing woman. Available information has 
not shown any specific adverse events in nursing infants; however, instruct patients to contact 
their infant's  health  care provider if they note any adverse events. The American  academy of 
pediatrics has found ketorolac to be compatible with breastfeeding.
There are no known  risks to this study  beyond that of routine postoperative care at the time of 
cesarean birth in addition  to the aforementioned use of Ketorolac. All patient information  will be 
kept confidential. Patient research records will be kept confidential and names  will not be used 
in any written or verbal  reports. The patient’s  information will be given a code  number and 
separated from your name or any other information  that could identify them.  All information will 
be kept in a secure manner and computer records will be password protected.  Study  information  
will be kept as long as they are useful for the completion of the research study after which they 
will be destroyed.
IRB NUMBER: 2016-6966
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/05/2017
Version 3 – 12FEB2017 IRB #2016-6966 Page 8 of 9The patient  will not experience any direct benefit personally from participation in this study.  The 
benefit of participation in this study  will generate important information about  improving  
postoperative recovery at cesarean birth.
Data Management:  Data collected in this study protocol will be extracted from the secure 
password protected computer programs utilized by Montefiore for patient care: Epic / 
ASOBGYN/ EPFweb. Information  extracted for study use will be maintained on a password 
protected computer  in a locked office  and not accessible to others.  Once the clinical information  
obtained on a patient is completed the information will be de-identified. Patient  confidentiality 
will be maintained at all times.
Statistics: To achieve  comparable groups we will randomize enrollees to one of two treatment 
arms. Randomization will be done  with block sizes of 4 to reduce the likelihood of unmasking 
the randomized  assignment.  Randomization will be done according to separate  lists generated 
through www.randomization.com. Randomization will be performed by Dr. Catherine Igel. No 
patient identifying  information will be entered into this website  as this will be done prior to 
enrollment in the study
The primary aim of the study is to compare whether women randomized to an enhanced 
recovery program will have improved postoperative outcomes, breastfeeding initiation, reduction  
in length of stay without  compromising patient  satisfaction in comparison to standard of care 
postoperative recovery interventions. The primary analysis  will be a chi-square comparison of 
proportions of the 2 x 2 table of study arm (experimental/control) and hospital length  of stay 
(shortened length  of stay/standard length of stay). We will also assess  an odds ratio (with 95% 
confidence interval) for additional  outcome measures: Postoperative pain medication 
requirements, Breastfeeding initiation and continuation  rates and patient satisfaction will be 
determined by a follow-up survey performed greater than 4 weeks  postoperatively.
Data safety monitoring Plan (DSMP): In order to maintain additional patient safety, a DSMP 
will be in place for the study. The data will be reviewed by two clinicians  familiar with cesarean 
birth and perioperative and postoperative management and complications who are not part of 
the study, namely Dr. Rodney  Wright and Dr. Ashlesha Dayal. In addition,  a statistician who is 
not part of the study will review the data, Dr. Shankar Viswanathan. The Data  safety monitoring 
committee will meet every  6 months. Minutes of the meetings including  attendance, a summary 
of discussion and any relevant findings will be recorded. Data  will be reviewed  for adverse 
events throughout  the study  duration. The results  of findings and recommendations of the team 
will be reported to the Albert Einstein  College of Medicine  institutional review board for review 
and action. 
References:
1.Adamina M, Kehlet  H, Tomlinson GA, Senagore AJ, Delaney CP. Enhanced recovery 
pathways optimize health outcomes  and resource utilization: a meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials in colorectal  surgery. Surgery. 2011 Jun;149(6):830-40.
2.Wrench, IJ, Allison, A, Galimberti, A, Radley, S, Wilson,  MJ (2015). Introduction of 
enhanced recovery  for elective caesarean section enabling next day discharge:  a tertiary 
centre experience.  Int J Obstet  Anesth, 24, 2:124-30.
IRB NUMBER: 2016-6966
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/05/2017
Version 3 – 12FEB2017 IRB #2016-6966 Page 9 of 93.Brooten D, Roncoli  M, Finkler S, Arnold  L, Cohen A., Mennuti M. 1994. A randomized  
trial of early hospital discharge and home follow-up of women having cesarean birth. 
Obstet Gynecol, 84: 832-8.
4.ACOG Practice  Bulletin No. 120: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor  and delivery. 
American College  of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet  Gynecol. 2011  
Jun;117(6):1472-83.
5.James A, ACOG  Practice bulletin no. 123: thromboembolism  in pregnancy.  Committee  
on Practice Bulletins—Obstetrics. Obstet  Gynecol.  2011  Sep;118(3):718-29.
6.Practice Guidelines for Obstetric Anesthesia: An Updated Report by the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Task  Force  on Obstetric  Anesthesia  and the Society for 
Obstetric Anesthesia  and Perinatology. Anesthesiology. 2016 Feb;124(2):270-300.
7.Habib  AS, George  RB, McKeen DM, White WD, Ituk US, Megalla SA, Allen TK. 
Antiemetics added  to phenylephrine infusion  during cesarean  delivery:  a randomized 
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2013  Mar;121(3):615-23.
8.Masood SN, Masood  Y, Naim U, Masood MF. A randomized comparative trial of early 
initiation of oral maternal  feeding  versus conventional oral feeding after cesarean 
delivery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2014  Aug;126(2):115-9.
9.Huang H, Wang H, He M. Early oral feeding compared with delayed oral feeding  after 
cesarean section: a meta-analysis. J Matern  Fetal Neonatal Med. 2016;29(3):423-9
10.Guo J, Long S, Li H, Luo J, Han D, He T. Early  versus delayed oral feeding for patients  
after cesarean. Int J Gynaecol Obstet.  2015  Feb;128(2):100-5.
11.Saad AF, Saoud F, Diken ZM, Hegde S, Kuhlmann  MJ, Wen TS, Hankins GD, Saade 
GR, Costantine MM. Early versus  Late Feeding after Cesarean  Delivery: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial. Am J Perinatol. 2016 Mar;33(4):415-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1565918. 
Epub 2015  Oct 19.
12.Shabeen N. Masood,  Yasir Masood, Uzma  Naim, Muhammad F. Masood (2014). A 
randomized comparative trial of early initiation of oral maternal feeding  versus 
conventional oral feeding after cesarean  delivery. International  Journal of Gynecology 
and Obstetrics 126, 115–119
13.Craciunas L, MS Sajid, AS Ahmed. 2014.  Chewing gum in preventing postoperative 
ileus in women undergoing  caesarean  section:  a systematic  review and meta-analysis of 
randomised controlled trials. BJOG, 793-799; 121(7):793-9
14.Zhu YP, Wang  WJ, Zhang SL, Dai B, Ye DW. Effects of gum chewing on postoperative 
bowel motility after caesarean  section: a meta-analysis  of randomised controlled  trials. 
BJOG. 2014 Jun;121(7):787-92.
15.Shang H, Yang Y, Tong X, Zhang L, Fang  A, Hong L. Gum  chewing slightly  enhances 
early recovery from postoperative ileus after cesarean section: results of a prospective, 
randomized, controlled trial. Am J Perinatol. 2010 May;27(5):387-91.
16.Peleg,  D, Eberstark E, Warsof  SL, Cohen N, Ben Shachar I. 2016. Early  wound 
dressing removal after scheduled cesarean delivery: a randomized  control  trial. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. Am J Obstet  Gynecol.  2016  Mar 25. pii: S0002-9378(16)00527-5
17.Lowder JL, Shackelford DP, Holbert D, Beste T. 2003. A randomized, controlled  trial to 
compare ketorolac tromethamine versus placebo after cesarean  section to reduce pain 
and narcotic usage. Am J Obstet  Gynecol. 189(6):  1559-62
18.El-Mazny A, El-Sharkawy M, Hassan A. A prospective randomized clinical  trial 
comparing immediate versus delayed  removal of urinary  catheter following elective 
cesarean section. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2014  Oct;181:111-4.
IRB NUMBER: 2016-6966
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/05/2017