Protocol Page
Phase IIB  Study of Trimodality Management of clinical T1bN0M0  cancers of  the 
esophagus2010-0333
Core  Protocol Information
Short Title Trimodality management of T1b esophageal cancers
Study Chair: Steven H. Lin
Additional Contact:Aileen Mapps
Dustin M. Silk
Victoria Cox
Additional Memo Recipients: Recipients List
OPR Recipients (for OPR use only)
None
Study Staff Recipients
None
Department:Radiation Oncology
Phone:713-563-2300
Unit:97
Study Manager: Denise M. Erdman
Full Title:  Phase IIB Study of Trimodality Management of clinical 
T1bN0M0 cancers of the esophagus
Public Description: N/A
Protocol Type:Standard Protocol
Protocol Phase: Phase I/Phase II
Version Status: Activated -- Closed to new patient entry as of 09/12/2019
Version: 10
Document Status:Saved as "Final"
Submitted by: Dustin M. Silk--9/12/2019  3:53:05  PM
OPR Action: Accepted by:  Amber M. Cumpian  -- 9/12/2019 8:13:05 PM
Which Committee  will review this protocol?
 The Clinical Research  Committee - (CRC)
Protocol Body
1.0 Objectives
Objectives:  To assess the efficacy  (pathologic complete response)  and safety of Trimodality management 
(chemoradiotherapy followed by esophagectomy) in patients with clinically staged T1bN0M0  cancer  of the esophagus  or 
gastroesophageal junction.
Primary endpoint:  Pathologic Complete Response  (PCR) rate
Secondary Objectives:  
1.  Time  to disease progression or death
2.  Evaluation  of preoperative toxicity and postoperative morbidity/mortality 
3.  Evaluation  of feasibility of pretreatment  and posttreatment/preoperative deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
methylation biomarkers  in tumor and blood as predictor of  pCR rate 
2.0 Rationale
1.  The Need to Improve the outcomes for T1b esophageal cancer
Esophagectomy or endoscopic  mucosal resection is the most standard approach for  the management  of stage  I esophageal 
cancers.  Early stage  T1N0 disease can be defined  as disease that is confined to the superficial  mucosal layer (T1a) or  that 
which has invaded to the submucosal  layer  (T1b).   Multiple single institutional experiences documenting the outcomes of 
patients treated with esophagectomy for stage I esophageal cancers have demonstrated  a less than optimal outcomes for 
patients with T1b disease.  From M.D. Anderson, Cen et  al. have reported the results  of 99 consecutive patients with T1 
adenocarcinoma who have underwent esophagectomy/lymphadenectomy, of which  51 patients have  T1b disease (1).  The 
investigators reported a much  better 5-year overall survival (OS) for patients with T1a tumors  (88%) than those with T1b tumors 
(62%) (p=0.001).  Patients with evidence of lymphovascular invasion (LVI) and/or nodal  metastasis (LNM)  had a worse 5 year 
OS (≤37%) compared to those without either risk factors (88%, p<0.001).   Also from M.D. Anderson, Liu et al reviewed the 
pathologic correlate of LVI or LNM to the clinical stage  of patients  (2).  They found  that T1b stage is significantly associated with 
LNM (44% versus 12% for T1a, p<0.001), larger  tumors (>75% have >1.2  cm tumors versus ~30% for T1a tumors, p<0.001),  
and LVI (73% versus  18% for T1a, p<0.001).  These investigators  found that both LNM and  LVI were prognostic for tumor 
recurrence, but only LVI was prognostic for overall survival.  Tumor  recurrence was more frequent  in T1b disease (40% at 5 
years) than T1a disease (0% at 5 years),  resulting in 5 year OS of 58% for T1b and  91% for T1a disease  (2).  These findings 
have been confirmed in another large  cohort study of 100  patients with T1  esophageal cancers receiving primary 
esophagectomy (3).  They also found that LNM was significantly  associated with T1b disease (27% vs.  7% for T1a).  Although 
the 5 year OS for the entire cohort was 62%, and the 3 year DFS was 80%, this rate was significantly lower  for patients with  N1 
disease (5 year OS is 35% N+ vs 70% N-, p=0.0057).  These and  other surgical series have  demonstrated the poor outcomes  
of surgery alone  for T1b disease  due to the high propensity of these tumors to exhibit  poor prognostic features such as LVI, 
TNM, and larger tumors, which has also been  demonstrated  to be an  independent prognostic factor  (4).   
From these  surgical  series, it is also apparent that neither endoscopic mucosal  resection (EMR)  nor endoscopic submucosal 
resection (ESR) are adequate treatments for T1b esophageal cancers.   Limited resection  is very effective  treatment  for T1a 
disease, which has been demonstrated by the low risk features  of this stage  of disease  based on these surgical series as well 
as institutional experiences utilizing EMR for management of  early esophageal cancers.  However, even in the most  
experienced centers, R0 resection  is still only 75%, with high incidence of recurrences  (30%) (5, 6).  Even in the most selective 
group of patients  (<2cm  tumors, T1a, no LVI, histologic grades 1 to 2),  as reported by a series  of 100 patients in Germany, the 
lateral positive margin was still 34% (6).  During the median 33  month follow-up, recurrence or metachronous disease was 
found in 11% of patients.  All recurrences were salvageable, yielding  a 3 year  OS of 98%.  However, this treatment  approach 
wouldn’t be appropriate for T1b cancers  because  the unpredictably high rates of LNM and LVI would not be adequately 
addressed by a mucosal or submucosal  limited resection.  Recently, Barbour  et al (2010) (34) produced a stratification  scheme 
based on 85 T1 patients  treated with surgical resection alone.   The patients were analyzed  based on three  risk factors: T1b  
status, tumor grade, and presence  of LVI.  While patients with T1a disease or T1b disease with Grades 1 or 2 and negative  LVI 
had fairly good survival  (5 yr overall  survival of 95% and 85%,  respectively), patients with T1b disease  and grade 3 or any 
patients with LVI had 5 year survival  of 50% and 30%, respectively.   
So while esophagectomy is the standard of care for T1b esophageal cancers, multiple  surgical series have demonstrated that 
this disease carries high rate of unsuspected lymph nodal metastasis  (LNM) (27-45%) (2, 3, 7, 8) and lymphovascular invasion 
(LVI) (1, 2).  The presence of such features  portends to a poorer recurrence risk and overall survival as that seen for  more  
locally advanced disease (stage II-III), where trimodality management with chemotherapy with radiation followed by surgical  
resection is the standard of care in the United States.  This is based on  numerous trials (9-11) and a meta-analysis  (12) 
demonstrating survival  benefit with preoperative chemoradiation  compared to surgery alone.  
2.  Non-surgical management for T1b cancers
The only curative  measure for esophageal cancers without a surgical resection is  definitive chemoradiation.  Definitive 
chemoradiation has been  demonstrated to be curative for around 20-25%  locally advanced esophageal cancer patients in a 
large randomized trial of unresectable patients  (13).  Whether  definitive  chemoradiation will yield better outcomes in early stage 
esophageal cancers (exclusively squamous  cell cancers) was evaluated by investigators in Japan.  In an earlier experience, 
Yamada and colleagues tested the role of definitive chemoradiation in 63 T1N0M0  squamous cell cancers of the esophagus 
(T1a=23, T1b=40) (14).  The chemoradiation  employed a median dose of 59.4 Gy with concurrent cisplatin/5FU,  followed by 10-
12 Gy HDR brachytherapy.   They found high rates of  control for  T1a disease at 84.4%,  but the 5 year disease free survival  was 
50.5% for T1b disease.  Seven  patients  developed metastatic disease, all of which were  patients with  T1b disease.  Local 
failures were seen  in 15 patients  (11 local only,  4 local + distant  metastasis), with salvage therapies successful in saving 5 of 11 
local recurrence only patients.  In a separate  phase II study investigating  the efficacy of definitive chemoradiation for exclusively 
T1bN0 patients, cisplatin and 5FU were  concurrently administered with a split course regimen of 60 Gy of radiotherapy  (one 
week break  in between 30 Gy radiation)  (15).  Since the primary endpoint of the study was clinical complete  response (cCR)  
rate, each of the 72 patients  enrolled in the study was evaluated for clinical response  at 4 weeks after  chemoradiation with an 
EGD and biopsy.   A clinical CR was defined  as EGD evidence without tumor except  for flat erosion, a negative biopsy, and  no 
evidence of new lesions.  Although they found  a cCR rate of 87.5%, the 4 year recurrence free survival  was only  52.8%, similar 
to the previously reported retrospective study.  Of the 36 patients who developed recurrence or achieved less than a CR after 
chemoradiation, 16 had endoscopic resection as salvage  therapy, and  6 that failed within the treatment port  underwent 
esophagectomy as salvage.  However of the 14 patients who couldn’t be salvaged, 6 patients had distant metastasis and 8 
patients had regional lymph node involvement.  All 14 patients  died  of disease,  resulting in a 4 year OS of 80.5%.  
Although these studies  demonstrated  the feasibility and  relative safety of performing  non-surgical management for T1b 
esophageal cancers, the high risk of recurrence from these studies highlights the need for more aggressive therapies.  Also, all  
the patients treated in these two Japanese studies had  squamous cell cancers and so the applicability of this to patients treated 
in the United States  where adenocarcinomas are prevalent is unknown.  From these  two reports, around 10-15% of non-
salvageable recurrence  is due to regional  LNM.  If upfront esophagectomy and lymphadenectomy clears the residual  disease  
left in the primary site or regional lymph  nodes  after chemoradiation, approximately  a 10-15% improvement in survival  should  be 
expected.  
3.  The importance  of pathologic  complete  response in predicting prognosis in esophageal cancer patients after preoperative  
chemoradiation
Pathologic response  rate after preoperative  chemoradiation is  an important prognostic factor for survival in  locally advanced 
patients (16).  This generally ranges from 25-45% in most series of locally advanced cancers  managed with the trimodality 
therapy (9-11).  There is currently  no experience what the pCR rate is for stage  I patients since  trimodality therapy has not been 
evaluated for this stage of disease.  Utilizing a treatment regimen where that could  be systematically assessed will be  important 
to determine the potential of an organ preservation approach for T1b patients in the future.
4.  Preoperative  chemoradiation may improve outcomes in T1b patients
Since patients with submucosal disease  (T1b) tend to have high  risk for nodal metastasis and LVI, with the 5 year survival rates 
for the T1b patients  with these features  nearly comparable to locally advanced  cancers (stage  II-III), preoperative  or adjuvant 
therapies may be necessary to improve outcomes  of these  patients.  Adding adjuvant  therapies  after upfront surgery is an 
option for these patients, but postoperative therapies  incorporating radiation  or chemotherapy alone have not shown to improve 
outcomes in multiple  randomized trials in locally  advanced cancers  after surgical  resection (17).  Although  postoperative 
chemoradiation have  been shown to improve outcomes of patients with gastric/GE junction tumors based on the U.S. Intergroup 
0116 study (18), which randomized gastric  (80%) or GE junction  (20%) tumors to  surgery alone  or postoperative 
chemoradiation, there are several  disadvantages of using  postoperative chemoradiation.  Radiation fields after surgery tends to 
be larger since it must  cover not only the pretreatment surgical bed but also the areas of  dissection.  The dose used 
postoperatively is higher  and will vary depending on  the surgical margin status.  Oxygenation  tends to be poorer  in a dissected 
area, and therefore may decrease  the efficacy of radiotherapy (and the reason for the need of  higher doses of radiation).   With 
higher doses  of radiation, toxicity is likely to also be  higher.  In the area of the upper abdomen where sensitive  structures such 
as the stomach, small bowel, and liver reside,  doses above 45 to  50 Gy will be  very difficult to administer without causing severe 
gastrointestinal side effects (nausea/vomiting,  strictures, fistulas, small  bowel obstruction).  
Preoperative chemoradiation is an accepted standard in the United States for locally advanced stage II-III esophageal 
cancers.  The basis of this was first established by an  Irish study that randomized  113 patients with adenocarcinomas  of the 
esophagus to 2 cycles of preoperative cisplatin/5FU  and concurrent  radiation to 40 Gy in 15  fractions or  to surgical  resection 
alone (9).  The pCR rate for preoperative chemoradiation is  25%.  There  was a significant improvement in the 3 year overall 
survival (32% versus 6%) and median survival  (16 months versus 11 months)  (p=0.01) for the preoperative chemoradiation 
group.  Many with a pCR (85%) were alive and disease free at 2 to  43 months.  However  the surgical resection  group had  an 
unusually poor 3 year survival rate of 6%, especially when historical surgical series demonstrate a 3 year survival of 20-
25%.  Many would argue that preoperative chemoradiation made  up for the poor outcomes of surgery  in this series of 
patients.  At around  the same time,  Arlene  Forastiere and colleagues in the United States were also studying the role of 
preoperative chemoradation,  first as a phase II study that demonstrated  promising  results compared to historical  controls of 
surgery alone, and later as a prospective randomized study of 100 patients  (10, 19).  This latter study randomized  patients to 
preoperative chemoradiation  with 5FU/Cisplatin/Vinblastine plus radiation (45 Gy)  or surgery alone.  The pCR rate  was 
28%.  There was an improved local control rate in the chemoradiation group (81% versus 60%,  p=0.04),  but because of the 
small size of the study,  there was only a trend  to improved survival for the chemoradiation  group (30% versus 16%) 
(10).  Although technically a  negative study,  this trial is largely viewed as a positive trial demonstrating  the superiority of 
preoperative chemoradiation  since the survival  rate in the neoadjuvant group is similar  to the Walsh et al. study and that the 
surgery alone arm had survival rates that was largely equivalent  to historical rates.   These results were  further corroborated by 
the recent  publication  of the results of CALGB  9781,  a phase III study that closed to  poor accrual with only 56 patients  enrolled 
out of the planned 475 patients (11).  Patients were randomized to preoperative  cisplatin/5FU and radiation to  50.4 Gy  or 
surgery alone.  The pCR rate was 40%, and the median survival was better in the chemoradiation group  (4.5 years  versus 1.8 
years) as well as the 5 year overall  survival (39% versus 16%).  However, trials done through  the EORTC (Europe) and the 
TTROG (Australia)  testing the role for preoperative chemoradiation have been  largely negative  studies, with only a benefit of 
disease free survival  but not overall survival for patients treated  with preoperative  chemoradiation  (20, 21).   A meta-analysis of 
10 randomized  trials comparing preoperative chemoradiation versus surgery (1209  patients) found  better hazard-ratio for 
mortality (0.81), corresponding  to a 13% absolute  2-year survival  benefit.  The benefit was seen  for both squamous  and 
adenocarcinoma histologies (12).  
Our experience at M.D. Anderson also favors the trimodality approach.  We have analyzed our experience in 132 consecutive 
stage II-III patients treated  at M.D. Anderson  between 1990  to 1998  (22).  We found that preoperative chemoradiation was  
better than definitive chemoradiation alone  for 5 year loco-regional control (67.1%  vs 22.1%,  p<0.000), disease-free  survival  
(40.7% vs 9.9%, p<0.000), and 5-year overall survival (52.6%  vs 6.5%,  p<0.000).   There  was no difference in distant  
metastastic free survival between  the two groups, however.  There may been some negative selection  bias for the definitive 
chemoradiation group  since these patients tended to be older, have more squamous cell carcinoma, located at upper thoracic or 
cervical locations, and have more  T4 tumors, but on  both univariate and multivariate analysis, surgical resection remained a 
significant independent predictor of outcomes.   
The importance of adding surgical resection after chemoradiation remains  controversial since two European randomized trials 
demonstrated only an improvement  in local control but not overall survival  (23, 24).  One major caveat  of these studies is that 
the potential survival  benefit of surgery was offset by the high rates of postoperative morbidity/mortality.  We expect that the 
benefits of surgery should be seen  at high volume centers  where the morbidity and mortality rates are expected to be lower  
(25).  Since surgical resection is the expected  standard for T1b esophageal cancers  where the postoperative  complication  rates 
are low (3), it is therefore important  to assess the toxicity of trimodality treatment of T1b patients before adopting  it for 
widespread use.  
5.  Biomarker predictors  for pathologic response
It is a fact that definitive chemoradiation can cure select patients (26), particularly those  who achieves a pCR  after 
treatment.  Clinical predictors for pCR using PET response  or EDG biopsy results posttreatment are correlative, but are  not 
sensitive enough to predict pCR (27).  Tumor  biomarkers may be a more sensitive  way to determine which tumors are likely to 
respond to treatment.   Ajani and colleagues have utilized expression microarray  to identify three  markers (PERP, S100A2, and 
SPRR3) that have allowed discrimination of pCR from <pCR with high sensitivity  and specificity  (28).  This  is currently being 
validated in larger clinical sets.  
Promoter CpG island  DNA methylation  is a cancer-specific mechanism to  turn-off tumor-suppressor genes.  Since DNA is a 
stable molecule that is easily amplifiable from small amounts of materials,  detection of residual cancer specific DNA methylation 
changes in small amounts of tissue or body fluids may be a promising approach to assess treatment response after 
chemoradiation (29, 30).  
3.0 Patient Eligibility
Inclusion criteria:
1)  Histologically documented  adenocarcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma of the thoracic esophagus  or gastroesophageal 
junction that are staged as T1b using endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)  or from a large biopsy (either criteria  # 1 or #2 can be 
met for eligibility). 
2)  Patients who undergo a diagnostic Endoscopic Mucosal Resection  (EMR) and have a diagnosis of T1b stage 
established.   
3)  Performance score Karnofsky Performance  Scale (KPS) 80-100.
4)  Patients should be surgical candidates for esophagectomy and should have  no contraindications for chemotherapy  or 
radiation.
5)  Negative pregnancy test for women of child bearing potential.  They must agree to adequate contraception.
6)  Complete blood count (CBC) and complete metabolic panel (chemo-14: Glucose, Calcium, Albumin, Total  Protein, 
Sodium, Potassium, CO2, Chloride, Blood  Urea Nitrogen (BUN),  Creatinine,  Alkaline Phosphatase, ALT (SGPT), AST 
(SGOT), and Bilirubin) to assess  adequate hematologic,  renal and hepatic functioning will be obtained.  The  values are as 
follows: Adequate  hematologic (White Blood Count (WBC) >2,500/uL,  platelets > 75,000/uL), renal (creatinine clearance > 
50 mL/min),  and liver function (bilirubin  <=1.5 fold the upper limit of normal  and liver enzymes < 3 fold the upper limit of 
normal).  
7) Based on the risk factors and propensity of 
LNM and poorer survivals  seen in retrospective studies  as discussed in the introduction,  only patients with  any one (1) of high risk 
features such as LVI, tumors >1.2 cm, and high grade will be  enrolled (Grade is the pathologic term defining  the degree of 
differentiation. Grade 1 is well differentiated,  Grade 2 is  moderately  differentiated, and Grade  3 is poorly differentiated).
Exclusion criteria:
1)  Prior radiation to the chest
2)  Previous or concomitant  cancers  other than 1) curatively  treated carcinoma in situ of cervix, basal cell of the skin, curative 
treatment for transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder, and early stage  cancers at another non-overlapping site that was treated 
more than 3 years  ago for  cure.  
3)  Pregnant or breast-feeding  females
4)  Clinically significant uncontrolled major cardiac, respiratory, renal, hepatic, gastrointestinal or hematologic disease  but not 
limited to:
a) active uncontrolled infection
b) Symptomatic congestive heart  failure, unstable angina, or cardiac dysarrhythmia not controlled by pacer  device
c) no myocardial infarction within  3 months of registration 
5)Known hypersensitivity to docetaxel, 5-fluorouracil, polysorbate-80, or any component  of the formulation.
4.0 Pretreatment  evaluation
4.1.  Pretreatment evaluation:
A complete  history and physical to include performance status, recent weight  loss, percent  of weight loss, usual weight, and 
concurrent non-malignant disease  and its therapy must be recorded.  Laboratory  studies will included CBC with  differential, 
platelet count, Liver  function tests (LFTs), electrolytes, and creatinine within 3 weeks.  
Computed tomography (CT) of chest with contrast and  Positron emission tomography/ computed  tomography (PET/CT) scans 
are required workup components that should be done within  3 months  prior to starting chemoradiation.  Pulmonary  function 
tests (PFTs) should be updated within  3 months prior to starting treatment. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with EUS +/- 
biopsy at M.D. Anderson are required to confirm staging.  
Patients are evaluated independently by the thoracic surgeon, the medical oncologist,  and the radiation oncologist.  
Quality of life (QOL) during  treatment will be assessed at baseline,  during treatment,  and at followup.  The  QOL scale  used are 
the FACT E (Appendix  A), the FACT TS-G (Appendix B),  and the Mayo (Appendix C).  These  will be administered at various 
times pretreatment and throughout the course of treatment and at followup.  The questionnaire to be administered and  the time 
line of when these will be administered is detailed in the Appendix D.  
5.0 Evaluation During Study
5.1  Treatment Schematic
The following demonstrates the treatment  schematic for each week of therapy until radiotherapy is complete  (approximately 5.5 
weeks).
Table 1: Phase 2 Treatment  Schematic
Docetaxel and Fluorouracil  (5-FU)
Docetaxel and 5-FU should  be prepared and administered in accordance with the prescribing information  approved by the Food 
and Drug  Administration (FDA) or other regulatory agencies where docetaxel  and 5-FU are commercially available.  
See Table  2: Therapy Dose and Schedule below for additional information  regarding the dose and schedules for docetaxel, and  
5-FU.
Table 2: Therapy Dose and Schedule
*We will premedicate with 
dexamethasone 10 mg IV 30 minutes  prior to weekly docetaxel administration.
Docetaxel and 5-FU
Although commercial  supplies of 5-FU and docetaxel will be utilized, records  should, when  possible, document manufacturer,  
supplier, and lot numbers for each vial administered to each patient.  Any remaining or unused 5-FU or  docetaxel should  be 
handled according to the institution’s  guidelines for handling and disposing of antineoplastic agents.
5.2  Study Drug Handling and Disposal
Docetaxel and 5-FU
Docetaxel and 5-FU should  be disposed of in accordance with the prescribing information approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA)  or other  regulatory agencies where docetaxel and  5-FU are commercially available.  See  the docetaxel 
and 5-FU Product Information Sheets  for details regarding  handling and disposal.   
5.3  Radiation Therapy 
Participating institutions must utilize  3-D CT based planning and must be able to comply with the criteria  described below.
5.3.1  Dose  Specifications
The daily prescription  dose  will be 1.8 Gy to be delivered to the periphery  of the planning target volume (PTV).   The  isodose line 
(generally 93-98%) chosen will encompass at least 95% of the PTV.  
The maximum point dose, minimum point dose, and  mean dose to PTV will be reported.
The total dose  will be 50.4 Gy (1.8G/Fx/day)  prescribed to the periphery of  the PTV.
5.3.2  External  Beam Equipment
For Photons,  megavoltage equipment is required with effective photon energies >6 MV.  Proton  beam therapy (PBT) will also be 
allowed for this trial.
5.3.3  Treatment Planning Imaging and Localization Requirements
A volumetric treatment planning CT study  will be required to define gross tumor volumes (GTV) and planning target volume  
(PTV).  For this study, the local regional nodes (whether clinically positive or negative) will be included in  the clinical  target 
volume (CTV).  Each patient  will be positioned in an individualized immobilization device in the treatment  position on a flat 
table.  Contiguous  CT slices, 3-5 mm thickness of the regions, harboring gross  tumor and 8-10 mm thickness of the remaining 
regions, are to be obtained  starting  from the level of the cricoid cartilage and extending inferiorly through the liver.  The  GTV  and 
PTV and normal organs will be outlined on all appropriate CT slices  and displayed  using  beam’s  eye view.  Normal  tissues  to be 
contoured include lungs, skin, heart, spinal  cord,  esophagus, and liver.  A measurement scale for  the CT  image shall be 
included.
For cervical  primaries (defined  as tumors above the carina), the bilateral  supraclavicular nodes need to be included.  For mid-
esophageal primaries (at or below the carina), the paresophageal  nodes need to be  included—not the supraclavicular or 
celiac.  For distal/gastroesophageal primaries,  the field should include the celiac nodes  and left gastric nodes.  
Barium swallow during the planning CT is optional provided a diagnostic chest CT was done with contrast to delineate the 
outline of the esophagus.  
Optimal immobilization is critical for this protocol.  Alpha cradle or approved  alternative immobilization system  is 
required.  Patients may be placed  on the supine or prone position.  In general, supine  is recommended for proximal and distal 
primaries whereas  prone is recommended for mid-esophageal.
5.3.4  Volume and ICRU  Reference  Point Definitions
The definition of volumes will be in accordance with the 1993 ICRU Report #50: Prescribing, Recording and Reporting Photon 
Beam Therapy.
Gross Tumor  Volume (GTV) is defined as all known gross disease as defined by the planning CT  and clinical 
information.  Gross  tumor includes the primary (GTV-P) only.   Note:  ICRU Report #50  also defines a clinical target  volume 
(CTV) that includes  the area of subclinical  involvement around  the GTV.  For this protocol, we have chosen to define the CTV a 
minimum of 4 cm proximal and distal  and 1 cm lateral beyond the GTV delineated by CT scan and /or endoscopy (endoscopy is 
preferable).  The final CTV may be larger  since  for cervical primaries,  the supraclavicular  nodes need  to be included, and for 
distal primaries, the celiac nodes  need to be included in the treatment fields.   CTV must be determined by the treating  physician,  
and with CT based planning, must respect anatomic boundaries of potential microscopic disease spread.  
Planning Target Volume (PTV) will provide margin around the CTV to compensate for variability in treatment set up, breathing,  
or motion during treatment.   A margin  around the CTV will define the PTV.  The PTV volume  must include a minimum of 1 cm 
and a maximum of 2 cm around the CTV.  Therefore, the superior and inferior  margins will be approximately 5 cm beyond  the 
GTV, and the lateral margins will be approximately 2 cm beyond  the GTV.  Once again, the final PTV may be larger since  for 
cervical primaries, the supraclavicular nodes  need to be included, and for distal primaries,  the celiac nodes need to be included 
in the treatment fields.  If daily verification  imaging is  done, a 0.5cm expansion for the PTV is allowed.
5.3.5  3D Planning
For photon based radiation, both 3D conformal and Intensity  Modulated Radiation  Therapy (IMRT) techniques  can be used.  For 
PBT, either passive  scattering PBT or Intensity Modulated Proton  Therapy (IMPT)  can be used.   The techniques and  modality  
utilized will be at the discretion of the treating  physician.
Normal Tissue  Volume and Tolerance.   The normal tissues in the table below are  to be contoured in their entirety.
The following organs and  doses are guidelines  for the treatment plan (see Table 3: Normal Tissue Volume and 
Tolerance).  Physician/ Dosimetrist should  make every  effort not to exceed these  tolerance levels.  All normal  tissues  assume 
treatment at 1.8 Gy/Fx (uncorrected).
Table 3: Normal Tissue Volume  and Tolerance

It is expected that the dose to the lungs,  heart, spinal  cord, and liver will be  the primary  dose-limiting  structures.  Every  effort  
should be made to keep the total lung dose  to a minimum.
When planning the beam arrangement to the PTV,  the lungs, heart, spinal cord,  and liver should  be out of the field  to the 
greatest extent possible.  The dose per fraction to the lungs, heart, and spinal cord should be maintained at 2 Gy  or less per 
fraction to the greatest extent possible.  If tolerance dose to any of  the normal  organs is exceeded, alternate  beam arrangement 
should be used.
5.3.6  Treatment Verification
At least  twice weekly  (at least 48 hours  apart) verification films  or images  of the orthogonal views (anterior to 
posterior and lateral projection) must be reviewed by the treating physician.   If daily orthogonal  films are taken, the 
PTV margin can be reduced  to 0.5 cm expansion from the CTV.  The required accuracy of patient positioning and 
the use of multi-leaf collimator apertures  suggest the daily use of on-line imaging may be desirable.
5.3.7  Therapy Interruptions
If interruption of therapy (up to 2 weeks) becomes necessary, radiation therapy should be completed to the prescribed 
doses.  Total number  of fractions and elapsed days should be carefully reported.   
If the patient develops >Grade 3 RT-related  toxicity, RT, and chemotherapy (docetaxel and 5-FU) should be 
withheld.  Treatment can resume once  RT-related toxicity is  <Grade 3 (e.g. Grade  1 or 2 or pre-therapy  baseline).  
5.3.8 Criteria  for Toxicity
Toxicities  related to radiation therapy  include:  fatigue, myleosuppression, skin erythema, subcutaneous fibrosis, esophagitis, 
carditis, myelits, acute radiation  pneumonitis and late pulmonary  fibrosis, and esophageal stricture.
Acute toxicity monitoring:  Acute  (< 90 days from RT start)  side effects  of radiation therapy will be documented and graded 
according to the NCI-CTCAE version 4.0.  
Late toxicity monitoring:  Late (> 90 days  since start or persisting beyond 90 days) post-treatment  complications will be 
evaluated and graded according to the RTOG Late Effects Radiation Morbidity Criteria.
5.3.9  Dose  Delays and Dose  Modifications for Toxicity
Treatment with docetaxel, 5-FU, and radiation  therapy may be delayed,  up to 2 weeks (14 days), to allow for resolution of 
toxicity.  
Treatment must be delayed and/or  modified if any of the following apply:
Table 4: Dose Delays and Modifications for Toxicity

5.4 Post-treatment evaluation:
Four to six weeks after chemoradiation patient will be brought back  for restaging studies  using  contrast enhance CT  of chest  
and PET-CT, as well as repeat EGD  with biopsy to assess  for clinical response to  therapy.  Once patients are  deemed eligible 
for surgical  resection, surgery  should begin no later than 8 to 10 weeks  after completing  chemoradiation.  
5.5  Surgery
Transhiatal or transthoracic approaches (left thoractomy  or Ivor Lewis) will be left to the discretion of the surgeon.  
5.6.  Biomarker study
One of the secondary objectives  is evaluation of feasibility  of pretreatment and  posttreatment/preoperative DNA 
methylation biomarkers  in tumor and blood as predictor of  pCR rate.  Patient will be consented  for blood  draw  for 
assessing DNA methylation biomarkers on protocol LAB09-0307,  an approved protocol that consents patients being 
treated with radiation  for blood draws at various  times before, during, and after  treatment.  Tumor biomarkers  will be 
assessed using  tissue collected at the time of diagnosis either as fresh  frozen or paraffin-embedded samples.  The  
protocol to allow for use of this tissue  is LAB09-0856.  
6.0 Statistical Considerations
6.1  Preliminaries.  This is a single-arm phase IIB trial of chemo-radiation  followed  by surgery for patients with early stage  
grade T1b esophageal  cancer. This trial is motivated by the idea  that adding chemo-radiation  to surgery in this patient subgroup 
will improve their clinical outcome.  The primary endpoint will be pathologic  CR (PCR).   Secondary endpoints  will include  T = 
disease-free survival (DFS) time, defined as the time to  disease progression or death, pre-surgery toxicity (PreTox), defined as 
any NCI grade 4 non-hematologic  toxicity observed during the 10-week period beginning at  the start of chemo-radiation and 
ending at the time of surgery,  and post-surgery mortality (PostDeath), defined as death due to any cause during the 30-day 
period following surgery.  
6.2. Outcomes and Stopping Rules.  The design will include  three early  stopping rules: (a) A futility rule based on PCR that  
stops the trial if it is unlikely that an improvement in 
Prob(PCR), from the historical rate of .25 to a targeted rate of at least .45,  will be achieved;  (b) A safety rule based on PreTox  
that stops  the trial if it is likely that a probability of this event higher than the historical probability of .30 will occur  (c) A safety 
rule based on PostDeath that stops  the trial if it is likely that a probability of  this event higher  than the historical  probability of 
.026 will occur.  A maximum of 30 patients will be treated with a follow up of  1 year after the last patient is accrued. An  accrual 
rate of 6 patients per year will be assumed.
6.3. Futility Monitoring . The following  futility monitoring rule, as described in  Thall and Sung (31) will be  used.  We assume 
that the historical PCR probability  qPCR,0  ~ beta (50, 150), reflecting an historical rate of  25% based  on approximately 200 
patients, and that for the corresponding probability using the experimental treatment modality  in the trial, qPCR,E  ~  beta(.25, 
.75), reflecting the same prior mean of 25% but with an  effective sample size of 1 patient.  That is, the prior qPCR,E  on is non-
informative. Since the binary PCR outcomes will be obtained based on  tissue samples taken  at surgery, PCR will be monitored  
continuously and the trial will be stopped   for futility if  Pr(qPCR,0 + .20 < qPCR,E  | data)  < .025. This  translates  into the 
following decision boundaries: The trial will be stopped for futility if [# patients  with PCR]/[# patients evaluated] is less than or 
equal to 0/5, 1/10,  3/15, 4/20, or 6/25.
6.4. Safety  Monitoring. Since neoadjuvant chemo-radiation is used as conventional treatment for esophageal cancer patients  
with more advanced  disease  but surgery alone is standard therapy for T1b stage esophageal cancer patients, the following 
adverse events  (AEs) will be monitored  to ensure a safe trial.  The method of Thall, Simon and Estey (32) will be used.   The  
historical rates of PreTox and PostDeath that will be used to construct monitoring rules  are .30 for q1 = Prob(PreTox) and .026 
for q2 = Prob(PostDeath), where the latter  is computed as the weighted average  .02*.70 + .04*.30 = .026 to reflect the prior 
experience using chemo-radiation that the PostDeath rates are 2% in patients who do not experience PreTox and 4% in 
patients who do experience PreTox. Indexing the four possible elementary  AE outcomes by 1 = (No PreTox, No PostDeath), 2 = 
(PreTox, No PostDeath),  3 = (No PreTox, PostDeath), 4 = (PreTox, PostDeath), and their respective  probabilities by w1, w2, 
w3, w4, it follows that q1 = w2 + w4 and q2 = w3 + w4.  Indexing the experimental  regimen (neoadjuvant chemo-radiation + 
surgery) by E and the historical  standard experience by S, we assume  a non-informative Dirichlet prior with parameters (.6818, 
.2922, .0182, .0078) for wE = (wE1, wE2, wE3, wE4) under E and corresponding  informative Dirichlet standard historical prior 
with parameters (681.8, 292.2, 18.2,  7.8) for the corresponding  historical probability vector wH.  The  marginal AE probabilities  
are qE1 = wE2 + wE4  and qE2 = wE3 + wE4 for E and similarly qS1 = wS2 + wS4  and qS,2 = wS3 + wS4 for S. The two early 
stopping rules are as follows.  The trial will be stopped early  
6.4.1 due to an excessively high PreTox  rate if Prob(q1S < q1E | data) > .97, or
6.4.2  due to an excessively high PostDeath rate if Prob(q2S <  q2E | data)  > .95
These rules will be applied after each cohort of 5 patients has been treated  and evaluated.  The early stopping  bounds 
determined by these probability criteria are as follows:  Stop the trial due to an excessive  PreTox  rate if [# patients with 
PreTox]/[# patients scored] is greater than or equal to the upper bound  4/5, 7/10, 9/15, 11/20, 13/25.  Stop the trial due to an 
excessive PostDeath rate if [# patients with PostDeath]/[# patients scored] is greater  than or equal to the upper  bound 2/5, 2/10,  
3/15, 3/20,  3/25.
6.5 Simulation Study. Each  case  was simulated 1000 times, assuming an accrual rate of 6 patients per year  (0.5 per  month). 
The overall stopping probability  under  each scenario was computed as pSTOP = 1 – (1- pSTOP, T)*(1- p STOP, TOX-DEATH ) where p STOP, T = 
stopping probability  due to  the futility rule and pSTOP, TOX-DEATH  = stopping probability due to  the two safety rules, assuming 
independence.  Note that the only desirable scenario among the six scenarios considered is that where  the true event  
probabilities are Pr(T >2 yrs) = .92, Prob(PreTox) = .30 and Prob(PostDeath)  = .026.
6.6  Data Analyses .  
The rates of pathologic CR, PreTox and Postdeath  will be  tabulated and their possible  relationships to baseline  covariates 
assessed by logistic regression (32).  Unadjusted progression free survival time will be  estimated by the method  of Kaplan and 
Meier (33) and its possible  relationship to baseline  covariates assessed by survival regression modeling (32).
7.0 References
1.Cen P, Hofstetter WL, Correa  AM, et al: Lymphovascular invasion as a tool to further subclassify T1b  esophageal 
adenocarcinoma. Cancer 112:1020-1027,  2008
2.Liu L, Hofstetter WL, Rashid  A, et al: Significance of the depth of tumor invasion  and lymph node metastasis  in 
superficially invasive (T1) esophageal  adenocarcinoma. American Journal of Surgical Pathology 29:1079-1085,  2005
3.Pennathur A, Farkas A, Krasinskas AM, et al: Esophagectomy for T1 Esophageal Cancer: Outcomes in 100 Patients 
and Implications for Endoscopic Therapy. Annals of Thoracic Surgery  87:1048-1055, 2009
4.Bolton WD, Hofstetter WL, Francis AM, et al: Impact of tumor length on long-term survival  of pT1 esophageal 
adenocarcinoma. Journal of Thoracic  and Cardiovascular Surgery 138:831-836, 2009
5.Vieth  M, Ell C, Gossner L, et al: Histological analysis of endoscopic resection specimens from 326 patients with 
Barrett's esophagus  and early neoplasia. Endoscopy  36:776-781, 2004
6.Ell C, May A, Gossner L, et al: Endoscopic mucosal resection of early  cancer and high-grade dysplasia  in Barrett's 
esophagus. Gastroenterology 118:670-677, 2000
7.Bollschweiler E, Baldus SE, SchrÃ¶der  W, et al: High rate of lymph-node  metastasis in submucosal esophageal 
squamous-cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas. Endoscopy 38:149-156, 2006
8.Kim DU, Lee JH, Min BH, et al: Risk factors of lymph node metastasis  in T1 esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.  
Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 23:619-625, 2008
9.Walsh TN, Noonan N, Hollywood D, et al: A comparison  of multimodal therapy  and surgery  for esophageal 
adenocarcinoma. New England Journal of Medicine 335:462-467, 1996
10.Urba  SG, Orringer MB, Turrisi A, et al: Randomized trial of preoperative chemoradiation versus surgery alone  in 
patients with locoregional esophageal carcinoma. Journal of Clinical  Oncology  19:305-313, 2001
11.Tepper J, Krasna  MJ, Niedzwiecki  D, et al: Phase III trial of trimodality  therapy with cisplatin,  fluorouracil,  
radiotherapy, and surgery compared  with surgery alone for esophageal cancer: CALGB  9781. Journal of Clinical  
Oncology 26:1086-1092, 2008
12.Gebski V, Burmeister B, Smithers  BM, et al: Survival benefits from neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy  or chemotherapy 
in oesophageal  carcinoma: a meta-analysis, Lancet Oncology,  2007, pp 226-234
13.Herskovic  A, Martz K, Al-Sarraf  M, et al: Combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy compared with radiotherapy 
alone in patients  with cancer of the esophagus.  New England Journal  of Medicine  326:1593-1598, 1992
14.Yamada K, Murakami M, Okamoto Y, et al: Treatment results of chemoradiotherapy for clinical stage I (T1N0M0) 
esophageal carcinoma.  International  Journal of Radiation  Oncology Biology Physics 64:1106-1111, 2006
15.Kato H, Sato A, Fukuda H, et al: A phase  II trial of chemoradiotherapy for stage I esophageal squamous cell  
carcinoma: Japan  Clinical Oncology Group Study (JCOG9708). Japanese Journal of Clinical Oncology 39:638-643, 2009
16.Gaca JG, Petersen RP, Peterson  BL, et al: Pathologic  nodal status predicts  disease-free survival after neoadjuvant 
chemoradiation for gastroesophageal junction carcinoma. Annals of  Surgical Oncology 13:340-346,  2006
17.Fok M, Sham JST, Choy D, et al: Postoperative radiotherapy for  carcinoma of  the esophagus: A prospective,  
randomized controlled study. Surgery 113:138-147, 1993
18.Macdonald JS, Smalley  SR, Benedetti J, et al: Chemoradiotherapy after surgery compared with surgery  alone  for 
adenocarcinoma of the stomach or gastroesophageal junction. New England Journal  of Medicine 345:725-730, 2001
19.Forastiere  AA, Orringer MB, Perez-Tamayo  C, et  al: Preoperative chemoradiation  followed by transhiatal 
esophagectomy for carcinoma of the esophagus: Final report. Journal of Clinical  Oncology 11:1118-1123, 1993
20.Burmeister BH, Smithers BM, Gebski V, et al: Surgery alone versus  chemoradiotherapy followed by surgery  for 
resectable cancer of the oesophagus: A randomised controlled phase III trial. Lancet Oncology 6:659-668, 2005
21.Bosset JF, Gignoux M, Triboulet JP, et al: Chemoradiotherapy followed by surgery  compared with surgery alone  in 
squamous-cell cancer  of the esophagus.  New England Journal of Medicine 337:161-167, 1997
22.Liao Z, Zhang Z, Jin J, et al: Esophagectomy after concurrent chemoradiotherapy improves locoregional control in 
clinical stage  II or III esophageal  cancer  patients. International  Journal of Radiation  Oncology Biology  Physics 60:1484-
1493, 2004
23.Stahl  M, Stuschke M, Lehmann N, et al: Chemoradiation with  and without surgery in patients with locally advanced 
squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Journal of Clinical Oncology  23:2310-2317, 2005
24.Bedenne L, Michel P, BouchÃ© O, et al: Chemoradiation followed by surgery compared with chemoradiation alone in 
squamous cancer of the esophagus:  FFCD  9102. Journal of Clinical Oncology  25:1160-1168, 2007
25.Swisher SG, DeFord L, Merriman KW, et al: Effect of operative volume  on morbidity, mortality, and hospital  use after 
esophagectomy for cancer. Journal  of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery 119:1126-1134, 2000
26.Cooper JS, Guo MD, Herskovic A, et al: Chemoradiotherapy of  locally advanced esophageal cancer: Long-term  
follow-up of a prospective randomized  trial (RTOG 85-01). Journal of the American Medical Association 281:1623-1627,  
1999
27.Swisher SG, Erasmus J, Maish  M, et al: 2-Fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose positron emission tomography imaging is 
predictive of pathologic response and survival after preoperative chemoradiation in  patients with esophageal carcinoma.  
Cancer 101:1776-1785,  2004
28.Luthra R, Wu TT, Luthra MG, et al: Gene  expression profiling of localized esophageal  carcinomas: Association with 
pathologic response  to preoperative chemoradiation. Journal of Clinical  Oncology 24:259-267, 2006
29.Chan KCA, Lo YMD:  Circulating tumour-derived nucleic acids in cancer  patients: Potential applications as tumour  
markers. British Journal of Cancer  96:681-685, 2007
30.Mulero-Navarro S, Esteller M: Epigenetic biomarkers for human cancer: The time is now. Critical Reviews in  
Oncology/Hematology 68:1-11, 2008
31.Thall  PF, Simon RM, Estey EH: Bayesian sequential monitoring  designs for single-arm clinical trials with multiple  
outcomes. Statistics in Medicine 14:357-379, 1995
32.Venables WN, Ripley BD: Modern Applied Statistics with S. 4th Edition, 2002
33.Kaplan EL, Meier  P: Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. Journal of American Statistical 
Association 53:457-481, 1958
34. Barbour, AP, Jones, M, Brown, I, et al. Risk Stratification for Early Esophageal Adenocarcinoma: Analysis  of 
Lymphatic Spread and Prognostic Factors. Annals of Surgical Oncology:1-9.