CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL 
 
Protocol RM-493-010 
 
A Phase 2, Randomized, Double-Blind,  Placebo-controlled Pilot Study to 
Assess the Effects of RM-493, a Melanoco rtin 4 Receptor (MC4R) Agonist, in 
Obese Subjects with Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) on Safety, Weight 
Reduction, and Food-Related Behaviors 
 
This study will be conducted according to the protocol and in compliance with Good Clinical 
Practice, the ethical principles stat ed in the Declaration of Helsinki, 
and other applicable regulatory requirements. 
 
Study Sponsor:   Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 
855 Boylston Street Boston, MA 02 16, USA 
 
 
 Sponsor Signatory:  Medical Monitor:   Document Version (Date):          
    
    
 
CONFIDENTIALITY NOTE 
The information contained in this document is  privileged and confidential. Any distribution, 
copying, or disclosure is strict ly prohibited unless such disc losure is required by federal 
regulations or state law.  Persons to whom the information is disclosed must know that it is 
confidential and that it may not be further disclosed by them.  RM-493-010_PWS  |
A oved

Clinical Study Protocol RM -493-010,  page 24 
CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc.  
5.3. Method of Assigning Patients to Treatment 
Patients who qualify for the study will return to  the site on Day -1 (e.g., randomization will 
formally take place at the end of the placebo-co ntrolled run-in period, after compliance during 
the run-in period is assessed). Prior to randomizati on, the Investigator will ensure that the patient 
continues to meet inclusion and exclusion criteri a, and perform all pre-dose procedures. Once a 
patient is determined to be eligible for randomization by the Investigator, the Investigator or the 
Investigator’s research staff will randomize the patient according to a centralized randomization 
process.   
Note all patients will be pre-randomized to their status/treatment group for the randomized 
withdrawal part of the protocol at the initial ra ndomization.   
5.4. Blinding, Packaging, and Labeling 
5.4.1. Blinding and Breaking the Blind 
This is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-c ontrolled study. Blinding and randomization will 
be accomplished so that all study-related sta ff remain blinded to patient assignation.   
The Investigator, study site staff,  clinical research organization staff provi ding site management, 
and Medical Monitor will not have access to the randomization scheme during the study except 
in the case of an emergency.  Breaking the blind for a patient should be do ne only in the event of 
a medical emergency where the identity of study drug is necessary to appropriately treat the 
patient.  The request to break the blind shoul d be discussed with the Medical Monitor and 
Rhythm, whenever possible.  If the blind is broken, the reason, when and how the blind was 
broken will be documented.  Every attempt will be  made to maintain the blind throughout the 
study. 
5.4.2. Packaging and Labeling 
Study drug is provided in single-us e vials.  The study drug is s upplied in glass vials and is 
provided in kits according to the randomization schedule for pa tients enrolled in the study.  All 
study drugs, including placebo for practice, will be supplied by Rhythm. 
Packaging and labeling will be prepared to meet all regulatory requirements. 
5.5. Duration of Patient Participation 
The overall study duration will be approximately 12 months, as currently planned.  Individual 
patient participation in the study (Screening Period, Run-in, Treatment Period, withdrawal 
period, open label optional extension and Follow-up Period) will be approximately 5 months.   
Screening, inclusive of the placebo practice period, will occur within 30 days prior to entry into 
the single-blind plac ebo-run in period. 
5.6. Assessment of Treatment Compliance 
In order to evaluate the safety, tolerabili ty, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of the 
study drug, it is critical that pati ents receive study drug as direct ed.  All used vials and syringes 
will be collected to assess compliance with the protocol. RM-493-010_PWS  |
Approved

Clinical Study Protocol RM -493-010,  page 30 
CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Table 6-1: Schedule of Assessments (continued) 
1 A complete physical examination will be conducted at Screening (or at the discretion of the site, at Day -1), and Day 90.    He ight will be 
measured during the Screening Period only. 
2 A comprehensive skin evaluation will be performed by a dermatol ogist.  Any concerning lesions identified during the screening p eriod will 
be biopsied and results known to be benign prior to randomization.  If the pre-treatment biopsy results are of concern, the pat ient will be 
excluded from the study.   
3 Randomization to occur after all pre-dose procedures completed on Day 15.   
4 The screening and run in can be scheduled on the same day, as long  as the lab results are back in time for the start of run-in phase.  Study 
procedures required to be performed in the Screening Visit and also required in the Baseline visit per the SOA should be perfor med in the 
Screening portion of the single visit and do not need to be re peated during the Baseline ortion of the visit..  Study personnel will still need to 
record two separate visits in required study docume ntation, but both visits will have the same date. 
5 On Day 1, prior to the initial injection of run-in single blind study drug.  
6 Clinic Visit Schedule:  For Days 1-14 (ru n-in) patients will receive a telephone ontact  approximately 1 week into the Run-In; During the 
double blind 4-week treatment period (Days 15 to 42), there will be  an optional in clinic or telephone contact visit at ~2 week s into the 
treatment period (~Day 28 ± 2 days). There will be a clinic visit at the nset of  Withdrawal Period (~Day 42 ± 2 days); at the  end of the 2-
week randomized withdrawal period (~Day 56 ± 2 days), at the en d of th  optional open label period (~Day 70 - 2 days or +4 days ) and at the 
poststudy visit (~1-3 months after last active dose).   
7 The Fitzpatrick assessment will be performed. 
8 Telephone contact weekly by site for any visit more than 1 week apart.  
10 Weight is to be measured using the same scale after patients have emptied their bladder and while fasting.  Patients are to wea r scrubs or 
equivalent, no shoes, and will be weighed at  approximately the same time of day.  We ight measurements are to be done in 
 
11 Extra retain samples (2 red top and 2 purple top vacutainer) will be taken pre-dose pr ior to double-blind study drug, and at th e end of the 4-
week double blind treatment period before first dose of the withdrawal period. 
12 Study drug is administered by patients/caretakers beginning the mo rning of Day 1 through to Day 70 (-2 days, +4 Days); e.g., th e last day of 
Optional Extension).  Patients/caretakers, including home health  practitioners, will draw up and self-administer/administer the  drug on a daily 
basis. Home health practitioners may draw up study drug into syri nges for storage in refrigerator for up to 2-days in advance, if desired, for 
patient/caretaker self-administration.  On days with clinic vi sits, the patients/caretaker will administer the drug at the clinic in the presence of RM-493-010_PWS  |  
roved

Clinical Study Protocol RM -493-010,  page 31 
CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. the clinical staff.  Patients/caretakers will return all empty sy ringes and vials to the clinic when they visit (the number rec orded) and both 
clinic administered study drug, as well as outpatient study drug ad ministration will be recorded by the patient in a study diar y.   
13 Injection site evaluations and scoring (by the clinical staff) will include identification and measurement of areas of erythema, edema and 
induration, as well as the presence of localized pain, tenderness a nd itching.  Additional evaluation data can be collected at any visit where 
there are injection site reactions even if not a timepoint for formal assessment.   
14 All BP and HR measurements are to be obt ained in the sitting position following at least 5 minutes of rest.  All measurements w ill be taken in 
triplicate, approximately 2 minutes apart.  On Day 1 and Day 14, patients will have vitals obtained pre-dose.  When possible, B P should be 
taken in the same arm throughout the study, using the same methodol ogy (automated or manual).  Body temperature (°C) and respir ation rate 
(breaths/minute) will be obtained in the sitting po sition following at least 5 minutes of rest.   
15 On Treatment Day 15, at the end of the single-blind placebo run- in but prior to beginning dosing in the 4 week double blind tre atment period. 
16 A single 12-lead ECG will be performed in the supine position following a period of at  least 10 minutes of rest, at Screening, on Day 42 and 
at poststudy. 
17 Safety laboratories to be collected at screening.  Safety laborat ories also to be collected on Day 15, 28 (if clinic visit occu rs) 42, Day 70 and 
at Poststudy.  CBC with platelet count and standard indices, ch emistry panel (includes sodium, potassium, chloride, CO2, albumi n, total 
protein, glucose, BUN, creatinine, uric acid, AST, ALT, GGT, CPK, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, LDH,  calcium, 
phosphorus), urinalysis with microscopic analysis if positive fi ndings on dipsticks warrant further examination.  Fasting sampl es (8 hr 
minimum) are required at all timepoints where feasible in this population  
18 A blood sample for PK will be drawn within 5 minutes before d sing on Day 42 and Day 70 (during the clinic visit) for each pati ent.  These 
PK samples will be drawn with patients/caretakers being reminde d there should be NO study drug administration at home; the drug  will be 
administered in the clinic AFTER the PK sample is obtain d.  For the PK sample, the actual collection (clock) time will be reco rded, as well 
as the time of the previous day’s study drug injection time as reported by the patient/caretaker.   Exception: patients who participate in the PK 
substudy between Days 63 and 69 do not ne d to have PK repeated on Day 70 visit. 
19 Adverse events will be recorded from the ti me a p tien  provides informed consent.  Adverse events reported after randomization  will be 
considered as treatment-emergent adverse events. 
20 Questionnaires and other assessments include the Dykens Hyperphagia,  Food-
Related Problems Questionnaire,  and Symptom and Global 
Assessments.  
21 Basal metabolic rate for baseline should be obtained ONCE duri ng screening or during the 14 day double-blind placebo-controlled  run-in, but 
must be completed before initiation of the first dose of the 4-w eek double blind treatment period.  Post-dose basal metabolic r ate should be 
assessed ONCE during the 4-week double blind treatment period, pref erably on Day~ 42± 2 days and once during open label treatment 
period, preferably on day 70 (-2, +4 days). 
22  Perfor med or collected on visits where starting (or changing) the study drug treatment.  DEXA may be performed prior to or aft er treatment 
administration.   
23  To be perform ed onl
y if visit performed in  clinic; an in-clinic visit is recommended. 
24  Follow-up visit to be conducted 1- 3 months after completion of treatment 
25 Starting on any day from Day 63 through 69 (the second week  of the optional open-label, active-dose extension period), a substudy of 
patients will have a 24-hour PK profile obtained (as outlined in a separate PK manual). Blood samples will be collected at 0 (w ithin 5 minutes RM-493-010_PWS  |  
Approved

Clinical Study Protocol RM -493-010,  page 32 
CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. BEFORE dosing), 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 24 hours af ter dosing. The samples collected at 1 and 2 hours will be collecte d within 5 
minutes of the scheduled time; the samples at 4 to 12 hours will be  collected within 10 minutes of the scheduled time, and the 24-hour sample 
will be collected within 10 minutes BEFORE the next dose of st udy drug. For each PK sample, the actual collection (clock) time will be 
recorded. 
26  On day 15, urine pregnancy test to be performed prior to dos ing for the 4 week double blind treatment period; all other pregna ncy testing 
time points will be obtained from serum. 
 RM-493-010_PWS  |  
Approved

Clinical Study Protocol RM -493-010,  page 33 
CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 6.2. Patient Requirements 
6.2.1. Contraception 
RM-493 has not been evaluated in any pre-clin ical Developmental and Reproductive Toxicology 
Studies to date, therefore, the effects of RM-493 on embryo-fetal development are unknown at 
this time. It is imperative all study subjects adhere to the contraception requirements as outlined 
below.   
Females must not be pregnant and must have a negative serum pregnanc y test result at the 
Screening Visit and Day 1 with results known prior to initiati ng the injection, and pregnancy 
testing will be mon itored during the study. 
For females able to bear children, a hormonal (i.e ., oral, implantable, or  injectable) and single-
barrier method (i.e., sponge), or a double-barr ier method of birth cont rol (i.e., condom with 
spermicide) or abstinence must be used/ practiced throughout the study and for 90 days 
following the study. Females of non-childbearing potential, defined as surgically sterile (s tatus post hysterectomy, 
bilateral oophorectomy, or bilatera l tubal ligation) or post-menopa usal for at least 12 months 
(and confirmed with a screeni ng FSH level in the post-menopausal range), do not require 
contraception during the study. It is not known if this treatment will affect sp ermatogenesis.  Therefore, males with female 
partners of childbearing potential  must agree o use contraception (e.g., if they ;have not had a 
vasectomy then should either (a) abstain from  reproductive sexual intercourse or (b) use a 
condom and contraceptive foam during intercourse ) if they become sexually active during the 
study and for 90 days following the study. Male subjects must not donate sperm for 90 days 
following their partic ipation in the study  
6.2.2. Protection from Sun 
Skin hyperpigmentation, or ta ning, was observed in the cynomolgus monkey toxicology 
studies, and the human Phase 1/2 studies.  These events were reversible upon cessation of study 
drug.  However, it is still uncerta in if exposure to sunlight might exacerbate the tanning effects of 
RM-493. It is also important that patients do not participat e in any activities that will intentionally cause 
their skin to tan (e.g.; visit UV tanning salons, use spray tanners, self-tanning lotions, etc.). 
6.3. Efficacy Measurements 
6.3.1. Weight 
Weight (Kg) will be recorded as shown in the Schedule of Assessments (SOA), and generally 
will be assessed and recorded once weekly.  All m easurements will be done in triplicate at each 
timepoint.  The same scale should be used th roughout the study, including the Screening Visit, 
and should be calibrated on a regular basis.  We ight should be measured when patients are 
fasting and at approximately the same time at each  visit.  Patients should be in underwear or 
scrubs (or equivalent), with no shoes and have emptied their bladder.    RM-493-010_PWS  |
Approved

Clinical Study Protocol RM -493-010,  page 34 
CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 6.3.3. Body Composition DEXA 
Participants will have three DEXA procedures to measure body 
compositions over the course of 
the study.  DEXA uses low dose x-rays to non-invasi vely assess skeletal and soft tissue density.  
Half-body scans may be performed for subjects that extend beyond the scanning area. The risk 
associated with exposure to ionizing radiati on is minimal and further minimized through the 
exclusion of pregnant women. 
6.4. Clinical Procedures and Safety Assessments 
6.4.1. Informed Consent 
A complete description of the st udy is to be presented to each potential patient and signed and 
dated informed consent is to be obtained befo re any study specific proce dures are performed.   
6.4.2. Demographics and Medical History 
A complete medical history along with demographic data will be obtained for all patients during 
the Screening Period.  Data to be recorded in the source document and CRF include the patient’s 
gender, race, date of birth a nd concomitant medication use. 
A recent medical history will be obtained on Day 1 prior to randomization to assess continued 
study eligibility and adherence to final inclusion/ exclusion criteria.  This recent medical history 
includes a review for changes from screening as well as a review of the patient’s recent 
medication use and to assess whether or not any ch anges have occurred sin ce the previous visit. 
6.4.3. Physical Examination, Comprehensi ve Skin Examination, and Height 
Physical Examinations 
A complete physical examination will include re view of peripheral lymph nodes, head, eyes 
(including conjunctiva), ears,  nose, mouth and oropharynx, n eck, heart, lungs, abdomen, 
musculoskeletal including back, extremities a nd neurologic, will be performed during the 
Screening Period (or at the discretion of the site , can be performed at Day -1), and at the Final 
Study Visit.   
Abbreviated symptom-directed physical examinations (e.g., general, heart, lungs, abdomen, skin 
(not comprehensive), and extremities) will be performed during the Treatment Period, and follow 
up period as shown in the SOA.   
All physical examinations are to be  conducted in adequate light.   
Changes from baseline in any physical examinat ion findings identified by the Investigator as 
clinically significant must be recorded as an  adverse event (AE) on the appropriate CRF. RM-493-010_PWS  |
Approved

Clinical Study Protocol RM -493-010,  page 35 
CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Comprehensive Skin Examinations 
Comprehensive skin examinations will be perf ormed by a Dermatologist.  Comprehensive skin 
exams will be performed according to the SOA.   
At screening, a specific focus of the comprehensive skin examination will be the identification of 
any skin lesions that appear to have dysplastic or malignant potent ial that could interfere with the 
interpretation of study outcomes regarding skin changes.  In such cases, the patient will be 
excluded from the study.  However, any lesions of  concern can be biopsied and if confirmed to 
be benign prior to randomization, patient s can be enrolled in the study.   
In the event a patient experiences changes to skin or skin lesions that are unresolved (or have not 
significantly improved or are clos e to resolution) at the Final Study Visit, the patient may be 
asked to return for additional follow up assessmen ts to document progress towards resolution for 
~60-90 days after last treatment. 
Height 
Height (cm) will be measured  without shoes, during Screening using a wall-mounted 
stadiometer. 
6.4.4. Fitzpatrick Scale 
Each patient is to be categorized for skin type according to the Fitzpatr ick scale [18] during the 
Screening Period.  The Fitzpatrick Scale is depicted in Appendix 11.5. 
6.4.5. Concomitant Medication Review 
A review of concomitant medications will be conducted during the Screening Period and at every study visit.  Any medications taken by study patients will be recorded in source documents and on the appropriate CRF. 
6.4.6. Vital Signs 
Vital signs will be obtained in the sitting position following at least 5 minutes of rest each time 
they are measured, at the times outlined in the SOA.   
Blood pressure and heart rate 
Blood pressure (BP; mmHg) and heart rate (HR; bp m) are to be measured according to the SOA.  
At each timepoint, BP and HR measurements will be performed in triplicate approximately 2 RM-493-010_PWS  |
A

Clinical Study Protocol RM -493-010,  page 36 
CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. minutes apart , using the same methodology throughout the study (manual or automated).  
Careful attention should be paid to using an appropriately sized BP cuff.  
When possible, BP should be taken in the same arm throughout the entire study period. 
Repeat measures and more frequent monitoring can be implemented for significant increases in 
BP or HR.   
Body temperature and respiration rate 
Body temperature (°C) and respiration rate (bre aths/minute) will be obtained in the sitting 
position following at least 5 minutes of rest according to the SOA. 
6.4.7. 12-Lead Electrocardiogram 
Single 12-lead electrocardiograms will be performe d following a period of at least 10 minutes of 
rest in the supine position according to the SOA. 
6.4.8. Clinical Laboratory Tests 
Clinical safety laboratory tests are to be perf ormed by the local laborato ry as outlined in the 
Schedule of Assessments and patients are to be fasting for 8 hours.  Labs ar e to be drawn prior to 
dosing.  
All clinically significant laboratory abnormalitie s will be followed-up by repeat testing and 
further investigated according to th e judgment of the Investigator.   
Liver function test abnormalities will be evaluated in accordance with FDA Guidance (2009) as 
described in the Appendix 11.8.   
Specific tests are described below. 
6.4.8.1. Hematology  Clinical Chemistry and Urinalysis 
Hematology: 
Complete blood count with platel t count and standard indices will be obtained. 
Chemistry: Sodium, potassium, chloride, CO
2, albumin, total protein, gluc ose, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 
creatinine, uric acid, aspartate aminotransferase  (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), gamma-
glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT), creatine phosphoki nase (CPK), alkaline phosphatase, total 
bilirubin, direct bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), calcium and phosphorus. 
Urinalysis: 
pH, glucose, protein, ketones, bilirubin, bl ood, urobilinogen, specific gravity, nitrite, and 
leukocytes by dipstick analysis or machine urin alysis.  Urine microscopic examination will be 
performed if positive findings on dipsticks warrant further examination. 
6.4.8.2. Serum Samples for Storage 
Extra retain samples will be ta ken pre-dose prior to double-blind study drug, and at the end of the 
4-week double blind treatment period and will be  used only in the event that unscheduled 
diagnostic tests are required for safety reasons, or  for that are currently not defined 
but are directly related to the aims of this st udy.  These samples will be retained until the study RM-493-010_PWS  |
Approved

Clinical Study Protocol RM -493-010,  page 37 
CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. has been completed, and until the Sponsor has notif ied the study site in writing that the samples 
can be discarded. 
6.4.9. Injection Site Evaluation and Scoring 
Injection sites will be carefully inspected, ev aluated and scored during the study period. The 
injection site evaluation will include identificatio n and measurement of areas of erythema, edema 
and induration, as well as the presence of local ized pain, tenderness and itching.  A sample 
injection site evaluation form is included in the Appendix. 
Injection site evaluations and scoring will be conducted according to the SOA.  In addition, 
unscheduled evaluations may also be record ed as warranted by clinical conditions. 
6.4.10. Anti-RM-493 Antibody Measurements 
Blood samples for measurement of anti-RM- 493 antibodies will be drawn pre-dose, and 
thereafter according to the SOA. 
6.4.11. Patient Questionnaires 
The patient questionnaires will be answered by the patient and/or caretaker after careful training. 
PWS Hyperphagia Questionnaire (Dykens, 2014) 
The PWS Hyperphagia Questionnaire is a tool fo r assessing hyperphagia -related behavior and 
will be a primary endpoint of the study, evalua ted at both the end of the 4-week double-blind 
treatment phase, and again at the end of the 2-week randomized double-blind withdrawal phase .  
Food Related Problems Questionnaire (Russell 2003) The Food-Related Problems Questionnaire is a t ool specifically desi gned for patients with 
Prader-Willi Syndrome to rate preoccupation with food, impairment of satiety, difficulty with 
self-control and other food-rela ted ‘challenging’ behavior.  RM-493-010_PWS  |
proved

Clinical Study Protocol RM -493-010,  page 38 
CONFIDENTIAL  Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. RM-493-010_PWS  |
