Protocol Template Page 1 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 w COMIRB Protocol  
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
CAMPUS BOX F -490    TELEPHONE:  303 -724-1055  Fax:  303 -724-0990   
 
 
Protocol #:    17-1317  
Project Title:   TESTO: Testosterone Effects on Short -Term Outcomes in Infants with XXY   
Principal Inv estigator:  Shanlee Davis, MD, MSCS 
Version Date:   9/11/202 0        
 
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims:  
 
Karyotype 47,XXY, also known as Klinefelter syndrome, is the most common chromosomal abnormali ty in 
boys, affecting  1/600 male births or nearly 6 million individuals worldwide.1 XXY is associated with testo s-
terone (T) deficiency from primary testicular failure, motor and neurocognitive deficits,  and cardiometabol-
ic disorders .2 Men with XXY have higher mortality, with cardiovascular disease being the leading cause of 
death (standard ized mortality ratio 5.8).3 An essential question in XXY is whether the observed phenotype 
is solely attributable to the gene dosage effect from the extra X chromosome, or whether T  insufficiency 
contributes to the neurocognitive deficits and metabolic dysfunction and therefore could be mitigated by T treatment.  
 
The hypothalamic -pituitary -gonadal axis is activated twice in post -natal life: the mini -puberty period of i n-
fancy and true puberty early in the second decade.4 Although understudied, the T surge of mini -puberty in 
the first few months of life may play a role in long-term metabolic programming of energy metabolism and neurocognition .
5-7 Infants with XXY have a blunted T surge and giving T to infants with XXY has recently 
been proposed as an intervention.8-10 However, the only 
data to support this practice are retrospective reports of better cognitive scores in XXY boys who had received T in infancy.
11,12 With the rapidly increa sing rate of XXY 
diagnoses from non- invasive prenatal testing, it is crucial  
to study  the effi cacy and safety of infant T in XXY now.13 
Recognizing this clinical equipoise,  we conducted a pilot 
study to evaluate body composition (a surrogate ma rker 
of cardiometabolic health) as a short -term outcome of T 
treatment. Building on these preliminary results, we pr o-
pose further studying the short -term effects of T on ca r-
diometabolic and developmental outcomes. Our cen tral 
hypothesis is that T treatment  positive ly influences car-
diometabolic and neurodevelopmental outcomes in XXY 
infants (Figure 1).  To test this hypothesis, we will unde r-
take the following specific aims.   
 
 
Specific Aim 1 : To quantify the short -term effect of T in infants with XXY  on cardi ometaboli c out-
comes.   
Hypothes is: Percent body fat (%BF) will follow a normal trajectory in treated infants, while infants not 
receiving T will have greater %BF. Approach:  In the TESTO: Testosterone Effects on S hort-Term Out-
comes  trial, infants w ith XXY ( n=75) age  4-12 weeks will be randomized 1:1 to receive 25mg intramu s-
cular T injections every 4 weeks for 3 doses or placebo. . %BF will be assessed by air displacement ple-
thysmography at baseline, 12 weeks, and 24 weeks. The primary outcome is c hange in %B F z-scores  
at 12 weeks between groups (powered to detect a difference of 0.5SD). Infants initially receiving place-
bo will get T in the second half of the study (12 -24 weeks). Secondary outcomes include change %BF 
z-scores from 12- 24 weeks, growt h parameter s, and serum leptin ..  
 
 
 Figure 1. We hypothesize  T treatment will 
improve outcomes in infants with XXY. 
BF=body fat.  

Protocol Template Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Specific Aim 2 : To quantify the short -term effects of T in infants with XXY on neurodevelopment, 
gonadal function and safety outcomes.  
Hypothesis : (1): XXY infants receiving T will have greater gains in standard scores on early m otor skill s, 
emerging language, and adaptive functioning. ( 2): T treatment will not impair gonadal function, as 
measured by gonadotropins and biomarkers of Sertoli cell function. (3): There will be no serious ad-
verse outcomes a ssociated with T treatment in infants with XXY. Approach:  Infants from Aim 1 will be 
given standardized neurodevelopment assessments at baseline, 12 and 24 weeks. Serum hormone bi-
omarkers of gonadal function will also be obtained at these times. Adverse events will be monit ored 
throug hout the s tudy.  
 
Specif ic Aim 3 (exploratory): To measure metabolite changes induced by T in infants with XXY .  
Hypothesi s: Circulating metabolites involved in energy metabolism, specifically long chain acy l-
carnitines (LCAC) and branched -chain amino acids  (BCAA), w ill be lower due to improved mitochondri-
al function in T treated boys; T will favorably alter pathways involved in energy metabolism. Approach:  
LCAC and BCAA will be quantified at baseline and 12 weeks in the first 20 subjects. An unbiased plat-
form of over  4,000 metabolites will also be performed to identify pathways that are differentially regulat-
ed with T treatment.  
 
Assessing short -term safety and efficacy of T treatment in infants with XXY will provide the first evidence 
for establishing stan dard of care practices, with a planned extension for long- term outcomes. These r e-
sults will generate preliminary data on mechanisms of the effects of T during the critical mini -puberty per i-
od for the development of future work, such as sex steroid -induced epigenetic  modifications. Mentors with 
expertise in neurodevelopment, cardiometabolic outcomes, metabolomics, and clinical trials will optimize 
career development and foster expertise in gonadal and cardiometabolic function in children with sex 
chromosome aneuploidi es.   
 
 
II. Background and Significance :  
 
XXY/Klinefelter syndrome is common and the diagnosis in childhood is increasing. An extra X 
chrom osome is present in ~1/60 0 boys , therefore over 6 million boys and men worldwide are affected by 
this very com mon, but under -diagnosed, genetic condition known as XXY or Klinefelter syndrome (KS) .1 
XXY is characterized by a high degree of phenotypic heterogeneity throughout the lifespan but nearly 
universal test icular insu fficiency and infertility in adulthood.2,14 Our knowledge of the natural history of 
XXY in infancy and childhood is largely limited to birth cohort studies from the 1970’s and more recent cross -sectional  studies limited by a scertainment bias. Historically , less than 10% of males with XXY  are 
diagnosed before adolescence, however the rate of prenatal diagnosis is increasing exponentially as tes t-
ing of free- fetal DNA in maternal blood evolves to become  standard  screening  in prenatal care.
15,16 Fur-
thermore, there is evidence the actual incidence of XXY is increasing as well.17,18 With greater  recognition 
in infancy and potenti ally increa sed prevalence of XXY, there is a high demand for evidence- based r e-
search, particularly investigation of early determinants that contribute to increased morbidity and de-creased quality of life in this population.
19  
 
XXY res ults in universal testicular dysfunction and hypogonadism.  While many features of the XXY 
phenotype are variable, testicular dysfunction is nearly universal.20 In adults, this manifests as smal l tes-
tes, i nfertility , and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (el evated gonadotropins and low testicular hormone 
concentrations).2 The Leydig cells in the testes produce testosterone (T) and insulin-like hormone 3 
(INSL3), while the Sertoli cells produce inhibin B (INHB) and anti -mulleria n hormone (AMH). All of these 
testicular hormones have been demonstrated to be lower in XXY when compared to typical males from 
mid-puberty through adulthood.21-23 Microscopically, the testes of men with XXY are fi brotic wit h rare germ 
cells and Leydig cell hypertrophy.20 
 
Protocol Template Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Clinical evidence of testicular insufficiency in infants  
with XXY includes smaller testes size, reduced pe nile 
growth over the first months of life, mild hypotonia, 
and a passive temperament .10 Testicular biopsies 
have shown a lower number of germ cells in infants 
and children with XXY, however the histo logical a p-
pearance of Sertoli and Leydig cells is  typically nor-
mal.24-28 Five studies (total N=83) of hormones during 
infancy in XXY conclude  activation of the pituitary -
gonadal axis  in the first months of life, known as the 
mini- puberty,  does occur , however serum T is lowe r in 
XXY i n the majority .20 The only study to  quantify T 
concentrations with  liquid chromatography/mass spe c-
trometry (gold standard) was done by our collabor ator 
Dr. Lahlou. She found 8/38 XXY infants (2 1%) had 
serum T below the normal range during the mini -
puberty period, and 83% were below the median (Fig-
ure 2) .29 In summary, many XXY infant s have ev i-
dence of  testosterone insufficiency . 
 
 
Testosterone insufficiency increases cardiometabolic risk, and cardiovascular disease is the lead-
ing cause of morbidity and mortality in men with XXY . Adult men with XXY have a high prevalence of 
type 2 diabetes, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and cardiac dysfunction, with a s tandardized mortality  
ratio of 5.8 from these conditions .2,3,30-34 Many precursors of these conditions, such as insulin resistance, 
abdominal adiposity, and vascular dysfunction, have been shown to inversely correl ate with T concentra-
tions, and it is presumed the increase in cardiovascular -related morbidity and mortality in XXY is secon d-
ary to chronic hypogonadism.32,35- 39 In multiple populations including men with XXY, T has been show n to 
impro ve body composition – an early surrogate marker of altered metabolism associated with the devel-
opment of disorders of insulin resistance.30,40-42 However, there is a lack of randomized controlled trials of 
T in XXY  and observational studies suggest that late treatment of hypogonadism does not reverse exis t-
ing cardiovascular disease.38 Furthermore, two recent studies have found evidence of high body fat and 
serum markers of i nsulin resistance in children with XXY.43,44 Therefore, to reduce cardiovascular morbidi-
ty and mortality in XXY, we need to focus on prevention of early precursors. Body composition is a parti c-
ularly intriguing outcome measure as it can be as sessed throughout the lifespan, has been shown to be 
an early and modifiable risk marker of metabolic disease, and is directly altered by T.30,45 Body compos i-
tion is  also a clinically  meaningful outcome measure in i nfancy  as high body fat percentage early in life 
may contrib ute to the decreased strength, endurance, and athlet icism seen in XXY. A gap exists in our 
knowledge of body composition in infants with XXY and the effect of T on this important outcome meas-
ure.  
 
The testosterone surge during the mini -puberty period in the first months of life likely plays a cri t-
ical role in lifelong metabolic programming. We have known about the mini -puberty period for dec-
ades, howev er the purpose of  this brief activation of the hypothalamic -pituitary -gonadal axis remains quite 
speculative. Many tissues are sexually dimorphic and exposure to T during sensitive time points is r e-
quired for masculiniz ation of these organs. Mouse models that manipulate exposure to sex steroids in the 
neonatal period have found that early T exposure induces epigenetic modifications and results in lifelong 
effects on neurocognition and energy metabolism5,46 Block ing the neonatal T surge in male mice results in 
higher leptin concentrations and greater fat to muscle ratio for life, while a single dose of T given to neo-natal female rodents results in differential gene expression in the liver in a masculinized pattern.
6,47 Expo-
sure to T in neonatal mice also leads to decreased DNA methylation in the brain, resulting in the sexually 
dimorphic differences observed in brain structure and function.48 In humans,  several studies have report-
ed associations between T concentrations during the mini -puberty period and brain lateralization, lan-
guage organization, and gender identity.7,49,50 These findings are particul arly relev ant in XXY given the 
high risk of neurodevelopmental impairment and cardiomet abolic disease, and suggest the mini -puberty 
period is a critical time for intervention.  
 
Figure 2.  Serum testosterone in ma les with XXY 
(open circles ) is low or low-normal during the mini -
puberty period. Normal ranges in gray with Upper and 
Lower Limit (UL, LL). Lahlou et al. 2004.  
Protocol Template Page 4 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Studying tissue- specific gene expression and epigenetic modification in human infants is  invasive and 
labor -intensive, however we can investigate circulating metabolites that reflect systemic pathway regul a-
tion. Pat hways involved in energy metabolism are of specific interest in XXY. Long chain acylcarnitines 
(LCAC) are i ntermediate metabolite s of fatty acid oxidation within the mitochondria.51 Obesity and insulin 
resistance are strongly associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and accumulation of LCAC.52 Branc hed 
chain amino acids (BCAA) also build up in the presence of mitochondrial dysfunction and are regarded as 
an excellent biomarker for obesity and insulin resistance.53 Work by one of my mentors, Dr. Baker, has 
found that LCAC and BCAA are elevated in infants exposed to maternal obesity in utero, demonstrating abnormal metabolism from a very young age. We know maternal obesity is associated with insulin r e-
sistance in adult offspring and these metabolite differences in infancy represent the early metabolic pr o-
gramming that underlies childhood determinants of adult disease.
54,55 This work and the work of others 
highlight the critical importance of timing  of exposures on lifelong metabolic programming, and how m e-
tabolites can serve as early biom arkers of this process.56,57  
 
Finally, T treatment for infants with XXY is becoming common despite a lack of scientific evidence 
to support this practice.8 Samango- Sprouse et al reported that a cohort of boys with XXY who had r e-
ceived T  in infancy  had better neurodevelopment  in early childhood.11,12 Largely because of this single 
study, many par ents are requesting T for their XXY so ns. These proactive parents are often successful in 
obtaining this treat ment, reinforcing disparities in care without establishing if T is effective or safe in this 
population. A randomized and blinded trial of T is needed to fill thes e critical gaps and provide evidence 
for establishing standard of care.  
 
In summary, testicular dysfunction is universal in XXY and likely contributes to the clinical phenotype, i n-
cluding abnormalities in metabolism and neurodevelopmental  deficits. The mini- puberty period of i nfancy 
represents a biologically plausible time period for  intervention that may not only have immediate effects, 
but play an i mportant role for  lifelong  metabolic programming. A gap currently exists in our understanding 
of short and l ong-term ou tcomes of T treatment in infants with XXY. This study will investigate short -term 
outcome measures of T, including cardiometabolic, neuro developmental , and gonadal function, as well as 
explore altered regulation of energy pathway metabolites as a probable mechanism underlying metabolic 
programming  in infancy . 
 
This study is novel and the time is now. T treatment in infants with XXY has emerged as an off -label 
treatment in the US in the past few years, however there is no evidence to support this practice and co n-
sider able variability exists among providers.  Our extensive experience through the eXtraordinarY Kids 
clinic, parent support groups, and ongoing research efforts in this population has proven this is a highly motiva ted group of parents who strongly desire T tre atment for their sons. Despite the biologic plausibility, 
no study has rigorously investigated the efficacy or safety of T in infants with XXY. We have car e-
fully designed this study with family engagement  to allow us to answer important scientifi c que stions on 
the short -term effects of T while ensuring successful recruitment and retention. Our research team has 
the expertise and ideal environment to successfully conduct this study and advance our unde rstanding of 
the efficacy and safety  of this practice. Re cent changes in the clinical and research enviro nments make 
now the opportune time to conduct this study :  
• Technological advances in non- invasive prenatal screening have resulted in exponentially more 
infants being diagnosed with XXY. The May 201 6 American College of Obstetrics and Gynecol o-
gy Practice Bulletin recognized cell -free fetal DNA testing is a superior screening test that can be 
offered in all pregnancies.13 Implementation of this guideline means 10 times as many infants  
will be diagnosed with XXY. In addition, many proposed genomic- based newborn screening 
tools would incidentally diagnose sex chromosome aneuploidies. The demand for  knowledge in 
infants  with XXY is great.    
• At the 2nd International Workshop on Klinefelter Syndrome (Germany, March 2016) the lack of 
randomized controlled trials of T in XXY, and the need for these studies to be conducted with pa-tient-centered outcomes,  was emphasized and nearly unanimously agreed upon by experts in 
KS.
58 
• The field of metabolomics offers an opportunity to investigate the mechanisms of these changes.  
The outcome measures chosen for this study are not only su rrogate markers for future disease and dis a-
bility, but are meaningful patient -centered outcomes in infancy and childhood.  
Protocol Template Page 5 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 • High body fat with poor muscle tone may limit an infant’s ability to engage with his env ironment.  
• Delays in motor, language, and soc ial development affect 75% of boys with XXY and strongly 
correlate with future cognition, behavior, and academic performance.  
• This study will be the first to test the hypothetical mechanism demonstrated in animal models that 
T induces immediate metabolic and epigenetic modifications that in turn confer lifelong effects on 
metabolism and neu rocognition.  
 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
 
Preliminary data to support the study concept:  We have found 
testicular and cardiometabolic function are i nversely related in 
pre-pubertal XXY boys, and androgen supplementation i m-
proves cardiometabolic markers. In a study of 93 boys with XXY  
age 4 -12 (NCT 00348945) , 20% had ev idence of testicular failure (low 
INHB) at baseline, as well as elevated per cent body  fat (%BF,  z-
score +1) and high prevalence of metabolic syndrome features.59,60 
Low INHB was associated with greater cardiomet abolic risk including 
higher blood glucose, triglyc erides, and low -density lipoprotein (LDL),  
and lower high-densi ty lipoprotein (HDL), all p<0.05.  This is evidence 
that both testicular and cardiometabol ic function is  impaired before 
puberty in boys with XXY.  Furthermore,  two years of treatment with a 
weak androgen improved body composition (Figur e 3) and ca rdiome t-
abolic markers.61  
 
Preliminary data to support the study design: Our pilot study suggests this regimen of T is well 
tolerated and does affect body composition. In preparation for this stud y, I desig ned a feasibility study 
to evaluate the short -term effects of T on body composition (COMIRB 14 -7240, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) in infants . 
We enrolled 18 infants with XXY between 6-15 weeks of age and randomized subjects to receive testo s-
terone cypionate 25mg intramusc ularly every 4 
weeks x 3 or no treatment. I hold an Investiga-tional New Drug (IND 124260) file for the use of T in infants with XXY, and this file will be updat-
ed with this protocol.  There have been no ser i-
ous adverse events and the only side eff ects 
were an increase in appetite (n=2) and acne 
(n=2). %BF at baseline was normal, however 
increased by a z -score of +0.86±0.65 over 12 
weeks in infants not receiving T, while the 
change in %BF z -scores for infants who r e-
ceived T was -0.24± 0.67 (Figure 4). XXY 
infants who did not receive T had 4% more 
body fat at 5 months of age than normal male 
infants in the local Healthy Start Study.
62   
 
Preliminary data to support feasibility of recruitment: Our pilot study exceeded recruitment goals 
and allowed us to adapt our study design based on limitat ions. We had excellent recrui tment with an 
average one new subject per month and 100% retention rate without funds for recruitment or travel rei m-
bursement . Informal focus groups and surveys have been conducted with parents to iden tify their reasons 
for or against par ticipation . The greatest limitations in recrui tment/retention have been 1) costs incurred 
due to travel to Denver and 2) unwillingness to participate in a trial where they may potentially be random-ized to not receive T (as all perceived high benefits and l ow risks).  After designing the current study, we 
surveyed 34 parents of XXY infants anonymously using a link posted on targeted social media groups. 
67% reported they “definitely” would enroll their child if eligible in this study design, 21% said they “ma y-
be” would enroll , and only 12% indicated they would not enroll. These pilot findings were critical in desig n-
ing this study.   Figure 3.  %BF is high in XXY boys 4 -
12 yrs old. Androgen therapy i m-
proves body composition (p=0 .04). 
Figure 4. Left: T shots favorably effect the change in %BF 
z-scores after 12 weeks in infants with XXY. Right:  At 5 
months (visit 2), %BF is 4% higher in XXY boys not treated 
with T compared to 316 healthy boys.   p=0.005  p=0.037  

Protocol Template Page 6 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 IV. Research  Methods 
 
A.  Outcome  Measure (s):   
Primary for Specific Aim 1  
Change in %BF z -scores from baseline to 12 weeks (per  PeaPod)  
Primary for Specific Aim 2  
Change in motor composite percentile on the AIMS assessment from bas eline to 12 weeks  
Primary for Sp ecific Aim 3  
Change in C14:1 long chain acylcarnitine (LCAC) from baseline  
 
Secondary outcomes: Change in % BF z-scores from 12 to 24 weeks; change in anthropometric meas-
urements from baseline to 12 and 24 weeks; change in gross and fine motor scaled scores from the PDMS; cognitive and language scores on the Bayley; adaptive functioning from the ABAS; serum hor-
mone s, lipids, BCAA, LCAC , and pathway analysis of untargeted metabolomics;  urine metabolites;  and 
number and type of adverse events.  
 
B. Description of Population to be E nrolled:   
A total of 75 infants with XXY will be enrolled. We will include all races, ethnic ities, and languages . 
  
 Inclusion criteria : Male infants with 47,XXY karyotype iden tified prenatally  who are 4 -12 weeks old ( 31 to 
90 days of age). 47,XXY must be from a diagnostic test such as CVS, amniocentesis, or post -natal 
blood/tissue. Non -invasive prenatal  screening results alone will not be accepted.  
 Exclusion criteria :   
1) >20% mosaicism for a normal cell line   
2) Gestational age at birth <36 wee ks  
3) Birth weight <2.5
th%ile or >97.5%ile for age (small or large for gestational age)  
4) History of throm bosis in self or a first degree rel ative  
5) Exposure to androgen therapy out side the study protocol  
6) Use of medications known to affect body composition, such as growth hor mone or insulin  
7) Known allergy to the testosterone cypionate solution components including benyl benzoate, 
benzyl alcohol, or cottonseed oil  
 
Involving children is imperative as boys <18 years of age with XXY are much a different popul ation than 
adult men with XXY. Men with XXY have been shown to have a high prevalence of type 2 diabetes, me t-
abolic syndrome, fatty liver disease, and psychosocial difficulties. Clearly these processes begin in chil d-
hood. The potential to intervene in a preventative fashion, prior to the onset of disease, is more promising 
and productive t han trying to treat pre -existing disease. Infant boys are exposed to endogenous testo s-
terone in the first few months of life known as the “m ini-puberty period of infancy.” Animal and human 
studies su ggest this is a critical period for biologic programming , and therefore cannot be replicated at 
any other point in life. Including children in this study design allows us to investigate testosterone as a 
targeted intervention at this critical time point with evaluation of early markers of disease and disability.  
The ultimate goal is to i mprove the lives of children and adults with this condition.  
 
The age of the infants at enrollment was chosen 1) to allow assessment of testicular function dur ing the 
expected mini -puberty period of infancy, 2) to assure visits 2 and 3 will be completed before the infant is 
10kg, as this is the upper weight limit for the PeaPod (our body composition assessment tool), and 3) feedback from parents. 
 
 
 C. Study Design and R esearch Methods   
 
Overall study design . TESTO is a randomized controlled trial  assessing t he efficacy and safety of T i n-
jections in  infants with a prenatal diagnosis of XXY. Body composition, neurodevelopment, serum hor-
mones, safety parameters, and metabolomics will be assessed at baseline, 12 and 24 weeks into the 
Protocol Template Page 7 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 study. Infants wi ll be random ized 1:1 to receive T vs pl acebo for the first 12 weeks of the study with the 
primary outcomes assessed  after 12 weeks  (Figure 5). The second half of 
the study will cross the treat ment groups allowing us to evaluate if timing 
make s a difference in response and if initial benefits are sustained. This 
plan will optimize enrollment , as many parents will only participate if their 
son will get treatment, and allow us to maintain the blinded design.  
 
Setting. The study will be conduc ted at  Childre n’s Hospital  Colorado 
(CHCO) in the outpatient Pediatric Clinical Translational Research Cen ter 
(CTRC). CHCO is home to the eXtraordinarY Kids Clinic, the  first co m-
prehensive interdisciplinary clinic for sex chromosome ane uploidies .63 
The unique collaborative model and our expertise has led to national re-
ferrals and a high demand for clinical evaluations. We have successfully 
recrui ted hundreds of boys with XXY to participate in longitudinal and in-
terve ntional research studies through close collaboration with family sup-
port groups and nat ional/ international experts in XXY. Our investigative 
team has  expertise in child development, infant body composition, child-
hood disorders of insulin resistance, metabolomics, clinical trial recruit-
ment, robust data acquisition and data anal ysis, ma king this the ideal set-
ting. 
 
Recruitment  and Retention. Methods of recruitment will include 1) approaching new and existing pa-
tients seen at CHCO clinics including the eXtraordinarY Kids Clinic, Genetics Clinic, and Endocrinology Clinics, 2) outreach to the gen etic counselors and obstetricians in the Denver metropolitan area who are 
ordering and interpreting prenatal testing results, 3) genetic counselors at CHCO who may receive calls/referrals for infants with XXY diagnoses, 4) Email and mailings to pediatric endocrinologi sts around 
the country (exis ting listserv) and through posting on the Pediatric Endocrinology Society active research 
website, 5) advertisements through the parent support group AXYS including websites, social media, emails, flyer s, and mailing s, 6) Email and mailings to prenatal genetic counselors throughout the country 
(existing listserv), and 7) study  information on websites including Clinical Trials .gov, University of Col ora-
do and Chi ldren’s Hospital of Colorado. To facilitate dissemination  of information about our study, we will 
design study -specific webpage linked off the existing eXtraordinarY Kids website.  
 The goal for recruitment will be 15 subjects per year in years 1- 4. Based on our pilot study this goal is 
easily achie vable. Modest travel expenses will be covered for out -of-state participants.  
 In between study visits, families may receive newsletters from the eXtraordinarY Kids Clinic with updates from our ongoing research and periodic phone calls to stay in touch. Families will be  invited to our eX-
traordinarY Party in conjunction with the bi -annual AXYS family conference.  
 
Enrollment in multiple clinical trials . Enrollment in this protocol does not exclude participation in other 
clinical studies, with the exception of studies involving an intervention of androgen and/or other treatment that may impact body composition. Our team is concurrently enrolling for other studies involving infants with XXY, including the eXtraorindarY Babies Study (COMIRB 17- 0118). These studi es are complem en-
tary and participants can enroll in either or both studies. If participants enroll in both studies, visits will be coordinated for convenience of the participant’s family  and duplicate measures (ie blood draw, develop-
mental testing, etc) wi ll be combined.   
 
 
Consent . When a child is identified through clinic or other method identified above, a member of the 
study team will contact the parent to inform them of the opportunity to participate in a study. In many ca s-
es, the parents will contact  the PI, PRA o r genetic co unselor of the eXtraordinarY Kids Clinic after hearing 
about the study from one of the above sources. Prior to any information being collected, verbal consent to 
ask questions pertaining to the inclusion/exclusion criteria will be  obtained. A  member of the study team 
will describe the study and will offer to email /mail the consent form to the parents so the parents have 
ample time to review pr ior to deciding whether to schedule the first visit and enroll in the study.  
Figure 5. Overal l Study Design  
Protocol Template Page 8 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  
Prior to  any research procedures bein g performed, a study team member will review the consent form in 
person in a private location. Both verbal and written consent will be required from a parent or legal guar d-
ian to enroll in the study. All of the subjects in this pr otocol are inf ants and therefore too young to a s-
sent/consent to research participation themselves. To minimize coercion, parents will not be paid for en-
rolling their child in the study and only reimbursement for reasonable travel will be provided. We will em-
phasize to parents their  child’s particip ation is entirely voluntary and can be withdrawn at any time. As 
part of the consent process, par ents will be asked to summarize the study in their own words to ensure 
comprehension, and parents will have the opportunity to ask  questions. If the consenting parent does not 
speak English, an interpreter will assist with the consent process and a short -form consent document in 
the parent’s preferred language will be completed. If the consenting parent is blind, illiterate, or with read-
ing limi tations, the entire consent form will be read to the subject and wi tnessed by someone outside of 
the study team.  
 
Randomization.  Subjects will be randomized 1:1 using block randomization in groups of 20 to 1) receive 
T treatment i n the first 12  weeks followed by placebo,  or 2) placebo for the first 12 weeks followed by T. 
Investigational Drug Services at CHCO will generate the automated randomization list and dispense the 
study drug to maintain allocation concealment. All investiga tors and parents will rema in blind to the inter-
vention group .  
 
Study Proc edures .  
1. Study Visits . There will be a total of  three in-
person study vi sits:  
Visit 1, week 0 (4- 12 weeks of age)  
Visit 2, week 12 ± 10 days (~5 months of age)  
Visit 3, week 2 4 ± 10 days (~8 months of age) 
 Procedures  during the study visits will take a total 
of approximately 3 hours and will usually be com-
pleted on the same day. If all procedures cannot 
be scheduled for the same day they will be sched-
uled for two days in a row. The study vi sits will i n-
clude  all of the follow ing: 
 
• Infant and maternal history collection inclu ding 
medications, therapies, infant feeding method, 
and adverse reactions  (~30 minutes)  
• Physical examination including length, weight, 
head circumference, arm span, waist  circu m-
feren ce, stretched penile length, Tanner staging, and testicular size by Prader orchidometer  (~30 
minutes)  
• Quantified body compos ition assess ment by the PeaPod (~30 minutes)  
• Standardized neurode velopmental a ssessment (~30 minutes)  
• Morning venous blood draw following a minimum of 180 minutes fasting (~30 minutes)  
• Non-invasive u rine and stool sample collection (~10 minutes)  
• Visit 1 only: intramuscular injection and teach  
 
2. Injections/Intervention. Participants in this study will receive a total of  6 injection s. 25 mg testosterone 
cypionate (200 mg/mL) or placebo (saline) will be given via intramuscular injection every 4 weeks (study weeks 0, 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20). The total volume of each injection will be 0.125 mL. The first shot for all 
participants will be administered at CHCO before the end of study visit #1 and the infant will be observed 
for 15 minutes. Parents will elect to either have the 5 subsequent  injections given by a nurse at CHCO or 
to give them at home themselves. If they elect to give them at home, a nurse in the Pediatric CTRC or in 
Endocrinology will teach the parents how to administer the shots. Parents will receive an aut omated email 
reminder 24 hours before the next injection is due. Parents will keep an administration log to doc ument 
the injection was given.  Figure 6. Overall study design, timeline and a s-
sessments. T=testosterone, P=placebo  

Protocol Template Page 9 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  
Although our intent is to give all injections intramuscularly, if the parent inadvertently gives an injection 
subcutaneously it should not alter our validity. A recent study found subcutaneous testosterone injections are w ell tolerated and effective at raising serum testosterone levels,
64 although phar macodynamics may 
differ from intramuscular injections  therefore this method will not be encouraged.  
 
3. Interim surveys. A parent will complete a REDCap survey one week after each injection to capture per-
tinent information about the injection and potential side effects. One week out was chosen as most side 
effects attributable to the medication will be present by then and waiting longer may increase recall bias. 
This survey will serve as a drug administra tion log as well as interim safety monitoring. All surv ey results 
will be review by study staff and any potential unanticipated events or severe adverse events will be fol-
lowed up with a phone call to the parent.  
 
Safety Considerations. This testosterone  dosing and duration is accepted practice for treatment of m i-
cropenis in this age group without reported side effects.65 We had no serious adverse events in our pilot 
study using this protocol. Intramuscular injections inclu de the risk of inflammation and/or pain at the site 
of injection, sterile abscess, infection, and hypersensitivity reactions. Potential low -risk side effects of tes-
tosterone therapy include acne, pubarche, and increased erections. High doses and/or prolonged dur a-
tion of androgen therapy in some populations has been associated with bone age advancement, venous 
thromboembolism, water retention, anaphalactoid reactions, suppression of clotting factors II, V, VII, and 
X, polycythemia, and priapism. Testosterone also suppresses spermatogenesis, however infants do not 
undergo spermatogenesis. The effect of early testosterone on later fertility is un known.     
Likelihood of experiencing any risk: moderate (temporary pain at injection site)  
Likelihood of experiencing serious ri sk: very low  
Alternatives: There are multiple formulations of testosterone, however all deliver much higher 
doses than proposed in this protocol. Injections are routinely administered as ac cepted standard 
of care in infants with micropenis, an d are the ch oice of individuals currently advocating for tes-
tosterone in XXY infants. We have experience with testosterone gel in older populations, however even if we were able to deliver gel in an appropriate dose, risks of gel include unintentional con-tact, frequent application, skin reactions, and many of the possible side effects of testosterone 
therapy. Oxandrolone, an alternative androgen, is available as an oral formulation but has not been studied in this age group and appropriate dosing would be unknown. Therefore injections 
are the logical choice to study.  
Protection against risk : Standard procedure for reducing infection risk will be utilized including 
sterile single use needles and skin preparation. Parents will be present and/or giving the injec-tions. Infa nts will be observed for at least 15 minutes after their first injection to insure there are 
no immediate adverse reactions. Any subjects with a known allergy to any ingredients in the 
study drug or with a first -degree relative with a history of a blood clot will not participate in the 
study. Testosterone can be stored at room temperature, therefore no special precautions are r e-
quired to ensure the safety of the medication.  
Monitoring for reactions:  One week after every testosterone injection, parents will  be sent a brief 
REDCap survey via email to query for possible reactions. Parents will be given an optional log to record any side effects they notice at home to better help them complete the survey . At every 
study visit, a study team member will ask about  all side effects, hospitalizations, surgeries, new 
diagnoses, and new medications. Parents will also be encouraged to report serious side ef fects to 
the study team immediately.   
 
The PI will discuss any serious adverse events wi th Drs. Tartag lia and Zeit ler and all these events will be 
reported to regulatory bodies as required. A Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will be comprised 
of a minimum of three clinicians/scientists with expertise in clinical trial conduct and meth odology, XXY 
syndrome/ devel opment, and biostatistics. The DSMB will meet after every 20 subjects are enrolled. 
Members will review data on all adverse events, changes in growth parameters, and testicular func tion. 
There will not be any predetermined criteria for altering the study protocol or discontinuing the study, 
therefore these options will be at the discretion of the DSMB.  
 
Study Timeline.  The timeline for major  study activities are in Table 1.        
Protocol Template Page 10 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Table 1. Study Timeline              
Study Year    Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5    
Year  2017  2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  
Quarter  1   2   3   4  1   2   3   4  1   2   3   4  1   2   3   4  1   2   3   4  1   2   3   4  
IRB/IND/startup                          
Recruitment & Enrollment                          
Final Study V isits                         
Metabolomics analysis                          
DSMB Meetings                          
Data analysis                          
R03 (metabolomics); R01                          
Manuscripts                          
 
 
 
D. Description, Risks and Justification of Procedures and Data Collection Tools:  
 
1. BODY COMPOSITION  ASSESSMENT : The PeaPod  provides a reliable, non- invasive, quantit a-
tive assessment of fat mass and non -fat mass utilizing air- displacement plethysmograph technology 
in infa nts weighing less than 10 kilograms.66 This instrument has been validated with other methods 
of body composition assessment, such as deuterium dilution and dual -energy X -ray absorptiometry, 
and normative values for healthy, term, average -gestational age males are published from birth 
through 6 months.67 The PeaPod is safe and comfortable for infants and takes less than 10 minutes 
to per form, with the actual test less than 2 minutes. The chamber is heated and has white noise that 
distracts most infants. The infant can move, cry, and urinate during the assessment, therefore it is very “baby friendly”. However, the PeaPod may cause temporary distress to the infant as they are unclothed and not swaddled.
 A blinded study investigator will perform this assessment at all study 
visits.  Age-specific Z-scores for  %BF will be calculated from published data.67 
Likelihood of experiencing any risk: low  
Likelihood of experiencing serious risk:  very low  
Alternatives:  Body composition can be measured by  dual-energy x -ray absorpt iometry (DXA), 
however DXA does involve low amounts of radiation exposure in addition to laying on a flat sur-face similar to the PeaPod. DXA also is best when the subjects lie still, which is challenging for 
young infants. Body fat can also be estimated with skin fold cal ipers, however this is generally not 
as accurate as the PeaPod and does have the risk of temporary discomfort as well. Therefore, we 
have determined the PeaPod has the least risk to obtain our outcome of interest.  
Protections a gainst risk:  When possible, we will perform the PeaPod assessment when the infant 
is awake and content having recently eaten. We will encourage the parents to bring a familiar toy that may distract the infant if he becomes distressed. We would e ncourage co mforting/consoling 
after the procedure if temporary distress was experienced. Parents will be present during the PeaPod.  
   
2. NEURODEVELOPMENTAL ASSESSMENT : The Alberta Infant Motor Scale (AIMS), Peabody 
Developmental Motor Scales - 2 (PDMS -2), and the Bayley  Scales of I nfant Development – 3
rd edi-
tion will be performed by a psychometrist trained to administer these standardized neurodevelop-mental assessments. The AIMS is a performance -based and norm -referenced measure of infant 
gross m otor matura tion from birth to 18 months. It is intended to evaluate gross motor development 
over repeated assessments and has good reliability and predictive validity for later gross motor d e-
velopment.
68,69 In a systematic review of neurode velopmental tests, the AIMS had the best psycho-
metric properties and clinical utility.70 The PDMS-2  is a standardized assessment for infant develo p-
ment and includes six subtests to assess gross and fine motor scales  from birth to 5 years. It is one 
Protocol Template Page 11 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 of the most common tools for discriminating normal from abnormal infant motor development.71 This 
instrument was chosen as a broad assessment of motor development with normative reference data, 
and strongly correlates with other motor assessments. The Bayley  3 is a comprehensive standard-
ized assessment for infant development containing three domains: Cognitive, Language, and 
Motor.72 The Bayley -3 is widely used to diagnosis developmental delays up to 3.5 years of age. F i-
nally, a parent will complete the Adaptive Behavior Assessment System, 3rd edition ( ABAS 3), a va l-
idated measure of adaptive skills  across the lifespan, including infancy.73 The ABAS in corporates 
early developmental skills in areas such as feeding, sleep, play, self -regulat ion, and social develo p-
ment. The primary risk of the devel opmental evaluation is identification of developmental delays that 
may warrant further evaluati on and/or intervention. This may cause psychological distress to the 
parent.  
Likelihood of experiencing any risk: low  
Likelihood of experiencing serious risk:  very low  
Alternatives:  None identified.  
Protections against risk : Parents will be made aware of the high prevalence of at least mild d e-
velopmental delays in XXY. Parents will be present during the evaluation. If de lays are identified, 
the study team will disclose this to the parent(s) in a private area with specific recommendations 
for next -steps,  potentially including referrals and/or r esources.   
 
3. VENIPUNCTURE.  Venous blood samples will be drawn in the morning a minimum of 180 minutes 
after eating (fasting for an infant.) The collection of blood samples may result in temporary discomfort, 
bruising, bleeding, and on rare occasions, infection. Standard hospital  precautions for venipuncture will 
be followed. Anemia is also a risk; the routine guidelines in our Pediatric CTRC are 2.5 ml/kg per blood draw. We will draw 8 ml of blood per visit. If the subject is <3.2kg on the fi rst visit we will reduce the 
amount of blood to be drawn.    
Likelihood of experiencing any risk: moderate (temporary discomfort).  
Likelihood of experiencing serious risk:  very low  
 
Hormones . Serum will be processed and stored at  -80 degrees u ntil batch a nalysis for quantification 
of LH, FSH, total and free T by liquid chromatography tandem mas s spectroscopy (LC/MS), AMH,  
INHB , estradiol and leptin . Serum testosterone, inhibin B, AMH, estradiol and gonadotropins at 
baseline will a llow us to assess endogenous testicular function.  Hormone concentrations after tes-
tosterone exposure will serve as a short -term safety measure of testicular function. Exploratory aims 
may include looking at whether baseline serum testosterone predicts change in our outc omes after 
testosterone exposure. Leptin is biomarker of adiposity and will be used as a secondary measure to 
support our Peapod findings. Our previous work has shown that leptin concentrations are higher in boys with Klinefelter syndrome and this study wi ll be the first to assess this in infants and explore 
how testosterone supplementation alters leptin in this population.  Finally, we will measure serum li-
pids (triglycerides and HDL) and insulin as markers of insulin resistance using Trig/HDL ratio and 
1/insulin as es timates. There are very limited validated assessments of cardiometabolic health in in-
fants, therefore these data will largely be exploratory. If blood volume is limited, the order of priority 
for serum measurements will be as foll ows: Testoster one > inhibin B > leptin > gonadotropins > 
AMH > lipids > insulin > estradiol.  Additional serum may be saved for future analyses.   
Metabolomics.  Plasma will be processed and stored until batch analysis using electrospray tandem 
mass spectroscopy per stand ard protocol s in the Reisdorph Lab.
74,75 Concentrations of each metab-
olite of interest will be quantified: acylcarnitines (short, medium, and long- chain) and BCAA (leu-
cine/isoleucine and valine). Non-targeted measurements of me tabolites using liquid chro matog-
raphy/mass spectroscopy will be analyzed using a well -established platform for comprehen sive un-
biased metabolomics resulting in the relative quantification of over 4,000 metabolites, includ ing ami-
no and organic a cids, glycer olipids, sphingolipids, and sterols.76,77 Compound identification will be 
done through an in -house database. Principal components analysis will be used to consol idate the 
raw metabolite variables into cl usters. We w ill use these data to determine pathways that are up or 
down regulated with exogenous testosterone.  Additional plasma may be saved for future analyses.  
DNA and RNA storage.  Samples will be collected, processed, and stored at  -80 degrees for future 
analyses .  
Protocol Template Page 12 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  
4.  URINE AND STOOL COLLECTION . Urine will be collected by placing cotton balls in the diaper 
immediately after arriving at the study visits. Cotton balls become saturated when the infant urinates, 
and the urine will be squeezed out into a cryovial fo r storage to later measure hormones and metab o-
lites. If the infant stools during the study visit, a stool sample will be collected from the diaper and stored for future microbiome analysis. Both urine and stool samples will be stored as part of  this protoc ol, with 
future plans to use these stored specimens to measure hormones and metabolomics (urine) and assess 
the microbiome (stool) both to look for differences unique to XXY infants and to assess acute changes 
with testosterone exposure on thes e measures. No invasive methods for obtaining urine or stool will be 
used in this pr otocol, therefore no risk to the participant is identified.  
Likelihood of experiencing any risk: very low  
Likelihood of experiencing serious risk:  very low  
Alternatives:  There are no less -invasive alternatives to assess the microbiome or metabolites.    
 
5. HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAM.  A medical history for the participant including intrauterine 
history, birth history, medical and developmental history, and feeding history will be obtained from the 
parent at the first study visit  by a member of the study team. Subsequent study visits will collect inter-
im/updates to these histories as well as any potential study adverse events. A physical exam will be 
completed by the PI (in her  absence, one of the other physicians on the protocol). Weight will be re c-
orded to the nearest 0.01 kg. Length measurements will be recorded to the nearest 0.1 cm. Testicular 
volume to the nearest mL will be assessed using a Prader orchiometer. If testes a re significa ntly less 
than 1mL, an estimate of 0.5mL will be used.    
    
E.   Potential Scientific Problems:   
Recruitment and retention of subjects with rarer pediatric conditions can be problematic, however with our successful feasibility study and accommodation for participant travel in this budget, we do not anticipate 
enrollment as an obstacle. Utilizing a cross -over-type design reduces our major parental reservation of 
the study, which is the possibility of being randomized to not receive T, and stil l allows us to evaluate 
short -term effects of T and observe the metabolic pathways that have been al tered. As with all clinical 
research, we acknowledge there will be ascertainment bias and strict inclusion criteria that may limit the 
general izability of o ur results. Our proposal only i ncludes prenatally diagnosed infants, however our pre-
vious work demonstrated no differences in cardiometabolic or gonadal function between pre- or postnatal-
ly dia gnosed XXY boys therefore results from these outcomes should be generalizable.
78. Finally, to fur-
ther assess the external validity of our study we will collect and compare basic demographic data from 
families who decline study parti cipation, and will also co mpare our study cohort to our historic data of in-
fants who are seen in our eXtraordinarY Kids Clinic.    
 
Results and interpretation from the second half of the participant protocol (weeks 12- 24) does require cer-
tain assumptions, including that  this larger  study finds similar differences in body composition between 
treated and untreated infants as our pilot study did. There will not be a control group as part of this study for the second half of the study, but importantly these out comes are all secondary. In addition, we are 
concurrently recruiting for a natural history study in infants with X&Y chromosome variations (eXtraordi-narY Babies) that includes 100 infants with XXY who will have body composition assessments (PeaPod and later DEXA). Some of these will be infants participating in this study, but presumably an important 
subset will not be in the TESTO study and will not have received testosterone clinically. Finally, data from the Health Start Study of healthy local infants can serve as a no n-XXY contro l group for normal adipose 
accumulation in infancy.        
    
Our study does not address the large phenotypic variability in XXY. It is possible we will fail to find a di f-
ference in outcomes with T treatment because some boys with XXY have adequate gonadal function or 
have polymorphisms in their androgen receptor gene.
79,80 If we fail to find a difference in our primary out 
comes, we will perform post -hoc sub- analyses controlling for age and baseline testosterone concentra-
tions. In addition, DNA will be extracted and saved for future genomic analysis, including sequencing of 
the androgen receptor gene and other polymorphisms that have been associated with phenotypic variabi l-
ity in XXY.79-82    
 
Protocol Template Page 13 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Finally, we acknowledge there are many factors that influence body composi tion. These potential con-
founders will be minimized due  to our randomized design and inclusion/exclusion criteria. We will collect 
data on variables kn own to contr ibute to body composition, including race, maternal BMI, maternal weight 
gain during pregnancy, presence of gestational diabetes , birth weight and gestational age, infant feeding 
method, and physical therapy interventions.  We anticipate our randomized desi gn will minimize diffe r-
ences in these potential confounding variables, however if significant differ ences are found we will adjust 
for them in the anal yses.  
 
F.   Data Analysis Plan:   
The primary outcome for specific aim 1 is the  change in %BF  z-scores between baseline and 12 wee ks 
between treatment groups . Z-scores will be calculated using published norms for age,67 and the differ-
ence between groups will be assessed with a two-sided t -test using an alpha of 0.05. Allowing for a 10% 
drop-out rate, a sample size of 27 in each group gives us 80% power to detect a difference down to 0.5 z -
score change between groups, and >99% power to detect the change score we observed in our pilot 
study (1.0 z- score change) assuming a variance of 0.65 per our pilot data. We will next use regression 
models with treatment group, baseline %BF, age of enrollment and feeding method as explanatory vari a-
bles to assess absolute %BF at 12 weeks. Secondary analyses will  include chang e in %BF z -scores from 
12 to 24 weeks 1) in the group receiving T first (are the effects of T maintained or lost?) and 2) in the 
group receiving T second (does later T have the same effect?). We will analyze anthropometric mea s-
urements and serum biomarkers  similarly.  
 
For specific aim 2,  the change in standard scores on developmental assessments will be analyzed in a 
similar fashion as in  specific aim 1. Based on our pilot data, our sample size will yield 8 0% power to d e-
tect a diffe rence betw een groups of 23 percentil e points on the AIMS composite. Secondary analysis will 
include the changes in scaled scores for the individual Peabody domains and AIMS subtests, the Bayley 
composite scores, and the ABAS composite at 12 and 24 weeks. Gonadal function and safety outcomes 
will be compared between subjects on T and placebo using descriptive statistics.  
 
For specific aim 3 (exploratory) , we will compare C14:1 concentrations (an easily identified LCAC) be-
tween treatment groups at 12 weeks using two -sided t -tests, h ypothesizing C14:1 will be lower in the T 
treated group (representing improvement in fatty acid oxidation and energy metabolism). This aim is ex-ploratory; with 10 subjects per group we will have 80% power to detect a difference of 1.3 SD  with a two -
sided  alpha of 0.05. Then, paired t -tests will be used to compare C14:1 before and after T treatment (5 
paired samples), with similar power. We will analyze secondary outcomes including other LCAC and 
BCAA (leucine, isoleucine, and valine) in a similar fashion. N ext, we will  use principle component analysis 
on the entire dataset from the comprehensive untargeted analysis to identify patterns and pathways al-tered with T treatment. The spectra data file from the non-targeted metabolomics panel will be uploaded 
to Me taboAnalyst,  and the software will be used for Metabolite Set Enrichment Analysis as well as Pat h-
way Enrichment Analysis. We will have >80% power to detect at least 2 -fold changes between T treated 
and untreated using a significance level of 0.0001 (less t han two fals e positives based on the conserv a-
tive Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons). We will also input the analytes into known KEGG 
pathways of energy metabolism to look for pathway enrichment.   
 
Table 2 . Summary of primary and  secondary out come measure s for each Specific Aim (SA).  SA 1:  
Cardiomet abolic  Primary Outcome  Weeks  
Measurement Tool  12 24 
Change %BF z -scores from baseline  X  PeaPod  
Secondary Outcomes     
Change %BF z -scores from baseline   X PeaPod  
Change in height, weight , weight -for-
length and waist circumference z -scores 
from baseline  X X Physical exam measurements  
Serum leptin, lipids, and insulin  X X Immunoassays in CCTSI core laborat o-
ry S
A
 
2
 
 
 
 
Primary Outcome     
Protocol Template Page 14 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Change in motor composite from ba seline  X  AIMS percentile composite score (all 
domains)  
Secondary Outcomes     
Serum LH, FSH, INHB, AMH , E2 and To-
tal T X X Immunoassay and LC/MS (Lahlou lab)  
Change in gross and fine motor scaled 
scores   X X Scaled scores on all PDMS -2 domains, 
AIMS 
Cognitive and Language composite 
scores  X X Bayley III: cognitive and language d o-
mains  
Adaptive functioning  X X ABAS III standard scores  
Number of adverse events  X X Verbal questionnaire, parent -report  SA 3: 
Metab o-
lomics  Primary Outcom es    
Chan ge in C14:1 (LCAC) from baseline  X X Targeted metabolomics  
Secondary Outcomes     
BCAA, other LCAC  X X Targeted metabolomics  
Pathway analysis  X  Unbiased metabolomics  
 
 
G.  Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:   
This will be th e largest asse ssment of cardiometabolic health, neurodevelopment and testicular fun ction 
biomarkers in infants with XXY to date and the only longitudinal or interventional study. Management of 
KS in infancy and childhood is particularly important as screening for fetal aneuploidy is becoming stan d-
ard of care in all pregnancies through non-invasive prenatal testing. Thousands more infants will be dia g-
nosed with KS with very limited evidence- based management guidelines currently avai lable. Providers 
and parents alike are s eeking more information and options to prevent complications and co-morbidities 
in this condition. Our results will i nform the clinical management of testosterone therapy in infants with 
XXY, with the promise to provide an early intervention during a critical period that may prevent cardi-
ometabolic and neurodevelopment deficits. If testosterone therapy positively effects body composition 
and development in infants and does not have safety issues, there would be support for giving this ther a-
py as well as doing long- term follow -up studies. If no short -term benefits are shown following testosterone 
administration, this would provide evidence for not treating these infants. This study also sets up a unique opportunity to evaluate changes in the metabolome in response to exogenous testosterone, revealing 
underlying mechanisms involved in the regulation of metabolism and neurodevelopmental pathways dur-
ing a critical period of infancy.  
 Furthermore, results of this work may be generalizable beyond KS in understanding the understudied r e-
lationship of hypogonadism, body composition, and insulin resistance characteristic of obese boys, a 
problem of increasing significance secondary to the pediatric obesity epidemic.  Other hypogonadal popu-
lations including Turner syndrom e, Prader -Willi syndrome, and Down syndrome, will also benefit from the 
results of this study as they too have a blunted mini -puberty period of infancy.  
 
Future Directions. Based on the metabolomics results from Aim 3, I will seek funding for  the targeted 
and un target ed metabolomics analysis on stored specimens from all subjects in this study and potentially 
be able to compare to normal control infants and infants with other high risk factors for cardiometabolic 
dysfunction, such as maternal obesity and diabetes. We will consent for future contact to be able to follow 
this cohort longitudinally and compare their long- term neurodevelopmental outcomes to infants who do 
not receive T but have identical services through the eXtraordinarY Kids Clinic. Depending on our result s, 
my future R01 proposals may include long term follow up of this cohort and using additional –omic studies 
to understand the programming mechanisms occurring during the mini -puberty period or other critical 
times in development.  Another future direction is long- term longitudinal assessment of boys with XXY 
compared to XY controls, evaluating the many covariates (genetic, epigenetic, environment, T treatment, 
and other interventions) that influence phenotypic variability in XXY. M y work will co ntribute to the devel-
opment and refinement of evidence -based guidelines to ultimately improve cardiometabolic and neu-
rocognitive outcomes in this population.  
Protocol Template Page 15 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  
 H. References:  
 
1. Coffee B, Keith K, Albizua I, et al. Incide nce of fragile X syndrome by newborn screening for 
methylated FMR1 DNA. American journal of human genetics. 2009;85(4):503 -514. 
2. Pacenza N, Pasqualini T, Gottlieb S, et al. Clinical Presentation of Klinefelter's Syndrome: Differences According to Age. International journal of endocrinology. 2012;2012:324835.  
3. Bojesen A, Gravholt CH. Morbidity and mortality in Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY). Acta 
paediatrica. 2011;100(6):807- 813. 
4. Rey RA. Mini -puberty and true puberty: differences in testicular function. Annales 
d'endocrinologie . 2014;75(2):58 -63. 
5. Ghahramani NM, Ngun TC, Chen PY, et al. The effects of perinatal testosterone exposure on the 
DNA methylome of the mouse brain are late-emerging. Biology of sex differences. 2014;5:8.  
6. de Mello WG, de Morais SR, Dornell es RC, Kagoh ara Elias LL, Antunes -Rodrigues J, Bedran de 
Castro JC. Effects of neonatal castration and androgenization on sexual dimorphism in bone, leptin and corticosterone secretion. Bone. 2012;50(4):893- 900. 
7. Pasterski V, Acerini CL, Du nger DB, et al . Postnatal penile growth concurrent with mini -puberty 
predicts later sex -typed play behavior: Evidence for neurobehavioral effects of the postnatal 
androgen surge in typically developing boys. Hormones and behavior. 2015;69:98- 105. 
8. Wosnit zer MS, Paduch DA. Endocrinological issues and hormonal manipulation in children and 
men with Klinefelter syndrome. American journal of medical genetics Part C, Seminars in medical 
genetics. 2013;163C(1):16 -26. 
9. Lahlou N, Fennoy I, Carel JC, Roger M. Inhibin B and ant i-Mullerian hormone, but not 
testosterone levels, are normal in infants with nonmosaic Klinefelter syndrome. The Journal of 
clinical endocrinology and metabolism. 2004;89(4):1864- 1868.  
10. Fennoy I. Testosterone and the child (0 -12 years) wit h Klinefelter syndrome (47XXY): a review. 
Acta paediatrica. 2011;100(6):846 -850. 
11. Samango- Sprouse C, Stapleton EJ, Lawson P, et al. Positive effects of early androgen therapy 
on the behavioral phenotype of boys with 47,XXY. American journal of medical g enetics Part C , 
Seminars i n medical genetics. 2015;169(2):150 -157. 
12. Samango- Sprouse CA, Sadeghin T, Mitchell FL, et al. Positive effects of short course androgen 
therapy on the neurodevelopmental outcome in boys with 47,XXY syndrome at 36 and 72 months of age. Americ an journal of medical genetics Part A. 2013;161A(3):501- 508. 
13. Practice Bulletin No. 163: Screening for Fetal Aneuploidy. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;127(5):e123-
137. 
14. Nakamura Y, Kitamura M, Nishimura K, et al. Chromosomal variants among 1790 infertile men. 
Internation al journal of urology : official journal of the Japanese Urological Association. 
2001;8(2):49- 52. 
15. Lo JO, Cori DF, Norton ME, Caughey AB. Noninvasive prenatal testing. Obstetrical & 
gynecological survey. 2014;69(2):89- 99. 
16. B ianchi DW, Wilkins -Haug L.  Integration of noninvasive DNA testing for aneuploidy into prenatal 
care: what has happened since the rubber met the road? Clinical chemistry. 2014;60(1):78 -87. 
17. Morris JK, Alberman E, Scott C, Jacobs P. Is the prevalence of Klinefelter syndrome increa sing? 
Eur J Hum Genet. 2008;16(2):163- 170. 
18. Herlihy AS, Halliday JL, Cock ML, McLachlan RI. The prevalence and diagnosis rates of 
Klinefelter syndrome: an Australian comparison. The Medical journal of Australia. 2011;194(1):24-
28. 
19. Herlih y AS, Gillam  L, Halliday JL, McLachlan RI. Postnatal screening for Klinefelter syndrome: is 
there a rationale? Acta paediatrica. 2011;100(6):923- 933. 
20. Davis SM, Rogol AD, Ross JL. Testis Development and Fertility Potential in Boys with Kli nefelter 
Syndr ome. Endocri nology and metabolism clinics of North America. 2015;44(4):843- 865. 
21. Aksglaede L, Christiansen P, Sorensen K, et al. Serum concentrations of Anti -Mullerian Hormone 
(AMH) in 95 patients with Klinefelter syndrome with or without cryptorchidism . Acta paedi atrica. 
2011;100(6):839- 845. 
Protocol Template Page 16 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 22. Overvad S, Bay K, Bojesen A, Gravholt CH. Low INSL3 in Klinefelter syndrome is related to 
osteocalcin, testosterone treatment and body composition, as well as measures of the 
hypothalamic -pituitary -gonadal axis.  Andrology. 2014;2(3):421- 427. 
23. Christiansen P, Andersson AM, Skakkebaek NE. Longitudinal studies of inhibin B levels in boys 
and young adults with Klinefelter syndrome. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and 
metabolism. 2003;88(2):888- 891. 
24. Aksgl aede L, Petersen JH, Main KM, Skakkebaek NE, Juul A. High normal testosterone levels in 
infants with non- mosaic Klinefelter's syndrome. European journal of endocrinology / European 
Federation of Endocrine Societies. 2007;157(3):345- 350. 
25. M uller J, Skakk ebaek NE, Ratcliffe SG. Quantified testicular histology in boys with sex 
chromosome abnormalities. International journal of andrology. 1995;18(2):57- 62. 
26. Edlow JB, Shapiro LR, Hsu LY, Hirschhorn K. Neonatal Klinefelter's syndrome. American  journal 
of diseases of ch ildren. 1969;118(5):788- 791. 
27. Mikamo K, Aguercif M, Hazeghi P, Martin- Du Pan R. Chromatin -positive Klinefelter's syndrome. A 
quantitative analysis of spermatogonial deficiency at 3, 4, and 12 months of age. Fertility and 
sterility. 1968;19(5):731 -739. 
28. Ratcliffe SG. The sexual development of boys with the chromosome constitution 47,XXY 
(Klinefelter's syndrome). Clinics in endocrinology and metabolism. 1982;11(3):703- 716. 
29. Cabrol S, Ross JL, Fennoy I, Bouvattier C, Roger M,  Lahlou N. Assessment of Leydig and Sertoli 
cell functions in infants with nonmosaic Klinefelter syndrome: insulin- like peptide 3 levels are 
normal and positively correlated with LH levels. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and 
metabolism. 2011;96(4):E746- 753. 
30. Gravholt CH, Jensen AS, Host C, Bojesen A. Body composition, metabolic syndrome and type 2 
diabetes in Klinefelter syndrome. Acta paediatrica. 2011;100(6):871- 877. 
31. Jiang -Feng M, Hong- Li X, Xue -Yan W, et al. Prevalence and risk factors of diabetes in pat ients 
with Klinefelter syndrome: a longitudinal observational study. Fertility and sterility. 
2012;98(5):1331- 1335.  
32. Andersen NH, Bojesen A, Kristensen K, et al. Left ventricular dysfunction in Klinefelter syndrome is associated to insulin resistance, abdominal adiposity and hypogonadism. Clinical 
endocrinology. 2008;69(5):785- 791. 
33. Salzano A, Arcopinto M, Marra AM, et al. MANAGEMENT OF ENDOCRINE DISEASE: Klinefelter syndrome, cardiovascular system and thromboembolic disease. Review of literature and clinical 
perspectives. European journal of endocrinology / European Federation of Endocrine Societies. 
2016.  
34. Swerdlow AJ, Higgins CD, Schoemaker MJ, Wright AF, Jacobs PA, United Kingdom Clinical 
Cytogenetics G. Mortality in patients with Klinefelter syndrome in Britain: a cohort study. The 
Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism. 2005;90(12):6516- 6522.  
35. Bojesen A, Kristensen K, Birkebaek NH, et al. The metabolic syndrome is frequent in Klinefelter's syndrome and is associated with abdominal obesity and hypogonadism. Diabetes care. 
2006;29(7):1591- 1598.  
36. Foresta C, Caretta N, Palego P, et al. Reduced artery diameters in Klinefelter syndrome. International journal of andrology. 2012;35(5):720- 725. 
37. Seth A, Rajpal S, Penn RL.  Klinefelter's  syndrome and venous thrombosis. The American journal 
of the medical sciences. 2013;346(2):164- 165. 
38. Pasquali D, Arcopinto M, Renzullo A, et al. Cardiovascular abnormalities in Klinefelter syndrome. 
Int J Cardiol. 2013;168(2):754- 759. 
39. Ishikawa T, Ya maguchi K, Kondo Y, Takenaka A, Fujisawa M. Metabolic syndrome in men with 
Klinefelter's syndrome. Urology. 2008;71(6):1109 -1113.  
40. Blouin K, Boivin A, Tchernof A. Androgens and body fat distribution. The Journal of steroid 
biochemistry and molecular bio logy. 2008;108(3- 5):272- 280. 
41. Traish AM. Outcomes of testosterone therapy in men with testosterone deficiency (TD): part II. Steroids. 2014;88:117 -126. 
42. Wang C, Swerdloff RS, Iranmanesh A, et al. Transdermal testosterone gel improves se xual 
function,  mood, muscle strength, and body composition parameters in hypogonadal men. The 
Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism. 2000;85(8):2839- 2853.  
Protocol Template Page 17 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 43. Bardsley MZ, Falkner B, Kowal K, Ross JL. Insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome in 
prepubertal b oys with Kli nefelter syndrome. Acta paediatrica. 2011;100(6):866- 870. 
44. Aksglaede L, Molgaard C, Skakkebaek NE, Juul A. Normal bone mineral content but 
unfavourable muscle/fat ratio in Klinefelter syndrome. Archives of disease in childhood.  
2008;93(1):30- 34. 
45. Ibanez L, Ong K, Dunger DB, de Zegher F. Early development of adiposity and insulin resistance 
after catch- up weight gain in small -for-gestational -age children. The Journal of clinical 
endocrinology and metabolism. 2006;91(6):2153 -2158. 
46. Swift -Gallant A, C oome LA, Ramzan F, Monks DA. Nonneural Androgen Receptors Affect Sexual 
Differentiation of Brain and Behavior. Endocrinology. 2016;157(2):788- 798. 
47. Dkhil MA, Al -Quraishy S, Abdel -Baki AA, et al. Epigenetic modifications of gene promoter DNA in 
the liver  of adult female mice masculinized by testosterone. The Journal of steroid biochemistry 
and molecular biology. 2015;145:121- 130. 
48. Nugent BM, Wright CL, Shetty AC, et al. Brain feminization requires active repression of masculin ization via DN A methylatio n. Nat Neurosci. 2015;18(5):690- 697. 
49. Alexander GM. Postnatal testosterone concentrations and male social development. Frontiers in 
endocrinology. 2014;5:15.  
50. Friederici AD, Pannekamp A, Partsch CJ, et al. Sex hormone testosterone affects  language 
organization in the infant brain. Neuroreport. 2008;19(3):283 -286. 
51. McCoin CS, Knotts TA, Adams SH. Acylcarnitines --old actors auditioning for new roles in 
metabolic physiology. Nature reviews Endocrinology. 2015;11(10):617- 625. 
52. Aguer C, M cCoin CS, Kn otts TA, et al. Acylcarnitines: potential implications for skeletal muscle 
insulin resistance. FASEB J. 2015;29(1):336- 345. 
53. Newgard CB. Interplay between lipids and branched -chain amino acids in development of insulin 
resistan ce. Cell Metab . 2012;15(5):606 -614. 
54. Desai M, Jellyman JK, Ross MG. Epigenomics, gestational programming and risk of metabolic syndrome. Int J Obes (Lond). 2015;39(4):633 -641. 
55. Barbour LA. Changing perspectives in pre- existing diabetes and obesity in pregnancy: ma ternal 
and infant short - and long -term outcomes. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2014;21(4):257-
263. 
56. Simeoni U, Yzydorczyk C, Siddeek B, Benahmed M. Epigenetics and neonatal nutrition. Early 
Hum Dev. 2014;90 Suppl 2:S23- 24. 
57. Vicker s MH. Early li fe nutrition, epigenetics and programming of later life disease. Nutrients. 
2014;6(6):2165- 2178.  
58. Nieschlag E, Ferlin A, Gravholt CH, et al. The Klinefelter syndrome: current management and 
research challenges. Andrology. 2016;4(3):545- 549. 
59. Davis S,  Lahlou N, Bardsley MZ, Temple M, Kowal K, Ross JL. Longitudinal Study of Boys with 
Klinefelter Syndrome Gives Evidence of Prepubertal Testis Defect. The Endocrine Society; 2015; San Diego, CA.  
60. Davis S, Lahlou N, Bardsley MZ, Temple M, Kowal K, Ross J.  Gonadal Function is Associated 
with Cardiometabolic Health in Prepubertal Boys with Klinefelter Syndrome.  
61. Davis S, Cox -Martin M, Bardsley M, Kowal K, Zeitler P, Ross J. Effects of Oxandrolone on 
Cardiometabolic Health in Boys with Klinefelter syndrome: A Randomized Controlled Trial. 
Journal of Clinical Endocrine Metabolism. 2016.  
62. Sauder KA, Kaar JL, Starling AP, Ringham BM, Glueck DH, Dabelea D. Predictors of Infant Body Composition at 5 Months of Age: The Healthy Start Study. J Pediatr. 2017;183:9 4-99 e91.  
63. Tartaglia N, Howell S, Wilson R, et al. The eXtraordinarY Kids Clinic: an interdisciplinary model of 
care for children and adolescents with sex chromosome aneuploidy. J Multidiscip Healthc. 
2015;8:323- 334. 
64. Spratt DI, Stewart  I, Savage C, et al. Subcutaneous Injection of Testosterone is an Effective and 
Preferred Alternative to Intramuscular Injection: Demonstration in Female -to-Male Transgender 
Patients. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism. 2017.  
65. Carrillo  A. Disorders of Sexual Di fferentiation. In: Lifshitz, ed. Pediatric Endocrinology.  Vol 2. Fifth 
ed. New York, NY: Informa Healthcare USA; 2007.  
Protocol Template Page 18 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 66. Ma G, Yao M, Liu Y, et al. Validation of a new pediatric air -displacement plethysmograph for 
assessing body  composition i n infants. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2004;79(4):653-
660. 
67. Fields DA, Gilchrist JM, Catalano PM, Gianni ML, Roggero PM, Mosca F. Longitudinal body 
composition data in exclusively breast -fed infants: a multicenter study. Obesity. 2011;19(9):1887 -
1891.  
68. Darrah J, Piper M, Watt MJ. Assessment of gross motor skills of at -risk infants: predictive validity 
of the Alberta Infant Motor Scale. Developmental medicine and child neurology. 1998;40(7):485-
491. 
69. Snyder P, Eason JM,  Philibert D, Ridgway A, M cCaughey T. Concurrent validity and reliability of 
the Alberta Infant Motor Scale in infants at dual risk for motor delays. Physical & occupational 
therapy in pediatrics. 2008;28(3):267 -282. 
70. Spittle AJ, Doyle LW, Boyd RN. A sy stematic revie w of the clinimetric properties of neuromotor 
assessments for preterm infants during the first year of life. Developmental medicine and child 
neurology. 2008;50(4):254- 266. 
71. Provost B, Heimerl S, McClain C, Kim NH, Lopez BR, Kodituwakku P.  Concurrent validity of th e 
Bayley Scales of Infant Development II Motor Scale and the Peabody Developmental Motor 
Scales -2 in children with developmental delays. Pediatric physical therapy : the official publication 
of the Section on Pediatrics of the American Physical  Therapy Ass ociation. 2004;16(3):149- 156. 
72. Bayley N. Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, 3rd Edition.  San Antonio, TX: 
Harcourt Assessment Inc; 2006.  
73. Harrison P. OT. Adaptive Behavior Assessment System —Second edition (ABAS -II) San Antonio, 
TX: The Psychological Corporation; 2015.  
74. Chace DH, DiPerna JC, Mitchell BL, Sgroi B, Hofman LF, Naylor EW. Electrospray tandem mass 
spectrometry for analysis of acylcarnitines in dried postmortem blood specimens collected at 
autopsy from infants with unexplained cause of death. Clinical chemistry. 2001;47(7):1166- 1182.  
75. Shen JJ, Matern D, Millington DS, et al. Acylcarnitines in fibroblasts of patients with long -chain 3-
hydroxyacyl -CoA dehydrogenase deficiency and other fatty acid oxidation disorders. J Inher it 
Metab Dis. 2000;23(1):27- 44. 
76. Yang Y, Cruickshank C, Armstrong M, Mahaffey S, Reisdorph R, Reisdorph N. New sample 
preparation approach for mass spectrometry -based profiling of plasma results in improved 
coverage of metabolo me. J Chromatogr A. 2013;1300:217- 226. 
77. Cruickshank -Quinn C, Quinn KD, Powell R, et al. Multi -step preparation technique to recover 
multiple metabolite compound classes for in- depth and informative metabolomic analysis. J Vis 
Exp. 2014(89).  
78. Davis S,  Kowal K, Ross  J. Prenatal  Diagnosis of 47,XXY is Associated with Better Cognitive and 
Behavioral, But Not Physical Phenotypes in Childhood. 10th International Meeting of Pediatric 
Endocrinology; 2017; Washington D.C.  
79. Chang S, Skakkebaek A, Trolle C, et al. Anthropometry in Klinefelter Syndrome - Multifactorial 
Influences Due to CAG Length, Testosterone Treatment and Possibly Intrauterine Hypogonadism. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism. 2015;100(3):E508- 517. 
80. Bojesen A, Hertz JM, G ravholt CH. Genotype and phenotype in Klinefelter syndrome - impact of 
androgen receptor polymorphism and skewed X inactivation. International journal of andrology. 
2011;34(6 Pt 2):e642- 648. 
81. Zitzmann M. The role of the CAG repeat androgen receptor polymorphism in an drology. Frontiers 
of hormone research. 2009;37:52- 61. 
82. Zinn AR, Ramos P, Elder FF, Kowal K, Samango -Sprouse C, Ross JL. Androgen receptor CAGn 
repeat length influences phenotype of 47,XXY (Klinefelter) syndrome. The Journal of clinical 
endocrinology and metabolism. 2005;90(9):5041 -5046.  
 