IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exenatide Once Weekly for Smoking Cessation: A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
NCT0297529 7 
 
Version Date: 10/20/ 2017  
  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017    Project  Plans   
Exenatide Once Weekly for Smoking Cessation: A Randomized Clinical Trial 
Abstract  
Background: Cigarette smoking is the greatest preventable cause of morbidity and premature mortality 
in the US. Approved pharmacological treatments for smoking cessation are marginally effective, underscoring 
the need for improved pharmacotherapies. Glucagon -like pept ide-1 (GLP -1) is produced in the intestinal L -cells 
and in the hindbrain. The peptide maintains glucose homeostasis and reduces food intake. Several GLP -1 
agonists are used clinically for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and obesity. In addition to reducin g food intake, 
GLP-1 agonists have recently been shown in preclinical studies to attenuate appetite for drugs and alcohol.  
Aims: Our primary aims are: 1) to examine the impact of treatment with weekly extended -release 
injectable exenatide on smoking abstin ence and 2) to assess whether exenatide treatment is associated with 
the reduction in craving and withdrawal symptoms in the study sample. Our secondary aims are: 1) to examine 
the effect of extended -release exenatide on cue -induced craving for cigarettes,  2) to evaluate the effect of 
exenatide treatment on continued abstinence from smoking and craving for cigarettes at 1 - and 4 - weeks post - 
treatment, and 3) to collect DNA samples from the study participants for the examination of the GLP -1 receptor 
variab ility and smoking outcomes.  
Methods: We will enroll pre -diabetic and/or overweight smokers (n=90) who desire to quit smoking. 
Participants will be randomized 1:1 to receive once weekly exenatide or placebo for a total of 6 weeks. All 
participants will rece ive transdermal nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) and behavioral counseling.  
Abstinence from smoking, craving, and withdrawal symptoms will be assessed during and at 6 weeks of 
treatment, as well as at 1 - and 4 -week post -treatment.  
Expected Outcomes: We h ypothesize that: 1) exenatide treatment will increase the number of 
participants able to achieve complete smoking abstinence above that achieved via standard NRT and 2) 
exenatide will reduce craving and withdrawal symptoms, as well as cue -induced craving. Craving and 
withdrawal symptoms predict long -term efficacy, which could be examined in a follow -up study.  
 
A. Background  
Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable mortality in the U.S., producing over 400,000 
deaths annually1. Additional 50,000 de aths occur each year among nonsmokers who are exposed to 
secondhand smoke. Over 16 million Americans suffer from chronic diseases caused by smoking. Annually, 
these diseases cost the U.S. $170 billion in direct medical care and over $156 billion in lost pr oductivity [1]. 
These data illustrate the significance of cigarette smoking on individuals and our society at large and 
underscore the importance of identifying therapeutic approaches to assist smoking cessation.  
The first line pharmacological therapies fo r smoking cessation include nicotine replacement therapy 
(NRT), bupropion hydrochloride, and varenicline tartrate. Nearly 50 million of Americans smoke cigarettes, and 
although many report wanting to quit, the 12 -month abstinence rates with the use of thes e therapies range 
from 22% to 33% [1]. These relatively modest long -term improvements in abstinence rates underscore the  
importance of developing improved therapeutic approaches to assist smoking cessation [2, 3].  
Glucagon -like peptide -1 (GLP -1) is produce d endogenously in the intestinal L -cells and in the hindbrain 
nucleus tractus solitaries [4 -7] in response to nutrient ingestion. Acting primarily via GLP -1 receptors (GLP -1R) 
in the hypothalamus and brain stem, GLP -1 regulates glucose homeostasis via incr easing the secretion of 
insulin [8] and suppressing the secretion of glucagon [9, 10]. GLP -1 also reduces food intake [11, 12] in part by 
reducing appetite [13 -15]. The proposed study medication, exenatide, a GLP -1 receptor agonist (GLP -1RA), is 
currently used clinically for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), and a related GLP -1RA (liraglutide) 
was recently FDA -approved for the treatment of obesity in patients with or without DM, suggesting that 
exenatide may have similar effects.  
GLP-1Rs are expressed in many brain regions. In addition to hypothalamus and brain stem, GLP -1Rs 
are expressed throughout the mesolimbic dopamine system [16], and GLP -1 containing neurons extend 
directly into the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumben s [17] - areas that are intimately associated with 
the regulation of reward. These data suggest that the role of GLP -1 extends beyond the glucoregulatory effects 
to reward regulation and that the GLP -1 system represents a target for pharmacological treatme nt of addictive 
behaviors [11, 12]. Consistent with this, recent and novel findings from animal studies have indicated that 
treatment  with GLP-1RAs  attenuates  reward  induced  by alcohol  [18, 19], cocaine  [20, 21], amphetamine  [20, 
22], and most relevant here, nicotin e [23]. In mice, treatmen t with a GLP-1RA at a dIoRsBeNwUitMhBnEoRo: tHhSeCr -MS-17-0802 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   behavioral effects attenuated nicotine -induced locomotor stimulation, accumbal dopamine release, and 
reduced the expression of nicotine conditioned place preference [23].  
Of additional relevance to the present application, a number of recent studies aimed to evaluate the 
effects of GLP -1RAs on weight loss using the pharmacogenetic approach [24 -26]. The objective of these 
studies was to examine whether GLP -1R variability moderates the effect of GLP -1RA treatment on weight loss. 
The studies showed that GLP -1R variability is indeed associated with weight loss in GLP -1RA-treated 
participants. Several GLP -1R polymorphisms, with the most commonly cited rs6923761, predicted weight 
response to GLP -1RA treatment [24 -26]. Given the overlap among food and drugs of abus e as it relates to 
engaging the reward circuitry [27, 28], the findings of these studies suggest that GLP -1R variability may 
moderate the effect of GLP -1RA treatment on smoking outcomes.  
 
B. Research  Aims  
We will evaluate, for the first time, the impact of tr eatment with extended -release injectable exenatide on 
smoking abstinence among pre -diabetic and/or overweight adults presenting for treatment to the UTHealth 
Center for Neurobehavioral Research on Addiction. In addition, to obtain preliminary evidence for a larger 
follow -up study that will evaluate the mediating effects of craving and withdrawal symptoms on abstinence in 
smokers treated with exenatide, we will assess the impact of exenatide on post -quit craving and withdrawal 
symptoms – proximal factors whi ch covary with and predict future abstinence [29 -32]. Lastly, we will collect 
DNA samples from the study participants to examine the relationship between GLP -1R variability and smoking 
outcomes.  
 
Primary Aims:  
 
Aim 1: to examine the effect of weekly extended -release injectable exenatide treatment on carbon - 
monoxide confirmed self -reported smoking abstinence in pre -diabetic and/or overweight smokers 
following a quit attempt  
Hypothesis 1.a.: Exenatide will increas e the rate of complete smoking abstinence measured by seven - 
day point prevalence abstinence (self -reported and biochemically verified via expired carbon -monoxide 
levels) following six weeks of treatment.  
Hypothesis 1.b.: Exenatide -treated participants wil l show differential change over time in the probability 
of abstinence as measured by seven -day point prevalence during the six week treatment.  
Aim 2: to examine the effect of weekly extended -release injectable exenatide treatment on post -quit 
craving and w ithdrawal symptoms in the study sample  
Hypothesis 2.a. Exenatide will reduce post -quit craving (as measured by the Questionnaire of Smoking 
Urges score) and withdrawal symptoms (as measured by the Wisconsin Smoking Withdrawal Scale 
score) following six wee ks of treatment.  
Hypothesis 2.b.: Exenatide -treated participants will show differential reduction in post -quit craving and 
withdrawal during the six week treatment.  
 
Secondary Aims:  
 
Aim 1: To examine the effect of the 6 -week exenatide treatment on 1 - and 4- week post -treatment 
abstinence from smoking and craving for cigarettes in the study participants  
Hypothesis: Exenatide will increase the rate of complete smoking abstinence measured by seven -day 
point prevalence abstinence (self -reported and biochemical ly verified via expired carbon -monoxide 
levels) at 1 - and 4 -weeks post -treatment.  
Aim 2: To examine the effect of extended -release exenatide on cue -induced craving for cigarettes 
Hypothesis: Exenatide treated participants will display lower craving for cigarettes (as measured by the 
Questionnaire of Smoking Urges score) following virtual reality exposure.  
Aim 3: To collect blood samples from the study participants and genotype for GLP -1R polymorphisms 
and other polymorphisms in the future.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   C. Study Design and  Methods  
C1. General Study  Design and Procedures  
Our aims will be accomplished via a double -blind, placebo -controlled, randomized clinical trial. The 
participants will be 90 adult smokers who have pre -diabetes (Type 2, HbA1C=5.7 -6.4%) or are overweight 
(BMI≥25 kg/m2). The participa nts will be randomized 1:1 to receive exenatide or placebo. All participants will 
receive transdermal NRT and individual behavioral smoking cessation counseling. Quit date will be set 
following 2 weeks of exenatide/placebo treatment because we anticipate t hat it will take 2 weeks for the effects 
of exenatide to emerge [33, 34]. Smoking abstinence will be evaluated via self -report and confirmed during 
clinic visits via breath carbon monoxide (CO) measurements.  
 
Table 1. Study Procedures  
 
Study Timeline  
 
 
Smoke?  
  Screen  Weeks 1 -2 
Quit day  Weeks 3 -6 
End of Treatment  Week 7  Week 10  
 
Ad Libitum   
Ad Libitum  No 
Smoking  No 
Smoking  No 
Smoking  
Informed Consent, MINI, 
Demographics,  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria, 
Physical Exam, Medical History  X     
Blood (DNA) sample   M, Week 1     
Concomitant Meds, AEs, Vitals  X M M M M 
FTND, Pregnancy Test, Safety Labs  X     
Exenatide or Placebo   M M   
NRT   M   
Behavioral Therapy   M M   
Number of Cigarettes Smoked  X M M, T, W, T, F, S, S  M M 
Breath CO  X M M M M 
WSWS, QSU, PANAS  X M M M M 
Virtual Reality Session   M, Week 1   M, Week 3     
 
AEs-Adverse Events; CO -carbon monoxide; FTND -Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence; M - Monday; 
MINI -MINI Neuropsychiatric interview, NRT – nicotine replacement therapy; PANAS - Positive and Negative 
Affect Schedule; QSU – Questionnaire of Smoking Urges, W SWS – Wisconsin Smoking Withdrawal Scale  
 
Design Rationale . Administration of exenatide 2 mg once weekly results in therapeutic concentrations (>50 
pg/mL) in approximately 2 weeks, whereas steady -state concentrations of approximately 300 pg/mL are 
achieved  within approximately 4 -6 weeks [33, 34]. Based on these pharmacokinetics, we selected to set the 
quit date following 2 weeks of exenatide treatment and to evaluate the primary outcome (7 -day point 
prevalence abstinence) following a total of 6 weeks of tre atment. This is the first study to evaluate the effect of 
exenatide treatment on smoking outcomes; therefore, the optimal time -points for quit date and assessment of 
the primary outcome cannot be predicted with certainty. To mitigate this concern, we will evaluate the trajectory 
of quit attempts and abstinence throughout the duration of the study.  
 
C2. Setting and Treatments  
This study will be conducted at the UTHealth Center for Neurobehavioral Research on Addiction.  
Participants will be recruited using various strategies, including flyers, newspaper ads, and referrals. When the 
potential participants call the provided telephone number, the requirements and the procedures of the study 
will be explained, and a brief pre screen to determine initial eligibility will be administered. The pre -screen 
interview will include questions concerning medical and psychiatric history, psychoactive substance use, and 
smoking history. Individuals who appear eligible based on the initial pre-screen will be invited for a face -to-face 
interview.  
During a face -to-face interview with the study PI, participants will be given consent documents that will 
be read to them if needed. Following completion of the informed consent process, each partici pant will provide 
his or her medical history and have a brief physical exam including assessment of vital signs and collection of 
samples for laboratory testing. Following completion of the initial screening and determination of the study 
eligibility, part icipants will return to clinic for randomization (1:1) to receive exenatide treatment or placebo. The  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   first dose of exenatide/placebo will be administered during that visit. Subsequent to that visit, participants will 
return to clinic once a week for 5 more weeks. A total of 6 weekly injections will thus be administered. All 
participants will receive NRT treatment and individual behavioral smoking cessation counseling as is the 
recommended standard for use with pharmacotherapy. Cue -induced cra ving for cigarettes is assessed during 
visit 1 (baseline) and visit 3 following virtual reality exposure. Participants receive compensation at the end of 
each study visit.  
Upon the completion of the treatment phase of the study, the participants who were a bstinent following 
6 weeks of treatment will be contacted via telephone at 1 - and 4 -weeks post -treatment to ascertain continued 
abstinence from smoking. Those who report being abstinent, will be invited for in -person visit for the 
biochemical verification of abstinence.  
The blood samples for DNA extraction will be collected during the participants’ first study visit, using 
two 5 -ml lavender top vacutainers. The samples will be labeled using unique study identifiers and transported 
at room temperature to the  Baylor College of Medicine Psychiatric Genetics Laboratory in the Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences for further analysis.  
 
C3. Recruitment, Eligibility, and Randomization  
Recruitment . We will use advertisements in local newspapers, flyers, as well as referrals to recruit 
volunteers.  
Eligibility . The following inclusion criteria must be met for an individual to participate in the study:  
1. Be English -speaking volunteers who desire to quit smoking and are willing to make a quit attempt 
during the  course of the  study;  
2. Be aged between 18 and 75  years;  
3. Have smoked ≥10 cigarettes a day for at least one year and provide a breath CO ≥10  ppm;  
4. Have a negative pregnancy test, if female of childbearing  potential;  
5. Have HbA1C levels between 5.7 and 6.4% and/o r body mass index of ≥25  kg/m2. 
6. Not currently using any therapy for glycemic control (either injectable [i.e. insulin] or oral  agents);  
7. Have vital signs as follows: resting pulse between 50 and 95 bpm, BP between 90 -150 mmHg systolic 
and 45 -95 mmHg  diastolic;  
8. Have  hematology  and chemistry  laboratory  tests  that are within  reference  limits  (10%),  with the 
following exception: pancreatic tests (lipase and amylase) must be within normal  limits;  
9. Have a medical history and brief physical examination demonstrating no clinically significant 
contraindications for study participation, in the judgment of the principal  investigator.  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Meet criteria for the following psychiatric and/or s ubstance use disorders as assessed by the MINI: 
items C (current manic or hypomanic episode only), I (alcohol abuse - Alcohol Addendum -past 3 
months only; current alcohol dependence), J (substance abuse -Substance Abuse Addendum – past 3 
months only; curre nt substance dependence), K (current psychotic disorder or current mood disorder 
with psychotic  features).  
2. Individuals who meet criteria for non -exclusionary psychiatric disorders that are considered clinically 
unstable and/or unsuitable to participate as determined by the Principal  Investigator.  
3. Individuals rated as moderate (9 -16) to high (17 or greater) on suicidality as assessed by Module B of 
the MINI.  
4. Have personal or family history of medullary thyroid carcinoma or multiple endocrine  neoplasia 
syndro me type  2; 
5. Have type 1 diabetes  mellitus;  
6. Have severe cardiovascular disease (history of myocardial infarction, life -threatening arrhythmia, or 
worsening angina  pectoris);  
7. Have active temporomandibular joint disease;  
8. Have severe gastrointestinal disease (i .e. severe  gastroparesis);  
9. Have previous history of pancreatitis or are at risk for  pancreatitis;  
10. Have  CrCl<30;  
11. Have any previous medically adverse reaction to study medications, nicotine, or  menthol;  
12. Be pregnant or lactating or unwilling to provide a negative pregnancy test before study  entry;  
13. Not using a reliable form of contraception (e.g., abstinence, birth control pills, intrauterine device, 
condoms, or  spermicide);  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   14. Have any illness w hich in the opinion of the primary investigator would preclude safe and/or successful 
completion of the  study.  
Criteria for withholding study treatment: Subsequent doses of exenatide will not be administered if 1) any of 
the following occur: hypoglycemia, hypersensitivity reaction, anaphylaxis, nephrotoxicity, pancreatitis, or severe 
injection site reaction or 2) the study PI believes that there may be any reason to withhold exenatide. Criteria for 
participant discontinuation following study initiation. Inability to comply with study procedures; meet 
discontinuation criteria due to side effects/adverse events associated with the study treatment. Stopping criteria. 
We will monitor the frequency of the treatment -related adverse events. If more than 10% of part icipants entering 
the study experience treatment -related adverse event, we will halt the study if indicated by the pattern and 
severity of adverse events. Drop out. We plan to recruit a total of 90 subjects and anticipate that 74 subjects will 
complete the  study (80% retention). Randomization . An independent investigator will randomize participants 1:1 
into exenatide and placebo groups using blocks of four. Sterile saline will serve as the placebo for exenatide. 
Exenatide dosing, accounting and observation . Exenatide will be administered at a dose of 2 mg subcutaneously 
once a week on Mondays. Any unused medication will be accounted for and disposed of. NRT dosing, accounting 
and observation . NRT will be administered as a transdermal patch at a dose of 21 m g. The patches will be 
dispensed on Mondays in the amount sufficient for 1 week of use. Any unused patches with be accounted for 
and disposed of. Payment to Research Participants. Participants will receive compensation for their time and 
effort. Participan ts will be compensated at the end of the screening visit and at the end of each study visit, 
regardless of whether they remain in the study. The compensation rate will be as  follows:  
Screen: $10 
Visit 1:  $10 
Visit 2:  $15 
Visit 3:  $20 
Visit 4:  $25 
Visit 5:  $30 
Visit 6:  $50 
Post-treatment Visit 1: $10 
Post-treatment Visit 2: $10 
Provision of DNA sample: $20  
C4. Data Collection and Measures  
Clinical Assessments  
The MINI Neuropsychiatric Interview will be administered during screening to determine whether subjects 
meet the DSM -5 criteria for nicotine -use disorder and to rule out presence of any exclusionary psychiatric and 
substance abuse disorders [35].  
Nicotine dependence will be assessed during s creening using Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine 
Dependence [36]. FTND is a valid and reliable 6 -items questionnaire that evaluates the quantity of cigarette 
consumption, the compulsion to use, and dependence.  
Baseline smoking status will be assessed during scr eening via self -reported smoking of >10 
cigarettes/day for >1 year and with recent smoking confirmed by an expired air carbon monoxide (CO, Micro+ 
Smokerlyzer®, Williamsburg, VA ) level of ≥10 ppm.  
Abstinence from smoking . Self -report abstinence will be lo gged by participants and confirmed via time - 
line follow back procedures [37]. Biochemical verification of abstinence (expired CO level of <5 ppm) will be 
performed during clinic visits.  
Withdrawal symptoms will be assessed using Wisconsin Scale of Withdra wal Symptoms (WSWS) [38]. 
WSWS is a valid and reliable questionnaire which includes subscales of anger, anxiety, concentration, craving, 
hunger, sadness, and sleep.  
Craving for smoking will be evaluated using the Questionnaire of Smoking Urges [39], a 32 -item scale 
that assesses the intention and desire to smoke and an anticipation of relief from the withdrawal -associated 
negative affect.  
Positive and negative affect will be assessed using the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule [40] 
(PANAS), a 20 -item qu estionnaire that asks participants to rate the extent to which they experience positive 
(i.e. excited, inspired, proud) or negative (i.e. irritable, distressed, upset) emotions.  
Depressive symptoms will be assessed using the Patient Health Questionnaire De pression Scale 
(PHQ -8) [41], an 8 -item questionnaire that assesses presence and severity of depressive symptoms over the 
previous two weeks.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   Virtual Reality (cue -induced craving for cigarettes). To assess baseline withdrawal symptoms and 
craving for cigarettes participants complete the Wisconsin Scale of Withdrawal Symptoms (WSWS) and the 
Questionnaire of Smoking Urges (QSU). Participants will then take part in a virtual reality (VR) session that is 
viewed using a head -mounted device (NIVS SX -60, NIVS, Reston, VA) with a head tracker (Ic3 inertia cube, 
Intersense) connected to a desktop computer. Participants are exposed to VR neutral cues (nature scenes), 
followed by series of VR smoking -related cues. VR smoking cues are personalized to match each participant’s 
preferred brand of cigarettes. Similarly, the style of music played in the VR party contexts is also adjusted 
based on participant preference. Cue reactivity is assessed within the VR environment immediately after each 
VR scenario with t he aid of a gamepad to answer craving -related questions (using a visual analog scale of 0 - 
100). VR neutral context consists of a nature video; VR active paraphernalia context consists of proximal 
smoking -related objects (packs of cigarettes, ashtrays, bot tles of alcohol) placed on tables around the room; 
and VR party context consists of similar smoking cues and includes interactions with avatars at the party where 
cigarettes are offered, drinks are poured, and conversations are held while people light up c igarettes. Exposure 
to each VR environment (neutral, paraphernalia, party) lasts approximately 3 minutes and follows a timed path 
where at certain points participants are visually directed for a few seconds to pay attention to non -smoking or 
active cues in  order to standardize some of the VR exposure within the environment. This VR paradigm was 
used in a previous study that showed that self -reported levels of “craving” (p<0.01) and “thinking about 
cigarettes” (p<0.0001) were significantly greater after expo sure to the active cues versus non -smoking cues 
and that there were significant positive correlations between self -reported craving prior to the VR session and 
craving induced by active VR cues (p<0.01) [42].  
Medical/Pharmacological Assessments  
Medical his tory and physical exam. Personal and family health profiles and medical history will be 
collected during screening and reviewed with a licensed medical professional. During this time, a physical exam, 
neurological exam, and neuropsychiatric mental status e valuation will also be conducted.  
Clinical laboratory assessment . During screening, blood for hematology studies will be collected in 
anticoagulant -containing vacutainer tubes for analysis of Hemoglobin A1C, CBC, chemistry, liver function tests, 
renal func tion tests, and amylase and lipase levels. A urine -based pregnancy test for females will measure 
human chorionic gonadotropin. Blood glucose levels will be assessed using finger stick prior to each dose of 
exenatide.  
Blood samples for DNA extraction . The b lood samples will be collected during the participants’ first 
study visit, using two 5 -ml lavender top vacutainers. The samples will be labeled using unique study identifiers 
and transported at room temperature to the Baylor College of Medicine Psychiatric  Genetics Laboratory in the 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences for further analysis.  
C5. Study Medications  
Exenatide. Exenatide will be administered at a dose of 2 mg subcutaneously once a week for 6 weeks. 
Because administration of exenatide 2 mg once weekly results in therapeutic concentrations (>50 pg/mL) after 
2 weeks of treatment, the participants randomized to exena tide treatment will receive 2 weekly doses of 
exenatide prior to quit day. Because steady -state concentrations are achieved within 4 -6 weeks, the 
participants will be treated for a total of 6 weeks [33, 34]. As noted above, this is the first study to exami ne the 
effect of exenatide treatment on smoking outcomes; therefore, the selected time -points for quit date and 
assessment of the primary outcome may not be optimal. To mitigate this uncertainty, we will evaluate the 
trajectory of quit attempts and abstine nce throughout the duration of the study.  
Exenatide will be purchased commercially as Bydureon for SC injection. The incidence of 
hypoglycemia with the use exenatide is low because the release of insulin following administration exenatide is 
glucose -mediat ed. Although there have been questions about the safety of incretins such as exenatide, as 
treatment may be associated with increased rates of pancreatitis, a recent meta -analysis of 60 studies 
(n=353,639), consisting of 55 randomized controlled trials (n= 33,350) and five observational studies (three 
retrospective cohort studies, and two case -control studies; n=320,289) has shown that incretin treatment was 
not associated with increased rates of pancreatitis [43]. Ongoing post -marketing monitoring is also u nderway. 
In addition, data from rodent studies suggest that GLP -1 agonists may be associated with an increased risk of 
thyroid C -cell hyperplasia and C -cell tumors; however, experiments with monkeys did not show proliferation of 
C-cells in thyroid gland af ter chronic administration of GLP -1 agonists. Longitudinal data from clinical trials 
have not demonstrated a causal association between GLP -1 agonists and thyroid C -cell pathology over a 2 - 
year period  [44]. 
NRT. NRT patches (21 mg) will be purchased commercially as generic nicotine patches. The patches 
will be dispensed on Mondays in the amount sufficient for 1 week of use [45]. Nicotine patches is an over -the- 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   count product with a proven safety re cord. The patches are contraindicated in persons with hypersensitivity to 
nicotine or menthol, those with severe cardiovascular disease (i.e. history of myocardial infarction, life - 
threatening arrhythmia, or worsening angina pectoris), and those with temp oromandibular joint disease. To 
address these concerns, patients with these conditions will be excluded from participation in this study.  
C6. Behavioral Counseling  
All participants will receive brief individual behavioral smoking cessation counseling as is  the 
recommended standard for use with pharmacotherapy [46]. The counseling protocol is manual driven, has 
been used in several previous studies [47 -49] and will consist of 6 in -person sessions (on the days when the 
participants come to clinic to receive e xenatide/placebo treatment) and 2 brief supportive phone calls (one day 
pre-quit and 3 days post -quit), lasting 10 -15 minutes each, spanning the 6 week active treatment phase.  
Counseling content will follow the previous study [49] and briefly involves prep aration for quitting, identification 
of high risk situations for smoking, development of coping skills and direct support before and after the quit 
date, motivational intervention for keeping or resetting a quit date, management of withdrawal symptoms and 
medication compliance. Counseling will be provided by the study PI, actively practicing Family Nurse 
Practitioner with a Ph.D. degree. The study PI will be trained by experienced Ph.D. or Master’s - level smoking 
cessation clinicians from Dr. Cinciripini’s  team. The team has extensive experience from the previous trials in 
training and monitoring the integrity of the counseling protocol including recording time and content of each 
session. At the conclusion of active treatment, participants will be offered referral for ongoing cessation 
counseling (quitline).  
C7. Safety Assurances and Adverse Events  
Medical Monitoring. Vital signs will be assessed at each visit. Blood glucose levels will be assessed prior to 
each dose of exenatide. The PI will halt exenatide  administration if stopping criteria are met. The dose of 
exenatide that we will use is the standard dose that is currently used clinically; therefore, we expect no medical 
issues to arise. Should a participant become unable to cooperate with study procedu res he or she will be 
replaced.  
Adverse event assessment and management. P articipants’ well -being will be assessed at each visit.  
Participants will be asked if they are experiencing any discomfort indicating potential side effects. 
Spontaneously reported s ymptoms or complaints will be recorded and reported as required if events are 
classified as serious.  
D. Data Analysis  Plan  
Data Management. Initially, data stripped of all personal identifiers will be collected using paper -and- 
pen or direct computer entry. T he database will then be backed up and a copy will be securely e -mailed to the 
PI and statistical consultant for analysis. A research assistant trained in quality assurance procedures will 
thoroughly check data from clinical charts against source documents . Twenty percent of the outcome data will 
be double -entered. In the event of major discrepancies, outcome data will receive 100% source document 
verification. We will construct a relational data -base in Microsoft Access that will maintain data integrity by  
limiting entry codes for respective variables and by preventing orphan records.  
Sample Size Justification . We will enroll 90 subjects in this study. Our intention is to conduct the largest 
study possible, given the budget. In the statistical methods outli ned below we describe the data analysis 
strategy that will be used in order to optimize the information provided by the anticipated sample. Furthermore, 
data obtained in this study will serve as the preliminary evidence for a larger follow -up study.  
Statistical Methods. Whether GLP -1RAs confer benefit in treating nicotine dependence has not been 
tested in clinical trials. Frequentist statistics that are based on dichotomous null hypothesis -testing (i.e. 
estimating the probability of observing the data , or data more extreme, given that the null hypothesis is true) 
would be less informative in the context of this early -phase project. We, therefore, select a Bayesian approach 
to data analysis. Bayesian probability estimates incorporate prior information a bout plausible parameter values 
with the observed data, forming the posterior distribution and thereby, allow estimates of the probability that the 
true value of the parameter falls in some range. The Bayesian approach will thus allow us to bet on the 
alternative hypothesis and ascertain the probability that the treatment confers some level of benefit, given the 
observed data [50]. According to the FDA, Bayesian statistics offer improved methodological efficiency for 
early -phase projects aimed to “repurpose ” existing therapies for new indications [51 -53]. Decision -making 
based on an initial trial of a compound for a new indication is assisted by estimates of the probability of an 
effect of some specified magnitude, even with small sample sizes [54, 55].  
Statistical analysis. An intent -to-treat approach will impute those who drop out of the study being 
counted as continuing to smoke. Demographic and baseline characteristics of the study participants by group 
that show correlations with both treatment group and  outcomes may be potential confounders and result in  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   analyses including and excluding the salient demographic or baseline characteristic to ascertain the degree to 
which this is the case. Evidence of confounding will result in reporting both adjusted and unadjusted estimates 
of treatment effect. For retention, group differences in the time to drop -out t over the 6 -week study period as a 
function of treatment will use Cox Proportional Hazards survival analysis. Data analyses will use generalize d 
linear and multilevel models. For Primary Aim 1 and Secondary Aim 1, logistic regression models (with a log - 
link to permit estimates of relative risks) will be used to assess the effect of treatment on 7 -day point 
prevalence abstinence following 6 weeks  of treatment (Primary Aim 1), as well as at 1 - and 4 -weeks post - 
treatment (Secondary Aim 1). For Primary Aim 2 and Secondary Aim 2, mixed models and multilevel models 
will be used to assess the effect of treatment on craving (QSU score), withdrawal sympt oms (WSWS score), 
and cue -induced craving for cigarettes (QSU score following virtual reality exposure). Lastly, multilevel models 
will the used to examine the trajectory of abstinence throughout the course of the study. Vague, neutral priors 
provide a bas is for initially evaluating the trial results: for linear Cox proportional hazards and logistic 
regression, priors for coefficients will take the form ~Normal (μ = 0, σ2 = 1 x 106) in the linear, log -hazard and 
log-relative risk scales. Priors for error or  dispersion terms will use ~Gamma(a = 0.001, b = 0.001) and  
~Uniform(1,1000) for level one and two effects respectively. Working with Dr. Charles Green, we will 
investigate the robustness of the resulting posterior distributions using a variety of neutral and pessimistic 
priors representing vague, weakly -informative, and skeptical informative perspectives. Informative priors will 
use extant information (e.g. meta -analytic findings [56] for smoking outcomes). Evaluation of posterior 
distributions will permit  statements regarding the probability that effects of varying magnitudes exist, given the 
data. For the genetic analyses (Secondary Aim 3), the primary phenotype to be used as the measure to 
treatment response will be assessment of smoking over the 6 -week evaluation period, as measured by self - 
report and corroborated by weekly breath CO measurements. This will match the parent exenatide study 
endpoints. Variants of the GLP -1R will be genotyped and examined for association with treatment response. 
For conti nuous traits (breath CO levels) we will perform one -way ANOVA with the continuous trait as the 
response variable and genotype as the predictor variable. This will test the null hypothesis that the mean level 
of the trait is the same for all genotypes. We w ill use linear regression to adjust for any confounding variables 
before performing one -way ANOVA. For dichotomous traits (smoking abstinence), chi -square analysis will test 
the null hypothesis that the trait is independent of genotype. For confounding var iables, we will use logistic 
regressed before chi -square analysis. To correct for the multiple testing we will use Bonferroni adjustment.  
 
E. Potential Difficulties and Solutions  
Safety of exenatide. Exenatide does not act like insulin to directly lower blood  glucose; therefore, the 
medication is relatively safe and rarely causes hypoglycemia. There have been concerns that GLP -1 may 
cause pancreatitis; however, a recent meta -analysis suggests this is not so [43]. There are also data from 
rodent studies suggest ing that GLP -1 agonists are associated with an increased risk of thyroid C -cell 
hyperplasia and C -cell tumors; however, data from clinical trials have not demonstrated a causal association 
between GLP -1 agonists and thyroid C -cell pathology [44]. To addres s the concerns regarding the risk 
pancreatitis and/or thyroid cancer associated with GLP -1 agonists, potential participants with abnormal levels 
of pancreatic enzymes, those at risk for pancreatitis, and those with personal and/or family history of thyroid  C- 
cell tumor will be excluded from participation in this study. It is also possible that exenatide may not be 
tolerated well by the study population. This is unlikely, given that the exenatide is generally well tolerated. If a 
participant does not tolera te exenatide, subsequent dose of exenatide will not be administered and the 
participant will be replaced.  
Recruitment. Critical to any clinical study is recruitment of sufficient numbers of participants. We anticipate no 
difficulty recruiting the required sample size. As noted in the Background section, cigarette smoking is a 
common problem. Retention. Should dropout be a problem we will increase subject payment which will 
increase retention.  
 
F. Interpretation and Potential Importance of  Findings  
The objectiv e of this early -phase project is to estimate the probability that the proposed treatment 
(exenatide) confers a clinically relevant level of benefit in treating nicotine dependence. If our hypotheses are 
confirmed, the results of this early -phase project wo uld provide strong preliminary data in support of a definitive 
follow -up study. In a follow -up study we would assign subjects to placebo and exenatide with quit dates at 2 
and 6 weeks of treatment to determine the onset of clinical effects. We would then i ncrease the study duration 
to at least 12 weeks. This would enable us to clarify the length of time needed to achieve the therapeutic levels 
and would provide a clearer test of efficacy. We will also examine the mediating effects of craving and  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   withdrawal symptoms on abstinence, which would elucidate the mechanisms by which GLP -1 agonists 
enhance smoking abstinence.  
Overall, there are at least three aspects of this study that are highly important:  
1) This is the first clinical study to evaluate exenatide as potential treatment for nicotine dependence. If this 
treatment is effective, it could represent a new approach to assist smoking cessation. In addition, because 
exenatide is unrelated to other smoki ng cessation therapies, it could be combined with other treatments, 
such as NRT or varenicline, to create an effective “quit  package”.  
2) If exenatide is effective as treatment for nicotine dependence, smokers with or at risk for DM would require 
only one tre atment modality for glucose control and smoking  cessation.  
3) Given that fear of weight gain is a frequent reason for smokers’ reluctance to quit [57] treatment with 
exenatide  may represent  an integrated  approach  to smoking  cessation  and post-cessation  weight  gain in 
overweight  smokers.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   References  
1 The health consequences of smoking -50 years of progress: A report of the surgeon general.  Atlanta 
GA, 2014.  
2 Polosa R, Benowitz NL: Treatment of nicotine addiction: Present therapeutic options and pipeli ne 
developments. Trends Pharmacol Sci  2011;32:281 -289. 
3 Dani JA, Jenson  D, Broussard  JI, De Biasi  M: Neurophysiology  of nicotine  addiction.  J Addict  Res Ther 
2011;S1  
4 Reimann F: Molecular mechanisms underlying nutrient detection by incretin -secreting cells. Int Dairy J 
2010;20:236 -242. 
5 Han VK, Hynes MA, Jin C, Towle AC, Lauder JM, Lund PK: Cellular localization of 
proglucagon/glucagon -like peptide  i messenger  rnas in rat brain.  J Neurosci  Res 1986;16:97 -107. 
6 Larsen PJ, Tang -Christensen M, Holst JJ, Orskov C: Distribution of glucagon -like peptide -1 and other 
preproglucagon -derived  peptides  in the rat hypothalamus  and brainstem.  Neuroscience  1997;77:257 -270. 
7 Jin SL, Han VK, Simmons JG, Towle AC, Lauder JM, Lund PK: Distribution of glucagonlike peptide i 
(glp-i), glucagon, and glicentin in the rat brain: An immunocytochemical study. J Comp Neurol 1988;271:519 - 
532. 
8 Holst JJ, Seino Y: Glp -1 receptor agonists: Targeting both hyperglycaemia and disease processes in 
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract  2009;85:1 -3. 
9 Matsuyama T, Komatsu R, Namba M, Watanabe N, Itoh H, Tarui S: Glucagon -like peptide -1 (7-36 
amide):  A potent  glucagonostatic  and insulinotropic  hormone.  Diabetes  Res Clin Pract  1988;5:281 -284. 
10 Gutniak  M, Orskov  C, Holst  JJ, Ahren  B, Efendic  S: Antidiabetogenic  effect  of glucagon -like peptide -1 
(7-36)amide in normal subjects and patients with diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med  1992;326:1316 -1322.  
11 Engel JA, Jerlhag E: Role of appetite -regulating peptides in the pathophysiology of addiction: 
Implications for pharmacotherapy. CNS Drugs  2014;28:875 -886. 
12 Skibicka KP: The central glp -1: Implications for food and drug reward. Front Neurosci  2013;7:181.  
13 Naslund  E, Schmidt  PT, Hellstrom  PM: Gut peptide  hormones:  Importance  for food intake.  Scand  J 
Gastroenterol  2005;40:250 -258. 
14 Tang -Christensen M, Larsen PJ, Goke R, Fink -Jensen A, Jessop DS, Moller M, Sheikh SP: Central 
administration  of glp-1-(7-36) amide  inhibits  food and water  intake  in rats. Am J Physiol  1996;271:R848 -856. 
15 Turton MD, O'Shea D, Gunn I, Beak SA, Edwards CM, Meeran K, Choi SJ, Taylor GM, Heath MM, 
Lambert  PD, Wilding  JP, Smith  DM, Ghatei  MA, Herbert  J, Bloom  SR: A role for glucagon -like peptide -1 in the 
central regulation of feeding. Nature  1996;379:69 -72. 
16 Merchenthaler I, Lane M, Shughrue P: Distribution of pre -pro-glucagon and glucagon -like peptide -1 
receptor messenger rnas in the rat central nervous system. J Comp Neurol  1999;403:261 -280. 
17 Alhadeff  AL, Rupprecht  LE, Hayes  MR: Glp-1 neurons  in the nucleus  of the solitary  tract project  directly 
to the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens to control for food intake. Endocrinology 2012;153:647 - 
658. 
18 Shirazi  RH, Dickson  SL, Skibicka  KP: Gut peptide  glp-1 and its analogue,  exendin -4, decrease  alcohol 
intake and reward. PLoS One  2013;8:e61965.  
19 Egecioglu  E, Steensland  P, Fredriksson  I, Feltmann  K, Engel  JA, Jerlhag  E: The glucagon -like peptide 
1 analogue exendin -4 attenuates alcohol mediated behaviors in rodents. Psychoneuroendocrinology 
2013;38:1259 -1270.  
20 Egecioglu  E, Engel  JA, Jerlhag  E: The glucagon -like peptide  1 analogue,  exendin -4, attenuates  the 
rewarding properties of psychostimu lant drugs in mice. PLoS One  2013;8:e69010.  
21 Graham  DL, Erreger  K, Galli A, Stanwood  GD: Glp-1 analog  attenuates  cocaine  reward.  Mol Psychiatry 
2013;18:961 -962. 
22 Erreger K, Davis AR, Poe AM, Greig NH, Stanwood GD, Galli A: Exendin -4 decreases amphetamine - 
induced locomotor activity. Physiol Behav  2012;106:574 -578. 
23 Egecioglu E, Engel JA, Jerlhag E: The glucagon -like peptide 1 analogue exendin -4 attenuates the 
nicoti ne-induced locomotor stimulation, accumbal dopamine release, conditioned place preference as well as 
the expression of locomotor sensitization in mice. PLoS One  2013;8:e77284.  
24 de Luis DA, Diaz Soto G, Izaola O, Romero E: Evaluation of weight loss and metabolic changes in 
diabetic patients treated with liraglutide, effect of rs 6923761 gene variant of glucagon -like peptide 1 receptor. J 
Diabetes Complications  2015;29:595 -598. 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   25 Jensterle M, Pirs B, Goricar K, Dolzan V, Janez A: Genetic variability in glp -1 receptor is associated 
with inter -individual differences in weight lowering potential of liraglutide in obese women with pcos: A pilot 
study. Eur J Clin Pharmaco l 2015;71:817 -824. 
26 Sathananthan  A, Man CD, Micheletto  F, Zinsmeister  AR, Camilleri  M, Giesler  PD, Laugen  JM, Toffolo 
G, Rizza RA, Cobelli C, Vella A: Common genetic variation in glp1r and insulin secretion in response to 
exogenous glp -1 in nondiabetic subj ects: A pilot study. Diabetes Care  2010;33:2074 -2076.  
27 Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, Tomasi D, Baler R: Food and drug reward: Overlapping circuits in 
human obesity and addiction. Curr Top Behav Neurosci  2012;11:1 -24. 
28 Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Tomasi D, Baler RD:  Obesity and addiction: Neurobiological overlaps. Obes Rev 
2013;14:2 -18. 
29 West R, Schneider N: Craving for cigarettes. Br J Addict  1987;82:407 -415. 
30 West RJ, Hajek P, Belcher M: Severity of withdrawal symptoms as a predictor of outcome of an attempt 
to quit smoking. Psychol Med  1989;19:981 -985. 
31 West  R: The multiple  facets  of cigarette  addiction  and what  they mean  for encouraging  and helping 
smokers to stop. COPD  2009;6:277 -283. 
32 Wray JM, Gass JC, Tiffany ST: A systematic review of the relationships between craving and smoking 
cessation. Nicotine Tob Res  2013;15:1167 -1182.  
33 Fineman M, Flanagan S, Taylor K, Aisporna M, Shen LZ, Mace KF, Walsh B, Diamant M, Cirincione B, 
Kothare P, Li  WI, MacConell L: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of exenatide extended -release after 
single and multiple dosing. Clin Pharmacokinet  2011;50:65 -74. 
34 Parkes  DG, Mace  KF, Trautmann  ME: Discovery  and development  of exenatide:  The first antidiabetic 
agent  to leverage the multiple benefits of the incretin hormone, glp -1. Expert Opin Drug Discov 2013;8:219 - 
244. 
35 Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, Amorim P, Janavs J, Weiller E, Hergueta T, Baker R, Dunbar 
GC: The mini -international neuropsychiatric intervie w (m.I.N.I.): The development and validation of a structured 
diagnostic  psychiatric  interview  for dsm-iv and icd-10. J Clin Psychiatry  1998;59  Suppl  20:22 -33;quiz  34-57. 
36 Heatherton  TF, Kozlowski  LT, Frecker  RC, Fagerstrom  KO: The fagerstrom  test for nicotine 
dependence:  A revision  of the fagerstrom  tolerance  questionnaire.  Br J Addict  1991;86:1119 -1127.  
37 Sobell LC, Sobell MB, Leo GI, Cancilla A: Reliability of a timeline method: Assessing normal drinkers' 
reports  of recent  drinking  and a comparative  evaluation  across  several  populations.  Br J Addict  1988;83:393 - 
402. 
38 Welsch SK, Smith SS, Wetter DW, Jorenby DE, Fiore MC, Baker TB: Development and validation of 
the wisconsin smoking withdrawal scale. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol  1999;7:354 -361. 
39 Cox LS, Tiffan y ST, Christen AG: Evaluation of the brief questionnaire of smoking urges (qsu -brief) in 
laboratory and clinical settings. Nicotine Tob Res  2001;3:7 -16. 
40 Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A: Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative 
affect: The panas scales. J Pers Soc Psychol  1988;54:1063 -1070.  
41 Kroenke K, Strine TW, Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Berry JT, Mokdad AH: The phq -8 as a measure of 
current depression in the general population. J Affect Disord  2009;114:163 -173. 
42 Thompson -Lake DG, Cooper KN, Mahoney JJ, 3rd, Bordnick PS, Salas R, Kosten TR, Dani JA, De La 
Garza R, 2nd: Withdrawal symptoms and nicotine dependence severity predict virtual reality craving in 
cigarette -deprived smokers. Nicotine Tob Res  2015;17:796 -802. 
43 Li L, Shen J, Bala MM, Busse JW, Ebrahim S, Vandvik PO, Rios LP, Malaga G, Wong E, Sohani  Z, 
Guyatt GH, Sun X: Incretin treatment and risk of pancreatitis in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: 
Systematic review and meta -analysis of randomised and no n-randomised studies. BMJ  2014;348:g2366.  
44 Chiu WY, Shih SR, Tseng CH: A review on the association between glucagon -like peptide -1 receptor 
agonists and thyroid cancer. Exp Diabetes Res  2012;2012:924168.  
45 Gray KM, McClure EA, Baker NL, Hartwell KJ, Carpenter  MJ, Saladin ME: An exploratory short -term 
double -blind randomized trial of varenicline versus nicotine patch for smoking cessation in women.  Addiction 
2015;110:1027 -1034.  
46 Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update u.S. Public health service clinical  practice 
guideline executive summary. Respir Care  2008;53:1217 -1222.  
47 Cinciripini PM, Tsoh JY, Wetter DW, Lam C, de Moor C, Cinciripini L, Baile W, Anderson C, Minna JD: 
Combined effects of venlafaxine, nicotine replacement, and brief counseling on smoking  cessation. Exp Clin 
Psychopharmacol  2005;13:282 -292. 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0802 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/20/2017   48 Cinciripini  PM, Blalock  JA, Minnix  JA, Robinson  JD, Brown  VL, Lam C, Wetter  DW, Schreindorfer  L, 
McCullough JP, Jr., Dolan -Mullen P, Stotts AL, Karam -Hage M: Effects of an intensive depres sion-focused 
intervention for smoking cessation in pregnancy. J Consult Clin Psychol  2010;78:44 -54. 
49 Cinciripini PM, Robinson JD, Karam -Hage M, Minnix JA, Lam C, Versace F, Brown VL, Engelmann JM, 
Wetter DW: Effects of varenicline and bupropion sustained -release use plus intensive smoking cessation 
counseling on prolonged abstinence from smoking and on de pression, negative affect, and other symptoms of 
nicotine withdrawal. JAMA Psychiatry  2013;70:522 -533. 
50 Wijeysundera DN, Austin PC, Hux JE, Beattie WS, Laupacis A: Bayesian statistical inference enhances 
the interpretation of contemporary randomized control led trials. J Clin Epidemiol 2009;62:13 -21 e15. 
51 O'Neill RT: Fda's critical path initiative: A perspective on contributions of biostatistics. Biom J 
2006;48:559 -564. 
52 Woodcock  J: Fda introductory  comments:  Clinical  studies  design  and evaluation  issues.  Clin Trials 
2005;2:273 -275. 
53 Temple R: How fda currently makes decisions on clinical studies. Clin Trials  2005;2:276 -281; 
discussion  364-278. 
54 Spiegelhalter DJ, Myles JP, Jones DR, Abrams KR: Methods in health service research.  An 
introduction to bayesian methods  in health technology assessment. BMJ  1999;319:508 -512. 
55 Lilford  RJ, Thornton  JG, Braunholtz  D: Clinical  trials  and rare diseases:  A way out of a conundrum.  BMJ 
1995;311:1621 -1625.  
56 Mills EJ, Wu P, Lockhart I, Thorlund K, Puhan M, Ebbert JO: Comparisons of h igh-dose and 
combination nicotine replacement therapy, varenicline, and bupropion for smoking cessation: A systematic 
review and multiple treatment meta -analysis. Ann Med  2012;44:588 -597. 
57 Benowitz  NL: Pharmacology  of nicotine:  Addiction,  smoking -induced  disease,  and therapeutics.  Annu 
Rev Pharmacol Toxicol  2009;49:57 -71. 