COMIRB #  12-0184 Page  1
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015PROT OCOL #: 12-0184
COMIRB Protocol Protocol Version 3,  07/09/2015
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD 
CAMPUS BOX  F-490   TELEPHONE: 303-724-1055  Fax: 303-724-0990   
Project Title: Aspiration in  Acute Respiratory Failure Survivors
Principle Investigator:   Marc Moss  MD
I. Hypothesis  and Specific  Aims
We hypothesize that the  BSE  assessment  of swallowing  certain consistencies will provide the most  
accurate diagnosis  of aspiration.
A.  Specific  Aim #1:  To develop  a BSE-based non-invasive clinical prediction rule (CPR) that will 
accurately and efficiently diagnose aspiration in ARF survivors.
B.  Specific  Aim #2:  To identify abnormalities in laryngeal structure and swallowing physiology that are 
associated with aspiration  in ARF survivors.
.
Study Design: Prospective cohort study of patients with acute  respiratory failure who  require mechanical 
ventilation for  more than 48 hours. 
Inclusion Criteria:
1. Admission to an ICU.
2. Mechanical ventilation with an endotracheal tube  for greater than 48 hours. 
Exclusion Criteria:
1. Age < 18 years  
2. Contraindication to enteral nutrition administration.
3. Pre-existing or acute  primary central or peripheral  neuromuscular disorder 
4. Pre-existing history of dysphagia or aspiration.
5. Pre-existing head and neck cancer or surgery.
6. Presence of  a tracheostomy.
7. Coagulopathy resulting  in uncontrolled nasal  or pharyngeal bleeding.
8. Unable to participate due to altered mental status
9. Extubated for greater  than 72 hours. 
10. Inability to obtain  informed consent from patient or an appropriate surrogate.
11. Pregnancy
12.  Imprisoned  at the time of admission, anytime during the hospitalization,  or anytime  during the 
follow up period
First, a SLP will perform a comprehensive BSE  on each ARF survivor.  
Subsequently a second blinded  SLP/investigator will perform the FEES to determine  whether  aspiration is 
truly present. The  FEES  examination will  also identify abnormalities associated with aspiration.
For Aim #1: Primary Outcome Variable: Aspiration (PAS score of ≥6)  on the FEES with any of the five 
feedings. A  PAS score  of ≥ 6 includes  patients with  both  silent and non-silent aspiration.
Statistical analysis: Recursive partitioning or Classification and Regress Tree (CART) analysis creates a 
tree that  asks a  series  of yes/no questions, taking the user down  different branches depending on the 
answers. At  the end  of each branch will  be an estimated probability of outcome.  
For Aim #2: Primary outcome  variables: Presence of abnormalities in the four laryngeal  functions  and two  
swallowing physiology  measures.  
Statistical analysis:  For each outcome and independent variable, a univariate logistic  regression model  will 
be developed.  
Overall Sample  Size  Determination: In a simulated data analysis,  a sample size of 200 yielded an area  
under the curve (AUC) of .75 for the resultant tree algorithm. To be conservative,  we will enroll  a total of 225 
patients.
Significance:  For the 455,000 acute respiratory failure  (ARF) survivors  each year, aspiration is a 
devastating complication that can develop after the initiation of oral nutrition.1;2 Occurring in as  many 
as 44% of ARF survivors, aspiration is associated with  many deleterious consequences including 
pneumonia, percutaneous feeding tube placement, long term care facility  admission, and increased hospital  
COMIRB
APPROVED
05-Aug-2015
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page  2
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015
Figure 1:  R21 Proposal Overview:
 The outer  circle represents  our 
multidisciplinary infrastructure.mortality.3-6 The complications  of aspiration  must be weighed against the consequences of inappropriately 
delaying the resumption  of oral feeding. Delayed resumption of oral nutrition is  associated  with prolonged 
enteral tube feeding, increased caregiver burden, patient dissatisfaction,  and increased  health-related 
costs.7-10 Improving the ability  to easily and accurately diagnose aspiration in ARF survivors would  both 
reduce the frequency  and severity of aspiration  and limit the problems  associated with delaying oral 
nutrition. T his proposal will  develop  an effective non-invasive bedside diagnostic clinical prediction  rule 
(CPR) to detect  aspiration  in ARF survivors.
Speech language  pathologists (SLPs) determine when ARF survivors can resume oral feeding.11 
Based on our national survey, SLPs commonly  rely upon the bedside  swallow evaluation (BSE)  to provide 
feeding recommendations for ARF survivors.11 The BSE  consists  of a comprehensive history and physical 
examination followed by assessment of the patient’s ability to swallow foods  and liquids of different 
consistencies. SLPs do not routinely order or perform gold standard  tests such  as a videofluoroscopic  
swallow study  (VFSS) or flexible endoscopic swallow study  (FEES).11 This is  in part due to appropriate  
safety concerns about transporting critically  ill patients to radiology for a VFSS  and the lack of equipment or 
expertise to perform the  FEES.11  In patients with stroke  or head and neck cancer, diagnostic  CPRs have 
been developed that detect aspiration  based on specific components of the BSE. 12-22 Due to differences  in 
the reasons for aspiration, CPRs  for these  patients are  unlikely to be effective for ARF survivors. 12-14;16;20 As 
a result, there are no BSE-based diagnostic non-invasive  CPRs 
that SLPs can  use to  provide  feeding recommendations  for ARF 
survivors.  
Using recursive partitioning analysis  (RPA), we  will develop 
an effective  diagnostic CPR to accurately detect 
aspiration in ARF survivors. RPA has been previously 
used to create clinically  useful  CPRs including:  
identifying patients  with chest pain that  require 
hospitalization and selecting  trauma patients that  benefit 
from a cervical CT scan.23;24 Based on our  preliminary 
data, we hypothesize  that the BSE assessment of 
swallowing certain consistencies  will provide the  most  
accurate diagnosis  of aspiration.   We propose to 
conduct a multi-center study that will enroll  ARF 
survivors within 72 hours after extubation.  First, a SLP 
will perform a comprehensive BSE on each ARF survivor. Subsequently a second blinded SLP/investigator will perform the FEES to  determine  
whether aspiration is truly  present (Figure 1). 
In ARF survivors,  the mechanisms responsible  for 
aspiration are also relatively unexplored.25;26 Though 
many mechanisms may contribute  to aspiration in ARF 
survivors, abnormalities in  laryngeal  structure and swallowing physiology  likely play a prominent  role in the 
development of aspiration.25 Specific abnormalities that  may be responsible for aspiration include:  laryngeal  
sensory defects and  edema, vocal fold immobility and granuloma formation, delayed swallowing time,  and 
reduced pharyngeal  clearance.25;27-31  Building on our compelling data, the FEES examination  will identify 
abnormalities associated with aspiration, and pave  the way for  the development  for targeted therapies to 
prevent and treat aspiration.
Aim #1:  To develop a  BSE-based non-invasive clinical prediction rule (CPR) that will accurately and 
efficiently diagnose aspiration  in ARF survivors.
Aim #2: To identify abnormalities in  laryngeal  structure and  swallowing physiology that are associated  with 
aspiration in  ARF survivors.
Dr. Moss’ interest in dysphagia began with his  2000 New England Journal of Medicine article identifying the 
harmful effects of  using  blue dye to detect aspiration in  ARF patients.32 Our multidisciplinary team  
established a strong collaboration with Dr. Susan Langmore and her exemplary research group  at Boston 
University.26;33-49 Dr. Langmore developed the FEES  procedure and she is  one of the pioneers of dysphagia-
related research.50;51 These two productive research  teams  have contributed to the recent increased 
awareness of swallowing dysfunction  and aspiration in ARF survivors.25;26;33;52 Collectively, we have 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page  3
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015
generated substantial preliminary data demonstrating both the need  for better  diagnostic CPRs and for  
studies that identify the mechanisms  responsible for aspiration. Utilizing our established research 
infrastructures, we are ideally  positioned to conduct and complete the proposed multidisciplinary  research 
studies. 
TRIAL DESCRIPTION
Background: 
Dysphagia and subsequent aspiration  are common in survivors of acute  respiratory failure (ARF).  
Each year more than 700,000  patients  develop  ARF requiring mechanical ventilation.  The care of these 
patients costs an estimated $27 billion, or 12% of all hospital expenses.2 Based on a 65% rate of survival,  
455,000 ARF patients are extubated and leave the hospital.2 Unfortunately, many ARF survivors must cope  
with a  variety  of consequences of their critical  illness.53-58 One previously under-recognized consequence of 
ARF is dysphagia and subsequent aspiration.6;25;26 As summarized in our two recently published clinical 
reviews on dysphagia and aspiration  during  recovery from  critical illness, as many as  44% of ARF survivors 
(200,000 patients annually) have difficulty with  aspiration.25;26 Whether clinically significant or “silent” 
(without symptoms), aspiration is associated with  pneumonia, percutaneous feeding  tube placement,  an 
increased need for institutionalized care, and increased  hospital  mortality. 9;59-61
The bedside  swallowing  evaluation (BSE) is commonly used to diagnose aspiration in ARF 
survivors. Every  90 seconds, a  critical  care practitioner in the United States determines  when it is safe to 
restart oral nutrition for an ARF survivor.1;2  Most  critical care practitioners delegate this  decision to speech-
language pathologists  (SLPs).11 In more than 60% of ARF  survivors, SLPs perform a  bedside evaluation 
(BSE) as  their  sole assessment to detect aspiration  and determine feeding recommendations.11 The BSE 
consists of two components:  1) a history and physical examination, and 2) an assessment of the patient’s 
ability to swallow foods and  liquids of different consistencies. SLPs do not routinely order or perform gold 
standard tests such as  a videofluoroscopic swallow  study (VFSS)  or flexible  endoscopic swallow  study 
(FEES) to detect aspiration.11
The BSE may not accurately diagnose aspiration in  ARF survivors. By combining specific components 
of the  BSE, clinical prediction  rules (CPRs)  have been developed for  patients with head and neck  cancer  or 
cerebrovascular accidents.16-18;31;62-70 These disease-specific  CPRs may not accurately  detect aspiration in 
ARF survivors for the following reasons. 1) The proposed  mechanisms responsible  for aspiration in ARF 
survivors increase the likelihood of  silent aspiration  that would not be routinely detected  on a BSE.9;59-61 2) 
Decreased saliva production  after radiation  alters swallowing function and has been included in head and 
cancer specific CPRs.12-14;20;66;71 This  criterion  would most likely not contribute to aspiration  in ARF 
survivors. 3)  Some aspiration CPRs were developed  using only patients referred for  formal swallowing 
evaluations; creating both a  selection bias and limiting generalizability of the results.69;70;72 4) Due to their 
diminished respiratory reserve, the consequences  of aspiration are greater in ARF survivors.73 Therefore 
CPRs might need  to be more sensitive  for the detection of aspiration. 5) Certain CPRs were developed  
without comparison to  a gold standard test of aspiration such as a VFSS or FEES.69;70;72 6) The 3 ounce 
water swallow  test (3-WST)  is a sensitive  initial  screening  test in hospitalized patients. However,  it is unclear 
whether the 3-WST applies to ARF survivors, or what BSE components could be combined with the 3-WST 
to confirm aspiration.74-76 
Because the mechanisms responsible for aspiration are essentially unknown, there are no medical 
therapies to treat or prevent aspiration in  ARF  survivors .26 Currently SLPs treat patients  with 
suspected aspiration by restricting oral nutrition,  adjusting the consistency of their food or liquids, or 
teaching patients different  swallowing maneuvers.77-90 All of these interventions limit  the chance of 
aspiration but  do not  treat the underlying  cause of  the swallowing dysfunction.77-90 There  are several 
abnormalities in ARF survivors that  may  be responsible for dysphagia and subsequent aspiration (Figure  
2). These  abnormalities  may  be caused by the prior 
endotracheal tube,  deconditioning,  critical  illness 
polyneuromyopathy, reduced pharyngeal clearance, and/or limited respiratory reserve.27-31;52;91-96 We 
identified specific abnormalities in laryngeal function and swallowing physiology that are associated with aspiration in  ARF survivors (see preliminary data).52 
Additional studies are  needed to  delineate  the 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page  4
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015
mechanisms responsible  for aspiration in these patients.
PRELIMINAR Y DATA:  1.Longer duration of mechanical ventilation is associated with dysphagia.5 We 
conducted a cohort study of  446 ARF patients admitted to the Medical  ICU who required  mechanical 
ventilation and received  a BSE.  Patients with prior  neuromuscular disorders were excluded.   Dysphagia 
was present in 84% of  patients (mild  in 52% and moderate/severe in 48%). After  adjustment, longer duration 
of mechanical ventilation was independently associated with moderate/severe dysphagia (AOR 2.84  [1.78-
4.56], p <0.01).  These results suggest that dysphagia  is common in ARF survivors.
2. In ARF survivors, dysphagia  can persist until hospital discharge and is associated with prolonged  
hospitalization and delayed oral nutrition.  5 Moderate/severe dysphagia was independently associated 
with the composite outcome of pneumonia, re-intubation, or in-hospital death  (AOR 3.31  [1.78-4.56], 
p<0.01) (Figure 3). In ARF survivors, dysphagia was  still present in 55%  of patients  at hospital discharge. 
Hospital duration was  longer in ARF survivors  with dysphagia compared  to those without dysphagia (8 [5-
15] days  vs 5 [3-8] days after the initial BSE was performed, p<0.01). Patients with moderate/severe 
dysphagia were more  likely to be kept NPO after  the initial BSE (74% vs 15%, p<0.01) and receive a 
surgical feeding tube  during  hospitalization 
(15% vs 5%,  p<0.01).   
3. Our nationwide  survey of SLPs 
identified current  practices  to detect 
aspiration in ARF survivors. 11  We 
designed, validated, and distributed a survey to 1,966 SLPs working in an inpatient setting. 
Each survey included  questions concerning  
SLP staffing  and availability,  and methods 
used in the diagnosis  and treatment of 
dysphagia and aspiration.  A total of 836 SLPs completed their  survey  (43%),  801 of 
whom were actively practicing.  This survey represents the largest published study to date of SLP  practices  for ARF  survivors.  
4. There is currently  no uniformly used diagnostic  CPR to detect aspiration in ARF survivors.11  Only  
29% of hospitals have  formal guidelines for when critical  care providers should consult SLPs  in the 
evaluation of ARF survivors.  Most SLPs performed the  BSE on average 24 hours  after extubation. 
Importantly, the majority of SLPs (60%) only use the BSE to  identify aspiration in 
ARF survivors.  Gold standard tests (VFSS 
and FES)  are not commonly used,  and 
there is significant geographic variability  in 
their use (Figure 4). VFSS and FEES are 
also more available and  more utilized at 
university hospitals  when compared to 
community hospitals (p < 0.01).
5. We already have enrolled 26 ARF survivors in Aim #1 without any adverse events . A total of  50% of ARF 
survivors had  evidence  of aspiration on 
FEES evaluation. The diagnostic accuracy of each individual assessment of Figure 3
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page  5
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015
swallowing foods and liquids of different consistencies appears to be poor for  detecting true aspiration (see 
Table 1).   These data demonstrate feasibility to complete the studies in Aim  #1. By combining specific 
components of the BSE, we anticipate that  we will be able to develop a more  accurate diagnostic CPR for  
aspiration. 
6. In ARF survivors, abnormalities  of laryngeal  function and  swallowing physiology  are associated 
with aspiration (Aim #2 data). At Boston University Medical Center,  59 ARF survivors who required 
mechanical ventilation for at  least 48 hours underwent 
FEES examination including laryngeal structure and swallowing physiology  assessment. Upper  airway 
abnormalities were  common including: laryngeal  edema, 
vocal cord  immobility, and vocal  cord  granuloma 
formation. Vocal cord granulomas  were  associated with 
severe dysphagia or aspiration  (p = 0.04). This work has  
been submitted for publication and demonstrates the feasibility to complete the studies in  Aim #2.
OBJECTIVES
To develop  a BSE-based non-invasive clinical prediction  rule (CPR) that will accurately and efficiently 
diagnose aspiration in  ARF survivors.
To identify abnormalities in laryngeal structure and swallowing physiology that are associated  with aspiration  
in ARF survivors.
Primary Hypothesis: We hypothesize that the BSE assessment of swallowing certain  consistencies will 
provide the most accurate  diagnosis of aspiration.
1.  Screening  and recruitment:  
Patients meeting enrollment  criteria will be approached  for informed consent  no later than  72 hours after  
extubation. Surrogate  consent may be used if patients are unable to provide their own informed consent due 
to lack  of decisional  capacity.
Inclusion Criteria: Subjects  will be eligible to  participate in the study if they meet  all of the following  
criteria:
1. Admission  to a University  of Colorado Hospital  ICU
2. Mechanical ventilation support through an endotracheal tube for greater than 48 hours
Exclusion Criteria: 
1. Age < 18 years  
2. Contraindication to enteral nutrition administration.
3. Pre-existing or acute  primary central or peripheral  neuromuscular disorder 
4. Pre-existing history of dysphagia or aspiration.
5. Pre-existing head and neck cancer or surgery.
6. Presence of  a tracheostomy.
7. Coagulopathy resulting  in uncontrolled nasal  or pharyngeal bleeding.
8. Unable to participate due to altered mental status
9. Extubated for greater  than 72 hours. 
10. Inability to obtain  informed consent from patient or an appropriate surrogate.
11. Pregnancy
12.  Imprisoned  at the time of admission, anytime during the hospitalization,  or anytime  during the 
follow up period
If patients  meet  an exclusion  criterion,  they can be re-evaluated  to determine if the exclusion criteria no 
longer exists; up to 72 hours after  extubation. The presence  of delirium is  the one exclusion criterion that is 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page  6
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015most likely to change over time and require repeated assessments.
There is no  minimal amount of time that  is required after extubation  to be enrolled into the study (as long as 
the patient  meets the inclusion criteria and does not currently meet  any of the exclusion  criteria. 
After enrollment, the research  coordinator should complete the demographic information on the Case 
Report Forms. No fields on the Case Report Forms should be left blank. The research  coordinator should 
also contact and  the SLP who will  perform  the BSE,  and the second SLP who will perform the FEES. The 
research coordinator should arrange a specific time that  the BSE and FEES will be performed. 
Screening and recruitment techniques:
Every new  ICU admission receiving mechanical  ventilation will be screened,  wherein  an established 
treatment relationship exists. This will  include but not be limited to admissions from the ED, wards,  and 
operating room. We will also assess patients transferred from  outside hospitals. The enrollment window for  
these patients will include the time during admission  at the outside hospital  and during transfer. 
The research coordinators or site PI will  meet with  the new incoming groups of ICU residents as part of their  
unit orientation. During this time, the residents will be alerted to each of the study inclusion  and exclusion  
criteria.  We would also recommend developing  printed laminated cards with important study related  and 
contact for  the housestaff and other key members of the ICU teams.  Each day, the research coordinator will 
identify each  patient who is endotracheally  intubated and receiving mechanical ventilation  for at least 48 
hours. Patients  will then be followed until they are extubated.
At the  time of extubation, the  patient by definition  meets inclusion criteria for  the study. At this point the 
patient should  be entered into  the screening log in one of several ways
1. If they  meet a  permanent exclusion criteria, they should be entered  as be excluded  from the study
2. If they  meet a  potentially transient exclusion (like  altered mental  status), they should be followed for  up to 
72 hours after  exclusion  to determine if the exclusion criteria resolves.  If it resolves they should  approached  
for enrollment
3. If the patient meets no exclusion criteria,  they should be  approached about study participation.
4. If they  agree to  participate and sign the consent form then they are enrolled into the study.
5. If they  decline to  participate, then they should be entered  as an excluded patient.
Informed consent:
Obtaining informed consent  is a process that  is reviewed by the appropriate members of our  research team  
on a monthly  basis. All of the personnel involved in screening and patient identification  have successfully  
completed the on-line  course  on the Responsible Conduct of Research. Informed  consent will be obtained 
from each  patient or legally  authorized  representative (LAR) prior to enrollment  in the trial. No study 
procedures will be done prior  to obtaining informed consent. Permission to approach  patients and/or LARs 
will be  requested from the attending physicians.
In general our methods for  obtaining informed consent include  the following:  1. identification and contact of 
appropriate parties to perform informed  consent,  2. arrangement of a  mutually acceptable  meeting  time with 
this party in a private conference room or in the patient’s room,  and 3. a lengthy discussion between the 
study investigator and the interested party.  The discussion includes an update of the patient’s overall  
condition justifying the rationale  for inclusion of the patient  into the specific trial.  The consent form is 
reviewed in detail including the  background  information and rationale  regarding the specific intervention of 
the study, potential risks and options.   Patients or their representatives are informed of their rights as a 
research subject  and are informed  of their  ability  to discontinue study participation at any time throughout 
the trial.  Subjects  or their  representatives are given the  opportunity to ask any questions regarding the 
verbally described consent form.  Following  this discussion, opportunity is  given to privately read  the 
consent form.   If the patient or representative is illiterate,  the consent form is read to them.   After sufficient 
time, an additional  question and answer session  is performed if needed. 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page  7
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015A few key points  to the informed consent  process.
1. Sit down when you are taking to the patient and/or  surrogate.
2. Explain who you are  and that you normally  work  with patients in the intensive  care unit.
3. Explain that you are  here  to help  determine if the patient is  swallowing normally. 
4. Explain that difficulty swallowing is common after being on a  breathing machine
5. State  that the  standard tests to determine whether  someone  can swallow properly  after being  on a 
breathing machine are  to have a nurse or speech therapist to observe  a person  swallow liquids  and foods of 
different consistencies.  However, these tests are not perfect. Sometimes it appears that the patient  can eat 
normally, and they are actually swallowing things down  the wrong tube (into  their lungs), Other times,  it 
appears that the patient is not swallowing properly when  they  actually are swallowing properly.
6. In addition to  this normal swallowing exam,  there  is an  additional simple test we can do that is above and 
beyond the normal swallowing exam. This additional technique will definitively identify if someone is  
swallowing normally, and  allow us to identify the correct  strategy for  eating. Sometimes  we do this  test as 
part of the normal patient swallowing evaluation. 
7. The test  is simple and  down  right here in the patient’s room. It takes 5-10 minutes and the patient  can 
watch the test if they want. We will put a  very small  tube  (like a very thin straw) down the back  of the throat  
so we  can see  your  vocal cords. We will  then have you swallow liquids and foods  of different consistencies 
and see if the material is actually going down the  wrong tube. 
8. Share these results  with your doctors so they have the additional information  and can use the information  
to potentially take better  care of you in  regard  to your feeding  and swallowing. 
If the patient  agrees to  the study, then the coordinator should contact the SLP who will perform the BSE, 
and the second SLP who will perform the FEES. 
STUDY PROCEDURES:
1. Baseline assessments: 
This information will be collected by the study coordinator  at the time of enrollment.  
Patient Age
Patient Gender
Patient Race
Patient Height
Patient Weight
Primary Service
Hospital Admission Date
ICU Admission Date
Intubation Date  and Time
Size of the Endotracheal Tube
Extubation Date and  Time 
Previous reintubation (y/n)
APACHE II score
Charlson Comorbidity  Index
Next, a SLP will perform  a comprehensive BSE  on each  ARF survivor, and a second blinded SLP will 
perform the FEES to  determine whether aspiration is truly present. The order of the BSE and FEES exams 
will be  randomized. The  reason  for the random  order of the tests  is that after  several swallows,  a patient  
who has not eaten orally in several days or weeks will  start to do better  as the system  “wakes up”.  If  the 
BSE always precedes  the FEES, it might lead  to a false result – it would show more  aspiration on the BSE  
than the FEES.   But it won’t  be because the BSE  was showing a  false positive; in fact it is just that the 
patient started  to improve by the time he got the second exam.
2. Bedside Evaluation:
The BSE protocol should be  performed within  24 hours from the time that the informed  consent was signed. 
The BSE protocol will be performed in the same order  and the amount of each bolus delivered in the exact 
manner for  all patients. Unless there a  medical  restrictions (due to femoral lines, sacral wounds, etc), all 
BSEs should be performed in a sitting position. The  SLP will document  the patient position that the BSE was 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page  8
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015performed.
Part 1: Initial Assessment:  The SLP will  review the subject’s medical record and become knowledgeable 
with the patient’s medical history. The patient should  be seated with the head of the bed as elevated  as 
possible.  A physical exam of the aerodigestive  system will be performed including respiratory rate; saliva  
formation; lip  seal;  tongue movement, strength, and  coordination; palate movement, gag reflex; cough 
reflex; and voice quality/dysphonia. In addition, the SLP will also determine cough strength in L/min  using a 
peak flow  meter (HealthScan, Cedar Grove, NJ).
Part 2: Standardized consistency testing:  The SLP will  then  administer five  standard  consistencies.106 
Some consistencies will be tested twice with  different  amounts. In general, the bolus  should be administered 
with a  medicine cup. A straw  should only be used for the 3 ounce  water test and the 2  ounce patient  
controlled trials.
Boluses will be administered from lowest to highest aspiration risk: 1) ½ tsp, then  1  tsp ice chips ,  2) 1 tsp 
of nectar thick liquids,  then  3 tsp of  nectar thick liquids, 3)  a 2 ounce patient  controlled administration  of 
nectar thick liquids, 4) 1  tsp of pureed solids (applesauce), then 10 mls  of pureed solids (applesauce), 5) 5 
mls of thin liquids (water  or milk),15 mls of  thin liquids  (water or milk), and a  2 ounce patient  controlled 
administration of thin  liquids  and 6) ¼ of a graham  cracker.107 The patient  will be instructed to chew the 
graham cracker  before swallowing. In  order to limit the complexity and duration of our consistency testing, 
honey-thick liquids will be excluded from the  protocol. 
The SLP will wait for 10 seconds following the completion of each individual trial before recording the results 
for that consistency.  The following adverse  outcomes (coughing/choking, change  in breath sounds, and 
change in voice quality,  throat clearing, or change in pulse oximetry recording by  > 10%) will be recorded 
after each trial. 
If the clinician feels it is unsafe to  continue with  the next bolus consistency, the protocol  can be stopped at 
any time.
Coughing/coughing:  Dichotomized  as a single cough  or choking sound within 10 seconds after  diet 
administration (yes/no).
Change in breath sounds:  Breath  sounds  will be assessed before and 10 seconds after the examination by  
either auscultating over  the larynx at  the thyro-cricoid  space during  quiet breathing  or listening  to the 
patient’s breathing without a  stethoscope.  The SLP will record whether  they used a stethoscope or not to 
listen for change in  breath  sounds. Patients  will be classified as  “gurgling” or “non-gurgling.”  Gurgling is a 
low/medium-pitched rattling sound on inhalation or  exhalation.108   
Change in vocal quality:   Baseline  vocal quality will be assessed  initially and dichotomized as  
normal/abnormal.  Any transition from normal  to abnormal vocal quality  during feeding will be recorded.
Part 3: Three Ounce Water Swallow Test (3-WST):  During the  standardized 3-WST, patients receive three 
ounces of water and are instructed to drink the entire amount, via cup or straw,  completely and without 
interruption (the cup can  be held to the patient’s mouth by the SLP).74;76;109  The 3-WST will be scored as  
pass/fail.  Criteria for failure of the 3-WST are: the inability to drink the entire  amount, coughing or choking 
up to  1 minute after completion, or the presence of a wet-hoarse vocal quality. 
At this point the SLP will document their diet recommendations, and whether further invasive testing (MBSS 
or FEES) is indicated.  
Subsequently, the SLP can perform additional testing including specific maneuvers. The results of these  
additional tests will be recorded in  the CRF. The SLP will then document their diet recommendations that 
include the knowledge gained from the additional testing. Again the SLP will document  whether  further 
invasive testing  (MBSS or FEES) is indicated. 
Based on these recommendations, the patient will be allowed to advance  their diet prior to the performance 
of the  FEES, if indicated.
The coordinator should  make sure that  the BSE  CRF is completely filled  out before the SLP who completed 
the test leaves the ICU. 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page  9
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015
The BSE form for consistency testing in attached as Appendix.
3. FEES examination: The SLP will review the subject’s  medical record and become  knowledgeable with 
the patient’s medical  history. The FEES examination will be performed by a second SLP who is blinded to 
the results of the BSE. The  FEES should be performed within approximately  4 hours  of the BSE.
Similar to the BSE, the patient should be seated with  the head  of the bed as  elevated as possible. At the  
discretion of the SLP/investigator, Afrin  and Lidocaine spray can be administered into the nasal  passage 
before the laryngoscope is inserted. The use of these medications will be noted  in the case report form. 
Part 1: First the SLP will perform and  videotape  the examination of the upper airway.
Velar closure, base of  the tongue  retraction,  laryngeal elevation, right  and left vocal cord/arytenoid mobility, 
right and left pharyngeal wall  medialization, epiglottic retroflexion, granuloma formation, and upper airway 
edema will be  assessed. 
Laryngeal sensation will  be assessed by observing the laryngeal adductor  reflex  (LAR) or a patient 
response to a light touch/poke to the aeryepiglottic folds bilaterally  with the tip of the laryngoscope, and 
scored dichotomously.
Part 2: Standardized consistency testing:  The SLP will  then  administer five  standard  consistencies in two  
trials of  each consistency with different amounts.106 
Boluses will be administered from lowest to highest aspiration risk: 1) ½  tsp, then  1 tsp ice chips , 2) 1 tsp of  
nectar thick liquids,  then 3  tsp of nectar thick  liquids,  3) a 2 
ounce patient controlled administration  of nectar thick 
liquids, 4) 1 tsp of  pureed solids (applesauce), then 10 mls 
of pureed solids (applesauce), 5)  5 mls of thin liquids  (water 
or milk),15  mls of  thin liquids (water or milk), and a 2 ounce  
patient controlled  administration of thin liquids and 6) ¼ of a  
graham cracker.107  The patient will  be instructed  to chew  
the graham cracker  before swallowing. In  order  to limit the  
complexity and duration of our consistency testing, honey-thick liquids  will be excluded  from the protocol.  
After the swallow, the laryngoscope will be advanced to closely view the patient’s airway. The SLP will wait 
for 10 seconds following the completion of each individual trial before recording the results for that 
consistency. If  necessary, patients will be allowed  to drink water between  consistency tests  to clear any 
remaining residue from their upper airway
 
The entire  FEES will be video recorded. The SLP will score  each of the trials  using the PAS  score (Table 3).   
In addition for each of  the trials of the consistencies, the SLP will record the following two physiological 
measures: 
1) Swallowing onset time:  The time from first bolus visualization until swallow  onset.  
2) Incomplete bolus clearance: leaving residue in  the pharynx or laryngeal vestibule after  a swallow.
Using the video recordings, the quantification of the swallowing onset time and incomplete  bolus clearance 
will be  determined by a  single observer.
Part 3: Three  Ounce Water  Swallow Test (3-WST): During the standardized  3-WST, patients  receive 
three ounces  of water and are instructed to drink the entire amount,  via cup or straw, completely and without  
interruption (the cup can  be held to the patient’s mouth by the SLP).74;76;109  The 3-WST will be scored 
based on the PAS scoring system. 
The results  of the different components of  the FEES assessment will be made available to the treating team  
if requested. 
The coordinator should  make sure that  the FEES  CRF  is completely filled  out before the SLP who 
completed the test leaves  the ICU. See Appendix  for FEES evaluation form.
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 10
Protocol version 3,  07/09/20154. Outcome Assessments
All patients  will be followed for the subsequent outcome assessments.
Date of  ICU discharge
ICU length  of stay
Date of  hospital discharge
Hospital length of  stay
Discharge location
Reintubation since enrollment
If yes, date of reintubation
Died during ICU stay
Died during hospital stay
Surgical feeding tube  placed?
 
5. Statistical analysis for Aim #1: Recursive  partitioning or Classification  and Regress  Tree (CART)  
analysis creates a  tree that asks a  series of yes/no questions, taking the user  down different branches 
depending on the answers. At the end of each branch will be an estimated probability of outcome.  
Statistically, recursive portioning is a non-parametric  approach to regression, in this  case logistic  regression.  
We will predict a class  Y (aspiration vs. non-aspiration)  based on the  predictor variables, X1….Xn which can 
be either categorical or continuous.  The main characteristic of this method is  that predictor variables are 
“split” and partitions  are created so that  observations  with the same response variable  are grouped  together.  
After the first split,  further splits of variables will occur based on the  groups which are made from the prior 
split separately.   The goal is to group observations  with the same response class  minimizing  
misclassification.  Some  of the benefits of  using  recursive partitioning  are that the splits are  data driven, 
predictor variables  can be  used multiple  times, and interactions  will be included without having to decide  
which interactions are  important.  An algorithm  (or tree)  is obtained  that splits the predictor variables until 
each person has been  classified as  with aspiration  or non-aspiration in a terminal node.  Pruning  of the tree 
will take place by determining  a value of the change in misclassification  rate which is deemed too  small to 
include the next branches on the trees. By  splitting  the data up into ten sets and choosing  one set each 
time, ten-fold  cross-validation  will estimate the misclassification rate for the tree. The chosen set will be sent 
through a tree developed from  randomly choosing nine  of the sets.  The misclassification for this set will be 
calculated, and  performed 10 times until each set has been  sent through a  tree.  An average rate of 
misclassification is developed  to determine how well  the tree  based on all the data will perform on new data.
Sample Size Calculation  and Feasibility: Based on our 18 month data  from the two medical centers,  there 
were a total of 1087 patients who remained on mechanical ventilation  for at least 48 hours and lived to be 
discharged to home or self-care. For recursive partitioning,  there are  no specific sample  size calculations. 
However, in a simulated data analysis, a sample size  of 200 yielded  an area under the curve (AUC)  of .75 
for the  resultant tree  algorithm. To be conservative, we will enroll  a total of 225 patients.  Based on our 
estimated number  of ARF survivors, we will need to  obtain consent from only 20.6%  of them to achieve  our 
enrollment goal. This is a  very conservative estimate for obtaining informed consent  for research on 
swallowing function.
Additional Considerations: Our primary  analysis will  develop a CPR for  the combined outcome of silent 
and non-silent aspiration. We  will also develop a CPR  for silent aspiration  alone defined  as a PAS score =8, 
and a CPR for non-silent aspiration alone defined as a PAS score of 6-7. For each of the five different 
consistencies, the accuracy of the BSE  assessment  for aspiration will also be compared to the presence of 
aspiration of the FEES examination (PAS ≥6).  Sensitivity,  specificity,  positive and negative predicted values  
will be  determined with  95% confidence intervals  for each point estimate. Based on a  sample size of 225 
patients, the  width  of each 95% confidence interval  point estimate will be 2-4%. 
Statistical analysis  for Aim #2: For each outcome  and independent variable, a  univariate  logistic 
regression model will  be developed.  If  the Wald test for an individual variable in the logistic regression 
model is significant  at the p  <0.10 level, the variable will be included  in a multivariable logistic regression 
model.  ROC curves  will be constructed to determine how well the regression models correctly predict  
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 11
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015whether the subject had the outcome of interest.  Using baseline demographical  information, testing for  
confounding will also be assessed to better understand the relationships  between independent  variables 
and outcomes. Based on the enrollment described  in Aim #1, we have powered  the univariate comparison 
between our  primary independent  and dependent variables for these studies. A  logistic  regression with a 
sample size between  178 and 271 observations  achieves 80%  power at a 0.05 significance level  to detect 
an odds ratio  between 2.5 and 3.0.  
Risks and Justifications  of Procedures and Data Collection Tools: Risks of the FEES procedure  
include patient discomfort, gagging, vomiting, aspiration, mucosal injury , epistaxis, and an adverse 
reactions to topical anesthetics.12, 15-17   One study of 500 consecutive FEES assessments reported the 
occurrence of minor epistaxis  with spontaneous cessation of bleeding in 0.6% of cases.15  Another  survey 
of SLPs  performing a total of 6000  FEES  examinations  reported 20 cases  of epistaxis (0.3%).18
Vasovagal  syncope and  laryngospasm, while theoretical concerns, have been shown to occur 
exceedingly infrequently (a total of two and four cases, respectively , ever reported out of all FEES  
procedures ever  done).18   None of these reported cases resulted in serious  consequences.18   The 3-
WST has been shown  to be a safe test in large  groups of hospitalized patients.11, 19   Our informed consent  
process will involve a  complete discussion  of each of these  risks, citing reported frequencies of adverse 
events. Due to the risk of breach of confidentialit y, we have  assured that all data will be collected and 
stored in a safe manne r. All data at  each site, will be stored on a password protected research-specific 
server , and will not be transferred to any other computer or flash drive. Hard copies of consent forms and 
other forms will be kept in a locked drawer in a locked  office  at each enrolling site.  Citrix  ShareFile, a  
cloud-based, encrypted HIPAA compliant and University of Colorado  IT approved application will be used 
to share de-identified FEES video recordings between the two enrolling sites.  ShareFile will be accessible 
only to approved research staff and used for the fidelity and scoring of FEES procedures by investigators.   
Potential Scientific Problems: This study will not determine the accuracy of these  diagnostic  tests for 
patients who require mechanical ventilation for fewer than 24 hours or with pre-existing or acute  central  
neuromuscular disorders.  This will af fect the applicability of our results to these  patient  populations. We 
will also  not determine  the accuracy  of the BSE and 3-WST against a VFSS, considered  to also be a  gold 
standard test to diagnose  dysphagia.10   
HUMAN SUBJECTS
Each study participant or a  legally authorized representative (LAR)  must sign and date an informed consent  
form. Institutional review  board approval will be required before any subject is entered  into the  study. PETAL 
will use  a central IRB.
SELECTION OF SUBJECTS
Federal regulations  at 45 CFR 46(a)(3) require  the equitable  selection of subjects.  The ICUs  will be 
screened to determine if any patient meets inclusion and exclusion criteria. Data that have been collected  as 
part of the routine management of the subject will be reviewed  to determine eligibility.  No protocol-specific 
tests or  procedures will be performed as part of the screening process. If any subjects meet criteria  for study 
enrollment, then the attending physician will  be asked  for permission to approach the patient or his/her LAR 
for informed  consent. Study exclusion  criteria  neither unjustly exclude classes of individuals from 
participation in the research nor unjustly  include  classes of  individuals from participation in the research. 
Hence, the  recruitment of  subjects conforms to the principle  of distributive  justice. 
JUSTIFICATION OF INCLUDING VULNERABLE SUBJECTS 
The present research aims  to investigate the ability of  a bedside evaluation to detect aspiration in acute 
respiratory failure survivors.   Due to the nature of acute  respiratory failure and its risk factors (eg, sepsis,  
trauma), some patients  will have impaired  decision-making  capabilities. This study cannot  be conducted if 
limited to enrolling only those subjects with retained decision-making  capacity. Hence, subjects recruited for  
this trial  are not being unfairly burdened with involvement  in this  research simply  because  they are  easily 
available.
INFORMED CONSENT
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 12
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Federal regulations  45 CFR 46.111(a)(5) require  that informed consent  will be sought from each prospective 
subject or  the subject’s legally  authorized representative (LAR). As we will enroll  patients recovering from 
acute respiratory failure we  anticipate some consents will be from the subject’s LAR, and thus the remainder  
of this section  will focus on LARs. The investigator is responsible for ensuring that the LAR understands the 
risks and benefits of participating in the  study, and answering any questions the LAR may have throughout 
the study and sharing any  new  information in  a timely manner that may be relevant to the LAR’s willingness 
to continue the  subject’s participation in  the trial. The consenter will make every effort to minimize coercion.  
All study participants or their  LARs will  be informed of the objectives of the study and the potential  risks.  The 
informed consent  document will be used to explain  the risks and benefits  of study participation  to the LAR in 
simple terms before the patient is entered into the study,  and to document that the LAR  is satisfied with his 
or her  understanding  of the risks and benefits of participating in the study and desires  to participate in the 
study.  The  investigator is responsible  for ensuring  that informed consent  is given by each  LAR. This 
includes obtaining the appropriate signatures and dates on  the informed  consent document  prior to the 
performance of any protocol procedures and  prior  to the administration of study agent.
CONTINUING CONSENT
For subjects for whom consent was initially obtained from a LAR, but who subsequently regains decision-
making capacity  while in hospital,  all sites  will obtain formal consent for  continuing participation, inclusive of 
continuance of  data acquisition. The initial consent form signed by the LAR  should reflect that such consent 
will be  obtained.
WITHDRAWAL OF CONSENT
Patients may withdraw or be withdrawn (by the LAR)  from the trial  at any time without prejudice.  Data 
recorded up to the point of  withdrawal will be included in the trial analysis, unless  consent to use their  data 
has also been  withdrawn.  If a patient or LAR requests termination of the trial during the study period, the 
study will be  stopped  but the patient will  continue to be followed up as  part of the trial. If a patient or LAR 
withdraws consent  during trial treatment,  the trial will be stopped but permission will be sought  to access 
medical records for data related to  the study. If a patient or LAR wishes to withdraw  from the trial after 
completion of trial  treatment, permission to access medical records f or study data will be sought.  
Identification of Legally  Authorized Representatives
Many of the patients approached  for participation  in this research protocol  will invariably have limitations of 
decision-making abilities  due to their critical  illness. Hence, most  patients will not be able to provide 
informed consent.  Accordingly, informed  consent will be sought from the potential subject’s  legally 
authorized representative (LAR).  
Regarding proxy consent, the existing federal research  regulations (‘the Common Rule’) states  at 45 CFR 
46.116 that “no investigator may  involve  a human being as a  subject in research…unless  the investigator 
has obtained  the legally  effective  informed consent of the subject or the subject’s legally  authorized 
representative”; and  defines at 45 CFR 46 102 (c) a legally  authorized representative  (LAR) as  “an 
individual or judicial or  other body authorized  under applicable law  to consent on behalf of a  prospective 
subject to the  subject’s participation in  the procedures(s)  involved in the research.”  OHRP defined examples 
of “applicable law” as being state statutes,  regulations, case law, or formal  opinion of a State Attorney 
General that addresses the issue of surrogate consent to medical procedures. Such “applicable law” could 
then be considered as empowering  the LAR to  provide  consent for  subject participation  in the research. 
Interpretation of “applicable law” may be state specific and will be addressed by the  IRB.
According to a previous President’s Bioethics Committee (National Bioethics  Advisory Committee),  an 
investigator should accept as an LAR…a relative or friend of the potential  subject who is recognized as an 
LAR for purposes of clinical decision making  under the law of the state where the research takes place 
(National Bioethics Advisory Committee (NBAC), 1998). Finally, OHRP has stated  in their determination 
letters that  a surrogate  could serve as a LAR for research  decision making if such an individual is authorized 
under applicable state law to  provide consent for the “procedures” involved in the research  study (Office  of 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 13
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Human Research Protections (OHRP), 2002).     
JUSTIFICATION OF SURROGATE CONSENT
According to the Belmont Report, respect for persons incorporates at least two ethical convictions; first, that 
individuals should be treated as autonomous agents,  and second, that person with diminished autonomy are 
entitled to protection. One method that  serves to protect subjects is restrictions on the participation of 
subjects in  research  that presents greater than minimal risks.  Commentators and Research  Ethics 
Commissions have held the view that it is permissible to  include incapable subjects in greater than  minimal 
risk research as  long  as there  is the potential for beneficial effects  and that the research presents a balance 
of risks and  expected  direct benefits similar to  that available in the clinical  setting  (Dresser, 1999) . Several  
U.S. task forces  have  deemed  it is permissible to  include incapable subjects in research. For example, the  
American College of Physicians’ document allows surrogates to consent  to research  involving incapable 
subjects only  “if the net additional risks of participation  are not substantially greater than the risks of 
standard treatment.” (American College of  Physicians,  1989) . Finally, the National Bioethics Advisory 
Committee (NBAC) stated that an IRB may approve a protocol that presents greater than minimal risk but 
offers the prospect of  direct medical benefits  to the subject, provided that…the potential subject’s LAR gives 
permission…” (National Bioethics Advisory Committee (NBAC), 1998)
Consistent with the above ethical sensibilities regarding the participation of decisionally incapable  subjects 
in research and the previous assessment of risks and benefits in the previous section, the present study 
presents a balance of risks  and potential direct benefits that is similar to that available in the clinical setting.    
ADDITIONAL SAFEGUARDS FOR VULNERABLE SUBJECTS  
The present research will involve subjects who might be vulnerable to coercion  or undue influence.  As 
required in 45CFR46.111(b), we recommend  that additional safeguards be included to protect the rights  and 
welfare of these subjects. Such safeguards might include, but are not limited  to: a) assessment of the 
potential subject’s capacity to provide informed  consent, b) the availability  of the LAR to monitor the 
subject’s subsequent participation and withdrawal  from the study;  c) augmented consent  processes. The 
specific nature  of the additional safeguards will  be left to the  discretion of the central  IRB, in conjunction with 
the sites.  
CONFIDENTIALITY
Federal regulations  at 45 CFR 46 111 (a) (7) requires that when appropriate, there  are adequate provisions  
to protect the privacy of  subjects  and to maintain the confidentiality of data. To  maintain confidentiality,  all 
laboratory specimens, evaluation forms, and  reports  will be identified  only by  a coded number.  The  coded 
number will be generated by a computer,  and only the study team will have access to the codes.  All records 
will be  kept in a locked, password protected computer.  All computer entry and networking programs will be 
done with coded numbers only.  All  paper case report forms  will be maintained inside  a locked office.  Study  
information will  not be released without the written permission of the patient, except as necessary for 
monitoring by the National Heart, Lung,  and Blood  Institute, and the PETAL Clinical  Coordinating Center.
ADVERSE EVENTS
SAFETY MONITORING
Assuring patient safety is an essential component of this protocol. Each participating investigator 
has primary responsibility for the safety  of the individual participants under  his or her care. The 
Investigators will determine  daily if any adverse  events  occur during the period from enrollment 
through study day 2 or  ICU discharge,  whichever occurs first.  
The following adverse events will be collected in the adverse event  case report forms:
Serious adverse  events
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 14
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Nonserious adverse events that are considered  by the investigator to be related  to study 
procedures or  of uncertain relationship 
A clinical study adverse event is any untoward medical event associated with the study procedure  in 
humans, whether or not it is considered related to a study procedure.   
Adverse events related to  protocol procedures  must be evaluated by  the investigator. If the adverse event is 
judged to be reportable, as outlined above,  then  the investigator will report to the medical monitor their 
assessment of the potential relatedness of each adverse event to protocol procedure. Investigators will 
assess if there is a reasonable  possibility  that the study procedure caused  the event,  based on standard 
criteria. Investigators  will also consider if the event is unanticipated or unexplained given the patient’s 
clinical course,  previous medical conditions, and concomitant medications.  
If a patient's  participation in  the study is discontinued  as a  result of an adverse  event, study site personnel  
must report the circumstances  and data leading  to discontinuation of treatment in the adverse event  case 
report forms.  
SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS
Serious adverse  event collection begins after the patient or surrogate has signed  informed consent and has 
undergone study procedures.  If a patient experiences a serious adverse event  after  consent,  but prior to the 
start of the  study, the event will NOT be collected unless the investigator feels  the event  may have been 
caused by a protocol procedure. 
Study site personnel must alert the medical  monitor of  any serious and study procedure related adverse  
event within 24 hours of investigator awareness of the event.  Alerts  issued  via telephone are to be 
immediately followed with  official  notification on the adverse event  case report form. 
As per  the FDA and NIH definitions, a serious  adverse event  is any adverse event  that results  in one of the 
following outcomes and is not classified as a clinical  outcome of acute  respiratory failure using the 
definitions noted above:
Death  
A life-threatening experience (that  is, immediate risk of dying)
Prolonged inpatient hospitalization  or rehospitalization
As per  http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/HowToReport/ucm053087.htm:  Report  if admission to 
the hospital or prolongation of hospitalization was a result of the adverse event. Emergency room  
visits that do not result in  admission to the hospital should be evaluated  for one of the other serious  
outcomes (e.g., life-threatening; required intervention to prevent permanent impairment  or damage;  
other serious medically important event).
Persistent or significant disability/incapacity
As per  http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/HowToReport/ucm053087.htm:  Report  if the adverse  
event resulted in a  substantial disruption  of a person's ability to conduct normal  life functions,  i.e., 
the adverse event resulted  in a significant,  persistent or permanent change, impairment, damage or 
disruption in  the patient's body function/structure, physical activities and/or quality of life.
Important medical  events  that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require  hospitalization may be 
considered serious adverse events when, based upon appropriate medical judgment,  they may jeopardize  
the patient  and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this 
definition.
Serious adverse  events will be collected during the  first 2  study days or until ICU  discharge, whichever  
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 15
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015occurs first,  regardless of the investigator's opinion of causation.  Thereafter, serious adverse events  are not 
required to be reported  unless the investigator feels the events were  related  to either study drug or a 
protocol procedure.
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 16
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015APPENDIX: Case  Report Forms
Part 1:  BSE Direct Physical Examination
Facial symmetry Normal Asymmetric Not Done
  
Lip seal/strength Complete seal Reduced Seal/ Weak Not Done
Lip movements Normal Slow, uncoordinated Not Done
Tongue strength/  ROM Normal/complete Weak/Reduced No movement Not Done
Tongue  movements Normal Slow, uncoordinated Not Done
Dentition Adequate Missing teeth Dentures Edentulous Not Done
Saliva Normal Drools at  times Drools constantly Not Done
Palate/velar elevation Adequate Incomplete Not Done
Baseline voice Normal Aphonic  Hoarse Wet, gurgly Not Done
Baseline Breathing sounds Normal Wet Hoarse/noisy Stridorous Not Done
Respiratory rate
(count breaths for  20 seconds and  
then multiple by 3)__________(breaths/min)   or Not performed
Volitional coughStrong Weak  Absent Not done
Volitional cough with peak flow meter
___________(liters/min)  or Not performed
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 17
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Part 2:  Bolus administration
Study ID:                                     Date:                                        Time:
Note: Determine signs and symptoms of aspiration within 10 seconds  after swallowing
Ice Chips
(1/2 tsp)
Bolus given:
YES      NO
Stethoscope used for auscultation 
YES      NOSigns of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs 
___ No aspiration
or
___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voice
___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  Ox
              (Greater than  10%)Oral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   
__  Normal
or
__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
___Other impairment
Explain:
_________________Hyolaryngeal excursion
Can check  1, 2, or 3 signs 
__ Normal
or
__Delayed/Slow
___ Reduced
_____ Multiple swallows
Ice Chips
(full tsp)
Bolus given:
YES      NO
Stethoscope used for auscultation 
YES      NOSigns of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs 
___ No aspiration
or
___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voice
___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  Ox
              (Greater than  10%)Oral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   
__  Normal
or
__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
___Other impairment
Explain:
_________________
Nectar
Thick
(5 ml)
Bolus given:Signs of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs 
___ No aspiration
orOral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   
__  Normal
or
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 18
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015YES      NO
Stethoscope used for auscultation 
YES      NO___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voice
___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  Ox
              (Greater than  10%)__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
___Other impairment
Explain:
_________________
Nectar
Thick
(15 ml)
Bolus given:
YES      NO
Stethoscope used for auscultation 
YES      NOSigns of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs 
___ No aspiration
or
___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voice
___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  Ox
              (Greater than  10%)Oral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   
__  Normal
or
__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
___Other impairment
Explain:
_________________
Nectar
Thick
2 ounce Patient Controlled
With a  Straw
Bolus given:
YES      NO
Stethoscope used for auscultation 
YES      NOSigns of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs 
___ No aspiration
or
___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voice
___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  Ox
              (Greater than  10%)Oral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   
__  Normal
or
__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
___Other impairment
Explain:
_________________
Puree Signs of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs Oral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   Hyolaryngeal excursion
Can check  1, 2, or 3 signs 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 19
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015(applesauce)
(5 ml)
Bolus given:
YES      NO
Stethoscope used for auscultation 
YES      NO___ No aspiration
or
___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voice
___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  Ox
              (Greater than  10%)__  Normal
or
__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
___Other impairment
Explain:
___________________ Normal
or
__Delayed/Slow
___ Reduced
_____ Multiple swallows
Puree
(applesauce)
(15 ml)
Bolus given:
YES      NO
Stethoscope used for auscultation 
YES      NOSigns of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs 
___ No aspiration
or
___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voice
___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  Ox
              (Greater than  10%)Oral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   
__  Normal
or
__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
___Other impairment
Explain:
_________________
Thin Liquid
(water)
(5 ml) or a tsp
Bolus given:
YES      NO
Stethoscope used for auscultation 
YES      NOSigns of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs 
___ No aspiration
or
___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voice
___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  OxOral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   
__  Normal
or
__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
___Other impairment
Explain:
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 20
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015              (Greater than  10%)
_________________
Thin Liquid
(water)
(15 ml)
Bolus given:
YES      NO
Stethoscope used for auscultation 
YES      NOSigns of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs 
___ No aspiration
or
___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voice
___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  Ox
              (Greater than  10%)Oral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   
__  Normal
or
__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
___Other impairment
Explain:
_________________
Thin Liquid
(Water)
2 Oz 
Patient controlled  
With a  straw
Bolus Given:
YES    NO
Stethoscope used for auscultation 
YES      NOSigns of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs 
___ No aspiration
or
___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voice
___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  Ox
              (Greater than  10%)Oral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   
__  Normal
or
__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
___Other impairment
Explain:
_________________
Solid
(1/4 graham  
cracker)
Bolus given:
YES      NO
Stethoscope used Signs of Aspiration
Can check  1,2, 3, 4, or 5 signs 
___ No aspiration
or
___ Cough/Choking
___  Throat Clearing
___Change in voiceOral Phase
Can check  1,2, 3, or 4 signs   
__  Normal
or
__  Prolonged/Slow/Delayed/Cued
__  Disorganized 
__  Weak (oral residual)
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 21
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015for auscultation 
YES      NO___Change in Breath sounds
____ Change in  Pulse  Ox
              (Greater than  10%)___Other impairment
Explain:
_________________
Part 3.  3 oz Water Swallow Test (Yale Protocol)  
Patient is given a  cup with 3 oz water. He is asked to drink the entire amount, slowly and 
steadily, but without stopping.(use your judgment).  He can  drink from the cup with  a 
straw and the SLP can hold  the cup  or straw
Was the  3 oz water  test performed?      YES     NO
If yes complete the  following table.
Patient 
stopped
 1+ times?
Yes NoPatient failed
 to drink the  
entire amount?
Yes NoCough/Choking?
Yes NoChange in 
Voice??
Yes NoChange in
 Breath Sounds?
Yes No No signs
 of aspiration
Yes No
RESULTS of 3 oz  water test?                  PASS    FAIL
Pass= drinks the entire amount without  stopping (use your judgment),  and without 
coughing, choking during or immediately  after  completion.
Fail = does not finish the total amount, stops 1+ times  (for more  than a few seconds), or 
has overt signs  of aspiration  immediately after swallowing
SUMMARY OF  CLINICAL  EXAM
Results:
Dysphagia detected? Yes/no (oral or pharyngeal)
Aspiration detected?  Yes/no
Diet texture  recommendations (circle one)
Solids: regular (NDD3) mechanical (NDD2) puree (NDD1) npo
Liquids thin nectar honey npo
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 22
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 23
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Part 4:  Scoring Sheet for the FEES Testing
R 21 FEES Evaluation Form
Study ID:                                     Date:                                        Time:
MAKE SURE THE  ENTIRE  EXAMINATION IS VIDEOTAPED
Afrin spray used:            YES               NO
Topical lidocaine  used:   YES              NO
Velar Closure
(hiss like a snake)Complete  Incomplete  N/A
Base of  Tongue  Retraction
(Paul is  tall)Present Absent  N/A
Right Vocal  Cord/Arytenoid Mobility None   Mild Moderate Severe  N/A
Left Vocal  Cord/Arytenoid Mobility None   Mild Moderate Severe  N/A
Glottic Closure  
(breath hold,  cough,  phonation)Complete  Incomplete  N/A
Laryngeal Elevation/ Arytenoid lift
(glide with an  “eee”Present Absent  N/A
Right Pharyngeal Wall Medialization Complete Reduced Absent  N/A
Left  Pharyngeal Wall Medialization Complete Reduced Absent  N/A
Epiglottic Retroflexion  
(during swallow)Complete Reduced Inconsistent Absent  N/A
Granuloma Formation None   Mild Moderate Severe  N/A
Upper Airway  Edema None   Mild Moderate Severe  N/A
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 24
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Right Laryngeal Sensation
touch on the aryepiglottc  fold, if no 
sensation then repeat x1;None   Mild Moderate Severe  N/A
Left Laryngeal Sensation
touch on the aryepiglottc  fold, if no 
sensation then repeat x1;None   Mild Moderate Severe  N/A
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 25
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Ice Chips
(1/2 tsp)
Bolus given:
YES      NOPAS score
_________
Not Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallow
If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After SwallowSwallowing Onset Time
________
Not DoneIncomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
Not Determined
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
BOT valleculae Lateral
channels
piriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
Ice Chips
(full tsp)
Bolus given:
YES      NOPAS score
_________
Not Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallow
If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After SwallowSwallowing Onset Time
________
Not DoneIncomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
Not Done
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
BOT valleculae Lateral
channels
piriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
Nectar
Thick
(5 ml) or 1 tsp
Bolus given:
YES      NOPAS score
_________
Not Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before DuringSwallowing Onset Time
________
Not DoneIncomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
Not Done
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 26
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Swallow Swallow
After Swallow
If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After SwallowBOT valleculae Lateral
channels
piriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
Nectar
Thick
(15 ml)
Bolus given:
YES      NOPAS score
_________
Not Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallow
If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After SwallowSwallowing Onset Time
________
Not DoneIncomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
Not Done
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
BOT valleculae Lateral
channels
piriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
Nectar
Thick
2 ounce Patient Controlled
With a  Straw
Bolus given:
YES      NOPAS score
_________
Not Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallow
If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After SwallowSwallowing Onset Time
________
Not DoneIncomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
Not Done
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
BOT valleculae Lateral
channels
piriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 27
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Puree
(applesauce)
(5 ml)
Bolus given:
YES      NOPAS score
_________
Not Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallow
If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After SwallowSwallowing Onset Time
________
Not DoneIncomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
Not Done
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
BOT valleculae Lateral
channels
piriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
Puree
(applesauce)
(10 ml)
Bolus given:
YES      NOPAS score
_________
Not Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallow
If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After SwallowSwallowing Onset Time
________
Not DoneIncomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
Not Done
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
BOT valleculae Lateral
channels
piriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
Thin Liquid
(Water)
(5 ml)
Bolus given:
YES      NOPAS score
_________
Not Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After SwallowSwallowing Onset Time
________
Not DoneIncomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
Not Done
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
BOT valleculae Lateral
channels
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 28
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallowpiriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
Thin Liquid
(Water)
(15 ml)
Bolus given:
YES      NOPAS score
_________
Not Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallow
If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After SwallowSwallowing Onset Time
________
Not DoneIncomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
Not Done
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
BOT valleculae Lateral
channels
piriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
Thin Liquid
(Water)
2 Oz 
Patient controlled 
With a  straw
Bolus given:
YES      NOPAS score
_________
Not Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallow
If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After SwallowSwallowing Onset Time
________
Not DoneIncomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
Not Done
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
BOT valleculae Lateral
channels
piriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
Solid
(1/4 graham  PAS score
_________Swallowing Onset Time
Incomplete bolus  clearance
Yes No
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 29
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015cracker)
Bolus given:
YES      NONot Determined
If penetration  (2-5):
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallow
If aspiration (6-8)
Before Swallow
During
Swallow
After Swallow________
Not DoneNot Done
Residue location:
Circular all that apply
BOT valleculae Lateral
channels
piriforms Laryngeal 
vestibule
Response to residue:
Spontaneous clearing
None
3 oz Water Swallow  Test:  
Patient is given a  cup with 3 oz water. He is asked to drink the entire amount, slowly 
and steadily, but without  stopping.  He can  drink from the cup or a  straw and the SLP 
can hold the cup or straw
Was the  3 oz water  test performed?      YES     NO
If yes complete the  following table.
Did the  
patient 
stop 1 +  
times
Yes NoDid the patient finish the entire amount
Yes NoCough/Choking
Yes NoChange in 
Voice
Yes NoWet Breath 
Sounds
Yes NoNo signs of  
aspiration
Yes No
RESULTS of 3 oz  water test?                  PASS    FAIL
Pass= drinks the entire amount without  stopping (use your judgment),  and without 
coughing, choking during or immediately  after  completion.
Fail = does not finish the total amount, stops 1+ times  (for more  than a few seconds), or 
has overt signs  of aspiration  immediately after swallowing
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 30
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Reference List
(1) Vincent  JL, Akca S, De MA et al. The epidemiology of acute  respiratory failure in critically ill  
patients. Chest 2002;121:1602-1609.
(2) Wunsch H, Linde-Zwirble WT, Angus DC, Hartman ME, Milbrandt  EB, Kahn JM. The epidemiology 
of mechanical ventilation use in the United  States. Crit Care Med 2010;38:1947-1953.
(3) Barker J, Martino R, Reichardt  B, Hickey  EJ, Ralph-Edwards  A. Incidence and impact of dysphagia  
in patients receiving  prolonged endotracheal  intubation  after cardiac surgery.  Can J Surg 
2009;52:119-124.
(4) El SA, Okada M, Bhat A, Pietrantoni C. Swallowing disorders  post orotracheal intubation  in the 
elderly. Intensive  Care Med 2003;29:1451-1455.
(5) Macht  M, Wimbish  T, Clark BJ et  al. Postextubation dysphagia  is persistent and associated with 
poor outcomes in survivors of critical  illness. Crit Care 2011;15:R231.
(6) Skoretz SA, Flowers HL, Martino R. The incidence of dysphagia following endotracheal  intubation: a  
systematic review.  Chest 2010;137:665-673.
(7) de Aguilar-Nascimento JE, Kudsk KA.  Clinical  costs of feeding  tube  placement.  JPEN  J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 2007;31:269-273.
(8) Martino R, Foley  N, Bhogal S, Diamant N, Speechley M,  Teasell R. Dysphagia after  stroke:  
incidence, diagnosis, and  pulmonary  complications. Stroke 2005;36:2756-2763.
(9) Metheny  NA, Clouse RE, Chang  YH, Stewart BJ, Oliver DA,  Kollef  MH. Tracheobronchial aspiration 
of gastric contents in critically ill tube-fed patients: frequency,  outcomes, and risk factors.  Crit Care 
Med 2006;34:1007-1015.
(10) Quill TE. Utilization  of nasogastric feeding tubes in  a group  of chronically ill, elderly patients  in a 
community hospital. Arch Intern Med 1989;149:1937-1941.
(11) Macht  M, Wimbish  T, Clark BJ et  al. Diagnosis and treatment of post-extubation dysphagia: results 
from a national  survey. J Crit Care  2012;27:578-586.
(12) Carnaby  GD, Crary  MA. Development and validation of a cancer-specific swallowing assessment  
tool:MASA-C. Support Care  Cancer 2012;22:595-602.
(13) Chen AY, Frankowski R, Bishop-Leone J et al. The  development and validation  of a dysphagia-
specific quality-of-life questionnaire for patients with head  and neck  cancer: the M. D. Anderson 
dysphagia inventory.  Arch Otolaryngol Head  Neck Surg 2001;127:870-876.
(14) List MA, Ritter-Sterr C,  Lansky  SB. A performance status  scale for  head and neck cancer  patients.  
Cancer 1990;66:564-569.
(15) Mari F, Matei  M, Ceravolo MG,  Pisani A, Montesi A, Provinciali  L. Predictive value of clinical  indices 
in detecting aspiration in patients with  neurological disorders. J Neurol  Neurosurg Psychiatry  
1997;63:456-460.
(16) Martino R, Silver F, Teasell  R et al. The Toronto Bedside  Swallowing Screening Test (TOR-BSST): 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 31
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015development and validation of a dysphagia screening  tool for patients  with stroke. Stroke 
2009;40:555-561.
(17) McCullough GH, Wertz RT, Rosenbek  JC, Mills RH, Ross KB, Ashford JR. Inter- and intrajudge 
reliability of a  clinical examination  of swallowing  in adults. Dysphagia 2000;15:58-67.
(18) McCullough GH, Wertz RT, Rosenbek  JC. Sensitivity and specificity of clinical/bedside  examination 
signs for detecting aspiration in  adults subsequent to stroke. J Commun Disord 2001;34:55-72.
(19) Ramsey DJ, Smithard DG, Kalra L. Early assessments of dysphagia and aspiration risk in acute  
stroke patients.  Stroke 2003;34:1252-1257.
(20) Rosenthal DI, Mendoza TR,  Chambers MS et al.  The M. D. Anderson  symptom  inventory-head and 
neck module, a patient-reported outcome instrument, accurately  predicts the severity of radiation-
induced mucositis.  Int J Radiat  Oncol Biol Phys 2008;72:1355-1361.
(21) Smithard DG, O'Neill PA, Park C et  al. Can bedside assessment reliably exclude  aspiration 
following acute  stroke? Age Ageing  1998;27:99-106.
(22) Warms T,  Richards J. "Wet Voice" as a predictor  of penetration and aspiration  in oropharyngeal 
dysphagia. Dysphagia 2000;15:84-88.
(23) Goldman  L, Weinberg M, Weisberg  M et al. A computer-derived protocol to aid in the diagnosis of 
emergency room  patients with acute chest pain. N Engl J Med 1982;307:588-596.
(24) Hoffman JR, Mower WR, Wolfson  AB, Todd KH, Zucker MI. Validity of a set of clinical  criteria to rule 
out injury to  the cervical  spine  in patients with blunt trauma.  National Emergency  X-Radiography 
Utilization Study Group. N Engl J Med 2000;343:94-99.
(25) Macht  M, Wimbish  T, Bodine C, Moss M. ICU-acquired swallowing disorders. Crit Care  Med 
2013;41:2396-2405.
(26) Macht  M, White SD, Moss M. Swallowing dysfunction after critical  illness. Chest  2014;(in press).
(27) Aviv JE, Kim T, Sacco RL  et al. FEESST: a new bedside endoscopic test  of the motor  and sensory  
components of  swallowing. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1998;107:378-387.
(28) Aviv JE, Spitzer  J, Cohen M, Ma G, Belafsky P, Close LG.  Laryngeal adductor  reflex  and 
pharyngeal squeeze  as predictors  of laryngeal penetration and aspiration. Laryngoscope 
2002;112:338-341.
(29) Bradley RM. Sensory receptors of the larynx. Am J Med 2000;108 Suppl  4a:47S-50S.
(30) DeVita MA, Spierer-Rundback L. Swallowing disorders in patients  with prolonged orotracheal 
intubation or tracheostomy tubes. Crit Care Med  1990;18:1328-1330.
(31) Goldsmith T. Evaluation and treatment  of swallowing disorders  following endotracheal  intubation 
and tracheostomy. Int Anesthesiol Clin  2000;38:219-242.
(32) Maloney  JP, Halbower AC, Fouty  BF et al. Systemic absorption  of food  dye in patients with sepsis.  
N Engl J Med 2000;343:1047-1048.
(33) Kaneoka AS,  Langmore SE, Krisciunas GP et al.  The Boston Residue and Clearance Scale: 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 32
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Preliminary Reliability  and Validity Testing. Folia Phoniatr Logop 2014;65:312-317.
(34) Langmore SE, Miller  RM. Behavioral  treatment for adults  with oropharyngeal dysphagia.  Arch Phys  
Med Rehabil 1994;75:1154-1160.
(35) Langmore SE, Lehman ME. Physiologic  deficits in the orofacial system  underlying dysarthria in 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Speech Hear Res 1994;37:28-37.
(36) Langmore SE. Efficacy of behavioral treatment for oropharyngeal dysphagia. Dysphagia 
1995;10:259-262.
(37) Langmore SE. Dysphagia  in neurologic patients in the intensive care  unit. Semin Neurol 
1996;16:329-340.
(38) Langmore SE. Role  of flexible laryngoscopy for evaluating aspiration. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol  
1998;107:446.
(39) Langmore SE. Laryngeal  sensation:  a touchy subject. Dysphagia  1998;13:93-94.
(40) Langmore SE, Terpenning MS, Schork A et al. Predictors of aspiration  pneumonia:  how important is  
dysphagia? Dysphagia 1998;13:69-81.
(41) Langmore SE. Issues in  the management of dysphagia.  Folia  Phoniatr Logop 1999;51:220-230.
(42) Langmore SE. An  important tool for measuring quality of life. Dysphagia 2000;15:134-135.
(43) Langmore SE, Skarupski  KA, Park PS, Fries BE. Predictors of aspiration pneumonia in nursing 
home residents. Dysphagia 2002;17:298-307.
(44) Langmore SE. Evaluation  of oropharyngeal  dysphagia:  which diagnostic  tool is superior? Curr Opin  
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg  2003;11:485-489.
(45) Langmore SE, Kasarskis EJ, Manca ML, Olney RK. Enteral tube  feeding for  amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis/motor neuron disease. Cochrane  Database Syst Rev 2006;CD004030.
(46) Langmore SE, Olney RK, Lomen-Hoerth C, Miller BL. Dysphagia in patients  with frontotemporal 
lobar dementia. Arch  Neurol  2007;64:58-62.
(47) Langmore SE, Grillone  G, Elackattu A, Walsh M. Disorders of swallowing: palliative care. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2009;42:87-105, ix.
(48) Murray J, Langmore SE, Ginsberg S, Dostie A. The significance  of accumulated oropharyngeal 
secretions and swallowing  frequency in  predicting  aspiration. Dysphagia 1996;11:99-103.
(49) Macht  M, King  CJ, Wimbish T et al.  Post-extubation dysphagia is associated with longer 
hospitalization in survivors of critical illness with neurologic impairment. Crit Care  2013;17:R119.
(50) Langmore SE, Schatz K, Olsen N. Fiberoptic endoscopic examination of swallowing safety:  a new 
procedure. Dysphagia 1988;2:216-219.
(51) Langmore SE, Schatz K, Olson N. Endoscopic and  videofluoroscopic evaluations of swallowing and 
aspiration. Ann Otol  Rhinol Laryngol  1991;100:678-681.
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 33
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015(52) Colton HJ, Noordzij JP, Murgia  B, Langmore S. Laryngeal  injury from prolonged intubation: a 
prospective analysis of contributing factors. Laryngoscope 2011;121:596-600.
(53) Adhikari NK, McAndrews MP, Tansey CM et al.  Self-reported symptoms of depression and memory  
dysfunction in  survivors  of ARDS.  Chest 2009;135:678-687.
(54) Desai SV,  Law TJ, Needham DM. Long-term complications of critical care. Crit Care Med 
2011;39:371-379.
(55) Griffiths RD, Jones  C. Recovery from intensive care. BMJ 1999;319:427-429.
(56) Herridge MS, Tansey  CM, Matte A et al.  Functional disability 5  years after acute respiratory  distress 
syndrome. N Engl J Med 2011;364:1293-1304.
(57) Herridge MS. Recovery and long-term outcome in acute  respiratory distress syndrome. Crit Care 
Clin 2011;27:685-704.
(58) Hopkins RO, Weaver LK,  Collingridge D, Parkinson RB,  Chan KJ, Orme JF, Jr. Two-year cognitive, 
emotional, and quality-of-life outcomes  in acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2005;171:340-347.
(59) Holas MA, DePippo KL, Reding  MJ. Aspiration and relative risk of medical complications following 
stroke. Arch Neurol 1994;51:1051-1053.
(60) Kikuchi R, Watabe  N, Konno T, Mishina  N, Sekizawa K, Sasaki  H. High  incidence of silent 
aspiration in elderly patients  with community-acquired pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
1994;150:251-253.
(61) Schmidt J, Holas M,  Halvorson K, Reding M. Videofluoroscopic evidence of aspiration predicts  
pneumonia and  death  but not dehydration following stroke. Dysphagia 1994;9:7-11.
(62) McCullough GH, Wertz RT, Rosenbek  JC, Mills RH, Webb  WG, Ross KB.  Inter- and intrajudge 
reliability for videofluoroscopic swallowing  evaluation measures. Dysphagia  2001;16:110-118.
(63) Garon BR, Sierzant  T, Ormiston C. Silent aspiration:  results of 2,000 video fluoroscopic evaluations. 
J Neurosci Nurs 2009;41:178-185.
(64) Hafner G, Neuhuber  A, Hirtenfelder  S, Schmedler B, Eckel HE. Fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of 
swallowing in intensive  care unit patients. Eur  Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2008;265:441-446.
(65) Warnecke T, Ritter MA, Kroger B et al. Fiberoptic endoscopic Dysphagia severity scale  predicts  
outcome after  acute  stroke.  Cerebrovasc Dis 2009;28:283-289.
(66) Herrera  LJ, Correa AM, Vaporciyan  AA et al. Increased risk of aspiration  and pulmonary  
complications after lung resection in head and neck  cancer patients. Ann Thorac Surg 
2006;82:1982-1987.
(67) Antonios N, Carnaby-Mann  G, Crary  M et al. Analysis of a physician tool for  evaluating dysphagia 
on an inpatient stroke unit: the modified  Mann Assessment of Swallowing Ability. J Stroke 
Cerebrovasc Dis  2010;19:49-57.
(68) Gonzalez-Fernandez M, Sein MT, Palmer JB. Clinical experience  using the Mann assessment of 
swallowing ability  for identification  of patients at risk for  aspiration  in a mixed-disease population. 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 34
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015Am J Speech Lang Pathol  2011;20:331-336.
(69) Daniels SK, Anderson JA, Willson PC. Valid items for screening dysphagia  risk in patients  with 
stroke: a systematic  review. Stroke 2012;43:892-897.
(70) Schepp SK, Tirschwell DL,  Miller RM, Longstreth WT, Jr. Swallowing  screens  after acute stroke: a  
systematic review.  Stroke  2012;43:869-871.
(71) Husaini H, Krisciunas GP, Langmore  S et al. A survey of variables used by  speech-language 
pathologists to assess function and predict functional recovery in oral cancer  patients. Dysphagia  
2014;29:376-386.
(72) Scott  A, Perry A,  Bench J. A study of interrater reliability when using videofluoroscopy as an 
assessment of swallowing. Dysphagia  1998;13:223-227.
(73) Marik PE.  Aspiration  pneumonitis  and aspiration pneumonia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:665-671.
(74) DePippo KL, Holas  MA, Reding  MJ. Validation of the 3-oz water swallow test  for aspiration following 
stroke. Arch Neurol 1992;49:1259-1261.
(75) Wu MC, Chang  YC, Wang TG, Lin LC. Evaluating swallowing  dysfunction using a  100-ml water 
swallowing test. Dysphagia 2004;19:43-47.
(76) Suiter DM, Leder  SB. Clinical utility  of the 3-ounce water swallow  test. Dysphagia 2008;23:244-250.
(77) Logemann JA. Multidisciplinary management of dysphagia. Acta  Otorhinolaryngol Belg  
1994;48:235-238.
(78) Macqueen  C, Taubert S, Cotter D, Stevens S, Frost G. Which  commercial thickening  agent  do 
patients prefer? Dysphagia 2003;18:46-52.
(79) DePippo KL, Holas  MA, Reding  MJ, Mandel FS, Lesser ML. Dysphagia therapy following stroke: a 
controlled trial. Neurology 1994;44:1655-1660.
(80) Logemann JA, Gensler G, Robbins J et al. A  randomized study of three interventions for aspiration 
of thin liquids  in patients with dementia or Parkinson's disease. J Speech  Lang  Hear Res 
2008;51:173-183.
(81) Logemann JA. Treatment of oral and pharyngeal  dysphagia. Phys  Med Rehabil  Clin N Am 
2008;19:803-16, ix.
(82) Logemann JA, Pauloski BR, Rademaker AW et al. Swallowing disorders in the first year after  
radiation and chemoradiation. Head Neck  2008;30:148-158.
(83) Logemann JA, Rademaker A, Pauloski BR et  al. What information do clinicians use in 
recommending oral  versus nonoral  feeding in  oropharyngeal dysphagic patients? Dysphagia 
2008;23:378-384.
(84) Robbins  J, Gensler G, Hind J et  al. Comparison of 2 interventions for  liquid aspiration on pneumonia 
incidence: a  randomized trial. Ann  Intern Med  2008;148:509-518.
(85) Carnaby-Mann GD, Crary MA. McNeill dysphagia therapy program: a  case-control study. Arch  Phys 
Med Rehabil 2010;91:743-749.
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 35
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015(86) Duarte VM, Chhetri DK, Liu YF,  Erman AA, Wang MB. Swallow preservation exercises during 
chemoradiation therapy maintains swallow function. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2013;149:878-
884.
(87) Logemann JA, Rademaker A, Pauloski BR et  al. A randomized study comparing the Shaker 
exercise with traditional therapy: a preliminary study.  Dysphagia 2009;24:403-411.
(88) Speyer R, Baijens L, Heijnen M, Zwijnenberg I.  Effects of therapy  in oropharyngeal dysphagia by  
speech and language therapists:  a systematic review. Dysphagia 2010;25:40-65.
(89) Bours GJ, Speyer R, Lemmens J, Limburg M, de WR. Bedside screening tests vs.  videofluoroscopy  
or fibreoptic endoscopic  evaluation  of swallowing  to detect dysphagia in patients with neurological  
disorders: systematic  review. J Adv Nurs 2009;65:477-493.
(90) Carnaby  G, Hankey GJ,  Pizzi J. Behavioural intervention for dysphagia in acute stroke: a  
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Neurol  2006;5:31-37.
(91) Sue RD, Susanto I. Long-term complications  of artificial airways.  Clin Chest Med 2003;24:457-471.
(92) Colice  GL, Stukel TA, Dain  B. Laryngeal  complications of prolonged intubation. Chest 1989;96:877-
884.
(93) Van der Meer  G, Ferreira Y, Loock JW. The S/Z ratio: a  simple and reliable clinical  method of 
evaluating laryngeal  function in patients after intubation. J Crit Care  2010;25:489-492.
(94) Puthucheary Z,  Harridge S, Hart N. Skeletal muscle dysfunction in critical  care: wasting, weakness,  
and rehabilitation  strategies. Crit Care  Med 2010;38:S676-S682.
(95) Metheny  NA, Schallom  L, Oliver  DA, Clouse RE. Gastric residual  volume and aspiration in critically 
ill patients receiving gastric feedings. Am J Crit Care 2008;17:512-519.
(96) Metheny  NA. Residual volume measurement should be retained in enteral feeding protocols. Am J 
Crit Care 2008;17:62-64.
(97) Ely EW, Inouye SK,  Bernard GR et  al. Delirium in mechanically ventilated patients:  validity and 
reliability of the confusion assessment method for the intensive care unit (CAM-ICU). JAMA  
2001;286:2703-2710.
(98) Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J et al. Evaluation of delirium in critically ill patients:  validation of the 
Confusion Assessment  Method  for the Intensive  Care Unit (CAM-ICU). Crit Care  Med 
2001;29:1370-1379.
(99) Bryant LR, Trinkle  JK, Mobin-Uddin K, Baker J, Griffen WO, Jr. Bacterial colonization profile  with 
tracheal intubation  and mechanical  ventilation. Arch Surg  1972;104:647-651.
(100) Johanson WG,  Pierce AK, Sanford JP. Changing  pharyngeal bacterial flora of hospitalized  patients. 
Emergence of gram-negative bacilli. N Engl J Med 1969;281:1137-1140.
(101) Ely EW, Inouye SK,  Bernard GR et  al. Delirium in mechanically ventilated patients:  validity and 
reliability of the confusion assessment method for the intensive care unit (CAM-ICU). JAMA  
2001;286:2703-2710.
(102) Ely EW, Siegel  MD,  Inouye SK. Delirium in the intensive care unit: an under-recognized syndrome 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 36
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015of organ dysfunction. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2001;22:115-126.
(103) Ely EW, Gautam S,  Margolin  R et  al. The impact  of delirium in the intensive  care unit on hospital 
length of stay. Intensive Care Med 2001;27:1892-1900.
(104) Mann G. The Mann assessment of swallowing ability. Clifton,  NY: Thomson Learning Inc., 2002.
(105) Mann G, Hankey GJ, Cameron D. Swallowing disorders following acute stroke: prevalence  and 
diagnostic accuracy. Cerebrovasc  Dis 2000;10:380-386.
(106) Smith Hammond  CA, Goldstein LB, Horner  RD et al. Predicting  aspiration in patients  with ischemic 
stroke: comparison  of clinical signs and aerodynamic measures of voluntary cough. Chest 
2009;135:769-777.
(107) The national  dysphagia diet task force.  The national Dysphagia  diet: standardization  for optimal 
care.  Chicago,  IL: American Dietitic  Association, 2002.
(108) Vazquez R, Gheorghe C, Ramos F, Dadu R, Amoateng-Adjepong Y, Manthous  CA. Gurgling breath 
sounds may predict hospital-acquired pneumonia. Chest 2010;138:284-288.
(109) Suiter DM, Sloggy  J, Leder  SB. Validation  of the Yale Swallow Protocol: a  prospective double-
blinded videofluoroscopic study.  Dysphagia  2014;29:199-203.
(110) Rosenbek JC, Robbins JA, Roecker EB, Coyle JL, Wood  JL. A  penetration-aspiration scale.  
Dysphagia 1996;11:93-98.
(111) Colodny  N. Interjudge and intrajudge  reliabilities  in fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing 
(fees) using  the penetration-aspiration scale:  a replication  study. Dysphagia 2002;17:308-315.
(112) Kelly AM, Leslie P, Beale T,  Payten C, Drinnan MJ. Fibreoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing 
and videofluoroscopy: does examination type influence  perception of pharyngeal residue severity?  
Clin Otolaryngol 2006;31:425-432.
(113) Kelly AM, Drinnan  MJ, Leslie P. Assessing penetration  and aspiration:  how do videofluoroscopy and 
fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of  swallowing  compare? Laryngoscope 2007;117:1723-1727.
(114) Leder SB, Acton LM, Lisitano HL, Murray JT. Fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing 
(FEES) with and without blue-dyed food. Dysphagia 2005;20:157-162.
(115) Fife TA, Butler SG,  Langmore SE et al.  Use of Topical Nasal  Anesthesia During Flexible  
Endoscopic Evaluation  of Swallowing in Dysphagic Patients. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2014.
(116) Lester S, Langmore SE, Lintzenich  CR et al. The effects of topical anesthetic on swallowing during 
nasoendoscopy. Laryngoscope 2013;123:1704-1708.
(117) Sadek  SA, De R, Scott A, White AP,  Wilson  PS, Carlin  WV. The efficacy of topical  anaesthesia in 
flexible nasendoscopy: a double-blind randomised controlled trial. Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci 
2001;26:25-28.
(118) Sunkaraneni VS,  Jones SE. Topical  anaesthetic  or vasoconstrictor preparations for  flexible fibre-
optic nasal pharyngoscopy and laryngoscopy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;CD005606.
(119) Cohen MA, Setzen M, Perlman  PW, Ditkoff M, Mattucci KF, Guss J. The safety  of flexible 
COMIRB #  12-0184 Page 37
Protocol version 3,  07/09/2015endoscopic evaluation of swallowing with  sensory testing in an outpatient otolaryngology setting. 
Laryngoscope 2003;113:21-24.
(120) Ota K, Saitoh E,  Baba M, Sonoda S. The secretion severity rating scale: a  potentially useful tool for 
management of acute-phase fasting stroke patients. J Stroke  Cerebrovasc Dis 2011;20:183-187.
(121) Bellg AJ, Borrelli B, Resnick  B et al. Enhancing treatment fidelity in health behavior change studies:  
best practices and recommendations  from the  NIH Behavior  Change Consortium. Health Psychol 
2004;23:443-451.
(122) Borrelli B, Sepinwall D, Ernst D et al.  A new tool to  assess treatment fidelity and evaluation  of 
treatment fidelity across 10 years of health behavior  research. J Consult Clin Psychol 2005;73:852-
860.
(123) Spillane V, Byrne MC, Byrne M, Leathem CS, O'Malley M, Cupples ME. Monitoring treatment  fidelity 
in a randomized controlled trial  of a complex  intervention.  J Adv Nurs 2007;60:343-352.
(124) Francois B, Bellissant E, Gissot V et  al. 12-h pretreatment with methylprednisolone versus placebo 
for prevention of postextubation  laryngeal  oedema: a randomised double-blind trial. Lancet  
2007;369:1083-1089.
(125) Pearse RM, Young JD. Steroids to prevent postextubation laryngeal oedema.  Lancet  
2007;369:1060-1061.