Version 4, 7/21/16   1 
                                                            
 
 
 
 
Title: Reducing Diagnostic Errors in Primary Care 
Pediatrics (Project RedeDE)  
 
 
Research Team : Michael L. Rinke, MD, PhD, David G. Bundy, MD, MPH, Steven J . Choi, MD, 
Jason Adelman, MD, Heather C. O’Donnell, MD, Moonseong Heo, PhD, Keri Thiessen, MEd, 
Elizabeth Rice-Conboy, Hardeep Singh, MD, MPH and the American Academy of Pediatrics’ 
Quality Improvement Innovation Network  
 
NCT Number : 02798354  
  

Version 4, 7/21/16   2 
  
1. Background/Significance:  
Despite being identified in 1999 in ‘To Err is Human’ as a central facet of patient safety,1 
diagnostic errors (missed, delayed or incorrect diagnoses) remain understudied,2 cause 
appreciable patient harm,3 and their reduction lags behind advances in other patient safety 
areas.4,5. Limited pediatric -focused research on diagnostic errors highlights the significance 
of this problem in children: 54% of pediatricians report making diagnostic errors at least 
monthly and 45% report making harmful diagnostic errors at least annually.6 In ambulatory 
pediatrics, evidence of harmful diagnostic errors is emerging: children experience a median 
delay of 3 years before receiving an asthma diagnosis,7 and 23% of children diagnosed with 
retinoblastoma have a diagnostic delay of more than 8 weeks, leaving them at increased 
risk of tumor invasion.8 Errors in diagnosis were the most prevalent error type in closed 
pediatric malpractice claims.9 Evidence from adult and pediatric primary care settings 
suggest diagnostic errors are harmful  and involve a variety of diseases .5  
Few studies rigorously investigate diagnostic error reduction efforts and even fewer 
focus on children.5 A recent review led by a co- investigator of this proposal, suggests a need 
for empirical studies to test interventions to reduce diagnostic errors, and that most existing 
studies focus on adults, lack rigorous process and outcome measures, suffer from non -
experimental or quasi experimental designs, and/or were limited to a single institution.10 
Evidence for reducing pediatric  diagnostic errors is rare and often not current: the 
implementation of a pediatric trauma team reduced delayed and missed diagnoses of major 
injuries from 4.3% to 0.46%.11  Computer aided differential diagnoses reduced mean time to 
diagnosis of all pediatric inpatients from 2.8 days to 1.9 days in 1975.12 Research on 
interventions to prevent pediatric diagnostic errors is needed.  
The proposal will focus on 3 specific, high- risk, pediatric ambulatory diagnostic errors 
each representing a unique dimension of diagnostic assessment: evaluation of symptoms, 
evaluation of signs and follow -up of diagnostic tests. Adolescent depression (i.e. symptoms) 
affects nearly 10% of teenagers,13-16 is misdiagnosed in almost 75% of adolescents17 and 
causes significant morbidity.18 Pediatric elevated blood pressure (signs) is misdiagnosed in 
74-87% of patien ts,19,20 often due to inaccurate application of blood pressure parameters that 
change based on age, gender and height. Actionable pediatric laboratory values (diagnostic  
tests) are potentially delayed up to 26% of the time in preliminary investigations  and 7 -65% 
in adults ,21,22 leading to harm and malpractice claims.22-25 
We propose to conduct a multisite, prospective, stepped wedge cluster randomized trial 
testing a quality improvement collaborative (QIC) intervention within the American Academy 
of Pediatrics’ Quality Improvement Innovation Networks (QuIIN) to reduce the incidence of 
pediatric primary care diagnostic errors. QuIIN is a national network of over 300 primary 
care practices, ranging from tertiary care academic medical centers to single practitioner 
private practices, interested in and experienced with QICs . Because many processes are 
likely to be common across diagnostic errors in outpatient settings, a multifaceted 
intervention, such as a QIC, has a high likelihood of success and broad applicability across 
populations. Preparatory inquiries to QuIIN primary care provider s suggest high interest in 
reducing these 3 diagnostic errors and provider a greement with randomization to evaluate 
diagnostic error interventions .  
The purpose of this IRB application is to cover the data analysis of the QIC data generated 
in this project .  The AAP’s IRB will cover each individual pediatric clinic, the data collection 
and the conduct of the study.  
 
2. Study Design:  
Objectives:  
Version 4, 7/21/16   3 
 Primary  
• To determine whether a QIC  consisting of evidence- based best -practice 
methodologies, mini -root cause analyses, data sharing, and behavior change  
techniques, is associated with a reduction in 3 specific diagnostic error rates in a 
national group of pediatric primary care practices.  
o Hypothesis 1:  Implementation of a QIC will lead to a 40% reduction in missed 
diagnosis of adolescent depression.  
o Hypothesis 2: Implementation of a QIC will lead to a 30% reduction in missed 
diagnosis of pediatric elevated blood pressure.  
o Hypothesis 3: Imp lementation of a QIC  will lead to a 45% reduction in 
delayed diagnosis of actionable laboratory results.  
 
Secondary  
• To determine if a QIC’s effect changes for wave 1 versus wave 2 participants, who 
serve as the control group in the first year of the collaborative.  
• To further investigate the epidemiology of three ambulatory pediatric diagnostic 
errors:  missed diagnosis of adolescent depression, missed diagnosis of pediatric 
elevated blood pressure, and delayed diagnosis of actionable laboratory results .  
• To evaluate patient outcomes related to these diagnoses including outcomes after 
positive depression screening, missed elevated blood pressure screening and 
delayed diagnosis of actionable laboratory values.  
 
Methods:  
This proposal aims to identify system s solutions for reducing harmful pediatric diagnostic 
errors. We will perform a prospective, stepped wedge cluster randomized controlled trial to test 
the hypothesis that QIC strategies can reduce three specific diagnostic errors in a national 
group of ambulatory pediatric primary care practices.  These data will inform future diagnostic 
error prevention efforts and provide data on QIC efforts aimed at pediatric diagnostic errors. 
Baseline data from the QIC will identify incidence data for errors in 3 separate stages of the 
diagnostic process: symptoms (missed diagnosis of adolescent depression), signs (missed 
diagnosis of pediatric elevated blood pressure) and diagnostic tests (delayed diagnosis of 
actionable laboratory results). Each of these diagnostic err ors represents missed opportunities 
to recognize abnormal diagnostic findings.26-28 Human subjects’ protection will be completed at 
the CHAM to cover the researchers and data analysis and at the American Academy of 
Pediatrics to cover all practices, as completed for prior QuIIN projects.29 
The goal of this proposal  is to reduce diagnostic errors by tracking diagnostic errors 
rates (outcomes measures) and reliably performing best practices for diagnosing adolescent 
depression, pediatric elevated blood pressure and actionable laboratory result s (process 
measures). In order to reduce overall data collection burden on practices and to increase 
engagement of practices that would have been in the control group, we have changed the study 
design. These changes do not affect t he statistical power of  the study. The intervention will 
consist of implementing QIC methodology in all practices to assist teams in reliably performing 
the processes that will reduce the diagnostic error outcomes via evidence- based tools.30-32 
Practices will be randomized into three groups, with each group intervening on 1 diagnostic 
error and serving as the control group for a second diagnostic error.  After 8 months of 
participation, each group w ill begin intervening on the diagnostic error they were a control group 
for, continue intervening on their original diagnostic error, and function as the control group for 
the third diagnostic error.  In the final 8 months of the QIC, all three groups will  intervene on all 
three diagnostic errors.   
Version 4, 7/21/16   4 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In order to test the 
hypothesis that a QIC can reduce 
these diagnostic errors, we will 
employ a prospective, stepped 
wedge cluster randomized 
controlled trial. First, all practices 
will submit baseline data on one of 
the three diagnostic errors (defined 
below) and this will provide data for 
an initial manuscript on the 
epidemiology of these diagnostic 
errors. Following baseline data 
collection, we will apply 
multivariate matching before 
randomization, which has been 
shown to provide more accurate 
effect est imates, creating an 
Table 1: Quality Improvement Collaborative (QIC) 
Components  
• Bi-annual 2 day interactive webinar learning sessions  
• Monthly all collaborative webinar & conference calls sharing 
best practices  
• Monthly one on one team calls with dedicated QI coach 
(QuIIN staff and research team)  
• Monthly data submission on both process and outcome 
measures (diagnostic errors) using QuIIN IT infrastructure  
• Monthly data feedback both at aggregate level with full inter -
team transparency as well as at specific institutional level 
using QuIIN IT infrastructure  
• Month ly mini -root cause analyses performed on 3 errors at 
each site  
• Multidisciplinary teams consisting of at least a physician, 
nurse and office practice associate  
• Instruction on best practices from content area expert s in QI, 
diagnostic errors, hypertension, mental health and EHRs   
• Instruction on model for improvement, MUSIQ and behavior 
change via QI methodology (small tests of change/PDSA  
• Instruction on QI team leadership and team QI skills  
• Ongoing sharing of best ideas and barriers/issues among 
institutiona l teams  
 

Version 4, 7/21/16   5 
 equivalent of 7% increase in sample size.33 Practices will be matched based on key 
demographics related to diagnostic errors including 1) patient volume per practitioner +/ - 100 
patients, 2) university affiliation  and 3) prior work reducing these diagnostic errors. After 
matching, randomization wil l occur via computerized random number generation and one -third 
of practices will be assigned to each of the three QIC intervention groups . 
The QIC intervention components are described in Table 1 and closely mirror prior 
evidence on components integral to QIC success32,34,35 and prior QICs conducted by QuIIN and 
the research team.29,36 Prior research by co- investigators and others have shown that reducing 
diagnostic errors requires more than just technological alerts ,37,38 which is why a QIC 
intervention was chosen. The QIC will ensure the 6 key contextual MUSIQ factors will be met,39 
increasing the  ability of each practice to reduce these errors. Rapid data feedback on 
performance with benchmarking is crucial to behavior change for diagnostic error reduction.40 
Root cause analyses have proven useful in i dentifying underlying causes of diagnostic errors.41 
The mini -root cause analyses used in this QIC involve identifying 1 diagnostic error monthly at 
each QIC site, examining  standardized patient , provider,  and systems factors that could have 
led to the error,  and spreading systematic lessons learned to prevent future errors .42,43 These 
factors could include 1) patient factors of age, gender, reason for visit, patient comorbidities, 
language barriers, acute illness, agitation of patient/family, social issues, etc . , 2) provider 
factors of type of provider, provider level of training, provider fatigue/impairment, personal  
stressors of providers, provider disagreements, provider knowledge, provider beliefs about the 
project or the patient, etc.  and 3) systems factors of time of visit, clinic milieu during visit (chaotic 
vs. calm), increased workload, staffing concerns, verbal/written communication, computer 
software or hardware, non- computer equipment, etc .. These  deidentifed factors will be 
submitted to the QIC  monthly  in order to aggregate causes of these errors . No protected health 
information (PHI) will be collected in t he aggregate entered data for these min- root cause 
analyses. One of the novel approaches of this collaborative is the use of an interactive webinar 
format for learning sessions.  
All practices will participate in the QIC  for the full 2 years of the study . They will attend 
an initial 2 -day interactive webinar learning session where they will learn QI methodology, 
enhance and practice QI skills, identify local 30- 60 day aims for the diagnostic error  they are 
intervening on first , increase their understanding of diagnostic errors and these errors in 
particular, and create systems for standardized data collection and data entry. P ractices will 
submit monthly data on their intervention and control diagnostic errors but only receive 
centralized data feedback, coaching or collaborative involvement  regarding their intervention 
error . (Figure 1) We acknowledge that error measurement in the baseline and intervention 
periods may introduce an intervention effect, but we have no reason to believe this effect will be 
different for the intervention and control practices. As noted above, after 8 months, practices will 
participate in a second 2 -day video conference learning session, continue to intervene on their 
first error, begin to intervene on the error they were a contr ol group for and begin to collect 
control data for the third diagnostic error. Including the control group in the QIC ensures that 
harm is prevented in the maximum number of patients and that clinical equipoise is met, as we 
believe this intervention will reduce errors. This stepped wedge design with two steps allows for 
the primary outcome comparison (diagnostic errors in intervention versus control ) and 
secondary outcome comparisons: 1) diagnostic error rates in second wave participants), 2) 
Sustainabilit y after first eight months  and 3) collaborative effect for second wave practices. 
These secondary outcome comparisons will shed light on the effectiveness and sustainability of 
QICs and inform future collaborative designs.  
Given concerns about practice at trition, we will additionally recruit a second wave of 
practices to join the collaborative.  The three phase quality improvement research model lends 
itself to simply on- boarding a new group of practices and integrating them into the project in 
Phase 2 whi ch would begin in June of 2016 . The up to 15 Wave 2 practices would be recruited 
Version 4, 7/21/16   6 
 in the winter of 2015 -2016, similarly randomized to the three already established collaborative 
groups  and enrolled in March of 2016, collect baseline data comparable to the w ave 1 practices 
and then participate in the collaborative beginning in June of 2016. As noted above, after 8 
months, practices will participate in a second 2- day video conference learning session, continue 
to intervene on their first error, begin to interv ene on the error they were a control group for and 
begin to collect control data for the third diagnostic error.  The only difference between the Wave 
1 and Wave 2 practices, are that the Wave 1 practices will ultimately intervene on all three 
diagnostic er rors of interest. As the Wave 2 practices are entering the collaborative 8 months 
later, they will only intervene on two of the three diagnostic errors of interest  over the course of 
16 months .  At the end of the collaborative, all resources and tools for the third diagnostic error 
will be given to the Wave 2 participants.   
 
 
 

Version 4, 7/21/16   7 
  
Target Diagnostic Error Outcome Measures:  
All outcome metrics are described in detail in Table 2 and the Data Collection section 
below .  
The missed diagnosis of adolescent depression primary outcome measure is defined as 
the incidence of depression in adolescents > 11 years old compared i n intervention versus 
control practices. This outcome measure was chosen because prior research suggested up to 
75% of adolescent cases are missed by primary providers,17,44 allowing incidence to serve as a 
proxy for missed diagnoses. The research team strongly considered using documented 
depressive symptoms (e.g. poor school performance, interrupted s leep patterns, increased 
disruptive behaviors, etc.) without appropriate provider identification or referral to mental health 
evaluation as the missed diagnosis of adolescent depression primary outcome. This metric was 
not chosen because preliminary data s uggested the number of adolescents with symptoms 
suggestive of depression documented prior to a mental health referral was extremely small. This 
finding echoes research that pediatricians’ use of adolescent and parental chief complaints to 
identify depress ive risk factors consistently under identifies  adolescent depression.44,45 The 
process measure for t his diagnostic error will be the percent of adolescents screened for 
depression, a practice recommended for all adolescents by the USPSTF,46 and feasible and 
acceptable to primary care pediatricians.47-49 
 
Table 2: Outcome and Process Measures,  and Evidence- Based Tools for Diagnostic Error 
Reduction  
Primary Outcome Measure  Process Measures  Evidence -Based Tools  
Number of Adolescents Diagnosed with 
Depression per 100 Adolescent Visits  
Patients >11 years old with documentation of 
major depression or subsyndromal depression 
diagnoses  1. Number of adolescents 
screened for depression 
with the PHQ -9-M per total 
number of adolescents 
seen per month  1. Patient screening in the 
waiting room  
2. Triage nurse scoring and 
flagging to facilitate 
provider recognition  
Elevated Blood Pressure Not Recognized by 
Providers per 100 Elevated Blood Pressures 
Measured  
Systolic or Dias tolic Blood Pressure >  90th 
percentile for age, gender and height or >120/80 
in >3 years old patients without history of 
hypertension and none of: 1) provider repeated 
blood pressure, 2) clinic note mentions elevated 
blood pressure/hypertension 3) plan included 
recheck or evaluation of blood pressure, or  4) 
ordering laboratory or other studies to evaluate 
elevated blood pressure  1. Number of patients >3 
years old with blood 
pressure checked at triage 
per total number of 
patients >3 years old seen  1. Triage nurse or EHR 
flagging of elevated 
blood pressures to 
facilitate provider 
recognition  
2. Family notification of 
elevated blood pressure 
at triage  
Delayed Actions on Laboratory Results per 
100 Abnormal Laboratory Results Received50 
No documented action step for first positive after 
30 days:  
1. Hgb<11 and MCV <75 in 1 or 2 year old  
documentation of beginning iron, sending 
iron studies or family conversation  
2. Lead> 5documentation of family 
conversation on lead remediation or plan to 
retest  
No documented action step for first positive after 
7 days:  
1. Positive Gonorrhea, Chlamydia, Syphilis or 
HIV test  documentation of antibiotics 
begun or referral to HIV specialist  
2. Positive group A streptococcal  throat culture 
with negative rapid group A streptococcal  1. Percent of providers with 
unread or 
unacknowledged 
laboratory results in their 
EHR inbox for greater than 
72 hours  1. Weekly nurse review of 
all abnormal laboratory 
results  
2. Standardized protocols 
for handling laboratory 
results  
3. Standing orders for 
laboratory results action 
steps to be completed by 
nurse with appropriate 
provider oversight  
Version 4, 7/21/16   8 
 Early detection via screening represents the best opportunity to reduce missed diagnosis of 
adolescent depression. We will screen patients with the Patient Health Questionnaire 9- item 
Modified for Adolescents (PHQ -9-M), as it  is a validated and highly specific tool (94.7%).51 
Building on work done by Ruth E.  Stein , MD ,52,53 a member of the Project Expert Group and 
others,49 we will use coaching and learning sessions to ensure appropriate follow -up for 
identified mental health concerns are in place before practices begin universal s creening. The 
evidence- based tools utilized by the collaborative to improve diagnosis of adolescent 
depression include patient screening in the waiting room, followed by nurse scoring and 
flagging. This methodology increased adolescent screening rates to 80 -84% in QI interventions 
at CHAM and in 6 non- affiliated sites,49 and is a necessary first step to adolescent depression 
diagnosis.  
The missed diagnosis of pediatric elevated blood pressure primary outcome is defined 
as elevated systolic or diastolic blood pressure for age, gender and height without provider 
recognition per 100 elevated blood pressures measured in intervention versus control practices. 
The process measure will assess the per cent of children >3 years old receiving blood pressure 
measurement at triage, as this is standard of care54,55 and an endorsed recommendation by the 
AAP,56 but not regularly adhered to in all pediatric clinics.57,58 The evidence- based tools 
implemented by the collaborative to help reduce this diagnost ic error will involve triage nurse or 
EHR flagging of elevated blood pressures for provider recognition19 and family notification of 
elevated blood pressures.  
The delayed diagnosis of actionable laboratory results  primary outcome measure is 
defined as the number of delayed actions, as defined in Table 2, per 100 abnormal laborat ory 
results received in intervention versus control practices. Abnormal values are defined by 
pediatric reference texts.50 Since no standard definition of an actionable laboratory ‘delay’ 
currently exists, timeliness of follow -up was determined by expert opinion and discussions with 
primary care practitioners. Delays are defined as greater than 30 days for action on elevated 
lead levels or microcytic anemia, or greater than 7 days for action on STI treatment,  
streptococcal  pharyngitis treatment or elevated or reduced TSH work -up. The process measure 
for delayed diagnosis of actionable laboratory results will be the number of providers with 
laboratory results unread or unacknowledged in their EHR inbox for more than 72 hours . The 
tools implemented by the collaborative will include standing orders for nurse actions when 
abnormal test results are received. For example, if a patient has a positive Chlamydia test, the 
nurse will immediately call the patient and schedule the next available visit for counseling and 
antibiotics. These interventions are based on successful newborn screening QICs at CHAM and 
QuIIN,29 and AHRQ’s toolkit for improving office -based testing.59  
 
QIC Data Collection and Standardization:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 testdocumentation of antibiotics begun or 
family conversation  
3. TSH<0.5 or > 4.5 in > 1 year old plan to 
repeat lab values or referral to 
endocrinologist  
Version 4, 7/21/16   9 
  An initial orientation session will teach all practices to identify each of these 3 diagnostic 
errors via chart review, collect data and reliably enter it into the QuIIN IT system, QIDA. The 
QIDA system has been used by prior QuIIN projects, is web- based and HIPAA compliant, and 
QuIIN will take responsibility for data security. QuIIN’s project manager has experiencing 
ensuring accurate and timely data submission for primary care pediatric practices from prior 
QuIIN QICs.  
Practices will collect 
the primary outcome data by 
employing EHR based record 
review or paper -based 
methods depending on 
abilities and interest of local 
EHRs. Developing data 
collection tools for both EHR 
and paper based practices 
allows for maximum 
generalizability of lessons 
learned from this 
collaborative. These tools will 
ensure standardized data 
collection by disparate 
practices and were pilot 
tested with two QuIIN 
practices. All data collection 
tools will be pilot tested on 
paper and beta tested by a 
minimum of 2 Expert Group members ( always including the QI Advisor).  As described below , 
data will be check ed for outliers or abnormal values and feedback given to practices to ensure 
consistency across practices. Additional data on providers’ abilities to recognize abnormal 
results, either in mental health, blood pressure or laboratory values, will also be collected as this 
is an important first step in the diagnostic process.  These data are described further in the Data 
collection section below. QIC leadership will use QIDA entered data to disseminate monthly 
feedback reports with full transparency and QIC benchmarking to intervention practices. 
Consented core QI team members from each practice will be able to access their team’s data. 
All practices will report demographic data annually, including patient volume, number and 
training level of physician or physician assistant -level providers, number of nursing and office 
staff, university -affiliation, EHR availability, presence of trainees,  estimated length of time 
providers take with patients,  and prior self -reported work aiming to improve these diagnostic 
errors.  
Table 3 summarizes the primary outcome data each practice will collect and the types of 
charts they will screen. Numbers of charts are based on power calculations described below  
and will be a convenience sample. Adolescents with depression will be identified by monthly 
chart reviews or EHR data summaries when this diagnosis is mentioned in the problem list or in 
assessment sections of visit notes. Pediatric elevated blood pressures will be identified by 
flagging blood pressure measurements at triage or pulling reports from EHR systems. Similar to 
the depression outcome, provider recognition will be identified when this diagnosis is mentioned 
in the problem list or in assessment sections of visit notes. Finally, abnormal lab results will be 
tracked by either EHR laboratory summary reports or laboratory management registry tools, 
such as those found in the AHRQ toolkit for improving office -based testing,59 and provider 
recognition will be identified when a diagnosis is mentioned in the problem list, in assessment Baseline  
(One Time Data Collection)  QIC Intervention Period  
(Mont hly Data Collection)  
Missed Adolescent Depression  
50 >11 year old patient charts who 
visited clinic in prior 6 months. 
Chart screened for depression 
diagnosis.   
17 >11 year old patient charts who 
visited clinic in prior month. Chart 
screened for depression 
diagnosis.  
Missed Elevated Blood Pressure  
50 > 3 year old patient charts with 
elevated blood pressure recorded 
at triage. Chart screened for 
provider recognition.   
10 > 3 year old patient charts with 
elevated blood pressure recorded 
at triage. Chart screened for 
provider recognition.  
Delayed Diagnosis of Actionable 
Laboratory Results  
50 patient charts with abnormal 
laboratory results as defined 
above. Chart screened for 
appropriate action within time 
guidelines defined above.   
 
10 patient charts with abnormal 
laboratory results as defined 
above. Chart screened for 
appropriate action within time 
guidelines defined above.  
*All charts screened will have the following demographic data recorded: age, 
gender  and insurance status.  Table 3: QIC Primary Outcome Data Collection for Each  
               Practice  
Version 4, 7/21/16   10 
 sections of visit notes or if medic ations are prescribed. Intervention practices will also report 
process outcomes ( Table 2).  
Finally, in order to better investigate if reducing these diagnostic error s leads to 
improved patient outcomes, we will ask practices one time during the 2 year collaborative to 
identify the time between when the appropriate information to diagnose the patient was 
available and when the actual diagnosis was conveyed to the family. Practices who have 
intervened on a given error will track 50 patient charts with one of the following  metrics: 1) time 
between positive mental health screen and diagnosis of depression or depression diagnosis 
ruled out, 2)  the number of days between blood pressure elevation in the medical record and 
notification of the family, or 3) time between abnormal  laboratory result received and notification 
of family.  Additionally, we will ask practices to evaluate 50 patients with a delayed diagnosis of 
actionable laboratory results 6 months after the diagnostic opportunity to evaluate for 
emergency department vis its, clinic visits, ultimate diagnosis , clinical worsening in laboratory 
values  and other patient morbidities. Similarly, we will ask intervention practices to evaluate 50 
patients whose diagnostic instrument of the PHQ -9M was positive 6 months after the diagnostic 
opportunity to evaluate how many were ultimately diagnosed with depression, attended initial 
mental health appointments and were referred to mental health or were diagnosed directly by 
the pediatrician.  
 
 
 
4. Study Population  
Our cohort will consist of at least 30 primary care pediatric practices which are part of 
QuIIN. We are confident that we can obtain this minimum number given that 45 of the 51 QuIIN 
practices (88%) participating in the pre- survey were interested in partic ipating in a diagnostic 
error project, and over 300 practices are part of QuIIN from 46 states. We were able to recruit 
and consent 34 practices, but 9 were lost after randomization due to multiple issues including 
change in clinic staffing, change in clinic leadership and difficulty with data collection.   For this 
reason we will recruit 15 additional practices to join the collaborative in Wave 2.  Interested 
practices reported seeing between 3,000 and 80,000 pediatric patients per practice annually 
(median 12,000). No practices will be excluded based on size as even the smallest practices 
have sufficient patient panels  to collect the data described above. Each practice- based team will 
be multidisciplinary, consisting of at least one physician, nurse and offi ce practice associate 
allowing for microsystem issues to be transmitted to practice leadership and QI skill to be 
disseminated across key groups.39 
 
 
Inclusion Criteria  
We will include 30 primary care pediatric practices that  are part of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics’ QuIIN organization.  Our second wave will recruit 15 additional 
practices. No practices will be excluded based on race, ethnicity, gender or location.    
 Given that this study is minimal risk and the data s ubmitted is deidentified , we will 
request a waiver of consent to look at patients’ protected health information submitted by 
these practices . Patient Protected Health Information (PHI) will not be collected in QIDA.  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 We will not exclude any practices  based on gender, race or ethnicity  of its providers or 
patients .  
 
4. Participant Recruitment:  
Version 4, 7/21/16   11 
 Upon IRB approval, primary care clinical teams will be recruited from the membership of 
the AAP’s Quality Improvement Innovation Networks (QuIIN) as well as other A AP listservs. In 
addition, Expert Group members will assist in recruiting potential practices.  
Practices will be enrolled via email and phone solicitation from the 300 QuIIN practices 
currently involved in the organization. This procedure has been successful in 39 prior and 
current QuIIN quality improvement collaborative practices.29 An application packet will be 
developed that will include a cover letter signed by Dr s. Micha el Rinke and David Bundy who 
represent the Project Expert Group. This application packet will also include a project overview, 
to describe the project and provide specific responsibilities of the practice/individual team 
members and a link to the applicati on to be completed via Survey Monkey . The application will 
ask for basic practice information and patient and practice demographics. QuIIN members and 
others will be notified of the opportunity to participate via email. The application packet includes 
details about an informational call to be held during recruitment so any interested individual can 
learn more about the project before completing an application. This informational call will be 
conducted by Expert Group leadership, AAP QuIIN Staff, and the QI Advisor.   This same 
recruitment format will be applied to the Wave 2 practices.  
 
5. Informed Consent:  
The core improvement team ( physician, nurse and office associate health care 
providers ) across the 30 Wave 1 practices  (25 retained) and 15 Wave 2 practi ces, enrolled via 
the AAP’s Quality Improvement and Innovation Networks (QuIIN) will be the primary human 
subjects for this proposal. Each practice will consent for participation via a standardized and 
previously used QuIIN consent form .  Over 300 practices are part of QuIIN from 46 states  and 
have between 1 and 80 providers in each practice. Interested practices reported seeing 
between 3,000 and 80,000 pediatric patients per practice per year (median 12,000). As the 
proposal is geared toward improving prov iders’ actions  and behaviors  to be consistent with 
best-practice care to diagnose the 3 specific conditions outlined in this proposal, the risk to 
individual providers is negligible and individual consent will be covered by a waiver of consent. It 
would be impractical to consult every healthcare provider in every clinic in this study.  This 
consent procedure will be carried out by the American Academy of Pediatrics and QuIIN as in 
previous projects conducted by their organization.  Providers are typically between 30- 60 years 
of age and no participants will be allowed who are less than 22 years old. No provider will be 
excluded.  Similarly, because patients will experience minimal risk and only the minimal personal 
health information will be collected on pati ents, will obtain a waiver of consent for patient data. 
Both of these waivers have been granted on prior QuIIN projects via the AAP’s IRB . 
 
6. Risk/Benefit:  
Risks:  
The physician, nurse and office associate health care providers at each of the QuIIN 
practices will be the primary human subjects for this work.  As the proposal is geared toward 
improving providers’ actions to be consistent with best -practice care, the risk t o providers is 
minimal. No individual provider compliance data or diagnostic error  data will be  recorded.  Only 
aggregated data at the practice level is recorded.  There will be no additional medical risks in 
implementing these procedures as they are all s tandard of care and we are only working to 
ensure reliable implementation.  Providers may feel discouragement if they are unable to 
reliably perform certain best -practices.  In order to minimize this risk, we will provide constant 
encouragement, utilizing systems focused, blame neutral coaching methodology.  Parents and 
patients will be free to decline any aspect of care as occurs normally in care.  As such, no 
additional risk is posed to the clinic patients.  
There are no foreseeable financial risks to pat ients as a result of this study. Providers 
could experience a potential decrease in patient volume and therefore financial revenue if their 
Version 4, 7/21/16   12 
 practice is worse than collaborative baseline and this information is made public. Practices will 
sign a non -disclos ure agreement regarding all data, and QuIIN has never experienced a data 
breech in 39 prior QIC projects. The research group and QuIIN will work hard to instill this 
understanding of confidentiality into the collaborative. On the contrary, practices could 
experience an increase in revenue if patients appreciate improved care and better diagnostic 
accuracy in their clinics. The financial risks to providers and practices are low.  
 
 
Benefits:  
The potential benefits of this study to the providers include timely  and actionable feedback, 
and alerts to help providers better recognize aspects of diagnostic performance in need of 
improvement. Teams will have the opportunity to test strategies for improving care that will 
become a national model, to work with colleagues from around the country, to learn from 
national experts in decreasing the incidence of diagnostic errors, utilize tools to screen for 
adolescent depression, high blood pressure and appropriate follow -up with actionable labs , to 
access practical tools and effective strategies for how to deliver better care, and receive 
ongoing support for improvement. If improvements in care are ac hieved, the benefits to parents 
and children are also likely to be significant. Teams will also have the opportunity to receive 
coaching from experts in the fields of quality improvement, medical informatics, health IT 
solutions, pediatric hypertension, pediatric mental health and diagnostic errors . Pending 
approval, pediatrician participants may have the opportunity to receive Part 4 Maintenance of 
Certification (MOC) credit  if they meet the minimum eligibility criteria.  
Although the subjects are the prov iders, pediatric patients may benefit from this study by 
being less likely to experience a diagnostic error.  
 
 
7. Data Collection:  
As with any study, we will take significant steps to safeguard all personal health 
information collected.  We will only collect the minimal amount of personal health information 
required as described above. All files will be deindentified and disassociated from practice 
identifiers as soon as the study is complete.  All records will be kept in locked offices, on 
password protected computers and in password protected files.  Finally, all data submitted to the 
QuIIN QIDA  national collaborative will be deidentified to the extent described above. QuIIN, 
using the QIDA software, has performed these activities on multiple prior QIC projects without 
any breaches of confidentiality.  The QIDA system is web- based and HIPAA compliant, and 
QuIIN will take responsibility for data security. Only the research team will have access to the  
raw QIDA data, and all data will be kept on password protected computers in locked offices. No 
patient identifiable information is stored in the QIDA database. Project data will be stored for 7 
years in the QIDA system, but once a project closes, only AAP QIDA staff will have access to 
the data.  As such the risk of a breach of confidentiality is minimal and the legal risks associated 
with a breach of confidentiality are also be minimal.  
 There w ill be 6 sets of data submitted to the QuIIN Quality Improvement Data 
Aggregator (QIDA) program.  First, all practices will report demographic data annually, including 
patient volume, number and training level of physician or physician assistant -level prov iders, 
number of nursing and office staff, university -affiliation, EHR availability, presence of trainees, 
and prior self -reported work aiming to improve these diagnostic errors. This demographic 
practice- level data will not include any PHI, aside from the contact information sought as with 
most project applications initially.  The project application will serve as the first set of practice -
based demographic data and it will be requested 2 additional times.  
Second, each practice will collect data on 1) incidence of adolescent depression 
(number of adolescents diagnosed with depression or subsyndromal depression as defined by 
Version 4, 7/21/16   13 
 the problem list or patient notes per 100 adolescent visits), 2) missed diagnosis of pediatric 
elevated blood pressure (elevated systolic or diastolic blood pressure for age, gender and 
height without provider recognition per 100 elevated blood pressures measured) and 3) delayed 
diagnosis of actionable laboratory results  (number of delayed actions, as defined in Table 2, per 
100 abnormal laboratory evaluations received). All of this data will originate from paper or 
electronic patient charts.  For each of the charts screened, the following demographic data will 
also be recorded: age, gender  and insurance status . These data will be entered into QIDA 
without patient names or birthdates.   No PHI will be recorded as part of this dataset that will be 
collected monthly .  
 The third set of data submitted will be process measure data for each of the three 
diagnostic errors described in the grant.  These data will be submitted by practices assigned to 
the related diagnostic error  while they are act ively intervening on that error (i.e. for 8 months  the 
group randomized to intervene on adolescent depression will collect process measure data on 
screening for adolescent depression) .  The three process measures will be 1) the percent of 
adolescents screened for depression, 2) the percent of children > 3 years old receiving blood 
pressure measurement at triage, and 3) the percent of providers with laboratory results unread 
or unacknowledged in their EHR inbox for more than 72 hours . These data will be enter ed in 
aggregate into QIDA for each clinic monthly and collected via electronic health record or 
practice based paper charting methods in each practice.   
 The fourth set of data collected will be mini -root cause analyses, which identify patient 
and systems  level factors that could have contributed to 1 diagnostic error monthly. Each 
practice will examine standardized patient , provider  and systems factors that could have led to 
the specific diagnostic errors identified in this grant. These factors could include 1) patient 
factors of age, gender, reason for visit, patient comorbidities, language barriers, acute illness, 
agitation of patient/family, social issues, etc . , 2) provider factors of type of provider, provider 
level of training, provider fatigue/impai rment, personal stressors of providers, provider 
disagreements, provider knowledge, provider beliefs about the project or the patient, etc.  and 3) 
systems factors of time of visit, clinic milieu during visit (chaotic vs. calm), increased workload, 
staffing  concerns, verbal/written communication, computer software or hardware, non- computer 
equipment, etc .. These mini -root cause analyses factors will be collected on paper based forms, 
deidentified and entered into SurveyMonkey . Practices will be encouraged to identify and 
spread lessons learned to all providers in their practices to prevent future errors.  
The fifth set of data collected will be related to providers’ abilities to recognize abnormal 
findings that could relate to the diagnostic errors of interest.  As recognition of abnormal findings 
is key to ultimately making a correct diagnosis, it is important for practices to track and 
understand if their clinicians are appropriately recognizing abnormal results.  These data will be 
obtained by electronic and paper chart review of the same 10- 17 charts per month as the 
primary outcome measures noted above.  They will include: 1) Percent of charts with 
documentation of patient’s systolic and diastolic blood pressure percentiles  documented in the 
record, 2) Percent of charts with documentation of mental health concerns or exclusion of 
mental health concerns in patient record or 3) Percent of charts with abnormal actionable 
laboratory results noted as “abnormal” in the patient rec ord.  Clinics will only collect these data 
when they are the intervention or control group for a given measure.   
The final set of data will be aggregate data of patients one time during the 2 year 
collaborative to identify the time between when the appropriate information to diagnose the 
patient was available and when the actual diagnosis was conveyed to the family. Practices who 
have intervened on a given error will track 50 patient charts with one of the following metrics: 1) 
time between positive mental  health screen and diagnosis of depression or depression 
diagnosis ruled out, 2)  the number of days between blood pressure elevation in the medical 
record and notification of the family, or 3) time between abnormal laboratory result received and 
notificat ion of family. , Additionally, we will ask practices to identify, in the same 50 patients with 
Version 4, 7/21/16   14 
 a delayed diagnosis of actionable laboratory results 6 months after the diagnostic opportunity to 
evaluate for emergency department visits, clinic visits, ultimat e diagnosis , clinical worsening in 
laboratory values  and other patient morbidities. Similarly, we will ask intervention practices to 
evaluate 50 patients whose diagnostic instrument of the PHQ -9M was positive 6 months after 
the diagnostic opportunity to ev aluate how many were ultimately diagnosed with depression, 
attended initial mental health appointments and were referred to mental health or were 
diagnosed directly by the pediatrician. . This final set of data will be collected only  once between 
12-18 mont hs after the intervention period begins.  
For research and publications that may result from this work, all data will be reported in 
aggregate, and individual and practice data will not be identifiable. If practice data is presented, 
each practice will rec eive an ID number in the report. Potential publications may include a 
conceptual model of key barriers and potentially useful strategies that emerged from this 
project. No patients or practice staff will be identified in any report or publication about thi s 
study. Practice names will only be used in the acknowledgement section of any potential 
publication.  
 
Statistical Models : The primary independent variable will be assignment to the control or QIC 
group and the 3 primary dependent variables will be the adolescent depression rate (number of 
adolescents diagnosed with depression per 100 adolescent v isits), the missed pediatric 
elevated blood pressure rate (elevated blood pressure not  recognized by providers per 100 
elevated blood pressures m easured) and the delayed diagnosis of actionable laboratory result s 
rate (delayed action s on laboratory results per 100 abnormal laboratory results r eceived). Since 
the individual -level outcome will be binary (missed/delayed diagnosis  or not ), we will apply 
mixed -effects logistic models for testing the three primary hypotheses during the first study year 
and for testing secondary hy potheses. T he clinic-specific intercept will be considered random to 
take into account potential correlations of outcomes from the subjects within the clinics. We will 
test each of the three main effect s using a mixed -effects model. All primary and secondary 
analyses wil l be controlled for potential confounding effects including factors such as baseline 
diagnostic error rates, patient volume, number and training of physician or physician assistant -
level providers,  number of nursing and office staff, university -affiliat ion, EHR availability, 
presence of trainees , and prior work improving these  diagnostic errors.  
 
Power A nalysis : Assuming a two sided alpha level of 0.05 and >80% power , we calculated the 
effect size we could detect for each of the 3 diagnostic error primary outcome measures, 
comparing the 10 -20 intervention practices , given the stepped wedge design,  to the 10- 20 
control practices using the above models, and the QIC methodology and preliminary data. 1) 
Missed diagnosis of depression: If each practice screens 17 adolescent charts a month, we are 
able to detect an effect size of 2.4% or a reduction in the diagnostic error rate as small as 33% 
(intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC)=0.005). 2) Missed diagnosis of pediatric elevated blood 
pressure: If each practi ce screens 10 patient charts with elevated blood pressure a month, we 
are able to detect an effect size of 12% or a reduction in the diagnostic error rate as small as 
13% (ICC=0.1). 3) Delayed diagnosis of actionable laboratory results : If each practice collects 
10 patient charts with abnormal laboratory values a month, we are able to detect an effect size 
of 13%, or a reduction in the diagnostic error rate as small as 15% (ICC=0.1). Although we are 
testing three outcomes, we do not correct the alpha level for multiple testing since the study 
subjects will most likely be different across the three outcome comparisons.  
 
 
8. Data Quality Control and Database Management:  
 We will make every effort to minimize data recording errors by checking for outliers or 
abnormal values using frequency tables or graphical tools such as box plots. If noted, we will  
Version 4, 7/21/16   15 
 correct or check the validity of those values  and discuss with practices . Although we expect few 
by virtue of randomization, we will examine imbalances between groups wi th respect to baseline 
practice  demographic characteristics and outcome measurements. We will use standard 
statistical methods such as chi -square, Fisher exact, two sample t -tests or Mann- Whitney tests, 
depending on the outcome scale and validity of normal distribution assumptions. If necessary, 
we will apply log -transformations for right -skewed data. We will include variables that are 
significantly different in the above statistical models to control for their potential confounding 
effects.  Although we anticipate little missing data based on prior QICs , when noted, we will 
examine reasons for incomplete records. We will  analyze available data as the primary analytic 
strategy since mixed- effects modeling is v alid for missing at random data. W e will als o conduct 
sensitivity analyse s applying a full conditional specification multiple imputation method which 
can apply to missing not at random data. We will compare results between available data 
analysis and multiple imputations data analysis.  
 
 
References:  
1. Institute of Medicine. To err is human: Building a safer health system. Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy Press; 1999.  
2. Zwaan L, Schiff GD, Singh H. Advancing the research agenda for diagnostic error reduction. BMJ 
quality & safety 2013;22 Suppl 2:ii52 -ii7. 
3. Graber ML. The incidence of diagnostic error in medicine. BMJ quality & safety 2013;22 Suppl 
2:ii21 -ii7. 
4. Singh H, Naik AD, Rao R, Petersen LA. Reducing diagnostic errors through effective 
communication: harn essing the power of information technology. Journal of general internal medicine 
2008;23:489 -94. 
5. McDonald KM, Matesic B, Contopoulos -Ioannidis DG, et al. Patient safety strategies targeted at 
diagnostic errors: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med 2013;1 58:381- 9. 
6. Singh H, Thomas EJ, Wilson L, et al. Errors of diagnosis in pediatric practice: a multisite survey. 
Pediatrics 2010;126:70 -9. 
7. Charlton I, Jones K, Bain J. Delay in diagnosis of childhood asthma and its influence on 
respiratory consultation rates. Arch Dis Child 1991;66:633 -5. 
8. Goddard AG, Kingston JE, Hungerford JL. Delay in diagnosis of retinoblastoma: risk factors and 
treatment outcome. The British journal of ophthalmology 1999;83:1320 -3. 
9. Carroll AE, Buddenbaum JL. Malpractice claims involving pediatricians: epidemiology and 
etiology. Pediatrics 2007;120:10- 7. 
10. Singh H, Graber ML, Kissam SM, et al. System -related interventions to reduce diagnostic errors: 
a narrative review. BMJ quality & safety 2012;21:160 -70. 
11. Perno JF, Schunk JE, Hansen KW, Furnival RA. Significant reduction in delayed diagnosis of injury 
with implementation of a pediatric trauma service. Pediatric emergency care 2005;21:367 -71. 
12. Wexler JR, Swender PT, Tunnessen WW, Jr., Oski FA. Impact of a system of computer -assisted 
diagnosis. Initial evaluation of the hospitalized patient. American journal of diseases of children 
1975;129:203- 5. 
13. Garrison CZ, Addy CL, Jackson KL, McKeown RE, Waller JL. Major depressive disorder and 
dysthymia in young adolescents. Am J Epidemiol 1992;135:792 -802.  
14. Whitaker A, Johnson J, Shaffer D, et al. Uncommon troubles in young people: prevalence 
estimates of selected psychiatric disorders in a nonreferred adolescent population. Archives of general 
psychiatry 1990;47:487 -96. 
15. Shaffer D, Fisher P, Dulcan MK, et al. The NIMH Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children 
Version 2.3 (DISC -2.3): description, acceptability, prevalence rates, and performance in the MECA Study. 
Version 4, 7/21/16   16 
 Methods for the Epidemiology of Child and Adolescent Mental Disorders Study. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1996;35:865 -77. 
16. Lewinsohn PM, Hops H, Roberts RE, Seeley JR, Andrews JA. Adolescent psychopathology: I. 
Prevalence and incidence of depression and other DSM -III-R disorde rs in high school students. Journal of 
abnormal psychology 1993;102:133- 44. 
17. Glazebrook C, Hollis C, Heussler H, Goodman R, Coates L. Detecting emotional and behavioural 
problems in paediatric clinics. Child: care, health and development 2003;29:141 -9. 
18. Eaton DK, Kann L, Kinchen S, et al. Youth risk behavior surveillance -  United States, 2011. 
Morbidity and mortality weekly report Surveillance summaries 2012;61:1 -162.  
19. Brady TM, Neu AM, Siberry G, Solomon B. Increased Provider Recognition of Elevat ed Blood 
Presure in Children.  American Society of Nephrology; 2012; San Diego, CA.  
20. Hansen ML, Gunn PW, Kaelber DC. Underdiagnosis of hypertension in children and adolescents. 
JAMA 2007;298:874 -9. 
21. Ealovega MW, Tabaei BP, Brandle M, Burke R, Herman WH. Opportunistic screening for diabetes 
in routine clinical practice. Diabetes care 2004;27:9 -12. 
22. Singh H, Thomas EJ, Sittig DF, et al. Notification of abnormal lab test results in an electronic 
medical record: do any safety concerns remain? The American journal of medicine 2010;123:238 -44. 
23. Wahls TL, Cram PM. The frequency of missed test results and associated treatment delays in a 
highly computerized health system. BMC family practice 2007;8:32.  
24. Callen J, Georgiou A, Li J, Westbrook JI. The sa fety implications of missed test results for 
hospitalised patients: a systematic review. BMJ quality & safety 2011;20:194 -9. 
25. Gandhi TK, Kachalia A, Thomas EJ, et al. Missed and delayed diagnoses in the ambulatory 
setting: a study of closed malpractice claims. Annals of internal medicine 2006;145:488 -96. 
26. Singh H, Hirani K, Kadiyala H, et al. Characteristics and predictors of missed opportunities in lung 
cancer diagnosis: an electronic health record -based study. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of 
the American Society of Clinical Oncology 2010;28:3307 -15. 
27. Singh H, Daci K, Petersen LA, et al. Missed opportunities to initiate endoscopic evaluation for 
colorectal cancer diagnosis. The American journal of gastroenterology 2009;104:2543 -54. 
28. Schiff GD, Hasan O, Kim S, et al. Diagnostic error in medicine: analysis of 583 physician -reported 
errors. Archives of internal medicine 2009;169:1881 -7. 
29. Hinton CF, Neuspiel DR, Gubernick RS, et al. Improving newborn screening follow -up in pediatric 
practices: quality improvement innovation network. Pediatrics 2012;130:e669 -75. 
30. Miller MR, Griswold M, Harris JM, 2nd, et al. Decreasing PICU catheter- associated bloodstream 
infections: NACHRI's quality transformation efforts. Pediatrics 2010 ;125:206 -13. 
31. Miller MR, Niedner MF, Huskins WC, et al. Reducing PICU central line -associated bloodstream 
infections: 3 -year results. Pediatrics 2011;128:e1077- 83. 
32. Nadeem E, Olin SS, Hill LC, Hoagwood KE, Horwitz SM. Understanding the components of quality 
improvement collaboratives: a systematic literature review. The Milbank quarterly 2013;91:354 -94. 
33. Greevy R, Lu B, Silber JH, Rosenbaum P. Optimal multivariate matching before randomization. 
Biostatistics 2004;5:263 -75. 
34. Schouten LM, Hulscher  ME, van Everdingen JJ, Huijsman R, Grol RP. Evidence for the impact of 
quality improvement collaboratives: systematic review. Bmj 2008;336:1491 -4. 
35. Hulscher ME, Schouten LM, Grol RP, Buchan H. Determinants of success of quality improvement 
collaborativ es: what does the literature show? BMJ quality & safety 2013;22:19 -31. 
36. Gaur AH, Bundy DG, Gao C, et al. Surveillance of hospital- acquired central line -associated 
bloodstream infections in pediatric hematology -oncology patients: lessons learned, challen ges ahead. 
Infection control and hospital epidemiology : the official journal of the Society of Hospital 
Epidemiologists of America 2013;34:316 -20. 
Version 4, 7/21/16   17 
 37. Sittig DF, Teich JM, Osheroff JA, Singh H. Improving clinical quality indicators through electronic 
heal th records: it takes more than just a reminder. Pediatrics 2009;124:375 -7. 
38. Singh H, Arora HS, Vij MS, Rao R, Khan MM, Petersen LA. Communication outcomes of critical 
imaging results in a computerized notification system. Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association : JAMIA 2007;14:459 -66. 
39. Kaplan HC, Provost LP, Froehle CM, Margolis PA. The Model for Understanding Success in 
Quality (MUSIQ): building a theory of context in healthcare quality improvement. BMJ quality & safety 
2012;21:13- 20. 
40. Berner ES, Graber ML. Overconfidence as a cause of diagnostic error in medicine. The American 
journal of medicine 2008;121:S2 -23. 
41. Giardina TD, King BJ, Ignaczak AP, et al. Root cause analysis reports help identify common 
factors in delayed diagnos is and treatment of outpatients. Health affairs 2013;32:1368 -75. 
42. Rinke ML, Chen AR, Bundy DG, et al. Implementation of a central line maintenance care bundle 
in hospitalized pediatric oncology patients. Pediatrics 2012;130:e996 -e1004.  
43. Rinke ML, Bun dy DG, Chen AR, et al. Central line maintenance bundles and CLABSIs in 
ambulatory oncology patients. Pediatrics 2013;132:e1403 -12. 
44. Zuckerbrot RA, Jensen PS. Improving recognition of adolescent depression in primary care. 
Archives of pediatrics & adoles cent medicine 2006;160:694 -704.  
45. Schubiner H, Tzelepis A, Wright K, Podany E. The clinical utility of the Safe Times Questionnaire. 
The Journal of adolescent health : official publication of the Society for Adolescent Medicine 
1994;15:374 -82. 
46. Force USPST. Screening and treatment for major depressive disorder in children and 
adolescents: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Pediatrics 2009;123:1223 -
8. 
47. Zuckerbrot RA, Maxon L, Pagar D, Davies M, Fisher PW, Shaffer D. Adolescen t depression 
screening in primary care: feasibility and acceptability. Pediatrics 2007;119:101 -8. 
48. Williams SB, O'Connor EA, Eder M, Whitlock EP. Screening for child and adolescent depression in 
primary care settings: a systematic evidence review for th e US Preventive Services Task Force. Pediatrics 
2009;123:e716- 35. 
49. Asarnow JR, Jaycox LH, Duan N, et al. Effectiveness of a quality improvement intervention for 
adolescent depression in primary care clinics: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2005;293: 311-9. 
50. Tschudy MM, Arcara KM. The Harriet Lane Handbook. 19th ed. United States: Elsevier; 2012.  
51. Allgaier AK, Pietsch K, Fruhe B, Sigl- Glockner J, Schulte -Korne G. Screening for depression in 
adolescents: validity of the patient health questionnair e in pediatric care. Depression and anxiety 
2012;29:906 -13. 
52. Zuckerbrot RA, Cheung AH, Jensen PS, Stein RE, Laraque D, Group G -PS. Guidelines for 
Adolescent Depression in Primary Care (GLAD -PC): I. Identification, assessment, and initial management. 
Pediatrics 2007;120:e1299 -312.  
53. Stein RE, Zitner LE, Jensen PS. Interventions for adolescent depression in primary care. Pediatrics 
2006;118:669- 82. 
54. Falkner B, Daniels SR. Summary of the Fourth Report on the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and 
Treatment of High  Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. Hypertension 2004;44:387 -8. 
55. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular H, Risk Reduction in C, Adolescents, 
National Heart L, Blood I. Expert panel on integrated guidelines for cardiovascular h ealth and risk 
reduction in children and adolescents: summary report. Pediatrics 2011;128 Suppl 5:S213 -56. 
56. Duncan PM, Duncan ED, Swanson J. Bright Futures: the screening table recommendations. 
Pediatric annals 2008;37:152 -8. 
Version 4, 7/21/16   18 
 57. Parker E, O'Connor P, Adams K. C -B5-04: Patterns of Blood Pressure Measurement at Pediatric 
Primary Care Visits in Large Medical Group Practices. Clinical Medicine and Research 2011;9:153 -4. 
58. Shapiro DJ, Hersh AL, Cabana MD, Sutherland SM, Patel AI. Hypertension screening du ring 
ambulatory pediatric visits in the United States, 2000 -2009. Pediatrics 2012;130:604- 10. 
59. Eder M, Smith SG, Cappleman J, Hickner J, Elder N, Singh G. Improving Your Office Testing 
Process, A Toolkit for Rapid -Cycle Patient Safety and Quality Improv ement. Rockville, MD: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2013 August  
 