Page 1 of  21 (V.04/27/2017)
HRP-591 - Protocol  for Human Subject 
Research 
Protocol Title:
Hybrid APC  assisted EMR for large colon polyps to reduce local recurrence, a prospective data collection Study
Principal Investigator:
Name: John M.  Levenick, MD
Department:  Medicine/ Gastroenterology & Hepatology
Telephone: 717-531-3834
E-mail Address:  jlevenick@pennstatehealth.psu.edu
Version Date:
 4/26/2018
Clinicaltrials.gov Registration  #:
N/A
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 2 of  21 (V.04/27/2017)Table of  Contents
1.0 Objectives
2.0 Background
3.0 Inclusion and  Exclusion Criteria
4.0 Recruitment  Methods
5.0 Consent  Process and Documentation
6.0 HIPAA  Research Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization
7.0 Study  Design and Procedures
8.0 Subject Numbers  and Statistical Plan
9.0 Confidentiality,  Privacy and Data Management
10.0 Data  and Safety Monitoring Plan
11.0 Risks
12.0 Potential  Benefits to Subjects and Others
13.0 Sharing  Results with Subjects
14.0 Subject Stipend  (Compensation) and/or Travel Reimbursements
15.0 Economic Burden  to Subjects
16.0 Resources  Available
17.0 Other  Approvals
18.0 Multi-Site Research
19.0 Adverse Event  Reporting
20.0 Study  Monitoring, Auditing and Inspecting
21.0 Future Undetermined Research:  Data and Specimen Banking
22.0 References
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 3 of  21 (V.04/27/2017)1.0 Objectives
1.1 Study  Objectives
The aim  of this study to evaluate and examine, whether use of Hybrid Argon Plasma Coagulation (APC) 
as adjunct to endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR), will reduce the risk of residual or recurrent neoplasia 
at 6 months. Hybrid APC is an existing FDA approved device for ablation of abnormal tissue anywhere in 
GI tract. We hypothesis that with Hybrid APC assisted EMR there  will be a decrease in recurrence rate 
after 6 months and it would be more effective compare to the  standard EMR procedure.
1.2 Primary  Study Endpoints
Measure Recurrent  rate and efficacy of Hybrid APC assisted EMR. Assess rate of local recurrent or 
residual neoplasia at the EMR scar using optical and histologic classification at 6 months.
1.3 Secondary  Study Endpoints
Evaluate rate of  post-polypectomy bleeding and post-polypectomy syndrome and compare it to 
standard procedure.
2.0 Background
2.1 Scientific Background  and Gaps
Colon Cancer is  a major disease that effecting more than 1 million people per year globally. 
Adenomatous polyps have been identified as the main precursor in lesions leading to colorectal cancer.1
                             Colon cancer  screening the best way to detect and remove large, often asymptomatic polyps. Early 
                        detection and resection of  these colorectal polyps can prevent the development of colon cancer. 
                              Endoscopic polypectomy introduced  in 1970’s, is an effective technique to prevent of colorectal cancer, 
                              as demonstrated  in National Polyps Study. Endoscipc mucosal resection (EMR) is a technique
                        used for resection  of medium to large colon polyps. In this technique, fluid is injected into the 
                        submucosal creating  a cushion  between the mucosa and the muscolaris propria. An electrocautery 
                             snare is  then deployed to resect the polyp in a single (en-bloc) or multiple (piecemeal) pieces. Most of 
                             polyps > 2cm  are resected in piecemeal way.  Although EMR is now considered standard of care with 
                              successful rate  resection of 85 % and low risk of complication (3-10% bleeding and 1% perforation), this  
                             technique has  inherent deficiencies, especially piecemeal EMR. This is particularly important if the polyp 
                        contains cancer.  Resection of scarred polyps using this technique is particularly challenging due to the  
                             non-lifting of  the polyp. Recurrence rates following piecemeal EMR can be as high as 20%.1,2
                             Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD)  is an alternative approach that aims to remove non- 
pedunculated precancerous or cancerous lesions  over 20 mm in one piece (en-bloc resection rate of 
89.95% and lesion recurrence rate of 0.7%). However, due to its technical complexity and high 
complication risk (mainly bleeding and perforation, with complication rates approximately 8%), it is not 
the current standard of care and only performed by experts in the technique.1 
Hybrid Argon  plasma coagulation (APC) is a new technique in which the endoscopist reinjects the 
submucosal  with fluid  to create a cushion (normal saline/ diluted adrenaline and /or sodium 
hyaluronate solution) to protect the muscle layer and is  then ablated using spray argon coagulation to 
treat any microscopic residual disease that is the seed for local recurrence .3 Previous studies have 
shown that this technique is a safe and easily applicable technique to complete resection for recurrent 
polyps after first EMR.
In this  present time there is no study to evaluate the safety and recurrence rate of the Hybrid-APC 
assisted EMR for large colon polyps at their initial resection attempt
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 4 of  21 (V.04/27/2017)2.2 Previous Data
In 2012  Tsiamoulos et.al.  in a single-center, retrospective case series report their experience in regards 
to   endoscopic  mucosal ablation (EMA) technique that can be used to complement the eradication of 
recurrent fibrotic colon polyps. In this study, of consecutive patients referred for endoscopic excision of 
recurrent benign colon polyps with severe submucosal fibrosis, fourteen patients (mean age 73 years; 9 
men, 5 women) with 15 recurrent colon adenomas (mean polyp size 30 mm, 9 proximal/6 distal) were 
included. EMA with a mean APC power setting of 55 W was applied. Complete polyp eradication was 
achieved in 9 of 11 patients (82%) at first or second completed follow-up. One patient needed 
laparoscopic colectomy because of cancer, and 1 underwent transanal endoscopic microsurgery for 
benign massive recurrence. The other 3 patients with small, easily treatable recurrence (≤3 mm) were 
followed by 1-year-surveillance. No perforations and no postpolypectomy syndrome were reported. 
They concluded that EMA appears to be a safe and easily applicable technique to assist the complete 
eradication of recurrent fibrotic colon polyps.3
A systematic review  and meta-analysis by Arezzo et.al in 2016 compares the safety and efficacy of 
endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) and endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) in the treatment of 
flat and sessile colorectal lesions >20mm. They reviewed the literature published between January 2000 
and March 2014. Pooled estimates of the proportion of patients with en bloc, R0 resection, 
complications, recurrence, and need for further treatment were compared. A total of 11 studies and 
4678 patients were included. The en bloc resection rate was 89.9% for ESD vs 34.9% for EMR patients 
(RR 1.93 p<0.001). The R0 resection rate was 79.6% for ESD vs 36.2% for EMR patients (RR 2.01 
p<0.001). The rate of perforation was 4.9% for the ESD group and 0.9% for EMR (RR 3.19, p<0.001), 
while the rate of bleeding was 1.9% for ESD and 2.9% for EMR (RR 0.68, p=0.070). Therefore, the overall 
need for further surgery, including surgery for oncologic reasons and surgery for complications, was 
7.8% for ESD and 3.0% for EMR (RR 2.40, p<0.001). They concluded that ESD achieves a higher rate of en 
bloc and R0 resection compared to EMR, at the cost of a higher risk of complications.4
Manner et.al  in 2015 performed a prospective study, which evaluating the efficacy and safety of the new 
technique of Hybrid-APC which combines submucosal injection with APC in patients with dysplastic 
Barrett’s esophagus. In this study Patients who had a residual Barret’s Esophagus (BE) segment of at 
least 1 cm after endoscopic resection of early Barrett's neoplasia underwent thermal ablation of BE by 
Hybrid-APC. Prior to thermal ablation, submucosal injection of sodium chloride 0.9% was carried out 
using a flexible water-jet probe. Surveillence upper GI endoscopy was carried out 3 months after 
macroscopically complete ablation including biopsies from the neo-Z-line and the former BE segment, 
and recording of stricture formation. Total of 60 patients were included in the study [55 pt male (92%); 
mean age 62 ± 9 years, range 42-79]. Ten patients were excluded from the study. In the remaining 50 
pt., Hybrid-APC ablation and surveillence endoscopy at 3 months were carried out. Forty-eight out of 50 
pt. achieved macroscopically complete remission after a median of 3.5 APC sessions]. Freedom from BE 
was histopathologically observed in 39/50 patients (78%). There was one treatment-related stricture 
(2%). Minor adverse events of Hybrid-APC were observed in 11 patients (22%). It concluded that Hybrid-
APC was effective and safe for BE ablation in a tertiary referral center. The rate of stricture formation 
was only 2%.5
2.3 Study  Rationale
EMR has a recurrence  rate of up to 20% in large ≥20 mm lesions with a relatively low risk profile. ESD 
has a low 1-4% recurrence rate but higher risk profile. We are assessing if adjuvant hybrid APC with EMR 
drop the recurrence rate near ESD levels while maintaining the safety profile of EMR.
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 5 of  21 (V.04/27/2017)3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion  Criteria
3.1 Inclusion Criteria
• Adult  patient aged ≥18 and ≤89 of any gender, ethnicity and race referred to endoscopy for resection     
   of large  colon polyps
•   Patients with  a ≥20mm  colon non-pedunculated polyp
Ability  to give written informed consent
3.2 Exclusion  Criteria
Patients  with known (biopsy proven) invasive carcinoma in a potential study polyp
Pedunculated  polyps (as defined by Paris Classification type Ip or Isp) 
Patients  with ulcerated depressed lesions (as defined by Paris Classification type III)
Patients  with inflammatory bowel disease
Patients  who are receiving an emergency colonoscopy
Poor  general health (ASA class>3)
Patients  with coagulopathy with an elevated INR ≥1.5, or platelets <50
Poor  bowel preparation
Target  sign or perforation during initial EMR
Need  for ESD for complete resection prior to APC
Pregnancy  and breast feeding
3.3 Early  Withdrawal of Subjects
3.3.1 Criteria  for removal from study
A patient  will be removed from the study for any following reasons:
• The  patient desires to discontinue participation
• The  investigator believes that discontinuation is in the best interest of patient
3.3.2 Follow-up for  withdrawn subjects
Patients will  be informed that participation in this study is voluntary and that they do not to 
have to participate in this research. If patients choose to participate, they have the right to stop 
any time. If a patient decides not to take part in the research or decides to stop taking part in 
the research at later date, there will be no penalty or loss benefits to which he/she is entitled.
The PI  of this study has the right to remove patients from the study without their permission. If 
the investigator determines that the subject does not fulfill the criteria to be in the study, or the 
subject’s condition becomes worse, he may remove the subject from the study. 
Information obtained  prior to withdrawal may continue to be used if is necessary for the 
soundness of the overall research. Furthermore, records of the care that we provided will be 
retained as long as the law requires.
As this  is a single point of care investigation, the process of withdrawal may occur between the 
time of consent and the administration of sedative. Withdrawal may occur either with a written 
or vocalized desire to retract one’s consent.
If a  subject is removed from the study prior to completion, the reason for doing so and the date 
the subject is discontinued will be documented.
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 6 of  21 (V.04/27/2017)4.0 Recruitment  Methods
4.1 Identification  of subjects
We will  recruit patients presenting with a known ≥ 20mm polyp prior colonoscopy and referred for 
resection of this polyp to Hershey Medical Center.               
4.2 Recruitment  process
All patients in  our institute with a known ≥ 20mm polyp detected at a prior colonoscopy who are  
referred for  colonoscopy procedure will be identified as potential study participants.                         
4.3 Recruitment  materials
Not applicable
4.4 Eligibility/screening  of subjects
All prospective  subjects undergoing colonoscopy with a ≥ 20mm colon non-pedunculated polyp 
will be seen  prior to the procedure to discuss and review the details of the study. Interested individuals 
will be screened to ensure that they meet inclusion and exclusion criteria.
5.0 Consent  Process and Documentation
5.1 Consent  Process 
 
5.1.1 Obtaining  Informed Consent
5.1.1.1 Timing  and Location of Consent
Consent and  basic demographics will be garnered by the PI, one of the  
co-investigators or research associate  prior to bringing the patient into
 the  endoscopy suite, discussions about the research and obtaining 
                                                                         informed consent  will occur in curtained endoscopy pre-procedure room.
 Patients  will be giving adequate time to review consent form and consult 
 with family  if they wish. Patients are not sedated at the time of consent.
5.1.1.2 Coercion  or Undue Influence during Consent
 Patients  will have time to review the consent form and ask questions.   
 Patients  will be informed that Colonoscopy procedure will take place 
 even  if the patient chooses not to participate in the study.
5.1.2 Waiver  or alteration of the informed consent requirement
Partial Waiver  of informed consent is requested pre – recruitment purpose. The chart and 
Medical record review pre-recruitment poses no more than minimal harm to
subject (i.e. loss  of confidentiality/privacy). Given the number of subjects and the
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 7 of  21 (V.04/27/2017)possibility that   not all subjects that look at their medical record may not eligible for the study 
this part of research would not be practical without waiver
5.2 Consent  Documentation
5.2.1 Written  Documentation of Consent
Consent will  be performed by the PI, co-investigators or research associate prior to the
procedure. A discussion  about the research study will be initiated prior to bringing the patient 
into the endoscopy suite. Written consent will be obtained by the PI, co-investigators or 
research associate prior to the procedure and that a copy of the signed consent form will be 
given to the subject. Patients will be informed that colonoscopy procedure will take place even if 
they chose to decline participation.
5.2.2 Waiver  of Documentation of Consent (Implied consent, Verbal consent, etc.)
Not applicable
5.3 Consent  – Other Considerations 
5.3.1 Non-English  Speaking Subjects
Not planned  at this time, although, if subjects who do not speak English will be enrolled, short 
form and oral translation process will be used to obtain informed consent.
5.3.2 Cognitively  Impaired Adults
5.3.2.1 Capability  of Providing Consent
Not applicable
5.3.2.2 Adults  Unable To Consent
Not applicable
5.3.2.3 Assent  of Adults Unable to Consent
Not applicable
5.3.3 Subjects  who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers) 
5.3.3.1 Parental  Permission
Not applicable
5.3.3.2 Assent  of subjects who are not yet adults
Not applicable
6.0 HIPAA Research  Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization
6.1 Authorization  and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization for the Uses and Disclosures of PHI
Check all  that apply:
 Not  applicable, no identifiable protected health information (PHI) is accessed, used or 
disclosed in this study. [Mark all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable]
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 8 of  21 (V.04/27/2017)Authorization will  be obtained and documented as part of the consent process. [If this is the 
only box checked, mark sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable]
Partial waiver is  requested for recruitment purposes only  (Check this box if patients’ medical 
records will be accessed to determine eligibility before consent/authorization has been 
obtained). [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3]
Full waiver  is requested for entire research study (e.g., medical record review studies). 
[Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3]
Alteration is requested  to waive requirement for written documentation of authorization 
(verbal authorization will be obtained). [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3]
6.2 Waiver  or Alteration of Authorization for the Uses and Disclosures of PHI
6.2.1 Access,  use or disclosure of PHI representing no more than a minimal risk to the privacy of the 
individual
6.2.1.1 Plan  to protect PHI from improper use or disclosure
Not applicable
6.2.1.2 Plan  to destroy identifiers or a justification for retaining identifiers 
Not applicable
6.2.2 Explanation for  why the research could not practicably be conducted without access to and 
use of PHI
The information  to be gathered is just for the recruitment purpose. Without it the PI could not 
identify the eligible subjects. This partial waiver is only for recognize the eligibility of study 
subjects. Obtaining consent from every subjects come for EMR would be prohibitive, resource 
exhaustive, and potentially cause confidentiality issues for the ones not be eligible for the study.
6.2.3 Explanation for  why the research could not practicably be conducted without the waiver or 
alteration of authorization
The projects requires  look at medical records to identify eligible subjects. 
Obtaining consent  from every subjects come for EMR would be prohibitive, resource exhaustive, 
and potentially cause confidentiality issues for the ones not be eligible for the study.
6.3 Waiver  or alteration of authorization statements of agreement
Not applicable
7.0 Study  Design and Procedures
7.1 Study  Design
This is a  prospective data collection study which patients with non-pedunculated large polyps ≥ 20mm 
undergoing endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR with adjuvant Hybrid Argon Plasma Coagulation (APC) 
of the base and edges of the polypectomy site to fulgurate any potential microscopic residual disease. 
Resected polyps will be sent to the pathology laboratory where pathologist determine the final 
diagnosis of the polyps as per standard of care. We will collect the detail of the procedure, including, 
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 9 of  21 (V.04/27/2017)general procedure  details, polyp characteristic, details of any adverse event may happen and the details 
of 6 months follow up colonoscopy procedure. 
7.2 Study  Procedures
Consent and  basic demographics will be garnered by the PI, Co-investigators or research associate in the 
pre-procedure area prior to bringing the patient to the endoscopy unit.
Whether or  not the patients choose to participate in this study, subject will undergo the scheduled 
colonoscopy in the same manner as any patient presently referred for resection of 
large polyps.  Patients will have undergone colonoscopy prep as it is standard at each center. All exams 
will be performed using high-definition colonoscopes with digital chromoendoscopy capability (e.g. 
Olympus 190 series). 
Lesions will  be identified using conventional colonoscopic views. Polyp characteristics will be recorded. 
Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) will be used for all resections: the polyp will be submucosally 
injected, so that the lesion will lift and demarcate from the submucosal layer. The submucosal injection 
creates a “cushion” between the mucosa and the muscularis propria. The idea is that mucosal lesions 
can be more safely removed. The applied injectate fluid will contain a lifting agent e.g. NaCl 0.9% and a 
dye agent e.g. methylene blue. The polyp will be resected with electrocautery snare. Following the 
resection of the polyp with the snare the submucosal area will be reinjected with saline  (NaCl 0.9%) and 
then thermally ablated using APC (Erbe Hybrid APC). Finally thermal ablation of the resection site with 
the hybrid APC will occur using start settings. Once resection is considered complete the mucosal defect 
may be closed with clips for situations include but not limited to control bleeding during the polyp 
resection. Patients will be monitored continuously as is routine for any colonoscopy performed in our 
institution. Patients will be observed for in the recovery room before discharge for any sign of 
complications. (See appendix 1) We will collect the detail of the procedure, including, general procedure 
details, polyp characteristic, details of any adverse event may happen and the details of 6 months follow 
up colonoscopy procedure. 
7.2.1 EXAMPLE:  Visit 1 or Day 1 or Pre-test, etc. (format accordingly)
Patients will  be contacted by phone 30 days post procedure to assess for any possible  
 complications.  (See appendix 2).
7.2.2 EXAMPLE:  Visit 2 or Day 2 or Post-test, etc. (format accordingly)
A follow-up colonoscopy  will be scheduled 6 months following the EMR procedure to evaluate    
for any recurrent polyp. 
This is a  standard of care for resection of large polyps 
7.3 Duration  of Participation
For all of  the subjects it will be take 6 months to complete the study. A follow up colonoscopy will  
schedule and preform 6 months post-procedure to assess recurrence rate.
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 10  of 21 (V.04/27/2017).
8.0 Subject  Numbers and Statistical Plan
8.1 Number  of Subjects
We’re going  to enroll 40 patients with detected colon polyps ≥20 mm that referred to Hershey 
Medical Center for EMR colonoscopy.
8.2 Sample  size determination
We shall  assume a recurrent rate of 5% for the APC assisted EMR. A sample size of 40 subjects provide 
60% power of rejecting  in a one-sided test, which is reasonable for a pilot study. 𝑯𝟎: 𝝅=𝟏𝟓%
8.3 Statistical methods
The statistical plan  for this study was designed with the assistance of Dr. Jason Liao with Penn State 
Public Health Sciences. The primary end point is the rate (proportion of patients) of local recurrent or 
residual neoplasia at 6 months for the Hybrid Argon Plasma Coagulation (APC) assisted EMR. Estimate of 
this recurrent rate will provided with 95% exact binomial confidence limits, which will then be compared 
to the historical rate of 15-20% recurrent rate for EMR alone. Statistical significance will be declared if 
the upper limit is smaller than 15%.  Even when significance is not reached, the confidence interval 
provides the plausible range of the local recurrent rate of the APC assisted EMR and helps to decide if a 
future study with a larger sample size is warranted. 
Summary statistics such  as percentage of male/female patients, percentage of polyps within the 
different location of colon, mean diameter of polyps, percentage rate of neoplasia recurrence after 6 
months , the percentage of each type of Polyps (Ip, IIa, IIb, IIc,  etc), and Percentage of successful 
resection will also be provided. SPSS 22 statistical software shall be used to perform statistical analysis.
9.0 Confidentiality,  Privacy and Data Management 
See the  Research Data Plan Review Form
9.1 Confidentiality
9.1.1 Identifiers  associated with data and/or specimens
9.1.1.1 Use  of Codes, Master List
9.1.2 Storage of  Data and/or Specimens
9.1.3 Access  to Data and/or Specimens
9.1.4 Transferring  Data and/or Specimens
9.2 Subject Privacy
10.0 Data  and Safety Monitoring Plan
10.1 Periodic  evaluation of data
                           The study  involves minimal risk to subjects as it involves evaluate Hybrid APC assisted EMR, 
                               which is FDA  approved equipment and standard care  procedure in U.S. for resection of 
                               large polyps.
                Oversight for  the conduct of the study will be provided by the PI, John M. Levenick, MD 
                and the  clinical research associate.  Any adverse event may occurring will 
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 11  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)                be documented  and reported according to HSPO policies and procedures. The principal 
                investigator and  co-investigators will be responsible for data collection and verification, and 
                review of  cumulative adverse events. Confidentiality will be protected by utilizing a code 
                number as  the only identifier for each subject and the master list will be kept under lock and 
                key with  access limited to the PI and research associate. Cumulative adverse events and study 
                progress summary  will be communicated to the IRB at the time of continuing review.  
       
10.2 Data  that are reviewed
All adverse  events will be documented and entered into the Redcap® data management system for
centralized data  storage and documentation. The following information will be entered: adverse event      
              type, onset/resolution  date and time, intensity/severity, action taken, and outcome. All deaths on the  
              study, not  related to progression of underlying disease will be reported to the IRB immediately. All 
              unanticipated AE’s  related or possibly related to  study will be reported by PI to the IRB according to 
HSPO policies  and procedures.
10.3 Method of collection  of safety information
Patient demographics,  risk factors, EMR procedural elements, Pathology results, complications, and all
follow up  data will be entered into the Redcap® data management system for centralized data storage
and documentation.
10.4 Frequency  of data collection
Data will  be collected at the time of enrollment, the initial procedure, 30 days post
procedure phone call  (adverse events), 2-3  weeks post-procedure pathology
results and   6 month follow-up colonoscopy examination .
10.5 Individuals reviewing the data
                          The PI and clinical  research associate will review cumulative adverse events and accrual every 
                             3 months  and report any issues requiring modification of the study or alternation of the risk: 
                             benefit ratio  to IRB immediately. A summary of adverse events, study progress and protocol
                             modification will  be included for IRB review in the continuing progress report.
10.6 Frequency  of review of cumulative data
The PI  and the clinical research associate will review cumulative adverse events and accrual every 3 
months.
10.7 Statistical  tests
Not applicable
10.8 Suspension  of research
The study  team will make decisions regarding cessation of accrual. This trial will be suspended for
review for  any patient death during, or up to 30 days after participating in the trial if felt to be causally
related to  participation in this trial. The study team and the Office of Human Protection will then decide
after review  whether it is safe to continue the trial. 
11.0 Risks
The research involves no  more than minimal risk to participants because it involves prospective review of the 
patient’s medical records, procedure details and any adverse events may occur for limited and in-sensitive 
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 12  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)information. The  only risk is the loss of patient confidentiality and the risk will be minimized by coding the 
research data and keeping separate list that links code number with identifiers.
12.0 Potential Benefits  to Subjects and Others
12.1 Potential  Benefits to Subjects
There are  no guarantees that subjects will benefit from participating in a research study, however, we 
hope there is a benefit of reducing recurrence rate while maintaining safety.
12.2 Potential  Benefits to Others
The results  of this research may lead to a technique for better way of complete resection of large polyps 
and safer one for future patients. 
13.0 Sharing  Results with Subjects
Data and  results of the study outcome will not be shared with either the patient, primary provider, or 
               referring provider.  The results of the colonoscopy will be shared as per normal routine of the endoscopist.
14.0 Subject  Stipend (Compensation) and/or Travel Reimbursements
Not Applicable
15.0 Economic  Burden to Subjects
15.1 Costs  
Participant will  not bear any costs which are not part of standard care. 
15.2 Compensation  for research-related injury
Subjects will  not receive any compensation for being in this research study. As this is a low risk study, 
the like-hood of complications or injury is very small. Is it possible however, that the subject could 
develop complications or injuries as a result of participating in this research study. In the event of injury 
resulting from this research, medical treatment is available but will provide at the usual charge.
It is  the policy of the institution to provide neither financial compensation nor free medical treatment 
for research-related injury. In the event of injury resulting from this research, medical treatment is 
available but will be provided at the usual charge. Costs for the treatment of research-related injuries 
will be charged to subjects or their insurance carriers. 
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 13  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)16.0 Resources Available
16.1 Facilities  and locations
All study  procedures including colonoscopy will be conducted at Gastrointestinal Endoscopy and Motility 
Center at UPS (suite 2000) at Hershey Medical Center. The fully-staffed Gastrointestinal Endoscopy and 
Motility Center features 8 endoscopy rooms with state of the art Olympus endoscopes. Two of the room 
designed to accommodate advanced therapeutic procedures, and have fluoroscopic capabilities. The 
suite has several onsite anesthesiologists, nurses and physicians. Measures in place to maintain patient 
privacy include: procedures that are performed in private studios or rooms and recovery that occurs in 
curtained rooms. If required, continuous emergency care is available. The primary investigator Dr. John 
Levenick is an Assistant Professor of Medicine. He has extensive experience with colonoscopy and EMR 
procedures. Additionally Dr. Levenick has several years of research experience as PI or Co-Investigator.
  
16.2 Feasibility  of recruiting the required number of subjects
A total of  40 patients are needed for this study. Approximately, 170 colonic EMR performed at Hershey 
medical center per year. 100-125 of these EMR are done to remove polyps >2cm. We anticipate 
complete enrollment in 6 months.
16.3 PI  Time devoted to conducting the research
 As the  principal investigator, Dr. Levenick has devoted a set amount of time to oversee the 
administration and surveillance of this study and to perform the procedures. He has been given a 
dedicated amount of academic time to pursue research, and while limited, it is sufficient to oversee and 
execute this trial safely and effectively.
16.4 Availability  of medical or psychological resources
 Patients  will have continuous monitoring of vital signs during and after the colonoscopy  
 procedure as  is standard of care for this procedure as outlined in the protocol. Continuous 
 emergency  medical care is available for any patient undergoing colonoscopy and to this study 
 population  as standard of care. Physician, nursing, and support staff are available continuously   
  while the  patient is in the endoscopy suite.
16.5 Process  for informing Study Team
The study  team will meet to review the study procedures every month at the therapeutic pod meeting. 
All team members will be up to date on the progress of the study and any adverse events that may 
occur.
17.0 Other  Approvals
17.1 Other  Approvals from External Entities
Not applicable
17.2 Internal  PSU Committee Approvals
Check all  that apply:
  Anatomic Pathology  – Hershey only – Research involves the collection of tissues or use of pathologic 
specimens. Upload a copy of HRP-902 - Human Tissue For Research Form on the “Supporting 
Documents” page in CATS IRB. This form is available in the CATS IRB Library.
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 14  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)  Animal Care  and Use – All campuses – Human research involves animals and humans or the use of 
human tissues in animals
  Biosafety – All  campuses – Research involves biohazardous materials (human biological specimens 
in a PSU research lab, biological toxins, carcinogens, infectious agents, recombinant viruses or DNA or 
gene therapy). 
  Clinical Laboratories  – Hershey only – Collection, processing and/or storage of extra tubes of body 
fluid specimens for research purposes by the Clinical Laboratories; and/or use of body fluids that had 
been collected for clinical purposes, but are no longer needed for clinical use. Upload a copy of HRP-901 
- Human Body Fluids for Research Form on the “Supporting Documents” page in CATS IRB. This form is 
available in the CATS IRB Library.
  Clinical Research  Center (CRC) Advisory Committee– All campuses – Research involves the use of 
CRC services in any way.  
  Conflict of  Interest Review – All campuses – Research has one or more of study team members 
indicated as having a financial interest.
  Radiation Safety  – Hershey only – Research involves research-related radiation procedures. All 
research involving radiation procedures (standard of care and/or research-related) must upload a copy 
of HRP-903 - Radiation Review Form on the “Supporting Documents” page in CATS IRB. This form is 
available in the CATS IRB Library.
  IND/IDE Audit  – All campuses – Research in which the PSU researcher holds the IND or IDE or 
intends to hold the IND or IDE.
  Scientific Review  – Hershey only – All investigator-written research studies requiring review by the 
convened IRB must provide documentation of scientific review with the IRB submission. The scientific 
review requirement may be fulfilled by one of the following: (1) external peer-review process; (2) 
department/institute scientific review committee; or (3) scientific review by the Clinical Research Center 
Advisory committee.  NOTE: Review by the Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute Scientific Review 
Committee is required if the study involves cancer prevention studies or cancer patients, records and/or 
tissues. For more information about this requirement see the IRB website at: 
http://www.pennstatehershey.org/web/irb/home/resources/investigator 
18.0 Multi-Site  Research
18.1 Communication  Plans
Not Applicable
18.2 Data  Submission and Security Plan
Not Applicable
18.3 Subject  Enrollment
Not Applicable
18.4 Reporting  of Adverse Events and New Information
Not Applicable
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 15  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)18.5 Audit  and Monitoring Plans
               Not Applicable
19.0 Adverse  Event Reporting
19.1 Adverse  Event Definitions
For device  studies, incorporate the following definitions into the below responses, as written:
Unanticipated 
adverse
 device 
effectAny serious  adverse effect on health or safety or any life-threatening problem 
or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or 
death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence 
in the investigational plan or IDE application (including a supplementary plan 
or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a 
device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.
19.2 Recording  of Adverse Events
All adverse  events (serious or non-serious) and abnormal test findings observed or reported to   
                             study team  believed to be associated with the study drug(s) or device(s) will be followed until  
the event (or its  sequelae) or the abnormal test finding resolves or stabilizes at a level 
                             acceptable to  the investigator.
 An abnormal  test finding will be classified as an adverse event if one or more of the following  
 criteria  are met:
• The  test finding is accompanied by clinical symptoms
• The  test finding necessitates additional diagnostic evaluation(s) or medical/surgical intervention;       
including significant additional concomitant drug treatment or other therapy
                             Note: Simply  repeating a test finding, in the absence of any of the other listed criteria,  
                             does not  constitute an adverse event.   
• The  test finding leads to a change in study drug dosing or discontinuation of subject  
    participation in  the clinical research study
• The  test finding is considered an adverse event by the investigator.
19.3 Causality  and Severity Assessments
The investigator  will promptly review documented adverse events and abnormal test findings to 
determine 1) if the abnormal test finding should be classified as an adverse event; 2) if there is a 
reasonable possibility that the adverse event was caused by the study drug(s) or device(s); and 3) if the 
adverse event meets the criteria for a serious adverse event.
If the  investigator’s final determination of causality is “unknown and of questionable relationship to the 
study drug(s) or device(s)”, the adverse event will be classified as associated with the use of the study 
drug(s) or device(s) for reporting purposes.  If the investigator’s final determination of causality is 
“unknown but not related to the study drug(s) or device(s)”, this determination and the rationale for the 
determination will be documented in the respective subject’s case history.
19.4 Reporting  of Adverse Reactions and Unanticipated Problems to the FDA  
19.4.1 Written  IND/IDE Safety Reports
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 16  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)The Sponsor-Investigator  will submit a completed FDA Form 3500Ato the FDA’s Center for 
Devices and Radiological Health for any observed or volunteered adverse effect that is 
determined to be an unanticipated adverse device effect.  A copy of this completed form will be 
provided to all participating sub-investigators.
                                           The completed  FDA Form 3500Awill be submitted to the FDA as soon as possible and, in no
                                           event, later  than 10 working days after the Sponsor-Investigator first receives notice of 
                                           the adverse  effect.   
If the  results of the Sponsor-Investigator’s follow-up evaluation show that an adverse effect that 
was initially determined to not constitute an unanticipated adverse device effect does, in fact, 
meet the requirements for reporting; the Sponsor-Investigator will submit a completed FDA 
Form 3500Aas soon as possible, but in no event later than 10 working days, after the 
determination was made.
For each  submitted FDA Form 3500A, the Sponsor-Investigator will identify all previously 
submitted reports that that addressed a similar adverse effect experience and will provide an 
analysis of the significance of newly reported adverse effect in light of the previous, similar 
report(s). 
Subsequent to the  initial submission of a completed FDA Form 3500A, the Sponsor-Investigator 
will submit additional information concerning the reported adverse effect as requested by the 
FDA.
19.4.2 Telephoned  IND Safety Reports – Fatal or Life-threatening Suspected Adverse Reactions
Not Applicable
19.5 Reporting  Adverse Reactions and Unanticipated Problems to the Responsible IRB
In accordance with applicable  policies of The Pennsylvania State University Institutional Review Board 
(IRB), the investigator will report, to the IRB, any observed or reported harm (adverse event) 
experienced by a subject or other individual, which in the opinion of the investigator is determined to be 
(1) unexpected; and (2) probably related to the research procedures. Harms (adverse events) will be 
submitted to the IRB in accordance with the IRB policies and procedures.
19.6 Unblinding  Procedures
Not Applicable
19.7 Stopping Rules
  Not Applicable
20.0 Study  Monitoring, Auditing and Inspecting
20.1 Study  Monitoring Plan
20.1.1 Quality  Assurance and Quality Control
                           The study  involves minimal risk to subjects as it involves evaluate Hybrid APC assisted EMR, 
                               which is FDA  approved equipment and EMR is standard care  procedure in U.S. for resection of 
                               large polyps.
                Oversight for  the conduct of the study will be provided by the PI, John M. Levenick, MD 
                and the  clinical research associate.  Any adverse event may occurring will 
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 17  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)                be documented  and reported according to HSPO policies and procedures. The principal 
                investigator and  co-investigators will be responsible for data collection and verification, and 
                review of  cumulative adverse events. Confidentiality will be protected by utilizing a code 
                number as  the only identifier for each subject and the master list will be kept under lock and 
                key with  access limited to the PI and research associate. Cumulative adverse events and study 
                progress summary  will be communicated to the IRB at the time of continuing review.  
20.1.2 Safety Monitoring
All adverse  events will be documented and entered into the Redcap® data management system 
for centralized data storage and documentation. The following information will be entered: 
adverse event  type, onset/resolution date and time, intensity/severity, action taken, and 
outcome. All deaths on the study, not related to progression of underlying disease will be 
reported to the IRB immediately. All unanticipated AE’s related or possibly related to study will 
be reported by PI to the IRB according to HSPO policies and procedures.
The Principal  Investigator will confirm that all adverse events (AE) are correctly entered into the 
AE case report forms by the coordinator; be available to answer any questions that the 
coordinators may have concerning AEs; and will notify the IRB, FDA, sponsor and/or DSMB of all 
applicable AEs as appropriate. All assessments of AEs will be made by a licensed medical 
professional who is an investigator on the research.
The Research Coordinator  will complete the appropriate report form and logs; assist the PI to 
prepare reports and notify the IRB, FDA and/or DSMB of all Unanticipated Problems/SAE’s.
21.0 Future Undetermined  Research: Data and Specimen Banking
21.1 Data  and/or specimens being stored
Not applicable
21.2 Location  of storage
Not applicable
21.3 Duration of  storage
                             Not applicable
21.4 Access  to data and/or specimens
               Not applicable
21.5 Procedures  to release data or specimens
               Not applicable
21.6 Process  for returning results
Not applicable
22.0 References
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 18  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)1. Von Renteln D , Bouin M , Barkun AN . Current standards and new developments of colorectal polyp 
management and resection  techniques. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Sep; 11(9):835-842.
2. Kandiah  K, Subramaniam S1, Bhandari P. Polypectomy and advanced endoscopic resection. Frontline 
Gastroenterol. 2017 Apr;8(2):110-114
3. Tsiamoulos ZP, Bourikas  LA, Saunders BP. Endoscopic mucosal ablation: a new argon plasma 
coagulation/injection technique to assist complete resection of recurrent, fibrotic colon polyps (with video). 
Gastrointest Endosc. 2012 Feb; 75(2):400-4.
4.  Arezzo  A, Passera R, Marchese N., et.al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of endoscopic submucosal 
dissection vs endoscopic mucosal resection for colorectal lesions. United European Gastroenterol J. 2016 
Feb; 4(1):18-29.
5. Manner  H, May A, Kouti I, et.al. Efficacy and safety of Hybrid-APC for the ablation of Barrett's esophagus. 
Surg Endosc. 2016 Apr;30(4):1364-70
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 19  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)Appendix 1: Schedule of events/study calendar, including screening, treatment, and follow-up
TimeLine Before Colonoscopy  During Colonoscopy 30 days   post 
EMR Procedure6 months  follow up 
Colonoscopy 
procedure
Tasks -Screen patient  for 
eligibility from Medical 
records and previous 
reports.
- Explain  study and 
obtain informed 
consent prior to 
colonoscopy-Assess polyp 
 eligibility
-Decide whether
  to resect  or not
include patient  in the 
study - Perform    
  EMR
  Followed by 
Hybrid
 APC 
  -Follow up  
phone call and 
pt. interview-Assesse interim  
events
 Assess  the 
resection site
Location Endoscopy unit Endoscopy unit         
 Phone Endoscopy unit
DataPatient characteristic 
and
 
See checklist  for 
inclusion/ exclusion 
criteria. Upload data 
into RedCap®See checklist.  Polyp characteristic data 
+ EMR procedure details using Hybrid 
APC study Data Acquisition Form. 
Upload data into RedCap®Minor and  major 
complications 
(Bleeding, 
abdominal pain, 
etc.)+ Pathology 
results.  Upload 
data into 
RedCap®Resection site  
procedure details 
using Hybrid APC 
study Data 
Acquisition Form. 
Upload data into 
RedCap® 
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 20  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)Appendix 2:  Following questions will ask from the patients at the time of the 30 days follow up.  The answer from 
patients and information from medical records will be transfer to Hybrid APC study Data Form and upload into RedCap®  
1. Did  you have any bleeding within 30 days following the EMR colonoscopy?
                                                                                                                                                       Yes
                                                                                                                                                       No
2. If  yes when did this start? Date of AE start: ___ ___/ ___ ___/___ ___ (mm/dd/yy)
       3. If  yes when did this end? Date of AE end: ___ ___/ ___ ___/___ ___ (mm/dd/yy)
4. If  yes how much bleeding did you have?
5.  If  yes did you need a treatment?
                                                                    No  treatment
                                                                    Outpatient treatment
                                                                    Inpatient  treatment, specify days of admission: N= ____
                                                                    Other, specify 
6.  Did  you need Blood transfusion:                     Yes
                                                                                              No
                                                                                       Don’t  know 
a. If  yes, number of transfused units: N= ______
7. Did  you have any fever  within 30 days following the EMR colonoscopy?
                                                                                                                                                   Yes
                                                                                                                                                   No
8. If  yes when did this Start?  Date of AE start: ___ ___/ ___ ___/___ ___ (mm/dd/yy)
9. If  yes when did this End? Date of AE End: ___ ___/ ___ ___/___ ___ (mm/dd/yy)
10.  What was  you temperature during this time?
11.       If  yes did you need a treatment?
                                                                    No  treatment
                                                                    Outpatient treatment
                                                                    Inpatient  treatment, specify days of admission: N= ____
                                                                    Other, specify 
12. Did  you have any abdominal pain within 30 days following the EMR colonoscopy?
                                                                                                                                                                   Yes
                                                                                                                                                                    No
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021
Page 21  of 21 (V.04/27/2017)13. If  yes what is the score of your pain from 0-10 (10 is the worst pain)?
14. If  yes where was the location?
15. If  yes did you need a treatment?
                                                                    No  Intervention
                                                                    Outpatient treatment
                                                                    Inpatient  treatment, specify days of admission: N= ____
                                                                    Other, specify 
16. If  yes did a Colonoscopy performed?          Yes
                                                                                          No
                                                                                     Don’t know  
17. If  yes did a CT performed?                                Yes
                                                                                              No
                                                                                       Don’t  know
18. If  yes did surgery required to repair/ resect your colon?
                                                                                                                       Yes
                                                                                                                       No
                                                                                                                Don’t  know
STUDY00008877
Approval: 2/15/2021