 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
Official Title  The PCORnet Blood Pressure Home Monitoring Study  (BP Home)  
NCT number  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB approval date  4/28/2021  
Document Version  Protocol v2.2  
 
  V2.2, SC approved 4/7/2021  
1 
 The PCORnet Blood Pressure Home Monitoring (BP  HOME ) Study  
Protocol  
 
Project Summary  
The PCORnet Blood Pressure Home Monitoring ( BP HOME ) Study is a patient -level randomized 
controlled trial that will compare the effectiveness of home blood pressure monitoring (HPBM) 
with versus without a linked Smartphone application  (“app”)  for helping patients with 
uncontrolled hypertension achieve a reduction in systolic blood pressure .  The trial will be 
conducted within the National Patient -Centered Clinical Research Network (PCORnet), which 
supports a research network that enables distributed querying of EHR data in a common data 
model.  It will also use the  Eureka Research Platform, an online research platform hosted by 
UCSF that supports eConsent, online surveys, and data collection from devices such as HBPMs.   
Data from these two data sources will be used together to accomplish the study aims.  Given 
that HBPM is the guideline -recommended standard of care (without specification of 
Smartphone linkage ), the HPBM devices and the app are all  commercially available and 
currently in use , and that clinicians, with input from patients, will maintain full control of  how 
BP is clinically managed, we believe participation in the project poses minimal risk to 
participants.  
 
Background and Significance  
Uncontrolled BP is the leading preventable cause of death in the US after smoking, causing 
nearly 400,000 deaths per yea r1.  While effective medications are available to control BP, 
multiple rounds of medication adjustment and intensification a re typically required, and BP 
control is often not achieved2,3.  The usual configuration of healthcar e delivery – periodic and 
relatively infrequent office visits with a physician – is not ideal for achieving BP control quickly 
and efficiently4,5.  One promising approach to enhancing clinic -based BP management is to 
support home BP monitoring by patients6.  Home BP monitoring technology has advanced 
substantially in recent years particularly in terms of linkage with Smartphones via Bluetooth , 
which enables use o f associated Smartphone applications.  Smartphone applications enable a 
wide variety of functions potentially useful for BP goal attainment, including reminders to 
measure BP, recording and displaying measurements, interpretation of measurements (e.g., 
goal attained, BP dangerously high, etc), and facilitating communication of measurements with 
treating clinicians.  It is unclear , however,  if this technological advancement helps patients 
achieve  BP control.  The PCORnet Home Blood Pressure Monitoring ( BP HOME ) Study is an 
individual -level randomized controlled trial that will compare the effectiveness of Smartphone -
linked  versus standard HBPM cuffs for helping patients with uncontrolled hypertension achieve 
a reduction in systolic blood pres sure . 
 
Aims  
1) To compare the effectiveness of Smartphone -linked  versus standard home BP monitors for 
helping patients with uncontrolled hypertension achieve a reduction in SBP .   
2) To assess patient -reported outcomes including satisfaction with the HBPM device and 
various aspects of BP management  
3) To assess the outcomes within subgroups based on age, sex and race/ethnicity.  
 
  V2.2, SC approved 4/7/2021  
2 
 Hypotheses  
Patients with uncontrolled hypertension who receive a Smartphone -linked  HBPM will have a 
larger average reduction in SB P at 6 months compared to those who receive standard HBPM, 
and will be more likely to promote use of the device to a friend . 
 
 
Study Design  
We have designed a patient -level randomized controlled trial that will compare the 
effectiveness of Smartphone -linked  versus standard HBPM for helping patients with 
uncontrolled hypertension achieve a reduction in their SBP , and patient satisfaction with t he 
device .  We aim to enroll 2000 patients who will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive a 
Smartphone -linked  or standard HBPM.  We will use data from the electronic health record 
(EHR), an online patient portal, and the home BP monitor (in the Smartphon e-linked  arm) to 
collect outcome data for a period of at least 6 months (for the primary outcome), and up to 18 
months (for secondary outcomes, depending on enrollment date).  The primary BP control 
outcome will be reduction in SBP , by clinic measurements, at 6 months.  The primary patient 
satisfaction outcome will be the Net Promotor Score7,8, derived from self-reported likelihood of 
recommending the device to a friend, at 6 months.  
 
 
Study Subjects  
Target population  
Adults receiving medical care who have uncontrolled BP  
 
Accessible population  
Adults receiving medical care at a participating PCORnet institution wh o meet inclusion criteria, 
are willing to enroll in the study, and complete baseline surveys.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
● Age ≥ 18 years  
● At least one ambulatory visit in one of the participating study sites during the past year  
● SBP > 145 mmHg at most recent clini c visit (may be treated with BP meds already or 
not) , as reported by the participant   
● A self -reported commitment to “work on lowering your blood pressure by 10 points or 
more to reduce your risk of heart attack and stroke”  
● Owns a Smartphone (Android or iOS) and has an email address  
● Willing to receive text messages from the study   
● Can read/write English well enough to use English -based Smartphone  apps and fill out 
online surveys in English  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
• Has an arm circumference  <22 cm or >42  cm  
• Owns a functioning HPBM and has used it in the last 3 months  
 
Recruitment Plan  
  V2.2, SC approved 4/7/2021  
3 
 Participating sites will recruit patients via 2 basic methods.  
1)   “High -Touch Method s”: Clinical or research staff at participating clinics will interact with 
patients directly to assess eligibility and interest in participation.  IRB -approved study 
materials will be available to support the patient interaction.  The materials will invite 
participants to register on the online portal, and they will be invited to enter their own special 
recruitment invitation code (“Golden Ticket Number”) to enable subsequent linkage between 
their EHR data and their data collected by the online portal.  Althou gh those materials will be 
designed to be self -explanatory for patients, clinical or research staff can assist patients as they 
sign up on the portal.  Clinic staff will keep a list of interested and apparently -eligible patients  to 
whom a Golden Ticket was  provided,  with their associated Golden Ticket Number , to enable 
EHR data linkage for patients that  eventually  enroll and  consent to participate in the study.  
This option requires active participation by the patient’s treating clinical staff  (though we ho pe 
it will be low -burden) .  We are also planning follow -up calls to patients who were provided a 
Golden Ticket Number but who did not end up enrolling in the study, to remind them about 
signing up and provide any technical support they might require.   Our Phone Script is included 
in Attachment A.  
2)   “Low -Touch Method s”: Patients appearing to meet criteria for enrollment according to 
their EHR data will be maile d, emailed , or otherwise contacted personally with an invitation to 
participate .  The inv itations will include the Golden Ticket Number to enable linkage, as above.  
Participating sites will have their own approved methods and procedures to facilitate this 
recruitment approach (Attachment A), otherwise they will use only the in -clinic recruitm ent 
method.  This option does not necessarily require contacting of the patient’s treating physician; 
these issues will be governed by local policies and rules and addressed at each participating 
site.   These patients may also be called for follow -up (see Phone Script).  
 
Attachment A describes site -specific recruitment procedures and materials.  
 
Determination of Eligibility  
Eligibility will be checked:  
1) Preliminarily, by clinical or research staff and patients, using Recruitment Option 1 
above;  
2) Preliminarily , by EHR data review, using Recruitment Option 2 above;  
3) Finally, with confirmation from patients , when they enroll through the online portal  
 
Consent Process  
We will use the Eureka Research Platform to deliver an electronic consent process that consists 
of a landing page, a simple “pledge” page that outlines responsibilities of the study (e.g., keep 
your data safe) and the patient (e.g., completing follow up surveys), a more traditional informed 
consent form (with a link to the Eureka Privacy Policy and Dat a Security Measures), and an 
invitation to participate in the study.  All participants will also provide an electronic signature 
(collected via Docusign using our Eureka Research Platform) on a HIPAA Authorization form 
that will allow us to obtain their EH R data  and link it with the other data collected via the 
platform.  Participants in the Smartphone -linked arm of the study will also be taken through a 
“device consent” in which they will be instructed to download the Smartphone app associated 
with the dev ice, and link their device account to their study account.  
 
  V2.2, SC approved 4/7/2021  
4 
 Attachment B describes the online portal, eligibility check and enrollment procedures that all 
participants responding to recruitment efforts will use  to register and consent to participate in 
the study . 
 
 
Study Interventions  
Overview : Participants enrolled in the stud y will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to two study arms 
distinguished by the type of HBPM device they receive.  All participants will receive guideline -
based instructions on HBPM.   
 
Intervention arms : Participants will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to:  
- Arm 1 : Smartphone -linked  HBPM with associated Smartphone  app 
- Arm 2 : Standard HBPM  
 
Attachment C describes the specific devices used in each arm of the study , and the Smartphone 
app used in Arm 1 .   
 
Randomization plan : Randomization tables with stratification (by clinical site) and blocking 
(with randomly varying block sizes) will be generated and stored in the Eureka Research 
Platform.  Participants meeting eligibility criteria, consenting, and completing baseline data 
collection will be automat ically assigned the first previously non -assigned randomization code, 
and will be notified immediately of their assignment (i.e., no blinding).  
  
Delivery of study devices and instructions : After randomization, UCSF -based study staff  will 
confirm contact i nformation and ship the assigned device to participants free of cost, and follow 
up via electronic survey , text message  and/or phone calls to make sure the device is received.  
Upon receipt of their device, participants in Arm 1 ( Smartphone -linked ) will be  asked to 
connect their device account to their study account , which will enable the study to receive BP 
measurement data from their device.   Participants in both arms of the study will be provided 
guidelines for HBPM (using publicly -available materials de veloped by the American Medical 
Association and American Heart Association for their Target: BP Program), and told to continue 
interacting with their treating physician as usual for BP medication management, etc.  
 
 
Measurements  
Overview : Measurements will be obtained via online survey through our online portal, from the 
participant’s EHR accessed via PCORnet, and from the Smartphone -linked  HBPM device for 
participants randomized to Arm 1.  Online survey data  will be elicited at pre -specified time 
points; pa rticipants will receive a variety of reminders to complete surveys, possibly including 
but not limited to email, text, and personal phone calls.  EHR data will be extracted for enrolled 
participants  using PCORnet quer ies, and analyzed  to evaluate baseline  medical conditions and 
outcomes .  All available BP measurements, encounter data and other EHR data from those 
queries, along with all BP and heart rate measurements extracted from Smartphone -linked  
HBPM for participants in Arm 2, will be used in analyses a s per outcome definitions described 
below.  
 
  V2.2, SC approved 4/7/2021  
5 
 The following table describes the measurements we plan to obtain on enrolled participants:  
 
     Baseline  1m 3m 6m 12m  18m  
Online survey data  
Baseline BP and eligibility   X 
Basic demographics    X 
Subjective Social Status Scales9 X 
HBPM use       X X X X X 
HBPM satisfaction      X  X 
Net Promoter Score7,8      X 
Satisfaction with BP management  X    X X X 
Quality of shared decision -making10      X X X 
Patient Activation11       X 
  
Attachment D provides the text of the onl ine surveys we will administer.  
 
EHR data  (all available data through end of follow -up will be extracted in the following domains)  
Basic demographics     
Diagnoses            
Encounter characteristics          
Provider characteristics          
Blood pressure         
Medications           
Lab results           
Death indicator          
 
The EHR data analysis s ection , below , provides additional detail.  
 
HBPM device data  (all available measurements made during follow up, for Arm 1 only)   
Blood pressure  
Heart rate   
 
Primary BP control outcome : The following pre -specified outcome will be used for the primary 
test of comparative effectiveness:  
1) Reduction in S BP at 6 months.  Reduction is defined by the absolute difference between 
the eligibility SBP (collected from the patient at the time of eligibility assessment) , and 
the SBP measured at the most recent outpatient clinical encounter  6 months after 
enrollment .  If more than 1 measurement is recorded during a single clinical encounter, 
the lowe r/lowe st will be used.  
 
Primary patient satisfaction outcome : The following pre -specified outcome will be used for the 
primary test of patient satisfaction:  
2) Net Promotor Score.  This score is assessed by asking a single question about likelihood 
of recommending the device to a friend, with options from 1 -10 (10 being extremely 
likely).  As per published methods7,8, persons indicating 9 or 10 are considered 
“Promotors”; persons indicating 7 or 8 are “Passives”; and persons indicating 1 -6 are 
  V2.2, SC approved 4/7/2021  
6 
 “Detractors”.  The score is calculated b y taking the percent of Promotors and subtracting 
the percent of Detractors, yielding a score for each group ranging from -100 to 100.   Note 
that an identical score could theoretically be produced for a group with either a 
relatively high proportion of Pro motors and Detractors, or a relatively low proportion of 
both.  
 
Exploratory outcomes : The following pre -specified secondary outcomes will also be measured 
and analyzed.  These include alternative measures of BP control, other patient -reported 
outcomes, and  process measures intermediate along the causal pathway to BP control.  
3) Documented attainment of a 10 mmHg reduction in SBP from baseline to 6 months, as 
defined above.   
4) Documented attainment of a 10 mmHg reduction in SBP  at 6 months, as in Outcome 1, 
but assessed using home BP measurements, when available.  As per guidelines, a set of 
12 or more home measurements (counting no more than 2 in the morning and 2 in the 
evening of each day) within any given 1 week time period will count as a completed 
Home Meas urement Protocol12.  The average SBP and DBP measurements within the 
most rece nt completed Home Measurement Protocol within 180 days of the index date 
(e.g., 6 months after enrollment) will then be used as the attained BP, regardless of 
subsequent clinic measurements or subsequent random home measurements.  If no 
completed Home Measurement Protocol is available within 180 days of t he index date, 
the most recent clinic measurement will be used.  Note that a documented Home 
Measurement Protocol can only be attained in Arm 1, as home measurements will not be 
accessible in Arm 2.   
5) Other BP Control outcomes defined as ( (SBP<140 mmHg and  DBP<90 mmHg ) OR 
(SBP <130  and DBP <80 ) OR 10 mmHg reduction ), assessed using  the baseline 
measurement  (self -reported OR last clinical measurement prior to randomization  from 
the electronic health record ) and subsequent measurements (clinical measurements OR  
clinical + home measurements) at a specified time -point (6 OR 12 OR 18 months) or 
using a time -to-control approach.  
6) Patient reported outcomes including various aspects of satisfaction with the HBPM 
device and BP management , including quality of shared dec ision -making and patient 
activation.  
7) Visit frequency.  We will analyze the number of ambulatory care visits during the 6 
month follow up period; we will also analyze the number of visits made before 
attainment of the first in -control BP.  
8) Medication intensi fication.  We will analyze the proportion of clinical visits with high BP 
(SBP>140 mmHg or DBP>90 mmHg) after which a BP medication was added.  
 
Pre-specified subgroups : The following subgroups are pre -specified:  
- Baseline Age: 20 -44 vs 45 -64 vs. 65+ years  
- Sex: Male vs. Female vs. Other vs. Missing  
- Race/Ethnicity: Non -Hispanic White vs. Non -Hispanic Black vs. Non -Hispanic Asian vs. 
Hispanic (any race) vs. Other/Multiple vs. Missing  
- Subjective Social Status, measured through online survey at baseline, using M acArthur 
Scale for SES (not the “Community” version)9: Upper vs. Middle vs. Lower tertil e, defined 
within our recruited sample of participants  
  V2.2, SC approved 4/7/2021  
7 
  
 
Analysis Plan  
Overview : Our primary analyses will test two independent hypotheses: that SBP reduction  
(outcome 1, defined above) differs by study arm, and that promotion of the HBPM device  
(outcome 2) differs by study arm.  Subgroup analyses and exploratory outcomes will also be 
analyzed, as described below.  
 
Primary BP control analysis : For analysis of t his outcome, which is continuous (defined above), 
we will use a random effects linear model, including a random effect for clinic and a fixed effect 
for a 3 -level variable that indicates whether the clinic is participating in a concurrently -running 
cluster -randomized quality improvement trial (Not participating vs. Full Support MAP 
intervention13,14 vs. Self -Guided MAP intervention13,14). 
 
Primary patient satisfaction analysis : The Net Promoter Score (NPS) is calculated from the 
proportions of Promoters and Detractors, as described above.  To asses s the influence of 
treatment assignment and other exposures on the NPS, we will first define the 3 -level outcome 
classifying each participant as a Promoter, a Passive, or a Detractor, then fit a random effects 
multinomial logistic model for the independent  effect of the exposure on this outcome.  The 
model will include the same random and fixed effects specified for the primary BP control 
analysis.  Expected  proportions in each outcome group by treatment assignment will then be 
obtained using standardizatio n.  Finally, the NPS scores for each group, as well as the between -
group difference in the score, with 95% confidence intervals for each,  will be calculated as 
linear combinations of the adjusted proportions, and a p -value calculated assuming a null 
hypoth esis of no between -group difference in the NPS.  
 
Subgroup analyses : We will produce subgroup -specific analyses of the primary outcomes for 
each of the pre -specified subgroups, and test for heterogeneity by including the appropriate 
interaction terms in the  models described above, with an omnibus test for each of the 4 
grouping variables.  Subgroups that include fewer than 100  study participants or with missing 
values for the subgrouping variable will be omitted from the omnibus test  and results 
presentation .  P-values for within -subgroup treatment effects will be reported only if the 
omnibus test is statistically significant at P<0.05.  
 
Exploratory analyses : We plan to analyze many additional outcomes, including alternate 
methods of defining BP control, alte rnate time -points, and additional endpoints including 
patient -reported outcomes and BP control process measures.  These analyses are not planned 
for testing of the primary hypotheses, but are important for describing the experience of BP 
control using the two different device types and for generating hypotheses for future study.  
Our general approach to these analyses will be similar to how we approach the primary and 
secondary analyses, but we may use other methods that are not pre -specified.  
 
EHR data ana lyses :  We plan to analyze the EHR data obtained from each partner site.  Each 
partner’s EHR information is standardized to the PCORnet Common Data Model (CDM) to 
collect data from the EHR systems.  The PCORnet CDM is a HIPAA Limited Data Set and  quality 
checks of the EHR data  are performed  using procedures and algorithms that PCORI established 
  V2.2, SC approved 4/7/2021  
8 
 for its clinical data research network sites .  Among other things, it standardizes laboratory tests 
and results using LOINC for laboratory tests and medica tion data using RxNorm.   
 
Queries will be sent to the sites asking for the following data:  
- Ambulatory Clinic information, including:  
- Basic demographic and visit information  
- Diagnoses  
- Medication orders  
- Blood pressure and pulse measurements  
- Lab Reports relevant to blood pressure  
- Vital Status  
 
To obtain the information above, we will use the following tables from the PCORnet CDM:  
- DEMOGRAPHIC  
- ENCOUNTER  
- PROCEDURE  
- VITAL  
- PRESCRIBING  
- DIAGNOSIS  
- LAB_RESULT_CM  
- DEATH  
- DEATH_CAUSE  
 
Please note that the research team will NOT request release of information pertaining to drug 
and alcohol abuse, diagnosis or treatment; HIV/AIDS testing; genetic testing; or mental health 
diagnosis or treatment.  
 
Attachment  E summarizes the steps required for the  OneFlorida Data Trust  to obtain data for 
the queries .    
 
 
Enrollment prediction modeling : 
In response to PCORnet’s emphasis on ensuring access to health care interventions for 
vulnerable populations, we plan an exploratory post -hoc a nalysis examining any disparities in 
enrollment in BP HOME, particularly by race and ethnicity. Black and Hispanic /Latinx  patients 
are underrepresented in clinical trials and health care research generally, and specifically 
within hypertension research. Th is is particularly worrisome given that these subgroups 
experience disproportionate burdens of negative sequelae of hypertension, including coronary 
artery disease, stroke, and chronic kidney disease. Further, the interaction between social 
determinants of  health (SDH), Black race and Hispanic ethnicity, and participation in 
interventional trials is not well understood.  
 
We p lan to study the interaction between self -identified race, self -identified ethnicity, and 
various indicators of social determinants of  health, measured at both the census tract and 
individual patient level, to understand their effects upon enrollment in BP  Home .  To 
accomplish this, participating BP Home sites will analyze all persons invited to join BP Home  
  V2.2, SC approved 4/7/2021  
9 
 and analyze predictors of enr ollment.  BP Home sites will consider different predictors 
depending on their availability; e.g., OCHIN may  consider social determinants of health they 
have specified  based on patient address and also at the individual patient level, while other 
sites may have different types of predictors.  Sites will generally keep individual -level data on 
non-enrolled patients local and do analyses through their honest broker teams, sharing only 
model results (aggregated).  
 
Multiple hypothesis testing : The intervention will likely be regarded as successful by clinicians 
if it is shown to be both efficacious and acceptable (that is, both co -primary outcomes are 
positive), so no penalty for multiple testing is needed to support this conclusion.  In any case, 
the results of both hypothesis tests will be reported.  No formal penalization for multiple 
hypothesis testing is planned for the subgroup or exploratory outcome analyses, which will be 
treated as exploratory and hypothesis -generating.  
 
Multiple imputation for missing data : Our general approach to missing data will be multiple 
imputation.  While our primary BP control outcome is defined to minimize loss to follow up and 
missing data, it is still possible that follow up will be missing if EHR linkage fails.  If this occurs 
(and in general for other analyses), we will use a multiple imputation strategy.  This approach 
will be optimized by the requirement for completion of baseline surveys before randomization 
occurs.  It is likely that our primary patient satis faction outcome will be missing in a sizable 
proportion of patients, since it will require patients to log back into our system and fill out an 
additional survey.  Again, we will handle this situation with multiple imputation.  In addition to 
multiple impu tation under the standard assumption that data are missing at random 
(conditional on observed covariates and outcomes), we will also implement sensitivity analyses 
using imputation under plausible missing -not-at-random scenarios.  
 
Data and Safety/Interim M onitoring : Given the minimal risk nature of the intervention (both 
arms are considered standard of care), no formal interim monitoring is required.  All study staff 
are CITI -trained, and will be on the alert for unanticipated adverse effects; if such effec ts are 
identified, UCSF study staff will notify our IRB and all study sites as needed to minimize risk for 
participants in the study.  
 
Sample size justification : With 2000 patients randomized (1:1 ratio, 1000 standard vs. 1000 
Smartphone -linked ), we will h ave 80% power to distinguish very small standardized treatment 
effects of only 0.125 standard deviations (SDs).   For example, if the standard deviation of SBP 
reduction is 8, we would have 80% power to distinguish a reduction of 11 mmHg from 10 
mmHg in SBP  reduction between the two groups.   We have not attempted a power analysis for 
the Net Promotor outcome given the complexity of the calculated score.  
 
 
 
References  
1. Danaei G, Ding EL, Mozaffarian D, et al. The preventable causes of death in the United 
States: comparative risk assess ment of dietary, lifestyle, and metabolic risk factors. PLoS 
Med. 2009;6(4):e1000058.  
  V2.2, SC approved 4/7/2021  
10 
 2. Nwankwo T, Yoon SS, Burt V, Gu Q. Hypertension among adults in the United States: 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2011 -2012. NCHS Data Brief. 
2013(133):1 -8. 
3. Wald DS, Law M, Morris JK, Bestwick JP, Wald NJ. Combination therapy versus 
monotherapy in reducing blood pressure: meta -analysis on 11,000 participants from 42 
trials. Am J Med. 2009;122(3):290 -300.  
4. Fontil V, Bibbins -Domingo K, Kazi DS, et al. Simulating Strategies for Improving Control 
of Hypertension Among Patients with Usual Source of Care in the United States: The 
Blood Pressure Control Model. J Gen Intern Med. 2015;30(8):1147 -1155.  
5. Wozniak G, Khan T, Gillespie C, et al. Hypertension Control Cascade: A Framework to 
Improve Hypertension Awareness, Treatment, and Control. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 
2016;18(3):232 -239.  
6. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aranow WS, et al. 2017 
ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the 
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults : A 
Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2017;70(6):PDF Only.  
7. Hamilton DF, Lane JV, Gaston P, et al. Assessing treatment outcomes using a single 
question: the net promoter  score. Bone Joint J. 2014;96 -B(5):622 -628.  
8. Wikipedia. Net Promotor. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_Promoter . 
9. The MacArthur Scale of Subjective Social Status.  
http://www.macses.ucsf.edu/research/psychosocial/subjective.php#measurement , 
2016.  
10. Barr PJ, Thompson R, Walsh T, Grande SW, Ozanne EM, Elwyn G. The psychometric 
properties of CollaboR ATE: a fast and frugal patient -reported measure of the shared 
decision -making process. J Med Internet Res. 2014;16(1):e2.  
11. Hibbard JH, Mahoney ER, Stockard J, Tusler M. Development and testing of a short form 
of the patient activation measure. Health Se rv Res. 2005;40(6 Pt 1):1918 -1930.  
12. Niiranen TJ, Johansson JK, Reunanen A, Jula AM. Optimal schedule for home blood 
pressure measurement based on prognostic data: the Finn -Home Study. Hypertension. 
2011;57(6):1081 -1086.  
13. American Medical Association,  Johns Hopkins Medicine. The 2015 M.A.P. checklists for 
improving BP control. 2015; https://targetbp.org/wp -content/uploads/2017/03/MAP -
Checklist.pdf . Accessed Oct 26, 2017.  
14. Hanlin RB, Asif IM, Wozniak G, et al. Measure Accurately, Act Rapidly and Partner with 
Patients (MAP) Improves Hypertension Control in Medically Underserved Patients: Care 
Coordination Institute and American Medical Association Hypertension Control Pro ject 
Pilot -Study Results. Journal of Clinical Hypertension. 2017;IN PRESS.  