 
t-PA Prophylaxis to Reduce Central Venous Catheter Associated 
Infection and Thrombosis  (TOPCAT) 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 February 5, 2019  
 
 
 
TOPCAT Protocol   
INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
       SUMMARY  
 
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Sheila Hanson , MD  
 
STUDY TITLE:  t-PA Prophylaxis to reduce Central Venous Catheter Associated Infection and Thrombosis  
(TopCAT)  
 
A. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
 
The purpose of this pilot study is to test feasibility of concept, consent and enrollment rates, and 
mechanics of study designed to assess if intra -catheter dwells of tissue plasminogen activator (t- PA: 
Alteplase; Activase®, Genentech )is effective in decreasing the rate of clinically diagnosed central line 
associated blood stream infection (CLABSI) or venous thromboembolism (VTE) in central venous 
catheters (CVC) compared to standard of care heparin  dwell .  
 
B. HYPOTHESIS / SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
We hypothesize there will be a lower rate of CLABSI or VTE in CVCs who receive t- PA as a dwell 
medication.  
 We will test this hypothesis in the following aims:  
Aim 1: It is feasible to enroll patients with CVC and randomize to receive t- PA vs heparin 
dwell.  
-Determine number of eligible patients, consents rates, and adherence to study 
protocol in patients with CVC in the CHW Intensive Care Unit (ICU). 
-Calculate the number of centers needed to adequately power a multi -center trial to 
determine if t- PA is effective in reducing CVC complications from the rates found in 
this pilot study.  
 Aim 2: Compare the rate of VTE and CLABSI in patients with a CVC in the ICU randomized to 
receive t -PA vs. heparin as a dwell in the CVC.  
-This will be a prospective, blinded, RCT enrolling 20 patients in the ICU with a CVC to 
receive t -PA or heparin to dwell for a minimum of 30 minutes every three days until 
CVC removal, discharge from the ICU or a maximum of 10 doses have been received.  
 
 
C. BACKGROUND, SIGNIFICANCE, AND RATIONALE   

 
 
TOPCAT Protocol  Central line associated blood stream infection (CLABSI) and venous thromboembolism (VTE) 
continue to be a major source of morbidity in patients with central venous catheter (CVC). There 
is physiologic plausibility that by decreasing fibrin development with the use of t- PA in CVCs, the 
rate of CVC -associated VTE and CLABSI would be decreased.  
It is well established that t- PA is safe and effective in restoring CVC patency  after occlusion  in 
adults (Deitcher 2002, Ponec 2001) and children (Bla ney 2006) , and is FDA approved for this use 
in both adults and children.  Using t -PA for occluded CVC is standard of care in CHW PICU and is 
recommended by clinical practice standards, including Infusion Nurses Society (INS), Association 
for Vascular Access  (AVA), American Association of Critical Care Nurses (AACN) , Oncology 
Nursing Society (ONS). 
It is not known if t- PA would be effective in preventing fibrin deposition and subsequent 
complications of VTE and CLABSI if administered prophylactically. Analysis of prophylactic t -PA 
used as a dwell solution for dialysis catheters suggests that this may be the case. A meta -analysis  
(Firwana 2011) reviewing randomized controlled trials of t- PA as a preventative locking solution 
for hemodialysis catheters compared  to heparin found a decrease adverse events including 
thrombosis with the use of t- PA (Schenk 2000, Hemmelgarn 2011, Gittins 2007).  
Use of t -PA for preventing VTE and CLABSI in the non -dialysis catheter is very limited. Preliminary 
evidence in pediatric patients with long term CVC dependency has shown th at prophylactic  dwell 
of tissue plasminogen activator (t- PA) has decreased episodes of CVC dysfunction; however,  that 
study was underpowered to test the outcomes of CLABSI or VTE( Malec 2017) . A multicenter  
study would be needed to provide sufficient sample size. The pilot study proposed here will test 
feasibility of concept, enrollment and consent rates, and mechanics of study design to be used to 
inform a grant application for a future multicenter trial.  
Currently, heparin as a capping or locking solution is the standard of care for functioning CVCs at 
CHW with t- PA reserved for restoration of flow with occluded CVC.   
 
 
D. DESIGN AND METHODS  
 
This pilot study at CHW will be a prospective, blinded, RCT enrolling 20 patients in the PICU with a CVC to receive t- PA (study drug) or heparin  (current standard of care and defined as control arm for this 
study ) to dwell for a minimum of 30 minutes every  three days until catheter removal or discharge from 
the PICU. Primary outcomes would be CLABSI or VTE. Secondary outcomes would be episodes of CVC dysfunction, off study use of t- PA, and bleeding.   
 
Patients meeting the following criteria will be eligible for study participation  
 
Inclusion criteria :  
• Age >2 weeks( corrected for gestational age)  to ≤ 18 years old  
 
 
TOPCAT Protocol  • PICU admission  
• CVC placed within 72 hours of enrollment (tunneled such as PICC, Broviac or Hickman,  or  
untunneled) and in place during hospitalization  
 
Exclusion criteria :  
• Pregnancy   
• Non-English -speaking  subjects and/or parent/guardian  
• Platelet count < 20,000  
• Active CVC infection -defined as positive blood culture from the in - situ CVC at time of 
enrollment  
• Current radiographically confirmed VTE  
• Currently receiving treatment doses of anticoagulation (heparin infusion >15U/kg/hr, 
enoxaparin injections >=2mg/kg/day or >=60mg/day)  
• CVC diameter <1.9 Fr 
• Current or previous diagnosis of Heparin Induced Thrombocytopenia or allergy to heparin or t-PA 
• Med-a- port catheters  
• Active internal bleedin g 
• Recent intracranial or intraspinal surgery 
• Serious head trauma  
• Intracranial conditions that may increase the risk of bleeding 
• Bleeding diathesis  
• Current severe uncontrolled hy pertension  
 
 
Any patient admitted to the ICU and meeting the above inclusion criteria will be approached for consent 
within 72 hours CVC placement. Randomization and administration of t- PA/heparin control treatment 
will be initiated within 24 hours of enrollment .   
 
After 1:1 randomization, t-PA/heparin  will be infused in the CVC for a dwell duration of 30 minutes -4 
hours and then withdrawn (lock therapy) every 3 days until discharge from the PICU , CVC removal  or a 
maximum of 10 doses received . Additional lumens will be treated on subsequent days.  Any lu men 
requiring continuous infusion of vaso -active medication will not receive dwell therapy, evaluated on a 
day- to-day basis. Timing of instillation of study dwell medication will be adjusted so as not to interfere 
with medications for patient care. Other stopping points of t- PA treatment are in Section L.  
 
 
E. TOTAL NUMBER OF HUMAN RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS PROPOSED FOR THIS STUDY AT THIS SITE 
AND GLOBALLY.  WHAT ARE THESE NUMBERS BASED ON?  
 
This single center, pilot study will enroll 20  subjects at CHW.   This sample size was chosen for the ability 
to be internally funded and to complete pilot data collection in a timely manner, with anticipated grant submission for a multi- center study in 2020.  
 
 
TOPCAT Protocol   
F. DRUGS OR PROCEDURES  
 
Procedures to be completed for this study are as follows:  
 
After informed consent/assent, the patient will be randomized and assigned to either the treatment arm (t-PA lock) or control arm (heparin lock).  Randomization will be stratified by age (<5 or ≥5 years old). 
Pharmacy will blind the study medication t-PA so that it is indistinguishable from the control arm.  
Randomization will be done in the investigational pharmacy prior to the dispensing of the t- PA/heparin .   
During enrollment, the unblinded assignment log will be kept in the locked investigational room in central pharmacy.  
 
Study Treatment and Dosing  
In subjects randomized to the t- PA (Alteplase; Activase®, Genentech, 1mg/cc concentration), dosing  will 
comply with the CHW Policy and Procedure Protocol t- PA Administration for Central Venous Access 
Devices (CVAD) ; subjects randomized to the control arm, standard of care heparin  group , will receive an 
equivalent volume for weight of hepa rin 10 units /ml.  The bedside RN will administer the study 
medication/heparin as per the above protocol. The CVC should be flushed with normal saline prior to 
infusion of t- PA/heparin .  After dwelling time of 30 minutes -4 hours, t-PA/heparin  control should be 
withdrawn , check for blood return in CVC and flush line with normal saline as per policy.  Each lumen of 
multi- lumen CVC should be treated every 3 days until patient discharge from ICU, removal of CVC, or a 
maximum of 10 doses of t-PA/heparin  control are received.  
 
Patient weight                  Volume T- PA/Heparin  
0-10kg     0.5ml  
10-20kg    1 ml  
>20kg     2 ml  
 These dos es by body weight have been approved by the FDA  for and CHHS Patient Care Protocol  (tPA 
Administration for Central Venous Access Devices (CVADs) for use in children with CVC and are not 
associated with significant bleeding.  If a 2mg (ml) dose of t- PA is administered by bolus injection directly 
into the systemic circulation, rather than as a dwell within the CVC, the drug concentration would return 
to endogenous levels with 30 minutes.  
 
Ultrasound imaging  
At the end of the study period, a noninvasive ultrasound with doppler will be performed  for research 
purposes  to assess for asymptomatic thrombosis in the blood vessel of the CVC location.  
 
 
G. RISK CATEGORY:  
 Both arms of the study : Risk Level  (2) 45 CFR 46.405  - Research involving greater than minimal risk  but 
presenting the prospect of direct benefit to the individual child subjects involved in the research . 
 
 
 
TOPCAT Protocol   
H. RISKS AND THE PRECAUTIONS WHICH  WILL BE TAKEN TO MINIMIZE RISK EXPOSURE  
 
There is a risk of bleeding at higher doses of both the study drug (t- PA) and heparin control, as both 
drugs used in standard clinical practice alter the coagulation system.  However, the doses by body weight used in this study have been approved by the FDA for and C HW Policy tPA Administration for 
CVADs for use in children with CVC and are not associated with significant bleeding. If a 2mg (ml) dose of 
t-PA is administered by bolus injection directly into the systemic circulation, rather than as a dwell 
within the CVC, the drug concentration would return to endogenous levels with 30 minutes.  As a precaution, we will monitor the dose of drug received and follow the CHW policy and procedure for administration.  Both arms of th e study are currently used in clinical care, it is the timing of the 
intervention that is under study.   As additional precaution, we will exclude patients at increased risk of 
bleeding (platelet count < 20,000 or receiving therapeutic dosed anticoagulation).  
 All adverse events  experiencing by study subjects will be monitored throughout the active study 
treatment period and for 30 days following the last dose of the t- PA/heparin , or for 7 days after CVC 
removal, whichever occurs first . For patients with CVC in place at time of hospital discharge, chart 
review will be perform ed to capture events up to 7 days after discharge.  
  
Breach of Confidentiality  
Data necessary for the completion of this study will be extracted from the subject electronic medical record and maintained in a REDCap database on the CTSI server. Some PHI will be maintained in this database but will only be accessible  to study team members listed on the registration page.  Any study 
information maintain on paper will be held in a locked file cabinet in the Critical Care o ffices.  
 
I. PROVISION FOR THE PROTECTION OF PRIVACY OF SUBJEC TS AND TO MAINTAIN THE  
CONFIDENTIALITY OF DATA  
 
As of October 2017,  the NIH has updated their policy on Certificates of Confidentiality and are 
automatically issuing these for eligible studies that are NIH funded.  They no longer issue a paper 
certificate, nor only submit on request.  
 
Does this study qualify for automatic issuance of a Certificate of Confidentiality  by the NIH? 
  No    Yes 
 The following encryption products employ cryptographic modules that the National Institute of Standards and  Technology has certified as meeting FIPS 140 -2 requirements.   Children’s Hospital  
and Health System endorsed the use of these products made to encrypt hard drives and removable media.   All electronic research data must be encrypted using one or more of these products.   
 
Please indicate which encryption tools you are using to secure your research data.  
 
___Credent Mobile Guardian (RS, PD) 
 
 
TOPCAT Protocol  ___GuardianEdge Hard Disk and GuardianEdge Removable Storage Encryption (HD, RS, PD) 
___IronKey encrypted flash drives (RS)  
___McAfee Endpoint Encryption (HD, RS) ___Microsoft Bitlocker (HD, RS when used with Windows 7 and FIPS compliant algorithms are enabled) 
___PGP Whole Disk Encryption and PGP Portab le (HD, RS) 
___SafeNet Protect Disk and SafeNet Protect File (HD, RS) 
___Seagate Secure Self- Encrypting Drives (HD when encryption option is enabled) 
___Symantec Endpoint Encryption (HD, RS, PD) ___WinMagic SecureDoc encryption (HD) (for MCW owned computer s) 
___Other (add description)  
Does not apply because:  
___ Data is de -identified – no PHI collected  (please provide detailed information on data elements in 
your protocol application)  
___ Data is stored on paper only  
___ Data is stored on CHW secured shared drives.  
   Data is stored on MCW secured shared drives.  
 
J. PROVISIONS FOR MONITORING DATA TO ENSURE THE SAFETY OF SUBJECTS; AND  ADDITIONAL 
SAFEGUARDS TO PROTECT THE RIGHTS AND WELFARE OF SUBJECTS WHO ARE LIKELY TO BE 
VULNERABLE  
 
Adverse Event Monitoring 
Any patient receiving a minimum of 1 dose of the t- PA/heparin control  will be followed for  adverse 
events by the study investigators and research coordinators for 30 days following  the last dose of the t-
PA/heparin,  or for 7 days after CVC removal, whichever occurs first. For patients with CVC in place at 
time of hospital discharge, chart review will be performed to capture events up to 7 days after discharge.  
Adverse events will be considered any change from baseline.  Expected adverse events are listed in section H; this section also includes those events considered serious but expected within this protocol. Expected SAEs will be reported in aggregate at the study’s annual review.  Any SUSAR experienced during the study  will be reported per IRB’s Reportable Events guidelines. At completion of the study 
adverse event rates between the study group and heparin control  group will be compared and included 
in any final study reports.  
Serious Adverse Events  
If any subject enrolled in the study experiences any serious adverse event, the study team and care team will discuss the likely cause of the events.  If it is determined that the event is probably or definitely related to the t- PA/heparin control  the study treatment can be discontinued at the discretion 
of the care team and study team.  Subjects whose treatment is discontinued will be followed for 30 days after the last t- PA/heparin control  dose  or until hospital discharge, whichever occurs first.  
  
K. ANTICIPATED BENEFITS ASSOCIATED WITH THE PROTOCOL  TO HUMAN RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS 
AND SOCIETY  
 
 
TOPCAT Protocol   
Benefit to the individual patient may include a decreased risk of CVC infection or VTE.  
Benefit to society at large will be knowledge gained to optimally design  multicenter interventional study  
to develop therapy to reduce the risk of central line infection and/or thrombosis. There is evidence that 
these complications  result in unfavorable outcomes such  as increased length of mechanical ventilation, 
increased length of stay, increased healthcare cost, and  increased mortality.  
 
L. STOPPING POINTS THAT WOULD NOT ALLOW THE STUDY TO CONTINUE AS PROPOSED  
 
Withdrawal from study  
The PI or subject’s primary care team can withdrawal the subject from this study due to  
• Consent is withdrawn by subject’s family  
• Treating physician wishes to withdrawal subject for any reason  
 
  
M. IS THERE A DATA SAFETY MONITORING BOARD IN PLACE?  WHO ARE IT'S MEMBERS?  HOW 
OFTEN DO THEY MEET?   
 There is no DSMB planned for this study .  
N. DESCRIBE HOW THE CONSENT  AND ASSENT PROCESS WILL TAKE PLACE.  INCLUDE A LIST OF 
APPROPRIATELY TRAINED PERSONNEL WHO WILL BE INVOLVED .   
 
After an eligible subject is identified, written informed consent will be obtained in person by an 
investigator or coordinator listed on the registration page for this study.  Study investigators who are also the eligible  subject’s attending physician at the time of consent will not participate in the consent 
conversation to remove any undue influence posed by the duel role. Following consent, a copy of the completed documents will be placed in the subject’s medical record, and a second copy will be given to the subject’s family. A consenting and enrollment log will be maintained  by the research team  for all the 
patients who are  screened for study,  approached meeting eligibility criteria  of the study  and who 
consented/ or d enied participation in the study . 
 We are requesting a waiver of assent for patients intubated, pharmacologically sedated, cognitively delayed that they would not fully comprehend what they are consenting to, and patients too critically ill defined as redu ced consciousness or impaired decision -making capacity.  The decision of an individual’s 
capability to assent for the study is made by reviewing medical records for that speci fic information . This 
is always confirmed with attending physician for finalization of assent waiver for the study  before 
patient is approached.   Assent will be obtained from the patient if he/she is at least 7 years of age and is 
alert enough or cognitively able to understand the nature of the study.  This a ssent will be obtained for 
all child subjects  (7-17 years old) and documented by signing a separate assent form  (for 7- 13 years old) 
or by signing an assent line on the parent permission form  (for 14-17 years  old). If the patient turns 18 
years old while still participating in the study, we will have patient confirm his or her interest in continuing participation. If patient is still interested in study participation we will have him or her consent during the current a dmission.  
 
 
TOPCAT Protocol   
We plan to enroll only English speaking patients for this 20 patient pilot study. We do not have available funds and resources at this time to provide Spanish ICF documents for this pilot study. If we notice a large population of Spanish speakin g patients being excluded we will consider including Spanish 
Speaking patients in the next phase of this study after the pilot is completed.  
 
O. PROCEDURES TO BE EMPLOYED IN ANALYZING DATA  AND THE ANTICIPATED SIGNIFICANCE OF 
THE PROPOSED STUDY  
 
Aim 1 Outcomes will include consent rates and determination of sample size to adequately power a 
multicenter trial to determine if t- PA reduces the rate of CVC complications (CLABSI and VTE) by 20% . 
 
Aim 2 Outcomes  
The primary outcome will be rate of clinical diagnosed CLABSI and VTE in each arm.  Secondary outcomes will include: episodes of CVC dysfunction (defined as inability to draw blood from line and/or inability to flush CVC), off study use of t- PA, and clinical bleeding 
 
Statistical analysis plan  
Analysis will be performed by Quantitative Health Sciences under the direction of Dr. Pippa Simpson. Data will be investigated with summary statistics (e.g. frequencies, median and 
inter -quartile range). Where appropriate for a p arametric analysis transformation will be 
used or a non -parametric analysis will be used. Differences between t- PA and heparin 
control groups will be examined by using Chi -square and Fisher’s exact tests for categorical 
variables, and a Mann -Whitney test or a t- test for the continuous or ordered variables.  
 
 
P. FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIPS  
 This study has received internal funding from the Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of 
Wisconsin . This funding will be used to pay for t- PA and completion of study procedures.   
 
Q. ADVERTISEMENTS / FLIERS  
 
No fliers or advertisements will be used to recruit subjects for this study  
 
R. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
1. Malec LM, Cooper J, Rudolph J, Michaels MG, Ragni MV.  Prophylactic rtPA in the prevention of line-
associated thrombosis and infection in short bowel syndrome . J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2017;  
 
2. Ragni MV, Journeycake JM, Brambilla DJ.  Tissue plasminogen activator  to prevent central venous access 
device infection : a systematic review of CVAD  thrombosis , infection , and 
thromboprophylaxis.  Haemo philia  2008; 14:30– 38. 
 
 
 
TOPCAT Protocol  3.  Hemmelgarn B.R., Moist L.M., Lok C.E., et al: Prevention of dialysis catheter malfunction with 
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator. N  Engl J Med 2011; 364: pp. 303- 312 
 
4. Baskin JL, Pui CH, Reiss U, et al. Management of occlusion and  thrombosis  associated with long- term 
indwelling central venous catheters.  Lancet  2009; 374:159.  
 
5. Dillon PW, Jones GR, Bagnall- Reeb HA, et al. Prophylactic urokinase in the management of longterm 
venous access devices in children: a Children's Oncology Group study.  J Clin Oncol 2004; 22:2718 –2723.  
 
6. Balestreri L, De CM, Atovic M, et al. Central venous catheter -related  thrombosis  in clinically 
asymptomatic oncologic patients: a phlebographic study.  Eur J Radiol  1995; 20:108– 111.  
 
7. Journeycake JM, Buchanan GR. Thrombotic complications of central venous catheters in children.  Curr 
Opin Hematol  2003; 10:369– 374.  
 
8. Blaney M, Shen V, Kerner JA, et al. Alteplase for the treatment of central venous catheter occlusion in 
child ren: results of a prospective, open -label, single -arm study (The Cathflo Activase Pediatric Study).  J 
Vasc Interv Radiol  2006; 17:1745– 1751.  
 
9. Macrae JM, Loh G, Djurdjev O, et al. Short and long alteplase dwells in dysfunctional hemodialysis 
catheters.  Hemodial Int 2005;9:189- 195 
 
10. Onyeama SN, Hanson SJ, Dasgupta M, Baker K, Simpson  PM, Punzalan RC . Central Venous Catheter -
associated Venous Thromboembolism in Children with Hematologic Malignancy. J Pediatr Hematol 
Oncol. 2018 May 31. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000001229. [Epub  ahead of print]  
 11. Cathflo Activase: Prescribing Information: https://www.gene.com/download/pdf/cathflo_prescribing.pdf
 
 12. CHHS Patient Care Protocol - tPA Administration for Central Venous Access Devices (CVADs): 
https://connect.chw.org/ -/media/DocumentLibrary/Policies -and-Procedures/Protocol ---tPA-
Administration -for-Central -Venous -Access-Devices ---CVADs.ashx  
 
13. Deitcher SR, Fesen MR, Kiproff PM, et al; for the Cardiovascular Thrombolytic to Open Occluded Lines -2 Investigators. Safety and efficacy of alteplase for restoring function in occluded central v enous 
catheters: results of the Cardiovascular Thrombolytic to Open Occluded Lines trial.  J Clin Oncol. 
2002;20(1):317- 324.  
 14. Ponec D, Irwin D, Haire WD, et al; Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (alteplase) for restoration of flow in occluded central venous access devices: A double- blind placebo -controlled trial—
the cardiovascular thrombolytic to open occluded lines (COOL) efficacy trial.  JVIR. 2001;12:915 -955.  
 15. Firwana BM, Hasan R, Ferwana M et al. tissue Plasminogen activator versus heparin for locking 
dialysis catheters; A systematic review. Avicenna J Med. 2011; 1(2) 29 -34. 
 
 
TOPCAT Protocol   
16. Schenk P, Rosenkranz AR, Woflfl G, et al. Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator is a usefu alternative to heparin in priming quinton permacath. Am J Kidney Dis 2000; 35:130 -6. 
 
17. Gittins NS, Hunter -Blair YL, Matthews JN, et al. Comparison of alteplase and heparin in maintain the 
patency of paediatric central venous haemodialysis lines: A randomized controlled trial. Arch Dis Child. 
2007; 92: 499- 501.  
 
18. Infusion Nurses Society. Infusion therapy standards of practice.  J Infus Nurs. 2016;39(suppl 1):S1-
S159  
 
19. Camp -Sorrell D, ed. Access Device Standards of Practice for Oncology Nursing. 4th ed. Pittsburgh, PA: 
Oncology Nursing Society; 2017:1- 85. 
 20.Haire WD, Herbst SF. Consensus conference on the use of alteplase (t- PA) for the management of 
thrombotic catheter dysfunction.  J Vasc Access Devices . Summer 2000:1- 8. 
 21. AVA. Study Guide for Vascular Access Certification. Association for Vascular Access;2011:iii -164.  
 22. Cummings -Winfield C, Mushani -Kanji T. Restoring patency to central venous access devices.  Clin J 
Oncol Nurs. 2008;12(6):925- 934.  
    
 
 
 
 
 