 
V5 – IRB approved 3Feb2016 APPENDIX H 
Informed Consent 
 
You have agreed to join the Oral Health 4 Life (OH4L) research study.  This document 
summarizes key study details you agreed to when you joined.  Please keep this for your records. 
 
Principal Investigators: 
Jennifer McClure, PhD, Group Health Research Institute, mcclure.j@ghc.org , 206-287-2737 
Terry Bush, PhD, Alere Wellbeing, terry.bush@alere.com , 206-876-2201 
 
Project Manager: 
Ella Thompson, Group Health Research Institute, thompson.e@ghc.org , 206-442-5211 
 
Research Funder: 
This study is paid for by the National Institutes of Health. 
 
Research Study Purpose: 
This study will compare standard services offere d through state tobacco quitlines to standard 
services plus additional counseli ng and resources designed to prom ote better oral health.  We 
will examine how well each program helps people change their knowledge, attitudes, and health 
behaviors.  Everyone in this st udy has been randomly assigned (as if  by the flip of a coin) to one 
of these two programs. 
 
What you have agreed to: 
You have agreed to receive up to 5 calls from a tobacco quit coach and to receive other materials 
from your state tobacco quitline to help you stop  smoking.  You have completed at least one of 
these calls already.  You have also agreed to receive one text message every 1-2 weeks over the 
6 month study period.  You may or  may not also receive additiona l counseling and resources to 
help you reduce your risk of oral disease.  The letter enclosed with th is form provides more 
information about the services you have been randomly selected to receive. 
 
You also agreed to answer 3 surveys.  You have completed the first of these.  Someone from the Group Health Research Institute will contact you by phone in about 2 months and in about 6 
months to complete the remaining surveys.  Each one will take about  15-20 minutes.  After you 
complete each of these surveys, we will mail you $30 as a thank you.  Your tobacco quitline is managed by a company called Alere Wellbeing.  You agreed that information collected by this company as part of  their standard services to help you quit smoking 
or as part of this study may be shared with researchers at the Group Health Research Institute. We will only look at information collected during 2015-2018. This includes information you 
provided about yourself and your use of the quitlin e services.  When you en rolled in the quitline 
program, you gave Alere Wellbeing permission to audio record your contacts with the quitline.  
This is standard for all of the quitline couns eling calls.  Researchers at the Group Health 
Research Institute will randomly listen to a selection of calls from all study participants, to ensure study participants are receiving the corr ect advice and materials from the study.  Your 
calls may be included in this group.  This informa tion will only be used for this research and it 
will be kept confidential as provi ded by law.  Any identifiable information you provide to us or 
 
V5 – IRB approved 3Feb2016 we receive from Alere Wellbeing for the purposes of this research will be destroyed within 5 
years after the end of this study (2023). 
 
Benefits to You: 
As a result of being in this study you may qu it smoking and reduce your risk for cancer, heart 
disease, lung disease, and or al disease.  You may also feel good knowing that you have 
contributed to science.   
 
Risks to You & Protections: 
If you stop smoking you may experience nicotine w ithdrawal.  Symptoms include headaches, 
irritability, sleep disturbance, constipation, and cravings to smoke.  These will go away in a few 
days or weeks.  You can reduce these sympto ms if you use a nicotine replacement therapy, 
which may have been provided to you by your quitline.  If so, this medication can also have side-
effects such as headaches, nausea,  trouble sleeping, and rash or sk in irritation.  These symptoms 
are also temporary.  If you change your oral car e habits, such a brushing or flossing more often, 
you may experience some gum bleedi ng or oral discomfort.  This usually goes away with if you 
continue to brush or floss daily.  It is also possible that some one not in this study could learn 
your identity.  To reduce this risk, we will ne ver intentionally share your name with anyone 
outside of the study.  We have an agreement in place with the text message vendor  and website 
hosting vendor to keep your phone number private, and we will never use your name or reveal your identity in any resear ch papers or reports. 
 
HIPAA: 
Your health information is protected by a fede ral privacy law called HI PAA.  Group Health and 
Alere Wellbeing must follow this privacy law.  A ccording to HIPAA, the information collected by 
the researchers for this study is pa rt of that protected health info rmation.  HIPAA requires that the 
researchers tell you the following: 
 By participating in this study, you are allowing us to share your health information with the study 
researchers (named above) and their staff.  This health informa tion includes your answers to the 
study surveys, details about your participation in the standard services offered through state 
tobacco quitlines, and, if assigned to the oral  health program, any information about your 
participation in the additional counseling and resour ces designed to promote better oral health and 
your use of the study website.  The study website is  hosted by Isomedia, Inc.  We will ask you to 
use your cell phone number as your user name to l og into the study website.  After the first time 
you log in you will have the option to change your user name, if you choose.  In some cases we are required to give informa tion to government agencies or review boards who 
watch over the honesty and safety of research.  If  we are asked to do this, we have no plans to 
share information that could identify you personally.     Researchers working on this study have signed a c onfidentiality pledge to protect your privacy.  
No publications or reports from this study w ill identify you.  Any information we share with 
others outside of Group Health and Alere Wellbeing may not be protected under federal law.  However, other laws, regulations and agreemen ts may protect the information from improper 
use.    
 
V5 – IRB approved 3Feb2016 The HIPAA Privacy Law does not always apply to  those who are given protected information.  
Once Group Health and Alere Wellbeing have gi ven out health information, the person who 
receives it may re-disclose it. Privacy laws may no l onger protect the information. 
 
In order to be in the study, you mu st agree to use of your health information.  This permission for 
the researchers to obtain  your health information ends when the study ends. 
  
Who to Contact: 
If you have any questions about this study or experience any of the symptoms listed above, 
please call the study manager listed on the other side of this page. 
 
If you have questions about your rights as a research participant,  you can call the Human 
Subjects Office at 206-287-2919.  
Other: 
Your participation in this study is voluntary.  You can choose to withdraw at any time.  If you 
withdraw, you will continue to receive services from your state tobacco quitline. You will not 
lose your rights to any treatment or be nefits you are otherwise entitled to.   
 If you change your mind, you may take back by calling the Oral Health 4 Life Project Manager, Ella Thompson, at (206) 442 - 5211 or by writing to:  
 Dr. Jennifer McClure Group Health Research Institute 1730 Minor Ave, Suite 1600 
Seattle, WA 98101 
 
If you drop out, we will keep any information alr eady collected but will not contact you in the 
future or collect new information after your drop out date.     
 
Representatives from the National Institutes of Hea lth or their proxies may inspect data collected 
for this study.  A description of this clinical  trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required 
by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. When the study is completed, summary results will be posted at this site.  This site is available to the public.    
 There are no plans for study partic ipants to receive any money or other benefits from products or 
procedures that may be developed as a result of this study. 