 
Page 1 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24  
EMPA -KIDNEY Trial Protocol  
 
A multicentr e international random ized parallel group  double -
blind placebo -controlled clinical  trial of EMPA gliflozin once 
daily to assess cardio -renal outcome s in patient s with 
chronic KIDNEY  disease  
 
 
Does inhibition of sodium -glucose co -transporter -2 with empagliflozin 
prevent kidney  disease progression and cardiovascular death in 
patients with chronic kidney disease ? 
 
Selective inhibition of sodium -glucose co -transporter -2 (SGLT -2) with empagliflozin causes 
urinary glucose  excretion and  reduces  hyperglycaemia , weight , plasma circulating volume 
and blood pressure . This has been shown to translate safely into reduc ed clinical risk from 
cardiovascular disease  (particularly heart failure  and cardiovascular death ) in people with 
type 2 diabetes  (T2D)  and established  cardio vascular disease.  SGLT -2 inhibition with 
empagliflozin also reduce s albuminuria and slows the annual decline in estimated 
glomerular filtration rate in people with T2D who still have preserved kidney  function. Th e 
kidney  effects  may result from increased sodium delivery to the kidney’s macula densa , 
which in turn caus es glomerular afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction  and reduc ed 
intraglomerular pressure . Raised intraglomerular pressure is believed to be central to t he 
“final common pathway ” of disease progression  in chronic kidney disease (CKD) . Since  
SGLT -2 inhibition with empagliflozin also causes gl ycosuria and acute  haemodynamic  
changes in kidney  function in people without diabetes, empaglif lozin may also be 
nephroprotective  in conditions without ambient hyperglycaemia , which collectively account 
for 50 to 70% of patient s with CKD worldwide . Patients with established CKD  are at 
substantial risk of progressing to end -stage kidney  disease  despite the use of medical 
therapies , including renin -angiotensin system inhibition , so identifying new treatments to 
delay progression is a priorit y. Moreover, patients  with CKD  are at high risk of cardiovascular 
death and heart failur e, which may also be reduced by  empagliflozin.  
 
A streamlined international trial  
 
This randomized trial will compare  empagliflozin 10  mg once daily versus matching placebo , 
given on top of standard of care , in around 6000  participants with established  CKD , with or 
without diagnosed diabetes mellitus,  who are being treated  (where tolerated)  with an 
appropriate  dose of  a renin -angiotensin system  inhibitor . The study is event -driven,  and will 
continue until the required number of primary outcomes has occurred. Follow -up will allow 
reliable assessment of the effects of empagliflozin  on kidney  disease progression  or 
cardiovascular mortality , and other clinical outcomes . The study design is streamlined: extra 
work for collaborating doctors and hospitals will be kept to a minimum, and only essential 
information  will be collected . The trial is focused on readily identifiable and important clinic al 
outcomes. P articipant reported information recorded by participant interview directly into 
bespoke computer  systems and centrally measured creatinine are the main means of data 
collection . 
 
Central Coordinating Office  (CCO) ,  
 
Tel:  E-mail:   

 
Page 3 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 3.4.1  Final check of eligibility and compliance before  randomization  ................................ ...................  28 
3.4.1.1  Collection of blood and urine samples  ................................ ................................ ....................  28 
3.4.2  Random allocation of study treatment  ................................ ................................ .........................  28 
3.5 FOLLOW -UP VISITS (2 AND 6 MONTHS  AND THEN 6-MON THLY) ................................ .....................  29 
3.5.1  Recording adverse events and adherence to study treatment  ................................ ....................  29 
3.5.2  Collection of blood and urine samples  ................................ ................................ .........................  29 
3.5.3  Issuing study treatment and arranging further appointments ................................ .......................  30 
3.5.4  Follow -up for randomize d participants not attending study clinics  ................................ ...............  30 
3.5.5  Monitoring of women of child bearing potential  ................................ ................................ ...........  30 
3.5.6  Monitoring of people with diabetes mellitus  ................................ ................................ .................  30 
3.5.7  Local Lead Investigator supervision  ................................ ................................ ............................  31 
3.6 CENTRAL MONITORING OF PARTICIPANT SAFETY , EARLY RECALL VISITS AND MODIFYING STUDY 
TREATMENT  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  31 
3.6.1  Early Recall Visits  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  31 
3.6.2  Monitoring liver function, potassium, creatinine and AESIs  ................................ .........................  31 
3.6.3  Modifying study treatment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  31 
3.6.4  Unblinding of study treatment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 32 
3.6.5  Withdrawal of consent  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  32 
3.7 CONFIRMATION AND VERIFICATION OF STUDY OUTCOMES (“ADJUDICATION ”) ..............................  32 
3.8 CITED REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  33 
4.1 APPENDIX 1: ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR STUDY DESIGN AND 
CONDUCT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  37 
4.2 APPENDIX 2: VISIT SCHEDULE AND PR OCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ....... 40 
4.2.1  Clinic procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  40 
4.3 APPENDIX 3: STUDY ADDRESSES  ................................ ................................ ..............................  41 
5.1 VERSION HISTORY ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  42 

 
Page 4 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 TRIAL SYNOPSIS  
 
Trial title  A multicentr e international randomi zed parallel group double -blind placebo -controlled 
clinical trial of EMPAgliflozin once daily to assess cardio -renal outcome s in patient s 
with chronic KIDNEY disease  
Short  and lay  title EMPA -KIDNEY  (The study of heart and kidney  protection with empagliflozin)  
Clinical phase  III 
Trial design  Randomized double -blind placebo -controlled trial  
Responsibilities  The study was initiated by the University of Oxford and developed in a collaboration 
with Boehringer Ingelheim , wh ich has provided funding for the trial. Boehringer 
Ingelheim , the sponsor of this tria l, has delegated  responsibility for the conduct , 
analysis  and reporting of the trial to the  University of Oxford . 
Boehringer Ingelheim ID 1245 -0137  
ClinicalTrials.gov  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
EudraCT  number  2017 -002971 -24 
Trial participants  Eligibility criteria:  
1. Aged  ≥18 years* at Screening ; and  
2. Chronic kidney disease (CKD) at risk of kidney  disease progression;† 
3. A local investigator judges  that the participant neither  require s empagliflozin 
(or any other SGLT -2 or SGLT -1/2 inhibitor) , nor that  such treatment  is 
definitely  inappropr iate; and 
4. No exclusion criteria apply  
Participants will be treated with  appropriate  doses of renin -angiotensin system ( RAS)-
inhibition , unless such treatment is either not tolerate d or not indicated.  No patient 
currently being treated with empagliflozin (or other SGLT -2 or SGLT -1/2 inhibitor ) 
should be taken off this therapy to meet the eligibility criteria . Throughout the study, 
the care of participants will remain the responsibility of their local doctors who will be 
asked to ensure individualized standa rd of care, incl uding  management of 
cardiovascular risk factors and other existing comorbidities (e.g. hypertension, 
diabetes etc.). This should be conducted in the context of prevailing local, national or 
international guidance.  
Planned sample size  Approximately  6000  participants , including at least one -third with diabetes , one-third 
without  diabetes , and up to one-third with a  CKD -EPI estimated glomerular filtration 
rate (eGFR) ≥45 and <90 mL/min/1.73m2 at Screening  
Placebo Run-in 8-12 weeks  
Treatment duration  Event driven: the trial will continue until at least  1070 participants have experience d a 
first primary outcome  after randomiz ation   
Primary outcome  
 Time to first occurrence of : 
 Kidney  disease progression  (end-stage kidney  disease‡, a sustained eGFR <10 
mL/min/1.73m², renal death , or a sustained ≥40% decline in eGFR from 
randomization) or  
 Cardiovascular death  
Secondary outcome s Key secondary outcomes : 
 Time to first h ospitalization for heart failure or cardiovascular death  
 Time to occurrence s of all-cause h ospitalization  (first and recurrent  combined ) 
 Time to death from any cause  
Other secondary ou tcomes : 
 Time to kidney  disease progression  
 Time to c ardiovascular death  
 Time to c ardiovascular death or end-stage kidney  disease  
Medicinal Product  Oral empagliflozin  10 mg  
Formulation, dose, route 
of administration  Run-in: pl acebo  film-coated tablet once daily (single -blind)  for oral administration;  
From randomization: empagliflozin 10 mg film-coated tablet once daily versus 
matching placebo  film-coated tablet  once daily (double -blind)  for oral administration  
* Or “full age” as required by local regulation s (e.g. 2 0 years in Japan)  
† Either (i) e stimated glomerular filtration rate ( eGFR ) ≥20, <45 mL/min/1.73m2; or (ii) eGFR ≥45, <90 
mL/min/1.73m2 with urine albumin:creatinine ratio ≥200 mg/g  
‡ End-stage kidney  disease  is defined as  the initiation of maintenance dialysis  or receipt of a kidney transplant   

 
Page 6 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 1.1 DOES INHIBITION OF SODIUM -GLUCOSE CO -TRANSPORTER -2 (SGLT -2) WITH EMPAGLIFLOZIN  
PREVENT  KIDNEY  DISEASE PROGRESSION  OR CARDIOVASCULAR D EATH IN PATIENTS WITH 
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE  (CKD) ? 
 
1.1.1  Substantial cardiovascular risk exists for CKD patients despite statin -based 
therapy  and antihypertensive therapy  
In high -income countries, the prevalence of CKD  is about 10% and is likely to i ncrease as 
average population age rises and dia betes mellitus becomes more prevalent .1, 2 
Cardiovascular risk increases progressively as kidney  function declines .3, 4 There is 
evidence that lowering low -density lipoprotein cholesterol and blood pressure in people with 
CKD reduces cardiovascular risk,5, 6 but substantial residual risk remains  and no other 
treatments have been shown to reduce cardiovascular risk in this group of patients .  
 
A key feature of cardiovascular disease in CKD  is presence of structural  heart pathologies 
(e.g. left ventricular hyper trophy  and/or dilatation) and heart failure  (which may be 
accompanied  by coronary heart disease ). At least half of patients with advanced CKD (i.e. 
stages 4 -5) have abnormal cardiac structure on echocardiography,7,8 increasing to over 80% 
by the time dialysis is initiated.8  
 
1.1.2  Empagliflozin reduces the risk of cardiovascular death in people with type 2 
diabetes and established  cardiovascular disease  
Selective inhibition of SGLT -2 causes increased urinary glucose and transiently  increased 
sodium excretion. This  is associated  with reductions in weight and blood pressure as well 
as haemoglobin glycation (HbA1c). Among 70 20 patients  with type 2 diabetes m ellitus ( T2D) 
and established  cardio vascular disease in the EMPA -REG OUTCOME trial, empagliflozin 
reduced the primary cardiovascular composite outcome (death from cardiovascular causes, 
nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke) by 14% compared to  placebo (hazard  ratio 
[HR] 0.86, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.74 -0.99). This was driven by a significant reduction 
in cardiovascular  death (HR 0.62, 95% CI 0.49 -0.77, nominal p<0.0001). A pre-specified 
secondary outcome of hospitali zation for heart failure was reduced by 35% ( HR 0.65, 95% 
CI 0.50 -0.85).9 
 
The EMPA -REG OUTCOME trial was conducted in participants with relatively preserved 
kidney  function (>9 0% had a baseline estimated glomerular filtration rate [ eGFR ] >45 
mL/min/1.73m2), and it  is unclear whether e mpagliflozin can prevent  cardiac disease in 
patients with more severe kidney  impairment.  
 
1.1.3  Substantial risk of kidney  disease progression in people with CKD despite 
inhibition of the renin -angiotensin system  
CKD is often a progressive condition , with proteinuria representing a significant risk factor 
for a more rapid decline in kidney  function .10 Although patients with early CKD are more 
likely to die before they reach end -stage kidney  disease ( ESKD ), the avoidance of ESKD  is 
still highly desirable due to its adverse effects on quality of life and the substanti al costs of 
dialysis and transplantation to healthcare providers. Inhibition  of the renin -angiotensin 
system (RAS) with angiotensin -converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) or angiotensin receptor 
blockers (ARB) reduce s albuminuria and slow s the rate of progres sion in proteinuric 
nephropathies , particularly in diabetic kidney disease .11-13 However, a substantial residual 
risk of ESKD  remains. Although combination therapy (i.e. ACEi plus ARB) was initially 
thought to be a promising  approach , such combined regimens do not delay kidney  disease 
progression and may cause hyperkalaemia or acute kidney injury.14 There is therefore a 

 
Page 8 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 reabsorption, thereby increasing distal sodium delivery to th e macula densa, which has been 
shown to activate a tubulo -glomerular feedback leading to afferent arteriolar 
vasoconstriction , thereby reducing intraglomerular pressure and urinary albumin excretion.  
 
Empagliflozin has also been shown to have a pharmacological effect in people without 
diabetes.  In healthy volunteers, empagliflozin 10  mg daily resulted in approximately 50  g/day 
glycosuria , and a n initial acute decrease in GFR  (an indicator of reduced  intraglomerular 
pressure ) has been shown to occur in overweight but otherwise healthy volunteers 
(unpublished data, BI clinical trial report 1245.66 ). Taken together , these observations 
suggest that empagliflozin has haemodynamic effects in the kidney in the absence of 
elevated blood glucose .  
 
It is therefore reasonable to hypothe size that empagliflozin may have beneficial effects on 
kidney  disease progression  and cardiovascular risk among those with CKD , irrespective of 
the presence of diabetes . Worldwide , the proportion of patients with CKD who have diabetes 
ranges from about 30  to 50% so, if empagliflozin has beneficial effects on kidney  and 
cardiovascular outcomes in CKD , then its use in patients with CKD but without diabetes 
would increase the potential  population who might benefit from this drug by 2-3 times.20, 21  
 
1.1.5  The safety of empagliflozin  has been established in people with type 2 diabetes  
The e mpagliflozin clinical development programme has randomized >15 ,000 trial 
participants to date. About 550 healthy volunteers have been exposed to empagliflozin (up 
to 800 mg in a single dose and up to 50 mg in multiple dosing), with good tolerability. 
Approximately 8500 patients with T2D have been treated with empagliflozin in clinical  
studies, of which more than half have been treated for a year  or more .22-30 In all  these 
studies, empagliflozin was well tolerated. In the EMPA -REG OUTCOME trial , which had  a 
median follow -up of 3.1 years , the frequency of serious adverse events (SAEs) and adverse 
events that led to discontinuation of study treatment among patients allo cated empagliflozin 
was no higher than that among those allocated placebo.9, 15 There was no significant 
increase in  the frequency of hypoglycaemia with empagliflozin , except when used in 
combination with a sulphonylurea or basal dose insulin .31 Electrolytes were  not s ignificantly 
different among those allocated to empagliflozin  or placebo .31 Compared to placebo, there 
was an increased frequency of mycotic genital infections. By contrast with t he increased risk 
of bone fracture  and lower -limb amputation  observed with another SGLT -2 inhibitor , 
canagliflozin,32 there was no such adverse safety signal observed when over 12,000 patients 
with T2D from placebo -controlled empagliflozin clinical trials  (including EMPA -REG 
OUTCOME ) were an alysed together .31 Furth er safety analyses from EMPA -REG 
OUTCOME showed that t he adverse event profile of empagliflozin in patients who had 
impaired kidney function at baseline  (i.e. eGFR < 60 mL/min/1.73m2), a potentially vulnerable 
population, was consistent with that reported i n the overall trial population.15 In summary, 
the EMPA -KIDNEY trial  aims to assess  whether empag liflozin  reduce s the risk of  kidney  
disease progression or cardiovascular death  in people  with CKD , irrespective of whether 
they have  diabetes , and whether the benefits of treatment outweigh  any adverse effects.    

 
Page 10 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 albumin:creatinine ratio (both based on local laboratory results at screenin g), and region .33 
The algorithm includes a sto chastic element (treatment is assigned to the arm determined 
by the minimization algorithm with a probability of 0.9  and by a random number generator 
with a probability of 0.1) . Given the stochastic element of the randomization, re -
randomization methods fo r the analysis are not considered necessary and only traditional 
methods of analysis are planned. Randomized participants will be issued with a 7-month 
supply of study treatment consisting of  empagliflozin  10 mg or matching placebo . One tablet 
is to be tak en daily  with or without food . To ensure a dose interval of about 24 hours, the 
medication should ideally be taken at approximately the same time every day.  
2.3 DATA ANALYSIS PLAN 
 
2.3.1  Main and subsidiary a ssessments  
2.3.1.1  Primary assessment  
The p rimary assessment will involve an intention -to-treat comparison  among all randomized 
participants , using a Cox model adjusting for each of the minimization variables (see above),  
of the effects of allocation to empagliflozin  versus placebo on  the time to the first occurrence 
of: 
 
(i) Kidney  disease progression  (defined as ESKD , a sustained decline in eGFR to <10 
mL/min/1.73m2, renal death , or a sustained decline of ≥40% in eGFR  from 
randomization ); or  
(ii) Cardiovascular death . 
 
ESKD  is defined as  the initiation of maintenance dialysis  or receipt of a kidney transplant .  
 
To ensure bias is not introduced by differences between treatment arms in the extent to 
which extra eGFR measurements are made outside of scheduled follow -up visits, the term 
‘sustained ’ in respect of  a decline in  eGFR  (to <10 mL/min/1.73m2, or of ≥40%  from baseline ) 
is that it is either (a) m easured at two consecutive scheduled study follow -up visits; or (b) 
measured at the last scheduled study follow -up visit  or the last scheduled visit before  death  
(or withdrawal of consent ). 
 
2.3.1.2  Secondary assessment s 
If the primary outcome  is statistically significant (either at the interim or final analysis), the 
key secondary outcomes  will then be tested.  The secondary assessment s will involve 
intention -to-treat comparisons among all randomized participants of the effects of allocation 
to empagliflozin  versus placebo during the scheduled treatment period on : 
 
(i) Key secondary outcomes : 
a) Time to first hospitalization for heart failure  or cardiovascular death;  
b) Time to  occurrence s of all-cause  hospitalization s (first and recurrent  
combined ); 
c) Time to death from any cause . 
  

 
Page 11 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 (ii) Other s econdary outcomes : 
a) Time to first occurrence of kidney  disease progression ; 
b) Time to c ardiovascular death ; 
c) Time to c ardiovascular death or ESKD . 
 
In testing  the key secondary outcomes , their p -values will be corrected for multiple testing 
using the Hochberg “step -up” procedure that controls the familywise error rate . Other 
secondary outcomes will be assessed without adjustment for multiplicity  at a nominal level 
of α = 0.05 (two -sided) . 

 
Page 12 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 2.3.2  Safety, biochemical and e xploratory assessments  
2.3.2.1  Safety assessments  
Safety assessments will involve intention -to-treat among all randomized participants  and, 
where appropriate, on -treatment analyses  of the effects of  allocation to empaglifl ozin versus 
placebo during the scheduled treatment period on:  
 
(i) SAEs due to:  
(a) Urinary tract infection, overall and separately by sex; 
(b) Genital infection, overall and separately by sex; 
(c) Hyperkalaemia ; 
(d) Acute kidney injury ; 
(e) Dehydration ; 
 
(ii) AEs of Special Interest (AESIs) : 
(a) Liver injury , both overall and separately by cause  (defined as ALT or AST ≥5x 
Upper Limit of Normal [ ULN] or the combination of ALT or AST ≥3x ULN with 
bilirubin ≥2x ULN; measured in the same blood sample at study follow -up or early 
recall visits; see Section 3.5.2 ); 
(b) Ketoacidosis, both overall and, separately, by baseline diabetes status;  
(c) Lower limb amputations ( overall and by level) ; 
 
(iii) Other AEs relevant to the study question : 
(a) Bone fractures, both overall and separately by site and aetiology (i.e. 
distinguishing those resulting from high and low impact  trauma ); 
(b) Severe h ypoglycaemia  (defined as  low blood sugar causing severe cognitive 
impairment  which requir es assistance  from another person  for recovery) ;  
(c) Symptomatic dehydration  (defined as  whether or not a participant has 
experienced symptoms they attribute to dehydration , such as feeling faint or 
fainting) ; 
 
(iv) Hospitalization by specific causes†; 
 
(v) SAEs  both overall and, separately, by categor y†; 
 
(vi) Discontinuation of study treatment overall and by various causes (including SAEs†, 
non-serious adverse events†, and other reasons);  
 
† based on Medical Dictionary for Drug Regulatory Activities  (MedDRA) System Organ Class 
classification  

 
Page 13 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24  
(vii) Changes in weight and s ystolic and diastolic blood pressure  from baseline . 
 
2.3.2.4  Health economic assessments  
The study results may, if app ropriate,  be used to conduct health economic assessments 
regarding the use of empagliflozin . An analysis plan  will be pre-specified if any such 
analyses are considered  worthwhile . 
 
2.3.3  Statistical analysis  
A full Data Analysis Plan will be finalised  prior to any unblinding of study results. Briefly, all 
participants randomized to empagliflozin will be compared with all participants randomized 
to placebo, regardless of whether a participant received all, some or none of their allocated 
treatment (i.e.  intention -to-treat analyses). A participant may contribute to more than one 
assessment if they have events of more than one type (e.g. hospitalization for heart failure 
followed by ESKD ). For the time -to-event analyses  survival analytic methods will be us ed to 
evaluate the time to the first event during the entire study period. For each categorical 
outcome, Cox proportional hazards regression adjusted for the prognostic  variables used in 
the minimization algorithm (age, sex, prior diabetes, eGFR, urinary a lbumin:creatinine ratio, 
and region) will be used to estimate the hazard ratio comparing all those allocated active 
empagliflozin with all those allocated placebo. Estimates of the hazard ratio will be shown 
with 95% confidence intervals, and Kaplan -Meier estimates for the time to each of the 
primary and secondary outcomes will also be plotted.  For the secondary outcome of all -
cause h ospitalization , the analys is will examine all events  (i.e. not just the first event in each 
participant) . 

 
Page 15 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 The safety profile of emp agliflozin has been well -studied in previous trials.9, 15, 22-31 
Therefore, in line with regulatory guidance,35 collection of safety data will be streamlined.  
 
2.5.1.1.1  Non-serious adver se events  
Non-serious AEs will only be recorded if  they:  
(a) Lead to discontinuation of study treatment ; or  
(b) Are one of the following:  
 Bone fracture (with additional information recorded about fracture site and aetiology 
[i.e. distinguishing those resu lting from high and low impact ]) 
 Severe h ypoglycaemia (as defined in Section  2.3.2.1 ) 
 Episodes of gout  
 Symptomatic dehydration (as defined in Section  2.3.2.1 ) 
 An Adverse Event of Special Interest (AESI; see S ection  2.5.1.1.2 ) 
 Events that could lead to amputation  (which include diagnosis or treatment for 
periphera l arterial disease, peripheral neuropathy, diabetic foot ulcer, and lower limb 
infection or gangrene ). 
 
2.5.1.1.2  Adverse Events of Special Interest  (AESI)  
The following AE s will be recorded regardless of whether they fulfil the criteria for a SAE:  
 Liver injury   
 Ketoacidosis  
 Lower limb amputations ( overall and by level) . 
 
All new AESIs will be reviewed each working day  by  ( ) 
clinicians and relevant additional details sought promptly (see Section 3.6.2 ). Detailed 
reports on AESIs will be provided by the  to Boehringer  Ingelheim at regular intervals.  
 
2.5.1.1.3  Serious Adverse Events (SAEs)  
SAEs are defined as those adverse events that:  
 Result in death  
 Are life-threatening  
 Require inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization;  
 Result in persistent or signi ficant disability or incapacity  
 Result in cong enital anomaly or birth defect  
 Are important medical events in t he opinion of a responsible Local Investigator (i.e. 
not life -threatening or resulting in hospitalization, but may jeopardise the participant 
or require intervention to prevent one or other of the outcomes listed above) .  
 
For the purposes of this trial,  certain pre -specified Preferred Terms (e.g. “agranulocytosis”, 
“interstitial lung disease” ), and all cancer s will always be considered Seriousa.  
 
Pregnancy will not be considered an AE in this trial, but must be report ed promptly (within 
24 hours) to the Regional Co -ordinating Centre ( RCC ) or  and then followed up using 
Pregnancy Monitoring Form s. 
 
2.5.1.2  Recording and review of relevant AEs by LCC staff  
All relevant AEs  (as defined in Section 2.5.1.1 ) reported by participants at each study visit 
interview will be recorded and assessed by trained LCC clinic staff  (usually the LCC 
Research Coordinator)  directly on the study computer -based data entry system (see Section 
                                            
a In accordance with the  European Medicines Agency initiative on Important Medical Events .  
Note: New cancer diagnosis and recurrence of pre -existing cancer should all be recorded . 

 
Page 16 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 2.6.3 ), regardless of whether the participant continues to take study treatment or not. If the 
study team become aware of SAEs or A ESIs  between study visits, they are requested to 
report them within 24 hours. If LCC clinic staff cannot access the computer -based data entry 
system, they must contact their RCC to report the AE  within that timeframe . After completion 
of the trial, investi gators do not need to actively monitor participants, but could report SSARs 
or related AESIs through telephone contact to the RCC or  
 
The electronic SAE form will capture the following information for all SAEs:  
 Unique study identification number of th e participant  
 Unique SAE form identification number  
 The time and date that the SAE form is completed  
 The source of the report (e.g. participant, relative, study nurse, Local Investigator , or 
other doctor)  
 A description of the event : Event description s will be recorded by the trained clinic 
staff using MedDRA Preferred Term s. If an appropriate term cannot be identified, 
advice can be sought from the Local Investigator or a  study clinician, or the 
description can be recorded as free -text and subsequently coded by  study  
clinician , blin d to study treatment allocation  
 The reason for believing the AE to be serious (i.e. resulted in death, life -threatening, 
hospitalisation, disabling, congenital anomaly in offspring, other important medical 
event)  
 The date the event started  
 The place where the event was diagnosed or managed (e.g. hospital inpatient, 
hospital outpatient, participant’s home)  
 The name of the place where the event was diagnosed or managed (if appropriate)  
 Number of nights spent in hospital (if applicable ) 
 The outcome (ongoing, recovered, death, unknown)  
 Whether the event is thought likely to be due to study treatment . In making this 
assessment, there should be consideration, based on the available information, of 
the pharmacology of the drug and drug class, probability of an alternative cause, the 
timing of the reaction with respect to study drug, the response to withdr awal of the 
study drug, and (where appropriate) the response to subsequent re -challenge or dose  
change.  
 
Such detailed information will also be collected for all AESIs . 
 
The electronic  non-serious AE  form will capture the following information:  
 Unique study identification number of the participant  
 Unique AE form identification number  
 The time and date that the AE form is completed  
 A description of the event (as describe above)  
 The date the event started  
 The outcome (ongoing, recovered, unknown)  
 Whether the event is thought likely to be due to study treatment  (as above) . 
 
Local Investigators are required to review all AEs recorded by those LCC Research Co -
ordinators who have been delegated the task of recording AEs.   
 

 
Page 17 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 2.5.1.3  Collection of Additional Information  for Suspected Serious Adverse 
Reactions (SSARs)  by  
Any SAE that is considered, with reasonable possibility, to be due to study treatment by 
either Local Investigators , appropriately delegated LCC clinic staff or  study clinicians  
(or Boehringer  Ingelheim staff) , is potentially a SSAR. The study clinician will obtain 
standard information, including participant study number, identity of reporting person, 
description of event, and reason for attribution to study drug. All such reports will then be 
forwarded urgently to a  Clinical Coordinator (or their delegated  study clinician 
deput y), who will review the evidence for seriousness and relatedness  (in discussion with 
the LLI if necessary) , and seek any additional information required (includin g relevant 
information relating to medical history and treatment both prior to and following 
randomization , and prior to/at the time of onset of the SSAR ).  
 
2.5.1.4  Expedited reporting of SUSARs and exemptions from expedited reporting  
SSARs that are unexpected ac cording to the Investigator’s Brochure are subject to 
expedited reporting.36, 37 However, in line with recommendations by regulatory authorities, 
anticipated events that either are efficacy endpoints, consequences of the underlying 
disease or are events common in the study population will be exempted from expedited 
reporting in order t o protect trial integrity and because based on a single case it is not 
possible  to conclude that there is a reasonable possibility that the investigational drug 
caused the event .36, 38 Such  events that are exempted from expedited reporting to health 
authorities in this trial are listed below.  
1. Efficacy endpoints:  
 Kidney  disease progression (i.e. ESKD ) 
 Myocardial infarction  
 Stroke and t ransient ischaemic attack  
 Heart failure  
 CV death  
 New-onset diabetes mellitus . 
 
2. Common CKD -related eventsb: 
 Acute -on-chronic kidney  failure  
 Dialysis and dialysis access  related events and complications  
 Bone fractures  and parathyroid -related events . 
 
Any SSARs that are considered not exempt  will be reported promptly by the  to 
Boehringer  Ingelheim, and Boehringer Ingelheim will make an assessment of whether the 
event is “expect ed” or not ( based on the latest version of the empagliflozin Investigator 
Brochure ). Any SSAR that is unexpected will be considered a potential Suspected 
Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR) and will be unblinded by a member of the 
 clinical staf f with such privilege . 
 
All SUSARs will be reported to relevant regulatory authorities, to the Chair of the Data 
Monitoring Committee (DMC) and, as required, to ethics committees and Institutional 
Review Boards  and investigators  in an expedited manner in a ccordance with regulatory 
requirements.  
 
                                            
b The relevant MedDRA Preferred Terms which are exempt a re specified in  the Adverse Event Reporting  
SOP . 

 
Page 18 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 2.5.2  Interim analyses: role of the independent Data Monitoring Committee  
2.5.2.1  Regular unblinded analyses by the DMC  
The DMC will assess pa rticipant  safety and the progress of the trial through review of 
unblinded data at specified intervals, and recommend to the Steering Committee and 
Boehringer Ingelheim whether to continue, modify, or stop the trial. Measures are in place 
to ensure blinding of Boeh ringer Ingelheim, University of Oxford, the Steering Committee 
and all other trial staff and participants. The tasks and responsibilities of the DMC will be 
specified in the DMC charter. The DMC will maintain written records of all its meetings.  
The DMC wi ll request analyses at a frequency relevant to the stage of the study (typically at 
6-12 monthly intervals, with a Chair’s review every 3 -6 months) or in response to emerging 
data from other trials. These unblinded analyses of all SAEs and other study outc omes (both 
overall and in key subgroups, including by region) and all expected SSARs will be supplied 
in strict confidence by a statistician not otherwise involved in the trial.  
 
The DMC would be expected to advise the Steering Committee if clear evidence  emerged 
of an adverse effect on all -cause mortality (at least 2 standard deviations) or if, in the view 
of the DMC, there was other compelling evidence of hazard that seemed likely to outweigh 
any potential benefit.  
 
Unless advised by the DMC in response to clear evidence of hazard, the Steering 
Committee, collaborators, participants, representatives of the Boehringer Ingelheim, and all 
study staff will remain blind to these results until the end of the study. The DMC is 
independent of the University of Ox ford and Boehringer Ingelheim.  
 
2.5.2.2  Early stopping for benefit  
In addition, the DMC may review a single formal interim efficacy analysis once 150 
participants have experienced a first ESKD event (by which time it is expected that 
approximately 60% of all first  primary outcomes will have occurred). Full details of the 
stopping guidelines at this interim analysis, including the alpha spent at this analysis and 
the alpha remaining for the final analysis, will be provided in the DMC Charter. Separate 
alpha -spending  functions will be used for the testing of the primary and key secondary 
outcomes to control the type I error rate across two analysis time -points, and a gatekeeping 
approach followed by the Hochberg procedure will be used to control the type I error rate 
across multiple endpoints.  
 
Briefly, in order for the DMC to recommend that the trial is stopped early for benefit at this 
formal interim analysis, both of the following conditions must be met:  
 
(1) a reduction in the primary outcome with the Hwang -Shih-DeCani alpha -spending function 
(=-8) used to define the required two -sided p -value and its corresponding critical Cox 
hazard ratio; and (2) a reduction in the secondary composite outcome of time to 
cardiovascular death or ESKD to at least the same critical Cox hazard ratio as observed in 
the primary outcome, but with the proviso that the p -value is constrained to be < 0.05. For 
example, for the scenario when 60% of the first primary outcomes (i.e. 642 first primary 
outcomes) have occurred at the time of the interim analysis, this would equate to stopping 
criteria of: (i) a two -sided p -value <0.002 with a critical Cox hazard ratio <0.78 for the primary 
outcome; and (ii) a critical Cox hazard ratio of <0.78 and a two -sided p -value <0.05 for the 
secondary outcom e of time to cardiovascular death or ESKD [with 400 such events and a 
critical Cox hazard ratio of <0.78 a p -value of <0.014 would be observed]. Note the 
secondary outcome of time to cardiovascular death or ESKD is not part of the prospectively 
defined hyp othesis testing strategy but is included as an additional stopping criterion to 

 
Page 20 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 potential to have) a substantial impact on the protection  of the study participants or the 
reliability of the study results (with full details provided in a Quality Assurance Systems 
SOP) . 
 
Throughout the study, the  will centrally monitor performance against the predefined 
critical -to-quality facto rs. This process will predomina ntly be quantitative in nature and 
remedial actions will be determined based on the  detection of deviations and totality of the 
evidence.  
 
The relevant RCC and/or the  will arrange monitoring visits to LCCs  as considered 
appropriate based on perceived training needs and the results of central process monitoring 
and statistical monitoring of study data  (i.e. monitoring visits will be spaced by several 
months) . The purpose of such visits will be to ensure that the study is c onducted according 
to the protocol , ICH -GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements , and by helping LCC 
clinic staff  to resolve any local issues  with the study and by providing additional focused 
training  where necessary . Particular attention will be g iven to the effectiveness of strategies 
to recruit appropriate participants, the consenting process, the completeness of follow -up, 
the maintenance of participant compliance with the study treatments  (which will be assessed 
by participant self -report) , the reporting of study outcomes and reportable AEs (see Section 
2.5.1),  and collection of relevant supporting documentation  to support the adjudication 
process (see Section 3.7). With the exception of local laboratory results (where a random 
subs et will be assessed), n o routine source data review and verification will take place as 
such  data are obtained directly from participants  (or occasionally from relatives or doctors) 
by interview . Where possible,  monitoring visits will include observation of a participant’s 
study visit. A report of each monitoring visit will be prepared by the study monitor  and 
provided to LCC, RCC and  staff  (including the Head of Monitoring)  for review, and filed  
appropriately . Copies of these reports will be supplied to Boehringer  Ingelheim on request.  
With prior arrangement, representatives of Boehringer  Ingelheim may attend monitoring 
visits . Details of monitoring are provided in an On -Site Monitoring SOP.  
 
2.6.2  Supply of study treatment  
Study treatments will be manufactured, packaged, labelled and delivered to each LCC or 
RCC by Boehringer Ingelheim (or their subcontractor) under the direction of the  and 
according to Good Manufacturing Practic es. An inventory of study drug supplies wi ll be 
maintained on the study computer -based  system and monitored at the . LCC Local 
Investigators will be responsible for making appropriate arrangements for the storage and 
issuing of study treatments, and for the disposal of unused study drug in acco rdance with 
study SOPs.  
 
2.6.3  Data management  
All data in the study will be processed electronically using a set of custom -written 
applications  developed to meet the requirements of the protocol and to comply with 21 CFR 
Part 11 and other relevant regulatory, l egal and information security requirements . The LCC 
staff (usually the LCC R esearch Coordinator) will use bespoke web -based applications  for 
local study management and to enter participant data (including study visit forms and AE 
information)  directly into the database . These source data will be held in central databases 
located both at the  and at an independent third party where it will remain under the 
control of the Local Investigator s (i.e. no paper case  report forms exist) . Any data queries 
reporte d by LCCs to the or RCC (as per regional arrangements) during the study will 
be recorded onto the computer -based study management system. Data queries will be 
reviewed and managed by the  in accordance with an Internal Operating Procedure, 

 
Page 21 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 with data  changes only made to pre-defined critical -to-quality data points. Clear electronic 
documentation will be maintained so the original data entry is not obscured and there is a n 
audit trail for each entered data error and data chang e. 
 
RCC and  staff will use the suite of administration applications  on the computer -based 
system  to manage LCCs  and study participants, including central clinical supervision (review 
of AEs and laboratory results)  by the , management of follow -up and co mpliance, 
tracking of samples for central analysis, collection of supporting documentation for relevant 
events, and clinical outcome  adjudication . 
 
All data accesses will require a unique username and password, and any changes to data 
will require the user  to enter their username and password as an electronic signature. Staff 
will have access restricted to only the functionality and data that are appropriate to their role 
in the study.  
  
2.6.4  Biological sample assay, transport and storage  
2.6.4.1  Local analysis of eligibility and safety bloods  
Local laboratories will be used in all LCC study clinics for eligibility checks at the Screening 
visit ( urine albumin:creatinine ratio [or protein :creatinine ratio, according to local practice], 
and blood creatinine  plus liver transaminases [AST or ALT] ), at the Randomi zation visit 
(blood creatinine, potassium, liver transaminases, bilirubin and haematocrit)  and for clinical 
safety oversight at each follow -up visit (including blood creatinine , potassium  and liver 
transaminase s with bilirubin ; see Section  4.2.1 ).  
 
Haem atocrit, haemoglobin,  phosphate , sodium  and corrected calcium  will also be measured 
locally at 18 months of follow -up in a subset of about 20% (e.g. UK participants) of the 
surviving population .  
 
2.6.4.2  Central assessment of samples collected at the randomization visit and 
during follow -up 
Samples of both blood and urine are to be collected from all participants at the 
Randomization visit for central analysis and storage, including subsequent DNA extraction 
(subject to relevant consent, see Section 2.6.4.3 ) at a central ISO 17025 accredited  
laboratory . Central samples will not be used to assess eligibility. Further samples  of both 
blood and urine  are to be collected from all participants at the 2 mont h, 18 month (i .e. the 
approximate study midpoint) and Final Follow -up visits. Blood will be collected for central 
analysis of creatinine at the time of every scheduled Follow -up visit (see Section 4.2.1 ). 
RCCs will supply LCC staff with kits to collect these blood and urine samples . Blood is to be 
kept cool before centrifugation, separation into bar -coded cryovials, and storage at below -
18°C within a day of the study clinic visit. Samples are to be transferred to below -40°C 
within 4 weeks. At appropriate intervals, samples will be collected from the LCCs (by the 
RCC or ) and transferred to the central laboratory for analysis (see Section  4.2.1 ) and 
for long-term frozen storage. Full details of sample collection, transport, storage and analysis 
are provided in a separate SOP.  
 
2.6.4.3  Conse nt approval for unspecified analyses on blood and urine samples  
Sample tubes will be labelled with a unique Sample ID which will be linked to the participant 
and the study visit using the study computer -based data entry system (i.e. samples will be 
pseudon ymised). Outside the study clinic, staff involved in the transport, storage and 
analysis of these samples will have no means of linking tubes to an identifiable participant. 
Consent for protocol -specified analyses will be included in the main consent form.  In 
addition, all participants will be asked if they would provide Supplementary Consent to allow 

 
Page 22 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 samples that have been collected for central laboratory analyses to be retained and used 
for unspecified analyses in the future. Similarly, Supplementary Cons ent will be sought to 
permit genetic material in the blood samples to be analysed. In all cases, participants will be 
free to opt in or out of any part of the Supplementary Consent without affecting their eligibility 
for the trial.  
 
2.6.5  Administrative details  
2.6.5.1  Source documents and archiving  
Source documents for the study constitute the clinic visit records held in the study main 
database , results  of protocol -mandated local laboratory blood and urine  analyses,  the 
additional information obtained on reported adverse events that are relevant to the outcome 
measures (see Section 3.7), death certificates, and  drug supply records. These will be 
retained for at least 25 years from the completion of the study. Boehringer Ingelheim  and 
regulatory agencies will have the right to commission a confidential audit of such records in 
the , RCCs, and LCCs provided thi s does not result in unblinding while the study is in 
progress.  
 
2.6.5.2  Funding  
This study was initiated by  University of Oxford  and developed as an  academic 
collaboration with clinical sci entists at Boehringer Ingelheim . Boehringer Ingelheim  is the 
sponsor , and  will perform  regulatory submissions  and interactions . It will also provide 
funding and packaged study medication (empaglif lozin and matching placebo) for the study. 
Boehringer  Ingelheim  has delegate d other roles to  the University of Oxford , which is 
responsible for leading the trial scientifically and methodologically worldwide , including its 
conduct and statistical analysis . It is intended that the study will be conducted in the US in 
collaboration with independent scientists from the  
. Data will be collected and analysed independen tly from the source of funding.  
 
2.6.5.3  Indemnity  
Boehringer  Ingelheim will, at all times, indemnify the study investigators and study staff from 
claims that may be made against them for any injury sustained by a study participant as a 
consequence of participation in the study in accordance with this protocol. The indemnity 
will be outlined in detail in the agreements between the , RCCs and LCCs (and in a 
letter from Boehringer Ingelheim ). 
 
2.6.5.4  End of the within -trial period  
When the minimum number of required study outcomes has accrue d (see Section 2.4.1.2 ), 
or the DMC advise s the trial should be stopped early , participants will be invited to Final 
Follow -up visit s. This visit may occur earlier than their planned next 6-month ly visit. The end 
of the trial is then defined as the latest of the following two dates: 7 days after the last 
participant’s Final Follow -up visit, or the date of the last 4-week post -Final Follow -up blood 
draw . 
 
2.6.5.5  Publications  and reports  
The Steering Committee  (which includes representatives from University of Oxford,  
 and Boehringer Ingelheim , as well as other individuals with relevant expertise) 
will be responsible for drafting the primary manuscript from the study  and will establish a 
publicat ion plan for secondary and supplementary analyses . In general, p apers initiated by 
the Steering Committee (including the primary manuscript) will be written in the name of the 
Collaborative Group, with individual investigators named personally at the end o f the report 
(or, to comply with journal requirements, in web -based material posted with the report).  Draft 
copies of any manuscripts  relating to the effects of empagliflozin from this trial will be 

 
Page 23 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 provided to Boehringer Ingelheim for review prior to publ ication  but the decision to submit 
for publication will rest with the Steering Committee . 
 
The Steering Committee will also institute a process by which p roposals for additional 
publications (including from clinician scientists within Boehringer Ingelheim seeking to 
further evaluate the benefit -risk profile of empagliflozin and from independent external 
researchers) are considered by the Steering Committee before they begin. The Steering 
Committee will facilitate the use of the study data and approval will not be unreasonably 
withheld. However, the Steering Committee will need to be satisfied that any proposed 
publication is of high quality , honours the commitments made to the study participants in the 
consent documentation and ethical approvals, and  is compliant with relevant legal and 
regulatory requirements (e.g. relating to data protection and privacy).  The Steering 
Committee will have the right to review and comment on any draft manuscripts prior to 
publication . 
 
2.6.5.6  Substudies  
Proposals for substudies must be approved by the Steering Committee before they begin. 
In considering such proposals, the Steering Committee will need to be satisfied that the 
proposed substudy is of a high quality, and that it wil l not compromise the main study in any 
way ( e.g. by reducing the recruitment rate or compliance with study treatment  or overuse of 
stored biological samples ). 
 

 
Page 25 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 3.1 ELIGIBILITY FOR THE STUDY  
 
Consenting i ndividuals are eligible for randomization if:  
(i) Age is ≥18 yearsc at Screening ; 
(ii) There is evidence of chronic kidney disease at risk of kidney  disease progression 
(see Section 3.1.1 ); 
(iii) A local Investigator judges  that the participant  neither  require s empagliflozin (or 
any other SGLT -2 or SGLT -1/2 inhibitor), nor that such treatment  is inappropriate; 
and 
(iv) None of the exclusion criteria apply (see Section 3.1.2 ). 
 
Participants will be treated with appropriate doses of single agent RAS-inhibition  with either 
ACEi or ARB  unless such treatment is either not tolerated or not indicated  (see Section 
3.3.4 ).  
 
No potential participant currently being treated with empagliflozin (or other SGLT -2 or SGLT -
1/2 inhibitor ) should be taken off this therapy to meet the eligibility criteria . 
 
3.1.1  Inclusion criteria  
Evidence of progressive CKD  at risk of kidney  disease progressio n is defined on the basis 
of local laboratory results recorded at least 3 months before and at the time of the Screening 
visit, and requires that : 
(a) CKD -EPI eGFR ≥20 <45 mL/min/1.73m²; or  
(b) CKD -EPI eGFR ≥ 45 <90 mL/min/1.73m2 with urinary albumin:creatinine ratio 
≥200 mg/g (or protein:creatinine ratio ≥ 300 mg/g)  
 
Note: the number of participants  with or without diabetes mellitus (of any type) will be at 
least one -third of each , and the number of participants  with an eGFR >45 mL/min/1.73 m2 
limited to about one-third. The Steering Committee will monitor these proportions and will 
limit recruitment of particular categories of participant in whom sufficient numbers  have 
already been screened or randomized . 
 
3.1.2  Exclusion criteria  
None  of the following must be fulfilled : 
(i) Currently r eceiving SGLT -2 or SGLT -1/2 inhibitord; 
(ii) Diabetes mellitus type 2 and prior atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseasee with an 
eGFR > 60 mL/min/1.73m2 at Screening ; 
(iii) Receiving combined ACEi and ARBf treatmentd; 
(iv) Maintenance dialysis, functioning kidney transplant, or scheduled living donor 
transplantd; 
(v) Polycystic kidney disease;  
(vi) Previous or scheduled bariatric surgery;  
(vii) Ketoacidosis  in the past 5 years ; 
(viii) Symptomatic hypotensiond, or systolic blood pressure <90 or >180 mmHg  at 
Screening ; 
(ix) ALT or AST >3x ULN at Screening;  
(x) Hypersensitivity to empagliflozin or other SG LT-2 inhibitor;  
                                            
c Or “full age” as required by local regulation (e.g. 2 0 years in Japan) .  
d Based on self-reports at Screening and Randomization visit s. 
e Myocardial infarction, angina, stroke or peripheral arterial disease  (including lower limb amputation)  
f Or renin -inhibitor combined with ACEi or ARB.  

 
Page 26 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 (xi) Any intravenous  immunosuppression  therapy in last 3 months ; or anyone currently 
on >45 mg prednisolone (or equivalent)d;  
(xii) Use of  an investigational medicinal product in the 30 days  prior to Screening v isit; 
(xiii) Known to be poorly compliant with clinic visits or prescribed medicationd; 
(xiv) Medical history that might limit the individual’s ability to take trial treatments for the 
duration of the study (e.g. severe respiratory disease; history of cancer or evidence 
of spread within last 4 years, other than non -melanoma skin cancer; or recent h istory 
of alcohol or substance misuse)d; 
(xv) Current pregnancy , lactation or women of childbearing potential (WOCBP), unless 
using highly -effective  contraceptiong; 
(xvi) Type 1 diabetes mellitus . 
 
In addition, individuals will be excluded at the Randomization visit if the participant : 
(i) Does not adhere  to Run-in treatment ; 
(ii) Is no longer willing to be randomized and followed for at least 3 years; 
(iii) Is considered by a local investigator not to be suitable for randomiz ation  (see Section 
3.3.4 ); or 
(iv) Experiences ketoacidosis,  heart attack , stroke , or hospitalization  for heart failure , or 
hospitalization for urinary tract infection  or acute kidney injury  during  Run-in. 
 
Note that individuals who do not fulfil one or more inclusion criteri a, or who fulfil one or more 
exclusion criteri a, may be re-screened and later become eligible.  
 
3.2  IDENTIFICATION AND IN VITATION  
3.2.1  Identification and invitation of potentially eligible participants  
Extensive pre -screening efforts will be made to identify large numbers of potential 
participants at each  LCC. The exact methods will vary by centre and by country, and in all 
cases will be subject to appropriate institutional review board approval and compliance with 
data privacy regulations. In general, potentially eligible participants  (based on age, blood 
and urine results) will be identified from clinical records (including electronic health care 
records) and contacted to seek their provisional agreement to attend a Screening visit. 
Potential participants will be given information about the study.  
 
3.3 SCREENING VISIT AND PRE-RANDOMIZATION RUN-IN 
3.3.1  Assessment of relevant medical history and eligibility  
LCC clinic staff  will recheck  basic inclusion criteria  are met  (e.g. age  and the  blood /urine 
results used to identify potential  participant s) then take written inform ed consent . 
 
3.3.2  Written c onsent  
Individuals who appear initially to be eligible will have the study explained to them by the 
clinic staff, using the Participant Information Leaflet and Consent Form as a basis for 
discussion. Where relevant, supplementary Consent  will also be sought (see Section 
2.6.4.3). Each individual will have an opportunity to initiate discussion, and have time to think 
about their participation in the study, perhaps after discussing it with their family  or a local 
doctor . Individuals who choose to do this will be asked to attend a repeat Screening visit 
                                            
d Based on self-reports at Screening and Randomization visit s. 
g Highly effective methods of contraception include implants, injectables, combined oral contraceptives (the 
participant must have been on a stable do se for at least 3 months prior to entering the trial), intrauterine device, 
vasectomised partner, or true sexual abstinence (when this is the preferred and usual lifestyle of the patient 
and does not include periodic abstinence [e.g. calendar, ovulation, s ymptothermal or post -ovulation methods]). 
Use of such methods must be maintained throughout the trial and for 7 days after the end of the trial.  

 
Page 27 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 within a few weeks. Attendees will be discouraged from participating if it is thought unlikely 
that they would be willing and able to continue attending Follow -up visits for at least 3 years .  
 
3.3.3  Confirmation of eligibility and c ollection of blood and urine samples  
After providing written consent, blood/urine test results  will be recorded. O ther medical 
history (including primary renal diagnosis and other co -morbidity ), non-study medicatio n, 
blood pressure  and other factors pertinent to eligibility will be obtained directly from 
participants (rather than from hospital record  review ) and recorded directly  into the 
Screening Form . These in clusion and exclusion criteria will be checked with th e assistance 
of the study computer -based system .  
 
A non-fasting blood  sample will be taken for local analysis  of creatinine  and liver 
transaminases (AST or ALT), and a urine  sample  will be taken for local analysis of urinary 
albumin:creatin ine ratio (or, if albuminuria measurement  unavailable in local laboratory , 
protein:creatinine ratio ). The LCC clinic staff will issue a 15 week supply of placebo  tablet s 
to eligible participants . 
 
WOCBP, defined as women less than 55 year s of age u nless surgically sterile or with history 
of a postme nopausal state, will be requested to use highly effective methods of 
contraception. A pregnancy test will be offered if, after questioning about recent menses and 
regularity of menstrual cycle, pregnancy is considered reasonably possible (or if a 
pregnancy test is required by local regulation).  
 
Participants with diabetes will be educated about the risks of diabetic ketoacidosis  and the 
actions they should take if they suspect it , and will be  provided with  a specific information 
card (see Section 3.5.6 ). 
 
An appointment will be made for the Randomization visit in 8 -12 weeks.  The participant’s 
doctor(s) will be informed that the participant has entered Run -in. 
 
Following the Screening visit, the locally analysed blood and urine results will be recorded 
onto the study computer -based system, which will provide an other  assessment of eligibility 
(see Section 3.1). If these results indicate that the participant is not eligible for the trial, they 
may be repeated once if in the opinion of a Local Investigator  they were spurious , otherwise 
the participa nt will be withdrawn from the Run-in period and asked  to stop and return all 
placebo Run-in medication . 
 
3.3.4  Review of eligibility and renin -angiotensin system inhibition  by a Local 
Investigator  
During Run-in, the LLI (or authorised delegate)  will be given a description of the pa rticipant ’s 
medical history  (including primary renal diagnosis) , single agent RAS-inhibition  treatment  
and blood and urine results  all based on the Screening visit , and a sked to indicate whether, 
in their view, these results (or any other factor) make the pa rticipant  unsuitable for entry into 
the randomized phase of the study . Additionally, participants  should be randomized only if 
a Local Investigator judges that the participant does not require empagliflozin (or any other 
SGLT -2 or SGLT -1/2 inhibitor), and neithe r is such treatment inappropriate . No pa tient 
currently being treated with empagliflozin (or other SGLT -2 or SGLT -1/2 inhibitor) should be 
taken off this therapy to meet the eligibility criteria.  
 
For eligible  participants , the LLI (or authorized and medically qualified delegate) will also be 
asked to confirm t hat the pa rticipant  is prescribed , in their opinion, an appropriate  dose of 

 
Page 28 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 single agent RAS-inhibition  (i.e. ACEi or ARB , but not both).  Those participants  for whom  
RAS inhibition  is not considered indicated  (e.g. due to concomitant medication or co -
morbidity),  or who cannot tolerate RAS inhibition , will still be eligible to enter the trial , but the 
reason for not using RAS -inhibition will be documented . Those participants  who, in the 
opinion  of the LLI, need to start RAS  inhibition  or are not on a n appropriate dose will be 
excluded from the study (but may be rescreened later , e.g. once established on an 
appropriate dose ). 
 
Additionally, throughout the study, the care of participants will remain the responsibility of 
their local doctors , who are asked to ensure  appropriate and  individualized care.  This 
includes appropriate management of risk of kidney  disease progression, ris k of 
cardiovascular disease, and other conditions which are common in CKD ( such as  mineral -
bone disorder, renal anaemia, metabolic acidosis). Modifiable risk factors include  but are 
not limited to  glycaemic control in participants  with diabetes, blood pres sure control, and 
treatment of dyslipidaemia.  It is advised that this is conducted in the context of prevailing 
local, national or international guidance . 
 
3.4  RANDOMIZATION VISIT (0 MONTHS ) 
3.4.1  Final check of eligibility and compliance before  randomization  
For individuals who attend their Randomization Clinic appointment , study eligibility will be 
confirmed (see Section 3.1). The participant will also be  asked if they have experienced any 
SAE or significant problems during the Run -in period . Information on other relevant factors 
will also be collected, such as prior history of urosepsis, heart failure and New York Heart 
Association (NYHA ) functional class ification, history of  peripheral neuropathy, diabetic foot  
ulcer , lower limb infection or gangrene, smoking history and alcohol intake , and an 
assessment of health related quality of life is to be made (using  the EQ5D -5L questionnaire). 
Details of all non -study treatments will be sought, compliance with Run -in treatment 
checked, and consent information checked. Blood pressure, height, weight, and hip  and 
waist circumference will be measured. The participant’s willingness to take study medication 
and attend follow -up visits for at least 3 years will be confirmed . Details will be recorded 
directly onto the Randomization Form on the study computer -based system  (which is 
designed to obtain complete information , assess eligibility,  and to prompt appropriate 
actio ns). 
 
3.4.1.1  Collection of blood and urine samples  
Eligible participants will have a blood sample taken for local measurement of creatinine , 
potassium , liver function (ALT or AST, and bilirubin), and haemoglobin/ haematocrit . Blood 
and urine samples will  also be processed in preparation for subsequent transportation to the 
central laboratory (see Section 2.6.4 ). 
 
3.4.2  Random allocation of study treatment  
Eligible and consenting individuals will be allocated empagliflozin  or matching placebo using 
a minimized randomization  program on the study computer -based system  (see Section 
2.2.2 ).33 Participants will be allocat ed a numbered treatment pack containing a 7 -month 
supply of one tablet daily of either active empagliflozin  10 mg  or matching placebo . 
 
The numbered treatment packs will be issued to the participant by the LCC clinic staff or 
their local hospital pharmacy.  An appointment for the first post -randomization Follow -up visit 
will then be made by the study staff, with guidance from the study  computer -based system . 
The participant’s doctor(s) will be informed  that the participant has been randomized.  

 
Page 29 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 Following the Randomization visit, the locally analysed blood results will be recorded onto 
the study computer -based system  by the LCC . 
 
3.5  FOLLOW -UP VISITS (2 AND 6 MONTHS  AND THEN 6-MONTHLY ) 
3.5.1  Recording adverse events and adherence to study treatment  
Following randomization, all participants are scheduled to attend Follow -up visits at 2 and 6 
months, and then 6 -monthly until the end of the study . 
 
At each visit, details of all hospital admissions  and any other SAEs  will be sought  from 
participants, and  questions will specifically be asked about SAEs due to  urinary tract 
infection, genital infection, hyperkalaemia, acute kidney injury and dehydration . Information 
about  new-onset of diabetes, gout,  AESIs  (i.e. liver injury, ketoacidosis and lower limb 
amputation ), bone fractures, severe hypoglycaemia and symptomatic dehydration will also 
be recorded . The source of the information/ data is the report from the participant (or where 
unavailable a relative or other doctor) entered directly into the electronic case report form . 
In this study, p aper or electronic hospital notes are not routinely reviewed  to identify AEs . 
Any SAE considered to be due to study treatment (i.e. a possible SSAR) is to be discussed 
as soon as possible with a RCC/  study clinician in order that additional information can 
be collected (see Section  2.5.1.3 ).  
 
Key changes to non -study medication will be sought, and adherence to study treatment wi ll 
be reviewed. Adherence will be assessed and documented by LCC clinic staff  at every study 
visit by asking participants about missed doses and visual inspection of remaining tablets (a 
pill count will not be performed). The amount of study treatment taken since the last visit will 
be estimated and recorded as “most” , “some” or “little/none” (with further guidance on these 
categories provided in t he LCC Clinic Manual) . The LCC clinic staff  will discuss any reasons 
for non -adherence with the participant  (and with their LLI or with clinical staff if 
necessary) and encourage the participant to take study treatment regularly whenever 
appropriate. For participants who discontinue study treatment, the reason for doing so will 
be sought.  
 
Blood pressure and weight will be measured at each Follow -up visit. At  the 18 month and 
the Final Follow -up visit, hip and waist circumference will be measured  and health related 
quality of life ( using  EQ5D -5L questionnaire) will be assessed. Details are to be recorded 
directly onto the electronic Follow -up form on the study computer -based system .  
 
Local Research Co -ordinators will be trained to  ask participant s to report any relevant AEs 
(related or not) occurring up  to 7 days after their Final Follow -Up Visit directly to LCC clinic 
staff.  
 
3.5.2  Collection of blood and urine samples  
At each Follow -up visit, a non -fasting blood sample will be taken for local analysis for 
creatinine , potassium  and liver function (ALT  or AST, and bilirubin) . Results are  ideally 
entered onto the computer -based system within 2 working days.  At 18 months of follow -up, 
a 20% subset of participants (e.g. UK participants)  will also have haematocrit, haemoglobin, 
phosphate, sodium and corrected calcium measured locally .  
 
Four weeks after the Final Follow -up visit, a subset  of about 20% of participants  (who have 
not started dialysis or have a functioning kidney transplant ) will provide a further non-fasting 
blood sample  for local analysis of creatinine  (known as the 4-week post-Final Follow -up 
blood draw)  and a urine sample for local analysis of urine albumin  and creatinine .  

 
Page 30 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24  
At each scheduled follow -up visit a central blood sample will be collected. At the 2 and 18 
month  and Final Follow -up visit s, urine samples will also be collected (see Section 2.6.4.2 ).  
 
3.5.3  Issuing study treatment and arranging further appointments  
Provided continuing study treatment remains appropriate, participants will be given a further 
7-month supply of their randomly a llocated study treatment ( empagliflozin  10 mg  or 
matching placebo), and any previously allocated treatment will be retrieved (except at the 
2-month visit). An appointment will then be made for their next scheduled Follow -up visit.  
 
3.5.4  Follow -up for randomized  participants not attending study clinics  
Follow -up information is to be collected from all study participants, irrespective of whether 
they continue to take study treatment, usually at routine Follow -up clinic visits , unless they 
withdr aw consent (see Sec tion 3.6.5) . If, however, a participant becomes unwilling or unable 
to attend study clinic visits then LCC staff will telephone the participant (or, where 
appropriate, their relative or carer) at the time of each of their scheduled Follow -up 
appointments a nd complete the necessary Follow -up form on the study computer -based 
system . If monitoring of blood is no longer possible (e.g. because the participant no longer 
attends clinic visits and no other means of measuring creatinine/liver function can be 
arrange d), then the participant will be asked to discontinue all study treatment and advised 
to see a local doctor.  All efforts will be made to continue to follow -up such participants (as 
described above), and t hose being followed by  telephone  or other remote method will be 
encouraged to provide blood sample s for central analysis  at relevant time points . If this is 
not possible, then LCC or RCC staff will attempt to check a participant’s progress by 
interview or direct correspondence with the participant’s own local doctors or (where 
appropriate consent and approvals are in place)  by reviewing available information on 
routine healthcare systems (including local blood result systems) and registries . (In the UK, 
for example, there are registries for treated ESKD , hospital admissions, cancers, and 
deaths .) Such information could also be used for long -term follow -up, alongside participant 
questionnaires administered by telephone , mail or electronically .  
 
3.5.5  Monitoring of women of child bearing potential  
Animal studies show that empagliflozin crosses the placenta during late gestation to a very 
limited extent , but it is considered preferable to avoid its use during pregnancy . WOCBP  will 
therefore have to agree to use highly effective methods of contraception during the trial. At 
each visit, a pregnancy test will be offered if, after questioning about recent menses and 
regularity of menstrual cycle, pregnancy is considered reasonably possible (or if a 
pregnancy test is required by local regulation). LCC c linic staff will also reinforce the need 
for highly effective contraception  at each visit . If a pa rticipant  becomes pregnant during the 
trial, the trial medication will be stopped  and the pa rticipant  will be followed up until birth or 
termination of the pregnancy (see furt her details for reporting of pregnancy in Section  
2.5.1.1 ). 
 
3.5.6  Monitoring of people with diabetes mellitus  
LCC clinic staff will receive training on the specific ris k of ketoacidosis  (which can present 
with lower than anticipated  blood glucose  levels  in people with diabetes treated with  SGLT -
2 inhibitors ) and will be asked to provide additional written information about ketoacidosis  to 
participant s with diabetes (e.g. a trial information card) . Testing equipment and materials to 
detect blood ketones will be available  to people with type 1 diabetes  before Randomization.  
 

 
Page 31 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 3.5.7  Local Lead Investigator supervision  
LLI will meet regularly with the other LCC s taff to review study progress, the delegation of 
duties log and approve listings of reported adverse events. The RCC or  will be 
contacted if adverse event information  needs to be refined.  
  
3.6 CENTRAL MONITORING OF PARTICIPANT SAFETY , EARLY RECALL VISITS AND MODIFYING 
STUDY TREATMENT  
 
3.6.1  Early Recall Visits  
An Early Recall visit may be arranged for any participant who requires review outside their 
planned visit schedule. Examples of circumstances where this may be necessary include 
the assessment of abnormal values in safety blood  result s from routine Follow -up visits , or 
if symptoms of liver disease (e.g. icterus) develop between scheduled Follow -up visits , or 
an extra visit is required a few weeks after the Randomization Visit (e.g. if requested by local 
regulators  or Local Investigator ). As at routine study visits, the results of blood tests 
performed at Early Recall visits will be entered by LCC clinic staff  into the study computer -
based system  (which is designed to prompt appropriate actions) and these res ults will be 
monitored centrally by clinical staff at the and RCCs in accordance with the study 
procedures .  
 
3.6.2  Monitoring liver function , potassium , creatinine  and AESIs  
 study clinicians will be responsible for reviewing local results on liver funct ion, 
potassium  and creatinine , and all reports of AESIs. They will advise on the need for (and 
timing of) Early Recall visits and whether study treatment should be stopped or restarted. In 
so doing, study clinicians will collaborate with the LLI and ot her LCC clinic staff  (or 
RCC in certain regions) , as necessary , and will generally initiate contact if  there have been 
results that fulfil the definition of liver injury  or a 50% increase in creatinine since the 
preceding Follow -up visit. Management strategies include ascertainment of a more detailed 
clinical picture , additional investigations, more frequent study visits , or a lower threshold for 
stopping study treatment . 
 
3.6.3  Modifying study treatment  
If adverse events occur that are believed to be due to empagliflozin , including significant 
elevation of liver transaminases , the study treatments may be temporarily or permanently 
discontinued. The following events are also sufficient reason to discontinu e the study 
empagliflozin  or placebo:  
 
 SAE considered likely to be due to the study treatment ( i.e. SSAR, see Section  
2.5.1.3 ) 
 Kidney transplantation  
 New reason to prescribe empagliflozin or another SGLT -2 or SGLT -1/2 inhibitor  (e.g. 
a local doctor of the opinion that  it should be included as part of the current standard 
of care  for prevention of cardiovascular events ); or new reason not to use an SGLT -
2 inhibitor  (e.g. local doctors may cho ose to stop  study treatment on initiation of 
maintenance dialysis  or after ketoacidosis ) 
 Pregnancy  or suspected pregnancy  
 At the request of the participant or their doctors (for whatever reason) or  any other 
situation where cont inuing study treatment is not considered to be in the participant’s 
best interests by their own doctors or the  study clinical team (including cessation of 
use of reliable contraception  in WOCBP  or use of high potency immunosuppression ). 

 
Page 32 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24  
Whenever possible, the study computer -based system  will prompt LCC clinic staff  to 
consider whether there are specific reasons to discontinue or to re start study treatment  (if 
appropriate, i.e. if reasons for discontinuation do not exist any longer) .  study clinicians 
will provide advice if required.  
 
3.6.4  Unblinding of study treatment  
There are two main situations in which unblinding of the treatment allocation ( empagliflozin  
or placebo) for an individual participant may be warranted:  
 
 When knowledge of the treatment allocation could materially influence the immediate 
medical management (e.g. after overdose)  
 When  unblinding is necessary as part of Safety Reporting (see Section  2.5.1.4 ). 
 
Urgent unblinding is available by contacting a  study clinician on a 24 -hour basis via 
the  Freefone telephone service. For the avoidance of doubt, if an investigator or local 
doctor  request s the unblinded treatment allocation , it will be provided.  All unblinding 
episodes are logged within the study computer -based  system.  
 
3.6.5  Withdrawal of consent  
Participants may decide that they no longer wish to take study treatment or are no longer 
willing to attend study visits. LCCs may be ab le to help participants overcome problems 
associated with personal circumstances (e.g. provide transport support to attend clinics).  
These decisions are not considered to be withdrawals of consent, and appropriate 
procedures for dealing with them are descr ibed elsewhere in this protocol (e.g. for 
discontinuation of study treatment see Section  3.6.3  and for alternative methods of follow -
up see Section 3.5.4 ). However, participants are free to withdraw consent for some or all 
aspects of the study at any time. In order to ensure that relevant safeguards are put in place 
to maintain the individual’ s safety (e.g. if an important safety issue comes to light that might 
affect a participant who has previously withdrawn from the study) and to prevent a breach 
of the individual’s decision to withdraw (e.g. to prevent re -invitation of an individual who had  
previously withdrawn consent), the decision to withdraw should ideally be put in writing and 
a copy maintained at the LCC (with key data items being recorded on the study computer -
based system ). This written information should specify which aspect(s) of t he study consent 
is being withdrawn: for example, direct contact from study staff; collection of information from 
a relative or friend; collection of information from local d octors or routine data sources; or 
the storage and analysis of samples for protoco l-specified future unspecified assays. (In 
accordance with regulatory g uidance, data that have already been collected and 
incorporated into the study database, including the results of laboratory assays, will continue 
to be processed .) 
 
3.7 CONFIRMATION AND VERIFICATION OF STUDY OUTCOMES  (“ADJUDICATION ”)  
 
Outcomes  (and components) purely based on laboratory values (e.g. sustained ≥40%  
decline in eGFR,) will not be adjudicated and analyses will emphasize the results of 
measurements made at central laboratorie s. Wherever possible, eGFR will be calculated 
using centrally measured serum creatinine  (with local results substituted if central results 
are unavailable) . eGFR will be calculated using the CKD -EPI creatinine formula .40 
 
Receipt of a kidney transplant or initiation of maintenance dialysis will also not be 
adjudicated. Instead , LCC reports will be cross -checked  by the  with information at 

 
Page 33 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 subsequent follow -up visits o r (where available) with additional medical information collected 
for adjudication of deaths.   
 
Additional medical information will be sought for AEs that undergo adjudication . In general, 
these will be limited to all deaths and events initially reported a s hospitalization for heart 
failure, myocardial infarction, stroke, liver injury , ketoacidosis , lower limb amputation  and 
acute kidney injury . Other events may be added to th e adjudication list  if consider ed 
necessary t o ensure a reliable assessment of the  clinical effects ( and particularly safety) of 
empagliflozin.  Most hospitalizations will not be adjudicated and so analyses of 
hospitalizations will mainly be based on LCC reports . 
 
Relevant information needed for adjudication may come from the records hel d at the LCCs 
and other hospitals, from participant’s own doctors, or from electronic sources and registries. 
In some cases it may be necessary to obtain information that predates randomization into 
the study. A central panel of c linicians based at, or ove rseen by, the  will provide the 
adjudication. Review, processing and adjudication of AEs will be conducted in accordance 
with the study SOPs and will be blinded to study treatment allocation (empagliflozin or 
placebo) . The relevant SOP will detail a quality control  process where the first events 
adjudicated by each adjudicator and a random subsample thereafter (about 5%) will be 
reviewed by a second adjudicator (blind to original adjudication).  
 
3.8 CITED REFERENCES  
 
1. Levey AS, Coresh J. Chronic kidney disease. Lancet  2012; 379(9811): 165 -80. 
2. Stevens PE, O'Donoghue DJ, de Lusignan S, et al. Chronic kidney disease 
management in the United Kingdom: NEOERICA project results. Kidney Int  2007; 72(1): 92 -
9. 
3. Matsushita K, van der Velde M, Astor BC, et al. Association of estimated glomerular 
filtration rate and albuminuria with all -cause and cardiovascular mortality in general 
population cohorts: a collaborative meta -analysis. Lancet  2010; 375(9731): 2073 -81. 
4. Go AS, Chertow GM, Fan D, McCulloch CE, Hsu CY. Chronic kidney disease and 
the risks of death, cardiovascular events, and hospitalization. N Engl J Med  2004; 351(13): 
1296 -305. 
5. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists Collaboration. Impact of renal function o n the effects 
of LDL cholesterol lowering with statin -based regimens: a meta -analysis of individual 
participant data from 28 randomised trials. The lancet Diabetes & endocrinology  2016; 4(10): 
829-39. 
6. Ninomiya T, Perkovic V, Turnbull F, et al. Blood pre ssure lowering and major 
cardiovascular events in people with and without chronic kidney disease: meta -analysis of 
randomised controlled trials. BMJ 2013; 347: f5680.  
7. Park M, Hsu CY, Li Y, et al. Associations between kidney function and subclinical 
cardiac abnormalities in CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol  2012; 23(10): 1725 -34. 
8. Foley RN, Parfrey PS, Kent GM, Harnett JD, Murray DC, Barre PE. Long -term 
evolution of cardiomyopathy  in dialysis patients. Kidney Int  1998; 54(5): 1720 -5. 
9. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al. Empagliflozin, Cardiovascular Outcomes, and 
Mortality in Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med  2015; 373(22): 2117 -28. 

 
Page 34 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 10. Fox CS, Matsushita K, Woodward M, et al. Associations of kidney disease measures 
with mortality and end -stage renal disease in individuals with and without diabetes: a meta -
analysis. Lancet  2012; 380(9854): 1662 -73. 
11. Jafar TH, Schmid CH, Landa M, et al. Angiotensin -converting enzyme inhibitors  and 
progression of nondiabetic renal disease. A meta -analysis of patient -level data. Ann Intern 
Med 2001; 135(2): 73 -87. 
12. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Clarke WR, et al. Renoprotective effect of the angiotensin -
receptor antagonist irbesartan in patients with  nephropathy due to type 2 diabetes. N Engl 
J Med  2001; 345(12): 851 -60. 
13. Brenner BM, Cooper ME, de Zeeuw D, et al. Effects of losartan on renal and 
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med  
2001; 345(12): 86 1-9. 
14. Fried LF, Emanuele N, Zhang JH, et al. Combined angiotensin inhibition for the 
treatment of diabetic nephropathy. N Engl J Med  2013; 369(20): 1892 -903. 
15. Wanner C, Inzucchi SE, Lachin JM, et al. Empagliflozin and Progression of Kidney 
Disease in  Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med  2016; 375(4): 323 -34. 
16. Schnaper HW. Remnant nephron physiology and the progression of chronic kidney 
disease. Pediatric nephrology  2014; 29(2): 193 -202. 
17. Ruggenenti P, Porrini EL, Gaspari F, et al. Glomerular hyperfiltration and renal 
disease progression in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care  2012; 35(10): 2061 -8. 
18. Tonneijck L, Muskiet MH, Smits MM, et al. Glomerular Hyperfiltration in Diabetes: 
Mechanisms, Clinical Significance, and Treatment. J Am So c Nephrol  2017; 28(4): 1023 -
39. 
19. Haynes R, Staplin N, Emberson J, et al. Evaluating the contribution of the cause of 
kidney disease to prognosis in CKD: results from the Study of Heart and Renal Protection 
(SHARP). Am J Kidney Dis  2014; 64(1): 40 -8. 
20. Jha V, Garcia -Garcia G, Iseki K, et al. Chronic kidney disease: global dimension and 
perspectives. Lancet  2013; 382(9888): 260 -72. 
21. USRDS. International Comparison. 2014 Annual Data Report: Atlas of End -Stage 
Renal Disease in the United States. , Natio nal Institutes of Health, National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD. 2014; 2. 
22. Ridderstrale M, Andersen KR, Zeller C, et al. Comparison of empagliflozin and 
glimepiride as add -on to metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 104 -week randomised, 
active -controlled, double -blind, phase 3 trial. The lancet Diabetes & endocrinology  2014; 
2(9): 691 -700. 
23. Haring HU, Merker L, Seewaldt -Becker E, et al. Empagliflozin as add -on to metformin 
in patients with type 2 diabet es: a 24 -week, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled 
trial. Diabetes Care  2014; 37(6): 1650 -9. 

 
Page 35 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 24. Haring HU, Merker L, Seewaldt -Becker E, et al. Empagliflozin as add -on to metformin 
plus sulfonylurea in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 24 -week, ran domized, double -blind, 
placebo -controlled trial. Diabetes Care  2013; 36(11): 3396 -404. 
25. Kovacs CS, Seshiah V, Swallow R, et al. Empagliflozin improves glycaemic and 
weight control as add -on therapy to pioglitazone or pioglitazone plus metformin in patie nts 
with type 2 diabetes: a 24 -week, randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab  
2014; 16(2): 147 -58. 
26. Roden M, Weng J, Eilbracht J, et al. Empagliflozin monotherapy with sitagliptin as an 
active comparator in patients with type 2 diabetes : a randomised, double -blind, placebo -
controlled, phase 3 trial. The lancet Diabetes & endocrinology  2013; 1(3): 208 -19. 
27. Rosenstock J, Jelaska A, Frappin G, et al. Improved glucose control with weight loss, 
lower insulin doses, and no increased hypogly cemia with empagliflozin added to titrated 
multiple daily injections of insulin in obese inadequately controlled type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 
care 2014; 37(7): 1815 -23. 
28. Rosenstock J, Jelaska A, Zeller C, et al. Impact of empagliflozin added on to basal 
insulin in type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled on basal insulin: a 78 -week randomized, 
double -blind, placebo -controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab  2015; 17(10): 936 -48. 
29. Tikkanen I, Narko K, Zeller C, et al. Empagliflozin reduces blood pressure in patients 
with type 2 diabetes and hypertension. Diabetes Care  2015; 38(3): 420 -8. 
30. Barnett AH, Mithal A, Manassie J, et al. Efficacy and safety of empagliflozin added to 
existing antidiabetes treatment in patients with type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease: 
a randomised, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial. The lancet Diabetes & endocrinology  
2014; 2(5): 369 -84. 
31. Kohler S, Zeller C, Iliev H, Kaspers S. Safety an d Tolerability of Empagliflozin in 
Patients with Type 2 Diabetes: Pooled Analysis of Phase I -III Clinical Trials. Advances in 
therapy  2017; 34(7): 1707 -26. 
32. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al. Canagliflozin and Cardiovascular and Renal 
Events in Typ e 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med  2017; 377(7): 644 -57. 
33. Pocock SJ, Simon R. Sequential treatment assignment with balancing for prognostic 
factors in the controlled clinical trial. Biometrics  1975; 31(1): 103 -15. 
34. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, et al. Design and analysis of randomized clinical trials 
requiring prolonged observation of each patient. II. analysis and examples. Br J Cancer  
1977; 35(1): 1 -39. 
35. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration. 
Guidance for Industry Deter mining the Extent of Safety Data Collection Needed in Late 
Stage Premarket and Postapproval Clinical Investigations. 2015.  
36. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration. 
Guidance for Industry. Safety Assessment for IND Repor ting. Dec 2015.  
37. ICH Harmonised tripartite guideline  Clinical safety data management: definitions and 
standards for expedited reporting E2A. Oct 1994.  

 
Page 36 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 38. Risk proportionate approaches in clinical trials. Recommendations of the expert 
group on clinical trials for the implementation of Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 on clinical 
trials on medicinal products for human use. Apr 2017.  
39. Meeker -O'Connell A, Glessner C, Behm M, et al. Enhancing clinical evidence by 
proactively building quality into clinical trials. Clinical trials  2016; 13(4): 439 -44. 
40. Levey AS, Stevens LA, Schmid CH, et al. A new equation to estimate glomerular 
filtrati on rate. Ann Intern Med  2009; 150(9): 604 -12. 

 
 
Page 37 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY1.4 2018-04-25         
    EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24  
4.1 APPENDIX 1: ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND RESPONSIBILITIES  FOR STUDY DESIGN AND 
CONDUCT  
 
Boehringer  Ingelheim  
Boehringer Ingel heim has delegated  certain responsibilities to the independent Principal 
Investigators and  at the University of Oxford , and to the Steering Committee. 
Boehringer Ingelheim  remain s fully responsi ble for: 
 
 Provision of study funding  
 Provision and distribution (but not allocation) of manufactured and labelled study drug  
 Regulatory submissions and interactions (with support from the Principal 
Investigators)  
 Auditing of investigational  sites, facilities, study setup , study processes , etc. as per 
the Audit Plan . 
 
Responsibility for o versight of the qu ality and integrity of the trial data remains with 
Boehringer Ingelheim . 
 
Principal Investigators  
The Principal Investigators have overall responsibility for:  
 
 Design of the study ( in collaborati on with Boehringer  Ingelheim ) 
 Preparation of the Protocol and  subsequent revisions  
 Managing the   
 Development of computer -based  systems  and study SOPs .  
 
Steering Committee  
The Steering Committee is responsible for:  
 
 Agreeing the Data Analysis Plans  
 Reviewing progress of the study and, if necessary, suggesting a nd agreeing changes 
to the Protocol  
 Reviewing new scientific evidence  that may be of relevance  
 Drafting, r eview and approval of study main publication (s) 
 Review and approval of proposals for subsequent analyses and publications  
 Approval of substudy proposa ls  
 Reviewing study quality and risk management approaches , and ensuring that the 
focus is always on issues that have (or the potential to have) a substantial impact on 
the safety of the study participants or the reliability of the study results  
 Monitor ing participant characteristics  and limiting recruitment of particular categories 
of participant when sufficient numbers have already entered the trial . 
 
Data Monitoring Committee  
The independent Data Monitoring Committee is responsible for:  
 
 Reviewing unblinded interim data according to the schedule outlined in the Protocol  
 Advising the Steering Committee if, in their view, the randomized data provide 
evidence that may warrant early termination  of all or part of the study  for either 
efficacy or safety  

 
Page 38 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24  Review of the formal interim analys es (see Section  2.5.2.2 ). 
 
Central Coordinating Office  
The  is responsible for the overall coordination of the Study, includin g: 
 
 Study planning and organisation of Steering Committee meetings  
 Agreement of each regional recruitment plan (including countries, number of LCCs, 
number of participants, and timelines)  
 Contractual issues with RCCs and budget administration  
 Co-ordination  of Ethics Committee applications  
 Supporting Boehringer  Ingelheim  in their interactions with  regulatory authorities and 
other outside agencies as appropriate  
 Design, implementation and maintenance of computer -based system s for the study 
(including /RCC computer -based system  for administration and study computer -
based system  for direct data entry)  
 Provision of study materials to RCCs and LCCs, and provision of IT support to RCCs  
 Monitoring of drug supply in liaison with  Boehringer Ingelheim  (who will be 
responsible for drug distribution to each LCC)  
 Central laboratory assay and long -term storage of blood and urine samples  
 Monitoring of overall progress of the study , with a focus on critical -to-quality factors  
 Clinical safety monitoring, including reporting  of SSAR s to the Chair of the Data 
Monitoring Committee and to Boehringer  Ingelheim  
 Responding to technical, medical , data  and administrative queries from the RCCs  
 Manage data queries and data changes (with a clear audit trail)  
 Management of outcome  adjudication  
 Liaison with the Data Monitoring Committee . 
 
Regional Coordinating Centres  
Each RCC is responsible, under the direction of its Regional Coordinator, for:  
 
 Identification of potential LCCs and agreement of their recruitment plans (including 
number of participants and timelines)  
 Contractual issues with LCCs and regional budget administration  
 Obtaining any central Ethics Committee approval (where appropriate) and assisting 
LCCs with local Ethics Committee applications  
 Training of LCC staff and a ssistants  
 Distribution of study materials to LCCs  
 Responding to technical, medical and administrative queries from the LCCs  
 Perform LCC on -site m onitoring visits by trained study monitors  
 “Process ” monitoring of LCCs by responding to regular or occasional reports on 
regional progress prepared by the  
 Ensuring appropriate follow -up of abnormal safety blood results  
 Collection and initial processing of relevant documentation  to confirm reported events 
in line with study SOPs  
 Collection and short -term stora ge of blood and urine samples from LCCs, and 
subsequent transport of them to the   
 Organisation of meetings of collaborators within the region  
 Enter ing data entry errors reported by LCCs  
 Supporting Boehringer  Ingelheim in their interactions  with regulat ory authorities as 
appropriate  

 
Page 39 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24  Ensuring that trial-related activities are performed according  to local regulations . 
 
Local Clinical Centres  
The LCC lead investigator and LCC staff are responsible for:  
 
 Meeting regularly as a team  to review study progress  locally , the delegation of duties 
log and for Local Investigators to review and approv e listings of locally reported 
adverse events  (i.e. provide LLI oversight)  
 Obtaining local Ethics Committee approval  were necessary  (aided by the RCC)  
 Obtaining local management approval where necessary  
 Perform ing trial-related activities according to local regulations  
 Provision of adequate clinic space and access to appropriate systems for the 
identification of potentially eligible individuals  
 Conducting clinic procedu res: managing and distributing study drugs (in conjunction, 
if required, with the hospital pharmacy), and maintaining relevant study equipment in 
accordance with the Protocol and SOPs  
 Ensuring adequate local laboratory facilities for safety monitoring and,  if necessary, 
processing and temporarily storing samples for central analysis  
 Reviewing Screening Form data , confirm appropriate dose of RAS -inhibition  (where 
relevant), confirm no reasons to prescribe or not prescribe empagliflozin (or other 
SGLT -2 or SG LT-1/-2 inhibitor) , and approv ing participants for randomization (Local 
Investigator s only)  
 Providing i ndividualized  care, including management of cardiovascular risk factors 
and other existing comorbidities (e.g. hypertension, diabetes)  according to relev ant 
guidelines  
 Dealing with routine enquiries from participants and their families in collaboration with 
the RCC  where necessary  
 Obtaining clinical information when requested to confirm potential primary and 
secondary , tertiary and safety  study outcomes  
 Informing the RCC or  of any possible data entry errors . 
 

 
 
Page 40 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY1.4 2018-04-25             EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 4.2 APPENDIX 2: VISIT SCHEDULE AND PR OCEDURES  
4.2.1  Clinic procedures  
  
Task Activity Registration Screening Randomization
- 12 to -8 weeks 0 months 2 months 6 months 6 monthly visits Final visit**
Demographics Record contact details X check check check check check check
Relevant medical history (incl. inclusion criteria & an dose of RAS inhibitor) X X
Exclusion criteria (incl. relevant non-study medication) X X
Other information (smoking, alcohol) X
Use of non-study medication X X X X X X
Consent Obtain consent X
Confirm consent X
Safety & outcomes reporting Adverse events (incl. Suspected Serious Adverse Reactions) X X X X X
Self-reported compliance X X X X X
Reasons for stopping study treatment (incl. SAEs, non-serious adverse events, other reasons) X X X X X
Remote follow-up using routine data sources and/or participant surveys* (X)* (X)* (X)* (X)*
Quality of life (by EQ5D-5L) X 18 month only X
Physical measurements Blood pressure X X X X X X
Height X
Weight X X X X X
Hip & waist circumference X 18 month only X
Local laboratory assessments Creatinine and liver function tests (transaminases and bilirubin) X X X X X X**
Potassium X X X X X
Haematocrit, haemoglobin X (all) 18 month only (in about a 20% subset)
Sodium, corrected calcium, phosphate (in about a 20% subset) 18 month only
Urinary albumin and creatinine X
Pregnancy test*** X X X X X X
Central sample collection Blood samples for central analysis of creatinine & storage**** X X X X X
Urine for central analysis of albumin & creatinine, and storage X X 18 month only X
Issue placebo X
Randomize eligible & willing participants X
Issue randomized treatment (empagliflozin 10 mg or placebo; 210 day supply) X X X
Retrieve unused treatment X X X X
Create appointment X X X X X X
Provide advice X X X X X X
*** If pregnancy reasonably possible as indicated by participant's history (or if required by local regulation)In-trial follow-up
* Remote follow-up may be used for some participants who are unwilling or unable to attend study visits, and for all surviving participants for several years after the final visit; ** Additional local blood creatinine 
**** NT-pro BNP measured at 0 months and HbA1c measured at 0, 2, 18 months and final visit.and urine albumin:creatinine ratio measurement 4 weeks after final follow-up ( ~20% subset). Final follow-up timing is determined by the Steering Committee in response to numbers of events & DMC recommendations.Medical history & eligibility 
 assessment
Randomization & study treatment
 handling
Appointment management 
& advice
  

 
Page 42 of 42 
EMPAKIDNEY 2.0 2020-01-13     EuDRACT: 2017 -002971 -24 5.1 VERSION HISTORY  
 
EDMS # 5434  
 
Version  Version date  Summary  
1.0 8th January 2 018 Version 1.0 finalized  
1.1 8th January 2018  Footnote update  
1.2 25th January 2018  Formal interim analysis update  
1.3 26th March 2018  Update following MHRA review  
1.4 25th April 2018  Update following FDA review  of formal interim analysis  
2.0 13th January 2020  Recruitment target increase  to 6000 participants ;  
exclusion of further particip ation from people with type 1 
diabetes  after introduction of a cap ; clarification on the  
subdivisions of cardiovascular death; reducing tertiary 
subgroup analyses solely  to the primary outcome and 
highlighting the subgroups of key interest ; section 3.1.2 
exclusion criterion (ix) modified; substituting local 
creatinine results when central creatinine results are 
missing ; and clarification in table 4.2.1 that  Hb/Hct is 
measured in all participants at rand omization  (to be 
consistent with the protocol text in section 3.4.1.1)  
 
 
 
