1 Carbidopa-le vodopa in Neovascular AMD 
Study design: Prospective, open label, two-parallel group
PI: Robert W. Snyder, MD, PhD, PC 
Unique Protocol ID:  0001
Protocol Version 4
Date: June 24, 2017 
IND Number: 132078
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT 03022318
2 Study 001: Short t erm effects of carbidopa-l evodopa i n Neovascular AMD 
Synopsis 
In 2008, Dr. Brian McKay identified a receptor,  GPR 143, on the surface of RPE cells and 
discovered that L-D OPA was  the natural ligand or stimulator of GPR143.  He showed that 
treatment of RPE cells with exogenous L-D OPA resulted in the release of additional PEDF.  
In subsequent work his group also showed that L-D OPA stimulation o f PEDF in RPE cells 
was also associated with a decrease in VEGF.   Thus, McKay hypothesized that exogenous 
L-DOPA may p revent
 the onset of AMD or progression to wet AMD.
In 2015, McKay and his associates published a paper  that showed that patients, who had been 
treated with  
L-DOPA, had a delay in the onset of AMD by 8 years, compared to patients 
who
 had not
 been treated with L-D OPA.  In addition,  those who had AMD and went on to 
develop wet  AMD, did so 5 years later than those with no history of L-D OPA treatment.   L-
DOPA is an intermediate in the pigmentation pathway.  McKay et al suggested that the 
reason darkly p igmented  races do not get AMD nearly as frequently as lighter pigmented 
races, i
s that they produce more pigment, and thus more L-DOPA to stimulate  GPR143 on 
RPE cells.  According to  this hypothesis, the stimulated RPE cells release PEDF and decrease 
VEGF, 
which together are responsible for the protective effect.  
Since there are no established animal models for AMD, and  L-D OPA has a good  safety p rofile 
in healthy volunteers and patients with Parkinson’s disease, we initiated  a prospective trial 
to show efficacy in patients with neovascular AMD.  Th is trial is in patients who have not 
had intraocular  anti-V EGF injectio ns.  This trial will also  evaluate the safety and tolerability 
of L-D OPA,  in this population of patients with Wet AMD. The patients will be made aware 
of potential side effects of L-D OPA. 
Design: Prospective, two parallel group, open label  
Objectives    
1 To determine whether L-D OPA-c arbidopa s upplementation can improve or 
stabilize the anatomic findings on OCT, within 30 days, in patients with choroidal 
neovascular AMD. 
2 To
 d
etermine whether L-D OPA-c arbidopa s upplementation can improve or 
stabilize visual function within 30 days, in patients with choroidal neovascular AMD, 
by testing ETDRS visual acuity. 
3 To evaluate the relative benefits of carbidopa-l evodopa 25-1 00 mg, one tablet  
once daily hs and one tablet TID 
4 To determine whether L-D OPA-c arbidopa supplementation is well tolerated in  
our target group of patients with wet AMD in one eye. 
3 Inclusion criteria  
1 A diagnosis of AMD with choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in one eye.  
2 Not previously treated with  anti-VEGF  injections.  
3 Normal or dry AMD of any grade in the second eye. 
4 Age 50-8 5 years.  
5 Willing ness to maintain AREDS vitamin supplements throughout the study, or remain off 
these supplements for the duration of the study, if not taking them prior to the study;  
Treatments:  
Patients
 receive either  open label, carbidopa  25-100  mg, one tablet once daily  hs for one  month 
or one tablet  dosed three times daily, in the morning, with supper and hs for o ne month (100 or 
300 mg of levodopa daily). This is the equivalent of very low to low doses o f  carbidopa-
levodopa in patients with  Parkinson’s disease. 
Each 
patient will be reevaluated at weekly ( 5-8 day) intervals.  
Duration: up to
 32 days of treatment.   This study will end with the first anti-VEGF injection, 
or after Visit 5, whichever occurs first.  At  the end of the study, patients will be eligible to 
enter
 Study 002.  
Measurements and Activities: 
1 Ophthalmic history and comprehensive eye examination; including visual acuity,  with best 
correction, using an EDTRS chart, in both eyes prior to randomization, and ophthalmoscopic 
eye
 examination, and OCT;   
2 Repeat assessment of visu al acuity u sing an EDTRS chart, ophthalmoscopic eye 
examination,
 and OCT at weekly v isits;  
Criteria
 for anti-V EGF injections  
This 
will be based on: weekly e valuation  of ETDRS visual acuity ( decrease of 5 letters from 
previous visit); increased macular thickness (compared to normal and previous visit as 
measured by
 OCT);  new blood (hemorrhage on direct r etinal examination; or s ubjective 
decrease in vision.  If any of these criteria are  met, or if, in the opinion of the 
Ophthalmologist, or the patient’s Retina Specialist, the patient  requires anti-V EGF therapy, 
the patient will have an anti-V EGF intraocular injection,  by his or her R etina Sp ecialist. If 
none of these criteria are met at visits 2 , 3 or 4, with patient agreement, anti-V EGF injection 
will not be done, and the patient will be reevaluated in 1 week.  