Page 1 of 34  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Resident-to-Resident Elder Mistr eatment Intervention for Dementia Care in Assisted Living 
Protocol and statistical plan File date: 8/12/20 
  
Page 2 of 34  Background and rationale  
Researchers have recently begun to address negative and aggressive interactions among 
residents in long-term care. However,  scientific attention is increasing1,2,3,4,5,6,7 because such 
aggression has been found to be extensive, and has the potential to impact physically, and/ or 
cause psychological distress to both residents and staff.8,9  A few studies discussing elder abuse in 
the residential care sector address resident-to-re sident elder mistreatment (R-REM) in assisted 
living residences (ALRs).10,11, 12 Benson13 examined “relational aggression”, defined as a 
manipulative, non-physical form of  aggression using rumour or gos sip.  An extensive study on 
elder abuse in residential care facilities14 highlights the need for staff training and behaviour 
management strategies to counter serious outco mes such as physical injury and emotional 
distress. Similarly, Caspi,15 examining R-REM in two special care units of an ALR identified staff 
prevention strategies and suggested incorporating those into care staff training programs. Castle16 
reported the perceptions about elder abuse among adm inistrators and direct care workers in 1,500 
randomly selected ALRs nationwide, documenting that R-REM was reported to be more common 
than staff-to-resident abuse . A recent study17 reported the 30-day prevalence of physical (7.6%), 
verbal (9.5%), and sexual (2.0%) aggression by  ALR residents towards other residents or staff 
based on data from the 2010 National Survey of Residential Care Facilities. They found a five, 
four, and two-fold increase, respectively in  the likelihood of engaging in these behaviours for 
residents with Alzheimer’s disease and relat ed disorders. These authors call for training and 
prevention in ALR. Thus, R-REM in residential ca re in general, and specifically in AL settings, 
although prevalent, has received little attention.  
The authors conducted the first systematic, pros pective study of resident-to-resident elder 
mistreatment (R-REM) in nursing homes and hav e developed novel methodology to identify the 
phenomenon.  Data demonstrated that (1) R-REM is highly prevalent, (2) case finding 
methodology is greatly enhanced by meaningful participation of front line staff, and (3) 
paradoxically, higher functioning residents may be at greatest risk for involvement in R-REM (e.g., 
residents who are ambulatory and capable of wanderi ng as opposed to those who are in the last 
stages of dementing illness). Additionally, funde d by the New York State Department of Health 
Page 3 of 34  dementia grants program we developed a three modul e-program targeting front line staff to 
implement best practices related to R-REM in long-term services and support (LTSS) settings.  
Using an experimental design, we tested the in tervention in nursing homes. Evaluation of 
longitudinal outcomes showed significant increases in staff knowledge post training, controlling for 
pre-training levels for the intervention group and of increased recognition of R-REM, and 
longitudinal reporting in the intervention as contrasted with the usual care group.18 Additionally, 
falls, accidents and injuries were reduced.19 These findings have important implications for 
assisted living residences (ALRs) where residents typically have cognitive impairment with better 
mobility and less staff to intervene in R-REM.  T he state survey process is also less uniform in 
ALRs (in comparison to nursing hom es) and has not addressed R-REM. 
 
Objectives  The goal of the project is to evaluate a training program for staff that enhances identification and 
intervention with respect to episodes of resident -to-resident elder mistreatment (R-REM). The 
hypotheses corresponding to the specific proces s outcome aims (1 & 2) and primary distal 
outcome (aim 3) for which the study was powered are: 
Aim 1 (A1).  Enhance staff knowledge of R-REM   
Hypothesis 1: Staff knowledge related to R-REM and R-REM treatment will increase after 
training. 
Aim 2 (A2).   Enhance staff recognition, reporting and care planning related to R-REM   
Hypothesis 2:  Due to the heightened awareness as a result of training, the frequency of 
reported R-REM in the intervention group will increase, relative to the comparison group 
after training. 
Aim 3 (A3). Evaluate the impact of the staff interventi on on resident falls, accidents and injuries 
and on quality of life using a prospective experim ental design that derives information from 
five sources:  (1) resident interviews (2) staff informants (3) observational data (4) chart and 
(5) incident/accident report data.  
Primary Hypothesis: The frequency of falls, accidents and injuries will decrease in the 
Page 4 of 34  intervention group, relative to the comparison group after implementation of the training 
intervention. 
Secondary Hypotheses:   1.  Resident quality-of-life as measured by affective state will 
improve in the intervention group, relative to  the comparison group after implementation of 
the training intervention. 
2.  Resident behavior problems will decline in  the intervention group, relative to the 
comparison group after implementation of the tr aining intervention. Resident behaviors will 
mediate the relationship between the intervent ion and the falls/accidents/injuries outcome. 
Trial design  This is a pragmatic, prospective, cluster randomiz ed trial (facility level) design with three waves  of 
data collection (baseline, 6- and 12- months) at 12 assisted living facili ties in two New York regions. 
There will be three levels of clustering:  faciliti es within regions, units within facilities and repeated 
measures on residents within units, with the regions fi xed. On a rolling basis, six facilities will be 
selected at random and recruited in New York Ci ty and the nearby suburban counties (downstate 
region). Six facilities in the upstate New York re gion of Rochester will also be randomly selected. 
Three facilities in each region will be randomized to usual care or to the intervention on a 1:1 ratio. 
Facilities allocated to the usual care group will receive the intervention after completion of their 12 
month data collection.  
 
Methods: Participants, interventions and outcomes Study setting  
Because an aim of the study was to examine resi dent-to-resident elder mistreatment (R-REM) in 
all residents, including those with Alzheimer’s dis ease, to maximize resources, we restricted our 
sample to larger licensed ALRs with special needs (including memory care) units in the two 
selected New York regions.  The sample includes  facilities with special needs units because the 
likelihood of R-REM is greater there.
20  Upstate we selected from the population of 33 facilities with 
bed sizes of 50 and over with special units for in dividuals with cognitive impairment. Downstate, 
there are 50 larger (80+ bed) facilities with s pecial needs units for cognitive impairment in the 
Page 5 of 34  selected area.   
 
Eligibility criteria  
Because of the longitudinal nature of the study, it was desirable to screen out short-stay residents. 
All residents  on long-term care units, except residents receiving hospice care in the sampled 
facilities will be invited to participate.  
Facilities will have the option to exclude indivi duals for selected reasons. For residents unable to 
complete the consent process (due to e.g., cognitive impairment, l anguage barrier, health 
impairment), consent will be sought by designated pr oxies (families or legal guardians).  Residents 
unable to respond (due to language other than English or Spanish, or impairment) will be excluded 
from resident level measures; c hart review, staff informant, and observational measures will be 
performed on those whose famili es provide proxy consent.  
 Who will take informed consent?  A formal “Informed consent and HIPAA Authoriz ation” document was approved by the Weill 
Cornell Medicine Institutional Revi ew Board (IRB). A brief screen is used to determine capacity to 
provide informed consent. This procedure has been used in several large studies of nursing homes 
and assisted living residents and has been approved  by several IRBs. (Family members of 
individuals who are unable to provide informed c onsent will be contacted to obtain consent.) 
Additionally, family members of all residents will be sent letters informing them of the study with an 
opt-out option. 
The actual informed consent is obtained after the resident either a) reads the Informed Consent 
Form, or b) the interviewer reads the Informed Consent Form to the resident. 
There are several cases where a verbal informed consent is used in place of a written informed 
consent: 
    1) If the resident has a perceptual impairment t hat makes it difficult for her/him to read/sign the 
Informed Consent Form (e.g., visual impairment) 
    2) If the resident is illiterate, the intervie wer reads the Informed Consent Form to the resident  
Page 6 of 34      3) If the resident has a physical impairment that  prevents her/him from writing (e.g., contractures 
in both arms, paralysis, etc.) 
    4) If the resident does not wish to sign the Informed Consent Form, but verbally indicates that 
s/he is willing to participate in the interview Per the IRB, in these cases, an observer not associ ated with the research (e.g., facility staff) must 
witness the verbal consent process.  
 
Interventions 
Explanation for the choice of comparators  After successful implementation of the R-REM research protocol in nursing homes, the authors 
wanted to further test the intervention in anot her LTSS setting with a similar population but with 
less staffing and state oversight. Assisted living was selected because it is an area of LTSS that is 
growing rapidly both in numbers of faciliti es and in terms of the populations served. 
 Intervention description  
The intervention, i.e., the training of nursing, so cial work, administrative and other staff on R-REM 
is conducted in three separate sessions: 1) Re cognition and Risk Factors, 2) Management, and 3) 
Implementation of Guidelines. The trainer who adm inisters the three modul es is an experienced 
doctoral level, adult education professional who par ticipated in the devel opment and modification 
of the modules; she has extensive experience in st aff training. Modules are provided to facilities 
randomized to the intervention after the completion of baseline data collection, and to those 
randomized to usual care after completion of 12-month follow up data collection. 
Description of Module 1: Recognizing R-REM:   Module 1 covers the extent of R-REM which 
includes: evidence; risk factors a ssociated with the victims, perpetrators, and environment; and the 
role of cognitive impairment. Di fferent forms of mistreatment are covered, including physical, 
psychological, sexual, and theft.  This module is delivered in the form of an experiential half-hour 
in-service training, plus pre- and post-te sts designed to be conducted at the ALRs.   
Description of Module 2:  Management of R-REM   
Page 7 of 34  A. Introduction and review of previous session and pretest 
B. Film on management of elder mistreatment  
C. A presentation of the SEARCH ( Support, Evaluate, Act, Report, Care Plan, Help to Avoid) 
approach to R-REM management;  review, lessons learned; post-test.   The 25- minute film for this module was designe d by the research team and directed and produced 
by the New York University Department of Media Production. It was narrated by distinguished 
journalist, Charles Osgood, and includes a discussi on of what constitutes putative evidence of 
serious abuse, such as bruises, cuts, or more se rious injuries (broken b ones or cracked ribs). 
Mistreatment such as verbal aggression and th reats, sexual harassment and missing belongings 
are discussed. Three skits by pr ofessional actors are presented.  
Skit 1:  Most obvious form of elder mistreatment: physical assault; Skit 2:   Less obvious form of 
elder mistreatment: verbal insult; Skit 3:  Subtle form of elder mistreatment: psychological abuse, 
e.g. wandering uninvited into another’s room and rummaging through another resident’s property. 
Each skit is followed by an example of a poor staff response to the event as well as a better 
practice, and by commentaries by leading multid isciplinary experts in elder abuse, representing 
different perspectives: psycho-social, m edical, nursing, administrator/legal.  
The final component of the video is a review of nine steps to manage and curb R-REM.    
 
Description of Module 3 : Implementation of best practices related to R-REM   
1.  Introduction and review of previous session;  2.  Presentation of implementation methods  and forms (The R-REM Behavior Recognition and 
Documentation Sheet -- BRDS); disc ussion of methods for completion; 
3. Presentation of filmed vignettes for practice in the completion of the BRDS; 4. Review practice sheets and lessons learned; 
5. Review of implementation guidelines. 
The focus of this session is on the interventi on fidelity and implementat ion measures, including 
implementation of reporting guidel ines. The training includes video vignettes that are rated and 
reviewed to confirm skills.  Ways to enhance positive group relationships and the use of 
Page 8 of 34  community to counteract individua l acts of mistreatment are di scussed, addressing the question, 
How can staff work together to structure the soci al and physical environment to mitigate R-REM?  
The importance and rules for reporting R-REM are reviewed.   
 Criteria for discontinuing or mo difying allocated interventions  
There are no predetermined criter ia for discontinuing or modifying the intervention. 
 
Strategies to improve adhe rence to interventions  
Each session is scheduled twice for all shifts, incl uding the night staff.  Additional makeup sessions 
are available for those staff unable to attend the or iginal training sessions. Facility administrators 
alert the staff of the mandatory training sessions using several methods including flyers posted in 
the staff room and notices in pay stubs.  Relevant concomitant care permitted or prohibited during the trial  None 
Provisions for post-trial care  
There are no such provisions for this non-inva sive minimal risk intervention for ALR staff. 
 
Outcomes  
Aim 1: Process level 2 evaluation of staf f knowledge outcomes: Knowledge tests: Ten 
question pre-post knowledge tests were developed for each of the first two R-REM training 
modules, i.e., Recognition and Risk Factors,  and Management (the SEARCH approach) based on 
its respective content.  An additional knowledge test was developed for the third module: Implementation Guidelines, in order to assess us e of the BRDS to document R-REM events.  The 
latter test compares staff answers to the gold standard ratings. Hypothesis  1, regarding enhanced 
staff knowledge will be examined for individual kn owledge items using paired t-tests, comparing 
pre–post knowledge scores between groups, adjusting st andard errors for clustered data within 
Page 9 of 34  facilities. Group differences in total scores will be examined using a linear  mixed (fixed and random 
effects) model for effect estimation. 
Aim 2:  Process level 3 evaluation of implementa tion outcomes: Recognition and reporting 
using the R-REM Measures:  R-REM behavior recognition and documentation sheet (BRDS): 
This measure was based on the Shift Coupon, a form originally designed by nursing staff to 
provide a “quick, easy, anonymous, and non-thr eatening method to report adverse events,”21 and 
is in the form of a small note pad. BRDSs are intended to measure recognition and capture real 
time R-REM events. Hypothesis 2, regarding enhanced R-REM recognition will be examined with a 
Chi-square analysis comparing counts of BRDS  reports from experimental and comparison 
facilities captured over time, and treated as binary incidents. Reporting implementation will be 
examined by evaluating the differences between experimental and comparison group staff reports 
of R-REM, collected over three waves. Individual  R-REM reporting will be determined by counting 
whether any of the staff-reported R-REM indicators are positive. The object of this analysis is not 
to identify individuals and perpetrators, but to examine the reported events. In modeling R-REM 
events, a Poisson regression of count data will be performed.  
Aim 3: Primary level-4 evaluation of distal outcomes: Summary of the sources of data for 
determining falls/accidents/inju ries and incidents of R-REM: The data used for evaluation of 
the primary distal outcome and for R-REM repo rts include (a) self-report among those residents 
who are capable, (b) Accident and Incident Reports, (c) resident record review, (d) observational 
data, including the BRDS, and (e) reports from st aff. In addition, an environmental evaluation will 
occur. Data for falls and injuries will be collec ted via chart review, st aff report and residents who 
can self-report, and from Incident/Accident Reports on an ongoing basis. Resident and staff 
informant information will be collected at basel ine, 6- and 12-month follow-up. Falls will be 
considered as binomial (any fall) an d Poisson distributed (fall counts).  
 
Sample size {14} 
Power calculations are provided for the primary distal outcome: falls, including accidents and 
injuries, also the outcome requiring the largest samp le size. Upstate it is expected that an average 
Page 10 of 34  of 50 residents per site will be selected for a total of  300.  Downstate, the facilities are larger, and it 
is expected that the average size will be 125 residents or 750 total. The proposed sample size is 6 
facilities and 525 residents per arm. 
Using the canonical link (Logit), the generalized linear model (GLIMMIX):
jk ijk ijk ijk FU X p p  1 0 )) 1/( log(   , where FU jk is a random effect associated with facility 
and unit.  
The formula for the sample size per group using the method of Diggle is: 
)) (/())1(1() 2 (2
0 12
11 00*p pn n qp qpz QP z m       ; and using the GEE method: 
2
1 0 101 10 012
1 2/ 1 *
) ( 2))1(1))( 1( ) 1( () (
p p nn p p p p Z Zmo
  
     . The formula below is adjusted with variance 
inflation factor (V if) and reliability(R el):  m=V ifm* / R el and  
Vif = (1+ ( ne – 1)ρe)(1+ ( ns -1) ρsnepe/(1+(ne-1) ρe)) 
 where n s=5 is the average number of units in the facility, ρs=0.015 is the ICC for facility, n e =17 is 
the average number of residents in the unit, ρe =0.03 is the ICC for unit, and the reliability: 
Rel=0.95.   
The following table assumes α=0.05, power (1- β) =80%, R=0.95 and V if=2.5 (With n e=17, 
ICC Unit=0.03, N s =5, ICC Facility=0.015, the fall rate at follow-up: p 0=33% and p 1=20.75%). Two 
scenarios for ρ (the average correlation of the outcomes over waves) were posited: 
As shown, with 525 per group, power is adequate for intent-to-treat (ITT) analyses, including all 
respondents.  Because randomization is at the faci lity rather than individual level, there is the 
potential for imbalance on baseline variables and mi ssing covariate data.  Assuming attrition of Group Fall rate P(y=1) Diggle Method GEE Method 
Baseline 
Rate 6  
Month 12 
Month Combined 
6M & 12M M 
(ρ=0.5) M 
(ρ=0.6) 
 M 
(ρ=0.5) M 
(ρ=0.6) 
Intervention 37% 22% 19.5% 20.75% 404 431 399 425 
Usual Care 37% 34% 32% 33% 404 431 399 425 
Page 11 of 34  15% at wave 1, it is estimated that 445 per  group will have at least baseline and one additional 
wave of data included, using the EM missing data algorithm; thus, power is adequate to detect the 
posited difference in fall reduction of about 12% even with attrition.  
 Recruitment  
All residents are approached and invited to par ticipate. For those who do not wish to be 
interviewed, a different or the same intervie wer approaches again at another time that may be 
more amenable to the resident. All resident questi ons are addressed and interviews occur at a 
time and place preferred by the resident.   
Assignment of interventions: allocation 
Sequence generation  Algorithms for conducting randomization that take in to account clustering such as exists with 
geographical regions and rolling enrollment have been developed by the author.  This method has 
yielded balanced groups for many studies.  This randomization procedure will be carried out using 
a SAS macro after a facility completes the baseline interview.  A random number from 0 to 1 will be 
used to determine the assignment group.  The standard cut score will be set at 0.5 for the first n 
facilities from the same region.  Facilities which receive a random number between 0 and 0.5 will 
be assigned to the usual care group and those wi th a random number greater than 0.5 will be 
assigned to the intervention group. The balance bet ween the groups within each group will be 
carefully weighted after the total number of fac ilities from a group reaches a number greater than 
n.  Before the randomization procedure, the num ber of facilities randomized to each arm for each 
region will be estimated using SAS macro program s.  If more than the n facilities are randomized 
initially, the cut score for the next facility is equal  to the ratio of the intervention group (n1) to the 
facilities already randomized (m) for that group (n1/m).  For example, group A region provides 
eight facilities for randomization and the n is set to 5, the first five facilities (n) will be randomized to 
the standard cut score 0.5 (about half will go to the intervention and half to the usual care group).  
The sixth facility’s randomization cut score is equal to the number of facilities in the intervention 
Page 12 of 34  group (n1) divided by the total number of facilities randomized within that group (in this case, the 
denominator m is 5.) The seventh fa cility's cut score will be adjust ed according to the previous six 
facilities, and so forth.    
 Concealment mechanism  
The biostatistician who runs t he randomization procedure passes t he information directly to the 
intervention trainer who alerts the ALRs of t heir assignment. The principal investigator who 
oversees the data coordinating centre (DCC) at t he Research Division, Hebrew Home at Riverdale 
(RD-HHAR) is the only other person made aware of the assignment.  
 
Implementation  
A biostatistician at the coordinating centre  developed and runs the randomization procedure. 
Randomization occurs at the facility level. Resear ch interviewers who enrol participants are blinded 
to randomization group.  
Assignment of interventions: Blinding 
Who will be blinded  Research staff who interact with facilities are b linded to the extent possible; project managers, field 
managers and research interviewers are not made aware of the site assignment. ALR residents 
are not made aware of group assign ment. It is possible that ALR staff in facilities assigned to the 
intervention may mention the training to research staff at either the 6- or 12-month follow-up data 
collection. 
 Procedure for unblinding if needed  
Not applicable, there are no circumst ances where unblinding would be needed. 
 
Data collection and management 
Plans for assessment and collection of outcomes  
Page 13 of 34  Data for aim 1: Ten question pre-post knowledge te sts were developed for each of the first two R-
REM training modules. Data for aims 2 and 3 ar e derived from five sources:  (1) Resident 
interviews (2) Staff informants (3) Observati onal data (4) Chart and (5) Incident/accident report 
data. Research interviewers attend a 5-day tr aining session that includes how to administer 
questionnaires. Training continues in the field.  
1.  Resident interview 
Determination of capacity to prov ide informed consent and participate:  A brief screen will be used 
to determine capacity to provide informed c onsent (see Protection of Human Subjects). 
Institutional Comprehensive Assessm ent and Referral Evaluation (INCARE).22,23,24  Individuals who 
are able to provide informed consent (or whose fa mily members consent on their behalf) will be 
assessed with the INCARE, a mult ilevel-multi source instrument that contains quality of life 
outcomes and case-mix covariates and allows at least some assessment to be completed across 
all levels of residents. It includes: (a) arousal  and cognitive functioning, (orientation, memory, 
calculation / attention), (b) range of motion and ambul ation, (c) affect and (d) behavior.  It includes 
the Care Dementia Diagnostic Scale (CAREDIAG) which has been studied using several 
advanced psychometric models, including analyses of its relationship to dementia diagnosis.25,26 
Scales for each construct have evidenced m oderate to high (Cronbach’s alpha) reliability 
coefficients.  Estimates for the ADL scales range from 0.59 for standing disability to 0.95 for Total 
ADL/Ambulation disorder; from 0.86 to 0.94 for the cognitive scales; and 0.90’s for the behavior 
scales.27 The McDonald’s omega was estimated at 0.95 for the CAREDIAG. 
The Feeling Tone Questionnaire (FTQ): The FTQ m easure of affect contains 16 questions asked 
of the resident. Typical items are:  "Are you feel ing well?"; "Are you feeling happy today?"; "Do you 
feel lonely?".  Each item is coded “yes”, “ no” or "equivocal (sometimes, it depends)", and the 
response rated for affect using a 5-point cont inuum from  1 -- "laughs, praises, enthusiastic, 
emphatically positive" to 5 -- "extreme negative -- cr ies, groans, curses, is emphatically negative".  
Three scales are scored: Response, Affect and Total.  The FTQ has been used among numerous 
samples of nursing home residents, in which reliabiliti es were in the 0.90's. In an AL sample alphas 
Page 14 of 34  ranged from 0.73 to 0.90 at baseline and from .77 to  0.93 at follow-up. The measure has recently 
been evaluated and shortened28 using a large sample of 6000 LTSS residents, including AL. 
Performance Activities of Daily Living (PADL): The PADL29 (alpha typically in the 0.90’s)30 is a 27-
item scale that measures an i ndividual’s lack of ability to perform various upper and lower body 
movement tasks associated with eating, dressi ng and grooming, such as putting on a sweater, 
buttoning and unbuttoning a sweater, guiding a spoon to the mouth, combing hair independently. 
Performance times are recorded, and items are rat ed as to whether the task was performed with or 
without cueing, or could not be performed at all. 
Extended Interview: An extended Interview will be  administered to participants with sufficient 
cognitive abilities to respond.  Research has dem onstrated that many residents can reliably self-
report yes/no questions about daily care,31 life satisfaction,32 pain,33 and quality of life.34,35,36 It is 
anticipated that about 70% to 80% of residents will be included at this stage. This interview includes scales of fear of falling/ fa lls history, depression/ affect, and ADLs.
37 The number of falls 
experienced in the past year and the Fear of Fa lling scale, comprised of eight items tapping 
feelings regarding fear of falling and the r easons for fear, will be administered.  The alpha 
coefficient for this scale for a prior NY State Assisted Living sample was .84 at baseline and 0.85 
at follow-up. Depression scales: The Short Care 38,39,40,41,42  (alpha of 0.83 for an assisted living 
sample at baseline and 0.81 at follow-up) typi cal items are “feeling sad or depressed during the 
past month,” “cried during the past month”, and “lie  awake at night with depressed thoughts.” 
Included is an anchored four-point global rating of happi ness level. We will also include the Patient 
Reported Outcomes Measurement Informat ion System (PROMIS) Depression scale.43 
Resident to Resident Elder Mistreatment- Resident  Version (R-REM-R):  For residents who are 
capable, the R-REM-R will be used to determine w hether an incident of R-REM has been directed 
at the respondent. This measure was created by the applicant team by combining desirable 
aspects of the most commonly used instrument in violence research44 with a measure used to rate 
behavioral disturbance in LTSS.45 The measure contains 22 items related to verbal, physical, 
sexual and other behaviors along with their fr equency during the two weeks and the past year. 
Page 15 of 34  After focus groups with LTSS staff, more R-RE M items were added and a follow-up distress 
question was added to all endorsed item s. The Cronbach’s alpha estimate for the scale was 0.90.   
2. Staff Informant Interview 
A brief Informant interview will be administered to the staff member most familiar with the 
participant. 
Nurse Informant Rating of Behaviors:  The Nurs e/Primary Care Worker Informant Interview46 will 
be used. Typical items include: “Wanders during the day;” “Repetitive questioning”; 
“Argumentative”; “Demanding”; and “Dis rupts other’s activities”.  Items are rated for frequency: 
“Not at all”; “Sometimes (1-4 times per week )”; and “Often (5+ times per week)”. The Cronbach’s 
alpha estimate was in the 0.80s, and the 0.60s in an urban and rural LTSS sample.47 
The R-REM Staff Version was developed along with  the resident version (see above). R-REM is 
operationalized as staff endorsing (or incident reports of) any items on the R-REM Interview.  The 
following instructions are given to staff:  “We are trying to find out about things residents have done 
to other residents.  I’d like you to think about incidents involving (resident) and one or more people living here.  We’ll focus on different forms of re sident-to-resident mistreatment.  This can include 
verbal incidents like: residents saying mean things  to each other, insulting each other’s race or 
ethnic group, and/or screaming at each other.  Ph ysical incidents can include: hitting, pushing, 
and/or grabbing. Sexual incidents may include touc hing, or saying or doing sexual things that 
made other residents feel uncomfortable. We are also interested in incidents involving other 
residents going into rooms without being asked,  touching personal things, or throwing things.   We 
are referring to both serious reportable and minor in cidents that would not necessarily be formally 
reported.  Remember we are talking about inci dents in the past two weeks that involved 
(resident).” A list of R-REM behav iors is provided. Location, time , the identity of the person who 
started the incident and a description of other pa rticipant(s) (sex and relationship) are recorded. 
The staff member reports what s/he did about this (e.g., separated or redirected residents). The 
Cronbach’s alpha estimate for the R-REM scale wa s 0.90. The Schmid-Leiman bi-factor model 
identified three group factors: verbal, physical and  a less differentiated factor including items on 
room invasion, throwing and threatening gestures. An additional item related to sexual encounters 
Page 16 of 34  was also included.48,49  The alpha estimate from the “psych” R package50,51  was 0.94, omega 
hierarchical 0.76, omega total 0.97 and explained common variance (ECV) 52 was 0.59.  
3. Observational Data  
A. For each participant, ten five-minute observati ons are performed by trained interviewers at 
different times of the day and in different locati ons in order to obtain additional information about 
incidents of R-REM and other disturbed behaviours. Wh ile episodes of R-REM are likely to be brief 
and intermittent, based on our experience in t he nursing home study, interviewers did observe 
many incidents of R-REM. The Total Observatio n Checklist includes 14 affect and 37 behaviour 
items (Observed Behavior Checklist).53  Frequencies of affective and behavioural states are coded 
as: “Not at all”, “Very little (1 or 2xs duri ng observation period)”, “With some frequency (several 
times)”, “With moderate frequency (many times but not continuous)”, or “With great frequency 
(continuous)”.  Typical affect items include: “Cryi ng”; “Agitated”; “Emotionally labile”. Typical 
behavioural items include: “Disruptive of ot hers”; “Wandering”; and “Ar gumentative”. In an urban 
LTSS sample, the Cronbach’s alphas ranged from .74 to 0.85 and from 0.85 to 0.87 in a rural LTSS sample.
54   
B. R-REM behavior recognition and documentati on sheet (BRDS): This measure was based on the 
Shift Coupon, a form originally designed by nur sing staff to provide a “quick, easy, anonymous, 
and non-threatening method to report adverse events,”55 and was in the form of a small note pad. 
BRDSs are intended to measure recognition and c apture real time R-REM events. These forms 
are designed as prescription pads to be carried in the pockets of staff.  They are distributed at the 
training sessions (module 3 for intervention facili ties and during the opening of the unit for usual 
care staff); additional pads are available at a ce ntral location. Sheets are torn off after documenting 
R-REM. Items include: residents involved, identity of the perpetrator, actions involved, location, 
potential cause, and what did you (staff) do about it. Boxes for completed forms are placed in a 
designated location on each unit. 
C. Event logs: When an event is repo rted from a) resident interview b)  staff interview c) interviewer 
observation, or d) BRDS, the research interviewe r will complete an Event Log worksheet in order 
to better understand the circumstances of the R- REM event. This form contains descriptive 
Page 17 of 34  information about the event, its time and place,  the reporting source, the participants, and 
environmental factors at the time of the event.   
4. Chart data 
Demographic variables of interest include age, race, educational attainment, and length of stay in the facility. Medical diagnoses, m edications, activities of daily  living, cognitive impairment and 
mental health data will be extracted from t he Assisted Living Residence Medical Evaluation form. 
Diagnosis information will be integrated into a como rbidity index, in order to adjust for burden of 
chronic illnesses. Interrater reliability will be examined on a random subset of charts. In addition, 
physical function, including history of falls in the past 3 months, frequency of falls, resulting injuries 
and open-ended comments and behavioral issues data wi ll be extracted from the Assisted Living 
Resident Evaluation Form that is completed at adm ission. The resident Indi vidual Service Plan will 
be reviewed for reports of occurrences of R-REM,  falls, incidents and injuries and other covariate 
information that develop from three months  prior to baseline through the study end. 
5. Accident/ Incident Reports 
The New York State Department of Health mandates  electronic transfer of accident and incident 
reports to regional offices as part of licensing st andards for ALRs statewide. Federal regulations 
require the reporting of alleged violations of abus e, mistreatment and neglect, including injuries of 
unknown origin to the facility administrator and in  accordance with state law. The reports will be 
reviewed for potential incidents of R-REM and falls. Data will be collected from three months prior 
to the study through the end of data collection.  Each incident report reviewed for resident falls/ accidents/ injuries may also contain evidence of R-REM.  
6. Environmental Assessment 
In addition, physical environment is assessed (dir ect assessment at local site): The modified 
Therapeutic Environment Screening Scale (TESS)
56 will be used by research staff to measure the 
physical environment. The TESS includes 12 domain s: unit autonomy, exit control, maintenance, 
cleanliness, safety, lighting, space/seating,  physical appearance/homelikeness, access to 
outdoors, orientation and cuing, privacy, and noise, and a scale measuring qual ity.  These data will 
Page 18 of 34  be collected for descriptive purposes, and for possibl e inclusion in hierarch ical linear models.  
Facility and unit characteristics will also be collected. 
 
Plans to promote participant rete ntion and complete follow-up  
Based on our experience in the conduct of many studi es with residents in long term care facilities, 
we expect 15% attrition at 6 months and up to 40% at 12 months follow up, mainly related to 
discharge, hospitalizations and death.   Thes e percentages have been considered in the power 
calculations. All enrolled i ndividuals who still reside at the facili ty at the follow-up visits will be 
invited to participate at follow-up at a convenien t time for the respondent. Multiple attempts will be 
made to interview these residents. 
 
Data management  Data entry and quality: All screening and evaluat ion data will be collected using a computer 
assisted personal interview (CAPI) system. This  method provides accuracy in data collection, 
because the system does not accept out-of-range values, and does not allow for deviation from 
prescribed skip patterns.  The DCC will creat e scoring and cleaning programs for scales within 
instruments. Although the CAPI and data entry systems should not allow these types of errors, the cleaning programs serve to double check the accura cy of the data. Periodically, the data manager 
will review all data for duplicate records, illogica l collection dates or times of interview, outlier and 
out of range values, and illogical contingencies using program syntax created for each data file. 
After any corrections are made, items distributio ns will be reviewed to make sure no anomalies 
remain. In addition, the project coordinator periodi cally reviews entire files as a quality assurance 
measure. Data storage, data safety and security: All laptops used for data collection and office based 
desktop computers are password protected and Bitl ocker encrypted. Laptops will not leave the 
facility. Laptops with encrypted data are stored in a locked cabinet at the facility and not removed 
until study end. They are dedicated to the projec t and not connected to the internet. Log sheets will 
also be kept in a locked onsite storage area.  
Page 19 of 34  At the DCC, electronic data are backed up daily or weekly to a backup server depending 
upon the receipt of data. Additional backup external  hard drives are stored in a fireproof safe. 
Protected Health Information (PHI) is confined to  a secure device that is not connected to the 
internet. All computers are passw ord protected and the whole driv e is encrypted with Bitlocker 
encryption. They are on a non-routable LAN network . No file and database servers are accessible 
to the public through the Internet. A hardware-bas ed firewall device protects the network system 
against hackers and any unauthorized internet access. Spam and email filtering is built-in within 
the firewall device. The anti-viru s software (McAffee Anti Virus) pr otects the network from threats 
of viruses, worms and Trojan horses and other malw ares contained in email attachments and also 
from files downloaded through the internet. Through "push-technology" this anti-virus software is 
automatically updated for all virus definitions and other updates.  
 Confidentiality  The field coordinator will oversee the onsite assi gnment of individual IDs. These ID numbers will 
not contain PHI (e.g., social security number, me dical records number, etc.) The list of assigned 
IDs with minimal PHI (name, date of birth and date of admission) is maintained in a locked cabinet 
at an on-site location during the course of data co llection and later transferred to a secure cabinet 
at the DCC. Data-collection files will be identified only with coded IDs. In compliance with HIPAA, 
individual participant confidentiality will be assu red using ID codes throughout data processing and 
analyses. Additionally, none of the analyses will permit identificat ion of any individual by name. 
The interviewers will be aware of the linkage between individual and ID numbers. At the DCC, 
individual participants will be known only by their ID numbers, which will be used as the basis for 
communication with the interviewers in the event of data anomalies. The cl inical/research barrier 
will remained intact, in that it is not necessary for any of the data-processing staff to be familiar 
with the identity of the participants.  No PHI will be stored in devices linked to the internet. 
 
Statistical methods 
Statistical methods for prim ary and secondary outcomes  
Page 20 of 34  Analyses for the primary hypothesis for the distal outcome:  The primary analyses will 
examine, on an ITT basis, the differences between the usual care and intervention groups in the 
reduction of falls/accidents/injuries over time.  Other approaches, e.g., the analysis of the “as 
treated” sample can result in biased estimates of  the causal treatment effect due to compromised 
random assignment. Our primary approach to analyses is guided by our own experience,57 and 
reviews.58,59  Depending on the level of missing data, analytic strategies (see below) can be used 
to address non-compliance, e.g.60   Based on prior trials that we have coordinated, sampled from 
this population, 1 year attrition is between 30% and 40%; thus for 6-month data (projected attrition 
of 15%), the ITT analyses of all s ubjects will be feasible.  Longitu dinal analyses will include those 
with at least baseline and one follow-up.  Sensit ivity analysis will be performed using multiple 
imputation under different assumptions for missing data. 
Because randomization is at the facility ra ther than individual level, imbalance may be 
observed on baseline variables.  Preliminary analyses will be per formed to determine whether the 
groups are balanced. Two-tailed test s of significance will be performed. Binomial tests are to be 
conducted on dichotomous variables, Poiss on tests on nonbinomial (e.g., count) data, and t tests 
on ordinal data, adjusting standard errors for clustered data within facilities; p values are reported 
because the design does not permit randomization at the level of the individual.  
Effect on likelihood of falls/injuries/accident reduction :    
Statistical methods appropriate for clustered data wi ll be used in the prim ary analysis to compare 
the groups with respect to the binary outcome. Generalized mixed effects models (MEMs) will be 
used to test the hypothesis that those assigned to the intervention will experience a significantly 
higher rate of fall/accident/injury reduction as contrasted with usual care. The outcome will be 
modeled as a function of intervention, time and their interaction and controlling for the baseline 
falls.  To account for the clustered nature of the outcomes, the models will include random effects 
for facilities, units and subjects. The models will be fit using mix ed effects logistic-regression as 
implemented in SAS Proc Glimmix. The appropriate  covariance structure will be determined. The 
primary analysis will  be supplemented with an exploration of the effect of baseline subject, facility 
and unit characteristics on the intervention effect. These results will inform generalizability of 
Page 21 of 34  intervention effects.  
 
Analyses for secondary outcomes :  The proposed secondary outcomes are affect, measured by 
the FTQ and the NIH PROMIS depression measure,61,62 ,63    and behavior.  The reliability estimates 
of the outcomes are typically at least 0.90.  Met hods for analyses of treatment effects in pre-post 
clinical trials, in the context of missing data, have been compared.64,65,66,67,68,69   The primary 
proposed analyses will use MEMs, and a full in formation likelihood approac h, with sensitivity 
analyses using generalized esti mating equations (GEE). 
Statistical models: The primar y endpoint analysis for comparison between the two groups with 
respect to various outcomes will be based on models for the outcome at 6 and 12 months as a 
function of the intervention condition, adjusting for the baseline value of the outcome, i.e. an 
ANCOVA-type MEM analysis with intervention as a factor with two levels and baseline value as a 
covariate.  For multiple outcomes (e.g. NI H PROMIS and FTQ) MANC OVA-type MEMs will be 
used to simultaneously model the multiple outcome  variables.  An additional factor (domain) 
denoting the individual outcome variabl es will be included in the model together with interactions 
between domain (depression/affect measures) and intervention.  A significant interaction term 
would indicate that the effect of the treatment is different for affect and depression; in that case two 
treatment effects will be estimated for each outco me. If the interaction is not significant a model 
with only main effects for depression/affect and tr eatment will be fit and the (common) treatment 
effect will be estimated from this model. In additi on to significance testing, we will estimate the 
treatment effects with 95% CI.  The MEMs allo w modeling the correlation between the variables 
assessed on the same subject and that between s ubjects from the same units and facilities.  
Group differences in total scores will be examin ed using a linear mixed (fixed and random effects) 
model for effect estimation. 
The use of SAS Proc MIXED will allow for the pos sible group heterogeneity in residual variances 
that may require modeling to satisfy model as sumptions and improve model fit, and the modeling 
of the covariance structure.  In secondary analys es, we will examine with in subjects change over 
time. We did not perform power calculations for the secondary outcomes because the most 
Page 22 of 34  stringent power requirements are for the primary outcome.  However, we will be able to detect 
relatively small effect sizes, given the sample size. 
Examination of the exploratory potential m ediating effects of behavior on the relationship 
between the R-REM intervention and the falls/inju ries/accident outcome will be examined using 
mediation analyses. Although recent evidence fr om Monte Carlo studies support simple joint 
significance tests of the mediating path coefficients,70,71,72  also examined will be other formal tests 
of mediation effects.73,74 
Based on prior experience with the outcomes, it  is not expected that transformations will be 
necessary.  Baseline variables will be  examined by study arm; however, no p values will be 
provided, and covariates (other than baseline va lues) are not proposed for inclusion in the main 
analyses of treatment effects.  
Examination of potential region differences: Data from regions (upstate  and downstate) will be 
combined and each outcome (e.g., depression, affect ) modeled as a function of two factors (i) 
intervention, a factor with 2 levels and (ii) region , a factor with 2 levels, and the interaction between 
(i) and (ii). MEMs will be used for each outcome , e.g., depression, and likelihood ratio tests ( χ2) 
used to test for significance of the interaction te rm.  The study is not powered to detect meaningful 
regional differences in treatment effect; therefore we will use =0.15 as a criterion, and explore if 
regional differences are related to di fferences in intervention effects.  
 Interim analyses  
There are no plans for interim analysis  or predetermined stopping guidelines. 
 
Methods for additional anal yses (e.g. subgroup analyses)  
Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects (HTE): Because there is interest in examining subgroups to 
determine for which individuals interventions may be effective, we will perform descriptive HTE 
with potential effect modifiers as interaction term s. HTE will be examined for subgroups, e.g., those 
with and without cognitive impairment.    
Page 23 of 34  Methods in analysis to handle protocol no n-adherence and any statistical methods to 
handle missing data  
Examination of baseline differences on key variab les between completers and those lost-to-follow-
up will be conducted to inform about the nature of the missing data. The ITT analyses performed 
using MEMs will permit all indi viduals with at least one post-baseline observation to be included.  
Depending on the level of missing data, analy tic strategies can be used to address non-
compliance, e.g.75   For the sustainability analyses, analyses will be of those with at least baseline 
and one follow-up.  Sensitivity analysis will be perf ormed using multiple imputation under different 
assumptions for missing data.  Examination of  baseline differences on key variables between 
completers and those lost-to-follow-up will be conduc ted in order to inform about the nature of any 
missing longitudinal data.  Methods of examini ng missing data, e.g., propensity scores, inverse 
probability, EM algorithm and multiple imputati on sensitivity analyses will be considered.  If 
substantial missing outcome data are observed, we will use a specific imputation approach, e.g., 
Markov Chain Monte Carlo procedures76 depending on the amount and pattern of missing data.  
SAS Proc Multiple Imputation and MIAnalyze will  be used. We will perform joint simultaneous 
imputation; at least 50 multiple imputations wi ll be generated and PROC MIAnalyze will be used to 
combine the results and estimate the log-odds, adjusted standard errors, and significance.  
 
Plans to give access to the full protocol, part icipant level-data and statistical code  
There are no such plans at this time.  
Oversight and monitoring 
Composition of the coordinating cen tre and trial steering committee  
The DCC at the RD-HHAR is responsible for oversight of data collection and analyses.  
 
Composition of the data monitoring committee,  its role and reporting structure {21a} 
The Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) or  data monitoring committee (DMC) is composed 
of five members including a chair, clinician/ safety  officer, and a biostatistician.  The NIA project 
Page 24 of 34  officer will also attend DSMB meetings.  The DS MB responsibilities include: review the research 
protocol, informed consent documents and plans for data safety and monitoring; evaluate the 
progress of the trial, including periodic asse ssments of recruitment, accrual and retention, 
participant risk versus benefit, performance of the tr ial sites, and other factors that can affect study 
outcome; review study performance, make recommendations and assist in the resolution of 
problems reported by the principal Investigator; protect the safety of the study participants; report 
to NIA on the safety and  progress of the trial; and ensure the confidentiality of the study data and 
the results of monitoring. The Board ac ts independently from the study sponsor.  
 Adverse event reporting and harms  
All adverse events (AEs) and severe adverse events (SAEs) will be reported by the interviewers to 
the Project Manager who will update the Adve rse Events Reporting Form and alert the PI. 
Given that the study intervention is staff tr aining, and there are no physical components to 
the participant evaluation (e.g., no blood draws or ph ysical examinations), it is expected that no AE 
or SAEs will be related to study participation. Gi ven that this is an older study population, SAEs 
(e.g., hospitalizations, death) are expected to occu r, with no relationship to study participation. 
Thus, per the NIA sample SAE/AE Process flow diagram, these events are not unexpected and will 
be reported to the DSMB at annual teleconferences. However, in the unlikely event that an AE or 
SAE is determined to be definitely, probably, or poss ibly related to the study it will be reported as 
follows: SAEs will be reported by the PI to t he DSMB, NIA, and IRB within 24 hours of the event 
being reported to the Investigator; AEs will be si milarly reported within two weeks of the event. 
Although there will be multiple assisted living facilities  enrolled, it is unlikely that these participating 
sites will have their own IRBs; thus , there will not be site specific IRB notification beyond that to the 
Weill Cornell Medical Center and the Hebrew Home at Riverdale IRBs. 
 
Plans for communicating important protocol amendments to relevant parties (e.g. trial 
participants, ethical committees)  
Any protocol amendments will be presented first to  the DSMB for approval. If approved, plans will 
Page 25 of 34  be presented to the IRB. 
 
Dissemination plans  
Study outcomes will be presented in manuscripts  in relevant peer-reviewed journals and at 
scientific meetings. Depending on the wishes of t he facility administrators, there may be a meeting 
for participating facilities staff to present study findings. 
 
Abbreviations 
AEs: adverse events  ALRs: assisted living residences 
BRDS: Behavior Recognition and Documentation Sheet 
CAPI: computer assisted personal interview CAREDIAG: Care Dementia Diagnostic Scale  DCC: data coordinating centre DSMB: Data Safety and Monitoring Board 
FTQ: Feeling Tone Questionnaire  
HTE: heterogeneity of treatment effects INCARE:  Institutional Comprehensive Assessment and Referral Evaluation  
IRB: Institutional Review Board 
ITT: intent-to-treat LTSS: long-term services and support 
MEMs: mixed effects models 
NIA: National Institute on Aging  PADL: Performance Activities of Daily Living 
PHI: Protected Health Information 
PROMIS: Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
RD-HHAR: Research Division, Hebrew Home at Riverdale 
R-REM: resident-to-resident elder mistreatment 
Page 26 of 34  SAEs: severe adverse events  
TESS: Therapeutic Environment Screening Scale 
 
Ethics approval and consent to participate  This protocol has been approved by the Weill Cornell Medicine IRB (protocol 1710018676) and by 
the Hebrew Home at Riverdale IRB (protocol 021 4I/P095/06).  Informed consent will be obtained 
from all study participants.  
  
Page 27 of 34  References 
 
1 Castle N. Resident to resident abuse in nursing homes as reported by nurse aides. J Elder Abuse 
Negl. 2012;24:304-56. doi:10.1080/08946566.2012.661685. 
2 Lachs MS, Rosen T, Teresi JA, Eimicke JP, Ra mirez M, Silver S, et al. Verbal and physical 
aggression directed at nursing home staff by residents. J Gen Intern Med. 2013; 28:660-7.  doi: 10.1007/s11606-012-2284-1 
3 Pillemer K, Chen EK, Van Haitsma KS, Teresi J A, Ramirez M, Silver S, et al. Resident-to-
resident aggression in nursing homes: results from a qualitative study. Gerontologist . 
2011;52:24-33. doi: 10.1093/geront/gnr107 
4 Ramirez M, Watkins B, Teresi JA, Silver S, Suk ha G, Boratgis G, et al. Using qualitative methods 
to develop a measure of resident-to-resident elder mistreatment in nursing homes. Int 
Psychogeriatr . 2013;25:1245-56. 
5 Shinoda-Tagawa T, Leonard R, Pontikas J, McDonough JE, Allen D, Dreyer PI. Resident to 
resident violent incidents in nursing homes.  JAMA . 2004;4:591-8. doi: 
10.1001/jama.291.5.591 
6 Teresi JA, Ocepek-Welikson K, Ramirez M, Ei micke JP, Silver S, Van Haitsma K, et al. 
Development of an instrument to measur e staff-reported resident-to-resident elder 
mistreatment (R-REM):  Ps ychometric properties using it em response theory and other 
latent variable models. Gerontologist. 2013;54:460-72. doi:10.1093/geront/gnt001. 
7 Teresi JA, Ramirez M, Ellis J, Silver S, Boratg is G, Kong J, et al. A staff intervention targeting 
resident-to-resident elder mistreatment (R-REM) in long-term care increased staff 
knowledge, recognition and reporting: Resu lts from a cluster randomized trial.  Int J Nurs 
Stud. 2013;50:644–56. doi 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2012.10.010. 
8 Cohen-Mansfield J, Marx MS, Rosenthal AS. A description of agitati on in a nursing home. J 
Gerontol: Soc Sci .1989;44:M77-84. 
9 Rosen T, Lachs MS, Bharucha AJ, Stevens SM, Tere si JA, Nebres F, et al. Resident-to-resident 
aggression in long-term care facilities: insights from focus groups of nursing home 
Page 28 of 34   
residents and staff. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008;56:1398-1408. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-
5415.2008.01808.x 
10 Phillips LR, Guo G, Haesook K. Elder mistreatm ent in U.S. residential care facilities: The scope 
of the problem. J Elder Abuse Negl. 2013;25:19-39. doi: 10.1080/08946566.2012.712851. 
11 Phillips LR, Guo G. Mistreatment in assisted li ving facilities: Complain ts, substantiations, and risk 
factors. Gerontologist. 2010;51:3343-53. doi: 10.1093/geront/gnq 122. 
12 Hawes C. Elder abuse in residential long te rm care settings: What is known and what 
information is needed. In: Bonnie RJ & Wallac e RB, editors. Elder Mistreatment: Abuse, 
neglect and exploitation in an aging Amer ica.  Washington, DC: Committee on National 
Statistics and Committee on Law and Justic e, National Research Council. National 
Academies Press; 2003. 
13 Benson JJ, Beckmeyer JJ.  Aggression and subj ective well-being in independent senior living 
communities. Paper Presentation: Gerontologi cal Society of America Annual Meeting 2013; 
Saturday November 23, 2013. P age 182 in Conference Program. 
http://www.geron.org/meeting2013/2013_ProgramBook.pdf. 
14 Hawes C, Kimbell AM. Detecting, addressing and preventing elder abuse in residential care 
facilities. Final Report: The National Institut e of Justice. Grant Number: 2005-IJ-CX-0054, 
2009. 
15 Caspi E. Aggressive behaviors between residents with dementia in an assisted living residence. 
Dementia. 2014;14:528-46. 
16 Castle N. An examination of resident abuse in  assisted living facili ties. Report: The National 
Institute of Justice. Grant Number: 2010-IJ-CX-0023, 2013. 
17 Gimm G, Chowdhury S, Castle N. Resident  aggression and abuse in assisted living. J Appl 
Gerontol. 2018;  37:947-64. doi:10.1177/0733464816661947  
18 Teresi JA, Ramirez M, Ellis J, Silver S, Boratg is G, Kong J et al. A staff intervention targeting 
resident-to-resident elder mistreatment (R-REM) in long-term care increased staff 
knowledge, recognition and reporting: Resu lts from a cluster randomized trial.  Int J Nurs 
Stud. 2013;50:644–56. doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2012.10.010. 
Page 29 of 34   
19 Research Division, HHAR.  Staff training in resi dent-to-resident elder mistreatment (R-REM).  
Final Report to the Division of Residential Se rvices, New York State Department of Health, 
March 2012. 
20 Lachs MS, Teresi JA, Ramirez M, van Haitsma K, Silver S, Eimicke JP, et  al. The prevalence of 
resident-to-resident elder mistreatment in nursing homes. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165:229-36. doi:10.7326/M15-1209 
21 Kellogg VA, Havens DS. Adverse events in acute care: an integrative literature review. Res Nurs 
Health. 2003;26:398–408. 
22 Gurland B, Wilder D. The CARE interview revisited:  Development of an efficient, systematic, 
clinical assessment. J Gerontol.1984;39:129-37. 
23 Teresi JA, Golden R, Gurland B. Concurrent an d predictive validity of the indicator-scales 
developed for the Comprehensive Assessment and Referral Evaluation (CARE) interview. J 
Gerontol. 1984;39:158-65. 
24 Golden RR, Teresi JA, Gurland B. Development  of indicator scales for the comprehensive 
assessment and referral evaluation (CARE)  interview schedule. J Gerontol. 1984;39:138-
46. 
25 Gurland BJ, Wilder D, Cross P, Teresi J, Ba rrett VW. Screening scales for dementia:  Toward 
reconciliation of cross-cultural findings.  Int J Geriatr Psychiatry .1992 ;7:105-13. 
26 Teresi JA, Kleinman M, Ocepek-Welikson K,  Ramirez M, Gurland B, Lantigua R, et al. 
Applications of item response theory to the examination of the psychometric properties and 
differential item functioning of the CARE Dementia Diagnostic Scale among samples of 
Latino, African-American and White non-Lati no Elderly.  Res Aging. 2000;22:738-73. 
27 Teresi J, Holmes D, Bloom H, Monaco C, Rosen S. Factors differentiating hospital transfer 
among high and low transfer rate long-term ca re facilities. Gerontologist.1991;31:795-806. 
28 Teresi JA, Ocepek-Welikson K, Toner JA, Kl einman M, Ramirez M, Eimicke JP, Gurland BJ, Siu 
A. Methodological issues in measuring subjec tive well-being and quality-of-life:  
Applications to assessment of affect in older, chronically and cognitively impaired, 
Page 30 of 34   
ethnically diverse groups using the Feeli ng Tone Questionnaire. Appl Res Qual Life. 
2017;12:251-88 . doi:10.1007/s11482-017-9516-9 
29 Kuriansky J, Gurland B. The Performanc e Test of Activities of Daily Living . Int J Aging Hum 
Dev.1976;7:343-52. 
30 Petkova E, Teresi J. Some statistical issu es in the analyses of data from longitudinal, 
intervention studies of elderly chronic care populations. J Psychosom Res. 2002;64 :531-47. 
31 Simmons SF, Schnelle JF. Strategies to m easure nursing home residents satisfaction and 
preferences related to incontinence and mobi lity care. Gerontologist. 1999;39:345-55. 
32 Simmons SF, Schnelle JF, Uman GC, Kulvicki , AD, Kyung-Ok HL, Ouslander JG. Selecting 
nursing home residents for satisfaction surveys. Gerontologist. 1997;37:543-50. 
33 Fisher SE, Burgio LD, Thorn BE, Hardin JM. Ob taining self-report data fr om cognitively impaired 
elders:  Methodological issues and clinical impl ications for nursing home pain assessment. 
Gerontologist.1997;46:81-8. 
34 Teresi JA, Abrams R, Holmes D, Ramire z M, Eimicke J. Prevalence of depression and 
depression recognition in nursing homes. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 
2001;36:613-20. 
35 Teresi J, Abrams R, Holmes D. Measurem ent of depression and depression recognition among 
individuals with cognitive im pairment. In: Albert S, Logsdon R, editors. Assessing quality of 
life in Alzheimer's disease. New York: Springer Publications; 2000. 
36 Teresi JA, Abrams R, Holmes D, Ramirez M, Shapiro C, Eimicke J. The influence of cognitive 
impairment, illness, gender and African-Americ an status on psychiatric ratings and staff 
recognition of depression. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002;10:1-9.  
37 Katz S, Ford AB, Moskowitz RW, Jackson BA, Ja ffee MW. Studies of illness in the aged.  The 
Index of ADL:  A standardized measure of  biological, psycho social function. JAMA . 
1963;185:94ff. 
38 Gurland BJ, Kuriansky JB, Sharpe L, Simon R,  Stiller P, Birkett P. The Comprehensive 
Assessment and Referral Evaluation (CARE): Rationale, development and reliability. Int J 
Aging Hum Dev. 1977;8:9-42. 
Page 31 of 34   
39 Golden RR, Teresi JA, Gurland BJ.  Developm ent of indicator scales for the comprehensive 
assessment and referral evaluation (CARE)  Interview Schedule. J Gerontol. 1984;39:138-
46. 
40 Teresi JA, Golden R, Gurland B, Wilder D, B ennett R. Construct validity of indicator-scales 
developed for the Comprehensive Assessment and Referral Evaluation (CARE) Interview 
schedule.  J Gerontol. 1984;39:147-57. 
41 Teresi JA, Golden R, Gurland B. Concurrent an d predictive validity of the indicator-scales 
developed for the Comprehensive Assessment and Referral Evaluation (CARE) interview.  
J Gerontol. 1984;39:158-65. 
42 Gurland N, Golden R, Teresi J, Challop J. The SHORT-CARE:  An efficient instrument for the 
assessment of depression, dementia, and disability.  J Gerontol. 1984;39:166-69. 
43 Pilkonis PA, Choi SW, Reise SP,  Stover AM, Riley WT, Cella D, on behalf of the PROMIS 
Cooperative Group. Item banks for measuring emotional distress  from the Patient-Reported 
Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS®): Depression, anxiety, and anger. 
Assess. 2011;18:263–83.  doi: 10.1177/1073191111411667 
44 Straus MA. Measuring intrafamily conflict and vi olence: The Conflict Ta ctics (CT) Scale. In: 
Straus, MA, Gelles, RJ, editors. Physical violen ce in American families: Risk factors and 
adaptations to violence in 8,145 families.  New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishing; 
1990.  p. 29-47.  
45 Cohen-Mansfield J, Marx MS, Rosenthal AS. A description of agitati on in a nursing home. J 
Gerontol: Soc Sci. 1989;44:S77-84. 
46 Barrett VW. A study of disturbing behavior in ment ally impaired elderly. Doctoral dissertation.  
New York: Columbia University. 1988. 
47 Teresi J, Holmes D, Benenson E, Monaco C, Ba rrett V, Ramirez M., et al. A primary care 
nursing model in long-term care facilities: Evaluation of impact on affect, behavior, and 
socialization. Gerontologist.1993;33:667-74. 
Page 32 of 34   
48 Ramirez M, Watkins B, Teresi JA, Silver S, Sukha G, Bortagis G, et al. Using qualitative 
methods to develop a measure of resident-to-re sident elder mistreatment in nursing homes. 
Int Psychogeriatr. 2013;25:1245-56. doi: 10.1017/S1041610213000264    
49 Teresi JA, Ocepek-Welikson K, Ramirez M, Eimicke JP, Silver S, Van Haitsma K, et al. 
Development of an instrument to measur e staff-reported resident-to-resident elder 
mistreatment (R-REM) using item response theory and other latent variable models. 
Gerontologist. 2013;54:460-72.  doi:10.1093/geront/gnt001 
50 Rizopoulus D. LTM: An R package for lat ent variable modeling and item response theory 
analyses. J Stat Softw. 2006;17:1-25. 
51 Rizopoulus D. LTM: Latent Trait Models under IRT.  2009 . http://cran.r 
project.org/web/packages/ltm/index.html . 
52 Reise SP, Moore TM, Maydeu-Olivares A. Target  rotations and assessing the impact of model 
violations on the parameters of unidimensional  item response theory models. Educ Psychol 
Meas. 2011;71:684-711. 
53 Teresi JA, Holmes D, Benenson E, Monaco C, Ba rrett V, Ramirez M, et al.  A primary care 
nursing model in long-term care facilities:  Evaluation of impact on affect, behavior, and 
socialization. Gerontologist. 1993;33:667-74. 
54 Teresi J, Holmes D, Benenson E, Monaco C, Barr ett V, Ramirez M. et al. A primary care nursing 
model in long-term care facilities: Ev aluation of impact on affect, behavior, and 
socialization. Gerontologist. 1993;33:667-74. 
55 Kellogg VA, Havens DS. Adverse events in acute care: an integrative literature review. Res Nurs 
Health. 2003;26:398–408. 
56 Sloane PD, Mitchell CM, Weissman G, Zimmer man SI, Long KM, Lynn M, Calkins M, Lawton 
MP, Teresi J, Grant L, Lindeman D, Montgom ery R. The therapeutic environment screening 
survey for nursing homes (TESS-NH):  An  observational instrument for assessing the 
physical environment of institutional settings for persons with dementia. J Gerontol: Soc 
Sci. 2002;570:569-78. 
Page 33 of 34   
57 Petkova E, Teresi JA. Some statistical issues in  the analyses of data from longitudinal studies of 
elderly chronic care populations . Psychosom Med. 2002;64:531-47. 
58 Gardiner JC, Luo Z, Roman LA. Fixed effe cts, random effects and GEE: what are the 
differences? Stat Med. 2009;28:221-39. 
59 Liu GF, Lu K, Mogg R, Mallick M, Mehrotra DV. Should baseline be a covariate or dependent 
variable in analyses of change from baseline in  clinical trials? Stat Med. 2009;28:2509-30. 
60 Robins JM. Correction for non- compliance in equivalence trials. Stat Med. 1998;17:269-302. 
61 Choi SW, Reise SP, Pilkonis PA, Hays RD, Cella D. Efficiency of static and computer adaptive 
short forms compared to full length measures of depressive symptoms. Qual Life Res. 
2010;19:125-36. 
62 Choi SW, Reise SP, Pilkonis PA, Hays RD, Cella D. Efficiency of static and computer adaptive 
short forms compared to full length measures  of depressive symptoms. Qual Life Res. 
2010;19:125-36. 
63 Teresi J, Ocepek-Welikson K, Kleinman M, Eimick e JE, Crane PK, Jones RN, et al. Analysis of 
differential item functioning in the depression item bank from the patient reported outcome 
measurement information system (PROMIS): An item response theory approach. Psychol 
Sci Q. 2009;51:148-80.  
64 Davidian M, Tsiatis AA, Leon S. Semiparametric es timation of treatment effect in a pretest-
posttest study with missing data. Stat Sci. 2005;20:295-301. 
65 An H, Little R. Comment. Stat Sci. 2005;20:282-4. 
66 Brumback BA, Brumback LC. Comment. Stat Sci . 2005;20:284-9. 
67 Molenberghs G. Comment. Stat Sci. 2005;20:289-92. 
68 Robins JM, Rotnitzky A, Zhao LP. Estimation of regression coe fficients when some regressors 
are not always observed. J Am Stat Assoc. 1994;89:846-66. 
69 Schafer JL, Kang JDY. Comment. Stat Sci. 2005;20:292-5. 
70 MacKinnon DP, Fairchild AJ, Fritz MS. Medi ation analysis. Annu Rev Psychol. 2007;58:593-614. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.58.110405.085542 
Page 34 of 34   
71 Mackinnon DP, Lockwood CM, Williams J. Confidence li mits for the indirect effect: distribution of 
the product and resampling methods.  Multivariate Behav Res. 2005;39:99-128. 
72 MacKinnon DP, Lockwood CM, Hoffman JM, West SG, Sheets V. A comparison of methods to 
test mediation and other intervening variabl e effects. Psychol Methods. 2002;7:83-90. 
73 Sobel ME. Asymptotic confidence intervals for i ndirect effects in structural equation models. In: 
Leinhardt S., editor. Sociological Methodology.  Washington, DC: American Sociological 
Association. 1982 ; p. 290-312. 
74 Sobel ME. Some new results on indirect effects and their standard errors in covariance structure 
models. Social Methodology. 1986;16:159-86. 
75 Robins JM. Correction for non- compliance in equivalence trials. Stat Med. 1998;17:269-302. 
76 Rubin DB, Gelman A. Markov chain Monte Carlo methods in biostatistics. Stat Methods Med 
Res. 1996;5:339-55. 