 
 
Efficacy of allergy patch testing 
in directed dietary therapy of 
eosinophilic esophagitis: A pilot 
study  
 
NCT# 02227836 
 
October 30, 2014 
 10/30/2014 
Title: Efficacy of allergy p atch testing in directed dietary therapy of eosinophilic esophagitis : A 
pilot study  
Principal Investigator:  Karthik Ravi 
Co-Principal Investigator:  Jeffrey A Alexander  
Co-Investigators:  Miguel  A Park, Dawn R Davis, David A Katzka , Jackie See 
Study Coordinators:  Debra M Geno , Lori A Kryzer  
 
Background:  
 Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic disease characterized by esophageal 
eosinophilia leading to inflammation and fibrosis.  One of the possible mechanisms in this 
disease is that antigen recognition occurs in the esophagus by dendritic cell recognition and 
generation of a Th 2 allergic r esponse.  The causative agents are believed to  be food antigens, 
supported by resolution of esophageal eosinophilia with an  elemental diet in patients.1,2  
However, the clinical utility of an elemental is  limited due to  expense and  poor dietary 
compliance.3  Consequently the more selective six food elimination diet, with exclusion of the 
most common food allergens of milk, soy, egg, wheat, peanuts/tree nuts, and shellfish/fish, has emerged as the main nonpharmacologic treatment strategy with reasonable efficacy in both 
pediatric and adult EoE patients.
4-6  In addition, food reintroduction allows identification of a 
single causative food in a substantial proportion of patients.4,5  Howe ver, clinical application of 
this strategy is a difficult and lengthy process for patients, with the need for multip le 
esophagogastroduodenoscopies (EGDs) presenting considerable cost considerations.5   
 Consequently a selected  elimination diet based on less invasive testing would offer the 
ideal dietary treatment strategy .  The efficacy of skin prick testing  (SPT)  to direct a selective 
elimination diet in EoE has been explored.  However, to date this strategy has not proven 
effective, with skin prick testing providing poor positive and negative predictive values.4-7  This 
may be becau se SPT measures an IgE mediated allergic response to food allergens, potentially 
explaining its limited utility in the Th2 mediated process of EoE.  Allergy patch testing (APT), 
by virtue of its measurement of delayed hypersensitivity, may offer a reasonable alternative.  
APT involves application of potential allergens directly in to the skin for an extended time period, 
with resultant reactions suggestive of a delayed hypersensitivity reaction , more consistent with 
the Th2 process implicated in  EoE.  Indeed, several pediatric studies have demonstrated greater 
success  in identifying causative foods with APT than SPT.8-10  However, to date adult studies 
using APT in EoE are lacking. 
 We propose that APT may accurately  allow for a directed elimination diet in EoE with 
similar efficacy to  the SFED.  Such an approach would offer a more feasible and cost effective 
clinical approach  to treating EoE, requiring fewer office visits and EGDs.   
 
Hypothesis: 
Allergic patch testing will identify causative food an tigens in eosinophilic esophagitis 
Primary Aim:  
1. Determine the reliability of  the allergy patch test (APT) to predict effective directed 
dietary therapy of EoE  
Secondary Aim:  
2. Determine efficacy of APT  as compared to a SFED  
3. Determine efficacy of APT in patients who are nonresponders to a SFED  
4. Determine efficacy of SFED in patients with EoE  
Methods:   
Study Design:  
 Patients referred to Mayo Clinic Rochester with an establish diagnosis of EoE  
who are nonresponsive to proton pump inhibitor (PPI)  medical therapy  will be identified  
(as defined below) .  Eligible patients will then meet with one of three  investigators  (KR, 
JAA, DAK) , complete the Mayo Dysphagia Questionaire-30 Day ( MDQ -30) foll owing 
which a standardized APT will be conducted.  Therea fter, a standard  clinically indicated  
SFED  treatment protocol will be completed as outlined below.  Patients will follow up 
with one of three investigators (KR, JAA, DAK) following the elimination diet who will 
be blinded to the results of the APT .  During this visit responders and nonresponders will 
be identified and nonresponders will complete a directed elimination diet based on APT 
results.  
Inclusion criteria:  
• Adults ages 18-90  
• Patients with EoE, defined as dysphagia with histologic finding of greater than or 
equal to 15 eosinophils per high powered field (eos per HPF)  on index  esophageal 
biopsy  
• Persistent symptoms and/or greater than or equal to 10 eos per HPF on esophageal 
biopsy after at least 8  weeks of twice daily PPI  therapy  
 
Exclusion criteria: 
• Patients with conditions known to be associated with esophageal eosinophilia, 
including Crohn’s disease, Churg-Strauss, achalasia, and hypereosinophilic 
syndrome 
• Steroids within 8 weeks of study enrollment 
• Dermatologic conditions precluding application of Finn chambers to the skin for 
APT  
• Inability to read due to: Blindness, cognitive dysfunction, or English language illiteracy  
 
Study Flow:  
Eligible patients meeting  the diagnostic definition of EoE will be identified: 
1. Patients will meet with one of 3 investigators (KR, JAA, DAK) to discuss diagnos is 
and treatment  and complete the MDQ-30 to assess baseline symptoms  
2. A urine pregnancy test will not be performed as part of the study as this will be done 
clinically.  
3. Patient  will then undergo APT testing per the following protocol: 
• 2g of dry foods will be placed in 2ml of isotonic saline solution.  The mixtures will then be placed in aluminum cups (ie Finn chambers) measuring 6 or 12 mm in diameter and adhered to the patient’ s back.  
• Foods to be included will be milk, wheat, egg, soy, peanut, tree nut, fish, shellfish, 
beef, corn, chicken, potato, pork, legumes, barley, rye, tomato, rice, fruits 
• The patches will be removed at 48 hours, and results read at 96 hours after application. 
• Reactions will be classified as negative, 1). erythema  2).erythema/raised 3 ). 
erythema/raised/spreading  4). erythema/raised/spreading/blistering . 
4. The patient will then meet with a dietitian to discuss  the SFED  
5. The clinical SFED protocol will be followed as below:  
• Patients will follow the SFED by excluding milk, wheat, eggs, soy, nuts, and 
fish for 6 weeks 
• The patient s will keep a diet diary  and meet with the dietitian prior to 
initiating the SFED and  immediately after completing the SFED .  In addition, 
a phone interview (DMG, LAK ) will be completed at 2 and 4 weeks of the 
SFED  to ensure compliance 
• Following completion of the SFED, the patient will meet with one of three investigators (KR, JAA, DAK) who will be blinded to the APT results and the MDQ-30 will be  given  
• The patient will then undergo an EGD with esophageal biopsies as per clinical 
practice  
• Patients with symptomatic and histologic response (defined by <10 eos per HPF on biopsy) will be defined as responders. 
• Responders will then undergo food reintroduction via the following protocol: 
a. Nuts for 2 weeks 
b. Fish for 2 weeks 
c. Repeat EGD at the end of 4 weeks with repeat biopsy 
d. If biopsy shows <10 eos per HPF, skip to step f 
e. If biopsy shows ≥ 10 eos per HPF, eliminate only nuts for 2 weeks then repeat EGD and i f <10 eos per HPF, then fish x 2 weeks with repeat EGD to confirm 
persistent histologic remission.   
f. Eggs for 2 weeks 
g. Soy for 2 weeks 
h. Repeat EGD at the end of 4 weeks with repeat biopsy 
i. If biopsy shows <10 eos per HPF, skip to step k 
j. If biopsy shows ≥ 10 eos per HPF, eliminate only eggs for 2 weeks then repeat 
EGD and if <10 eos per HPF, then soy x 2 weeks with repeat EGD to confirm persistent histologic remission.   
k. Wheat for 2 weeks 
l. Repeat EGD at the end of 2 weeks with repeat biopsy 
m. If biopsy shows <10 eos per HPF, skip to step o 
n. If biopsy shows ≥ 10 eos per HPF, eliminate wheat  and repeat EGD  
o. Milk for 2 weeks 
p. Repeat EGD at the end of 2 weeks with repeat biopsy 
q. If biopsy shows ≥ 10 eos per HPF, eliminate milk and repeat EGD  
6. SFED nonresponders will then undergo a directed elimination diet , with specific 
foods eliminated based on the results of the APT .  A clinically indicated r epeat EGD 
will be conducted 6 weeks later with 4 mid and 4 distal esophageal biopsies. 
 
There is minimal risk associated with this study.  As the in itial diagnostic evaluation and SFED 
are part of standard clinical care, there is no increased risk from the standpoint of endoscopy or conscious sedation for enrolled pa tients.    APT is generally  safe, with potential complications 
including active sensitization, dermatitis, hyper - or hypo- pigmentation, milia, pressure effect, 
and scar .  However, reported rates of these complications are far less than 1% and are easily 
reversible.  The most feared  risk is anaphylaxis, which is extremely rare and only described with 
bacitracin and neomycin which will not be used in this study.   
Statistical Analysis  and Feasi bility : 
 We plan on conducting a pilot study with a total enrollment of  20 patients for this study.  
In 2013, 230 patients with an ICD-9 code matching EoE were seen at our institution.  
Approximately 50% of these patients were nonresponders to PPI .  Consequently, even assuming 
only 50% recruitment, approximately 58 patients would be enrolled ove r a 12 month period. 
Primary Endpoint: 
1. Proportion of successfully treated SFED patients, defined by histologic and symptomatic response, with causative food identified by APT 
Secondary Endpoints: 
2. Proportion of EoE patients with histologic response to an APT directed diet in nonresponders to SFED 
3. Proportion of EoE patients with symptomatic response to an APT directed diet in nonresponders to SFED 
4. Proportion of EoE patients with histologic response to the SFED 
5. Proportion of EoE patients with symptomatic response to the SFED  
 
References:  
1. Kelly KJ, Lazenby AJ, Rowe PC, Yardley JH, Perman JA, et al.  Eosinophilic esophagitis 
attributed to gastroesophageal reflux: improvement with an amino -acid based formula.  
Gastroenterology 1995; 109: 1503-1512 
2. Markowitz JE, Spergel JM, Ruchelli E, Liacouras CA.  Elemental diet is an effective treatment for eosinophilic esophagitis in children and adolescents.  Am J Gastroenterol 2003; 98: 777-782 
3. Peterson KA, Byrne KR, Vinson LA, Ying J, Boynton KK, et al.  Ele mental diet induces 
histologic response in adult eosinophilic esophagitis.  Am J Gastroenterol 2013; 108: 759-766 
4. Kagalwalla AF, Sentongo TA, Ritz S, Hess T, Nelson SP, et al.  Effect of six-food 
elimination diet on clinical and histologic outcomes in eosinophilic esophagitis.  Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol  2006; 4: 1097-1102 
5. Gonsalves N, Yang GY, Doerfler B, Ritz S, Ditto AM.  Elimination diet effectively treats eosinophilic esophagitis in adults; food reintroduction identifies causative factors.  Gastroenterology 2012; 142: 1451-1459 
6. Lucendo AJ, Arias A, Gonzalez- Cervera J, Yague-Compadre JL, Guagnozzi D, et al.  
Empiric 6 -food elimination diet induced and maintained prolonged remission in patients 
with adult eosinophilic esophagitis: a prospective study on the food cause of the disease.  J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013; 131: 797-804 
7. Molina- Infante J, Martin -Noguerol E, Alvarado- Arenas M, Porcel -Carreno SL, Jimenez -
Timon S, et al.  Selective elimination diet based on skin testing has suboptimal efficacy 
for adult eosinophilic esophagitis.  J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012; 130: 1200-1202 
8. Spergel JM, Andrews T, Brown-Whitehorn TF, Beausoleil JL, Liacouras CA.  Treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis with specific food elimination diet directed by a combination of skin prick and patch tests.  Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2005; 95: 336-343 
9. Spergel JM, Brown-Whitehorn T, Beausoleil JL, Shuker M, Liacouras CA.  Predicitive 
values for skin prick test and atopy patch test for eosinophilic esophagitis.  J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2007; 119: 509-511 
10. Assa’ad AH, Putnam PE, Collins MH, Akers RM, Jameson SC, et al.  Pediatric pateints with eosinophilic esophagitis: an 8-year follow up.  J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007; 119: 
731-738 
 