 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol  
Measurement of Agricultural and Dietary Glyphosate 
Exposure among Pregnant Women  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
June 30 , 202 2 
1  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................  PAGE  4 
1.1 Organization of this  Document  
1.2 General Information for Lab  Members  
1.3 Terminology  
1.4 New Lab Member Training  Requirements  
1.5 Scope  
 
 
2. RECRUITMENT  ................................ ................................ ..................  PAGE  8 
2.1 Summary of  Methods  
2.2 Materials*  
2.3 Procedures  
 
 
3. ENROLLMENT &  INITIALCONTACTLESS  MEETING  ............  PAGE  11 
3.1 Summary of  Methods  
3.2 Materials*  
3.3 Procedures  
 
 
4. WEEKLY URINE  SAMPLE  COLLECTION  ................................ . PAGE  15 
4.1 Summary of  Methods  
4.2 Materials*  
4.3 Procedures  
2  5. WEEKLY URINE SAMPLE  ANALYSIS&  STORAGE  .................  PAGE  18 
5.1 Summary of  Methods  
5.2 Materials*  
5.3 Procedures  
5.4 Weekly Urine Sample Labeling  System  
 
 
6. DIETARY  INTERVENTION  ................................ ..............................  PAGE  21 
6.1 Summary of  Methods  
6.2 Schedule  
6.3 Materials*  
6.4 Procedures  
 
 
7. DAILY URINE  SAMPLE  COLLECTION  ................................ ........  PAGE  27 
7.1 Summary of  Methods  
7.2 Materials*  
7.3 Procedures  
 
 
8. DAILY URINE SAMPLE  ANALYSIS&  STORAGE…  ..................  PAGE  30 
8.1 Summary of  Methods  
8.2 Materials*  
8.3 Procedures  
8.4 Daily Urine Sample Labeling  System  
3  9. URINE  SAMPLE  SHIPMENT  & GLYPHOSATE  ANALYSIS….  PAGE  35 
9.1 Summary of  Methods  
9.2 Materials  
9.3 Procedures  
 
 
*Materials Available Upon Request  
4  1. INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Organization of this  Document  
 
The standard operating procedures and associated materials for this studyare 
included in this compilation, outlining all of the fieldwork and laboratory 
activities to be carried out by the Curl Agricultural Health Lab as part of the 
study Measurement of Ag ricultural and Dietary Glyphosate Exposure 
among Pregnant Women . The documents are arranged in nine categories, 
each with the standard operating procedures for the following aspects of the 
study: 1) Introduction; 2) Recruitment; 3) Enrollment & Initial Con tactless 
Meeting; 4) Weekly Urine Sample Collection; 5) Weekly Urine Sample 
Analysis & Storage; 6) Dietary Intervention; 7) Daily Urine Sample 
Collection; 8) Daily Urine Sample Analysis & Storage; and 9) Urine Sample 
Shipment & Glyphosate Analysis.  
1.2 General  Information for Lab  Members  
 
The procedures  presented  in these  standard  operating  procedures  are intended 
to ensure the collection of high -quality data, and lab members should follow 
them at all  times.  
 
To ensure no COVID -19-specific risks, no more than two lab members will 
be in the lab at the same time. Such interaction with comply with all Boise 
State University policies, will only occur when required and will follow all 
standard COVID -19 safety guidel ines, including face masks, social 
distancing, and frequent hand washing. Masks will be worn in the lab and in 
the Environmental  Research  Building  (ERB)  at all times,  and social  distancing 
protocols will be followed. Before returning to the Boise State Uni versity 
campus after scheduled breaks or campus closures, all lab members will 
follow university guidelines for COVID -19 testing and isolation, if required. 
All lab members will participate in a weekly or bi -weekly virtual meeting to 
remain up -to-date and aligned on tasks. There will be no face -to-face 
interactions  between  lab members  and potential  or enrolled  study  participants.  
 
All communication with participants and any potential participants will be 
done via their preferred method of communication (call or text) and in their 
preferred  language.  In most  instances  in this protocol  it is assumed  that text is 
the preferred method o f communication for participants once enrolled in  this 
5  study.  In addition  to collecting  and testing  urine  samples,  as well as managing 
food ordering  and delivery  activities,  lab members  will also be responsible  for 
keeping clear and thorough records of these activities. Accurate, detailed 
documentation is a vital part of the data collection process. The following 
guidelines will help lab members in completing the forms included in this 
document and logging  activities:  
 
• Be compulsive  in record  keeping.  It is better  to record  too much 
information than not enough. After the data are collected, these 
records will be the only way of knowing what occurred during 
sample collection and in the  lab. 
 
• Always use pen (no  pencils).  
 
• If a record on a form ne eds to be changed, draw a single line 
through the entry that needs to be changed, write in thecorrect 
information, and then write the date of the change and the 
initials of the lab member making the  change.  
 
• If a mistake is made or there are deviations fro m protocol, 
indicate this on the associated form. This is very importantin 
helping the data analysts identify factors that may affect  data 
quality.  
 
• Always use 24 hour (i.e. military)  time. 
 
1.3 Terminology  
 
The following abbreviations are used throughout this document:  
 
IRB IRB stands for Institutional Review Board. This is a 
committee that protects the rights and welfare of human 
subjects recruited to participate in research conducted 
through Boise State  University.  
 
ERB  ERB stands for Environmental Research Building. This 
building is located on the Boise State University main 
campus, and houses the Curl Agricultural Health  Lab. 
6  CAHL  CAHL stands for Curl Agricultural Health Lab. The 
CAHL is located in the ERB, room 3106, at Boise State 
University.  
 
WIC  Clinic  WIC  stands  for Women,  Infant,  and Children.  Recruitment 
for this study will be completed in cooperation with WIC 
clinics in the Southwest, Central Southwest, Central, and 
South Central Health Districts of Idaho. This includes 
clinics in Caldwell and Nampa (Southwest); Boise, 
Meridian, and Garden City (Central); and Twin Falls, 
Shoshone, Gooding, Jerome, and Heyburn (South 
Central).  
 
SG SG stands  for specific  gravity.  CAHL  lab members  will be 
testing the specific gravity of the participants’ urine 
samples.  
 
DI DI stands for deionized water. The refractometer used for 
measuring  specific  gravity  will be cleaned  using  DI water.  
 
CDC  CDC stands for the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. This entity will be responsible for analyzing 
all urine  samples  collected  in this study.  At the conclusion 
of the urine  sampling  component  of this study,  all samples 
will be shipped to a laboratory at the CDC for glyphosate 
analysis.  
 
K01 K01 refers to the Mentored Research Scientist 
Development Award, the funding for this  project.  
 
 
1.4 New Lab Member Training  Requirements  
 
IRB Training Requirements  
 
In order to i nteract with human subjects, new lab members must complete 
the CITI training, the IRB Additional Personnel Form, and the IRB 
Modification Form.  
7  Lab Training Requirements  
 
Lab Training  
 
All new lab members  will receive  general  lab training  prior  to involvement  in 
the study, although the manner in which this training occurs will depend on 
the current rules regarding COVID -19 safety.  
 
CAHL Shared Research Drive and K01 Database  
 
All electronic documentation will be stored in a protected Microsoft Access 
document entitled “K01 Database” located on a shared research drive 
operated  through  Boise  State  University.  In order  to access  the shared  research 
drive, all new lab members will email Ms. Spivak and ask her to request 
security  access.  
 
CAHL Calendar and Google Sheets  
 
All scheduling will be electronically documented in the password protected 
CAHL Calendar, and all cryovial storage locations will be electronically 
documented in the  password protected CAHL Google Sheets.  
 
1.5 Scope  
 
Glyphosate is the most commonly used herbicide in the world. This increase 
has been  driven,  in large  part, by the introduction  of glyphosate -resistant  crops 
such as “Roundup Ready” corn and soybeans. In Idaho , nearly a quarter 
million acres of Roundup Ready sugarbeets are cultivated each  year.  
Human  exposure  to glyphosate  and its formulations  may occur  through 
dietary,  agricultural  and residential  pathways.  Despite  its extensive  use, 
frequent  presence  in foodstuffs  and environmental  media,  and potential 
toxicity, current exposure levels in human populations are not well 
documented. However, several studies have suggested that in utero 
exposure to glyphosate and glyphosate formulations may have 
reproductive  effects and adversely impact developing fetuses. This 
study therefore aims to quantify pathways of glyphosate exposure 
among pregnant  women.  
8  2. RECRUITMENT  
 
2.1 Summary of Methods  
 
This study will involve recruiting 40 pregnant women in their first  trimester 
to measure residential and dietary glyphosate exposure throughout their 
pregnancies. This will be done in cooperation with local WIC clinics.  
 
2.2 Materials  
 
WIC Clinic Collaboration  
 
• Introduction  to Study  and Recruitment  Video  for WIC  Staff 
(https://youtu.be/pFH3MIELXNU ) 
 
• Video for Potential Participants (English:  
https://youtu.be/sOG0lppKzUw  or Spanish:  
https://youtu.be/p75mIj0hwrc ) 
 
• Recruitment Flyer*  
 
• Index Card  Flyer*  
 
• Slip for Potential Participant Contact  Information*  
 
Contacting Potential Participants  
 
• Completed Slip for Potential Participant Contact  Information  
 
• Recruitment Scripts*  
 
• Eligibility  Questionnaire*  
 
• Cell phone with One Talk  App 
• CAHL  Calendar  
 
• K01 Database  
9  2.3 Procedures  
WIC Clinic Collaboration  
WIC Clinic Collaboration  
 
The staff at the WIC clinics will watch the Introduction to Study and 
Recruitment Video for WIC Staff to provide them with general information 
about the study and the virtual study recruitment process. During 
appointments with cli ents, the staff will show the Video for Potential 
Participants  to women  who are thought  to meet  eligibility  requirements  based 
on available information, or this video may be emailed to these women from 
the WIC staff to watch at their convenience. This vide o will be provided to 
potential participants in their preferred language, either English or Spanish. 
This video will instruct them to inform their WIC staff if they are interested 
in participating. The WIC staff will then complete a Slip for Potential 
Participant Contact Information with the potential participant’s name and 
contact information in the participant’s preferred language, English or 
Spanish. The WIC clinic staff will fax the completed Slip for Potential 
Participant Contact Information to Dr. Cur l or will call Dr. Curl to relay 
potential  participant  information.  The Recruitment  Flyer  and Index  Card  Flyer 
can be used by the WIC staff to aid in recruitment either by emailing these 
documents to potential participants or printing these documents for u se in the 
clinics should face -to-face appointments at the WIC clinics take place. This 
process will continue until recruitment is  complete.  
 
Documentation  
 
Dr. Curl will record all information contained in each Slip for Potential 
Participant Contact Inform ation in the K01 Database. Dr. Curl will also 
perform an initial eligibility screening of each potential participant’s address 
and due date. If a potential participant is eligible after the initial screening, a 
lab member will attempt to contact her.  
 
Cont acting Potential Participants  
 
Contacting Potential Participants  
 
A lab member will contact the potential participant during her preferred 
contact time and in her preferred language via her preferred contact method  
10  no more than two days after receiving the Slip for Potential Participant 
Contact Information. If the potential participant is contacted via text message 
(using the Text Message Recruitment Script), a phone call will be arranged 
for that time (if available)  or for a later date to cover the Phone Recruitment 
Script and Eligibility Questionnaire. If contacted via phone call but the 
potential participant does not answer, a voicemail will be left in accordance 
with the Voicemail Recruitment Script if the potential participant has a 
voicemail option set -up. If contacted via phone call and the potential 
participant does answer, the lab member will cover the Phone Recruitment 
Script  and Eligibili ty Questionnaire.  However,  another  call can be arranged  if 
the potential participant is not available to talk at that  time.  
 
Determining Eligibility and Scheduling  
 
Once the potential participant is contacted via a phone call, the lab member 
will recite th e Phone Recruitment Script. If the potential participant is 
interested in the study at this point, the lab member will administer the 
Eligibility Questionnaire, following the instructions on the form and asking 
all the necessary  questions.  This questionnai re will be completed  on paper  for 
proper study documentation purposes. If the participant is eligible, the lab 
member will then arrange a date and time to have an initial  meeting.  
 
Documentation  
 
Scheduled initial contact meetings will be documented in the  CAHL 
Calendar. All correspondence with any potential participant (regardless of 
interest in study or eligibility) will be recorded in the Potential Participant 
Contact Form in the K01 Database. This also includes any attempts to reach 
a potential particip ant by text or phone call, and if a voicemail is left. If the 
participant is uninterested or ineligible, the reason will also be recorded in 
that form and an “XX” will be placed in “Participant ID” field. If the 
participant is interested and eligible, all paper documents containing contact 
information, eligibility questions, and/or notes will be placed in the 
“Pending” file in the locked filing cabinet located in CAHL. If the 
participant is uninterested or ineligible, all paper documents containing 
contact information, eligibility questions, and/or notes will be placed in the 
“Uninterested/Ineligible” file located in the same locked filing cabinet.  
11  3. ENROLLMENT & INITIAL CONTACLESS  MEETING  
 
3.1 Summary of Methods  
 
After a woman has been determined eligible for the study and has indicated  a 
willingness to participate, a lab member will schedule and attend an initial 
contactless meeting that will include the Informed Consent process, 
Demographics  Questionnaire,  Pesticide  Exposure  Questionnaire,  collection  of 
the first weekly urine sample, and an explanation of the process for the 
remaining weekly urine sample collections. A Urine Chain of Custody Form 
has been  developed  to track  the movement  of all urine  samples  from  collection 
to final storage in the lab. Lab members will initial each step of sample 
transport on the log, and note any observations, deviations from sample 
handling protocols, and/or problems with each sample. Once back at CAHL 
the lab member will an alyze and store the first weekly urine  sample.  
3.2 Materials  
 
• Two Informed Consent  Forms*  
 
• Video for Informed Consent (English:  
https://youtu.be/cI -wEKWKVso  or Spanish:  
https:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=sL3WqtcT7Zk ) 
• Demographics  Questionnaire*  
 
• Pesticide Exposure  Questionnaire*  
 
• Video for Urine Collection Instructions (English:  
https://youtu.be/Gf -xqsx3mLI  or Spanish:  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WQ9MjRADA_o ) 
 
• Cell phone with One Talk  App 
 
• Supplies for first and second weekly urine sample  collections:  
 
a) Specimen cups with barcoded label for the first  and 
second week’s collections (week numbers 1 and 2, 
respectively) in separate sealable plastic  bags 
12   
b) Extra specimen  cup 
 
c) Two pairs of nitrile  gloves  
 
d) Two coolers  
 
e) Two ice packs  
 
f) Two Sharpies and a  pen 
 
g) Urine Chain of Custody  Form*  
 
h) $10 Gift  Card  
 
i) Urine Collection Instruction Form*  
 
j) Urine Collection Reminder  Poster*  
 
• CAHL  Calendar  
 
• K01 Database  
 
3.3 Procedures  
 
Supplies Preparation  
 
A lab member  will compile  and set out the materials  listed  above.  Hard  copies 
of all necessary papers will be placed in a folder labeled with the potential 
participant’s  ID number.  The lab member  will take all supplies  and this folder 
to the initial  meeting.  
Scheduling  
 
All scheduling, including any scheduling changes, will be recorded in the 
CAHL Calendar and in the K01 Database. The lab member will call or text 
(based on the potential participant’s preference) the potential participant one 
day prior to the scheduled mee ting as a reminder.  
13  Initial Contactless Meeting  
 
A lab member will conduct the initial contactless meeting with the potential 
participant in her preferred language. For any exchange of materials, the 
participant  should  be inside  her home  with the door shut while  the lab member 
drops  off materials  at her door while  wearing  a mask.  Once  the lab member  is 
back inside the car, the participant may come out and pick up the materials. 
Only one lab member should be present for this meeting so that two people 
are not traveling in the car together. This lab member will be fluent in the 
potential participant’s p referred language. At this meeting, the lab member 
will arrive and drop of the two copies of the Informed Consent Forms (in the 
preferred language) at the potential participant’s door that have already been 
signed and dated by the lab member. The lab membe r will then return to the 
car and call the potential participant to introduce themselves, instruct her to 
pick up the Informed Consent Forms, and tell her that these forms will be 
explained via video. The lab member will then text the link for the Video fo r 
Informed  Consent  to the potential  participant  in her preferred  language,  either 
English or Spanish. After the potential participant watches the video, the lab 
member will review the document and answer questions (if necessary) over 
the phone.  If the potential participant  agrees  to participate  in the study,  the lab 
member will then instruct the participant to sign and date both copies of the 
Informed Consent Form and keep one copy for herself and place one copy 
back  outside  for the lab member  to collect  and keep.  The lab member  will put 
this copy in the car to bring back to the lab. At this time, this woman is 
considered an official study participant, and will be assigned a participant ID 
number.  
 
The lab member will then conduct the Demographics Question naire and 
Pesticide  Exposure  Questionnaire  in the participant’s  preferred  language  over 
the phone, following the instructions provided at the top of these documents. 
After completion of both questionnaires, the lab member will inform the 
participant  that she can now provide  the first weekly  urine  sample  and explain 
that the urine sample collection process will be explained via video. The lab 
member  will then text the link for the Video  for Urine  Collection  Instructions 
to the participant in her preferred la nguage, English or Spanish. While the 
participant is watching this video, the lab member will drop off at the 
participant’s  door the following  supplies:  1) specimen  cup with barcoded  label 
for the first week’s collection (week number 1) in a sealed plastic bag; 2) a 
pair of nitrile gloves; and 3) a Sharpie. The video will instruct  theparticipant  
14  to call the lab member  to discuss  any questions  or concerns,  including  if there 
is an accident and an extra specimen cup is  needed.  
 
After the participant provides the first urine sample, she will place the 
specimen cup outside her door in the sealed plastic bag. The lab member will 
then collect the sample, ensure the collection da te and time have been 
provided  and that the cup is labeled  with the Participant  ID number,  and place 
it in the lab cooler with the lab ice pack to bring back to the lab. The lab 
member will also complete the appropriate sections of the Urine Chain of 
Custody Form. The lab member will then leave a $10 gift card and the 
following supplies for the seco nd week’s collection (week number 2) at the 
participant’s  door:  1) specimen  cup with barcoded  label  for the second  week’s 
collection in a sealed plastic bag; 2) a cooler for the participant to keep; 3) an 
ice pack for the participant     to      keep; 4) e xtra specimen cup to be used  
in case of an accident  and only when  barcoded  cup is not available;  and 5) the 
Urine Collection Instruction Form and Urine Collection Reminder Poster 
(both in the preferred language). Once back in the car, the lab member will 
call the participant and  instruct  her to pick up the supplies  and will review  the 
process for subsequent weekly urine sample collections as described in 
Section 4 of this document. The participant can use the Urine Collection 
Instruction  Form  as a reminder  on how to complete  the collection  process,  and 
the Urine Collection Reminder Poster as a reminder to collect samples 
weekly. The lab member will schedule subsequent weekly urine sample 
collections over the  phone.  
Documentation upon Returning to the Lab  
 
After  the initial  contactless  meeting,  the lab member  will return  to the CAHL. 
There, the lab member will place the first weekly urine sample in the 
refrigerator and complete the appropriate sections of the Urine Chain of 
Custody Form. This sample will rem ain in the refrigerator for no more than 
24 hours until analyzed. The cooler will be returned to the storage shelf and 
the ice pack will be placed back in the  freezer.  
 
The lab member will then document participant information in the K01 
database and paper  copies of materials will be placed in the locked filing 
cabinet.  At this time the lab member  should  analyze  and store  the weekly  urine 
sample as described in Section 5 of this  document.  
15  4. WEEKLY URINE SAMPLE  COLLECTION  
 
4.1 Summary of Methods  
 
As with the initial urine sample, all subsequent weekly urine samples will be 
collected, analyzed, and stored by lab members in a completely contactless 
manner. Weekly urine samples will be numbered sequentially. Each week, 
each study participant will prov ide a first morning void sample on a pre - 
scheduled day, and will place the sample in her cooler with her ice pack 
outside  her home.  A lab member  will then collect  that week’s  sample,  provide 
the participant with a specimen cup for the following week, and bring that 
week’s sample back to CAHL in a lab cooler with a lab ice pack. Once back 
at CAHL, the lab member will analyze and store the weekly urine  sample.  
 
4.2 Materials  
 
• Specimen cup with barcoded  label  
 
• Extra specimen  cup 
 
• Nitrile  gloves  
 
• Cooler  
 
• Ice pack  
 
• Urine Chain of Custody Form for the correct participant  ID 
 
• $10 Gift  Card  
 
• One Sharpie and  pen 
 
• Cell phone with One Talk  App 
 
• CAHL  Calendar  
 
• K01 Database  
16  4.3 Procedures  
 
Supplies Preparation  
 
A lab member will compile and set out the materials listed above. The Urine 
Chain of Custody Form will be taken from the folder in the locked filing 
cabinet labeled with the participant’s ID number. The lab member will take 
all supplies to the urine collec tion. 
Scheduling  
 
For weekly urine sample collections, participants will be informed at the 
initial contactless meeting of a pre -established date and time for weekly 
sample pick ups, which will be decided a priori by lab staff based on CAHL 
staff availabil ity to travel to certain locations on certain days and times. 
Scheduling changes will be considered should the pre -set day and time for 
weekly  sample  collection  not work  for a study  participant.  All scheduling  will 
be recorded in the CAHL Calendar. The lab member will call or text the 
participant one day prior to the scheduled pick up as a  reminder.  
 
Weekly Urine Sample Collections  
 
Each  week  on the pre-scheduled  day, participants  will be instructed  to provide 
a first morning  void in the specimen  cup with the barcoded  label  for that week, 
which was provided to them at the prior week’s collection. The participants 
will be instructed to use their previously provided Sharpie to record the date 
and time of collection  directly on the specimen cup. The sample should be 
provided the morning of the collection day (first morning void), and then 
placed  in the sealable  plastic  bag and into the previously  provided  cooler  with 
the ice pack.  This cooler  will then be placed  outside  the participant’s  home.  A 
lab member will then travel to each participant’s home to collect the urine 
sample. If the lab member arrives at a participant’s home and finds that the 
weekly urine sample has not been provided, the lab member will make 
reasonable attempts to contact the participant and collect the urine  sample.  
 
At collection, the lab member will ensure that the cup is labeled with the 
correct  Participant  ID number  and correct  week  number.  The cup will then be 
placed in the lab cooler wit h the lab ice pack to be taken back to CAHL. The 
lab member will leave in the participant’s cooler: 1) specimen cup with 
barcoded label for the following week’s collection in sealable plastic bag;  2) 
17  extra specimen cup to be used in case of an accident and only when  barcoded 
cup is not available; and 3) a $10 gift card for the sample just provided. At 
collection time, the lab member will complete the appropriate sections of the 
Urine  Chain  of Custody  Form.  The lab member  will ensure  that the participant 
filled in the date and time of collection on the cup label, and if this did not 
occur this will be noted in the Urine Chain of Custody Form, along with any 
other problems or deviations from  protocol.  
 
After each sample collection, a text message will be sent to each participant 
in her preferred language.  
 
If a participant does not provide a urine sample for a given week, the lab 
member  will document  the missed  week  on the Urine  Chain  of Custody  Form. 
This will be considered a missed week and that week number will not be 
reused the following week, and instead the next sequential week number will 
be used.  
 
Documentation upon Returning to the Lab  
 
After  collecting  the sample,  the lab member  will return  back  to CAHL.  There, 
the lab member will place the weekly urine sample in the refrigerator and 
complete the appropriate sections of the Urine Chain of Custody Form. This 
sample  will remain  in the refrigerator  for no more  than 24 hours  until analyzed 
for color, clarity and specific gravity, and stored at -80˚C. The lab member 
will then document  all information  in the K01 Database.  The lab member  will 
file the Urine Chain of Custody Form in the folder labeled with that 
participant’s ID number in the locked filing cabinet. At this time, the lab 
member should analyze and store the weekly urine sample as described in 
Section 5 of this  document.  
Final Weekly Urine Sample Collection  
When each participant is approximately 4 weeks away from her due date, a 
text message wi ll be sent to the participant in her preferred language to 
remind her to let us know once she gives birth. Once the participant informs 
us that her baby has been born, no more weekly urine samples will be 
provided or collected. Each participant will receiv e a $50 gift card for 
completion of the study.  
18  Gift Cards  
 
All gift card purchases and documentation will follow Boise State 
University rules and regulations.  
 
 
5. WEEKLY URINE SAMPLE ANALYSIS &  STORAGE  
 
5.1 Summary of Methods  
 
Weekly urine samples will be collected from participants and returned to 
CAHL in a lab cooler with a lab ice pack. Samples will be stored for no 
more than 24 hours under refrigeration at CAHL until analyzed and stored. 
During analysis, lab members will det ermine urine color, clarity, and 
specific gravity. Urine sample storage will occur immediately after urine 
sample analysis. Each sample will be aliquoted into four 4mL weekly 
cryovials  for storage.  These  will be stored  in a weekly  cryobox  in the CAHL  
-80˚C  freezer. At the conclusion of an individual’s participation in the  study 
(ideally when they give birth), one of the four 4 mL weekly cryovials from 
each week will be sent to the CDC for glyphosate analysis. The remaining 
three cryovials are duplicate samp les that will be stored in  thebiorepository.  
 
5.2 Materials  
 
Weekly Urine Sample  Analysis  
 
• Absorbent pads  
 
• Kimwipes  
 
• Cup containing ethyl  alcohol  
 
• Squirt bottle containing DI water  
 
• Nitrile  gloves  
19  • Pen 
 
• Urine Sample Characteristics  Log*  
 
• Color and Clarity  Guide*  
 
• Transfer  pipettes  
 
• Atago Urine Specific Gravity Refractometer, PAL  10-S 
 
• K01 Database  
 
Weekly Urine Sample Storage  
 
• Absorbent  pads 
 
• Nitrile  gloves  
 
• Eppendorf Plus Research Pipette and  tip 
 
• Four weekly cryovials with barcoded  labels  
 
• Weekly  Cryobox  
• Empty Cryobox at the lab  station  
 
• Google Drive Cryobox  Document  
 
 
5.3 Procedures  
 
Weekly Urine Sample Analysis  
 
Supplies Preparation  
 
Prior  to starting  urine  sample  analysis,  the lab member  will set up a lab station 
by placing the following supplies on an absorbent pad: 1) Kimwipes; 2) cup 
containing  ethyl  alcohol;  3) squirt  bottle  containing  DI water;  4) Atago  Urine  
20  Specific Gravity Refractometer, PAL 10 -S; 5) transfer pipettes; and 6) the 
appropriate urine specimen cup from the refrigerator. The lab member will 
also have  out the Color  and Clarity  Guide  and a Urine  Sample  Characteristics 
Log. A pair of nitrile gloves will be worn when handling urine  samples.  
 
Measurement of Color and Clarity  
 
The color and clarity of each urine sample will be noted through comparison 
with the Color and Clarity Guide and recorded on the Urine Sample 
Characteristic Log.  
 
Measurement of S pecific Gravity  
 
SG will be measured following the manufacturer’s instructions that  
accompany the refractometer. 
Documentation  
The lab member will complete the Urine Sample Characteristics Log, 
Information from the Urine Sample Characteristics Log will be recorded in 
the K01 Database. The paper copy of the Urine Sample Characteristics Log 
will then be filed in the folder labeled with the participant’s ID in the locked 
filing cabinet.  
 
Weekly Urine Sample Storage  
 
Supplies Preparation  
 
Urine sample storage should occur immediately after analysis. Prior to 
beginning  storage  procedures,  the lab member  will set the following  supplies 
out on a lab station on an absorbent pad (this can be the same absorbent pad 
used during analysis): 1) Eppen dorf Plus Research Pipette (set at 4.0 mL) 
and tip; 2) four 4 mL weekly cryovials with the appropriate barcoded  labels;  
3) one cryobox at the lab station; and 4) the appropriate urine specimen cup. 
A pair of nitrile gloves will be worn when handling urine samples.  
 
Weekly Urine Sample Storage  
 
Four mL of the urine sample will be pipetted into four separate 4 mL weekly 
cryovials using the Eppendorf Plus Research pipette and tip. Once all four of  
21  the weekly cryovials have been filled, the lab member will remove the 
weekly cryobox from the -80˚C freezer. This weekly cryobox will be placed 
at the lab station, and the newly filled weekly cryovials will then be 
transferred from the cryobox at the lab s tation and into the freezer weekly 
cryobox. The weekly cryobox in the freezer will only be removed from the 
freezer briefly for daily cryovial transfer, and it will be immediately returned 
to the freezer as quickly as possible.  
 
Documentation  
 
The lab memb er will record the specific cryovial label and cell number 
where each of the four weekly cryovials were placed in the freezer weekly 
cryobox. This will be recorded in the CAHL shared Google Drive Cryobox 
Document.  
 
6. DIETARY  INTERVENTION  
 
6.1 Summary of Methods  
 
The dietary  intervention  will take  place  over the course  of 17 days,  from  June 
14 to June 30. Participants will receive one week of conventional groceries 
and one week of organic groceries, the order of which will be randomly 
assigned.  Each  week,  each study participant  will shop  for up to $150  worth  of 
groceries using an online account at a local grocery store, and grocery orders 
will be delivered to participants. Participants will track their food intake each 
week using a Food Log. During the dietary intervention, participants will not 
provide  weekly  urine  samples  and will instead  provide  14 daily  urine  samples.  
 
6.2 Schedule  
 
The dietary intervention will be divided into two weeks referred to as “Week 
One” and “We ek Two.” Key dates during the dietary intervention, as well as 
key dates prior to starting the dietary intervention, are:  
22  May 24 -28: Dietary Intervention Reminder Flyers left in participant’s  
coolers  
 
June 3 -June 9: Personalized Week One Groc ery Flyer left in  
participant’s coolers  
 
June 7 -11: Week One Food Logs left in participant’s coolers  
 
June 13: Week One grocery orders placed  
 
 
June 14: Week One grocery orders delivered, participants begin to eat 
Week One groceries  
 
June 15: Washout day  
 
June 15 -21: Participants complete Week One Food Log 
June 16 -22: Week One daily urine sample collections  
June 17 -June 18: Personalized Week Two Grocery Flyer left in  
participant’s coolers  
 
June 21: Week Two grocery orders placed, Week Two Food Logs left  
in participant’s coolers  
 
June 22: Week Two grocery orders delivered, participants stop eating 
Week One groceries and begin to eat Week Two groceries  
 
June 23: Washout day  
 
June 22 -29: Participants complete Week Two Food Log 
June 24 -30: Week Two daily urine sample collections 
June 24: Week One Food Logs collected  
June 30: Week Two Food Logs collected  
23  6.3 Materials  
 
• Shared Research  Drive  
 
• Cell phone with One Talk  App 
 
• Dietary Intervention Reminder  Flyer*  
• Supplies for Week  One:  
 
a) Personalized Week One Grocery  Flyer*  
 
b) Week One Food  Log*  
 
• Supplies for Week  Two:  
 
a) Personalized Week Two Grocery  Flyer*  
 
b) Week Two Food  Log*  
 
6.4 Procedures  
 
Supplies Preparation  
 
Prior to beginning the dietary intervention, a lab member will create a new 
email account through Gmail for each participant. The lab member will then 
use this email to create an online account for each participant at the local 
grocery store.  
 
Grocery Ordering and Delivery  
 
During weekly urine sample collections from May 24 -May 28, a lab member 
will leave  the Dietary  Intervention  Reminder  Flyer  in the participants’  coolers 
in their preferred  language.  
 
Participants will be provided their own local grocery store account username 
and password by a lab member. Participants will receive a personalized flyer 
(described in more detail below) with instructions regarding how to log into  
24  their accou nt and shop for up to $150 worth of groceries (either conventional 
or organic, as randomly assigned) and select their preferred grocery delivery 
time.  
 
Participants will also be instructed to call or text a lab member via the One 
Talk App once grocery shop ping is complete. The lab member will then 
review the order to ensure that all items are available and correspond to the 
week in which the participant has been randomized (i.e., conventional or 
organic),  and that no prohibited  items  have  been  added  (e.g.,  no alcohol,  non- 
food items, items from the “Personal Care & Health” department, cigarettes, 
or lottery tickets). The lab member will contact the participant if there are 
questions  or concerns  about  the order.  After  the lab member  has reviewed  the 
order, h e/she will contact the participant to confirm her delivery address and 
preferred delivery time. The participant or a member of her household must 
be home at the time of grocery delivery. The grocery order will be placed by 
the lab  member.  
 
Participants wil l also be given a brief food log for each week, in which they 
will be asked to note any food or drinks they consume from food outside of 
their grocery order, including any meals from restaurants. Participants will 
also be asked to complete a Likert scale q uestion each day with the  following 
options: “Everything I ate was fromthe study,” “Most of what I ate was from 
the study,” “About half what I ate was from the study,” “A little bit of what I 
ate was from the study,” or “None of what I ate was from the  study.”  
 
Week One  
 
A lab member will leave a Personalized Week One Grocery Flyer in the 
participant’s cooler in her preferred language during weekly urine sample 
collections from June 3 -June 9. Each Week One Grocery Flyer will be 
personalized for each part icipant. This flyer will clearly indicate: 1) the 
participant’s username and password for her online local grocery store 
account,  2) whether  she should  shop  for conventional  or organic  groceries for 
this week, 3) how to complete her grocery shopping; 4) ho w to select her 
preferred grocery store location and delivery time frame, 5) the deadline for 
completing her grocery shopping, and 6) instructions to text or call lab 
members on the One Talk phone number once her grocery shopping is 
complete.  
25  On the day before the participant is scheduled to complete her Week One 
grocery shopping, the lab member will send a text to the participant in her 
preferred language reminding her to complete her order by 5:00 PM the 
following day, if she has not done so yet. 
 
Grocery orders for Week One will be delivered to participants on June 14. 
Participants will begin to eat their Week One groceries on June 14.  
 
The Week One Food Log will be left in each participant’s cooler in her 
preferred language by a lab member d uring urine sample collections on June 
7-11. Participants will complete the Week One Food Log from June 15 -June 
21. Participants  will be instructed  to leave  the completed  Week  One Food  Log 
in their coolers along with their daily urine samples on June 24, a nd a lab 
member will collect it on June  24. 
 
On June 14, after groceries have been delivered for Week One, the lab 
member will contact the participant in her preferred language to ensure the 
groceries were received, to remind her to complete the Week One F ood Log, 
and to remind her that daily urine sample collection will begin on June 16.  
 
Week Two  
 
A lab member will leave the Personalized Week Two Grocery Flyer in the 
participant’s cooler in her preferred language during daily urine sample 
collection  on June 17 or June 18. This flyer  will be similar  to the Personalized 
Week  One Grocery  Flyer,  but with appropriate  changes  made  for Week  Two.  
 
On the day before the participant is scheduled to complete her Week Two 
grocery shopping, the lab member will send a  text to the participant in her 
preferred language reminding her to complete her order by 5:00 PM the 
following day, if she has not done so yet.  
 
Grocery orders for Week Two will be delivered to participants on June 22. 
Participants will begin to eat their Week Two groceries on June 22.  
 
On the day before the participant is scheduled to receive her Week Two 
groceries, the lab member will send a text  to the participant in her preferred 
language reminding her to collect her urine sample as a first morning void  on 
the morning of June 22, prior to consuming any Week Two  groceries.  
26  The Week  Two Food  Log will be left in each participant’s  cooler  in her 
preferred language by a lab member during urine sample collections on  June 
21. Participants will complete the Week Two Food Log from June 22 -29. 
Participants  will be instructed  to leave  the completed  Week  Two Food  Log in 
their coolers along w ith their daily urine samples on June 30, and a lab 
member will collect it on June  30. 
 
On June 22, after the groceries have been delivered for Week Two, the lab 
member will contact the participant in her preferred language to ensure the 
groceries  were  received,  to remind  her to stop eating  Week  One groceries  and 
begin  eating  Week  Two groceries,  and to remind  her that there  will be no daily 
urine sample collection the following day, June 23, and daily urine sample 
collection will resume on June  24. 
 
On June 23, the lab member will contact the participant in her preferred 
language  to remind  her that daily  urine  sample  collection  will resume  the next 
day on June 24, to remind her to place her completed Week One Food Log  in 
her cooler along with her dail y urine sample, and to remind her to complete 
the Week Two Food  Log. 
 
On June 24, in addition to collecting the daily urine sample, the lab member 
will pick up the completed Week One Food Log.  
 
On June 29, the lab member will contact the participant in her preferred 
language to remind her to place her completed Week Two Food Log in her 
cooler along with her final daily urine sample the following morning, and to 
remind her that the study will resu me weekly urine sample collections the 
following week.  
 
On June 30, in addition to collecting the final daily urine sample and picking 
up the completed Week Two Food Log, the lab member will leave the 
materials  to resume  weekly  urine  sampling  the following  week.  The necessary 
weekly urine sample materials should be determined individually for each 
participant based on the week number last recorded prior to the dietary 
intervention.  
27  7. DAILY URINE SAMPLE  COLLECTION  
 
7.1 Summary of Methods  
 
Daily urine  samples will be provided during the dietary intervention during 
Week One, from June 16 -22, and during Week Two, from June 24 -30. 
Participants  will provide  a total of 14 daily  urine  samples.  Daily  urine  samples 
will be numbered sequentially. Each day, each  study participant will provide 
a first morning void sample and will place the sample in her cooler with her 
ice pack outside her home. A lab member will then collect that day’s sample, 
provide the participant with a specimen cup for the following day, and  bring 
that week’s sample back to CAHL in a lab cooler with a lab ice pack. Once 
back  at CAHL,  the lab member  will analyze  and store  the daily  urine  sample.  
 
Daily urine sample collections will follow the same protocol as described in 
Section 4 of this doc ument, with the following major deviations:  
 
• Lab members will collect and deliver daily urine samplecups, 
rather than weekly urine sample  cups 
 
• Lab members  will complete  a Daily  Urine  Chain  of Custody 
Form, rather than the Urine Chain of Custody  Form.  
 
• For non -local collections two days of daily urine samples will 
be collected during a two -day trip. On the first day a lab 
member will drive to that area, collect the daily urine samples 
for that day, transport the daily urine samples in a lab cooler 
with a  lab ice pack to a hotel, and store the daily urine samples 
in the study refrigerator at the hotel. The lab member will  spend 
the night at the hotel, and then on the second day the lab 
member will collect the daily urine samples for that day and 
bring the urine samples for both days back to CAHL in a lab 
cooler with a lab ice  pack  
 
• Participants will receive one $50 gift card at the end of the 
dietary intervention period if they provided all 14 daily urine 
samples, rather than receiving a $10 gift card for e ach sample 
collected  
28  7.2 Materials  
 
• Specimen cup with barcoded label in a sealable plastic bag  (day 
one) 
 
• Specimen cup with barcoded label for the following  day’s  
collection in a sealable plastic bag  
 
• Extra specimen  cup 
 
• Nitrile  gloves  
 
• Cooler  
 
• Ice pack  
 
• Daily Urine Chain of Custody Form for the correctparticipant 
ID* 
 
• One sharpie and pen  
 
• Cell phone with One Talk  App 
 
• CAHL  Calendar  
 
• K01 Database  
 
• Study  refrigerator  
 
• Hotel confirmation  number  
 
• $50 gift card (for the last day  only)  
29  7.3 Procedures  
 
Supplies Preparation  
 
The specimen cup with the barcoded label for the first day’s collection (day 
one) in a sealable plastic bag will be left in each participant’s cooler during 
June 7 -11, the last weekly urine sample collection before startin g the dietary 
intervention.  
 
For daily urine sample collections, a lab member will compile and set out the 
materials listed above. The Daily Urine Chain of Custody Form will be  taken 
from the folder in the locked filing cabinet labeled with the participant ’s ID 
number. The lab member will take all supplies to the urine  collection.  
Daily Urine Sample Collections  
 
Each  day, participants  will be instructed  to provide  a first morning  void in the 
specimen cup with the barcoded label for that day, which was provided to 
them at the prior day’s collection. The participants will be instructed to use 
their previously provided Sharpie to record the date and time of collection 
directly on the specimen  cup. The sample should be provided the morning of 
the collection day (first morning void), and then placed in the sealable plastic 
bag and into the previously  provided  cooler  with the ice pack.  This cooler  will 
then be placed outside the participant’s  home. 
 
Two lab members  will collect  local  daily  urine  samples  as described  in Section 
4 of this document.  The two lab members  will travel  separately  and divide  the 
number of  collections.  
 
One lab member will collect non -local daily urine samples as described in 
section 4 of this document, with the exception that non -local daily urine 
sample collections will occur daily during a two -day trip. For each two -day 
trip, a lab member will drive on  the first day (this will occur on June 16, 18, 
20, 24, 26, and 28), collect the daily urine samples for that day, transport the 
daily urine samples in a lab cooler with a lab ice pack to the hotel, and store 
the samples in the study refrigerator at the ho tel. The lab member will spend 
the night at the hotel, and then on the second day the lab member will collect 
the daily urine samples for that day (June 17, 19, 21, 25, 27, and 29). The lab 
member will then bring the urine samples for both days back to CAH L in a  
30  lab cooler  with a lab ice pack.  Daily  urine  sample  collected  from  the non-local 
area on June 22 and June 30 will be completed  by one lab member  in one day. 
 
The lab member will text the participant one day prior to each daily pick up 
as a reminder. After each sample collection, a text message will be sent to 
each participant.  
 
If a participant does not provide a urine sample for a given day, the lab 
member wil l document the missed day on the Daily Urine Chain of Custody 
Form. This will be considered a missed day and that day number will not be 
reused the following day; the next sequential day number will be used.  
 
Documentation upon Returning to the Lab  
 
After collecting samples, the lab member will return back to CAHL either 1) 
on the same  day for local urine  sample collections,  or 2) on the second day  of 
each two -day trip for non -local urine sample collections. There, the lab 
member  will place  the daily  urine  samples  in the refrigerator  and complete  the 
appropriate sections of the Daily Urine Chain of Custody Form. The samples 
will remain in the refrigerator for no more than 24 hours until analyzed. 
Samples  collected  on the first day of each two-day trip must  be prioritized  for 
processing on the same day they return to the  lab. 
 
Gift Cards  
 
A $50 gift card will be given to participants who provide all 14 daily urine 
samples.  
 
8. DAILY URINE SAMPLE ANALYSIS &  STORAGE  
 
8.1 Summary of  Methods  
 
Daily  urine  samples  will be collected  from  participants  and returned  to CAHL 
in a lab cooler with a lab ice pack. Each day, one or more lab member(s) will 
be responsible  for analyzing  and storing  all daily  urine  samples  arriving  in the 
lab that day. During analysis, the lab member will determine urine color, 
clarity, and specific gravity. Urine sample storage will occur immediately 
after urine  sample  analysis.  Each  sample  will be aliquoted  into two 4mL daily  
31  cryovials f or storage. These will be stored in the daily cryobox in the CAHL  
-80˚C freezer. In addition, 0.6 mL of each urine sample will be aliquoted into 
two 4 mL composite cryovials created for each participant for each week. 
These  will be stored  in the composite  cryobox  in the CAHL  -80˚C  freezer.  At 
the end of the dietary intervention, each participant will have two 4 mL 
composite  cryovials  that contains  0.6 mL of each daily  sample  for each week, 
representing  a weekly  composite  sample.  At the conclusion  of an individual’s 
participation in the study (ideally when she gives birth), one of the two 4 mL 
composite cryovials from each week will be sent to the CDC for glyphosate 
analysis (up to 2 total composite cryovials per participant: one for week one 
and one for week  two).  The remaining  composite  cryovials,  as well as the two 
daily 4 mL cryovials, will be stored in the  biorepository.  
 
8. 2 Materials  
Daily Urine Sample Analysis  
 
• Absorbent  pads 
 
• Kimwipes  
 
• Cup containing ethyl  alcohol  
 
• Squirt bottle containing DI  water  
 
• Nitrile  gloves  
 
• Pen 
 
• Urine Sample Characteristics  Log*  
 
• Color and Clarity  Guide*  
 
• Transfer  pipettes  
 
• Atago Urine Specific Gravity Refractometer, PAL  10-S 
 
• K01 Database  
32  Daily Urine Sample Storage  
 
• Absorbent  pads 
 
• Nitrile  gloves  
 
• Eppendorf Plus Research Pipette and  tip 
• Four cryovials with barcoded labels (two daily cryovialsand 
two composite cryovials)  
 
• Daily Cryobox and Composite  Cryobox  
 
• Google Drive Cryobox  Document  
 
8. 3 Procedures  
 
Daily Urine Sample Analysis  
Lab members will analyze the daily urine samples as described in Section  
5.3 of this document.  
 
Daily Urine Sample Storage  
 
Supplies Preparation  
 
Urine sample storage should occur immediately after analysis. Prior to 
beginning storage procedures, the lab member will set the following supplies 
out on a lab station on an absorbent pad (this can be the same absorbent pad 
used during analysis): 1) Eppen dorf Plus Research Pipette (set at 4.0 mL and 
then changed to 0.6 mL) and tip; 2) two 4 mL daily cryovials with the 
appropriate barcoded labels and two 4 mL composite cryovials with the 
appropriate barcoded labels; 3) one cryobox at the lab station; and 4)  the 
appropriate urine specimen cup. A pair of nitrile gloves will be worn when 
handling urine samples.  
33  Daily Urine Sample Storage (Daily Cryovials)  
 
Four mL of the urine sample will be pipetted into two separate 4 mL daily 
cryovials  using  the Eppendorf  Plus Research  pipette  and tip. Once  both of the 
daily  cryovials  have  been  filled,  the lab member  will remove  the daily  cryobox 
from the -80˚C freezer. This daily cryobox will be placed at the lab station, 
and the newly filled daily cryovials will then be transferred from the cryobox 
at the lab station and into the freezer daily cryobox. The daily cryobox in the 
freezer wil l only be removed from the freezer briefly for daily cryovial 
transfer, and it will be immediately returned to the freezer as quickly as 
possible.  
 
Daily Urine Sample Storage (Composite Cryovials)  
 
For the first daily urine sample collection of each week, 0.6 mL of the urine 
sample will be pipetted into two separate 4 mL composite cryovials using the 
Eppendorf Plus Research pipette and tip. Once both of the composite 
cryovials have been filled, the lab member will transfer the composite 
cryovials from the c ryobox at the lab station into the freezer composite 
cryobox. The composite cryobox will be immediately placed in the freezer  as 
quickly as  possible.  
 
Each day when the next daily urine sample is collected from a participant, 
another  0.6 mL from  that sampl e will  be aliquoted  into the two separate  4 mL 
composite  cryovials,  on top of the previously  frozen  sample.  This process  will 
be repeated until the composite cryovials contains 0.6 mL from each of the 
seven days, representing a weekly composite cryovial. The composite 
cryobox in the freezer will only be removed from the freezer briefly for 
aliquoting, and it will be immediately returned to the freezer as quickly as 
possible.  
 
Documentation  
 
The lab member will record the specific cryovial label and cell number 
where each of the two daily cryovials were placed in the freezer daily 
cryobox. This will be recorded in the CAHL shared Google Drive Cryobox 
Document. The lab member wil l also record the specific cryovial label and 
cell number where each of the two composite cryovials were placed in the  
34  freezer composite cryobox. This will also be recorded in the CAHL shared 
Google Drive Cryobox Document.  
 
9. URINE SAMPLE SHIPM ENT & GLYPHOSATE  ANALYSIS  
 
9.1 Summary of Methods  
 
Once all weekly and daily urine samples have been collected, analyzed, and 
stored for all 40 participants, two lab members will complete a quality 
assurance (QA) check of each cryovial to ensure that it is lab eled with the 
correct barcoded label and that it is placed in the correct cryobox and correct 
cell, and that this information correlates with the information in the K01 
Database,  as well as with the Google  Drive  Cryobox  Documents.  The QA will 
be done thoro ughly, but quickly, to prevent the thawing of the cryovials. 
Following the QA, the first of the four cryovials from every other week and 
the first composite  cryovials  from  each week  in the dietary  intervention,  along 
with a number of quality control vials and randomly selected cryovials, will 
be sent to the CDC for glyphosate analysis. These samples will be packaged 
by three lab members and then sent on dry ice to the CDC via Overnight Air 
Priority Shipping with  tracking.  
 
9.2 Materials  
 
Quality Assurance  
 
• Google Drive Cryobox Document  
 
• K01 Database  
 
• Nitrile  gloves  
 
• Frozen cryoboxes  
 
Sample Shipment  
 
• Twelve cryovial carrier boxes (labeled as box  1-12) 
35  • Twenty -four small absorbent  pads 
 
• Twenty -four rubber  bands  
 
• Twelve biohazard  bags 
 
• Shipping cooler  
 
• Shipping box  
 
• Shipping stickers  
 
• Shipping  tape 
 
• Nitrile  gloves  
 
• All weekly, composite, and daily cryoboxes in the -80˚C  freezer  
 
• Four absorbent pads  
 
• Five ice  packs  
 
• Five pounds of dry  ice 
 
9.3 Procedures  
 
Quality Assurance  
 
Weekly Urine Samples Electronic Documentation Check  
 
The electronic database documents containing information on the stored 
weekly urine sample collections and cryovials will be exported from their 
original source. All changes to any of these documents will be done on the 
exported copies and will be tracked. No changes will be made the original 
data sources.  
 
The lab member  will cross -check  the exported  forms  with the exported  aliquot 
boxes document. The lab member will highlight any info rmation on  the 
36  exported aliquot boxes document that does not match or that seems 
implausible. The lab member will briefly describe the issue in the margins of 
the exported aliquot boxes document. The lab member will refer to the Urine 
Chain of Custody Form as needed.  
 
Weekly Urine Sample Cryovials Check  
 
After completion of the Electronic Documentation Check, two lab members 
will cross -check the now highlighted exported aliquot boxes document with 
the frozen cryovials in order to 1) confirm that each cryovial is in the co rrect 
cell; 2) confirm  that each cryovial  is labeled  correctly;  and 3) clarify  any typos 
or resolve other issues in the exported aliquot boxes  document.  
 
Documentation and Correction  
 
After all the weekly cryoboxes have been checked and returned to the -80˚C 
freezer, the lab members will review all the highlighting and notes in the 
exported aliquot boxes document. Typos will be corrected as appropriate.  
 
Quality Assurance For Daily and Composite Urine Samples  
 
QA for the daily  and composite  urine  samples  will follow  the same  procedures 
as QA for the weekly urine samples as described  above.  
 
Sample Shipment  
 
Sample Selection  
 
Dr. Curl will select 600 cryovials to send to the CDC. This selection will 
include the first of the four cryovials from every other weekly urine sample 
collected  from  each participant  throughout  the study.  In addition,  based  on the 
weekly urine samples bei ng sent to the CDC, Dr. Curl will randomly select 
participant IDs and week numbers to serve as weekly urine sample quality 
controls. For these urine samples the second of the four cryovials will also  be 
sent to the CDC. Dr. Curl will also send the first of  the two composite 
cryovials from each week of the dietary intervention from each participant to 
the CDC, as well as all 14 daily cryovials from one participant fromeach day 
of the dietary intervention to serve as composite sample  qualitycontrol.  
37  Supplies Preparation  
 
Prior  to the shipment  of urine  samples  to the CDC,  three  lab members  will set 
up a shipping  station  in the lab with the following  supplies:  1) twelve  cryovial 
carrier boxes; 2) twenty -four small absorbent pads; 3) twenty -four rubber 
bands; 4) twelve biohazard bags; 5) shipping cooler; 6) shipping box; 7) 
shipping tape; 8) shipping stickers; and 9) four absorbent pads. The lab 
members will also have five  ice packs in the freezer and five pounds of dry 
ice in the -80˚C freezer, and will have the Aliquot Boxes Spreadsheet 
available  electronically.  
 
Packaging and Shipping  
 
Packaging will begin with weekly cryovials, then composite cryovials, and 
then daily cryovials. Cryoboxes will be pulled from the -80˚C freezer one at 
a time and the selected cryovials from that cryobox will be transferred to a 
cryovial carrier  box. 
 
The l ab members will place the five ice packs from the freezer at the bottom 
of the shipping  cooler  and place  two absorbent  pads on top. The lab members 
will then remove all twelve cryovial carrier boxes in biohazard bags  fromthe  
-80˚C freezer and place them in to the shipping cooler along with five pounds 
of dry ice. Finally, two more absorbent pads will be placed on top and the lid 
to the shipping cooler will be taped closed with one single strip of shipping 
tape running horizontally across the lid. The shippin g cooler will be placed 
into the shipping  box and the shipping  box will be taped  closed  with one single 
strip of shipping tape running horizontally across the box. No more tape 
should be used on the shipping cooler or shipping box as the dry ice in the 
shipment must not be completely sealed off from  oxygen.  
 
Appropriate shipping stickers will be place d on the shipping box, and the 
box will be transported for Overnight Air Priority Shipping with tracking 
with early morning arrival. The lab members will email the CDC to provide 
the tracking information, and will also request that the CDC confirm receipt 
of the samples and that all samples arrived frozen once the shipment arrives.  