1 | P a g e  
        
 
 
 
 
Cooling Vest May Reduce Heat Stress, Improve Thermal 
Comfort, and Preserve Cognitive Performance of Surgeons 
While Performing Surgery  
 
Version 4.0  
September 03 , 2020  
 
 
Daniel I. Sessler , Jill Byrne, and Colleagues  
 
 
Department of Outcomes Research  
Anesthesiology Institute  
Cleveland Clinic  
9500 Euclid Ave __ P77  
Cleveland, OH 44195   
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 2 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020   
Amendments:  
Protocol date changed f rom April 28, 2020 Version  2.0 - to July 15, 2020  Version 3.0:  
Page 7 of 16 under METHOD section changed the age limit from  30-65 years of age to 25 -65 years of age . 
 
Protocol date changed from July 15, 2020 Version 3.0 – to September 3, 2020 Version 4.0  
Page 7 of 16 under METHOD section changed the surgical helmet system from an exclusion to an inclusion as 
long as the system is consistently worn for each of the surgeon’s four cases.  
Page 9 of 16 under Secondary Outcome #1 - mean core temperature.  Oral t emperatures of the participants 
will be measured preoperatively and postoperatively prior to completing the C3B battery assessment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 3 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020   
INTRODUCTION  
Heat Stress is a serious problem affecting surgeons in operating facilities across the United  States 
and throughout the world.  Surgeons are literally drenched from perspiration while wearing impervious 
surgical gowns and protective clothing which increases the incidence of health related maladies, such 
as fatigue and dehydration (Satarifard, Gaei ni, & Choobineh, 2012; Nerbass et al., 2017), decreased 
thermal comfort , and alterations to cognitive performance (Berg et al., 2015), potentially increasing 
surgical errors (Zwolinska & Bogd an, 2012). Human beings respond to heat stress via a cascade of 
physiological responses (increased acute circulatory system response, central nervous system 
activation and molecular responses increase production of heat shock proteins to protect cells).  
These mechan isms are activated in an effort to adapt or normalize systemic and cellular responses of 
the body which initially improves brain function and ideally enhances cognitive performance (Logan & 
Barksdale, 2008), although repeated triggers to the stress respons e systems have a cumulative “wear 
and tear” impact on body functions which contribute to cognitive decline and other health related 
morbidities (Satarifard, Gaeini, & Choobineh, 2012; Logan & Barksdale, 2008).  
Decrements in cognitive performance  occur whe n core temperature increases by about 1⁰ C 
(Reinerste n et al. , 2008; Simmons et al., 2008). The level of cognitive decline depends on exposure 
duration, the intensity and complexity of the activity, andꟷ importantlyꟷ the degree of hyperthermia 
(Gauoa et al. , 2011; Simmons et al., 2008). There have been several heat stress studies performed in 
industrial settings and in climatic heat chambers.  Processing speed and reaction time, short -term 
memory, and decision are all impaired (Gaoua et al., 2011; Sun et al. , 2012; Piil et al., 2017; Mazlomi 
et al., 2017).  
Cooling the skin reduces the unpleasant sensations caused by excessive heat exposure (Simmons et 
al., 2008) . Localized cooling of the torso during systemic heat exposure reduces physiological stress 
by low ering body skin and core temperatures, decreasing heart rate, reducing sweat rate, and 
improving perception of thermal comfort (Chang, Song, & Yang, 2015). Cooling vests  worn under 
impervious surgical gowns serve as a heat sink and reduce unpleasant sensat ions and the symptoms 
of physiological stress (Smolander et al., 2004; Ke nney et al., 2011; Reinersten et al., 2008).  
We propose to test the primary hypothesis that wearing a cooling vest during surgery improves 
surgeons’ perception of thermal comfort . Secondary, we will test the hypothesis that wearing a 
cooling vest during surgery reduces surgeons’ mean -body temperature and  preserve s their 
cognitive performance.   
 
Specific Aims  
1. Our primary aim is to evaluate surgeons’ self -rated thermal comfort with and without a cooling 
vest during prolonged and strenuous surgery.  
Primary hypothesis : Surgeons’ self -rated thermal comfort is improved by wearing a cooling vest 
during prolonged and strenuous surge ry. 
2. A secondary aim is to evaluate surgeons’ mean -body temperature with and without a cooling 
vest during prolonged and strenuous surgery.   
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 4 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  Secondary hypothesis 1 : Surgeons’ mean -body temperature , estimated from core and mean -
skin temperature,  is reduced by wearing a cooling vest during prolonged and strenuous surgery.   
 
 
3. Another secondary aim is to evaluate surgeons’ cognitive performance with and without a cooling 
vest just after prolonged and strenuous  surgery.   
Secondary hypothesis 2 : Surgeons’ cognitive performance is  better  preserved by wearing a 
cooling vest during prolonged and strenuous surgery compared to the same surgeons’ cognitive 
performance without wearing a cooling vest during prolonged and strenuous surgery.   
4. An additional secondary  aim is to evaluate the surgeons’ perceived ergonomic workload with and 
without a cooling vest during a prolonged and strenuous surgery.  
Secondary hypothesis 3: Surgeons’ perceived ergonomic workload is less demanding by 
wearing a cooling vest during prol onged and strenuous surgery compared to the same surgeons’ 
perceived ergonomic workload without wearing a cooling vest during a prolonged and strenuous 
surgery.   
 
Background and Significance  
Heat stress is a serious problem affecting the physiological and  psychological responses of surgeons 
in operating rooms (OR) across the United States and throughout the world as body heat is trapped 
under protective impervious surgical gowns increasing body temperature (Satarifard, Gaeini, & 
Choobineh, 2012), possibly altering cognitive performance (Berg et al., 2015), and potentially 
increasing surgical errors (Zwolins ka & Bogdan, 2012). Physical efforts of individuals to adapt to 
higher temperatures, or acclimate, within an occupational environment is dependent on the  type of 
work performed, thermal condition and insulated layers of clothing worn (Zwolinska & Bogdan, 2012).  
Cooling systems are sometimes used to reduce thermal discomfort and to improve comfort, decrease 
sweating, and increase work prod uctivity (Lango e t al., 2009). In a met -analysis by C han, Song, and 
Yang (2015), the use of microclimate cooling systems in occupational settings attenuated increases 
in core temperature, sweat rates, and improved human performance.  Research does not exist to 
capture surg eons’ perceptions of comfort, skin and core body temperatures in real-time operating  
conditions and whether surgeons experience a degree of heat stress sufficient to impair their 
cognitive performance.  A gap in research also exists to identify whether a cooling vest intervention 
worn by surgeons while performing surgery will improve comfort and/or reduce negati ve physiological 
and psychological responses to heat stress (Lango et al., 2009).  
Environmental, Personal, and Situational OR Conditions Impacting 
Surgeons  
The Facility Guidelines Institute recommends the ambient temperature  levels in each OR are 
monitore d and maintained at 20 -24⁰C (68⁰ - 75⁰F) which contributes to heat stress experienced by 
surgeons.  AORN Standard Practice Guidelines, Safe Environment of Care Protocol states: Ambient 
temperature levels in each OR are monitored and maintained at 21 -24⁰C t o reduce hypothermia and 
improve surgical outcomes experie nced by patients (AORN, 2017). It is estimated that 20% of 
surgical patients experience unintentional hypothermia, core body temperature dropping below 36⁰C, 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  potentially increasing p erioperative com plications including delayed wound healing, surgical site 
infections, and surgical blood loss (Sessler, 2016).  
Regulated ambient operating room temperatures to protect vulnerable sedated patients from 
hypothermia may be warm for surgeons as their elevated  body temperatures predispose sterile 
surgical fields to contamination from surgeons’ sweat dripping onto the field (Berg et al., 2015). 
Additionally, the level and duration of discomfort experienced by surgeons at the field are also 
impacted by close phys ical proximity among operating members, patient warming devices, physical 
exertion, body position, and use of lead x -ray aprons which collectively contribute to elevated body 
temperatures, excessive fluid loss, and alterations in cognitive performance (Ber g et al., 2015; 
Nerbass et al., 2017).  
Surgical gowns and additional layers of personal protective clothing have a considerable impact on 
the body temperature and comfort of the surgeon (Zwolinska & Bogdan, 2012). Surgical gowns are 
medical products that comply with occupational safety regulations instituted by the Association for the 
Advancement of Medical Inst rumentation (AAMI) to ensure barrier protection to prevent high -risk 
contaminations, penetration by liquids, or any microbial transmission (Reinersten et al., 2015). The 
gowns are manufactured from nonwoven material fibers, which are bonded to each other b y friction 
and/or cohesion and/or adhesion (AORN, 2017). In addition to the impervious gowns, additional 
safety requirements stipulate surgical personnel wear goggles, glasses with side guards face masks , 
knee -high shoe covers, waterproof aprons, or additi onal sleeve layers to be worn, dependent on the 
type of surgery, and double gloving to reduce the risk of infection (AORN, 2017).   
Physiological and Psychological Responses to Heat Stress  
Human beings respond to  heat stress  via a cascade of acute physiological responses to initially 
enhance the body’s response to heat stress in which systemic and cellular functions attempts to 
regulate and regain control throughout the stress event (Bouchama & Knochel, 2002). The initial 
reactions include an acute circulatory system response, central nervous system activation, and 
molecular responses to increase production of heat shock proteins which work to protect cells from 
damage or cell death (Bouchama & Knochel, 2002). Following the ac ute response, most individuals 
acclimate to physiologic changes to maintain a balance state within body systems. Repeated daily 
exposure and prolonged contact to heat stress predispose some individuals to develop adverse 
physiological and psychological res ponses to heat stress (Conrad & Bimonte -Nelson, 2010; Moran et 
al., 2006; Logan & Barksdale, 2008).  
Initially, an acute cir culatory system response to heat stress occurs whereby cardiovascular 
activity diverts blood flow to the body surfaces, increasing p eripheral blood volume to bring about 
profuse sweating (Horowitz & Robinson, 2007) which evaporates in ambient temperatures and 
naturally cools the body (Amorium et al., 2015) unfortunately, not for surgeons as sweat is blocked 
from evaporating. At the sam e time the  cardiovascular activity occur s, the central nervous system 
reacts to warm temperatures and moderate physical activity through activation of the hypothalamic -
pituitary -adrenal (HPA) axis (Nater, Skoluda, & Strahler, 2013). Initial activation of t he HPA axis, the 
body’s stress response, or the fight -flight reaction, protects organs from permanent harm by 
increasing alertness and protecting against pathogens by boosting the immune system response 
(Ryann et al., 2016). Released from the HPA axis, glu cocorticosteriods, primary stress hormones, are 
sent to bind with available glucose in the bloodstream which are routed to the brain to support 
cognitive performance and decision making functions  during stressful situations (Ryann et al., 
2016).  
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 6 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  At the molecular level , cells initially respond to heat stress by synthesizing highly conserved sets of 
polypeptides, heat shock proteins (HSPs), the stress proteins essential for survival at normal and 
elevated temperatures (Kregel, 2002). Elevated levels of HSPs measured during heat exposure 
suggest these proteins play an important role in maintaining cellular homeostasis, or a balance state, 
in response to heat stress (Horowitz et al., 2004). Cell protection is a critical function of HSPs to 
develop thermotoleran ce, a defense mechanism of cells to protect tissue  from damage associated 
with heat stress exposure by increasing transcription (production) of HSPs, creating  a temporary state 
of heat tolerance or balance (Horowitz et al., 2004).  
Following the initial ra pid acute responses of the systemic and cellular processes, individuals 
acclimate, or acclimatize to heat stress, by increasing levels of extracellular fluid and blood plasma, 
activation of stress hormones, and conservation of salt by the kidneys which imp rove the body’s 
ability to resist dehydration (Bouchama & Knochel, 2002) and increase a balance state of adaptation 
(Horowitz & Robinson, 2007). Additionally, allostasis, an advanced flexible version of homeostasis, 
signals the body to remain stable during  exposure to stressful events. This complex process 
continually monitors and adapts the variability occurring among hormones, temperature, and blood 
pressure (Logan & Barksdale, 2008).  
Chronic activation or daily exposure to heat stress threatens the body ’s efforts to maintain a 
balanced state, eventually becoming fatigued and physiological and psychological responses 
deteriorate with repeated exposure to heat (Logan & Barksdale, 2008). Each time the stress response 
is activated, physiological adjustments are made, which have a cumulative “ wear and tear ” effect on 
body functions (Satarifard, Gaeini, & Choobineh, 2012; Logan & Barksdale, 2008).  Several adverse 
physiological reactions occur when permane nt triggers continually activate the release of stress 
hormones from the neuroendocrine system resulting in elevated levels of corticosteroids, which alter 
the immune system, suppress the digestive system, and burden the reproductive system (Nadar 
Skoluda, & Strahler, 2013; Logan & Barksdale, 2008).  Long -term exposure to elevated corticosteroids 
increases the occurrence of anxiety, depression, heart disease, and weight gain contributing to health 
related morbidities ( Satarifard, Gaeini, & Choobineh, 2012). The effects of elevated and prolonged 
exposure to gluco corticosteriods  may leave the hippocampus region of the brain vulnerable to 
potential injury neurotoxicity or metabolic challenges (Conrad & Bimonte -Nelson, 2010) potentially 
resulting in dysregulation of the HPA axis and  alterations in cognitive performan ce (McEwen, 
1998).  
Cognitive performance is a brain function allowing individuals to use acquired knowledge to work 
through mental processes and exposure to stress (Berg et al., 2015). The brain controls voluntary 
and involuntary activities including, but  not limited to; attention, perception, mood, emotion , appetite, 
and memory (Kamphuis et al., 2012). Alterations in voluntary and involuntary activities resulting from 
heat stress depend on the length and source of heat exposure, the length an d complexity  of the duty 
to be performed and the skill level of the participant (Gaoua et al., 2011). Individuals who have 
acquired high skill levels and experience with particular repetitive tasks may be able to tolerate 
subsequent effects of heat stress for a longer duration of time (Hancock, Ross, & Szalma, 2007). 
Several heat stress studies performed in industry and simulated climatic heat chambers, measuring 
processing speed and reaction time short -term or working memory, and executive function of 
participants, rep orted an increased number of errors and impairment of cognitive performance 
(Gaoua et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2012; Piil et al., 2017; Mazlomi et al., 2017).  
Cooling the body is the most effective means of improving human performance (Chan, Song, & Yang, 
2015). Cognitive functions of the brain respond to cooling by improving perceptions of thermal 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 7 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  comfort, decreasing cardiovascular strain, and less decrements to cognitive performance are noted 
(Goaua et al., 2011; Simmons et al., 2008; Chan, Song, & Yang, 2 015).  
Surgeons experience discomfort from elevated body temperatures while performing surgery, but the 
presence and/or absence and the amount of alterations to cognitive performance are not known 
(Berg et al., 2015; Lango et al., 2009; Zwolinska & Bogdan 2011) and if cooling t he body preserves 
resources, reduces threats to cognitive performance , and reduces perceptions  of a physically 
demanding ergonomic workload .  
Environmental conditions (ambient OR temperatures, overhead lighting, electrical equipment),  
personal factors (personal pr otective equipment, metabolic heat, core and skin temperatures ) and 
situational factors (type and length of a surgical procedure , perceived ergonomic workload ) contribute 
to the presence of occupational heat stress experienced  by surgeons performing surgical procedures. 
Surgeons’ physiological and psychological responses to heat stress are measureable through a self -
reported response to thermal comfort  and perceived ergonomic workload , skin and core body 
temperature sensors, an d a cognitive battery assessment. The physiological and psychological 
measure of surgeons’ responses to heat stress can be influenced by wearing a cooling vest during 
the surgical procedure (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1. Conceptual Framework.  
 
Methods  
The trial  will be conducted with Cleveland Clinic  IRB approval and consent from participating 
surgeons. The trial will be registered at ClinicalTrials.gov. A full statistical analysis plan will be 
developed before any data are evaluated. Reporting will be consisten t with the CONSORT guidelines.  
Subject selection    
Inclusion criteria are: 1) surgeons who perform  elective  major  orthopedic surgery such as total hip 
and knee arthroplasties  scheduled  for 90 to 150 minutes  at the Cleveland Clinic Main Campus ; 
2) Orthopedic surgeons  ages of 25-65 years old , as body  temperatures may be  lower and less sta ble 
 

 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 8 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  in the elderly  (Waalen & Buxbaum, 2011 ), who operate frequently enough to  participate in four cross -
over cases ; 3) Surgical procedures in which surgical helmet systems or airborne barrier protection 
devices are worn are included as long as the surgeon wears the system for all four cases being 
measured.  
Exclusion criteria are: 1 ) Surgical cases that require surgeon s to sit on stools during the procedure, 
which may  impact tempe rature and energy expenditure ; 2) Surgeons who report having a recent 
illness  within 24 hours prior to the surgery , symptoms producing a febrile condition; 3) Surgeons who 
worked the previous evening ; and  4) Surgeons who wear lead X -ray gowns.  
Surgeon research subjects  will be recruited by posting information about the study on the Orthopedic 
and Rheumatology Institute website. All human subject research protocols instituted by the Cleveland 
Clinic will be followed and documented. Partici pating surgeons will be advised of all known risks and 
benefits of study as well as information describing the requirements of the study and data 
management. The surgeons will be advised of the option to stop participation at any time. Written 
informed con sent will be obtained from each surgeon.  
Participating surgeons will be assigned a study number and only this number will be included on 
case -report forms. A single cross -linking record will identify specific surgeons for the purpose of 
organizing cross -over cases. Otherwise, analysis will be based on study number and no individual 
data will be linked to specific surgeons. Case -report forms will be kept locked in a secure research 
office and data -acquisition iPads will be encrypted.   
We do not plan to obtai n consent from patients for this comparative effectiveness trial that evaluates 
an FDA exempt  device designed to improve surgeons’  comfort.   
Protocol  
We propose a randomized cross -over trial using a uniform and strongly balanced 4 -period design in 
which will include four operations for each surgeon .  Surgeons will be randomized to 1 of 4 
sequences: ABBA, BAAB, AABB or BBAA.  The design is “uniform” in that each treatment appears 
the same number of t imes within each sequence (u niform within sequence) and if each treatment 
appears the same number of times within each period (uniform within each period).  It is strongly 
balanced with respect to first -order carryover effects because each tr eatment precede s every other 
treatment, including itself , the same number of times.  
 
We chose this design versus a parallel group design because 1) it removed the potential for 
confounding, even with a small sample size, as comparisons are made within subject, and not 
between subjects ; 2) the design is very efficient since within -subject comparisons are correlated, 
obviating the need for a larger study which would also not be  practical  in this setting.  Also, no 
differential car ryover effect is expected in this study, r emoving one of the main concerns with 
crossover trials.  
Surgeons will be randomly assigned to use either the CoolSource™ cooling vest  (worn between 
scrubs ) and a conventional surgical gown  for each of 4 surgeries . Sequence of treatments within   
surgeons w ill be randomized ( ABBA, BAAB, AABB or BBAA ), and determined using the PLAN 
procedure in SAS, such that each surgeon will wear vest and non -vest twice.  The sequencing will not 
be shared with any study personnel.  A llocation for each case will be concealed with a web -based 
system that will be accessed only shortly before surgery.  
We will target an ambient temperature of  21°C ± 1°C, and try to maintain the same temperature of 
each of the four study cases for each surgeon.  The CoolSource ves t holds six reusable cooling packs 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 9 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  located bilaterally on the shoulders, angled flank along the base of the rib cage, and along each side 
of the spine, mid -back. The vest will be donned over hospital -issued scrubs after all temperature 
sensing devices have  been applied and before  surgical hand scrub bing. Surgeons will wear the vest 
throughout surgery, and for a few additional minutes while postoperative assessments are made 
(details below).   
The w eight of the disposable cooling vest is 1 kg which is evenly  distributed  over both shoulders. The 
cooling  packs have an insul ated cover to reduce condensation or sweating while seated inside the 
vest pocket . The flexible frozen reusable cooling packs will be inserted into each of the six pockets 
and the  vest belt w ill be tied to hold the cooling packs securely. The disposable  cooling vests will be 
discarded after each case,  and the cooling packs returned to a freezer.  
Measurements  
A questionnaire detailing demographic information (age, height, weight, age, ethnicit y, and education 
level) training level, specialty program, and estimated past case volume will be completed by 
participating surgeons before their first case.   
Temperature of the freezer holding the cooling packs will be assessed before randomization to 
confirm that the temperature is <0°C.  
Before every surgical case starts the time the surgeon dons the cooling vest and the time the surgeon 
dons the sterile surgical gown will be recorded .  
Primary Outcome will be self -rated thermal comfort .  Immediately after surgery, while still 
gowned , surgeons will rate their thermal comfort on a 0 -10 Likert scale, with 0 representing extreme 
cold, 5 being thermal comfort, and 10 representing extreme heat. Two points on the 11 -point Likert 
scale will be con sidered a clinically important difference.  
Secondary  Outcome #1  - mean core temperature .  The first secondary  outcome will be the mean 
core temperature for a case, calculated as the time -weighted average over the taken measurements. 
The surgeon’s core bod y temperature will be monitored by a validated wireless wearable 
iThermonitor WT701 biosensor  which  estimates core temperature within ±0.5⁰C (Pei et al., 2018). 
The sensor will be applied to the surgeon’s right axilla 15-20 minutes prior to the surgical hand scrub 
performed at the start of surgery and secured with an adhesive cover . A small patch of  axillary  hair 
will be clipped or shaved as necessary . After the temperature sensors are applied , the surgeon’s oral 
temper ature will be measured by the Femometer adult digital oral thermometer which meets 
professional accuracy standards for digital thermometers (ASTM E1112 -00) to support the accuracy 
of the iThermonitor core body temperature measurement . The surgeon’s oral te mperature will be 
measured for a second time when the surgeon exits the surgical field prior to taking the C3B battery 
assessment.  
Secondary Outcome #2  - mean skin temperature .  The second secondary  outcome will be the 
mean skin temperature for a case, calculated as the time -weighted average over the taken 
measurements .  Mean skin temperature will be estimated from skin temperature from the back of the 
upper chest , deltoid arm, thigh, and calf  using the formula  [MST R = 0.3 tchest  + 0.3 tarm + 0.2 tthigh + 0.2 tleg 
or 0.3(tchest  + tarm) + 0.2(tthigh + 0.2 tleg)] (Ramanathan, 1964).  Skin temperature  will be continuously 
measured using wireless  patches , TempTraq , which meet professional accuracy standards for digital 
thermometers (ASTM E1112 -00). The sensors will remain affixed with adhesive dressing on the 
surgeon’s body surface throughout  surgery and approximately 10 minutes required for post -operative 
testing .  
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 10 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  Secondary Outcome #3 will be surgeons’ cognitive performance , measured with the C3B 
battery . The self -administered C3B is a performance -based battery of cognitive tests which  measure 
visual memory; episo dic learning and delayed memory ( five learning trials with a total score of 70)  
and processing speed; information process ing speed and incidental memory (15 symbols repeated 
for 120 seconds) . Also, relevant distractions or interruptions (phone call, pager, staff, equipment, and 
other) will be recorded and the frequency in which they occur  during the C3 B battery test . Both tests 
will be aggregated using z -scores and summing the z -scores within patient.  A greater than 10% 
within -subject difference in total scores will be considered significant.  Testing will take place right 
after surge ry with surgeons  still gowned . The surgeons will sit  with the iPad touch screen placed  on a 
desk in front of them  for approximately  10 minutes  to complete the cognitive test . To minimize 
learning during the trial, participating surgeons will complete the cognitive assessment  battery  before 
the first study day . For subsequent cases,  the test will be administered  prior to the surgical hand 
scrub and after the end o f surgery.  The C3B test modules use auditory test instructions and on -
screen visual test stimul i consistent with symbols, single digits, and sin gle letters.   
Secondary Outcome #4 will be surgeon’ perceived ergonomic workload measured with Borg 
CR 10 scale of exertion and the rating -of-fatigue (ROF) scale.  
Immediately after surgery, while still gowned , surgeons will rate their perceived exertion on a 1 -10 
Borg CR 10 scale, with 1 representing very slight exertion, 5 being severe, and 10 representing 
maximal exertion. Perceived fatigue will be rated on a 0 -10 ROF scale, with 0 representing not 
fatigued at all, 5 moderately fatigued, and 10 total fatigue & exhaustion. Two points difference on 
either scale will be considered a clinically important difference . Time the surgeon removes the sterile 
surgical gown and the cooling vest after completing the C3B will be recorded. Also, total amount of 
time the surgeon wore the sterile surgical gown / cooling vest in minutes will be calculated .  
Ambient operating room temperature s will be monitored  at ≤15 -minute intervals  with an electronic 
thermometer position ed eight feet from the base of the OR table, outside of the surgical field on the 
circulating nurses’ workstation.  
Data Analysis   
Participants’ age, weight, height, and other continuous demographics and baseline characteristics will 
be summarized using descriptive statistics (n, mean, median, standard deviation, minimum and 
maximum), while race, surgical specialty, as well as other c ategorical variables will be summarized 
with frequency tabulations.   The 4 sequence groups will be compared on baseline variables 
descriptively.  
Specific Aim 1) Evaluate the difference between surgeons’ self -rated thermal comfort with and 
without a cooling vest during prolonged and strenuous surgery.   0-10. 
Perceived measure of thermal comfort for both conditions, with and without a cooling vest will be 
analyzed by descriptive statistics recommended for ordinal Likert scale items  – i.e., frequencies and 
median [quartiles].   
We will use a linear mixed effects model to test the treatment effect of the cooling vest on mean 
thermal comfort.  We will adjust for treatment, sequence and period effects, and include subject as a 
random effect  to account for t he within -subject correlation.  W e will test for differential carryover effect 
by assessing the treatment -by-period interaction.  If no interaction is detected the interac tion term will 
be removed and the treatment effect assessed in a main effects model.  
Specific Aim 2)  Evaluate the difference between the surgeons’ core, mean skin, and mean  
body temperature s with and without a cooling vest during a prolonged strenuous surgery.   
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 11 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  For each temperature we will used a linear mixed effects model to test the tre atment effect of the 
cooling vest on a subject’s temperature during the case.  We will adjust for treatment, sequence and 
period effects, and include subject as a random effect to account for the within -subject correlation.  
We will test for differential c arryover effect by assessing the treatment -by-period interaction.  If no 
interaction is detected the interaction term will be removed and the treatment effect assessed in a 
main effects model.  
Specific Aim 3: Evaluate the difference between the surgeons’ measure of cognitive 
performance with and without a cooling vest just after a prolonged strenuous surgery.  
Cognitive performance will be measured by the C3B performance -based battery of cognitive tests at 
the end of the case.  An overall score for a subjec t after a particular case will be calculated by first 
rescaling (e.g., so that each item ranges from 0 to 100) and then averaging the scores across the 
battery. Treatment effect will be assessed using a linear mixed effects model as described for Aims 1 
and 2.   
The significance level will be 0.05 for the primary outcome (Aim 1) and 0.05 across the 3 secondary 
outcomes (2 temperatures, cognitive function), such that the secondary outcomes will be assessed at 
a significance criterion of 0.05/3=0.017.  SAS st atistical software version 9.4, Carey, NC, will be used 
for all analyses.  
Specific Aim 4: Evaluate the difference between the surgeons’ perceived ergonomic workload 
with and without a cooling vest during a prolonged and strenuous surgery.  
Perceived ergonomic workload will be measured by duration of the surgical procedure recorded in 
minutes, surgeons’ report of the number of hours slept prior to the study day, Borgs’ visual analog 
scale for e xertion  (0-10), and the Rating of fatigue scale ( 0-10).  
Perceived ergonomic workload for both conditions, with and without a cooling vest will be analyzed by 
descriptive statistics recommended for ordinal measured items – i.e., frequencies and median 
[quartiles].   
We will use a linear mixed effects mod el to test the treatment effect of the cooling vest on mean 
perceived levels of exertion and fatigue.  We will adjust for treatment, sequence and period effects, 
and include subject as a random effect to account for the within -subject correlation.  We will  test for 
differential carryover effect by assessing the treatment -by-period interaction.  If no interaction is 
detected the interaction term will be removed and the treatment effect assessed in a main effects 
model.  
 
Sample Size Justi fication .   
Sample s ize calculation i s based on having 90% power at the 0.05 significance level to detect a 
difference of 2 or more (on a scale of 0 -10) on surgeons’ self -rated thermal comfort with and without a 
cooling vest .  With an estimate SD (s) of 3 for thermal comfort  in each group , and an assumed within -
subject correlation (
 ) of 0.5 , the estimated SD of the within -subject difference would be 
2 2 2
1 2 1 2 2 ,or 2(3 ) 2(0.5)(3)(3) 3 s s s s   
.   Within these assumptions we would need a total of 26 
subjects to have 90% power to detect a difference of 2 or more on mean thermal comfort in this 
crossover design.  The detectable difference corresponds to an effect size (Cohen’s D) of 0.66, which 
is medium to large.   For the 3 secondary outcomes each using a significance criterion of 
0.05/3=0.017, we would have 90% power to detect an effect size of 0.76.  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 12 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  Our assumptions of variability and within -subject correlation for the primary aim will be reass essed in 
an internal pilot study after 13 subjects have competed the 4 cases, and the total sample reassessed 
based on the findings.  
 
To ensure that sensors, iPad, and wireless technology can be monitored during a real -time surgical 
procedure, a small tri al of two or three case studies will be conducted to ensure all processes work 
properly, which will not be included in the final data analysis. Periods of poor data or lead 
disconnection will be marked for exclusion in analysis.  
 
Innovation  
The discomfort  surgeons experience during long surgical procedures combined with an inability to 
evaporate sweat through impervious surgical gowns prompted the innovative design of the 
disposable CoolSource™  Cooling System. The cooling vest is worn by surgeons under the  
impervious gown to reduce heat and improve comfort while performing surgery. The positive changes 
in mood, attention, and productivity have been reported by staff and surgeons in a product trial which 
supported the need for research to investigate the imp act heat stress has in which supported the 
need for research to investigate the impact heat stress has in real-time operating conditions.  
The innovative design of this study measures data by wireless sensor technology during real-time 
surgical procedures without disrupting the surgery, as previous studies utilized simulated conditions. 
Furthermore, limitations are numerous when trying to generalize findings discovered in structured 
simulated studies as there is a wider range of effecti ng factors in real-time investigations (Mazlomi et 
al., 2017). Information obtained from this study will support the development of prescriptive measures 
and standards to address heat stress in surgeons to alleviate perceptions of discomfort and improve 
physiological and psychological well -being.  
 
Protection of Human Subjects  
The research study is being conducted according to the purposes outlined in the research protocol 
and the  primary responsibility of the  informed  conse nt is designed  to protect the rights, welfare, and 
well-being of the participants. The risks and benefits  of the study are reasonable to the anticipated 
benefits  and the importance of generalizable knowledge that is expected to result.   
Identified Risks : 
 Risks to breach  of confidentiality : The records of this research will be kept confidential and 
every effort will be made to protect participants’  confidentiality thro ugh encrypted coded data 
and will not include any information that will make it possible to identify a pa rticipant.  Any 
reports that may be published will not include any information that will make it possible to 
identify a participant.  Research records will be kept in a locked file and access will be limited 
to the researchers and hospital review board res ponsible for protecting human participants.  
 Participants will be advised of the entire protocol as well as the voluntary option to withdraw 
from the study at any time.  
 Shaving  small skin areas (approximately 2” x 2”) for temperature sensor placement may be 
necessary for adhesive cover to adequately  adhere to skin surface s which could cause mild 
discomfort, redness, or itching as the body hair regrows.    
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 13 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020   Potential risks to comfort, elevated body temperatures, and  cognitive  performance  (e. g. short -
term memory  and/or processing speed ) in occupational heat stress studies  naturally occur 
while surgeons are operating, however, the cooling  vest intervention administered in the study 
may reduce  these potential risks .   
 There is no evidence that OR personnel wearing the cooling vest under the i mpervious sterile 
surgical gown  offer any risk to patients  as there is no direct contact .  
Steps to minimize risks :  
 Attenuate  first-time cooling -vest users’ concern s for perception of discomfort related to cooling  
packs or added weight , all participants will have the opportunity to wear the cooling -vest prior 
to any of the randomized trials.  
 All members of the research team will be appropriatel y trained, maintained appropriate 
credenti als, licensing privileges, and institutional competencies.  
Identifying benefits :   
 The vest design was designed  to cool areas o f the body that do not cause discomfort over a 
period of approximately two hours , and the cooling packs do  not come in direct contact with 
participant’s skin as it is worn over scrubs.   
 Heat stress studies have shown that wearing a cooling garment in stressful thermal 
environments can d ecreased heart rate s, reduce  sweat rate s, and improve human 
performance .   
 Surgeons who routinely wear the cooling vest perspire  less while operating.  This is a 
substantial advantage because when surgeons perspire, beads of contaminated sweat can fall 
into the patient’s open incision, contaminating the case and predisposing patients to infections.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 14 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References  
Amorim, F., Fonseca, I., Machado -Moreira, C., & Magalhaes, F. (2015). Insights into the role of heat 
shock protein 72 to whole -body heat acclimation in humans. Temperature, 2(4), 499 -505. doi: 
10.1080/23328940.2015.1110655  
Association of Operating Room Nur ses (2017). Guidelines for Perioperative Practice Publisher:  
AORN, Inc. ISBN:  978 -0-939583 -01-0 
Berg, R., Inaba, K., Sullivan, M., Okoye, O., Siboni, S., Minneti, M., Teixeira, P., & Demetriades, D. 
(2015). The impact of heat stress on operative performa nce and cognitive function during simulated 
laparoscopic operative tasks. Elsevier Inc. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.201406.012  
Blakeney, B. Unlocking the power of Innovation, 2009  
Bouchama, A., & Knochel, J. (2002). Heat Stroke. The New England Journal of Medicine , 346(25), 
1978 - 1986.  
Chan, A., Song, W., & Yang, Y. (2015). Meta -analysis of the effects of microclimate cooling systems 
on human performance under thermal stressful environments: Potential applications to occupational 
workers. Journal of Thermal Biology , 49-50: 16 -32. 
Chen, M., Chen, C., Yeh, W., Huang, J., & Mao, I. (2003), Heat Stress evaluation and worker fatigue 
in a steel plant. AIHA Journal, 64(3), 352 -359. 
Conrad, C., & Bimonte -Nelson, H. (2010). Chapter 2 - Impact of Hypothalamic -pituitary -
adrenal /gonadal Axes on Trajectory of Age -Related Cognitive Decline. Progress in Brain Research, 
182, 31 -76.  
CoolSource™ Cooling System, (2019). Cardinal Health, Retrieved from: 
https://www.cardinalhealth.com/en/product -solutions/medical/surgical/coolsource -cooling-system.html  
Facility Guidelines Institute, American Society for Healthcare Engineering. Guidelines for design and 
Construction of Residential Health, Care, and Support Facilities. 2014th ed. Chicago, IL: American 
Society fo Healthcare Engineering; 2014 .  
Gaoua, N., Racinais, S., Grantham, J., & Massioui, F. (2001). Alterations in cognitive performance 
during passive hyperthermia are task dependent. International Journal of Hyperthermia, 27(1), 1 -9. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 15 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  Gifford, R., Todiscoa , T., Fujisawaa , S., Allerhand, M. , Woods , D., Reynolds, R. (2019). Risk of heat 
illness in men and women: A systematic review and meta -analysis, Environmental Research . 171, 
24-35. doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2018.10.020  
Hancock, P., Ross, J., & Szalma, J. (2007). A meta -analysis of performa nce response under thermal 
stressors. Human Factors, 49(5), 851 -877, doi: 10.1518/001872007x230226  
Horowitz, M., Eli -Berchoer, L., Wapinski, I., Wapinski, N., & Kodesh, E. (2004). Stress -related 
genomic responses during the course of heat acclimation and i ts association with ischemic -
reperfusion cross -tolerance. Journal of Applied Physiology, 97, 1496 –1507.  
Horowitz, M., & Robinson, S. (2007). Heat shock proteins and the heat shock response during 
hyperthermia and its modulation by altered physiological con ditions. Progress in Brain Research, 162, 
433-446. 
iThermonitor™ Railing Medical Company, 2008 -2017.  
Kamphuis J., Meerlo P., Koolhaas J., & Lancel M. (2012). Poor sleep as a potential causal factor in 
aggression and violence. Sleep Medicine, 13, 327 –34. 
Kregel, K. (2002). Heat shock proteins: modifying factors in physiological stress responses and 
acquired thermotolerance. Journal of Applied Physiology, 92, 2177 –2186. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.01267.  
Logan, J., & Barksdale, D. (2008). Allostasis and allost atic load: expanding the discourse on stress 
and cardiovascular disease. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 17(7B), 201 -208. 
Mazlomi, A., Golbabaei, F., Dehghan, S., Abbasinia, M., Khani, S., Ansari, M., & Hosseini, M. (2017). 
The influence of occupational heat exposure on cognitive performance and blood level of stress 
hormones: A field study report. International Journal of Occupational Safety and Ergonomics, 23(3), 
431-439. doi:10.1080/10803548.2016.125113   
McEwen, B., (1998). Stress, adaptation, and disease:  Allostsis and allostatic load. Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences, 338(3)171 -179. 
Micklewright, D., St Clair Gibson, A., Gladwell, V., & Al Salman, A. (2017). Development and Validity 
of the Rating -of-Fatigue Scale, Sports Medicine, 47;2375 -2393. DOI 10.1007/s40279 -017-0711 -5 
Moran, D., Eli -Berchoer, L., Heled, Y., Mendel, L., Schocina, M., & Horowitz, M., (2006). Heat 
intolerance: does gene transcription contribute? Journal of Applied Psychology, 100, 1370 -1376.  
Nerbass, F., Pecoits -Filho, R., Cl ark, W., Sontrop, J., McIntyre, C., & Moist, L. (2017), Occupational 
Heat Stress and Kidney Health: From farms to factories. Kidney International Report, (2) 98 -108.  
Nater, U., Skoluda, N., & Strahler, J. (2013). Biomarkers of stress in behavioral medicin e. Current 
Opinions in Psychiatry, 26(5), 440 -444. Doi: 10.1097/YCO.0b013e328363b4ed  
Pasco® Wireless Temperature Sensor, PS -3201. Retrieved from: pasco.com/prodCatalog/PS/PS -
3201_wireless -temperature -sensor/index.  
Pei, L., Huang, Y., Mao, G., & Sessler, D. (2018). Axillary Temperature, as Recorded by the 
iThermonitor WT701, Well Represents Core Temperature in Adults Having Noncardiac Surgery. 
International Anesthesia Reserch Society, 126(3), 833 -838.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 16 of 16  
Version  4.0 September 03 , 2020  Pellerin, N., Deschuyteneer, A., Candas, V. (2004). Local thermal unpleasantness and discomfort 
prediction in the vicinity of thermoneutrality. European Journal of Applied Physiology, 92, 717 -720.  
Piil, J. F., Lundbye -Jensen, J., Trangmar, S. J., & Nybo, L. (2017). Per formance in complex motor 
tasks deteriorates in hyperthermic humans. Temperature, 4(4), 420 -424. 
doi:10.1080/23328940.2017.1368877  
Rao, S., & Alberts,J. (2017). Self -administered iPad C3B battery test. Lou Ruvo Center for Brain 
Health, Cleveland Clinic Hos pital System, Cleveland, Ohio.  
Reinertsen, R., Faerevik, H., Holbo, K., Nesbakken, R., Reitan, J., Royset, A., & Thi, M. (2008). 
Optimizing the Performance of Phase -Change Materials in Personal Protective Clothing Systems. 
International Journal of Occupat ional Safety and Eronomics, 14(1), 43 -53. 
Ryann, R., Booth, S., Spathis, A., Mollart, S., & Clow, A. (2016). Use of Salivary Diurnal Cortisol as 
an Outcome Measure in Randomized Controlled Trials: A Systematic Review. Annual of Behavior 
Medicine, 50, 210 -236. doi: 10.1007/s12160 -015-9753 -9     
Satarifard,S., Gaeini, A., & Choobineh,C. (2012). Changes in Blood Cortisol and Lactate Levels in 
Athletes after One Exercise Session in Cold, Warm and Natural Environments. Iranian Journal of 
Endocrinology & Metaboli sm, 14(2), 1 -10.   
Sessler D. Perioperative thermoregulation and heat balance. Lancet, North American Edition. 2016; 
387: 2655 -2664.  
Simmons, S., Saxby, B., McGlone, F., & Jones, D. (2008). The effect of passive heating and head 
cooling on perception, car diovascular function and cognitive performance in the heat. European 
Journal of Applied Physiology, 104:271 -280. 
Smolander, J., Kuklane, K., Gavhed, D., Nilsson H., & Holmér, I. (2004). Effectiveness of a Light -
Weight Ice -Vest for Body Cooling While Wearin g Fire Fighter’s Protective Clothing in the Heat. 
International Journal of Occupational Safety and Ergonomics, 10(2), 111 -117.   
Sun, G., Yang ., X., Jiang, Q., Liu, K., Li, B., Li, L., & Li, M. (2012). Hyperthermia impairs the executive 
function using the attention network test. International Journal of Hyperthermia, 28(7), 621 -626. 
doi:10.3109/02656736.2012.705217  
TempTrac® Blue Spark Technologies, Inc. Westlake, OH, USA.  
Waalen, J., Buxbaum, J. (2011). Is Older Colder or Older Colder? The Association of Age with Body 
Temperature in 18,630 Individuals, The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and 
Medical Sciences. 66A(5): 487 -492. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glr001  
Walter, E., & Carraretto, M. (2016). The neurological and cognitive consequences of  hyperthermia. 
Critical Care, 20:199 -207. doi: 10.1186/s13054 -016-1376 -4. 
Williams, N. (2017). The Borg Rating of Peceived Exertion (RPE) scale, Occupational Medicine, 
67(5), 404 -405. 
Zwolinska, M., & Bogdan, A. (2012). Impact of the medical clothing on th ermal stress of surgeons. 
Applied Ergonomics, 43, 1096 -1104. doi: 10.1016/j.apergo.2012.03.011  
 
 