Title: Operant Conditioning of Loading Response During Locomotion in 
Able-bodied Individuals and People After Stroke  
NCT number : Not  available  
Date: April 11,  2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statistical Design and Power  
Sample Size . 15 individuals with no known neurological conditions or history of orthopedic 
injuries will be studied in Aim 1. For the primary measure (soleus EMG response), the difference 
between the non -perturbed and perturbed EMG will be assess ed by Student’s t-test. In the 
previous study [29], a group analysis with a  s.d. of 0.87% change (%  non-perturbed EMG) was 
observed in the soleus EMG in response to 1 deg/s joint motion perturbation during the mid -late 
stance phase  (i.e., the variati on in the soleus EMG is linearly related to the velocity and/or 
amplitude of the perturbations [29]). Assuming similar s.d. for the proposed study, the sample size 
of N=15 allows us to estimate, with a two -sided 95% confidence le vel each, the soleus EMG 
response to perturbation within a margin of error of 5.4% non -perturbed EMG.   
A sample size of 5 participants with hemiparesis and gait deficits due to a stroke will be 
studied in Aim 2 to examine the feasibility  of the proposed algorithms and device. Due to the lack 
of availability of data with post -stroke participants, s.d. change % unperturbed soleus EMG cannot 
be defined prior to conducting testing with individuals after stroke. Hence, the pilot will provide 
preliminary results to characterize the soleus EMG due to the applied perturbations in people 
post-stroke, which will facilitate hypothesis testing and inform our sample size of stroke survivors 
in our subsequent study .   
Statistical Analysis . All statistic al analyses will be performed using SAS® 9.4. For 
descriptive purpose, continuous data  will be summarized with the number of non -missing values, 
mean, and standard deviation, minimum, median, and maximum  and categorical data will be 
summarized with the num ber of nonmissing values and the numbers (frequencies) of values  equal 
to each of the possible categories, unless stated otherwise. All statistical tests will be two -sided 
with a significance  level of alpha=0.05. Unless otherwise stated, no multiplicity ad justment will be 
applied, and no missing values will be imputed.  Mixed effects model  will be used as needed to 
assess whether the effect of our algorithm depends on other related factors, such as age  