 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrical stimulation to evoke recto -colonic reflex for colonic motility   
Funding Agency: VA RR&D  
Principal Investigator : Steven Brose, DO  
1593201 -8/12 -3-21/2021  
 
 Page 2 of 13 
  
Abstract  
 
This study hopes to c haracter ize the effects of minimally inv asive electrical rectal 
stimulation  on colonic motility in persons with neurogenic bowel dysfunction. Subjects will 
act as their own controls, with co ntrol data being obtained during subjects’ typical bowel 
routines.  Outcome  measur es i nclude bowel emptying  durat ion and amount of stool 
remov ed. These data will be compared to determine the efficacy of  electrical stimulation to 
promote bowel emptying compa red to patients ’ typical bowel routines , and to provide an 
effect size  on the outcome  mea sure s of colonic motili ty for powering future  stud ies. 
We hypothesize  that electrical  rectal stimulation will produce increased colonic motility  
that result s in defecation  and that defecation time will be similar to subjects’ typical bowel 
routin es. The time required for d efecat ion in response t o their typical bowel routine and to 
minimally invasive electrical rectal  stimulation  will be monitored . Subjects will also be 
asked  to report on sensations and comment on electrical stimulation . 
 
 
 Page 3 of 13 
 List of  Abbrev iations 
LSCDVAMC: Louis St okes Cleveland DVA Medical Center  
SVAMC: Syracuse VA Medical Center  
SCI: spinal cor d inju ry 
EMG : electromyogram  
AD: autonomic dysref lexia  
NBD: neurogenic bowel dysfunction  
FES: functional electrical stimulation  
IRB: Instit utional Revi ew Board  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 4 of 13 
 Contents  
 
1.0 Study Personnel  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  5 
2.0 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  5 
3.0 Objective s ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  6 
4.0 Resources and Personnel  ................................ ................................ ..........................  6 
5.0 Study Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 7 
5.1 Study Des ign ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  7 
5.2 Recruitment Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................  8 
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  ................................ ................................ ...................  9 
5.4 Inclus ion/Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ .....................  9 
5.5 Study Evaluations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 10 
5.6 Data Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  10 
5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects  ................................ ................................ .............................  11 
6.0 Reporting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  11 
7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ ......................  11 
8.0 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 5 of 13 
 Protocol Title: Electrical stimulation to evoke recto -colonic reflex for colonic motility  
 
1.0 Study Personnel  
 
PI: Steven Br ose, DO , Chief of the SVAMC SCI Unit  
Co-Investigators : Dennis Bourbeau, PhD, Investigator and  Biomedical Engineer at 
Clevela nd FES center and LSCDVAMC.       
2.0 Introduction  
 
Loss of bowel function is a major concern for veterans with central ner vous d isorde rs, 
such as spinal cord injury (SCI). Over 42,000 vetera ns hav e SCI, representing more 
than 15% of the total America n population with SCI. Followin g SCI, the colon is of ten 
unable to evacuate stools via peristaltic propulsion. Losing bowel func tion c an cau se 
constipation, gastro -intestinal complications, and fe cal in continence, severely impacting 
health and quality of l ife. 
 
The standard of care for individuals with neuro genic bowel dysfunction involves the 
design of a bowel program for predicta ble an d effe ctive elimination of the bowels. A 
bowel program include s diet , fluid intake, activity, and pharmaceutical or mechan ical 
rectal stimulation. Approx imately 80% of individ uals with neurogenic bowel 
dysfunction use digital stimulation of the rectu m to r eflexi vely activate the colon, 
improve colonic motility, and f acilit ate bowel evacuation. However, the bowel routine 
can r equire over an hour to evacuate  the bowels and this p rocess often requires the 
assistance of a caregiver, which adds to the cost  of ca re and  reduces independence. 
Restoring bowel function is consi dered a high priority by individuals with paraplegia,  
but it remains a critically unmet nee d requiring further devel opment. The top priority 
for individuals with tetraplegia is reaching an d hand  funct ion, but pelvic functions are 
still of high concern.  
 
Digital rectal distension is the clinical standard for eliciti ng colon motility. The majority  
of individuals with neur ogenic bowel dysfunction use digital rectal stimulation to 
mechanically disten d the rectum and reflexively activate colon peristalsis, which  loads  
stool into the rectum for bowel emptying. Digital rec tal distension takes advantage of an 
existing reflex pat hway affecting bowel function. The recto -colonic reflex has been well -
studied in cat s, dogs, and humans. Rectal distension activates mechano recept ors 
innervating the rectum, which sends afferent infor mation via small Aδ and C fiber s to 
the sacral spinal co rd. This input modulates a spinal reflex pathway that activates motor 
efferent  drive  to the colon, causing coordinated peristalsis and incre asing colonic 
motility. Digital rectal stimulation is effect ive, but it requires an individ ual, or a 
caregiver, to r each into the individual’s rectum with gloved fingers. Even with digital  
 Page 6 of 13 
 recta l stim ulation and other bowel program tools, the bowel routine  still typically 
requires an hour or two to complete. Relian ce on digital rectal stimulatio n is associated 
with lost  independence, lost time, lost dignity, and increased caregiver costs. 
Substituting rect al dis tension for a method that does not include the se dra wbacks would 
provide positive social and psychological benef its. 
 
We are currently developi ng approach es using elect rical stimulation to improve colonic 
motility as an alternativ e to digital rec tal st imulation and to take  advantage of the recto -
colic  refle x. Recent preclinical experiments have provided supporting  evidence that 
electrical stimula tion of the rectum or distal colon can modulate  this excitatory recto -
colic reflex and potentially prom ote bo wel emptying. W e hope  to quantify the effects of 
minimal ly invasive electrical  rectal stimulation , in comparison to subjects ’ typical bowel 
emptyin g routine,  on colonic activity in persons with neurogenic bowel dysfunction.  
 
3.0 Obje ctives  
 
This p ilot study hopes to  characterize the effects  of minimally invas ive el ectrical rectal 
stimulation on colonic motility in persons with neurogenic  bowel dysfunctio n, as well as 
collect  data to determine an effect size and so power future studies  that measure colonic  
motil ity in response to electrical stimulation   
Our hypothesi s is that electrical  rectal stimulati on will produce increased colonic 
motility  that result s in defecation  and that defecation time will be similar to subjects’ 
typical bow el routines.   
4.0 Resources  and Personnel  
 
All study actives  will occur a t the SVA MC, in the SCI inpatient clinic .  
Recruitment of subjects will be don e by the PI, who will identif y potentially eligible 
participants receiving SCI treatment at the SVAMC. Once p otential subjects are 
identif ied, info rmed consent will be obtained b y a resea rch as sistant or nurse . Only a 
nurse approved  on the study  will be responsible for collecting data . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 7 of 13 
 5.0 Study Procedures  
 
5.1 Study Design  
 
Experiments  will be conducted in the SCI inpatient cli nic in 10 in dividuals with 
neurogenic bowel dysf unction who h ave st able bowel routines . We will work with 
nursing staff  on the study  to maintain a consistent bowel emptying schedule for the 
subjects. We wil l not disrupt the patient’s typic al bowel emptying routi ne. On ly the 
Research Nurse will be comple ting any rese arch r elated procedures.  Data will be 
collected from subjects over 6 weeks during their typical bowel routines. Then we will 
test minimally inva sive electrical  rectal stimulatio n via a rectal probe in  a sec ond 6 -week 
period.  Subjects will be instrumented with a  rectal probe  and stimulator inserted by the 
Research Nurse only for the duration of those bowel routines and effects are not 
expected to c ontinue  past the end of the exper iment period. Subjects will r eturn to their 
typical bowel routine  at the end o f the 6-week stimulation testing period. For patients 
>6 months post -SCI, the control period for the study will consist of their typical digital  
stim bowel routine. Nurse s will log dig stim data as they usually do and this data will be 
used as control data fo r the  study . During the e xperimental phase of the experiment, dig 
stim will be replaced with electrical stimulation. Use of electrical stim will not change 
the patients ’ bowel routine otherwise. There is no set schedule for the intervention 
because we are adapt ing to each pat ients ’ normal bowel routine. The only structure is 
that we have a defined control period using their normal routine, followed by a defined 
experimental period with the e lectrical stimulation. For a normal bowel routine, 
patients typicall y receive bowel intervention every other day in a typical week.  
 
For subjects within 6 months of SCI diagnosis, but after the acute spinal shock phase, 
we will instead  alter nate between periods of control interven tion (dig stim) and 
electrical stimulation. Th is will be done 3 -7 times a week to optimize data acquisition, 
rather than having a defined control period followed by a defined experimental period. 
Neither the al tered pr ocedure nor the inclusion of patients who are < 6 months post -SCI 
will affect the ris k level of the study. Acute spinal shock is defined as the period 
immediately follo wing an acu te spinal cord injury. This phase resolves 72 hours post -
injury and it is exceptionally ra re that a pa tient in this phase of injury would be in the 
SCI, rather th an the ICU.  
 
 
Typical Bowel Routine  
Typical bow el routines usually involve  digital rectal stimulation co nducted by the 
subject, their nurse, or their  caregiver. An indi vidu al ins erts a gloved finger through the 
anus into th e rectum and m echanically disten ds the rectum by moving back and forth 
against t he inside of the rectal wall for approximately 30 seconds . Time is a llowed for 
the colon to move and e vacuate some stools , then the  process is repeated (typically 15 -
20 minutes  later). Digit al rectal stimulat ion is thus repeated until the colon contents ar e 
empty, usually marked by the appearance of mucus and no  evidence o f stools in the 
distal colon or re ctum.  Some subjects  may  also receive a mini -enema or other 
 Page 8 of 13 
 suppos itory to aid in bowel e mptying. Individua l bowel routine schedules vary but are 
typically  conducted 3 -5 times a week.  
 
Electrical Rectal Stimulati on 
A clinic ally standard rectal probe electro de will be inserted  into the rectum to 
administer electrical stim ulation . The probe elec trode will only be in place to administer 
bouts of stimulation jus t as gloved fingers administer digital rectal distension , after 
which  it will be  removed to allow for bowel emptying.  The probe elect rode will be 
connected to a Digitimer stimu lator DS7A, wh ich is FDA -approve d for electrical 
stimulation in human subjects a nd has bee n used in our previous, similar ex periments 
for bladder f unctio n. Stimulation will either be 20 Hz constant fre quency or bu rst 
pattern stimulation delivered as 5 -50 p ulses at 100 -200 Hz once per sec ond. We will 
first determine the stimulation amp litudes at  which the subject can sense stimu lation 
and at  what limi t they  tolerate stimulation but do not wis h to go high er for conce rn of 
discomfort. We will then apply stimul ation within t his range, not exp ected to exceed 40 
mA, which is the typical rang e we see i n similar applications of surface electrical 
stimulation.  Stimu lation will be administered continuo usly for the  duration of  the bowel 
routine. If stimulation does not  increase colo nic motility and p romote defecation, as 
determined by each subject ’s baselin e data on bowel emptying time, nur se experience , 
or clini cian e xpertise, then we will cease stimula tion for tha t day and re turn to the 
subject’s typical bowel routine . If stimulati on fails to increa se colonic motility for bowel 
emptying on 3 or m ore occasi ons in a given subject, then we wi ll stop the 6 -week 
stim ulatio n period and return that subject to their typica l bowel rout ine. 
 
The procedures in this study involve certain risks,  which are similar  to the risks of 
digital rectal stimulation, whi ch is part of a pa rticipant ’s bowel routine.  The incremen tal 
risks involv ed in performance of these studies are not signi ficantly gre ater than those 
encountered during a standa rd b owel routi ne. However, t hese  risks are outlined in the 
participan t’s con sent  form, along with  explanation s of what w ould  be done to reduce the 
likeli hood of adverse av ents, and what would be done s hould any occur.  
 
 
5.2 Rec ruitment  Methods  
Patients of  the SCI unit  will be recruited by word of mouth by Dr. Brose at the  SVAMC. 
As m any patients will be recruited as needed  to enroll 10 subjects  into the study . 
Eligibility will be a ssessed  via chart rev iew and pati ent interview by the  PI. Those 
expressing i nter est will b e referred to stud y staff who will exp lain the study , highlight 
that it is voluntary , and answer any questions .   
Every eff ort will be m ade to  recruit individuals that are representative of the US 
population. The units treating patients with spin al cord in juries, stroke, or multiple 
sclerosis at the SVAMC have a particul arly high proportion of subjects from 
underr epresented mi nority groups . The majority of individuals with neurogenic bowel  
dysfunction  that are available for the study are male.  Therefore it is expected t hat t he 
majority of experiments will be performed on men. Every effort will be made to include 
women who shoul d at least re presen t their prevalence in the spinal cord injured  
 Page 9 of 13 
 population.  All candidates will be treated the same wi th strict adhe rence to the inclu sion 
and exclusion criteria.  
Individuals who do not speak English will not be recruite d. How ever , it is n ot 
anticipate d that  non-English speaking potential participants will be enco untered.  
Participants will be paid  $50 via chec k sent thr ough the post  upon comple tion or partial 
comple tion of the study.  
 
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  
 
Informed consent will b e obtained b y a me mber of the research  staff , after verbal 
expla nation and provision of time for the subject to study  the consent for m and ask 
question s. The informed consent proces s will involve mee ting with a potential subject in 
a qu iet, private area (o n the SCI Un it or in a physician's private office), finding out 
whether he or she is capable of giving consent, and d iscussing the pu rpose, risks, and 
benefits of participation. We will ensure that all subjects genuinely understand  the 
study , that they are  aware t hat pa rticipation is entirely volun tary, and that they c an 
choos e to discontinue participation at any time.  
HIPAA authorizat ion will be discus sed with the potential participant at the time t he 
patient is interviewed and a c opy of the authorization  will be  given  to them for their 
review. Specific information co llected will include:  Date of bi rth, date of spinal in jury, 
level of  spinal injury, ge nder, name, medical record number (social securi ty number), 
current medications, prev ious bladder or urin ary trac t inte rventions, current medical 
status, and phone numbe r. This info rmation is be ing collected  because these da ta are 
used to  categorize indivi duals according to medical condition and allow i nvestigation of 
medically  related differences between the  respo nses of different individuals. The 
participant’s social se curity numbe r will be col lected in ord er to place appro priate 
documen tation in the part icipant’s medical record  
 
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusio n Criteria  
 
Inclusion Cri teria  
 Neurogenic bo wel dysfuncti on usi ng digital rectal stimulation  
 Neurologically stable  
 Skeletally mature  
 Adults 18 years or greater  
 Multiple Scleros is or Stroke o r Suprasacral SCI  
 Must be past acute spinal shoc k phase  
Exclusion Criteria  
 Page 10 of 13 
  Active  seps is 
 Open pressure sores on or aro und pe lvis 
 Significant colo n trauma or colostomy  
 History of Auto nomi c Dysref lexia  
 
5.5 Study Evaluations  
 
Data co llection will inclu de standard medical char ting and docume nting outcome 
measures , such as bowel emptying time as written in section 5.6 Data Analysis . No  tests , 
ques tionnaires, or procedures will be conducted b eyond th e typical bowel routine or 
stimulation  testing described in this  protocol.  
 
 
 
 
5.6 Dat a Analysis  
 
This work is considered a pilot study. Data will be collected  to determine an effect size  
and power future studies that measure  colonic  motility  in re sponse t o electrical 
stimulation . Therefo re, 10 subject s are chos en to provide sufficient  data  to power a 
future study.  
 
Bowel emptying  will be perform ed by  a trained clinician, caregiver, or sub ject (whoever 
normal ly performs it for t he sub ject) using sta ndard te chniqu e. The bowel routine is 
typic ally conduct ed with di gital rectal stimulation  and/ or the insertion of suppositories 
or similar chemical sys tems.  The time that elapses between initial intervention  and 
bow el emptying will be measur ed as bowel emp tying ti me. We will also test electrical 
stimulation to  modulate an excitatory recto -colic ref lex b y stimulating via a rectal probe 
electrode. These sy stems  are clinically available for chronic c onstipation in other  
indications and are  consi dered minimal r isk. We have e xperience measuring bowel 
activity with t hese metho ds. Initial introduction  of the rectal probe electrode  may cause 
temporary distension of th e rectum. To ensure that reflexive acti vity due to the prob e 
does not confound our da ta, we will wai t approx imatel y 5-10 minutes for the colon to 
relax bac k to basel ine activity before begi nning  the bowel routine with stimulation.  
 
The primary outcome  variable is bowel emptying time. Bowel empt ying time  data are 
not expected to follo w a no rmal distributi on. Ther efore , the non -parametric Mann -
Whit ney rank -sum  test with  a significance of 0.05 will be us ed to compare bowel 
emptying times  between typical b owel routines  and electrical stimulation con ditions 
 Page 11 of 13 
 across subje cts. We expect to ob serve a great deal of  variabi lity i n bowel emptying times, 
which  may require  many obse rvations and subjects to  achi eve s tatistical significance.  
 
Analysis on de -identified data will be performed by stu dy staff . De-Identified data from 
this study may be pooled with  data collect ed by Dr. Bour beau  originating  from  a similar  
stud y of the same n ame curr ently approved a t the  Louis Stokes Cleveland DVA Medical 
Center .  
 
5.7 Withdr awal of Subjects  
 
A subject  may  choose to with draw fr om participa tion in the study at any tim e. 
There are no poten tial r isks from early withdrawal or re moval fro m the stud y, as 
this is not a trea tment  procedure ; it is one time  feasibility study.  They may  also 
be withdrawn from the s tudy at any time by the PI or research  staff as per the  PI’s 
clinical judgement .  
 
6.0 Repo rting  
 
 
In the event that the security  of VA re search -related information (physic al or  electronic 
data) is compromised, eithe r by unauthorized use, disclosure, tran smissio n, removal, 
theft, loss, or destruct ion, the PI and author ized research staff will re port t o the ACOS 
for Research, Privacy  Officer,  and Infor mation Security Officer withi n 1 hour, as 
specified in Research & De velopment  Policy 1 51-17. 
 
7.0 Privacy and Co nfiden tiality  
 
Data Storage  
All study file s at the SVAMC  will be  kept in a locked f ile in a desig nated room in the SCI 
unit . Cons ent forms  will be k ept in a separate file a part from the data files . All research 
data (physical and elec tronic) will be anonym ized u sing identifiers supplied  by the 
experimen ter. In this stu dy, each participan t will be assi gned a subject number (e.g., 
Subject 001) , which wi ll be used to link all d ata p rovided by the participant. There will 
be no corresponden ce between the partici pant’s  subject number and other  personally  
identifying i nformati on, such as names o r conta ct info rmation, which could link them t o 
the stu dy or thei r data . The subject numb er ke y will be locked away separately from a ny 
 Page 12 of 13 
 data identifiab le by subject number.  Privac y for patient health info rmation wil l be 
strictly adhered to by study staff. Informa tion wi ll be collected during an interv iew in a 
quiet and private area (on the SCI  Unit , or in a physician’s private office).   
Becau se two VA  sites will be involved i n data  analysi s (LSCDVAMC and  SVAMC), data  
will be transferred  between these locati ons usin g secu re, encrypted VA email to the PI , 
co-PI, or designa ted research staff. Howe ver, nothin g beyon d data sharing should be 
require d between t he two sites because they are  opera ting off independ ent, locally -
approved IRB  protocols.  All data shared is de -identifi ed.  
Data Disposal  
In accordanc e with th e VHA Reco rds Control Schedule (RC S 10 -1), the official research 
file is a temporary record, whi ch is maintained by VHA for 6 years after cut off of the 
records  (cut off being the end of the fiscal year in whi ch the  study closed).  
8.0 References  
 
Fact  Sheet: V A and Spin al Cord Injury.; 2009. 
www.va .gov/opa/publications/factsheets.asp.  
King RB,  Parsons KC , et al. Neurogen ic Bowel Management in Adults wi th Spinal Cord 
Injury.; 1998.  
Anderson KD, Borisoff JF, Johnson RD, Stiens S a, Elliott SL. Long -term effects o f 
spinal c ord injury on sexual fun ction  in men: implications for neuroplasticit y. Spi nal 
Cord. 2 007;45:338 -348.  
Anderson KD. Targeting recovery: priorities  of the spinal cord -injured population. J 
Neurotrauma.  2004;21(10):1371 -1383.  
Fukuda H, Fuka i K. The afferent a nd efferent pathways of the r ecto -colonic reflex in the 
dog. Jpn J Ph ysiol.  1985;35(5) :795 -801.  
Chen J -H, Sallam HS, Lin L, Chen JDZ. C olorectal and rectocolonic reflexes in canines: 
involvement of t one, compliance, and anal sphincte r relaxation.  Am J Phys iol Regul 
Integr Comp Ph ysiol . 2010;299(3):R953 -9. 
Shafik A, Shafik A A, El -Sibai O, Ah med I. Role of sympathetic innervation in the 
defecation me chanism: a novel concept of its function. J Spinal Cor d Med. 
2003;26(2):150 -154. 
Garrett  BJR , Howard ER, Jones W. The internal anal sph incte r in the cat: A study of 
nervous mechani sms af fecting ton e and reflex activity. J Physiol. 1974;243:153 -166. 
Bouvier  M, Gonella J. Nervous control of the internal anal sp hincter of the cat. J 
Physiol. 198 1;310:457 -469. 
 Page 13 of 13 
 Ruhl A, Thewiûen M, Ross HG, Cle velan d S, Frieling T, Enck P. Discharge patte rns of  
intramural  mechanoreceptive afferents during selective dist ension of the cat’s rectum. 
Neurogastroenterol Motil. 1998;10:21 9-225. 
Sjöqvist A, Hellström PM, J odal  M, Lundg ren O. Neu rotransmitters involved in th e 
colonic contraction and vasodilatation  elicited by acti vation of the pelvic nerves in the 
cat. Gastroent erology. 1 984;86(6):1481 -1487.  
Takaki M, Neya T, Nakayama S. Fun ctional role of lumbar sympathetic  nerves and 
supraspinal  mechanism in the defeca tion reflex of the cat. Acta Med Okayama. 
1987;41(6 ):249 -257.  
Buntzen S, Nordgren S, Delbro D, Hultén L. Reflex  interacti on from the urinary bladder 
and the rectum on anal mot ility in the cat. J Auton Nerv Sys t. 1995;54:33 -40. 
De Gr oat W, Krier J. An elect rophy siological study of the sacral parasympa thetic  
pathway to  the colon of the cat. J Physiol. 1976;260:425 -445. 
De Groa t W, Krier J. The sacral parasympathetic reflex pathwa y regulating colonic 
motility and defa ecation i n the cat.  J Physiol. 1978;276:481 -500.  
Frost F, Hartwig D, Jaeger R, Leffler E , Wu Y . Electrica l stimulation of the sacral 
dermatomes in spinal cord injur y: effect on rectal manometry and bowel emptying. Arch  
Phys Med Rehabil. 1993;74:696 -701. 
Shafik A. R ecto -colic  reflex: role in the def ecati on mechanism. Int Surg. 81(3):292 -294.  
Ng C, D anta M, Prott G, Badcock C -A, Kellow J, Malcolm A. Modulatory influenc es on  
antegrade and retrograde tonic reflexes in the colo n and rectum. Am J Physiol 
Gast roin test Live r Physiol.  2004;287(5):G962 -6. 
 