Confidential  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comparing  Three Caries Prevention  Products  on Dentinal 
Hypersensitivity  – A Pilot Study  
___________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Protocol Version Date:  4/4/2017 
  
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 2 of 17  
I) Introduction  
A) Aim/Hypothesis/Objective  
The aim of this  pilot research project is to c ompare the clinical effect on 
dentinal hypersensitivity of three products : Casein Phosphopeptide -
Amorphous Calcium Phosphate (CPP -ACP) paste  with fluoride , 5000 Sodium 
Fluoride (NaF) dentifrice  containing Tri-Calcium Phosphate (TCP) , and a  
dentifrice containing Potassium Nitrate . 
 
The hypothesis of this study is that  CPP-ACP with fluoride  and 5000 ppm NaF 
with TCP  will exhibit a greater reduction in dentinal hypersensitivity  compared 
to the control ( dentifrice  containing Potassium Nitrate).  
 
The results of this pilot study will validate or negate the need for a larger 
clinical study that may provide generalizable results for using caries -
prevention products with the additional benefit of minimizing dentinal 
hypersensitivity.  
 
II) Background and Rationale  
 
Dentinal hyp ersensitivity commonly occurs in  patients with gingival recession, 
resulting from a reduced periodontium or  in patients w ho have undergone non -
surgical and surgical periodontal therapy .1,2 When the gingiva recede, the root 
surfaces of the teeth are exposed .3 In addition, after a  non-surgical or surgical 
periodontal procedure, the cementum of the root surface is removed as a result 
of scaling and root planing.  This leaves dentin exposed on the root surface  with 
open dentinal tubules .  In addition, dentin is  less mineralized than enamel and 
has a greater susceptibility to and a faster progression of root caries  and 
dentinal hypersensitivity .4 Root caries commonly occurs in patients who  have 
undergone periodontal therapy and extensive root caries often results in the 
extraction of t he tooth .5 
 
Dental professionals often make a variety of recommendations to remedy dental 
hypersensitivity, including the application of fluoride varnishes, a nti-
hypersensitivity toothpaste , gingival grafting procedures and various restorative 
procedures , aiming to occlude the dentinal tubules or desensitize the pulpal 
nerve endings .6,7 
 
Since the introduction of CAMBRA (CAries Management By Risk Assessment) in 
the Journal of the California Dental Association in 2007,8,9 the marketplace for 
anti-caries products has surged.  As a result, many approaches to the 
management of dental caries have been introduced and dental practitioners and 
sales representatives have promoted several anti -caries products.  In addition, 
the reduction or the abatement of the progression of dental caries (coronal, root 
and interproximal) as a result of a caries management program has been 
reported .10,11 Many caries management products hav e ingredients that include 
fluoride and calcium phosphate (Amorphous Calcium Phosphate -Casein 
Phosphopeptide (Recaldent ™) ,12 Tri-Calcium Phosphate ™ or Novamin ™) .13  
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 3 of 17 Moreover, encouraging clinical findings have been reported, including, but not 
limited t o the reduction of white spot enamel lesions and dentinal 
hypersensitivity .14 
 
The topical application of “antihypersensitivity” materials  is a common 
recommendation (least invasive of the “standard of care” recommendations) to 
diminish dentinal hypersensitivity and will serve to provide data for the research 
study.  The study will evaluate which of these products result in the greatest 
reduction of dentinal hypersensi tivity. The application of the experimental  
products for the reduction of dentinal hypersensitivity is for research purposes.   
 
The methods used to test sensitivity in this study have been used in published 
studies .6,15,16 The VAS scale used in this study has also been used for tooth 
sensitivity studies .16,17 A 30% decrease in VAS score has been shown to be 
clinically meaningful .18,19  
 
This pilot study would investigate the ability of anti -caries products to reduce 
dentinal hyp ersensitivity when compared to a sensitivity -reducing dentifrice.  It 
would be a novel contribution to the dental community if a material that is 
proven to reduce tooth decay is  also proven to reduce dentinal hypersensitivity.   
The results may potentially have a tremendous impact on the dental community 
because it may provide dental professionals a scientifically -supported approach 
to improve the comfort and quality of life of periodontal patients (patients who 
are treated for gum disease/ bone loss around teeth) and increase the lifespan 
of teeth that undergo periodontal treatment.  
 
III) Research Plan  
A) Experimental Design  
This pilot  study utilizes a single center, blinded, IRB -approved, randomized , 
prospective, paralleled group design to compare the reduct ion of dentinal 
hypersensitivity using CPP-ACP with fluoride  or 5000ppm NaF with TCP to  
potassium nitrate  (control) . 
 
B) Sample Size and Statistical Analysis  
Sample Size  
The primary analysis will be to compare the  percent  change in dentinal 
hypersensitivity b etween the 3 groups.  We assume that the control group may 
exhibit a modest improvement  in dentinal hypersensitivity (~5% ) whereas the 
two test groups should  demonstrate a more signif icant improvement (~30% ).  
Assuming a commo n standard deviation of 25% , we will have 58% power to 
detect a difference between the 3 groups using one w ay analysis of variance, 
with 1 0 subjects per group, and setting alpha to 0.05 (nQuery Advisor, Version 
7.0). Up to 13 subjects per group  will be recruited , to allow for a more t han 
20% dropout rate.  
 
The literature is varying on the amount of improvement possible with the products.  
Guidelines for sensitivity studies indicate that a main objective  
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 4 of 17 should be to produce a clinically  significant reduction in symptoms20.  With the use 
of VAS scores, a 30% decrease in VAS score has been shown to be clinically 
meaningful.18,19  For this study we anticipate a clinically meaningful decrease in 
sensitivity for the two test groups.  
 
 Statistical Analysis  
Normality will be assessed usi ng the Kolmogorov -Smirnov test.  If the 
assumptions of normality hold, then means and standard devia tions will be 
reported and the relationship between treatment arm and percent change in 
dentinal hypersensitivity will be tested using one -way ANOVA.  If the 
assumptions of normality do not hold, then medians and interquartile ranges 
will be reported and r elationships will be tested using the Kruskal -Wallis test.   
If the initial analyses are significant, then the post hoc  pairwise comparisons 
will be made using either independent -sample t -tests or Mann -Whitney U -
tests.  When patients are lost to follow -up, their information will be excluded 
from the analyses.  
All p-values less than 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.  
Analyses will be performed using SAS, Version 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).   
Randomization  
Each subject will be randomized to a treatment arm using a randomization 
website ( www.random.org ).  When subjects have multiple teeth eligible for the 
study, a separate randomization  scheme (also from www.random.org ) will be 
used to select that tooth.  A printout of the randomization scheme will be used 
by the investigator distributing the products.  
 
Blinding   
Examiners collecting the sensitivity data will be blinded as to which gro up the 
subject is in .  An investigator who did not examine the subject will distribute 
the product.  
 
C) Products  
 
Group                         Product 1  Product 2   
Group I  
(Control)  Sensodyne (Potassium 
Nitrate) manufactured by 
GalaxoSmithKline  N/A 
Group II   Crest Cavity Protection 
manufactured by Procter and 
Gamble  MI Paste  Plus (CPP-ACP with 
fluoride ) manufactured by 
GC America  
Group III  Clinpro 5000 (5000ppm NaF 
with TCP) manufactured by 
3M ESPE  N/A 
 
  
Senosydne is FDA approved for decreasing tooth sensitivity.  It is approved for 
use as it is being used this study.  
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 5 of 17  
Clinpro 5000 has been FDA approved for the prevention or reduction of dental 
caries.  A reduction in dentinal hypersensitivity has been anecdotally 
documented in the literature.  
 
MI Past e Plus is FDA approved for the reduction of dentinal hypersensitivity. It 
is approved for use as it is being used this study.  
Crest Cavity  Protection  Toothpaste is FDA approved as an anticavity drug.   
 
Oral-B 35 soft manual toothbrush  is FDA approved and being used as approved 
for this study.  
  
All products are  being used according to manufacturer’s instructions.  
 
D) Subject Characteristics  
 
1) Inclusion  Criteria  
− At least 18 years of age  
− Tooth with exposed root surface and/or exposed dent in 
− Tooth with a VAS score greater than or equal to 3 
− No adjacent tooth/teeth with sensitivity (as defined as  greater 
than 2  on the VAS)  
 
2) Exclusion Criteria  
− Participation in another dental study that may alter the results of 
this study . 
− A medical  condition that could interfere with reliable pain  
reporting (e.g., pain disorders)  
− Any chronic medical condition that requires the regular use of 
pain or anti -inflammatory medications  
− Used a desensitiz ing dentifrice within the preceding four weeks  
− Have rec eived an antihypersensitivity treatment (varnish or 
precipitating solution) of the identified tooth within the preceding 
four weeks  
− Undergoing active orthodontic treatment.  
− Teeth with carious lesions, buccal vertical cracks in enamel,  
evidence of irrevers ible pulpitis (pain lasting  more than five 
seconds after air stimulation)   
− Pregnant / lactating patients  (Clinpro5000 has 5000ppm fluoride 
and there is a risk of ingesting the product)  
− Patients with Milk Allergy  (CPP-ACP is a dairy based product)  
− Patients on Kidney Dialysis  (due to the free calcium in CPP -ACP, 
dialysis patients should be on a diet with limit ed calcium )  
3) Subject Withdrawal/Termination Criteria  
− Subjects will be withdrawn  from the study if they report the use 
of other dental hygiene products, including but not limited to: 
toothpaste, rinses, fluoride varnishes  
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 6 of 17 − Subjects will be withdrawn  from the  study if they undergo any 
phase I periodontal procedures, including a prophylaxis or scaling 
and root planing  
− Subjects would be withdrawn if they experience a negative side 
effect from any product used in the study .  
− The tooth being studied is extracted, damaged from trauma or 
receive s endodontic therapy.  
− Subjects may participate in another research study at the same 
time, as long as it does not impact the results from this study.  
− Subjects who do not comply with the study procedures, such as  
not returning for visits, not using product as documented in diar y, 
may be withdrawn from the study.  
− Subjects who become pregnant during the course of the study 
will be withdrawn. Subjects will be informed in the informed 
consent form to inform principal investigator or their designate if 
they become pregnant.  
− Subjects  who decide to stop participating in the study will be 
withdrawn.    
 
The Principal Investigator will determine whether subjects (either withdrawn 
subjects or subjects completing the study) are in need of additional treatment 
and/or follow -up observation a s a result of participation in this trial.   
 
E) Assessment  
1) Risk 
This study poses minimal risk to subjects as these are products that 
approved for use.   
 
With Clinpro5000, although the patient will be instructed not to ingest the 
product, ingestion may result in GI discomfort, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
cramping and fluorosis in children.  Fluoride exposure should be monitored 
in pregnant and nursing women.  Pregnant and lactating women and 
children will be excluded from this study.  
 
MI Paste  Plus contai ns Recaldent (Amorphous Calcium Phosphate -Casein 
Phosphopeptide) which is a milk -derived product .  This product is 
contraindicated with patients who have a milk protein (Casein IgE) allergy 
(this product is safe for lactose -intolerant patients).  Fluoride exposure 
should be monitored in pregnant and nursing women.  Pregnant and 
lactating women and children will be excluded from this study.  
 
Sensodyne contains fluoride and should not be ingested in large doses, 
especially by children.  Fluoride exposure shoul d be monitored in pregnant 
and nursing women.  Pregnant and lactating women and children will be 
excluded from this study.  
 
There is no anticipated risk with the completion of subject diaries.  
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 7 of 17  
There is the risk of some discomfort/sensitivity during tooth s ensitivity 
scoring.  
 
There is the risk of loss of confidentiality to the subject by participating in 
this study.  This risk will be kept to a minimum by following procedures 
listed under confidentiality.  
 
2) Benefits  
The subject may experience some decrease i n tooth sensitivity.  
 
3) Alternatives  
The alternative for the patient is to not participate in this study. An 
alternative for the patient to receive alternative  procedures  (e.g., fluoride 
treatment, topical desensitizer, composite restoration, or gingival graft) for 
sensitivity  at normal clinic fees.  
 
F) Study Procedures  
 
Visit 1: Screening Visit / Baseline : 
The subjects will be instructed to read the informed consent form (ICF ). 
Subjects will be  given ample time to have any questions answered . If a 
subject decides to participate, he or she will be instructed to sign the ICF. A 
copy of the ICF will be given to the subject.  
 
Subject will be asked to complete demographic informati on and a medical 
history.  
 
An oral exam, including evaluation of oral cavity and soft tissues, will be 
completed following standard of care procedures.  
 
All potential qualifying teeth will be evaluated for dentinal hypersensitivity and 
the one tooth with the most severe dentinal hy persensitivity  (in response to 
air) will be selected for the study.  If two or more teeth have the same score, 
one will be randomly selected.  
 
Each subject will be evaluated for the severity of dentinal hypersensitivity 
utilizing the VAS Scale to determine the subject’s perception of pain.  Testing 
methods described by Brahmbhatt et al.6 will be utilized in this study . Testing 
is for research purposes.   
 
Air test: A 1 second blast of air from an air -water syringe that is set to 
45psi at a distance of 10mm will be applied to the tooth. Adjacent teeth 
will be protected with fingers or cotton rolls.  The subject will classify the 
extent of the sensitivity on the VAS. If the discomfort becomes 
intolerable, the stimulus will be immediately removed.    
 
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 8 of 17 Water test: The patient will be given a 5 -minute rest between tests. 
Disposable, plastic syringes filled with water will be kept in an ice water 
bath until use. Then, cold water will be applied to tooth using a plastic 
syringe with a plastic tip. Three drops of water will be placed on the 
tooth16. Adjacent teeth will be protected with fingers or cotton rolls.  The 
subject will classify the extent of the sensitivity on the VAS. If the 
discomfort becomes intolerable, the stimulus w ill be immediately 
removed.    
 
Schiff Test:  The Schiff Sensitivity Scale21 will be utilized by the 
examiners to evaluate the response of the subjects  to both the air and 
water test . This analog scale scores for the tooth as 0, 1, 2 or 3 .  
 
0-Tooth/Subject does not respond to stimulus.  
1-Tooth/Subject responds to stimulus, but does not request 
discontinuation of stimulus.  
2-Tooth/Subject responds to stimulus and requests 
discontinuation or moves from stimulus.  
3-Tooth/Subject responds to stim ulus, considers stimulus to be 
painful, and requests discontinuation of the stimulus  
 
 
If the subject qualifies for the study, they will be entered into randomization.  
 
Intraoral photographs of the study teeth will be taken. Photographs are for 
research pu rposes.  Photographs will be taken at Visits 1 and 4.  Additional 
photographs may be taken to document any adverse reactions.  
 
After taking the data, the examiner will leave the operatory and another study 
team member will do the randomization.  In this way  the examiner will be 
blinded as to which group the subject is a part of.  
 
Subject will be randomized to one of three groups:  
Group I: Control  
The control group will use Sensodyne toothpaste twice daily (2 minutes 
each time  in the morning and the evening ) during the duration of the 
study.   
 
Group II:  
Subjects will be instructed to brush twice daily (2 minutes each time  in 
the morning and the evening ) using Crest Cavity Protection toothpaste. 
They will be instructed to apply  MI Paste Plus (CPP-ACP with fluoride ) 
twice daily  to the study teeth after brushing their teeth.  MI Paste  Plus 
will be applied to the study teeth with a finger.  
 
 
 
Group III:   
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 9 of 17 Subjects will be instructed to brush twice daily (2 minutes each time  in 
the morning and the evening ) using Clinpro 5000 (5000ppm NaF with 
TCP).  
 
The study team member will describe the proper use for the products and will 
review oral hygiene instructions .  Once the subject demonstrates 
understanding for the use of the products, the products and a handout for the 
use of the products will be distributed.  A toothbrush and 2 -minute timer will 
also be given to the subject.   The use of any other topical dental products  
(e.g., rinses, toothpastes, fluoride varnish)  will be discontinued.  The subjects  
may use additional products (e .g., dental floss, interproximal devices) to 
remove plaque.  Subjects will be given a diary in which to track product usage.  
Diary is f or research purposes.    
 
 
 
VAS 
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 
               No pain                     Worst pain imaginable  
 
 
 
Visit 2 (2 weeks  +/- 2 days after Visit 1 ):   
A study team member  who did not exam ine the subject at the initial visit  will 
ask the subject for any changes in the medical or dental history. The study 
team member will also  discuss patient compliance, adverse events, review and 
collect  the patient’s diary,  hand out a new patient diary, and  answer any 
questions that the subject  has regarding the products and dispense additional 
products, if necessary.  
 
Eligibility and subject withdrawal criteria will be reviewed to ensure the 
subject still qualifies for the study.  
 
The same examiner from the  initial visit will then  conduct the oral exam and 
collect the sensitivity data (if necessary, another examiner may see the 
subject, however, this will be avoided if possible) .   
 
An oral exam, including evaluation of oral cavity and soft tissues, will be 
completed following standard of care procedures.  
 
The same sensitivity tests will be done as at Visit 1. Tests are for 
research purposes.  
 
Visit 3 (4  weeks  +/- 2 days after Visit 1):   
A study team member  who did not exam the subject at the initial visit  will ask 
the subject for any changes in the medical or dental history. The study team 
member  will also  discuss patient compliance, adverse events, review and 
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 10 of 17 collect  the patient’s diary,  hand out a new pat ient diary , answer any questions 
that the subject  has regarding the products.  
 
Eligibility and subject withdrawal criteria will be reviewed to ensure the 
subject still qualifies for the study.  
 
The same examiner from the initial visit will then  conduct the oral exam and 
collect the sensitivity data (if necessary, another examiner may see the 
subject, however, this will be avoided if possible) .   
 
An oral exam, including evaluation of oral cavity and soft tissues, will be 
completed following stand ard of care procedures.  
 
The same sensitivity tests will be done as at Visit 1.  Tests are for 
research purposes.  
 
Visit 4 (8  weeks  +/- 1 week after Visit 1):   
A study team member who did not exam the subject at the initial visit  will ask 
the subject for any changes in the medical or dental history. The study team 
member  will also  discuss patient compliance, adverse events, review and 
collect the patient’s diary, answer any questions that the subject  has regarding 
the products.  
 
Eligibility an d subject withdrawal criteria will be reviewed to ensure the 
subject still qualifies for the study.  
 
The same examiner from the initial visit will then  conduct the oral exam and 
collect the sensitivity data (if necessary, another examiner may see the 
subject, however, this will be avoided if possible) .   
 
An oral exam, including evaluation of oral cavity and soft tissues, will be 
completed following standard of care procedures.  
 
The same sensitivity tests wi ll be done as at Visit 1. Tests are for 
research purposes.  
 
Intraoral p hotographs will be taken of the study  teeth. Photographs are for 
research purposes.  
 
All products may be kept by the subject at the end of the study.  
 
 
 
 
 
Subject timeline  
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 11 of 17                         Appointment  
 
 
Procedures  Visit 1  
Screening / 
Baseline  
 Visit 2 
(Treatment 
Day 14 ) Visit 3  
(Treatment 
Week 4 ) Visit 4  
(Treatment 
Week 8 ) 
Informed Consent  X    
Demographics  X   X 
Medical/Dental History  X X X X 
Evaluate Eligibility and 
Subject W ithdrawal C riteria  X X X X 
Oral Examination  X X X X 
Subject VAS Score (Air/Cold 
Water)  X X X X 
Examiner Schiff Sensitivity 
Scale  X X X X 
Digital Intraoral Photographs  X   X 
Assignment into Study Group  X    
Adverse Event Assessment   X X X 
Handout Diary  X X X  
Collect Diary   X X X 
Stipend  X X X X 
G) Subject Safety  
1) Adverse Event Reporting  
Adverse Events  
An adverse event  is any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a 
human subject, including any abnormal physical exam or laboratory 
finding, symptom, or disease, temporally associated with a subject’s 
participation in the research.   
 
Adverse events will be recorded in source documents and on case report 
forms. All adverse events and non -serious situations will be recorded, 
monitored, and reported to the IRB at time of continuing review.   
 
Serious Adverse Events  
A serious adverse event is one that r esults in death, or is life -threatening, 
or results in hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, or 
results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacitation, or results in a 
congenital anomaly/birth defect, or may jeopardize the subject’s health and 
may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other 
outcomes listed above.  
 
Serious adverse events will be recorded in source documents and on 
case report forms. Serious Adverse Events will be reported to the IRB 
within 15 business days.  
 
Unanticipated Problems  
An unanticipated problem is an incident, experience, or outcome that 
meets all of the following criteria: 1) The nature, severity, or frequency 
is unexpected for the subject population or research activities as 
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 12 of 17 describ ed in the current IRB approved protocol, supporting documents, 
and the ICF(s); 2) it is related or possibly related to participation in the 
research; 3) it suggests the  research may place the subject or others at 
a greater risk of harm then was previously recognized.  
 
Unanticipated problems will be recorded in source documents and on 
case report forms. Unanticipated problems will be reported to the IRB 
within 5 business days.  
 
H) Subject P articipation  
 
1) Screening  
The s tudy co -investigators will conduct screening examinations to identify 
subjects who meet the inclusion / exclusion criteria for enrollment into the 
study.  
 
2) Informed Consent  
An investigator or study coordinator (who is GCP and CITI trained) will 
introduce the study.  Patients will be asked to read the consent form and 
given ample opportunity to have their questions answered.  An investigator 
will assess the patient’s competency to provide consent by discussing th e 
study with the patient and ensuring that they understand the study. 
Patients will certify their willingness to participate in the study by signing 
and dating the IRB approved informed consent document.  The subject will 
be given a copy of the consent for m.    
 
If any new finding requires any change to the informed consent form, the 
subject will be reconsented.  
 
Non-English speaking subjects will not be enrolled in the study because 
study staff at this time are not certified, prepared, or trained to transl ate 
or communicate in any language other than English. The study budget does 
not allow for the payment of translation services at this time.  
 
3) Study Location  
Tufts University School of Dental Medicine  
 
4) Personnel  
Respo nsible for ong oing communication with the IRB – PI 
 
Obtaining  informed consent  – PI, Co -Is, and study coordinator ( who is GCP 
and CITI trained )  
 
Maintaining study records – PI  
 
Sensitivity testing and oral exam – PI and Co-Is 
 
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 13 of 17 Product distribution and instructions, answer ing any questions that the 
subject  has regarding the products.  – Study coordinator (with instruction 
from PI/Co -I who has not treated subject).  
 
Review ing and collect ing the patient’s diary,  handing out diaries  - PI, study 
coordinator/team member  
 
Intraoral photographs – PI, Co -Is 
 
Gift card distribution – PI, study coordinator/team member  
 
5) Payment for Participation  
(a) Compensation  
The subject will be given up to $ 100 in gift  cards.  $2 5 upon completion 
of visit 1, $2 5 upon completion of visit 2, $2 5 upon completion of visit 
3, $25 upon completion of visit 4 . 
 
(b) Transportation  
No reimbursement will be given for transportation or parking  
 
(c) Payment and Insurance  
There will be no fees associate d with the study procedures.  Neither the 
subject, nor their insurance company, will be billed for any study 
procedures.  
 
6) Study Results  
If interested, a copy of the published paper will be mailed to interested 
study participants.  A log will be kept of the participants who are 
interested in receiving study results.  
 
7) Confidentiality  
(i) To ensure confidentiality of subject information, each subject 
enrolled in the study will be assigned a unique alphanumeric code. 
Subjects’ files will be kept in a secure, loc ked cabinet in a secure 
room (DHS -1418) when the files are not reviewed. The information 
will only be shared between the researchers. All HIPAA requirements 
will be followed. All electronic files will be kept on a password 
protected computer in a secure, l ocked office.  
 
(a) Coding  
(i) Each will be assigned a subject identification number.  Alphanumeric 
identification numbers will be assigned sequentially. The full subject 
identification number will consist of the three letters from the 
subject’s initials and their enrollment number.  This will be accessible 
by study personnel only.  
 
(b) Access  / Data Safety Monitoring Board  
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 14 of 17 Only study personnel will have access to data.  Investigators will permit 
monitoring, audits, and regulatory inspections and will provide dire ct 
access to study related documentation.  
 
10) Data Safety Monitoring Plan:  
Study personnel will monitor this trial for all safety related issues to 
determine whether an unreasonable risk to subjects develops. Quality 
control measures include routine inspection of case report forms, source 
documents, data tabulations, and tracking of adverse events  
 
11) New Findings  
The subject will be informed of any significant new findings discovered 
during the course of this study that might influence the subject’s 
continuation and participation in the study.  Subjects will be told at a study 
appointment or via telephone of new findings during the study.   
 
If new findings require revisions to the ICF, the subject will be re -
consented.  
 
I) Collaboration  
N/A 
 
J) Record Retention  
1) Study Records  
The Investigator will maintain all study records and documents during 
the study period.  All paper files and documents will be kept in a locked 
file cabinet , within a locked room (DHS -212).  Electronic records will be 
kept on a pass word protected computer and only be accessible to study 
personnel.  
 
2) Long Term Retention  
The investigator will maintain all study records following completion or 
termination of this study in accordance to state law and institutional policy  
(at least 7 years  after study is complet ed or terminat ed). 
 
K) Reporting  
1) Final Report  
Unanticipated problems and adverse events will be reported per the Tufts 
MC/TUHS IRB Unanticipated Problem and Adverse Event Reporting Policy.  
 
The IRB will be notified of any deviations from the protocol in cases of 
medical emergencies when the change is  necessary to eliminate an 
apparent immediate hazard to the subject  
Progress reports on the investigation shall be submitted to the IRB at 
regular intervals, but in no event less often than yearly, e.g., at continuing 
review.   
 
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 15 of 17 L) Protocol Deviations  
No prot ocol changes or deviations will be made without prior agreement by the 
IRB unless implemented to prevent an immediate hazard to subjects.  All other 
protocol changes or deviations will be made by a formal amendment subject 
to IRB approval.  All such change s or deviations will be reported to the IRB as 
they occur and included in the final study report.  
 
M) Study Termination  
This study may be terminated for the following reasons:  
Discovery of unforeseen risk that could jeopardize the dental/physical 
well-being of subjects.  
Enrollment or recall rates that are not likely to produce sufficient data 
for evaluation of safety and efficacy  
Non-compliance with the clinical investigational plan, the Investigator  
Agreement, applicable FDA regula tions or conditions of approval 
imposed by the reviewing IRB  
Withdrawal of IRB approval  
In the event of study termination, the Principal Investigator will determine 
whether subjects are in need of additional treatment and/or follow -up 
observation as a res ult of participation in this trial.  
N) Subject Recruitment/Advertising  
Paper flyers will be posted throughout TUSDM , Tufts University School of 
Medicine and Tufts University School of Nutrition Science and Policy . 
Permission is not required for these posting locations. Flyers will remain posted 
until enrollment goals are met. Subjects will be recruited through responding 
to posted study advertisements.  The same language from the approved flyers 
may be posted on t he TUSDM website  and screen in the lobby . 
Investigators may also  verbally  inform clinic patients , faculty members who 
oversee students in the clinic, and post -graduate residents about the study.  
Investigators may send messages to colleagues via axiUm or i nform colleagues 
verbally, asking for their help in recruiting eligible subjects.  
An email  that alert s the TUSDM community to ongoing studies may include 
information on this study for recruiting purposes.  
Advertisements/information regarding the study ma y be posted on Facebook 
and/or Craigslist.  
All of the forms of recruitment will be submitted to the IRB for approval prior 
to use .  
A screening interview/questionnaire or screening script will be used for 
recruitment. Screen failure data will be retained by PI. Screening ID number 
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 16 of 17 and demographic information will be recorded.  Identifiable information will 
not be recorded in the screeni ng log.  
 
O) References/Bibliography  
1) Pradeep, AR., Sharma, A.  A Comparison of Clinical Efficacy of a Dentifrice 
Containing Calcium Sodium Phosphosilicate to a Dentifrice Containing 
Potassium Nitrate and to a Placebo on Dentinal Hypersensitivity:  A 
Randomized  Clinical Trial.  J Periodontol.  2010; 81(8):  1167 -1173.  
2) Yilmaz, HG., Kurtulmus -Yilmaz, S., Cengiz, E.,  Long -Term Effect of Diode 
Laser Irradiation Compared to Socium Fluoride Varnish in the Treatment 
of Dentine Hypersensitivity in Periodontal Maintenan ce Patients:  A 
Randomized Controlled Clinical Study.  Photomedicine and Laser Surgery.  
2011; 29(11):  721 -725. 
3) West, NX.  Dentine hypersensitivity:  preventive and therapeutic 
approaches to treatment.  Periodontology 2000.  2008; 48:  31 -41. 
4) Saunders Jr., RH., Meyerowitz, C.  Dental Caries in Older Adults.  Dent 
Clin N Am.  2005:  49; 293 -308. 
5) Hull, PS., Worthingto n, HV., Clerehugh, V., Tsirba, R., Davies, RM., 
Clarkson, JE.  The reasons for tooth extractions in adults and their 
validation.  J Dent .  1997; 25(3 -4):  233 -237. 
6) Brahmbhatt, N., Bhavasar, N., Sahayata, V., Acharya, A.,  Kshatriya, P.  A 
double blind cont rolled trial comparing three treatment modalities for 
dentin hypersensitivity .  Med Oral Pat hol Oral Cir Bucal.  2012 May 1;17 
(3):e483 -90. 
7) Orsini, G., et al.  A double -blind randomized -controlled trial comparing the 
desentizing efficacy of a new dentifrice containing 
carbonate/hydroxyapatite nanocrystals and a sodium fluoride/potassium 
nitrate dentifrice.  J Clin Perio dontol .  2010; 37: 510 -517. 
8) Journal of the California Dental Association, October 2007 (entire journal)  
9) Journal of the California Dental Association, November 2007 (entire journal)  
10) Featherstone JD, Zero DT. An in situ model for simultaneous assessment of 
inhibition of demineraliz ation and enhancement of remineralization. J Dent 
Res 1992 Apr;71 Spec No:804 -10. 
11) Ito, A., Hayashi, M., Ebisu, S.  How regular visits and preventive programs 
affect onset of adult caries.  J Dent Res.  Jul 2012; 91(7 Suppl):52S -58S. 
12) Wang, J., Yan, Y., Wang , X.  Clinical evaluation of remineralization potential 
of casein phosphopeptide amorphous calcium phosphate nanocomplexes 
for enamel decalcification in orthodontics.  Chinese Med J.  2012; 125(22): 
4018-4021.  
13) Su, N., Marek, CL., Ching, V., Grushka, M. Caries prevention for patients 
with dry mouth.  J Can Dent Assoc.  2011;77: 1 -8. 
14) Kowalczyk A, Botulinski B, Jaworska M, Kierklo A, Pawinska M, Dabrowska 
E. Evaluation of the p roduct based on Recaldent tech nology in the 
treatment of dentin hypersensitivity. Adv Med Sci.  2006;51: 40 –42. 
15) Rajesh, KS, Shashikanth Hedge, Arun Kumar, MS., Shetty DG.  Evaluation 
of the efficacy of a 5% calcium sodium phosphosilicate (Novamin) 
A Clinical Study Comparing Three Caries Prevention Products on Dentinal Hypersensitivity  
 
Version 4/4/17                   Page 17 of 17 containing dentifrice for the relief of dentinal hypersensitivity.  Indian 
Journal of Dent Res .  2012;23(3):  363 -7. 
16) Holland, GR., Narhi, MN., Addy, M., Gangarosa, L., Orchardson, R.  
Guidelines for the design and conduct of clinical trials on dentine 
hypersensitivity. J Clin Perio.  1997 (24):  808 -13. 
17) Hughes, N., Mason, S., Jeffery, P., Welton, H., Tobin, M., O’Shea, C., 
Browne, M.  A Comparative clinical study investigating the efficacy of a 
test dentifrice containing 8% strontium acetate and 1040ppm sodium 
fluoride versus a marketed control dentifrice  containing 8% arginine, 
calcium carbonate, and 1450ppm sodium monofluorophosphate in 
reducing dentinal hypersensitivity.  J Clin Dent.  2010; 21(2):  49 -55. 
18) Ritter AV., de L. Dias, W., Miguez, Pl, Caplan, DJ., Swift Jr., EJ.  Treating 
cervidal dentin hype rsensitivity with fluoride varnish.  A randomized 
clinical study.  JADA.   2006 Jul(137):  1013 -20. 
19) Raymond, WJ., Ostelo, JG., Deyo, RA., Stratford,P., Waddell, G., Croft, P., 
Von Korff., Bouter, LM., C de Vet, H.  Interpreting Change Scores for Pain 
and Fu nctional Status in Low Back Pain.  Towards International Consensus 
Regarding Minimal Important Change.  SPINE.  2008;33(1):  90 -4.  
20) Holland GR, Narhi MN, Addy M, Gangarosa L, Orchardson R.  Guidelines 
for the design and conduct of clinical trials on dentin e hypersensitivity.  J 
Clin Periodontol  1997; 24:  808 -13. 
21) Schiff T, Dotson M, Cohen S, DeVizio W, Volpe A. Efficacy of a dentifrice 
containing potassium nitrate, soluble pyrophosphate, PVM/MA copolymer, 
and sodium fluoride on dentinal hypersensitivity: A twelve - week clinical 
study. J Clin Dent  1994; 5 (Sp Is): 87 -92. 
 
 
 
 