4-13-22
Version 1. 1 
Protocol: Micronutrient supplementation in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD): A clinical  
trial examining mechanism of action  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Background: 
Prior studies have suggested that children with developmental disorders including autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD) have nutritional deficiencies and/or imbalances in vitamins and minerals, including low 
levels of vitamin D, lithium, zinc, and methionine and high levels of vitamin B6, vitamin C, and beta-
carotene, among others.1 These nutritional deficiencies may be responsible for impaired methylation, 
decreased glutathione levels, and increased oxidative stress seen in children with ASD.1  
The high prevalence of nutritional deficiencies in ASD may be due to dietary patterns in this population, 
and multiple studies indicate that children with ASD consume less varied diets with limited fruits and 
vegetables.2 Also, children with ASD have a high prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms including 
diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal pain,3 which likely affects the absorption of nutrients and the 
composition of healthy bacteria in the intestinal tract (microbiome).  
There are likely functional consequences to these highly prevalent nutritional deficiencies. One analysis 
found that autism severity scores were correlated with levels of vitamins, minerals, and amino acids.1 A 
double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of a vitamin/mineral supplement in 141 children 
with autism found numerous improvements in nutritional biomarkers as well as a statistically significant 
improvement in parent ratings of child functioning (with specific questions on language, behavior, social 
function, sleep, gastrointestinal symptoms, and eye contact). The parent rating scale ranged from 1 to 7 
(lower scores better), and the children in the treatment group had a 0.34 greater improvement in this 
score (which was described as a modest benefit). There was no improvement in the Social 
Responsiveness Scale (SRS) or the Pervasive Developmental Disorder Behavior Inventory (PDD-BI).4 A 
subsequent study from the same group evaluated a more complex intervention that included a 
nutritional supplement as well as digestive enzymes, carnitine, essential fatty acids, Epsom-salt baths, 
and a healthy gluten-free, casein-free, soy free diet. The study found improvements in autism 
symptoms but was limited by the single-blind study design.5  
Micronutrient supplementation in other developmental disorders, including Attention 
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), have also shown clinical benefits. In a randomized controlled 
trial of 135 children (mean age 9.8) with ADHD, 54% of children treated with micronutrients were 
defined as 
4-13-22 
Version 1. 1 
“responders” on a clinical global impression scale vs. only 18% of children i n the placebo group. The 
treated children also had a small but significantly greater increase in height (6mm), but the parent 
ratings were not improved in the treatment group.6 
Several potential mechanisms of action of micronutrients  supplementation on improved clinical 
outcomes  have been proposed, including changes in gut microbiota, methylation capacity, and 
inflammation.7-9 Further clarification of the mechanism of action of micronutrient supplementation has 
the potential to identify specific pathways involved in clinical benefits and allow for more targeted 
treatment by screening children for nutritional deficienci es and modifying supplement formulations to 
optimize benefits. We previously demonstrated the value of using urinary metabolomics to identify 
physiological changes associated with clinical outcomes in a clinical trial of sulforaphane (an antioxidant 
supple ment) in children with ASD.10 Fifteen children were enrolled and had a comprehensive urinar y 
metabolomic analysis performed at baseline and after 8 weeks of treatment with sulforaphane. Five 
metabolic pathways – oxidative stress, amino acid/gut microbiome, neurotransmitters, hormones, and 
sphingomyelin metabolites were correlated with changes in  clinical outcome measures. The 
sphingomyelin metabolite identification was novel and suggested a possible new line of research to 
determine whether antioxidant supplementation might alter this important component of neuronal 
development.10 
Since micronutrient deficiencies are common in children with ASD, and because there is scientific 
evidenc e to suggest that supplementation may produce important clinical benefits, we seek to more 
precisely examine the mechanism of action of micronutrient supplementation through a clinical trial 
using comprehensive, before -and-after metabolomic analyses. Since  the prior study, the metabolomics 
field has advanced so that it is now possible to obtain metabolomic analyses using Dried Blood Spots 
(DBS), which are minimally invasive (requiring only a fingerstick and a drop of blood), and provide a 
much broader metab olomic analysis than urine. We therefore plan to use this new technology in the 
current study. The analyses may suggest specific metabolic changes that underlie clinical improvements 
in ASD, which may provide a greater understanding of the physiology of AS D and lead to improved, 
targeted treatment options.  
 
Methods:  
4-13-22 
Version 1. 1 
Approvals:  The clinical trial will be reviewed and approved by the UCSF Committee on Human Research 
prior to performing any study activities. The study protocol will be registered at clinicalt rials.gov.  
Participants: The UCSF investigative team has an ongoing relationship with a local, non -public school 
(Oak Hill School, San Anselmo, CA) that specializes in the education of children and young adults with 
autism and related neurodevelopmental di sorders (ages 5 -22, grades K -12). This unique academic -
school -parent partnership was created with the goal of improving overall care and communication 
between caregivers, clinical providers, and teachers. All children/families attending the school (n=50 
currently) will be invited to participate in the study through e -mail, informational flyers, and an evening 
informational session.  
Children and young adults w ill be  eligible to participate if they are enrolled in the school, ha ve a formal 
diagnosis of autism, report no use of micronutrient supplements within the last 3 months , are willing to 
hold other treatments constant for the 8-week study period, ha ve no major medical problems other 
than ASD, are willing to provide urine sampl es, and parents were willing to complete on -line surveys at 
specified intervals. ASD is defined as being present if the child ha s a diagnosis from a medical 
professional trained to diagnose autism, or if the student is determined by school staff and the st udy 
psychiatrist to meet Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fourth Edition ( DSM–IV) 
criteria for ASD. Informed consent w ill be  obtained from the parent/caregiver of all child study 
participants  and directly from all adult study particip ants. Adults who are conserved will go through an 
informed consent process and provide assent, and their conservator will be asked to provide informed 
consent.  
Intervention:  
The planned study is  open -label  and all clinicians, parents, and teachers w ill be  aware of the treatment 
initiation and duration of 8 weeks. All enrolled children w ill be  provided a micronutrient 
supplementation (EM Power Plus).  
Objectives and outcomes:  
The primary goal of the study  is to determine if any observed changes in symptoms of ASD are 
correlated with changes in metabolites  that occur during treatment with micronutrients . We 
hypothes ize that micronutrient  treatment w ill lead to changes in physiological pathways  and that those 
changes w ill correlate with clinical improvements.  
4-13-22 
Version 1. 1 
The two primary o utcome  measure  is the correlation of the changes in clinical symptoms with the 
change in specific metabolites. Two measures will b e used to assess the  change in core and associated 
features of autism : the Autism Behavior Inventory, Short Form (ABI -S) and the Social Responsiveness 
Scale (SRS) . The ABI -S is an observer -reported outcome scale designed specifically to measure change 
and severity of ASD symptoms and has been shown to have content validity when completed by 
caregivers.11  The SRS is one of the most commonly used outcome measures in clinical trials  of ASD and 
focuses on social responsiveness and interaction .12 Parents/caregivers w ill be  asked to complete both 
measures at baseline, 4 weeks, and 8 weeks using an on -line and secure platform.  
Dried blood spots (DBS)  will be  collected on the day of study initiation and on the final day of the study 
after the 8-week treatment  period. We will be using “batch enrollment” where the parents and 
caregivers of all potentially eligible participants will be screened for eligibility and  asked to go through 
an informed consent process. Once the final “set” of eligible student participants is identified, they will 
all be given the study medication and have the DBS sample collected on the same day. DBS is collected 
using a simple, sterile, finger -prick device  and technique , which generates a drop of blood. The 
participant will be assisted to place his/her finger on a special DBS “card” which will collect the drop of 
blood. DBS cards  will be  individually packaged and stored immediately at -80 °C. During the screening 
visit, children  will have a  brief physical examination including height and weight to guide the proper 
dosing. Micronutrient treatment will be  provided at the screening visit alon g with dosing instructions , 
but participants will not begin the treatment until the study initiation day, when the DBS samples are 
collected.  
Safety assessments:  
Parents/caregivers and teachers w ill be  advised to report any concerns about a new medical pr oblem 
immediately to the study investigators, who w ill be  available at all times to receive reports of possible 
adverse effects. At the 4 week and 8-week on -line questionnaires, parents/caregivers w ill be  asked to 
report any new medical problems or concern s for possible side effects.  
Metabolomic analyses:  
All DBS samples w ill be  sent on dry ice in one batch to Metabolon (Morrisville, NC). Metabolomics 
analys es will be  conducted at Metabolon as previously described 13.  Briefly, samples w ill be  subjected to 
methanol extraction, then split into five aliquots for analysis by ultrahigh performance/mass 
spectrometry in the positive (two methods), negative or polar i on modes.  Metabolites w ill be  identified 
4-13-22 
Version 1. 1 
by automated comparison of ion features to a reference library of chemical standards followed by visual 
inspection for quality control 14. For statistical analyses and data display, any missing values w ill be  
assumed to be below the limits of detection; these values w ill be  imputed with the compound minimum 
(minimum value imputation).   Data w ill then  be normalized by measured osmolality, which is necessary 
to reduce the variability 15. A metabolic pathway for a given metabolite w ill be  assigned based on prior 
designations in the literature combined with experience from prior datasets at Metabolon.  
 
Statistical methods:  
Summary statistics w ill be  used to describe the variables.   Change in both the clinical variables and the 
metabolites w ill be  computed as post -test minus pre -test.   Pearson’s correlation coefficient w ill be  
estimated and tested to index the association between the change in each of t he two clinical scales and 
the change in each metabolite. Given the early -stage nature of the research, we will not adjust for 
multiple comparisons because we believe  it was more important to risk a Type II error than to miss a 
potentially important signal  by being overly conservative, as has been suggested by prior authors 16.   
We define, a priori , that a correlation cutoff of an absolute value of > 0.6 is of potential clinical 
relevance, because, given our planned sample size of 25, we w ill have approximately 80% power to 
detect a correlation of that size and such a correlation accounts for roughly one -third of the variance. 
Others have suggested that correlations with an absolute value of > 0.6 indicate a moderate or higher 
correlation 17 (and are hence of greatest interest in pointing to a mechanism of action).  
We also  plan to  examine the number of participants who ha ve a “clinical response, ” defined a priori  as 
an improvement of 4 or more points in the AB I-S. We will compare  the pre -post changes in the AB I-S 
and SRS in the responder and non -responder groups using the student’s t -test.  
  
4-13-22 
Version 1. 1 
Planned Data Tables:  
 
Table 1: Characteristics of Enrolled Participants  
 Category  Characteristic  Subjects  
N=15  
    % N 
Gender  Male    
 
Female    
Ethnicity  White    
 
Asian/Pacific  Islander    
 
No response    
Age 7-10   
 
11-14   
 
15-21   
 
Mean Age    
Primary diagnosis  Autism Spectrum Disorder    
Comorbidities  Intellectual Disability    
 
Language Disorder    
 
ADHD    
 
Pica   
 
Global Development  Delay    
 
Learning Disability    
 Other    
Current meds  Sertraline    
 
Lurasidone    
 
Risperidone    
 
Birth Control    
 
Zonis amide    
 Other    
 
4-13-22 
Version 1. 1 
Table 2: Metabolite correlations  
 Primary Outcome Measure   
Metabolite  ABI-S 
Corr.      p-value  SRS 
Corr.      p-value  Metabolic Pathway  
Amino acids (endogenous)     
    
Benzene metabolism   
       
Cholesterol metabolism     
     
Fatty acids     
     
Monoterpene phenol     
     
Neurotransmitters   
       
Oxidative stress     
     
Polyol   
       
Sphingomyelin     
     
Sugars   
       
TCA cycle     
     
Other   
      
  
4-13-22 
Version 1. 1 
 
Table 3. Change in outcome scores over the 12 -week study period  
Outcome Measure  Adjusted Mean Scores (95% CI)  Change from Baseline (95% CI)  
 Baseline  1 month  3 months  1 month  p 3 
months  p 
Autism  Behavior 
Inventory  
Total Score         
Social 
Communication         
Restrictive and 
Repetitive Behaviors         
Mental Health         
Self-regulation         
Challenging 
Behaviors         
Social Responsiveness 
Scale  
Total Score         
Awareness         
Cognition         
Communication         
Mannerisms         
Motivation         
Mean change scores will be adjusted for age and gender; *indicates statistically significant change from 
baseline  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-13-22 
Version 1. 1 
REFERENCES:  
1. Adams JB, Audhya T, McDonough -Means S, et al. Nutritional and metabolic status of children 
with autism vs. neurotypical children, and the association with autism severity. Nutr Metab (Lond) 
2011;8:34.  
2. Chistol LT, Bandini LG, Must A, Phillips S, Cermak SA, Curtin C. Sensory Sensitivity and Food 
Selectivity in Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder.  J Autism Dev Disord 2018;48:583 -91. 
3. McElhanon BO, McCracken C, Karpen S, Sharp WG. Gastrointestinal symptoms in autism 
spectrum disorder: a meta -analysis. Pediatrics 2014;133:872 -83. 
4. Adams JB, Audhya T, McDonough -Means S, et al. Effect of a vitamin/ mineral supplement on 
children and adults with autism. BMC Pediatr 2011;11:111.  
5. Adams JB, Audhya T, Geis E, et al. Comprehensive Nutritional and Dietary Intervention for 
Autism Spectrum Disorder -A Randomized, Controlled 12 -Month Trial. Nutrients 2018;10 . 
6. Johnstone JM, Hatsu I, Tost G, et al. Micronutrients for Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 
in Youths: A Placebo -Controlled Randomized Clinical Trial. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2021.  
7. Gustafsson HC, Sullivan EL, Nousen EK, et al. Mate rnal prenatal depression predicts infant 
negative affect via maternal inflammatory cytokine levels. Brain Behav Immun 2018;73:470 -81. 
8. Stevens AJ, Purcell RV, Darling KA, Eggleston MJF, Kennedy MA, Rucklidge JJ. Human gut 
microbiome changes during a 10 w eek Randomised Control Trial for micronutrient supplementation in 
children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Scientific reports 2019;9:10128.  
9. Stevens AJ, Rucklidge JJ, Darling KA, Eggleston MJ, Pearson JF, Kennedy MA. Methylomic 
changes in response to micronutrient supplementation and MTHFR genotype. Epigenomics 
2018;10:1201 -14. 
10. Bent S, Lawton B, Warren T, et al. Identification of urinary metabolites that correlate with 
clinical improvements in children with autism treated with sulforaph ane from broccoli. Molecular 
autism 2018;9:35.  
11. Pandina G, Ness S, Trudeau J, et al. Qualitative evaluation of the Autism Behavior Inventory: use 
of cognitive interviewing to establish validity of a caregiver report scale for autism spectrum disorder. 
Health Qual Life Outcomes 2021;19:26.  
12. Duku E, Vaillancourt T, Szatmari P, et al. Investigating the measurement properties of the social 
responsiveness scale in preschool children with autism spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord 
2013;43:860 -8. 
13. Long T, Hicks M, Yu HC, et al. Whole -genome sequencing identifies common -to-rare variants 
associated with human blood metabolites. Nature genetics 2017;49:568 -78. 
14. Dehaven CD, Evans AM, Dai H, Lawton KA. Organization of GC/MS and LC/MS metabolomics 
data in to chemical libraries. Journal of cheminformatics 2010;2:9.  
15. Chetwynd AJ, Abdul -Sada A, Holt SG, Hill EM. Use of a pre -analysis osmolality normalisation 
method to correct for variable urine concentrations and for improved metabolomic analyses. Journal o f 
chromatography A 2016;1431:103 -10. 
16. Rothman KJ. No adjustments are needed for multiple comparisons. Epidemiology 1990;1:43 -6. 
17. Mukaka MM. Statistics corner: a guide to appropriate use of correlation coefficient in medical 
research. Malawi Medical J ournal 2012;24:69 -71. 
 