 Page 1 of 13 
  
    
Study Title 
 
Biofeedback to Increase Propulsion during Walking after Stroke  
 
        
NCT# 
02667392 
 
      
Date 
8/08/19 
                  
 
 Page 2 of 13 
 Protocol 
1. Project Title: Biofeedback to Increase  Propulsion during Wa lking after Stroke 
2. Investigator(s):  Dorian Rose, PhD, PT 
    Dave Clark, ScD 
3. Abstract: 
Background/Purpose: Approximately 15,000 Veterans are hospitali zed for stroke each year. 
Impairments of motor control and the subsequent functional limi tations in ambulation are the 
most common manifestations and regaining the ability to walk is  the number one stated goal 
of Veteran stroke survivors. Forward propulsion of the body’s c enter of mass is a cardinal 
feature of gait that depends on the generation of appropriate a nterior-posterior ground 
reaction forces. Decreased propulsive force generation by the p aretic limb of stroke 
survivors has been identified through both simulation and cross -sectional studies as a major 
contributor to walking d ysfunction. Extrinsic verbal  feedback from a therapist is the standard 
approach used during gait retraining to improve propulsion gene ration. However, this key 
component of gait is not directly observable by therapists and patients are often unable to 
sense propulsion generation due to impaired intrinsic feedback,  specifically deficits in 
somatosensation and proprioception, hindering recovery of paret ic propulsion and 
compromising walking function. T he objective of this study is t o provide preliminary 
evidence that biofeedback as an adjuvant to therapists’ verbal feedback will improve 
propulsion and enhance walking function for Veterans post-strok e. 
Subjects: Thirty individuals > 6 -months post-stroke will partic ipate. Additional study criteria 
include: 1) Ambulation of househ old distances without physical assistance to advance or 
support the paretic leg; 2) Unilateral leg paresis confirmed by  a score of < 32 on the Fugl-
Meyer Motor Assessment; 3) Step length asymmetry (paretic > non -paretic step length); 4) 
Ambulation without an assistive or orthotic device. 
Methods: Participants will be randomized to either an experimen tal group that will train with 
propulsion biofeedback from commercially available pressure-sen sitive insole sensors 
(Biofeedback group; n=15) or a control group that will train wi th standard therapist-provided 
verbal feedback alone (Standard group; n=15). The 12 session (3 X/week for 4 weeks) gait 
training intervention will be delivered by a physical therapist -led team. For participants in the 
Biofeedback group, prior to the first intervention session, the  baseline amount of pressure 
exerted by the paretic forefoot during late stance will be dete rmined. The insole area 
underlying the forefoot will then be calibrated to produce a to ne when pressure exceeds 5% 
of this baseline pressure. This  threshold will be progressively  increased at regular intervals 
throughout the intervention peri od to ensure participants are t raining at their challenge-point 
to improve propulsion of the par etic limb.  An insole of simila r thickness will be worn in the 
shoe of the non-paretic leg for symm etry and comfort but will n ot produce a tone during the 
intervention. Those in the Standard group will not wear insoles  during intervention but will 
receive verbal feedbac k alone regarding pr opulsion of the paret ic limb during gait training. 
Therapist-provided verbal feedback will be used to instruct par ticipants on achieving and/or 
maintaining appropriate movement patterns that contribute to pr opulsion generation. For 
 Page 3 of 13 
 both groups, the therapist will choose from a standardized bank  of gait activities, suitable to 
each participant’s ability level. The goal for total walking ti me for each session will be 50 
minutes: 5, 10-minute bouts with a 2-minute rest between each b out. 
Outcome Measures: Paretic limb propulsion is our primary outcom e measure. Secondary 
measures include the Six Minute Walk Test, Functional Gait Asse ssment, Fall Self-Efficacy, 
temporal-distance gait measures and gait kinematics, and lower extremity strength 
measures, all of which will be measured pre- and post-intervent ion.  
Data Analysis Plan: Descriptive statistics will be provided for  all outcome measures. To 
identify the effect of the interv ention, differences between th e pre- and post-training 
assessment within each group (i.e. change scores) will be calcu lated. To test our 
hypotheses, we will apply independent sample t-tests to the cha nge scores of the 
Biofeedback and Standard group. Hypothesis testing will be cond ucted at a two-sided p < 
0.05 level.  
4.  Background: 
Improved walking ability is cons idered one of the most importan t outcomes of stroke 
rehabilitation1 with walking speed a widel y used measure of recovery2 and surrogate for 
functional walking ability.3 Forward propulsion of the body center of mass (COM) is a 
cardinal feature of normal, effi cient adult gait that depends o n the generation of 
appropriate anterior-posterior g round reaction forces (AP GRFs) . Decreased propulsive 
force generation by the paretic l imb of stroke survivors during  walking has been identified 
through both simulation and cros s-sectional stud ies as a major contributor to walking 
dysfunction.4-7 Bowden et. al., 8 demonstrated that propulsion sy mmetry during walking is 
able to differentiate individual s post-stroke as limited commun ity versus community 
ambulators and that those who achieve clinically meaningful imp rovements in walking 
speed also improve propulsion sy mmetry. With this direct link b etween paretic propulsive 
ability and posts troke walking performance, it is important to develop rehabilitation 
interventions that targe t paretic propulsion. 
The primary contributor to the pr opulsive impulse  in healthy co ntrols is activity of the 
ankle plantarflexors.9, 10 Similarly, in individuals post-s troke, coordinat ed activity of  the 
plantarflexor muscles in late sta nce and preswing positively co rrelated with paretic 
propulsive impulse.11 From work in our own lab, Cla rk and colleagues, in their 
investigation of modular organiz ation of muscle activity post-s troke revealed  that deficits 
in independent modulation of the quadriceps and plantarflexors resulted in decreased 
propulsion of the paretic com pared to the non paretic leg.12 Peterson and colleagues6 
further determined that hip ext ension angle was a significant p redictor and positively 
correlated with propul sive impulse of the pa retic leg. Given th at activity of the ankle 
plantarflexors and hip extension angle are primary contributors  to paretic propulsion,6 
Awad and colleagues implemented  a gait rehabilitation intervent ion consisting of 
Functional Electrical Stimulati on (FES) to the ankle plantarfle xors (to increase muscle 
activation) while participants am bulated at their maximum speed  (to facilitate  greater hip 
extension) on a treadmill with  overhead body-weight support 13 Post-intervention, 
improvements in paretic propulsi on were observed, demonstrating  the responsiveness of 
this impairment to reh abilitation. H owever, the modalities used  to achieve this 
improvement, FES and a treadmill  with a body-we ight support sys tem, are resources not 
 Page 4 of 13 
 available to many re habilitation clinics. A dditionally, this in tervention strategy required 2-3 
rehabilitation personn el to implement.  More  frequently in stro ke rehabilitation when these 
resources are not ava ilable, therapists pro vide verbal feedback  to encourage a patient 
(with right hemiparesis for examp le) to “take a large step” (wi th the left leg to  increase hip 
extension of the paretic, righ t leg) or “push through to the fl oor” (with the right foot to 
increase plantarflexor activat ion). This type of feedback, with  attention focused on the 
patient’s movement, defined as “ internal-focus feedback” may no t be sufficient as patients 
post-stroke often lack intrinsic feedback me chanisms (i.e. decr eased proprioception, 
decreased somatosenation) to translate these verbal commands in to desired movements.  
Furthermore, the therapist is unabl e to objectively determine t he magnitude propulsion 
force generated by the patient.  Therefore, this pilot study wi ll test the use of biofeedback 
(external-focus feedback) as an adjuvant to therapist-provided (internal-focus) feedback 
to determine if this relatively simple and cost-e ffective inter vention strategy  will serve to 
increase paretic pr opulsion dur ing gait.   
Provision of feedback is a widel y known requisite for motor lea rning to occur.14 Physical 
rehabilitation following stroke primarily consists of re-learni ng motor skills that have been 
impaired or lost secondary to CNS  damage. Intrinsic feedback me chanisms (i.e. 
proprioception, somatosensation), are crucial to motor skill le arning in healthy adults, but 
are either impaired or absent post-stroke .  Therefore, extrinsi c feedback from a therapist 
or from technology becomes a cru cial alternative feedback sourc e in rehabilitation. 
 
How best to augment the pat ient’s own impair ed feedback mechani sms is a critical factor 
for rehabilitation scientists to determine in the development o f efficacious rehabilitation 
practices. A recent systematic review15 found that augmenting feedback through the use of 
biofeedback was superior to therapist feedback in terms of perf ormance of lower limb 
activities in the short term, wit h the effect being maintained beyond the intervention, 
indicating that learning had occurred. These previous results i n training muscle activity, joint 
position and limb posit ion provides the impe tus of this pilot s tudy to examine the use of 
biofeedback in the acquisition of paretic limb propulsion durin g gait.  
A systematic review on the use o f biofeedback  acr oss a variety  of lower limb activities 
following stroke determined that  biofeedback wit h an external-f ocus was superior to 
therapist-generated feedback.15 In this pilot study specialized  shoe insoles that generate 
an audible tone when a prescribed  threshold of lo ading on the f orefoot during late stance 
is achieved (external-focus fee dback) will be tested as an adju vant to therapist-provided 
feedback. We hypothesize individu als who receive biofeedback in tervention as an 
adjuvant to therapist- provided feedback will  demonstrate improv ed paretic limb propulsion 
compared to those who receive th erapist-provided feedback alone .    
As achievement of walk ing independence, no t necessarily the red uction in impairment, is 
often the standard for su ccessful rehabilitation16 and consequently the focus of 
rehabilitation services,17 there exists a high prevalence  of inefficient walking strategi es 
among persons with chronic stroke.18 Although a restitution-based versus compensation-
based approach to rehabilitation implicitly seems  most prudent,  there is a current need to 
demonstrate the link between resto ration of impairments and fun ctional gains. Awad and 
 Page 5 of 13 
 colleagues19 recently demonstrated that improvement in propulsion of the pa retic leg, 
following a 12-week locomotor training program, predicted impro vement in distance 
walked, providing support for re habilitation prac tice based in restitution of impairments. 
Aim 2 of this proposal will comp are the effect o f our two inter ventions on functional gait 
ability as determined by long-distance walk ing ability, dynamic  balance and self-efficacy. 
5. Specific Aims: 
 
Specific Aim #1: Compare the e ffect of two interventions for im proving paretic limb 
propulsion in individuals with impaired, asymmetric gait post-s troke:  standard therapist-
provided verbal feedback (“verbal feedback group”) versus stand ard therapist-provided 
verbal feedback plus propulsion biofeedback (“biofeedback group ”). 
Hypothesis #1 : Improvement in paretic propulsi on during natural gait (i.e., tested without 
feedback) will be greater for the biofeedback group than for th e verbal feedback group. 
 
Specific Aim #2: Compare the e ffect of two interventions for im proving functional mobility in 
individuals with impaired, asymmetric gait post-stroke: standar d therapist-provided verbal 
feedback (“verbal feedback group”) versus standard therapist-pr ovided verbal feedback plus 
propulsion biofeedback (“biofeedback group”). 
Hypothesis #2:  Improvement in functional mobility will be greater for the bio feedback group 
than for the verbal feedback group, as measured by the Six-Minu te Walk Test, Functional 
Gait Assessment and Modified Falls Self Efficacy Scale. 
6. Research Plan: 
This will be a prospective, singl e-blind, RCT enrolling individ uals at 6-months post-stroke. 
Consent for participa tion and enrollment will  occur in t wo part s: 1) Screening Consent and 
2) Interventi on Consent. Part 1 , Screening Cons ent, consists of  physical screening to 
determine study eligibility. 
 Participants who meet  all inclusion/exclus ion criteria will be  enrolled and randomized to 
either the experimental (Biofeedba ck) or control (Verbal Feedba ck) group.  Individual 
treatment allocations  will be in s ealed envelopes which will be  opened only on enrollment 
of the next eligible participant. 
Priority for participa tion in this study w ill be given to volun teers who are Veterans.  To 
optimize our capability to recrui t Veterans we will conduct our  rehabilitation intervention at 
the Malcom Randall VA Medical  Center in Gai nesville FL.  
Recruitment. Potential  participants will b e recruit ed from the Database (IRB#  457-1999) of 
the VA Brain Rehabili tation and Research C enter (BRRC), a VA RR &D Center of 
Excellence. The databa se contains over 400 individuals with dia gnosis of stroke who 
have been screened by a neurologis t and interdisciplinary team to gather preliminary 
information about medical, motor and cognitive status. All indi viduals in the database 
have signed informed consent and a greed to be contacted for res earch participation.  
 Page 6 of 13 
 Inclusion criteria:  1) Diagnosis of stroke, 2) > 6 months < 10 years post-stroke o nset, 3) 
Medically stable, 4) 18-85 years of age, 5) Impaired lower extr emity sensation confirmed 
by a score of < 12 on the Fugl-Meyer Sensory Assessment or  <  50% correct on 
monofilament testing on the pl antar surface of the foot,20 6) Community-dwelling, 7) Step 
length asymmetry (paretic step length > non-paretic step length ); this asymmetry has 
been determined to be correlated  with minimal propulsive force of the paretic leg4, 8) 
Unilateral lower extremity pares is confirmed by a score of < 32  on the Fugl-Meyer Motor 
Assessment,20 9) Able to ambulate without an or thotic device, 10) Able to am bulate 
without an assistive device, 11) A mbulation of hou sehold distan ces without physical 
assistance to advanc e or support paretic  lower extremity.   
Exclusion criteria : 1) Presence of a neurological condition other than stroke, 2)  Pain upon 
ambulation, 3) Receiving physical  therapy services for mobility  and/or gait, 4) Severe 
arthritis or orthopedic problems  that limit passi ve ranges of m otion (knee flexion 
contracture of  -10°, knee flexi on ROM < 90°, hip flexion contr acture > 25°, and ankle 
plantar flexion contracture  > 15°).  Inclusion and Exclusion criter ia will initially be determined b y medical record review. 
 If 
following the medical record rev iew a potential participant rem ains eligible, they will be 
scheduled for an in-person screen  to determine if they meet the  criteria listed below.  
Potential participants will si gn the screening Informed Consent  Form and then the 
following screening assessm ents will be administered:  
 
1. Lower Extremity Fugl-Meyer Motor Assessment: The participant ’s ability to move 
their paretic lower limb will be assessed in  the supine, sittin g and standing 
position. 
2. Lower Extremity Fugl-Meyer S ensory Assessment: The participa nt’s ability to 
sense light touch and movement o f their paretic lower limb will  be assessed  in 
the supine and sitting position. 
3. Observational Gait Assessment: Participant will walk a dista nce of 14 meters, 
two times at their self-select ed walking pace. The physical the rapist assessor will 
observe participant’s gait for asymmetry. 
4. Range of Motion:  Range of Mot ion of the hips, knees and ank les of both lower 
limbs will be assessed. This a ssessment will take place in the supine and sitting 
positions. 
5. Monofilament Testing: A monof ilament will be touched to the sole of the 
participant’s paretic foot and t hey will be queried if they can  feel the 
monofilament. 
Participants who meet eligibil ity criteria fo llowing the screen ing assessment will be 
invited to sign Part 2 Consent, t he Intervention Informed Conse nt Form. Intervention 
Informed Consent allows for base line testing and study particip ation.  
 Procedure.  Thirty individuals will be randomized to either the  Verbal Feedback Group  
(n=15) or the Biofeedback Group  (n=15) group. Participants in the Biofeedback Group  
 Page 7 of 13 
 will wear a commercially availabl e pressure-sensitive insole (P edar, Novel Electronics, 
Inc.) in the shoe on the paretic l ower extremity. Prior to the first intervention session, 
participants in the Biofeedback Group  will walk wearing the pre ssure-sensitive in-soles 
to determine the baseline amoun t of pressure exerted by the par etic forefoot during late 
stance as the limb transitions to  the pre-swing position. The i nsole area underlying the 
participant’s forefoot will be ca librated to produce a tone whe n pressure exceeds 5% of 
baseline. This threshold will be progressively increased at reg ular intervals throughout 
the intervention period to ens ure participants are gait trainin g at their challenge-point.  
An insole of similar thickness will be worn in the shoe of the non-paretic leg for 
symmetry and comfort but will no t produce a tone. Participants in the Verbal Feedback 
Group  will not wear insoles during intervention.  
Intervention. Intervention (12 , 60-minute sessions, 3X/week for  four weeks) will occur in 
an outpatient research setting . Participants will be supervised  by a licensed physical 
therapist and wear a gait belt dur ing all activities. The thera pist will choose from a 
standardized bank of gait activitie s, suitable to each particip ant’s ability level, such as: 
1) walking along a straight ind oor path, 2) negotiating obstacl es, 3) walking up and 
down inclined surfaces, and 4) wal king in a distracting environ ment. These varied 
environments will be utilized to a ssure participants continued engagement in the 
intervention. The goal for total walking time for each session will be 50 minutes: 5, 10-
minute bouts with a 2-minute re st between bouts. This is the ty pical length and intensity 
of outpatient rehabilitation sessi ons for ambulatory patients d ischarged from inpatient 
rehabilitation. Biofeedback Group : Biofeedback (external-focus f eedback) will be provided as an 
adjuvant to therapist-provided fee dback during the intervention . Therapist feedback is 
described in the “Verbal Feedbac k Group” section below. Partici pants will be instructed 
that a tone will sound when they “ push off with their (paretic)  leg to swing it forward” 
when the participant-specific pre-p rogrammed threshold is excee ded.  
Verbal Feedback Group : Therapist-provided internal-foc us feedback (“directed towards  
components of body movement”
21) will be used to instruct participants on achieving 
and/or maintaining appropriate m ovement patterns that contribut e to propulsion 
generation.  Feedback will be custom ized for each participant, but will generally focus 
on 1) shifting body weight onto t he paretic side during stance 2) rolling over the front of 
the foot during late stance, 3) walking with symmetrical step l ength on both sides, 4) 
pushing off with the paretic l eg when stepping forward.  If par ticipants are performing 
any/all of these movements we ll, feedback will be used to ackno wledge and encourage 
continuation of the ap propriate movements. 
 Outcome Measures.  Assessments will take place pre- and post-in tervention and 
conducted by a licensed physical  therapist, blinded to group as signment.  
 
The primary outcome for Specific Aim #1 will be Paretic Limb Pr opulsion (PLP).  
 
Paretic Limb Propulsion (PLP). T he propulsive impulse will be d erived from the time 
integral of the positive A-P GRF for each leg.5 Participants will walk along a 10 meter 
pathway equipped with embedded forc e platforms (Advanced Medica l Technology, 
Inc.). The force plates are flus h with the floor and are not an  obstacle or tripping hazard.   
 Page 8 of 13 
 GRFs will be measured throughout t he stance phase for both legs . The A-P GRF 
component, normalized to body weight will be used to derive PLP . 
 Secondary outcome  measures will be collect ed and assessed to mo re explicitly describe 
participants’ gait. We will conduct explorat ory analyses on the se measures to guide 
formulation of future s tudies’ aims and hy potheses in this line  of research. Additional 
outcome measures will include:   1) Hip, knee and ankle  angle data from the LE’s will be acquire d using a modified Helen 
Hayes marker set with rigid clus ters on the pelvis and each thi gh, shank and foot 
segments and recording the move ment of these mar kers at 100 Hz using a 12 camera 
motion capture system (Vicon Moti on Capture Systems, Oxford, UK ). Data will be 
processed us ing Visual 3D (C -Motion, Inc., Germa ntown, MD). We are particularly 
interested in hip extension angl e during late stance given its known contribution to 
forward propulsion.
6  
 2) Spatial-temporal gait variabl es of stride time, stride lengt h, step time, ste p length, step 
width and gait speed will be ca ptured while walking across a GA ITRite instrumented 
walkway (CIR Systems In c, Havertown, PA),  
 3) Surface EMG will be recorded from the soleus (SO) and medial  gastrocnemius (MG) of 
both legs because of their known  contribution to forward propul sion.
10 
 
The primary outcome for Specific Aim #2 will be long-distance w alking function as 
measured by the Six-Minute Walk Test (6MWT).22  
 
Six Minute Walk Test:  reflects a person’s ability to maintain a moderate amount of exertion 
over a period of time. It has been identified as an excellent m easure of poststroke walking 
capacity and commu nity ambulation23, 24 as well as indicative of community reintegration 
post-stroke.25  Participants will walk for a to tal of six minutes at their co mfortable walking 
speed and the total distance walked will be recorded. Participa nts will be guarded by 
research personnel and will be permitted to stand and rest or s it and rest during the six 
minute time-frame as needed.  
 
Secondary Outcomes for Specific Aim #2 are:  
 Functional Gait Assessment (FGA),
26 a 10-item clinical gait and balance test during 
which participants perform the foll owing activities: walk at no rmal speeds, at fast and 
slow speeds, with vertical and hor izontal head turns, with eyes  closed, over obstacles, 
in tandem, backward and while as cending and descending stairs. The FGA is a superior 
test of dynamic balance to other  oft-used clinical performance tests such as the 
Performance-Oriented Mobility A ssessment, the Berg Balance Scal e, and the Dynamic 
Gait Index all of which have repor ted ceiling effects in commun ity-living older adults.27 
Excellent test-retest28 and intra- and inter-rater reliability29 has been established 
patients post-stroke. Additionally , a FGA cut-off score of 22/3 0 to classify those who are 
at increased risk for falls  has been established.26 Although fall-incidence is beyond the 
scope of this current pilot study we hypothesize that increased  contribution of the 
 Page 9 of 13 
 paretic leg to forward propulsion would lead to improved dynami c balance and more 
stable gait, decreasing fall incidence. Modified Falls Efficacy Scale (MFES)
30 is a 14-item questionna ire based on the Falls 
Efficacy Scale (FES),31 modified for people with chronic st roke. It includes the 10 it ems 
from the FES plus 4 items consi dered complex for people with st roke and is designed to 
measure self-perceived fear of  falling during task performance.  Significant differences in 
MFES scores between patients in  a Falls and Balance Clinic and healthy older adults (p 
< 0.05) attests to t he scales’ validity.30 Long-distance walking ability, dynamic balance 
during complex gait and falls sel f-efficacy will inform us rega rding if restitution of paretic 
limb propulsion during gait translate s into improvements in fun ction and improved 
quality of life. These results wil l inform the next study in th is line of research. 
Lower Extremity Strength Testi ng: Muscle strength of both limbs  will be assessed 
utilizing a hand- held dynamometer32. The dynamometer is plac ed between the hand of 
the assessor and the participant’s  limb, similar to a manual mu scle test, with the 
advantage of the dynamometer provi ding a quantified measurement  of force. 
Participants will be instructed to  contract their muscle and mo ve their limb against the 
dynamometer. Muscle st rength will be recorded. 
Videorecording. For participants who signed the video recording  consent, we will 
periodically videorecord traini ng sessions. This will allow the  intervention therapists to 
view the participant’s training and strategize on how to progre ss the intervention. 
Videorecordings will also provi de the therapists feedback on ho w they can best assist 
the participant. Assessment sessions  will also be periodically recorded. This will provide 
assessment therapists feedback on t heir implementation of the a ssessments. 
Videorecordings may also be used  in scientific presentations. P articipants will be 
informed when videotaping is occurring. 
7. Possible Discomforts and Risks: 
The risks undertaken in the walki ng therapy programs of the stu dy are no greater than 
those in everyday physical ther apy clinics wher e persons who ha ve had a stroke are 
challenged daily to exercise, trai n, practice and improve beyon d their current abilities. 
Safety in therapy is mandatory. R esearch personnel will walk be side participants during 
all aspects of the exercise int ervention and all aspects of the  assessment that assess 
gait. Participants may experience some fatigue while being test ed or during the therapy 
sessions. Should they become tir ed, they will be allowed to res t. Participants may 
experience temporary muscle sor eness as they increase the use o f their trunk and limbs 
during the walking interventi on. There is a risk of falling dur ing walking activities, but 
guarding by research personnel wil l minimize the risk. Stroke p atients, including those in 
this study, are at risk for another stroke, coronary heart dise ase related event and 
cardiac related death, regar dless of intervention. 
8. Possible Benefits: 
Subjects participating in this s tudy may see improvements in th eir walking speed, 
balance, and/or the amount of walki ng that they are able to do.  They may become more 
confident in their balance  and walking ability.    
 Page 10 of 13 
 9. Conflict of Interest: 
There are no conflicts of int erest apparent for any of the inve stigators. 
References 
1. Jorgensen HS, Nakayama H, Raa schou HO, Olsen TS . Recovery of  walking function 
in stroke patients: The copenhagen stroke study. Archives of physical medicine 
and rehabilitation . 1995;76:27-32 
2. Andriacchi TP, Ogle  JA, Galante JO. Walki ng speed as a basis  for normal and 
abnormal gait measurements. Journal of biomechanics . 1977;10:261-268 
3. Perry J, Garrett M, Gronley JK, M ulroy SJ. Clas sification of  walking handicap in the 
stroke population. Stroke . 1995;26:982-989 
4. Balasubramanian C K, Bowden MG, Neptune RR , Kautz SA. Relatio nship between 
step length asymmetry and walking performance in subjects with chronic 
hemiparesis. Archives of physical m edicine and rehabilitation . 2007;88:43-49 
5. Bowden MG, Balasubramanian CK , Neptune RR, Kau tz SA. Anterio r-posterior ground 
reaction forces as a measure of paretic leg contribution in hem iparetic walking. 
Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation . 2006;37:872-876 
6. Peterson CL, Cheng J, Kautz SA, Neptune RR. Leg extension is  an important 
predictor of paretic leg propulsion in hemiparetic walking. Gait & posture . 
2010;32:451-456 
7. Peterson CL, Hall AL, Kautz SA, Neptune RR. Pre -swing defici ts in forward 
propulsion, swing initiation a nd power generation by individual  muscles during 
hemiparetic walking. Journal of biomechanics . 2010;43:2348-2355 
8. Bowden MG, Behrman AL, Neptune RR, Gregor y CM, Kautz SA. Loc omotor 
rehabilitation of individuals wit h chronic stroke: Difference b etween responders and 
nonresponders. Archives of physical m edicine and rehabilitation . 2013;94:856-862 
9. McGowan CP, Kram R, Neptune RR. Modulation of leg muscle fun ction in response to 
altered demand for body suppor t and forward propulsion during w alking. Journal of 
biomechanics . 2009;42:850-856 
 Page 11 of 13 
 10. Liu MQ, Anderson FC , Schwartz MH, Delp SL. Muscle contribut ions to support and 
progression over a range of walking speeds. Journal of biomechanics . 
2008;41:3243-3252 
11. Turns LJ, Neptune RR, Kautz SA. Relationships between muscl e activity and 
anteroposterior ground reaction  forces in hemiparetic walking. Archives of physical 
medicine and rehabilitation . 2007;88:1127-1135 
12. Clark DJ, Ting LH, Zajac FE, Neptune RR, Kautz SA. Merging of healthy motor 
modules predicts reduced locomotor performance and muscle coord ination 
complexity post-stroke. Journal of neurophysiology . 2010;103:844-857 
13. Awad LN, Reisman DS, Kesar T M, Binder-Macle od SA. Targeting  paretic propulsion 
to improve poststroke walking function: A preliminary study. Archives of physical 
medicine and rehabilitation . 2014;95:840-848 
14. Schmidt R, Lee T. Motor control and learning: A behavioral emphasis . Champaign, IL: 
Human Kinetics , Inc.; 1999. 
15. Stanton R, Ada L, Dean CM, P reston E. Biofeedback improves activities of the lower 
limb after stroke: A systematic review. Journal of physiotherapy . 2011;57:145-155 
16. Wade DT. Outcome measures fo r clinical rehabilitation trial s: Impairment, function, 
quality of life, or value? American journal of physical medicine & rehabilitation / 
Association of Academic Physiatrists . 2003;82:S26-31 
17. Kitago T, Krakauer JW. Motor  learning principles for neuror ehabilitation. Handbook of 
clinical neurology . 2013;110:93-103 
18. Richards CL, Malouin F, Dean C. Gait in stroke: Assessment and rehabilitation. 
Clinics in geriatric medicine . 1999;15:833-855 
19. Awad LN, Binder-Macleod SA, P ohlig RT, Reisman DS. Paretic propulsion and trailing 
limb angle are key determinants of long-distance walking functi on after stroke. 
Neurorehabilitation and neural repair . 2014 
20. Fugl-Meyer AR, Jaasko L, Ley man I, Olsson S, S teglind S. Th e post-stroke 
hemiplegic pat ient. 1. A method for eval uation of physical perf ormance. 
Scandinavian journal of rehabilitation medicine . 1975;7:13-31 
 Page 12 of 13 
 21. van Vliet PM, Wulf G. Extrinsic feedback  for motor learning  after stroke: What is the 
evidence? Disability and rehabilitation . 2006;28:831-840 
22. Pohl PS, Duncan PW, Perera S , Liu W, Lai SM , Studenski S, e t al. Influence  of stroke-
related impairments on perfo rmance in 6-minute walk test. Journal of rehabilitation 
research and development . 2002;39:439-444 
23. Donovan K, Lord SE, McNaughton  HK, Weatherall M. Mobility b eyond the clinic: The 
effect of environment on gait and  its measuremen t in community- ambulant stroke 
survivors. Clinical rehabilitation . 2008;22:556-563 
24. Fulk GD, Reynolds C, Mondal S , Deutsch JE. Predicting home and community 
walking activity in people with stroke. Archives of physical medicine and 
rehabilitation . 2010;91:1582-1586 
25. Pang MY, Eng JJ, Miller WC. Determinants of satisfaction wi th community 
reintegration in older adults wi th chronic stroke: Role of bala nce self-efficacy. 
Physical therapy . 2007;87:282-291 
26. Wrisley DM, Kumar N A. Functional gait a ssessment: Concurren t, discriminative, and 
predictive validity in commu nity-dwelling older adults. Physical therapy . 
2010;90:761-773 
27. Pardasaney PK, Latham NK, Jet te AM, Wagenaar RC, Ni P, Slav in MD, et al. 
Sensitivity to change and respon siveness of four b alance measur es for 
community-dwelling older adults. Physical therapy . 2012;92:388-397 
28. Lin JH, Hsu MJ, Hsu HW, Wu HC , Hsieh CL. Psychometric compa risons of 3 
functional ambulation measures  for patients with stroke. Stroke; a journal of 
cerebral circulation . 2010;41:2021-2025 
29. Thieme H, Ritschel C, Zange  C. Reliability and validity of the functional gait 
assessment (german version) in subacute stroke patients. Archives of physical 
medicine and rehabilitation . 2009;90:1565-1570 
30. Hill KD, Schwarz JA, Kaloge ropoulos AJ, Gibson SJ. Fear of falling revisited. Archives 
of physical medicine and rehabilitation . 1996;77:1025-1029 
 Page 13 of 13 
 31. Tinetti ME, Richman D, Powell L. Falls efficacy as a measur e of fear of falling. Journal 
of gerontology . 1990;45:P239-243 
32. Stark T, Walker B , Phillips JK, Fejer R , Beck R. Hand-held dynamometry correlation 
with the gold standard  isokinetic dynamomet ry: A systematic rev iew. PM & R : the 
journal of injury, func tion, and rehabilitation . 2011;3:472-479 
 
 