 1 
 
Prenatal Mindfulness & Hypertension Stud y 
NCT0367911 7 
Document Dat e: August 20, 2020  
 2 
 
 
SUMMARY OF RESEARCH PLAN  
 
Summary and Significance  
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, defined as a group of diseases including preeclampsia, 
eclampsia, gestational hyperten sion, and chronic hypertension, are one of the greatest causes of perinatal  
morbidity and mortality (ACOG 2013 ). Consequences of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy include 
placental abruption, intrauterine growth restriction, seizures, and maternal and infant  death . These 
conditions affect 6 -10% of all  pregnancies, and the rate has increased substantially  over the past several 
decades (James and Nelson -Piercy 2004 , Kintiraki, Papakatsika et al. 2015 ). Rates of recurrence of 
hypertensive disorders in subsequent pregnancies may be as high as 94%, depending on the type, timing, 
and severity of hypertension in prior pr egnanc ies (Hjartardottir, Leifsson et al. 2006 ). 
Once hypertensive disorders develop, treat ments are limited to watchful waiting, antihypertensive 
medications, or ultimately, early delivery.  Antihypertensive medications may cause drowsiness, risk for 
postpartum depression, and intrauterine growth restriction  (James and Nelson -Piercy 2004 ). Thus, 
initiating antihyperten sive m edications for mild -moderate hypertension in pregnancy (>140/90 mmHg) 
is controversial as the maternal benefits may not outweigh fetal risks (Scantlebury , Schw artz et al. 2013 ). 
Despite the devastating consequences of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy and the negative side effects 
of antihypertensive medications, there are currently no alternatives to pharmacological interventions to 
prevent hypertensi on rec urrence in pregnancy. Thus, non -pharmacological approaches to prevent 
recurrence are sorely needed.  
Mindfulness interventions hold great potential to prevent recurrence in pregnant women with a 
history of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Results from p revious RCTs conducted in other 
populations show that mindfulness interventions are significantly more effective at reducing blood  
pressure in patients with pre -hypertension (Hughes, Fresco et al. 2013 ) and hypertension (Nejati, 
Zahiroddin et al. 2015 ) than other stress management interve ntions  (e.g., yoga, progressive muscle 
relaxation). The evidence is more limited among pregnant samples. There is some  evidence that higher 
mindfulness skills are associated with lower blood pressure in healthy pregnant women (Braeken, Jones 
et al. 2017 ). However, traditional mindfulness  training (MT) interventions, requiring 2.5 hours of class 
attendance for 8 weeks  plus a full -day retreat, may be difficult to adh ere to  in pregnancies complicated  by 
hypertensive disorders due to the possible need for activity restriction, hospitalization, increased maternal 
and fetal monitoring, and home and child care responsibilities.  Phone -delivered MT may provide a 
feasible and  effec tive alternative to traditional class -based MT interventions. Our group has successfully 
developed and tested a phone -delivered  MT intervention among medically complex patients, including 
pregnant women at risk for  preterm birth. The goal of the curr ent st udy is to determine if phone -delivered 
MT is feasible and acceptable among pregnant women with histories of hypertensive disorders of 
pregnancy.  
In this exploratory cl inical trial we will randomize 3 0 pregnant women  at risk for hypertensive 
disorder s to a n 8-week  phone -delivered MT intervention (N= 15) or treatment as usual (N= 15). All women  
will undergo 24 -hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring before and  after the intervention. Our 
interdisciplinary team is uniquely positioned to execute the prop osed s tudy given our complementary 
expertise in mindfulness interventions, perinatal mental health, and obstetric medicine.  
The specific aims of the study are:  
Specific Aim 1: To test feasibility and acceptability of phone -delivered mindfulness 
training fo r preg nant women with a history of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.  30 
pregnant women with a history of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy will be recruited and randomly 
assigned to MT (N= 15) or to treatment as usual (N= 15). Primary outcomes are feasi bility  and acceptability 
(>75% attend at least 4 sessions; > 20 on the client satisfaction questionnaire). We will explore 
preliminary effects (not powered for efficacy) of group differences in ambulatory blood pressure  (average 
daytime, nighttime, and diu rnal s ystolic, diastolic blood pressure, hyperbaric index, blood pressure 
variability, and dipping status). We will also examine  rates of hypertensive disorder recurrence that will 
be fully tested in a future fully -powered RCT.    
Specific Aim 2: Conduct a qualit ative analysis of feasibility and acceptability of phone -
delivered mindfulness training for pregnant women with a history of hypertensive 
disorders of pregnancy.  Following the mindfulness intervention, we will conduct individual 
qualitative interview s to s olicit feedback on participants’ treatment satisfaction, motivation for 
 3 
participation, barriers and challenges to participation, and appropriateness of the session content for 
hypertension in pregnancy. Information gained in the qualitative analysis will b e used to improve 
feasibility and acceptability in the future fully -powered RCT.  
Specific Aim 3: To examine differences in pathophysiological mechanisms of 
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy among women receiving mindfulness training vs. 
usual care . We h ypothesize that pregnant women receiving  mindfulness training will display reduced 
inflammation, improved uterine perfusion and fetal growth, and reduced blood pressure, and these 
mechanisms will in turn reduce risk for hypertensive disorder recurren ce. 
Anticipated Outcomes. Results from this developmental clinical trial will 1) provide  evidence on the 
feasibility and acceptability of delivering phone -delivered mindfulness training for pregnant women at  
risk for hypertensive disorders, 2) evaluate if a prel iminary signal of change in maternal blood pressure is 
detected between groups, 3) evaluate if a preliminary signal of change in pathophysiological mechanisms 
of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy is detected  over the course of the study, and 4) sol icit f eedback 
from participants on how to improve the feasibility and acceptability of the intervention in future trials. 
These results  will be used to inform a future fully -powered RCT. The results of this line of research are 
significant because MT could  serve  as an effective non -pharmacological preventive intervention for 
hypertensive disorders. Effective preventive interventions hold great promise to reduce the burden of 
disease to individuals and society.  
 
Research Design & Methods  
Phase 1: Recruit Par ticipa nts and Pilot the Developmental RCT.   Participant recruitment for this study 
will leverage the established infrastructure at the Women’s Medicine Collaborative Research Department. 
The Research Department has 4 research assistants who currently recru it par ticipants for ongoing 
perinatal studies at OBGYN offices throughout Rhode Island that service over 5,000 pregnant 
patients/year. Given that approximately 300 of these pregnant women will have a history of hypertensive 
disorders of pregnancy, and we a im to recruit 10% of these women for the current study, we are confident 
that we will be able to enroll N=3 0 pregnant women at risk for  hypertensive disorders of pregnancy for 
this study. The rationale for recruiting pregnant women at risk for  hypertensive  disor ders is based on the 
high rate of recurrence of hypertensive disorders in subsequent pregnancies  (Zhang, Troendle et al. 
2000 ), the high degree of diagnostic overlap among these conditions, and the common medical 
interventions that women with these conditions typically receive.  
 
Participants assigned to the MT interven tion w ill receive 30 -minute phone -delivered MT sessions once a 
week for 8 weeks. Dr. Elena Salmoirago -Blotcher, a faculty member in the Brown Center for Mindfulness, 
a certified mindfulness instructor, and an expert in mind -body approaches for cardiovascul ar hea lth, 
developed this intervention. The MT intervention is based upon the curriculum of the Mindfulness -Based 
Stress Reduction program (including practices such as awareness of breath, awareness of body sensations 
(“body scan”), awareness of sounds, em otions , and thoughts, open awareness, as well as cultivating 
mindfulness throughout daily activities). Participants will be asked to practice the mindfulness exercises 
for 15 minutes a day using audio recordings developed by our group. Our team has success fully delivered 
this intervention in a sample of pregnant women at risk for preterm delivery.  
 
Phase 2: Quantitative Evaluation of Feasibility and Acceptability.  Measures of feasibility will include 
recruitment and retention rates, as well as adherence to the in tervention. Specifically, we will measure the 
number of participants screened and eligible to participate, the number and reasons for refusal, the 
number and reason for dropout, and the number lost to follow -up. We will also measure the number of 
MT sessio ns attended and the minutes spent listening to the guided mindfulness practice recordings. The 
study will be considered feasible if > 75% of participants complete > 4 sessions and practice mindfulness 
exercises for 15 minutes a day for > 4 days a wee k. Acc eptability will be measured using the Client 
satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ -8 (Larsen, Attkisson et al. 1979 )). Scores on the CTQ -8range from 8 -32. 
The study will be co nsider ed acceptable if > 75% of participants report a score of > 20.  
 
SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 PANDEMIC.  Secondary Outcome Measurement.  Blood pressure 
will be assessed using ambulatory blood pressure monitoring  (ABPM, ScottCare device). This validated 
device (Zawadzki, Vandekar et al. 2013 ) can measure BP eve ry 30 minutes for 24 hours. ScottCare 
 4 
software automatically scores blood pre ssure readings to calculate average daytime, nighttime, and 
diurnal systolic, and diastolic blood pressure, hyperbaric index, blood pressure variability, and dipping 
status (BP fa ll > 10% from daytime levels). Prior research demonstrates high sensitivity and specificity of 
ABPM (specifically the hyperbaric index, an index of BP load on organs, blood pressure variability, and 
dipping status) in the early detection of hypertens ion. Peripheral blood will be collected via venipuncture 
before and after the 8 -week mindfulness or treatment as usual interval. Samples will be de -identified and 
stored for future research purposes. (Participants will c onsent to the collection and banking  of bl ood using 
a separate consent form.) Research u ltrasonography assessments will also be performed before and after 
the 8 -week mindfulness intervention or treatment as usual. The collection of maternal and fetal 
ultrasound findings will allow evaluation  of ma ternal uterine artery Doppler parameters, placenta size, 
fetal growth velocity rate and fetal Doppler parameters among the two study groups. Diagnoses of 
hypertensive disorders will be collected via medical chart review and rates of recurrence will b e comp ared 
across groups.  We will conduct linear mixed effects models to evaluate changes in blood pressure 
(dependent variable) according to time, group, and time x group interaction (independent variables).  
 
Phase 3: Qualitative Evaluation of Feasibilit y and Acceptability.  Following the intervention, women will 
be asked to complete in -depth qualitative interviews to solicit feedback on the intervention. Feedback 
from qualitative interviews will be used to identify patterns and themes in participants’ res ponses  that will 
then be used to further tailor and refine the phone -delivered MT intervention for pregnant women with 
histories of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy in preparation for a future fully -powered RCT.  
 
Recruitment.  A sample of 30 preg nant wo men, a ges 18 -40, before 20 weeks’ gestation  will be recruited 
into the study. Pregnant women from OBGYN  clinics and practices will be recruited through identification 
of eligible women through chart review. Women will also be recruited through placements o f post ers and 
brochures. Other recruitment sites are: hospital websites, various community sites and community 
groups, community health care groups and community -based newspapers. Interested participants will be 
contact ed  by  study staff and initial screen ing wi ll take place by telephone.  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion/exclusion criteria:  > 18 years old, singleton pregnancy, English speaking, <20 weeks’ gestation 
at enrollment, history of a hypertensive disorder, and no current engagement in min dfulne ss training 
(defined as weekly yoga, mindfulness exercises (including on -line), or meditation). Women will be asked 
to complete a baseline visit  remotely  to obtain background information on maternal characteristics and 
medical conditions in pregnancy . Foll owing the baseline session, women will be randomized to phone -
delivered MT intervention or to treatment as usual. Randomization will be stratified based on 
antihypertensive medication use (yes/no), if necessary.  
 
Procedures  
Initial  Telephone Screeni ng. Interested pregnant women  will complete a telephone screen including 
questions to assess inclusion/exclusion criteria. Visit  1 will then be scheduled with interested participants 
who meet initial inclusion criteria.  
 
Baseline Assessment : NO IN -PERSON RESEAR CH ACTIVITIES WILL TAKE PLACE 
DURING THE COVID19 PANDEMIC.   Interested and eligible participants from the phone screen will 
be invited to complete the Baseline Assessment  by telephone or video call . The first session wil l take place 
remotely by telep hone o r video call  and will include informed consent , interview , and self -report 
questionnaire measures . The electronic consent procedure and questionnaires will be performed by using 
Redcap platform, through Lifespan. Paper -forms will always remain an opt ion fo r every participant. All 
the remote research interactions will be completed by using institutionally approved secure video 
conferencing, phone calls and secure Redcap based platform. A link to the electronic  consent form , or the 
paper form,  will be e-maile d/mailed  to a participant prior to the phone/ video visit . The consent can then 
be returned by mail, by email, or in person at a later date.  During the COVID19 pandemic, 
participants will complete questionnaires remotely via  paper (mailed in advance o f 
sess ion) and/or  via REDCap  survey .  
 
 5 
Following consent, participants will complete the interview portion of the session . We will also ask 
participants the best  way to leave messages for them.  In addition, we will obtain information regarding 
two “locato rs,” o r friends or family members wh o will know how to reach the participant. If the interviews 
indicate that the participant is ineligible for continuation in the study, the session may be ter minated at 
that point in time. Women who endorse severe depress ive sy mptoms or psychosis will not be eligible to 
complete the mindfulness intervention, and referrals will be provided . Severe depression or psychosis will 
be defined as the following: Edinburgh Postpartum Depression Scale score of >25 indicates severe 
depressi on and “threshold” score on one re more on items 1 -5 of psychosis screen indicates current 
psychosis. The ineligible participant s will receive full compensation for the session.  This initial interview 
session will last  approximately 1 hour.  Participa nts wi ll receive $50 for completing the interviews and self -
reports.   
 
Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring.  SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 PANDEMIC.  
Following the baseline visit, all eligible and enrolled participants will be instructed to complete 
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring for 24 hours.  Blood pressure will be assessed using ambulatory 
blood pressure monitoring  (ABPM, ScottCare device). This validated device (Zawadzki, Vandekar et al. 
2013 ) can measure BP every 30 minutes for 24 hours. ScottCare software automatically scores blood 
pressure readings  to ca lculate average daytime, nighttime, and diurnal systolic, and diastolic blood 
pressure, hyperbaric index, blood pressure variability, and dipping status (BP fall > 10% from daytime 
levels).  Participants will be paid $50 for comp leting blood pressure monito ring . 
 
Peripheral blood draw and specimen banking.  SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 
PANDEMIC.  Before randomization,  women will be asked to provide a peripheral blood sample for 
specimen banking.  We will make every effort to time the peripheral blood draw wit h clin ical blood draws 
in order to minimize participant burden. Participants who consent to specimen collection and banking 
will have 10mL (< 1 tablespoon) of blood  collected via venipuncture at Lifespan Laboratories. Blood 
samples will be identified only by the participant ID and stored at -80° C at the RISE building (TMH) for 
later analysis. Participants will not receive the results of the blood draw. This information is included in 
the informed consent form.  
 
Research Ultrasound.  SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 PANDE MIC.  We will make every effort 
to time the research ultrasound with clinical ultrasounds in order to minimize participant burden. The 
first research ultrasound b efore randomization  will occur with, or after, participants have their clinical 
anatomy s can. B efore each research ultrasound, participants will be read a “script” that emphasizes that 
research ultrasounds do not take the place of clinical ultrasounds. For research ultrasounds , participants 
will be placed on the ultrasound bed  onto their back in a s emi‐recumbent position, slightly tilted toward 
their left side . For the research studies, we will use ultrasound devices currently in use for clinical 
evaluations.  We will record fetal heart rate, fetal position, placental position and size, and amn iotic fluid 
index according to standard clinical protocols. Next, we will record fetal biometric parameters and 
Doppler measurements of maternal and fetal blood vessels. If the following abnormal findings are 
detected on the research ultrasound, the OB/GYN  provi der will be notified: 1) fetal anomalies, 2) 
estimated fetal weight below 10%, 3) abnormal umbilical blood flow, 4) abnormal levels of amniotic fluid, 
and 5) absent fetal heart rate. Participants will not receive the results of the research ultrasoun ds. Th is 
information is included in the informed consent form.  
 
Randomization.  All participants will receive usual prenatal care, which may include intervention to 
prevent or treat hypertension during gestation.  Following the completion of the baseline ses sion , 
participants will be randomized to  treatment group ( mindfulness t raining  + treatment as usual , or 
treatment as usual ) using a stratified randomization approach  (stratified by hypertension medication 
use) .  
 
Mindfulness T raining I ntervention  + Treatme nt as Usual . Interested and eligible participants 
from the Baseline Assessment  will be invited to take part in an 8 -week phone -delivered mindfulness 
intervention , in addition to continuing to attend usual prenatal care appointments . Each intervention 
sessi on wil l last approximately 30 minutes (4 hours of total intervention) and will be scheduled for a time 
that is convenient for the participant. Mindfulness training sessions will occur once per week. Sessions 
 6 
will be led by an experienced m indfulness instru ctor, and participants will have the same instructor 
throughout the intervention. The 30 minutes will include  20 minutes of intervention  and 10 minutes for 
addressing participants’ questions and scheduling subsequent sessions. Mindfulness training modules 
will i nclude awareness of breath, body scan meditation, and sitting and movement meditation s. Women 
will be provided with recordings of mindfulness exercises to use for practice between sessions . Women 
will be asked to practice mindfulness activities daily  in be tween sessions. Women will be provided with 
audiotapes that will guide their mindfulness exercises. We will ask that women practice for 15 minutes 
each day, and record the date and duration of their practice. With participant permission, intervention  
sessi ons will be audiotaped for the purpose of assessing treatment fidelity. A research assistant will 
contact the participant between sessions to ask about any problem or discomfort participants might be 
experiencing during and between the training sessi ons, as well as to ask about any problem or difficulty 
they are having attending prenatal care appointments . 
 
Treatment as Usual.  Participants randomized to the treatment as usual condition will continue to 
receive their regularly -scheduled prenatal care , which may include interventions to prevent or treatment 
hypertension during pregnancy . A research assistant will check in with the participant each week to ask if 
they have been  to any  prenatal care appointments , and if so, the number and length of time sp ent at  each .  
 
Repeat Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring.  SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 
PANDEMIC . All participants will repeat the 24 -hour blood pressure monitoring after approximately 8 
week s from enrollment  or following completion of the mindfulness interve ntion,  if applicable . The 
procedures for ambulatory blood pressure monitoring are identical to those that were completed prior to 
randomization (see above).  Participants will be paid $50 for completing blood pressure monitoring.  
 
Follow -up Visit . NO IN -PER SON RE SEARCH ACTIVITIES WILL TAKE PLACE DURING 
THE COVID19 PANDEMIC.  At the follow -up visit  we will ask women to complete same self -report 
measures that were completed at the Baseline Assessment . During the COVID19 pandemic, 
participants will complete ques tionna ires remotely via  paper (mailed in advance) and/or  
REDCap.  We will also obtain updated information about participants’ health throughout the pregnancy, 
including emerging medical conditions and new medications  (“Pregnancy Context_ Follow -Up”) . At the  
final  session, women will be asked to provide feedback about the intervention in individual interviews. 
Interviews include  open questions and learn directly from our participants’ experience. In particular, at 
the follow -up assessment we will ask women about their overall satisfaction with the program, the 
acceptability of the length of sessions, the frequency of sessions, the number of sessions, and the content 
of sessions . This interview session will last  approximately 1 hour.  Participants will be compen sated $50 
for their time.  
 
Peripheral blood draw and specimen banking.  SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 
PANDEMIC.  After the 8 -week mindfulness training +  usual care, or usual care only  interval s, women 
will be asked to provide a peripheral blood sample for specime n bank ing. Participants who consent to 
specimen collection and banking will have 10mL  (< 1 tablespoon) of blood collected via venipuncture at 
Lifespan Laboratories. Blood samples will be identified only by  the participant ID and stored at -80° C at 
the RIS E buil ding (TMH) for later analysis.  
 
Research Ultrasound.   SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 PANDEMIC.   After the 8 -week 
mindfulness training + usual care or usual care only intervals , research ultrasound procedures identical to 
those prior to randomization will be per formed . We will again make every effort to time the research 
ultrasounds to coincide with clinical ultrasounds. We will only perform a follow -up research ultrasound 
that does not coincide with a clinical ultrasound if the clinical ultrasound is sched uled a t a time when the 
mindfulness intervention is still underway, or if the clinical ultrasound is scheduled for greater than 3 
weeks after the end of the mindfulness intervention. This is necessary to insure the integrity of the 
research data and to tes t the aims of the study.  
 
 
Measures  
Pregnancy Context.  The Pregnancy Context interview assesses current pregnancy health status, the 
number and gestational birth age of previous pregnancies, the number of previous deliveries, current and 
 7 
past pregnancy -specific  problems (i.e., gestational diabetes, cervical insufficiency), maternal infection, 
and medications in pregnancy, socioeconomic status, and previous experience with mindfulness and/or 
stress management interventions. Pregnancy Context_Follow -Up: At the fol low-up visit participants will 
be asked to provide updated information on their pregnancy including new diagnoses and medications.  
Health Behaviors:  Women will provide information on weekly cigarette and alcohol use by completing the 
Timeline Follow -back I nterview (Sobell and Sobell 1992 ). Preeclampsia symptom screen:  Particip ants will 
be asked to report if they have experienced symptoms of preeclampsia at each study visit and each 
mindfulness session.  Self-Report Measures:  Women will be asked to report on past experiences of 
childhood trauma ( MACE ) at the baseline sessio n. Wom en will be asked to complete self -report measures 
of stress (Perceived Stress Scale), mood (Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale, Pregnancy -Specific 
Anxiety), and Mindfulness ( Five Facets of Mindfulness  Scale , Multidimensional Assessment of 
Interocep tive A wareness ) at the baseline session and following the intervention. We will also ask women 
to complete a measure of perceived sleep quality (Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index) , quality of life (Quality 
of Life Measure), and PCL -5 (PTSD Checklist for DSM -5) at the baseline and follow -up sessions. At the 
follow -up session we will ask women to provide feedback about the intervention ( Intervention  Satisfaction 
Questions).  See Table 1 below for a list of measures and tim ing of administration.  
 
Table 1  Baseline  MT 
Intervention  Follow -up 
Interview Measures  
Pregnancy Context  X   
Pregnancy Context Follow -Up   X 
Health Behaviors  X  X 
Psychosis Screen  X   
Preeclampsia screen  X X (all visits)  X 
Self -Report Measures  
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale  X  X 
Preg nancy -Specific Anxiety  X  X 
Perceived Stress Scale  X  X 
Five Facets of Mindfulness Scale  X  X 
Multidimensional Assessment of 
Interoceptive Awareness (MAIA ) X  X 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index  X  X 
Maltreatment and Abuse Chronology 
of Exposure (MACE)  X   
Quality of Life Measure  X  X 
PTSD Checklist for DSM -5 X  X 
Intervention satisfaction q uestionnaire    X 
Qualitative Interview Questions    X 
Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring  SUSPENEDED DURING PANDEMIC  
In-laboratory blood pressure  X  X 
24-hour b lood p ressure monitoring  X  X 
Blood draw  X  X 
Research Ultrasound  X  X 
 
Pregnancy  Outcome Measures  
Following delivery we will collect outcomes of the pregnancy including diagnoses of hypertension, 
preeclampsia, and eclampsia. We will also record inciden ce of spontaneous p reterm labor, elective and 
medically -indicated labor induction, infant birth weight, APGAR scores, length of time in the NICU, and 
gestational age at birth via medical record following birth. Women will be asked to complete a release of 
inform ation in order for medical records to be provided to the study. Data will be extracted from medical 
records , entered into de -identified datasets,  and then destroyed.  
 
Human Subjects  
 8 
We will enroll 30 pregnant women at risk for hypertensive disorders of pre gnancy  in the current study. No 
restrictions will be placed on enrollment by race or ethnicity.  
 
Sources of Materials. All data collection will follow HIPAA guidelines. Data will be collected directly 
from participants and from medical charts by the  resea rch assistant. Data will include participant 
responses to interviews, paper -and-penc il questionnaires, and blood pressure data . We will assess 
eligibility criteria from phone interviews. All data will be treated as confidential and will never be stor ed 
or reported in association with identifying information. Only the PI and RA will have access to identifiable 
information. Both the PI and RA will have completed training in the ethical conduct of research prior to 
participant enrollment.  
 
Potential Risk s  
 
SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 PANDEMIC . Detection of elevated blood pressure during in-
laboratory or ambulatory blood pressure monitoring.  Elevated blood pressure readings may be detected 
during blood pressure assessments . 
Detection of symptoms consistent w ith pr eeclampsia . Symptoms of preeclampsia may be reported at 
study visits or at mindfulness sessions.  
Confidentiality or loss of privacy.  We will collect potentially sensitive information about participants; if 
released inappropriately, participants may e xperie nce embarrassment or distress.   
Embarrassment from interview or self -report measures.  There is the possibility that mothers may feel 
uncomfortable by some of the interview questions and self -report measures.  
Risk of discovering symptoms consistent w ith a psychiatric disorder.   Because we are asking women to 
complete questionnaires regarding depression and anxiety symptoms, we may be more likely to discover a 
psychological disorder (depression).   
Risk of discovering current domestic violence or abuse . Part icipants may disclose current domestic 
violence or abuse when completing the trauma questionnaire.  
SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 PANDEMIC . Risk of venipuncture.  There may be discomfort 
associated with obtaining peripheral blood via venipuncture. Venipunct ure al so carries the risk of 
developing a hematoma at the site of the puncture and a <1% risk of developing an infection at the site of 
puncture.  
SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 PANDEMIC . Detection of incidental fetal abnormal findings.  
Indices of abnormal fetal growth  may be detected at ultrasound sessions.  
SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 PANDEMIC . Risk of research ultrasound.  Ultrasound imaging is 
based on mechanical sound waves (non -ionizing radiation) so it doesn’t have the same risks as X -rays or 
other types of imag ing sy stems such as MRI. Ultrasound imaging is generally considered safe when used 
prudently by appropriately trained health care providers. Ultrasound energy does have the potential to 
heat tissues slightly or produce small pockets of gas in body fluids/t issues  and corresponding bioeffects 
have been described in animal models. No bioeffects have been reported in humans or in human fetuses, 
however, when exposures are be kept as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA).  
 
 
Adequacy of Protection a gainst Risk s 
 
SUSPEND ED DURING COVID 19 PANDEMIC . Discovery of elevated blood pressure. If 
elevated blood pressure readings (> 140 /90) are recorded during in-laboratory or ambulatory blood 
pressure monitoring, the participant’s prenatal care provider will be notified imme diatel y after the study 
team is aware of the elevated reading(s) . If blood pressure measurements are 160/110 or higher, 
participants will be instructed to go to the emergency room.  Participants would also be instructed to go to 
the emergency room i f the ob /gyn p rovider advises it. Participants will be aware that elevated blood 
pressure readings will be communicated to their prenatal care provider. This information is included in 
the informed consent form.  
 
Detection of symptoms consistent with preeclampsia . Wome n will be asked to report on 
symptoms of preeclampsia at each study visit as well as at each phone -delivered mindfulness session. If a 
participant endorses PEC symptoms , their provider will be immediately notified by phone. The trained 
research assis tant a nd mindfulness instructor will indicate that they are calling on behalf of the 
 9 
participant due to a medical emergency. The participant will also be instructed to call their provider. If 
neither the participant nor the research staff are able to speak  with a provider, the participant will be 
instructed to go to an emergency room for evaluation.  
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent. Written informed consent (including a description of the 
nature, purpose, risks, and benefits of the study) will be obtained from i ndividuals who express interest in 
participating. Participants will also provide release of information from medical records for the purpose of 
determining birth outcomes following delivery. The voluntary nature of the study and the participant’s 
right to withdrawal at any time will be emphasized during the consent process; this information will be 
provided to participants in written form at the time of consent.  
 
Embarrassment from interview or self -report measures:   To ease any potential discomfort, the 
research staff will be trained to interview in a comfortable non -judgmental manner. Additionally, women  
will have the option to stop the interview at any time, or to decline to complete any of the self -report 
measures. Finally, the PI will be available  shoul d any discomfort not be alleviated during or after the 
interview/self -report.   
 
Risk of discovering symptoms consistent with a psychiatric disorder:   Because we are asking 
women to report on symptoms of  depression and anxiety, we may be more likely to dis cover a 
psychologi cal disorder .  For all participants who endorse elevated symptoms of depression or anxiety, the 
RA or Dr. Bublitz will provide referrals and information regarding treatment options. We will also send a 
note to the participant’s OBGY N to i nform them of the patient’s elevated symptoms. In the event that a 
study participant endorses suicidal ideation,  the interviewer will complete a lethality assessment, will 
consult with Dr. Bublitz to for mulate a course of action, and will consult wit h the participant’s care 
provider. Appropriate intervention or follow -up care will be arranged with the treating clinician or, if 
hospitalization is required, through emergency serv ices. If real risk of harm to self or others is identified, 
we will remain with t he participant until an emergency intervention can be planned and implemented.  
Standard procedures include explaining (and re -explaining) all upcoming procedures to participants and 
conveying a strong attitude of caring, flexibility, and individuali zed at tention to participant. Should a 
subject ask to discontinue participation, or should staff detect an elevated level of distress, ongoing 
procedures will be halted immediately and a decision will be made in conjunction with the PI regarding 
the subjec t’s ab ility to continue in the protocol. Subjects are reminded throughout the course of the study 
that they are free to terminate their participation at any time.  
 
Risk of discovering current domestic violence or abuse.  If participants report current dome stic 
violence or abuse , they will be provided with information on follow up testing and medical care (see 
brochure from Day One). They will be encouraged to contact Day One in Providence Rhode Island, an 
organization that provides treatment, intervention, educat ion, advocacy, and prevention services to 
Rhode Islanders of all ages. They can call the Day One 24 -hour help line at 1 -800 -494-8100, or the 
National Sexual Assault Hotline at 1 -800 -656-4673.  
 
SUSPENDED DURING COVID 19 PANDEMIC . Risk of venipuncture.  Blood draws will be 
coordinated, when possible, with blood draws obtained during routine medical care to minimize the 
number of times venipuncture is performed. Venipuncture will be performed via standard techniques and 
skin preparation (with alcohol) to m inimiz e the risks of developing a hematoma or infection at the site of 
puncture. A topical anesthetic will be made available for use prior to venipuncture if desired. 
Venipuncture will be performed by a phlebotomist, physician or nurse experienced in drawi ng blo od to 
minimize risk of discomfort.  Risk of d etection of abnormal fetal parameters.  Measurements of 
fetal growth and vascular parameters will be collected at  research  ultrasound sessions. If the following 
abnormal findings are detected on the research  ultra sound, we will alert the OB/GYN provider: 1) fetal 
anomalies, 2) estimated fetal weight below 10%, 3) abnormal umbilical blood flow, 4) abnormal levels of 
amniotic fluid, and 5) absent fetal heart rate. The prenatal care provider who will then determ ine wh ether 
follow up with a clinical ultrasound is needed. Ultrasound and Doppler studies are routine clinical tests 
with no significant risks attached to them (Bhid e, Ach arya et al. 2013 ). Moreover,  assessment of uterine  
and umbilical artery by Doppler  techniques  are recommended and defined as essential research variables 
for studies on hypertensive disorders of pregnancy  and fetal growth restriction, by intern ationa l research 
committees (Khalil, Gordijn et al. 2019 , Myatt, Redman et al. 2014 ), as research  standard an d non -invasive 
 10 
method to evaluate   placenta function. The reason is that abnormalities of the placenta  and abnormal blood 
flow of the placental vessels usually occur before clinical onset of preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction 
(Baschat 2011 , Velauthar, Plana et al. 2014 ).  Normal reference ranges of  fetal and maternal arterial 
Doppler parameters have bee n publ ished, including normal reference ranges of maternal uterine artery 
from  11 to 41 weeks' gestation  (Baschat and Gembruch 2003 , Brown, Di Luzio et al. 1998 , Gomez, 
Figueras et al. 2008 ). 
 
For the research studies, we will use ultrasound devices currently in use for clinical evaluations. Per national 
and intern ationa l guidelines  (Bhide, Acharya et al. 2013 , Holt and Abramowicz 2017 ), when performing 
Doppler, mechanical (MI) and thermal (TI) indices will be displayed on the ultrasound screen. We will 
maintain T1 ≤ 1 and the exposure time will be kept as short as possible (Bhide, Acharya et al. 2013 ). 
Participants will be positioned on their back, leaning to the left, with a wedge or pillow under the right 
maternal back to prevent compression of the vena cava.  
 
With respect to threats t o conf identiality and integrity of the data , the followin g procedures will be in 
place:  
 
Confidentiality Safeguards.   To minimize any risk of accidental disclosure of confidential information 
about the project, all work described herein will be conducted w ith ut most regard to confidentiality. The 
Women’s Medicine Collaborative Research Department , a locked facility where all data entry will take 
place, has instituted a number of plans to safeguard subject confidentiality.  First, all data entry from the 
experimen t will take place directly in our facility . All staff involved with the project will receive training in 
confidentiality, and will sign a work agreement that states that a breach of confidentiality will be grounds 
for immediate dismissal. Second, a l og of participants will be locked in the PI’s research office at the 
Women’s Medicine Collaborative . This log will also be sto red on a computer in a password -protected file 
with access only by authorized personnel.  Otherwise, all  information obtained from  parti cipants  will be 
identified with random research numbers rather than names. All identifying information will be removed 
from the data file after the subject has completed the study (or dropped out from participation).  All data 
materials will be k ept in loc ked file cabinets in the  locked research facility.  The study database will be 
stored on Lifespan  computers with access only by authorized personnel.  Questionnaires and interview 
data will be kept in a locked filing cabinet. Consent forms will be st ored i n a separate locked filing cabinet, 
and will not be linked with subject numbers.  All computers at the research  facility are password protected 
with backup to a secure server.  Data analysis will take place on computers at the Women’s Medicine 
Collab orativ e. All computer files and written reports and papers will not identify subjects or make 
identification possible. We are confident that these precautions effectively minimize the risk of accidental 
or willful disclosure of confidential information.  
 
Potenti al Benefits of the Proposed Research:  
Previous research provides supportive evidence that mindfulness interventions may effectively reduce 
symptoms of depression, anxiety, and stress in pregnant women . Therefore, we believe that one benefit of 
partic ipatin g may be that participants who receive mindfulness training could experience fewer symptoms 
of psychological distress.  
 
Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained:  
The results of the proposed study will provide preliminary evidence on the feasibility a nd acc eptability of 
a phone -delivered mindfulness training intervention for pregnant women at risk for hypertension 
disorders . Results will also provide evidence on the effectiveness of the intervention at reducing 
psychological symptoms of distress in pre gnancy . Finally, results may provide  preliminary  evidence on 
the usefulness of such interventions on reducing rates of hypertension in at -risk women. We expect that 
these benefits will outweigh potential risks to participants.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring P lan:   
Dr. Bublitz will have primary responsibility for monitoring all participants. Any adverse events, breaks of 
confidentiality, or any other data or safety issues that arise will be immediately brought to th e attention of 
the RIH IRB . Dr. Bublitz will b e resp onsible for completing an Adverse Events Form should an event 
occur. She will report Se rious Adverse Events to the IRB  within 24 hours of having received notice of the 
event.  Adverse event reports will be reviewed a nnually with RIH  IRB to ensure part icipan t safety. In the 
 11 
event that a study participant endorses suicidal ideation during an interview,  the interviewer will 
complete a lethality assessment, will consult with the PI to formulate a course of action, and, with written 
permission, will consult  with the participant’s care provider. Appropriate intervention or follow -up care 
will be arranged with the treating clinician or, if hospitalization is required, through emergency services at 
Butler , The Miriam,  or Rhode Island hospital.  
 12 
Statistical App roach  
 
Randomization.  We will use a stratified randomization procedure to assign participants to 
mindfulness training  vs. usual care based on medications for hypertension. The randomization 
scheme will be generated based on a permuted block randomization p rocedure with small 
random sized blo cks. Randomization will be stratified by hypertension medications (yes/no).   
Sample size considerations.  The proposed sample size was estimated to have sufficient power to 
assess feasibility and acceptability, as well as  to provide a reasonable sample with which to 
estimate effect sizes and confidence intervals for secondary outcome s. We propose to enroll 30 
participants in a 1:1 ratio to mindfulness training  and usual care.  With a two -sided alpha -level of 
0.05, we will h ave more than sufficient power (>80%) to detect acceptability differences in the 
small -medium range, d=0.45/w=.2 .  
Missing data.  All analyses will be on the intent -to-treat sample under various assumptions about 
the missing data mechanism. Sensitivity to t hese assumptions will be tested.  
Blinding.  Study staff conducting the baseline and follow -up evaluations will be blinded to 
women’s randomized group assignment. Pathologist examining placental histopathology will be 
blind to treatment condition.  
Treatmen t Fidel ity. Mindfulness training  sessions will be audiotaped to assess  treatment fidelity. 
Treatment fidelity checklists for each mindfulness session were previously developed by Dr. 
Salmoirago -Blotcher and will be used to monitor reliability, validity, an d fidel ity of the 
mindfulness training  intervention.  
 13 
INFO RMED CONSENT  
 
       
Lifespan Affiliate Site where research will be conducted  
 
  Rhode Island Hospital       The Miriam Hospital  
  Bradley Hospi tal    Newport Hospital   
    Gateway Healthcare  
 
Agreement to Participate in a Research Study  
And Authorization for Use and Disclosure of Information  
 
015918                                   
Committee #       Name of Study Vol unteer  
 
Prenatal mindfulness training for pregnant women at risk for hypertension  
 
You are being asked to take part in a research study.  All research studies at Lifespan hospitals 
follow the rules of the sta te of Rhode Island, the United States government and Lifespan.  Before 
you decide whether to be in the study, you and the researcher will engage in the “informed 
consent” process.  During this process, the researcher will explain  the purpose of the study, how 
it will be carried out, and what you will be expected to do if you participate.  The researcher will 
also explain the possible risks and benefits of being in the study, and will provide other 
information.  You should feel fre e to ask any questions you might have.  The purpose of these 
discussions is for you to decide whether participating in the study is the best decision for you.  
 
If you decide to be in the study, you will be asked to sign and date this form with the person w ho 
explained the study to y ou.  A member of the research team will call you, at your convenience, to 
review the consent form with you and to answer all the questions you may have, before you 
decide to sign. This form summarizes the information you discusse d.  You will be given a cop y 
of this form to keep.   
 14 
 
1. Nature and Purpose of the Study       
You are being asked to take part in a research project because we are interested in understanding 
if a phone -delivered mindfulness intervention can be delivered to p regnant women who had 
probl ems with their blood pressure in the past. We are also interested in your opinions about this 
intervention, and your ideas for how to improve it for pregnant women in the future. We expect 
to enroll  30 pregnant women. The study i s sponsored by the Brown Ce nter for Mindfulness, the 
Cardiopulmonary Vascular Biology COBRE, and the Women’s Medicine Collaborative.  
 
2. Explanation of Procedures  
If you decide to be part of the study and are selected, you will participate in a study visit in 
which we will ask you some questions about your pregnancy, your symptoms of psychological 
stress before and during pregnancy, and your health. Study procedures  will be done remotely. 
This means that you may be asked to complete some interview questions during a phone call or 
during a video call. You will be asked to complete questionnaires on paper or through an 
electronic survey. Before starting any remote inte raction, a person from the research team will 
explain to you all the details of the remote interaction, such as type of  technology needed and 
will provide answers to all the questions you may have. For the research remote procedures, the 
research team will  use only the technologies approved by Lifespan IS/IT.  
 
After you complete the first study visit, you will be randomly assigned by chance to participate 
either in an 8 week phone -delivered mindfulness intervention (in addition to usual prenatal care), 
or to continue to receive your usual prenatal care. This means you have a 50% chance of 
 15 
participating in the mindfulness in tervention. After about 8 weeks, we will ask you again about 
your symptoms of psychological stress and health in pregnancy, and we will a sk you some 
questions about your experiences in the study.  
 
If you are eligible to participate after the first visit a nd are randomized to participate in the 
mindfulness intervention, we will ask you to take part in 8 phone -delivered individual 
mindfulnes s training sessions. These sessions will occur approximately once a week for 8 weeks. 
Each session will take approximat ely 30 minutes. Therefore, the total time that you will 
participate in the mindfulness intervention is about 4 hours. Mindfulness is a ty pe of relaxation 
exercise that involves paying attention to the present moment. The intervention will be 
conducted by a n experienced Mindfulness instructor. With your permission, we may tape record 
these phone sessions to help us with coding the interventi on; the tapes will be destroyed at the 
end of the study. Between these phone sessions, we will encourage you to practic e the 
mindfulness exercises everyday on your own time. We will ask you to listen to an audio 
recording of the mindfulness exercises that you learn in sessions every day for 15 minutes a day. 
We will ask you to write down the times that you practice these t echniques. When you have 
completed the mindfulness intervention, we will ask you what you liked and disliked about the 
intervention, your  reasons for attending or missing sessions, and your ideas for ways to improve 
the intervention in the future.  
 
If you are eligible to participate after the first visit and are randomized to the “treatment as 
usual” study group, we will continue to contact  you by phone once a week for 8 weeks while you 
 16 
receive your usual prenatal care. On these phone calls we will ask you if you have been attending 
prenatal care appointments.  
 
 
We will also ask you for your permission to release your medical record followi ng delivery in 
order to record the outcomes of your pregnancy.  
 
 
If you report current severe depression or psychosis at the first interview, you will not be eligible 
to continue in the study. We will provide you with referrals to mental health providers in the 
community. With your permission, we will also write your OB/GYN provider a letter to let them 
know about elevate d symptoms of depression or psychosis so that they can also help to connect 
you with additional services.   
 
We will ask you to provide in formation which will be used to maintain contact with you and also 
provide information about two “locators,” or friends  or family members who will know how to 
reach you in case you cannot be reached.  
 
Compensation:  
You will be compensated $50 for the first  and final study visits. These interviews will be 
conducted at the Women’s Medicine Collaborative or by phone.  
 
Costs f or participating in this study   
 17 
Some of the services you will receive are being performed only because you are participating in 
this rese arch study.  Examples of these ‘research only’ services include the phone -delivered 
mindfulness intervention..  Those se rvices will be paid for by the study and will not be billed to 
you or your health insurance company.  
 
Other services you will receive dur ing this research study are considered "routine clinical 
services" that you would have received even if you were not in  the research study. Examples are 
routine examinations by your OB/GYN provider.  These services will be billed to your health 
insurance co mpany, but you will be responsible for paying any deductibles, co -payments, or co -
insurance that are a normal part of y our health insurance plan.  If you do not have health 
insurance, you will be responsible for those costs.  
 
Contact Information:    
If you  have questions about this study, please call Margaret Bublitz, Ph.D. at (401) 793 -7884.  
 
3. Discomforts and Risks   
In this study you will be asked some questions about your feelings and behaviors. It is possible 
that some of the questions may make you uncomfortable. All staff members are professional and 
will not talk to any other people about what you say unless you say  you may harm ot hers or 
yourself. You may skip questions that make you uncomfortable. If you are experiencing elevated 
symptoms of depression or anxiety you may be referred for additional treatment so you can 
receive the care you need, or you can request s uch a referral. With your permission, we will also 
 18 
write your OB/GYN provider a letter to let them know about elevated symptoms of depression or 
anxiety so that they can also help to connect you with additional services.  
 
Mindfulness is intended to be a he lpful experience , but some patients may find this an 
uncomfortable experience . Some psychological discomfort, usually mild and transitory, may 
rarely happen in subjects that do not have severe depression or psychosis. A member of the study 
staff will conta ct you weekly to  ask you about any problem or discomfort you might be 
experiencing during and between the training sessions. If you experience any of these symptoms 
a member of the study staff will provide you with resources for additional treatment. You m ay 
stop particip ating at any time.  
 
 
4.  Benefits  
Although you may not benefit directly from participation, by taking part in this study you are 
helping researchers understand and improve mindfulness interventions for pregnant women . We 
hope that these i nterventions may  result in improved health for pregnant women in the future.  
 
5.  Alternative Therapies   
Alternative therapies include individual or group behavioral treatments for depression, anxiety, 
and stress, and medications. If you are interested in  these therapies  we are happy to provide 
referrals. These treatments will not prevent you from participating in this study. You may leave 
this study at any time.  
  
 19 
6.  Refusal/Withdrawal  
It is up to you whether you want to be in the study.  You are not req uired to enroll or participate.  
If you decide to participate, you can always change your mind and quit at any time.  If you 
decide not to be in the study, or if you quit later, you will still be able to get the health care 
services you normally get.  If y ou join, but lat er on the researcher or your doctor feels being in 
the study is no longer good for you, they may choose to take you out of the study before it is 
over.  If new information becomes available that might change your mind about whether you 
want  to stay in the study the researcher will share this information with you as soon as possible.  
 
Optional : Follow -up after Withdrawal of Consent  
If you leave the study, it would still be useful for us to know how you do for the remainder of 
your pregnancy and delivery. We would appreciate if you would permit us to get follow -up 
information about your health from your doctor or your medical record.  
 
____ If I withdraw from th e study, you have my permission to collect information about my 
health from my docto r or medical record.  
 
_____ I do not give my permission for you to continue to collect information about me if I stop 
participating in the study.  
 
            
 Signature of  study volunteer     Date   
 
 20 
You have the right to change your mind at any time regard ing follow -up after withdrawal.  If you 
decide to quit the study please tell the head researcher Margaret Bublitz, Ph.D. at (401) 793 -
7884 . 
 
7.  Medical Treatment/Payment in Case of Injury   
A research injury is any physical or mental injury or illness caus ed by being in the study. If you 
are injured by a medical treatment or procedure you would have received even if you were not in 
the study that i s not a research injury.  To help avoid research injury and added medical 
expenses, it is very important to fol low all study directions carefully.  If you do experience a 
research injury, Lifespan or the study doctor can arrange medical treatment for you. Such 
treatment will be paid for as described below.  
 
If you have insurance and have a research injury that is n ot covered by the study, it is possible 
that some or all of the cost of treating you could be billed to your insurer.  If your health 
insurance w ill not cover such costs, it is possible you would have to pay out of pocket.  In some 
cases, Lifespan might be  able to help you pay if you qualify for free care under Lifespan policy.  
However, Lifespan has no policy to cover payment for such things as lo st wages, expenses other 
than medical care, or pain and suffering.   
 
8.  Rights and Complaints   
Signing this f orm does not take away any of your lawful rights.  If you have any complaints 
about this study, or would like more facts about the rules for rese arch studies, or the rights of 
 21 
people who take part in research studies you may contact Janice Muratori in the Lifespan Office 
of Research Administration, at (401) 444 -6246.  
 
9.  Confidentiality and Research Authorization for Use and Disclosure of Your Hea lth Care 
Information  
Your research records will be treated as private health care records and will be protected  
according to Lifespan privacy practices and policies that are based on state and federal law.   In 
particular, f ederal law requires us to get yo ur permission to use or disclose (release your 
information to someone outside of Lifespan) your health informat ion for research purposes. If 
you sign this form you agree to be in this research study and you permit the use and disclosure of 
your health info rmation for the purpose of conducting the research, providing treatment, 
collecting payment and running the bus iness of the hospital.  This permission has no expiration 
date.  You may withdraw from the study at any time.  However, if you do not want the 
researchers to use or disclose any further information in this study you must cancel permission in 
writing  and ma y do so at any time. If you cancel your permission, you will stop taking part in the 
study and no new information will be collected about you.  H owever, if you cancel your 
permission, it will not apply to actions already taken or information already collec ted about you 
by the hospital or the researchers before you canceled your permission.  
 
Generally, the entire research record and any medical reco rds held by the hospital may be used 
and released for research purposes.  The following people or businesses/co mpanies/ might use, 
release, or receive such information:  
 
 22 
• The researcher and their support staff;  
• The study sponsor: The Brown Center for Mindfu lness, the Cardiopulmonary Vascular 
Biology COBRE, and the Women’s Medicine Collaborative.  
• Doctors, nurses, lab oratories and others who provide services to you or the sponsor in 
connection with this study;   
• The company or section of the U.S. government th at is paying for the study and others 
they hire to oversee, administer, or conduct the research;  
• The United St ates Food and Drug Administration, the Department of Health and Human 
Services, the Office of Inspector General, and the Office of Civil Rights; European 
Medicines Agency  
• People who volunteer to be patient advocates or research volunteer protectors;   
• Memb ers of the hospital's administrative staff responsible for reviewing, approving and 
administering clinical trials and other healthcare or researc h activities.  
• Accrediting Organizations  
 
There are times when the law might require or permit Lifespan to rele ase your health information 
without your permission.  For example, Rhode Island law requires researchers and health care 
workers to report abuse or neglect of children to the Department of Children, Youth and Families 
(DCYF) and to report abuse or neglect of people age 60 and older to the Department of Elderly 
Affairs.  
  
 23 
All researchers and health care providers are required to protect the privacy of your health care 
information.  Other people and businesses/organizations that are not health care providers are not 
required by law to do that so it is possible they might re -release your information.   
 
You have the right to refuse to sign this form and not participate in the research.  Your refusal 
would have no affect on your treatment, charges billed to you,  or benefits at any Lifespan health 
care site.  If you do not sign, you will not be able to enro ll in the research study and will not 
receive treatment as a study participant.   
 
If you decide to quit the study after signing this form (as described in Sect ion 6) no new 
information will be collected about you unless you gave us permission to do so.  H owever, the 
hospital or the researchers may continue to use information that was collected before you quit the 
study to complete analysis and reports of this re search.  
Please initial the following permissions:  
 
_____  I give permission  to tape record my sessions during the study.  The tapes will 
only be used for coding purposes.  
   
_____  I do not give permission  to tape record my sessions during the study.  The t apes 
will only be used for coding purposes.  
 
 
   _____  I give permission  for researchers to contact me in the future for research  
 24 
purposes.  
 
   _____  I do not give permission for researchers to contact me in the future for  
research purposes.  
 
 
      ____ _         I give permission  for researchers to contact the “locators” for wh om I have  
                         provided information in order to contact me for research purposes.  
 
      _____         I do not give permission  for researchers to contact the “locators” for whom I  
                         have provided information in order to contact me for research purposes.  
 
 25 
 
SIGNATURE  
 
I have read this informed consent and authorization form.  ALL OF MY QUESTIONS HAVE 
BEEN ANSWERED, AND I WANT  TO TAKE PART IN THIS RESEARCH STUDY.  
 
By signing below, I give my permissi on to participate in this research study and for the described 
uses and releases of information.  I also confirm that I have been now or previously given a copy 
of the Lifespan Privacy Notice  
 
 
 
 
 
The Researcher is required to provide a copy of this consent to you.  
 
_________________________________________  ________          ____________  
Signature of study volunteer/authorized representative*  Date         and    Time when signed  
  
 
I was present  during the consent PROCESS AND signing of this agreement by 
the study volunteer or authorized representative  This informed  consent document expires on _________________.    
DO NOT sign this  document after this expiration date  
 26 
 
____________________________________ ______   ______________  
Signature of witness (required if consent     Date  
is presented orally or at the reque st of the IRB)        
  
 
__________________________________________   ______________  
Signature of Translator       Date  
 
_____________________________ ______________  ________          __________  
Signature of researcher or designate     Date         and    Time when signed  
 
* If signed by agent other than study volunteer, please explain below.  
_______________________________________________________________ _______________
__ 
 
______________________________________________________________________________
__ 
 
 
 
 
 27 
Refe rences  
 
 
ACOG (2013). "Hypertension in pregnancy. Report of the American College of Obstetricians 
and Gynecologists' Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy." Obstet Gynecol  122(5): 1122 -
1131.  
Baschat, AA (2011). "Examination of the fet al cardiovascula r system." Semin Fetal Neonatal 
Med 16(1): 2 -12. 
Baschat, AA and Gembruch, U (2003). "The cerebroplacental Doppler ratio revisited." 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol  21(2): 124 -127. 
Bhide, A, Acharya, G, Bilardo, CM, Brezinka, C, Cafici, D, Hernan dez-Andrade, E, Kalache, K, 
Kingdom, J, Kiserud, T, Lee, W, Lees, C, Leung, KY, Malinger, G, Mari, G, Prefumo, F, 
Sepulveda, W and Trudinger, B (2013). "ISUOG practice guidelines: use of Doppler 
ultrasonography in obstetrics." Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol  41(2): 233 -239. 
Braeken, MA, Jones, A, Otte, RA, Nyklicek, I and Van den Bergh, BR (2017). "Potential 
benefits of mindfulness during pregnancy on maternal autonomic nervous system function and 
infant development." Psychophysiology  54(2): 279 -288. 
Brown, R, Di  Luzio, L, Gomes , C and Nicolaides, KH (1998). "The umbilical artery pulsatility 
index in the first trimester: is there an association with increased nuchal translucency or 
chromosomal abnormality?" Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol  12(4): 244 -247. 
 28 
Gomez, O, Figue ras, F, Fernande z, S, Bennasar, M, Martinez, JM, Puerto, B and Gratacos, E 
(2008). "Reference ranges for uterine artery mean pulsatility index at 11 -41 weeks of gestation." 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol  32(2): 128 -132. 
Hjartardottir, S, Leifsson, BG, Geirsson,  RT and Steintho rsdottir, V (2006). "Recurrence of 
hypertensive disorder in second pregnancy." Am J Obstet Gynecol  194(4): 916 -920. 
Holt, R and Abramowicz, JS (2017). "Quality and Safety of Obstetric Practices Using New 
Modalities - Ultrasound, MR, and CT."  Clin Obstet Gyn ecol 60(3): 546 -561. 
Hughes, JW, Fresco, DM, Myerscough, R, van Dulmen, MH, Carlson, LE and Josephson, R 
(2013). "Randomized controlled trial of mindfulness -based stress reduction for prehypertension." 
Psychosom Med  75(8): 721 -728. 
James, P R and Nelson -Piercy, C (2004). "Management of hypertension before, during, and after 
pregnancy." Heart  90(12): 1499 -1504.  
Khalil, A, Gordijn, SJ, Beune, IM, Wynia, K, Ganzevoort, W, Figueras, F, Kingdom, J, Marlow, 
N, Papageorghiou, AT, Sebire, N, Zeitlin,  J and Baschat, AA (2019). "Essential variables for 
reporting research studies on fetal growth restriction: a Delphi consensus." Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol  53(5): 609 -614. 
Kintiraki, E, Papakatsika, S, Kotronis, G, Goulis, DG and Kotsis, V (2015). "Pregnanc y-Induced 
hypert ension." Hormones (Athens)  14(2): 211 -223. 
Larsen, DL, Attkisson, CC, Hargreaves, WA and Nguyen, TD (1979). "Assessment of 
client/patient satisfaction: development of a general scale." Eval Program Plann  2(3): 197 -207. 
 29 
Myatt, L, Redman, CW,  Staff, AC, Hans son, S, Wilson, ML, Laivuori, H, Poston, L and Roberts, 
JM (2014). "Strategy for standardization of preeclampsia research study design." Hypertension  
63(6): 1293 -1301.  
Nejati, S, Zahiroddin, A, Afrookhteh, G, Rahmani, S and Hoveida, S (2015 ). "Effect of Gr oup 
Mindfulness -Based Stress -Reduction Program and Conscious Yoga on Lifestyle, Coping 
Strategies, and Systolic and Diastolic Blood Pressures in Patients with Hypertension." J Tehran 
Heart Cent  10(3): 140 -148. 
Scantlebury, DC, Schwartz, GL,  Acquah, LA, Whi te, WM, Moser, M and Garovic, VD (2013). 
"The treatment of hypertension during pregnancy: when should blood pressure medications be 
started?" Curr Cardiol Rep  15(11): 412.  
Sobell, LC and Sobell, MB (1992). Timeline Follow -Back. Measuring Al cohol Consumptio n. R. 
Z. Litten and J. P. Allen. Totowa, NJ, Humana Press.  
Velauthar, L, Plana, MN, Kalidindi, M, Zamora, J, Thilaganathan, B, Illanes, SE, Khan, KS, 
Aquilina, J and Thangaratinam, S (2014). "First -trimester uterine artery Doppler and adver se 
pregnancy out come: a meta -analysis involving 55,974 women." Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol  
43(5): 500 -507. 
Zawadzki, MJ, Vandekar, L, Smyth, JM, Haas, D and Gerin, W (2013). "An extended validation 
of the ScottCare 320 ambulatory blood pressure monitor: reco mmendations for clinical 
application." Blood Press Monit  18(3): 151 -155. 
Zhang, J, Troendle, J and Levine, R (2000). "Risks of hypertensive disorders in the second 
pregnancy." Obstet Gynecol  95(4, Supplement 1): S77.  
 30 
 