DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
 
Modification and evaluation of the DECIDE intervention to improve 
parent- provider  interactions  in low-income  parents  of adolescents  with 
Disruptive Impulse Control, and Conduct Disorders  
 
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Date: 12/06/2022 
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
       
 
Modification and evaluation of the DECIDE intervention to improve parent- provider 
interactions  in low-income  parents  of adolescents  with  Disruptive  Impulse  Control, and 
Conduct Disorders (DECIDE)  
IRB #1911897011  
 
 
Susan  Perkins,  PhD 
Indiana University School of Medicine and 
Richard  M. Fairbanks  School  of Public Health 
410 West 10th Street, Suite 3000  
Indianapolis,  IN 46202  
(317)  274-2626  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
     
 
Table  of Contents:  
1.0 Rationale  
2.0 Background  
3.0 Specific  Aims  
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization 
6.0 Study  Procedures  
7.0 Reporting  of Adverse Events  
8.0 Study  Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
9.0 Statistical  Considerations  
10.0 Privacy/Confidentiality  
11.0 Record  Retention  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.0 Rationale  
 
Interventions to optimize parent -provider interactions are urgently needed to ensure adolescents with 
Disruptive,  Impulse -Control, and Conduct  disorders  (DIC)  receive  the behavioral  health  care  they  need.  DIC affect  5 
million (1 in 5) American adolescents aged 12 to 17 years.1 DIC are characterized by emotional and behavioral 
dysregulation manifested by behaviors that are aggressive, infringe on the rights of others, violate social norms, 
and result in conflicts with authority figures.2 For these adolescents, behavioral health care is complex, long- term, 
and requires parental participation.3-5 Research by our team and others showed parents of these adolescents  
report that providers do not listen to them or involve them in their adolescents’ care.6-8 Research shows providers 
have  biases and limited skills  and confidence to  communicate with these parents  to encourage  them to voice their 
concerns and care preferences.9-12 Low income and/or minority parents are at greatest risk for not being involved 
in their adolescents’ behavioral health care, having poor interactions with providers, being more likely to perceive poor quality of their adolescents’ behavioral health care, and having low treatment engagement.
13-18 If 
unaddressed,  poor  parent -provider  interactions  interfere with  adoles cents’  retention  in behavioral  health  care.19,20 
No evidence -based interventions have targeted both parents and providers to optimize their interactions and 
improve behavioral health care for adolescents with DIC.3,21 
To address these problems, we propose modifying the evidence -based DECIDE intervention to target low 
income and/or minority parents and providers of adolescents with DIC. DECIDE stands for Decide the problem; 
Explore the questions; Closed or open- ended questions; Identify the who, why, or how of the problem; Direct 
questions to your health care professional; Enjoy a shared solution. DECIDE was developed for ethnically/racially 
diverse adult patients with serious mental illness,22 and the latest evidence -based iterations include intervention 
com ponents targeted to and shown to increase patient activation, provider communication, and patient -provider 
interactions.22 DECIDE has two primary components: 1) three patient training sessions designed to help patients 
effectively ask  questions  and partici pate in  decisions about care:  and 2) a  12-hour workshop and up to  4 individual 
coaching sessions  for providers  to improve perspective- taking,  reduce  attributional  errors,  and increase  receptivity 
to patient participation. DECIDE has improved patient activation,23,24 self-management,23 perceived quality of 
care,23and collaborative treatment decision making.22 
2.0 Background  
 
Adolescents with disruptive, impulse -control, and conduct disorders (DIC), especially those in low 
income and/or minority families, present some of the nation’s most pressing behavioral health care challenges. Five million (1 in 5) adolescents 12- 17 years of age are diagnosed with a DIC that includes the following DSM -5 
diagnoses: (a) Oppositional Defiant Disorder, (b) Conduct Disorder, (c) Intermittent Explosive Disorder, (d) Pyromania, (e) Kleptomania,  (f) Other  Specified  DIC Disorder,  and (g) Unspecified  DIC.
1,2,26 DIC are characterized  by 
emotional and behavioral dysregulation manifested in externalizing behaviors that are aggressive, infringe on the 
rights of others, violate social norms, and result in conflicts with authority figures.2 Annual medical costs average  
$14,000 per child  with  Conduct  Disorder  compared  to < $2300 per child  without  a mental  disorder.27 Annual  direct 
medical costs range from $17 to 56 billion for those with DIC.27-29 Parents incur financial costs associated with 
interruptions in employment due to caregiving responsibilities, increased healthcare needs for their own stress - 
related  illnesses,  and their  child’s  treatment.30-33 Approximately  57%  of children  with  mental  health  disorders, 
including DIC, come from households living at or below the federal poverty level,34 and low income and/or 
minority parents are particularly vulnerable to the negativ e effects of caregiving for adolescents with these 
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
disorders.18,35- 37 Problems  associated  with  DIC are exacerbated  during  adolescence  due to rapid  developmental 
changes and increased substance abuse and criminal activities.38 
The effective tr eatment of adolescents with DIC depends on their parents’ active engagement with 
behavioral health care providers.39,40 In addition to managing their adolescents’  problem behaviors  and their own 
distress over such behaviors,31,32,36,41,42 parents of adolescents with DIC must attend frequent and often urgent 
meetings with providers.6,7,43- 45 Active parent involvement with the mental health system is required due to the 
complex treatment regimens needed by adolescents with these disorders and the high- risk nature of their 
behaviors.32,44,46- 48 Parents  report  that encounters  with  providers  are often  time -consuming,  stressful,  stigmatizing, 
exhausting, and unhelpful.7,30 Negative interact ions with providers contribute to parent disengagement from their 
adolescents’ care and resistance to following provider recommendations, both of which lead to poor adolescent 
outcomes.49,50 
 
Low income and/or minority parents of adolescents with DIC are a t high risk for aversive interactions 
with providers due to socioeconomic disadvantages.32,51,52 Research has shown that effective communication  
skills deployed by consumers in healthcare encounters, such as asking informed questions and clearly articulati ng 
opinions and needs, are associated with greater satisfaction with care and better health outcomes.53-57 However, 
low income and/or minority persons often have less opportunity to acquire these skills due to low educational 
attainment, poor health litera cy, disadvantaged social position, and limited resources.47,58- 60 Negative interactions 
are fostered by providers who perceive low income and/or minority health consumers to be uninvolved, 
uniformed,  and unable  to make complex  health  care  decisions,8,19,47,61,62 and lack of training  about  how  to motivate 
low income and/or minority persons to voice treatment concerns and preferences. 18,59,60,63- 65 
Scientific  Premise:  To address  the above  issues,  research  suggests  appropriate  target  variables  for 
parents and providers are parent activation, provider communication, and parent -provider interactions.  
Activation is a person’s acquisition of knowledge, skills, and beliefs that facilitate active participation in health care.
66,67 High activation in a dult patients with chronic illness,68-77 such as diabetes,78 HIV/AIDS,79 hypertension;80 
and serious mental illness81-85 such as schizophrenia57 is associated with better health status and adherence to 
healthy behaviors.57,67 Consumers who are well informed about health conditions and who are confident in their 
abilities  to navigate  the healthcare  system  and manage  their  care  have  better  health  outcomes.47,57,86 In addition, 
improving provider  communication  increases  satisfaction,  adherence,  and health  outc omes  in pediatric and adult 
populations with physical and mental health concerns.86,87 Multiple factors contribute to the quality of patient - 
provider interaction including provider communication and institutional practices.37,47,86,88,89 Effective provider 
communication is characterized by attentive, facilitative, and collaborative behavio rs.22,86 
 
Benefits of parent interventions will not be fully realized without collaborative parent -provider 
interactions.90 Several  parent  support  and skills  training interventions  have  been  shown  to improve:  1) parent  
knowledge and management of their children and adolescents’ behavior problems;91-98 2) parent mental health 
and stress levels;93,94,99 and 3) parent self -efficacy in accessing and navigating adolescents’ mental health 
services.100,101 Moreover, activation interventions in adult behavioral health have demonstrated that patient 
activation  in the absence  of provider  support  can lead  to harmful  effects,  including further  exacerbation  of tension 
in patient - provider relationships or diminished patient use of ser vices particularly in low income and/or minority 
patients.23 Patients’ perception or belief that the provider is supportive (receptive) of the former’s efforts to be 
actively involved in treatment may act as a mediator of intervention effects.22,23 Alegria  and colleagues suggested 
that patients’ beliefs that providers will support their activation efforts may significantly contribute to benefits of 
patient -provider interactions, patient perception of management of care, perceived quality of care, and 
engage ment and retention in care.23 
Our proposed focus  on both  parents  and providers  is innovative  in this field.  In DIC and other  mental 
health  disorders,  there are several  support  programs  or interventions  targeting parents.  However,  there are no 
(zero) interventions targeting providers, and no interventions targeting both parents and providers. This was 
confirmed in a PubMed search of all existing English -language literature using terms “parent, mental health,  
activation  or empowerment,  and intervention”.  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
Our target variables are innovative in this field. Improving parent activation improves interactions with 
providers 17,21,102 yet only two studies to date have tested parent activation interventions in adolescent behavioral 
healt h care.102,103 These two studies102,103 showed positive effects on parent activation and perceived efficacy to 
work with mental health providers.104 However, neither study intervened with providers. Similarly, improving 
provider  communication  increases  satisfaction, adherence,  and health  outcomes,86,87 Yet there are no such  existing 
interventions for parents of children with DIC. This was confirmed in a PubMed search of all existing English - 
language literature using terms “parent -  provider co mmunication, mental health, and intervention. Provider 
communication interventions have been developed to improve encounters between healthcare providers and 
adult patients with physical health concerns,58,105,106 and parents of children in pediatric prima ry care.51,54,107,108 
However,  evidence -based  parent -provider  communication  interventions  for parents  of children  with  mental  health 
disorders, including DIC, have not been developed. Thus, this is the first intervention to improve interactions 
between par ents and providers of adolescents with DIC.  
 
Our inclusion of low income and/or minority parents addresses an understudied population. The 
existing parent  activation  intervention  studies  focused  on military  families102,109 or Latino  parents.104 The military 
sample was majority  white  (73%)  and middle  income.  Our study will include  a more racial/ethnic diverse sample.  
 
3.0 Specific  Aims  
 
The purposes of this two -phase study are to modify and test the DECIDE intervention (referred to as 
DECIDE from now on) for parents and providers of adolescents with DIC. In phase I, our team in Indianapolis, IN (Drs. Oruche, Draucker, Perkins, parent and provider advi sory boards) will work with two consultants to modify 
DECIDE. Dr. Nakash will help modify the DECIDE provider components to be relevant for DIC. Dr. Chacko will help 
modify DECIDE from patient to parent focused. In phase II, we will test modified DECIDE ag ainst usual care in 
parents and providers of adolescents with DIC using a two -group, pilot, randomized, controlled design. During 
phase II, Dr. Oruche became a Co -Investigator at the University of South Florida in Tampa, FL.  Dr. Chacko (New 
York, NY) has c linical expertise in improving activation among parents of adolescents with DIC. Dr. Nakash 
(Northampton,  MA)  led the design  and implementation  of DECIDE  components  targeted  to providers
25 Dr. Chacko 
will help modify DECIDE from patient to parent focused. Our setting is a large, safety net health system in the 
Indianapolis metropolitan area servicing primarily low income and/or minority persons.  
Specific  aims  are to: 
 
Phase  I, Aim 1. Modify  DECI DE for low income  and/or  minority  parents  and providers  of adolescents  with  DIC. 
 
Phase  II, Aim 2. Evaluate  the feasibility  and acceptability  of modified  DECIDE.  
 
Phase  II, Aim 3. Estimate  preliminary  effects  of modified  DECIDE  to improve parent,  provider,  and adolescent 
outcomes. We hypothesize that compared to usual care:  
 
Hypothesis  3.1. Modified  DECIDE  parents  will show  greater  improvements  in: 1) activation;  2) parent - 
provider interactions; 3) perceived management of adolescents’ behavioral h ealth care, 4) perceived  
quality  of adolescents’  behavioral  health  care,  and 5) engagement  in adolescents’  behavioral  health  care. 
Hypothesis 3.2. Modified DECIDE providers will show greater improvements in: 1) communication skills 
and 2) parent -provider interactions.  
Hypothesis  3.3. Adolescents  of modified  DECIDE  parents  and providers  will show  higher  rates  of retention 
in behavioral health care.  
 
If study findings are positive, we will be poised to test the modified DECIDE in a fully -powered R01 level 
randomized, controlled, multi -site clinical trial. If study findings are negative, we will have process and outcome 
information  needed  to further  refine DECIDE  or pursue  different  interventions.  Either  way,  this line of research  has 
potential to optimize parent -provider interactions and ultimately, ensure adolescents with DIC receive the 
behavioral health care they need.  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusi on Criteria 
Inclusion Criteria:  
Inclusion  Criteria  for providers  and interns:  Providers  will be regular  paid  staff members  who  are: 
(1) Associate’s  or bachelor’s  or PhD prepared  providers  who  work  with  parents  OR 
 
(2) Masters -prepared  clinical social workers  or mental  health  counselors  and 
(3) Provide  behavioral  health  services  to adolescents  and their  parents.  OR 
(4) Doctoral  level  interns  (e.g.  in psychology)  and 
(5) Provide  behavioral  health  services  to adolescents  and their  parents  OR 
(6) Providers  who  are bachelor’s  prepared  interns  must:  
(1) be currently  working  with  a center  or private  practice  to complete  requirements  for their  Master's 
degree and 
(2) be providing  behavioral  health  services  to adolescents  and their  parents.  
 
Inclusion  Criteria  for Guardians:  Guardians  will have  a child  or adolescent  with  DIC receiving  services  from a 
participating mental health provider. Parents/guardians meeting all the following criteria are eligible:  
(a) are aged  21 or older  
(b) speak  English  
(c) are the guardian  (biological  parent,  adoptive  parent,  step  parent,  foster  parent,  or legal  guardian)  of the child  or 
adolescent or a parent surrogate serving in a primary caregiver role (referred to as “parents”; if foster parent or 
legal guardian, ).  
(d) must  have  a child  or adolescent  aged  3 to 17 years  with  a diagnosis  of Disruptive  Impulse  Control  and Conduct 
Disorder (DIC) by a mental health professional. (This includes children with behavior problems, such as Oppositional Defiant disorder, Conduct disorders, or Intermittent Explosive disorders).  
(e) Attends  regular  appointments  with  a provider  
(f) Foster  parents  will be included  if they  have  a child  with  DIC now  or in the past,  and regardless  of whether  that 
child is receiving services from a participating mental health provider or not.  
 
Exclusion  Criteria  for parents:  
- Show  significant  cognitive  impairment  or acute  emotional  distress on screening  
- Have  an incarcerated  adolescent  
No providers  or parents  will be excluded  on basis  of race/ethnicity,  gender,  or sexual  orientation.  
 
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization 
Screening  
Providers  currently  employed  at Sandra  Eskenazi  Mental  Health  Hospital, Bowen  Center,  Centerstone,  and 
other applicable mental health ce nters or  private practice will be approached for inclusion on the  study.  Providers 
with at least one patient who is aged between 6 -17 and diagnosed with DIC disorders will be screened for 
enrollment.  
 
Informed Consent  
 
A study investigator  or research  assistant  will obtain  informed  consent  from the provider  either  via a 
HIPPA compliant teleconferencing platform (ie Zoom Health) or via telephone contact. Parents who become  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
enrolled  will be approached  via telephone  contact.  Informed  consent  for parents  will be obtained  virtually  via a 
HIPPA compliant telecon ferencing platform (i.e., Zoom Health) or telephone contact.  
Randomization  
 
All participants  will be assigned  to the intervention  arm and there will be no randomization.  Instead,  the 
intervention results will be compared to historical data.  
 
Study  Duration/Timeline  
 
The study will consist  of the provider  completing baseline  measures  and then  complete a 4.5 hours  (max) 
workshop  through Canvas  Learning  System,  completed  over  the course  of 2-3 weeks.  After  the provider  completes 
the workshop, he/she will be contacted by study staff to complete the post -intervention measures (T2) and 
conduct a recorded qualitative interview.  The parents will complete baseline (T1) study measures  before meeting 
with the parent trainer.  Then all will participate in up to three,  hour -long sessions training sessions with a parent 
trainer. In total, participation in the study will last between 6- 8 weeks.  
 
6.0 Study  Procedures  
 
1. Theoretical Framework. DECIDE is grounded in mental health disparities f rameworks113, 24 and social 
cognitive principles.114 The parent component is designed to increase parent activation, to help effectively ask 
questions  and participate  in decisions  about  care.23,112 66,111 The provider  component  is designed  to teach  provider 
communication  skills  in listening,  eliciting the patient’s  agenda, encouraging question,  and providing  management 
education.  
2. Preliminary Studies. Drs. Oruche, Draucker, Perkins, and Chacko collaborated on the preliminary 
studies  below.  For this application,  we added Dr. Nakash  (Consultant)  who  is a nationally  recognized  researcher 
and clinician with expertise in racial/ethnic disparities related to provider level factors. Our preliminary work is 
below.  
 
Preliminary study 1. Through this qualitative descriptive study (internal funding), Drs. Oruche and 
Draucker  identified  the most  salient  needs  and challenges  of parents  of adolescents  with  DIC. Results  indicated  
that parents’  interactions  with  providers  were often  aversive,  stressful,  and nonproductive;  suggesting need  for an 
intervention.7,115 
 
Preliminary study 2. Similar to the proposed study, we used a 2 -phase study to develop and preliminarily 
test an intervention called FAME (Family Management Efficacy) for parents of adolescents with DIC. With funding 
(KL2TR001106, UL1TR001108), Oruche, Dra ucker, Chacko and a parent and provider advisory board, developed 
and tested  this 6-week  parent  group -based,  in-person  intervention  among  low income  African  American  parents  of 
adolescents with DIC aimed at enhancing parent activation and improving interac tions with behavioral health care 
providers.116 The setting was the same as for the proposed study. FAME was acceptable but not feasible, and did 
not show preliminary efficacy on key outcomes because it did not have a provider component. Facilitators noted 
some parents  struggled  to develop  effective communication  skills  (e.g.,  asking  questions  of providers,  sharing  ideas 
about the adolescents’ treatments). The team gained valuable experience in intervention delivery to parents of 
adolescents with DIC and co nfirmed the importance of simultaneously targeting providers. These lessons inform 
modification of the evidence- based DECIDE intervention in this proposed study.117 
Preliminary  work for this application.  Drs. Oruche,  Draucker,  and Perkins  collaborated  with  Drs. Nakash 
(40 hours past  3 months) and Chacko (10  hours past  3 months), on  the following components of this  application: 
identification of target variables for the modified DECIDE, creation of the study conceptual model, selection of study measures, and overall study design.  
 
3. Methods  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
DECIDE Intervention . The evidence- based DECIDE intervention was developed for low income and/or 
minority adults with serious mental illness and their providers.22 DECIDE has both patient and provider 
components. DECIDE has improved patient activation,23,24 patient self- management,23 perceived quality of 
care,23and improved  collaborative  treatment  decision  making.22 Because DECIDE  was designed  for individuals  who 
work with adult patients, we wil l adapt it for parents and providers of adolescents with DIC. For example, case 
examples need to be relevant to the clinical work with this population and accommodate individual or family 
therapy; we will also shorten the provider training –  to increase feasibility of implementation and acceptability to 
participants. This fits with Stage 1A and 1B of the ORBIT model.118 
 
The modified  DECIDE will have  parent  and provider  components.  
The parent  component  is designed  to teach  parents  how  to effectively  ask questions  and participate  in 
decisions  about  their  adolescents’  behavioral  health  care.  It will include  up to three 60 minutes  sessions (the third 
session is optional). Session 1 (Decisions and Agency) is designed to increase awareness of t heir role in clinical 
interactions and encourage participation and decision making in care. Session 2 (Self -efficacy and Consolidation) 
encourages parents to ask questions about their adolescents’ behavioral health and health care and treatment options . S ession 3Optional Booster), which can discuss any previous topics the parent would like the trainer to 
review and can also include more practicing of asking questions).  
The provider component is designed to improve provider communication in three key areas:  1) 
perspective taking to understand circumstances and perceptions; 2) attributional errors or attributing negative parent behaviors to character traits instead of considering the situational factors; and 3) receptivity to parent participation  and collaboration.  We will shorten  the provider  training to increase  feasibility  of implementation  and 
acceptability to participants. The  training will included one 4.5- hour (rather than 12 -hour) group workshop.  
  
 
Intervention Delivery. In addition to standard care, all participants  will receive the modified DECIDE. 
Parents receiving intervention will receive up to three 60 -minute sessions over the course of three weeks. The 
sessions will focus on increasing the par ent’s involvement in decision -making, increasing their understanding of 
the decision -making  process,  and training the parents  to ask questions  concerning their  adolescent’s  care.  These 
training sessions will be delivered by trained study staff virtually vi a HIPPA compliant video teleconferencing 
platform (ie Zoom Health) or via Telephone as approved by IRB.  
Phase  I, Aim 1 
Recruitment of Parent Advisory Board . We will form a 5 -member parent advisory board to guide 
modification of DECIDE. Inclusion Criteria. Parents of adolescents with DIC, who are receiving services at Midtown Child  and Adolescent  Program. We will invite  parents  sequentially  in the clinic as well as parents  from our previous 
study advisory board and who participated in preliminary study 2 that agreed to be contacted for future studies.  
Recruitment of Provider Advisory Board . We will form a 5 -member provider advisory board to guide 
modification of DECIDE. Inclusion Cri teria. Midtown Child and Adolescent Program staffs who do not meet the 
inclusion  criteria  in phase  II (i.e. manager  and clinical  coordinators  or supervisors). We will invite  two other  direct 
care providers who work in the healthcare system but not at recruitment site. No parent or provider will be 
excluded on basis of race/ethnicity, gender, or sexual orientation.  
 
DECIDE Modification.  Dr. Oruche  has met  both  Dr. Nakash  and Midtown  Chief Executive Officer, Program 
manager and clinical coordinators to discus s potential modifications to the provider intervention to increase 
acceptability and feasibility. We will invite their continued participation during phase I. The research team and 
provider advisory board will  meet monthly for  ~ 3 months to modify the  intervention.  At the  initial meeting,  the PI 
will share  DECIDE  and discuss  what  components  need  to be modified.  The research  team will prepare  the modified  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
intervention materials and present modifications to the provider advisory group for iterative feedback. The same 
process  will be followed  to modify  the parent  component  of the DECIDE  intervention.  Together,  research  team and 
the parents’ advisory group wil l meet twice during the first 4 -months of study period. We will (a) share the parent 
component of the DECIDE intervention, (b) discuss what components need to be modified, (c) have the team do the modifications; and (d) present them back to the parent advi sory group for iterative feedback.  
 
Phase  II, Aims  2 and 3. 
 
Design.  A pilot  trial to assess  feasibility  and estimate outcomes  in intervention  vs. an historical  control.  
 
Setting.  Similar  to preliminary  studies,  we will conduct  this trial at Sandra  Eskenazi  Mental  Health  Hospital 
in Indianapolis, IN, Bowen Center in Indianapolis, IN, Centerstone centers in Indiana, Florida and Tennessee, other applicable mental health centers and private practice in the US.  Midtown is the largest publicly funded ment al 
health  center  in Indiana  and serves  primarily  low income  and/or  minority  population  (see Facilities  and Resources). 
Child and Adolescent Program employs 22 masters -prepared mental health providers. Oruche  also has clinical 
privileges at Midtown to  facilitate recruitment (see support letter). Midtown has  named  treatment engagement  as 
a top strategic priority.  
Sample. First, we will recruit 16 providers and then work with them to invite parents (or parent 
surrogates)  of adolescents  aged  6 to 17 years  who  have  been  diagnosed  with  a DIC disorder. Ideally,  we will enroll 
80 parents (5 parents per enrolled provider).  
 
Sample size justification. Because this is a feasibility pilot study, statistical models will be fit to estimate 
effect  sizes  for use in a future  randomized  trial.  Any inferential  testing  is considered  exploratory  though effect  sizes 
of ≥0.65 could be detected with 80% power in the models described below assuming pre/post exposure  
correlation of  0.5, intraclass  correlation of  5%, and two -tailed test  (α=0.05).  We will  follow the recommendation  of 
Hertzog
119 that a minimum of 30 participants per group are needed for pilot studies to examine group 
comparisons.119 To account for potential 20% dropout, we will recruit 40 parents to the intervention group with 1 - 
5 parents per provider) for up to a total of 80 parents. Provider sample size is based on availability.  
 
Procedures. Enrollment, consent, and baseline data collection. Providers . PI will attend provider team 
meeting at Midtown to introduce the study, answer questions, and invite them to participate. Trained research assistants (RA) will obtain verbal informed consent from interested providers. Parents. To screen parents, we will 
enlist the help of providers and administrative assistants at the clinic, who have access to providers’ caseloads, 
schedules, and adolescent patient demographics. To coordinate recruitment, we will ask the administrative 
assistants to select  adolescents  between  6 to 17 years  who  are diagnosed  with  DIC. PI and RAs will work  determine 
provider schedules or enrolled parents’ next visit . Parent eligibility and consent to participate will be determined 
by calling parents via telephone or a HIPPA compliant teleconferencing platform (ie Zoom Health). If RA does not make  contact  with  parent,  RA will send  study  flyer  and recruitment  letter  co-signed  by PI and Child  and Adolescent 
Program Manager. RA will make follow -up contact within 7 days after the sending the study materials.. If parent 
express interest in participation, the RA will determine eligibility. Next, RA will obtain verbal consent from interested  parents.. F ollowing  enrollment,  RA will collect  baseline  data  from all providers  and parents.. Training for 
providers will occur as soon after baseline measures are collected.  
 
R
evised  Study Schema:  
Figure  2: Study  Schema  
Providers  
Recruitment  
Screening  
Consent  
Baseline  Modified  DECIDE  intervention 
[workshop (1 @ 4.5 hrs)]  
Time  2  
DECIDE  Oral Interview (all 
providers)  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
Parents  
Recruitment  
Screening  
Consent  
Baseline  Modified  DECIDE  sessions 
2 @ 1 hr/week, with an 
optional  
3rd booster  session offered  @ 
1 hr/week  
Time  2  
DECIDE  Oral  Interview  (subset of 
parents)  
Green:  Quantitative  measures  and oral interviews  
All participants  will receive  the DECIDE  intervention.  Results  will be compared  to historical  control.  
Training for parents will be delivered remotely using telephone and/or Zoom Health for parents with video 
capability.  The parents  will be sent  a Zoom  Health  invitation  which  include  a toll free number  they  can call. This 
allows research staff to record ses sions for fidelity checks.  
 
 
Data collection . A trained study staff will collect baseline data (T1)  before the provider takes the DECIDE 
Training and will schedule a follow -up assessment 1 - 4 weeks post intervention training (T2). Providers will be 
instruc ted to think specifically about the most recent therapy session that he/she had with a parent of a child 
diagnosed with DIC in order to keep the parent provider interaction fresh in the provider’s mind when completing 
the measures.  Study staff will follow these same guidelines for scheduling the T2 data collection. Providers will 
complete and enter their surveys directly into REDCap.  Providers will be contacted by study staff to remind them 
to complete their  surveys  and to answer  any questions  if necessary.  Study staff will schedule  an appointment  with 
providers to collect the post -intervention (T2) measures in order to ensure the provider understands the 
instructions and also to conduct the post -intervention qualitative interview. Providers will b e instructed to  think 
specifically about the most recent therapy session that he/she had with a parent of a child diagnosed with DIC in order  to keep  the parent  provider  interaction  fresh  in the provider’s  mind  when  completing  the measures.  Parents 
will be  contacted and asked to schedule a convenient time to complete the surveys with the study staff.  
 
Measures.  
 
Aim 2 measures. The research project coordinator will keep logs and field notes of feasibility including: 1) 
enrollment  rates,  reasons  for ineligibility  and declining participation;  2) attrition  rate,  reasons  for missed  session  or 
intervention completion; and (3) measurement completion rates. We will measure parent and provider 
acceptability and satisfaction with modified DECIDE using Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ) and in -depth 
semi structured interviews at T2. RAs under  Draucker’s supervision will conduct in -depth semi -structured 
interviews  including:  All intervention  providers  (n = 8) and two of each  of the parents  (n = 16). To explore  different 
levels of acceptability by parents, for each provider, one parent will be chosen who has a high score (> 3) on the CSQ and one parent who has a low score (< 3). Both parents and providers will be asked about their experience 
with the intervention, what was helpful or not, and how they would change the intervention.  
 
Aim 3 measures . Parents,  providers,  and adolescents’  socio -demographic  factors  will be assessed  at T1; 
and outcomes will be assessed at T1 and T2.  We will include three items (i.e., level of parent organization,  
involvement,  and management  of adolescents’  care)  from  the Child  and Adolescent  Needs  and Strengths  (CANS) at 
Midtown’s request. We will use self- administered questionnaires with read- aloud procedures to address issues of 
literacy. All measures have well -established psychometric properties, sensitivity to change, and acceptable 
response burden.
120- 127 Multi -informant and mixed methods assessment of outcomes is a study strength. Given 
the change in design to one group pre and post intervention compared to historical group; we will use the Parent Participation Engagement Measure (PPEM). In lieu of Working Alliance  Inventory or Kim Alliance Scale as our key 
measure of parent -provider interaction or engagement.  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
 
 
Compensation.  All parent  participants  will receive a $25 gift card  for each  assessment  completed  and $25 
gift card if an oral interview is completed. They will receive a $10 gift card for each training session attended. We 
will offer continuing education credits (CE) for the 4.5- hr provider workshop. Dr. Oruche has arranged with her 
school’s Center for Continuing Education and Lifelong Learning to offer the CE credits at minimal cost. Providers 
will also receive $100 upon completion of the T1 measures, the DECIDE Workshop, T2 measures and the 
qualitative interview i f located at any center that is not Bowen or Eskenazi.  
 
Intervention Fidelity. W e will follow the treatment fidelity protocols developed for the original DECIDE 
trial and the NIH Treatment Fidelity Workgroup recommendations to ensure intervention integrity and minimize drift/group contamination.
128 Design. We are comparing an historical control data to intervention data gathered 
during the study.. Provider training. All study personnel will receive training specific to their role; regular 
supervision and retraining as needed. We will fully manualize the modified intervention similar to  the original 
DECIDE intervention with standardized treatment protocols, training manuals, and training content,25,129,130 
modified from patients to parents of adolescents with DIC. Treatment Delivery. Parent and provider intervention 
delivery will be asse ssed using a random sample of recorded trainings and checklist of key intervention 
components. Receipt and Enactment of Treatment. Facilitators for parent component will complete a session - 
specific field  note  entry  that summarizes  parent  responses  (i.e.,  level  of engagement  and understanding)  and any 
potential external factors (e.g., interruptions, noise) that may have influenced their response.  
7.0 Reporting  of Adverse  Events  
Participants  will be monitored for adverse events on  a daily basis.  Any adverse events  will be reported to 
PI immediately  and IRB immediately.  The research  investigative  team will be responsible  for data  and safety  of this 
study and include Ukamaka Oruche, PhD, RN (Co -I)); Claire Draucker, PhD, RN (Co -I), Susan Perkins, PhD (PI), Ora  

DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
Nakash  (Consultant),  and Anil Chacko (Consultant).  In addition  to monthly research  team meetings,  the committee 
will meet as  soon as possible following the occurrence of any adverse events.  
Data. Parents and providers (participants) in this study will be assigned a participant identification 
number (PIN). Research materials such as parent and provider interviews will contain the PIN instead of the 
participants’ names. A file containing a link betwe en the PIN and the participants’ names will be created and 
access  to this file will be restricted  to key research  staff such as the Project coordinator  and only  for the purpose  of 
scheduling interviews. All research staff will be required to complete train ing in Human Subjects protection 
sponsored  by the Indiana  University  Office of Research  Compliance.  This includes  basic human subjects’  protection 
and advanced training on Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPA) and Conflict of Interest. The 
staff will also receive additional training on working with participants or handling identifying information.  
 
After obtaining cons ent from the parent, the research team will access their administrative data, and 
parent interviews for purposes of this study.  Once at research team offices at the university offices, all documents 
that include  identifying  information  (i.e. names,  address es and telephone  numbers)  will immediately  be separated 
from the parent  assessments,  and recordings.  These  items  will be stored  by research  staff  authorized  by the PI in a 
locked file and an identifying case number will be generated. The PI and authorized research staff will be the only persons with access to the locked filing cabinet and/or any information or files that link the case number with any parent identifying information. No reports will be made public using any names or identifying information. R aw 
data  and accompanying  research  protocols  will be kept  for at least  7 years  post  publication  of findings,  as required 
by Indiana  University . Strict  measures  to assure  confidentiality  of the data  will be taken.  Computerized  data  will be 
identified by participant number only. All research staff PCs are password- protected and have standardized, full 
featured, software and hardware configurations. Only research staff authorized by the PI will have access to the data.  
 
Data  analysis  will be conducted with  use of coded  data  to reduce  the chance  of inadvertent  disclosure.  Dr. 
Perkins and her statistical team working with the data are the only persons on- site with network level 
administrative  password  privileges.  The original  data  and the encrypted data  will not be transported  or used  at any 
other  location  and the data  will not be copied  onto  other  computers,  discs,  CDs etc. We will maintain  all print -outs, 
electronic files, personal computers with restricted data on the hard drives, or other physical products containing data in locked cabinets, file drawers or other secure locat ions when not in use. Printed material that includes 
analyses based on restricted data will be promptly destroyed. At the end of the project, all files that include 
restricted data will be destroyed, including copies and subsets on the Indiana University s erver or any project 
computers.  
 
S
afety.  The committee will monitor  adverse events  reported  by participants  and reasons  for dropping  out. 
Adverse events will be reported to the study PI or her designee within 24 hours, and any serious unexpected 
adverse events related to the study intervention will be reported to the Institutional Review Board within 5 working days.  The relationship between adverse events and the study intervention will be determined  based  on PI 
and her research  staff examination  of the subject  (research  staff and/or  patient)  and subsequent  clinical judgment. 
Both provider and parent participants will have several phone numbers to call should they have any concerns or questions about any aspect of the study, including contact numbers for the PI, the project coordinator, the IRB offices, and the parent/patient representatives at Midtown. All other adverse events will be reported annually 
with the continuing review. Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation. Taking part in the study is voluntary. A participant 
may choose not to take part in the study or to withdraw from the study at any time. If the participant withdraws 
from the study, he/she will not be penalized in any way and will not lose any benefits he/she is entitled. The participant may choose to contact the study PI to formally withdraw, or he/she may simply choose to stop coming 
to the study sessions. If the participant chooses to withdraw, a study representative will call the participant to 
make  sure  he/she  is ok. The study representative will provide  the participant  with  contact  numbers  to obtain  other 
resources. For example, parents may be provided number to other Midtown programs or National Alliance on 
Mental Illness (NAMI) Indianapolis. In addition, the PI will meet monthly with the research project coordinator to 
review data collected to date in order to determine if there are any major problems in data collection procedures or data collected.  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
 
 
8.0 Study  Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
After  signing the informed  consent,  participants  can withdraw  and leave the study at any time.  Members  
of the study team will assist participants in withdrawing if that is the wish of the participant.  Withdrawing from  
the study will not impact  the participant’s  healthcare  in any way.  
 
9.0 Statistical  Considerations  
 
We will calculate the proportion eligible that enroll and proportion completing the intervention for both 
parents and providers. We will tabulate responses to Parent and Provider Satisfaction with Intervention items and 
calculate the proportion of parents and providers who have a mean ratings of at least 4 on the 5 -point scale 
(satisfied or highly satisfied). Effect sizes will be estimated by fitting linear mixed models, with parent, provider, or 
observer target and outcomes variables, all measured at T2, as outcomes and treatment group (intervention or usual care) as the explanatory variable. All models will also include the T1 outcome as a covariate and random 
effects  for provider  and parent  nested  within  provider  to account  for clustering.  Effects  sizes  will be estimated  with 
ω2. Analyses will be intent -to-treat and conducted using SAS Version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, N.C., Copyright 
2002- 2012).  
Supplementary Analyses : We will investigate how the adjustment for covariates (age of child, sex of 
provider  and parent,  parent  race  and income,  severity  of child  illness  and duration  in treatment)  impacts  effect  size 
estimates by adding interaction terms to models and estimating effect sizes separately for different levels of the 
covariate (e.g. male a nd female for parent gender). Missing Data : We will compare baseline variables between 
subjects who drop out of the study to those who do not using two -sample t tests, chi -square tests or their non-  
parametric  equivalents  as appropriate.  If we find that the missing  data  appear  to be MNAR,  this information  will be 
used in designing the larger trial. Because of the relatively small sample size, we will not attempt to model the 
missing data mechanism in this pilot study. Sex as a biological variable: As noted above, we will estimate effect sizes by sex for all outc omes. Draucker will lead the qualitative analysis of the semi -structured interviews with  
input from PI and research team. The interviews will be coded with standard content analytic procedures.
13 
 
10.0 Privacy/Confidentiality  
A secure web -based system (REDCap) will be used to capture study data.  Participation in this research is 
covered  by a Certificate  of Confidentiality  from the National  Institutes  of Health.  The researchers  may  not disclose 
or use any information, document, or specimens that could identify any participants in any civil, criminal, 
administrative, legislative, or other legal proceeding, unless participant consents to it.  
 
11.0 Record  Retention  
Records  will be retained  for up to seven  years  post  study completion.  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
 
 
 
References  
1. Merikangas KR, He J -p, Burstein M, et al. Lifetime Prevalence of Mental Disorders in US Adolescents: 
Results  from the National  Comorbidity  Study- Adolescent  Supplement  (NCS -A). Journal  of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2010;49(10):980- 989.  
2. APA,  ed Diagnostic  and statistical  manual  of mental  disorders  5th ed. Arlington,  VA: American  Psychiatric 
Association; 2013.  
3. Frampton  SB, Gustello  L, Hoy M, Naylor  S, M. Johnston  F. Harnessi ng Evidence  and Experience to Change 
Culture: A Guiding Framework for Patient and Family Engaged Care. NAM Perspectives. 2017.  
4. Stagman  S, Copper  J. Children’s  Mental  Health What  Every  Policymaker  Should Know.  Columbia 
University;2010.  
5. DeRigne  L. The Employment  and Financial  Effects  on Families  Raising Children  With  Special  Health  Care 
Needs: An Examination of the Evidence. Journal of Pediatric Health Care. 2012;26(4):283 -290.  
6. Baker -Ericzén MJ, Jenkins MM, Brookman -Frazee L. Clinician and Parent Perspe ctives on Parent and 
Family  Contextual  Factors  that Impact  Community  Mental  Health  Services  for Children  with  Behavior 
Problems. Child & youth care forum. 2010;39(6):397- 419.  
7. Oruche  UM,  Draucker  CB, Al-Khattab  H, Cravens  HA, Lowry  B, Lindsey LM. The challenges  for primary 
caregivers of adolescents with disruptive behavior disorders. J Fam Nurs. 2015;21(1):149 -167.  
8. Valenzuela  M, Smith  L. Topical  Review:  Provider –Patient Interactions:  An Important  Consideration  for 
Racial/Ethnic Health Disparities in Yo uth. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2016;41(4):473 -480.  
9. McCusker  J, Lambert  SD, Cole  MG,  et al. Activation  and Self- Efficacy  in a Randomized  Trial  of a Depression 
Self-Care Intervention. Health Education & Behavior. 2016;43(6):716 -725.  
10. McCusker  J, Lambert  SD, Haggerty  J, Yaffe MJ, Belzile  E, Ciampi  A. Self- management  support  in primary 
care is associated with improvement in patient activation. Patient Education and Counseling. 2018.  
11. Alegría  M, Nakash  O, Lapatin  S, et al. How  missing information  in diagnosis  can lead  to disparities  in the 
clinical encounter. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2008;14 Suppl(Suppl):S26 -S35.  
12. Nakash  O, Dargouth  S, Oddo  V, Gao S, Alegría  M. Patient initiation  of information:  Exploring  its role during 
the mental health intake visit. Patient Education and Counseling. 2009;75(2):220 -226.  
13. Medicine  Io. Unequal  Treatment:  Confronting Racial  and Ethnic  Disparities  in Health Care.  Washington, 
DC2003.  
14. Alexander J, Hearld L, Mittler JN. Patient –physician role relationships and patient activation: The 
moderating  effects  of race  and ethnicity.  Medical  Care  Research and Review.  2014;71(5):472- 495.  
15. Chen  J, Mortensen  K, Bloodworth  R. Exploring contextual  factors  and patient  activation:  Evidence  from a 
nationally representative sample of patients with depression. Health Education & Behavior. 
2014;41(6):614 -624.  
16. Gwynn  KB, Winter  MR, Cabral  HJ, et al. Racial  disparities  in patient  activation:  Evaluating the mediating 
role of health literacy with path ana lyses. Patient Education and Counseling. 2016;99(6):1033- 1037.  
17. Stein  GL, Kulish  AL, Williams  CS, Mejia  YC, Prandoni  JI, Thomas  KC. Latina/o  parent  activation  in children’s 
mental health treatment: The role of demographic and psychological factors. Journal of Latina/o 
Psychology. 2017;5(4):290 -305.  
18. Alegria  M, Green  JG, McLaughlin  KA, Loder  S. Disparities  in child  and adolescent  mental  health  and mental 
health servi ces in the U.S. In: William T. Grant Foundation; 2015:1 -23. 
19. Gengler  AM.  “I Want You to Save  My Kid!”  Illness  Management  Strategies,  Access,  and Inequality at an 
Elite University Research Hospital. Journal of health and social behavior. 2014;55(3):342 -359.  
20. Haine -Schlagel  R, Walsh  NE. A review of parent  participation  engagement  in child  and family  mental 
health treatment. Clinical child and family psychology review. 2015;18(2):133 -150.  
21. Mirza  M, Krisch er A, Stolley  M, Magana S, Martin  M. Review  of parental  activation  interventions  for 
parents of children with special health care needs. Child Care Health Dev. 2018;44(3):401- 426.  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
22. Alegria  M, Nakash  O, Johnson  K, et al. Effectiveness  of the decide  interventions  on shared  decision  making 
and perceived quality of care in behavioral health with multicultural patients: A randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;75(4):325- 335.  
23. Alegría  M, Carson  N, Flores  M, et al. Activation,  Self- management,  Engagement,  and Retention  in 
Behavioral  Health  Care:  A Randomized  Clinical  Trial  of the DECIDE  Intervention.  JAMA  psychiatry. 
2014;71(5):557 -565.  
24. Alegria  M, Polo  A, Gao S, et al. Evaluation  of a patient  activation  and empowerment  intervention  in 
mental health care. Medical Care. 2008;46(3):247- 256.  
25. Alegria M, Nakash O, Johnson K, et al. Effectiveness of the DECIDE Interventions on Shared Decision 
Making  and Perceived  Quality  of Care  in Behavioral  Health  With  Multicultur al Patients:  A Randomized 
Clinical Trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;75(4):325 -335.  
26. Handwerk  M, Field  C, Dahl  A, Malmberg  J. Conduct,  oppositional  defiant,  and disruptive  behavior 
disorders. Handbook of evidence- based practice in clinical psychology. 2012.  
27. Meri kangas  KR, Nakamura EF, Kessler  RC. Epidemiology  of mental  disorders  in children  and adolescents.  
Dialogues  in Clinical  Neuroscience.  2009;11(1):7 -20. 
28. Soni  A. The Five Most  Costly  Children's  Conditions,  2011:  Estimates  for U.S. Civilian  Noninstutionalized 
Children, Ages 0- 17. In: Quality AfHRa, ed2014.  
29. Hsia  RY, Belfer  ML. A framework  for the economic  analysis  of child  and adolescent  mental  disorders. . 
2008;20(3):251- 9. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2008;20(3):251- 259.  
30. Ooi KL, Ong YS, Jacob  SA, Khan  TM. A meta -synthesis  on parenting  a child  with  autism.  Neuropsychiatric 
Disease and Treatment. 2016;12:745 -762.  
31. Gopalan  G, Dean -Assael  K, Klingenstein  K, Chacko A, McKay  MM.  Caregiver  Depression  and Youth 
Disruptive Behavior Difficulties. Social work in mental health. 2011;9(1):56- 70. 
32. Green  SE. “We’re tired,  not sad”:  Benefits  and burdens  of mothering  a child  with  a disability. Social 
Science & Medicine. 2007;64(1):150- 163.  
33. Raina  P, O'Donnell  M, Schwellnus  H, et al. Caregiving process  and caregiver  burden:  conceptual  models  to 
guide research and practice. BMC pediatrics. 2004;4(1):1.  
34. Jiang Y, Granja  MR, Koball  H. Basic  Facts  about  Low-Income  Children:  Children under  18 Years,  2015.  
National  Center  for Children  in Poverty;2017.  
35. Byck  GR, Bolland  J, Dick  D, Ashbeck  AW,  Mustanski  BS. Prevalence of mental  health  disorders  among  low- 
income African American adolescents. Social psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology. 2013;48(10):1555-  
1567.  
36. Acri M, Gopalan G, Lalayants M, McKay MM. Depression and Service Use Among Caregivers Dually 
Involved  in the Child  Welfare and Mental  Health  Systems.  Social  work  in mental  health.  2015;13(5):481 - 
494.  
37. Aronson  J, Burgess  D, Phelan  SM, Juarez  L. Unhealthy Interactions:  The Role  of Stereotype Threat  in 
Health Disparities. American Journal of Public Health. 2013;103(1):50 -56. 
38. Steinberg  L. Risk taking  in adolescence:  New perspective from brain  and behavioral  science.  From  Current 
Directions in Psyhological Science Reprinted by permission of Blackwell Publishing, Ltd. 2007:55 -59. 
39. Stagman  S, Cooper  JL. Children's  Mental  Health:  What  Every  Policymaker  Should  Know.  National  Center 
for Children in Poverty;2010.  
40. Brampton SB, Guastello S, Hoy L, Naylor M, Sheridan S, Johnston- Fleece M. Harnessing Evidence and 
Experience to Change  Culture:  A Guiding Framework  for Patient  and Family Engaged Care.  Washington, 
DC: National Academy of Medicine;2017.  
41. Gerkensmeyer  JE, Perkins SM, Scott  EL, Wu J. Depressive symptoms  among  primary  caregivers  of children 
with  mental  health  needs:  Mediating and moderating  variables.  Arch  Psychiatr  Nurs.  2008;22(3):135 -146.  
42. Podolski  C-L, Nigg JT. Parent  Stress  and Coping  in Relation  to Child  ADHD Severity  and Associated  Child 
Disruptive Behavior Problems. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology. 2001;30(4):503- 513.  
43. Sales  E. Family  burden and quality  of life. Quality of Life Research.  2003;12(1):33 -41. 
44. Pizur -Barnekow K, Darragh A, Johnston M. “I Cried Because I Didn't Know if I Could Take Care of Him”: 
Toward  a Taxonomy  of Interactive  and Critical  Health  Literacy  as Portrayed  by Caregivers  of Children  with 
Special Health Care Needs. Journal of Health Communication. 2011;16(sup3):205 -221.  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
45. Sayal  K, Washbrook E, Propper  C. Childhood Behavior  Problems  and Academic Outcomes  in Adolescence: 
Longitudinal Population -Based Study. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 
2015; 54(5):360 -368.e362.  
46. Pennarola BW, Rodday  AM, Bingen  K, et al. Changing  factors  associated  with  parent  activation  after 
pediatric hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Supportive Care in Cancer. 2015;23(7):1997 -2006.  
47. Nightingale  R, Friedl  S, Swallow  V. Parents’  learning needs  and preferences  when  sharing  management  of 
their child’s long- term/chronic condition: A systematic review. Patient education and counseling. 
2015;98(11):1329- 1338.  
48. McKay  MM,  Bannon  Jr WM.  Engaging families  in child  mental  health  services.  Child  and Adolescent 
Psychiatric Clinics of North America. 2004;13(4):905 -921.  
49. Moy  E, Freeman  W. Federal  investments  to eliminate  racial/ethnic health -care  disparities.  Public  Health 
Reports (Washington, DC: 1974). 2014;129 Suppl 2:62- 70. 
50. Acri M, Bornheimer  LA, Jessell  L, Flaherty  HB, McKay  MM.  The impact  of caregiver  treatment  satisfaction 
upon child and parent outcomes. Child and Adolescent Mental Health. 2016.  
51. Khan  A, Furtak  SL, Melvin  P, Rogers  JE, Schuster  MA, Landrigan  CP. Parent -provider  miscommunications  in 
hospitalized children. Hospital Pediatrics. 2017:hpeds. 2016- 0190.  
52. Kutash  K, Duchnowski  AJ, Green  AL, Ferron  JM. Supporting  parents  who  have  youth  with  emotional 
disturbances through a parent -to-parent support program: A proof of concept study using random 
assignment. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research. 
2011;38(5):412 -427.  
53. Greene J, Hibbard JH, Sacks  R, Overton  V. When  seeing  the same physician,  highly  activated  patients  have 
better care experiences than less activated patients. Health Affairs. 2013;32(7):1299- 1305.  
54. Janevic MR, Baptist AP, Bryant -Stephens T, et al. Effects of pediatric asthma care coordination in 
underserved  communities  on parent  perceptions  of care  and asthma -management  confidence.  Journal  of 
Asthma. 2017;54(5):514- 519.  
55. Pidano  AE, Padukkavidana  MM,  Honigfeld  L. “Doctor, are you listening?”  Communication  about  children’s  
mental  health  and psychosocial  concerns.  Families,  Systems,  & Health.  2017;35(1):91.  
56. Tzeng  A, Tzeng  TH, Vasdev  S, Grindy A, Saleh  JK, Saleh  KJ. The role of patient  activation  in achieving better 
outcomes and cost -effectiveness in patient care. JBJS reviews. 2015;3(1).  
57. Alegría  M, Polo  A, Gao S, et al. Evaluation  of a Patient Activation  and Empowerment  Intervention  in 
Mental Health Care. Medical care. 2008;46(3):247- 256.  
58. Moskowitz D, Lyles CR , Karter AJ, Adler N, Moffet HH, Schillinger D. Patient reported interpersonal 
processes  of care  and perceived  social  position:  the Diabetes  Study of Northern  California  (DISTANCE). 
Patient Education And Counseling. 2013;90(3):392 -398.  
59. DeVoe JE, Wallace LS, Fryer Jr GE. Measuring patients’ perceptions of communication with healthcare 
providers:  do differences  in demographic  and socioeconomic characteristics  matter?  Health Expectations. 
2009;12(1):70 -80. 
60. Perry  M, Williams  RL, Wallerstein  N, Waitzkin  H. Social  capital  and health  care  experiences  among  low- 
income individuals. American journal of public health. 2008;98(2):330 -336.  
61. Chang  J, Dubbin L, Shim  J. Negotiating substance  use stigma:  the role of cultural  health  capital  in 
provider –patient interactions. Sociology of Health & Illness. 2016;38(1):90 -108.  
62. Dubbin LA, Chang  JS, Shim  JK. Cultural  health  capital  and the interactional  dynamics  of patient -centered 
care. Social Science & Medicine. 2013;93:113 -120.  
63. Copeland  VC. Disparities  in Mental  Health  Service  Utilization  among  Low-Income  African  American  
Adolescents:  Closing the Gap by Enhancing  Practitioner’s  Competence.  Child  and Adolescent  Social  Work 
Journal. 2006;23(4):407 -431.  
64. Unequal  Treatment:  Waht  Haelthcare Providers  Need to Know  About  Racila  and Ethnic  Disparities  in 
Health Care. 2002.  
65. Smedley  BD, Stith  AY, Nelson  AR, eds. Unequal  Treatment:  Confronting Racial  and Ethnic  Disparities  in 
Health Care. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2003.  
66. Hibbard JH, Stockard  J, Mahoney ER, Tusler  M. Development  of the Patient Activation  Measure (PAM): 
Conceptualizing and Measuring Activation in Patients and Consumers. Health Services Research. 
2004;39(4 Pt 1):1005- 1026.  
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
67. Green CA, Perrin NA, Polen MR, Leo MC, Hibbard JH, Tusler M. Developmemt of the Patient Activation 
Measure for Mental  Health  (PAM -MH).  Administration and Policy in Mental  Health.  2010;37(4):327 -333.  
68. Cooper LA, Roter DL, Carson KA, et al. A randomized trial  to improve patient -centered care and 
hypertension control  in underserved  primary  care  patients.  Journal  of General  Internal  Medicine. 
2011;26(11):1297- 1304.  
69. Corser  W, Holmes -Rovner  M, Lein C, Gossain  V. A shared  decision -making  primary  care  intervention  for 
type 2 diabetes. The Diabetes Educator. 2007;33(4):700- 708.  
70. Deen  D, Lu WH,  Weintraub  MR, Maranda MJ, Elshafey  S, Gold  MR. The impact  of different  modalities  for 
activating patients in a community health center setting. Patient Education an d Counseling. 
2012;89(1):178 -183.  
71. Deen  D, Lu W-H, Rothstein  D, Santana L, Gold  MR. Asking questions:  The effect  of a brief intervention  in 
community  health  centers  on patient  activation.  Patient  Education and Counseling.  2011;84(2):257 -260.  
72. Ibe C, Bowie J, Roter D, et al. Intensity of exposure to a patient activation intervention and patient engagement  in medical  visit communication.  Patient  Education and Counseling.  2017;100(7):1258 -1267.  
73. Lu W -H, Deen D, Rothstein D, Santana L, Gold MR. Activating community health center patients in 
developing  question- formulation  skills:  A qualitative  study.  Health Education & Behavior.  2011;38(6):637-  
645.  
74. Riippa  I, Linna  M, Rönkkö I. The effect  of a patient  portal  with  electronic messaging  on patient  activation 
among chronically III patients: Controlled before -and-after study. Journal of Medical Internet Research. 
2014;Vo 16(11).  
75. Tang  TS, Funnell  MM,  Brown  MB, Kurlander  JE. Self- management  support  in 'real -world' settings:  An 
empowerment -based intervention. Patient Education and Counseling. 2010;79(2):178- 184.  
76. Weinman  J. Doctor –Patient Interaction:  Psychosocial  Aspects  A2 - Smelser,  Neil J. In: Baltes  PB, ed. 
International  Encyclopedia  of the Social  & Behavioral  Sciences.  Oxford:  Pergamon;  2001:3816- 3821.  
77. Williams IC, Utz SW, Hinton I, Yan G,  Jones R, Reid K.  Enhancing diabetes self -care among rural African 
Americans  with  diabetes:  Results  of a two-year  culturally  tailored  intervention.  The Diabetes  Educator. 
2014;40(2):231 -239.  
78. Page -Reeves J, Regino L, Murray -Krezan C, et al. A comparative effectiveness study of two culturally 
competent  models  of diabetes  self- management  programming for Latinos  from low-income  households. 
BMC Endocrine Disorders. 2017;17:46.  
79. Oetzel J, Wilcox B, Avila M, Hill R, Archiopoli A, Ginossar T. Patient –provider interaction, patient 
satisfaction,  and health  outcomes:  testing  explanatory  models  for people  living with  HIV/AIDS.  AIDS  care. 
2015;27(8):972- 978.  
80. Ibe C, Bowie J, Roter D, et al. Intensity of exposure to a patient activation intervention and patient 
engagement  in medical  visit communication.  Patient  Education and Counseling.  2017;100(7):1258 -1267.  
81. Cabassa LJ, Manrique Y, Meyreles Q, et al. Br idges to better health and wellness: An adapted health care 
manager  intervention  for Hispanics  with  serious  mental  illness.  Administration and Policy in Mental  Health 
and Mental Health Services Research. 2018;45(1):163 -173.  
82. Lara -Cabrera ML, Gjerden M, Gråwe RW, Linaker OM, Steinsbekk A. Short -term effects of a peer co -led 
educational  programme  delivered  before mental  health  treatment:  A randomised  controlled  trial.  Patient 
Education & Counseling. 2016;99(7):1257- 1261.  
83. Lara -Cabrera ML, Salvesen Ø, Nesset MB, De las Cuevas C, Iversen VC, Gråwe RW. The effect of a brief 
educational programme added to mental health treatment to improve patient activation: A randomized 
controlled  trial in community  mental  health  centres.  Patient  Education & Counseling.  2016;99(5):760- 768.  
84. Rise MB, Eriksen L, Grimstad H, Steinsbekk A. The long -term effect on mental health symptoms and 
patient  activation  of using  patient  feedback  scales  in mental  health  out-patient  treatment  A randomised 
contro lled trial. Patient Education and Counseling. 2016;99(1):164- 168.  
85. Steinwachs  DM,  Roter  DL, Skinner  EA, et al. A Web -based  program  to empower  patients  who  have 
schizophrenia to discuss quality of care with mental health providers. Psychiatric Services. 
2011;62(11):1296- 1302.  
86. Schattner  A. The clinical  encounter  revisited.  The American journal  of medicine.  2014;127(4):268- 274.  
87. Moy  E, Freeman  W. Federal  investments  to eliminate  racial/ethnic health -care  disparities.  Public  Health 
Reports. 2014;129(1_suppl2):62- 70. 
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
88. Earl TR, Alegría  M, Mendieta  F, Linhart  YD. “Just  be straight  with  me:”  An exploration  of Black  patient  
experiences  in initial  mental  health  encounters.  American Journal  of Orthopsychiatry.  2011;81(4):519.  
89. Wissow  L, Gadomski  A, Roter  D, Larson  S, Lewis  B, Brown  J. Aspects  of mental  health  communication  skills 
training that predict parent and child outcomes in pediatric primary care. Patient education and 
counseling. 2011;82(2):226- 232.  
90. Kazdin  AE, Blase  SL. Rebooting  Psychotherapy Research  and Practice  to Reduce  the Burden of Mental 
Illness. Perspectives on Psychological Science. 2011;6(1):21 -37. 
91. Epstein  RA, Fonnesbeck  C, Potter  S, Rizzone  KH, McPheerters  M. Psychosocial  Interventions  for Child 
Disruptive Behaviors: A Meta -analysis. Pediatrics. 2015;136(5):947- 960.  
92. Dishion  TJ, Shaw  D, Connell  A, Gardner  F, Weaver  C, Wilson  M. The Family  Check -Up With  High -Risk 
Indigent  Families:  Preventing  Problem Behavior  by Increasing Parents’  Positive  Behavior  Support  in Early  
Childhood.  2008;79(5):1395- 1414.  
93. Butler  AM, Titus  C. Pilot  and feasibility  study  of a parenting  intervention  delivered  by parent  peers.  
Vulnerable Children and Youth  Studies.  2017;12(3):215 -225.  
94. Kuravackel  GM,  Ruble  LA, Reese  RJ, Ables  AP, Rodgers  AD, Toland  MD.  COMPASS  for Hope:  Evaluating the 
Effectiveness of a Parent Training and Suppo rt Program for Children with ASD. Journal Of Autism And 
Developmental Disorders. 2018;48(2):404- 416.  
95. Chacko A, Wymbs BT, Chimiklis A, Wymbs FA, Pelham Jr WE. Evaluating a comprehensive strategy to 
improve engagement  to group -based  behavioral  parent  training for high -risk families  of children  with 
ADHD. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology,. 2012;40:1351- 1362.  
96. Chacko A, Wymbs BT, Flammer -Rivera LM, Pelham WE, Walker KS. A Pilot Study of the Feasibility and 
Efficacy  of the Strategies  to Enhance  Positiv e Parenting  (STEPP) Program  for Single  Mothers  of Children 
With ADHD Journal of Attention Disorders 2008;12(3):270- 280.  
97. Gopalan G, Chacko A, Franco L, et al. Multiple Family Groups for Children with Disruptive Behavior Disorders:  Child  Outcomes  at 6-Month  Follow -Up. Journal  of child  and family studies.  2015;24(9):2721 - 
2733.  
98. Gross  D, Garvey  C, Julion  W, Fogg  L, Tucker  S, Mokros  H. Efficacy  of the Chicago  Parent  Program  with  Low- 
Income African American and Latino Parents of Young Children. Prevention science : the official journal of 
the Society for Prevention Research. 2009;10(1):54- 65. 
99. Barlow  J, Smailagic N, Huband  N, Roloff  V, Bennett  C. Group -based  parent  training program mes  for 
improving parental psychosocial health. The Cochrane Database Of Systematic Reviews. 
2014(5):CD002020.  
100. Jamison JM, Fourie E, Siper PM, et al. Examining the Efficacy of a Family Peer Advocate Model for Black 
and Hispanic Caregivers  of Children with  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder. Journal  Of Autism  And Developmental 
Disorders. 2017;47(5):1314 -1322.  
101. kutash K, Duchnowski A, Green A, Ferron J. Supporting Parents Who Have Youth with Emotional Disturbances  Through a Parent -to-Parent  Support  Program:  A Proof  of Concept  Study Using  Random 
Assignment. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research. 
2011;38(5):412 -427.  
102. Bickman  L, Heflinger  CA, Northrup D, Sonnichsen S, Schilling S. Long  term outcomes  to family  caregiver 
empowerment. Journal of Child and Family Studies. 1998;7(3):269- 282.  
103. Thomas  K, C, Stein  G, Williams  C, et al. Fostering  Activation  Among  Latino  Parents  of Children  With  Mental 
Health Needs: An RCT. Psychiatric Services. 2017;68(10):1068- 1075.  
104. Thomas  KC, Stein  GL, Williams  CS, et al. Fostering  activation  among  Latino  parents  of children  with  mental 
health needs : An RCT. Psychiatric Services. 2017;68(10):1068- 1075.  
105. Smith MY, Winkel G, Egert J, Diaz -Wionczek M, DuHamel KN. Patient -physician communication in the 
context  of persistent  pain:  validation  of a modified  version  of the patients'  Perceived  Involvement  in Care 
Scale. Journal Of Pain And Symptom Management. 2006;32(1):71- 81. 
106. Palmer  NR, Kent  EE, Forsythe  LP, et al. Racial  and ethnic  disparities  in patient -provider  communication, 
quality -of-care ratings, and patient activation among long -term ca ncer survivors. Journal of clinical 
oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2014;32(36):4087- 4094.  
107. Hart  CN, Drotar  D, Gori  A, Lewin  L. Enhancing  parent -provider  communication  in ambulatory  pediatric 
practice. Patient Education And Counseling. 2006;63(1 -2):38 -46. 
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
108. Hart  CN, Drotar  D, Gori  A, Lewin  L. Enhancing  parent –provider  communication  in ambulatory  pediatric 
practice. Patient Education and Counseling. 2006;63(1 –2):38 -46. 
109. Heflinger CA, Bickman L, Northrup D, Sonnichsen S. A theory- driven intervention and evaluation to 
explore  family  caregiver  empowerment.  Journal  of Emotional  and Behavioral  Disorders.  1997;5(3):184-  
191.  
110. Oruche UM, Robb SL, Aalsma M, Pescosolido B, Brown -Podgorski B, Draucker CB. Developing a Multiple 
Caregiver  Group  for Caregivers  of Adolescents  With  Disruptive  Behaviors.  Archives  Of Psychiatric  Nursing. 
2017;31(6):596 -601.  
111. Hibbard JH, Mahoney  E. Toward  a theory  of patient  and consumer  activation.  Patient  Education and 
Counseling. 2010;78(3):377- 381.  
112. Alegria  M, Nakash  O, Johnson  M. Effectiveness  of the DECIDE  Interventions  on Shared  Decision  Making 
and Perceived Quality of Care in Behavioral Health With Multicultural Patients. A Randomized Clinical 
Trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;74(4):325 -335.  
113. Ashton  CM, Haidet  P, Paterniti  DA, et al. Racial  and Ethnic  Disparities  in the Use of Health  Services:  Bias, 
Preferences, or Poor Communication? Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2003;18(2):146- 152.  
114. Bandura  A. Social  foundations  of thought  and action:  A social  cognitive  theory.  Prentice -Hall,  Inc; 1986.  
115. Oruche UM, Draucker CB, Alkhattab H, Knopf A, Mazurcyk J. Interventions for family members of 
adolescents  with  disruptive  behavior  disorders. J Child  Adolesc  Psychiatr  Nurs.  2014;27(3):99- 108.  
116. Oruche  UM,  Draucker  CB, Robb  SL, Aalsma  MC, Pescosolido  BA, Brown-Podgorski  B. Developing  a multiple 
caregiver group for caregivers of adolescents with disruptive behaviors. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing. 2017;31(6):596 -601.  
117. Oruche UM, Robb SL, Draucker CB, et al. Pilot Randomized Trial of a Family Management Efficacy 
Intervention  for Caregivers  of African  American  Adolescents  with  Disruptive  Behaviors.  Revised  and in 
review.  
118. Onken  LS, Carroll  KM, Shoham  V, Cuthbert  BN, Riddle  M. Reenvisioning Clinical  Science:  Unifying  the 
Discipline to Improve the Public Health. Clin Psychol Sci. 2014;2(1):22 -34. 
119. Hertzo  MA. Considerations  in determining  sample size for pilot  studies.  Research in Nursing & Health.  
2008;31:180- 191.  
120. Busseri  MA, Tyler  JD. Interchangeability  of the Working  Alliance  Inventory  and Working  Alliance  Inventory, 
Short Form. Psychological Assessment. 2003;15(2):193- 197.  
121. Haine -Schlagel R, Roesch SC, Trask EV, Fawley -King K, Ganger WC, Aarons GA. The Parent Part icipation 
Engagement  Measure (PPEM):  Reliability  and Validity  in Child  and Adolescent  Community Mental  Health 
Services. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2016;43(5):813 -823.  
122. Kim SC, Boren  D, Solem SL. The Kim Alliance  Scale:  development  and preliminary  testing.  Clinical  nursing 
research. 2001;10(3):314- 331.  
123. Maly  RC, Frank  JC, Marshall  GN, DiMatteo  MR, Reuben  DB. Perceived  Efficacy  in Patient- Physician 
Interactions (PEPPI): Validation of an Instrument in Older Persons. 1998;46(7):889- 894.  
124. Eisen  S, Wilcox  M, Idiculla  T, Speredelozzi  A, Dickey  B. Assessing  Consumer  Perceptions  of Inpatient  
Psychiatric Treatment: The Perceptions of Care Survey. Vol 282002.  
125. Green  AL, Lambert  MC, Hurley  KD. Measuring  Activation  in Parents  of Youth  with  Emotional  and 
Behavioral Disorders. J Behav Health Serv Res. 2019;46(2):306- 318.  
126. Horvath  AO, Greenberg  LS. Development  and validation  of the Working  Alliance  Inventory.  Journal  of 
Counseling Psychology. 1989;36(2):223 -233.  
127. Lyons  JS, Walton  BA. Child  and Adolescent  Needs  and Strengths  (CANS) Comprehensive Multisystem 
Assessment. Indiana CANS 5 to 17 Version 2.3. In: Praed Foundation; 2018.  
128. Bellg AJ, Borrelli  B, Resnick  B, et al. Enhancing  Treatment  Fidelity in  Health  Behavior  Change  Studies:  Best 
Practices and Recommendations From the NIH Behavior Change Co nsortium. Health Psychology. 
2004;23(5).  
129. Alegria  M. Protocol  Title:  Effectiveness  of DECIDE  in Patient- Provider  Communication,  Therapeutic 
Alliance and Care Continuation -  Supplement 1. Trial protocol. JAMA psychiatry. 2018.  
130. Alegria  M, Nakash  O, Johnson  K, et al. . Effectiveness  of the DECIDE  interventions  on shared  decision - 
making and perceived quality of care in behavioral health with multicultural patients: a randomized 
DECIDE  Parent -Provider  Interaction  
IRB Protocol   
clinical  trial.  Supplementary 2. DECIDE  intervention  materials.  JAMA  Psychiatry.  Published online  February 
21, 2018.  
131. Miles  MB, Huber man  AM, Saldana J. Qualitative  Data  Analysis:  A Methods  Sourcebook.  Washington,  DC: 
Sage; 2014.  