Protocol Cover/Title Pag e 
 
 
 
Teaching Parents Reiki for Their Adolescents Receiving Palliative Care  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
April 8, 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Protocol Synopsis  (one page)  
 
Study Title : Teaching Parents Reiki for Their Adolescents Receiving Palliative Care  
 
Study Design  
PICOT : 
P: Parents and adolescents receiving palliative care  
I: Teaching parents Reiki  for use in the home  
C: None  
O: Primary: The primary outcome for the proposed study is the feasibility and acceptability of teaching Reiki to 
parents of adolescents receiving palliative care. Secondary outcomes include : adolescent  global health, pain 
interference, medication use, and stress measures of hair cortisol (chronic, long term) and alpha amylase 
(immediate, short term) ; and parent  symptom profile (depression, anxiety, physical function, pain interference, 
fatigue, sleep di sturbance and ability to participate in social roles and activities), and stress measures of hair 
cortisol (chronic, long term) and alpha amylase (immediate, short term).  
T: Nine weeks from consent through follow up  
This intervention is  easily implemented across a wide range of geographically dispersed settings. Reiki is 
a popular complementary health approach across the United States. There are Reiki practitioners in every state 
according to The International Center for Reiki Training,1 the largest organization of Reiki practitioners in the 
country . With a tested protocol, manual, and training, this intervention could be taught to Reiki practitioners 
and then parents and other caregivers for a reasonably small cost . 
 
Significance  
Despite advances in the assessment and treatment of symptoms, including adolescents receiving 
palliative care, parents stil l report that their children suffer. Adolescents with life -threatening/life -limiting 
conditions, many of whom are developmentally delayed, experience many symptoms and have complex co -
morbidities requiring medical management.2–4 Many of these adolescents could benefit from complementary 
health approaches (CHAs) such as Reiki, a gentle light touch biofield energy therapy. Parents of adolescents 
receiving palliative care also experience high levels of stress.5,6 Previous studies have shown that empowering 
parents in the care of their chronically ill child help s parents better cope with challenges.7–9 Preliminary evidence 
showed that professionally -delivered Reiki is feasible for children and adolescents receiving palliative ca re at 
home.10 The majority of parents in that study said they wished they could learn Reiki so they might provide this 
relaxing therapy in the moment it was needed rather than waiting for the next professional session.  
Teac hing parents Reiki has the potential to impact both the child and the parent. Studies with adults 
have found that professionally -delivered Reiki decreased pain, anxiety, and other symptoms.11 Parents like to 
feel empowered in caring for their very ill children11,14 and doing so may decrease parental stress and othe r 
symptoms.13 The National Center for Complementary and Integrative He alth (NCCIH) considers Reiki to be safe , 
although little scientific evidence exists about the effectiveness of this intervention .14 The proposed study 
addresses NINR priorities of advancing symptom science  to “develop [and] test … novel, scalable symptom 
management interventions, including CHAs, in real -world clinical settings to imp rove health outcomes and 
quality of life”15(p.15)  and the science of compassion to improve palliative and end -of-life care  through 
“developing, testing, and implementing personalized, culturally congruent, and evidence -based palliative and 
hospice interventions . . . that best address the needs of underserved, disadvantaged, and diverse populations 
across the care continuum.”15(p. 31) A long -term bonus of teaching parents to deliver Reiki is that once learned, 
Reiki is highly scalable and costs nothing to use, an important potential overall cost  savings over other CHAs.  
 
Study Schema   
See Appendix 2.  
1 Background  and Rationale  
Despite advances in the assessment and treatment of symptoms, including pain in adolescents receiving 
palliative care, parents still report that their children suffer. Advances in medical science and care have led to a 
growing number of children living with life -limiting chronic conditions. Out of 83 million children under the age 
of 19,16 an estimated 600,000 to 1,600,00017 are living with life -threatening/life -limiting conditions and over 
180,000 are considered “medically fragile.”18 These children require intense medical a nd nursing care in the 
home and often experience lengthy, recurrent hospital stays, accounting for about 26% of hospital days and 41% 
of hospital charges.19 Adolescent s with life -threatening/life -limiting conditions, many of whom are 
developmentally delayed, experience many symptoms and have complex co -morbidities requiring medical 
management.2–4  
Many of these adolescents could benefit from complementary health approaches (CHAs) such as Reiki, a 
gentle light touch biofield energy therapy. Parents of adolescents receiving palliative care also experience high 
levels of stress.5,6 Previous studies have shown that empowering parents in the care of their chronically ill child 
help parents better cope w ith challenges.7–9 Some CHAs show promise for symptom managem ent without side 
effects, such as sedation from additional medication, thereby permitting greater alertness and allowing more 
interaction with family and friends.20,21 Preliminary evidence from the PI ’s pilot study showed that 
professionally -delivered Reiki is feasible for children and adolescents rece iving palliative care at home.10 The 
majority of parents said they wished they could learn Reiki so they might provide this relaxing therapy in the 
moment it was needed rather than waiting for the next professional session.  One non-experimental  program 
found that teaching parents Reiki was feasible and acceptable in the hospital. Parents who participated in two or 
more training sessions felt more confident providing Reiki.12 During informal interviews, parents said they felt 
good at being an active participant in their child’s care and that their child experienced increased comfort,  
relaxation, and decreased pain.12  
Parents of disabled adolescents receiving palliative care often suffer from high caregiver burden and 
chronic stress , leading to co -morbidities and decreased QoL. A cross -sectional survey conducted in Europe 
examined stress in 818 parents caring fo r a child with cerebral palsy.22 Results showed that 26% of mothers had 
very high stress. When the child had a communication or intellectual impairment or moderate -to-severe pain, 
parental stress was higher.22 Khanna et al. examined psy chological burden for 204 parents of children with 
serious chronic conditions.23 This study found that 75% of parents reported depression, and 67% had anxiety. 
We are interested in exploring whether adding a skill (Reiki) aimed at decreasing symptoms in the adolescent 
will result in a decrease in symptoms and chronic stress for the parent.  
Teaching parents Reiki has the potential to impact both the c hild and the parent. Studies with adults 
have found that professionally -delivered Reiki decreased pain, anxiety, and other symptoms.11 Parents like to 
feel empowered in caring for their very ill children11,14 and doing so may decrease parental stress and other 
symptoms.13 Reiki is non -invasive and can therefore be used with anyone. The National Center for 
Complementary and Integrativ e Health (NCCIH) considers Reiki to be safe , although little scientific evidence 
exists about the effectiveness of Reiki.14 The proposed study addresses NINR priorities of advancing symptom 
science  to “develop [and] test … novel, scalable symptom management interventions, including CHAs, in real -
world clinical settings to imp rove health outcomes and quality of life”15(p.15)  and the science of compassion to 
improve palliative and end -of-life care  through “developing, testing, and implementing personalized, culturally 
congruent, and evidence -based palliative and hospice interventions . . . that best address the needs of 
underserved, disadvantaged, and diverse populations across the care continuum.”15(p. 31) A long -term bonus of 
teaching parents to deliver Reiki is that Reiki is highly scalable and once learned, costs nothing to use, an 
important potential overall cost  savings over other CHAs.  
  
2 Aims and Objectives  
AIM 1 . Establish the feasibility and acceptability of teaching parents Reiki in the home to use with their 
adolescent  receiving palliative care .  
AIM 2 . Explore adolescents’ and parents’ stress response and symptom profile (i.e., physical function, 
anxiety, depression, fatigue, sleep, social roles, pain level, and biologic hair and saliva markers).  
AIM 3 . Explore parents’ confidence in delivering Reiki and beliefs in their ability to help their adolescent.  
We will achieve these aims by enrolling 12 community -dwelling adolescent -parent dyads receiving 
palliative care at home. Teaching parents Reiki is highly innovative and may provide a n ovel, easily scalable 
method of promoting self -management of symptoms.  
 
3 Study Design  
This study is a mixed methods quasi -experimental one group design.  
Parents of hospitalized ill children have been successfully taught to do Reiki with their children. 
However, no study that we are aware of has taught parents of community -dwelling children or adolescents  
receiving palliative care , nor has any study taught parents  of these adolescents  in a prospective, scientific 
manner. As such, a one -group feasibility, acceptability study design is appropriate to examine teaching parents 
Reiki one -on-one in the home using a short teaching period and booster session. The design and sample size will 
achieve the goals of the study , including preliminary symptom outcome measures and parental feelings about 
learning Reiki and providing this intervention to their adolescents.  
  
3.1 Study population  
Adolescent -parent dyads will be recruited in three  ways: (1) at an outpatient appointmen t with the 
palliative care team; (2) during an inpatient hospitalization; or (3) by mailing a letter, pamphlet , and opt -in/opt -
out postcard  or emailing a letter and pamphlet to the parent and follow -up with up to three phone calls or 
emails to introduce the study. For two parent households, p arents will need to decide which parent  provides at 
least some care for the adolescent and will perform the bulk of the Reiki sessions. The parent will provide 
written consent and the adolescent will provide written or verbal assent if able.  If the adolescent is  
developmentally delayed he/she may not be asked to provide written assent/consent. The decision of 
documented assent/consent will be determined by the judgment of the parent in conjunction with the clinical 
judgment of the Palliative Care Center. Whenever developmentally appropriate, the adolescent’s  
assent/consent should be solicited through simple explanations, questions, and cues  and his/her refusal 
respected.  
 
3.1.1 Eligibility criteria  
Participants will include adolescent -parent dyads  receiving care through a palliative care service . We are 
using the World Health Organization definition of adolescent of ages 10 -19 years. We will refer to this age group 
as adolescent throughout this protocol. Dyads will be included  if the adolescent : (1) is 1 0 to 19 years old ; (2) 
understands English ; (3) has a prognosis of at least 2 months ; and (4) if the parent /legal guardian  provides at 
least some care for the adolescent most days of the week and is able to read and write English at the 8th grade 
level. Dyads will be excluded  if (1) either the adolescent or the parent are taking or have taken any form of 
corticosteroids within the last 30 days (affects the HCC levels), or (2) either the adolescent or the parent has less 
than one inch of hair.  Dyads will also be excluded  if the adolescent resides in an inpatient facility, is in foster 
care/custody , or if the dyad does not have reliable means of storing samples at or below 32  degrees Fahrenheit .  
We intend to enroll participants regardless of sex , gender,  or race. However, the sample size will be too 
small to analyze results based on these characteristics.  
 
3.1.2 Enrollment Details  
We will recruit parent -adolescent dyads who fit the inclusion/exclusion criteria. All adolescents will have 
a life-threatening or life -limiting illness and will be receiving palliative care. Some of the adolescents will be 
cognitively and/or developmentally delayed and will not be able to give assent to the study. Parents of these 
adolescents are very aware of the ir adolescent’s moods and symptoms and will choose to consent or not for the 
study with the best interest of their adolescent in mind. Data will be collected either on paper or using a n iPad, 
depe nding on the participant preference  and/or internet availabi lity. Data will be collected either face -to-face 
(in the home or during an outpatient visit) or by phone depending on data to be collected and participant 
preference.   
 
3.2 Study measures and outcomes  
Table 1: Measures and Timing  
Variable  
(source) # = adolescent, * = parent  T0: 
Enrollment  T1: End of 
Intervention  T2: 4-week 
Follow up  
Demographics#*  X   
PROMIS Pediatric Global Health 7+2 or 
Parent Proxy Global Health 7+2 #  X X X 
PROMIS Pediatric Pain Interference or 
Parent Proxy  
Pain Interference#  X X X 
Parent: (physical and emotional) PROMIS 29  
Symptom Profile*  X X X 
Hair Sample Collection#*  X  X 
Parent Experience of Providing Reiki*    X 
Saliva collection#*  Pre/post 2 Reiki sessions per week during 
weeks 1 -4 
Medication Log#  Completed during weeks 0 -4 
Parent intervention Log*  Completed during weeks 1 -4 
 
Demographic form  (T0) basic demographic information on both parent and adolescent.  
Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) , sponsored by the NIH. PROMIS 
Pediatric Pain Interference or PROMIS Parent Proxy SF Pain Interference ,24,25 assesses how pain interferes with 
daily life for the adolescent . Well -validated measures show significant correlations between child and parent 
reports of pain.26 We will use the PROMIS Pediatric Global Health 7+2  measure to obtain an overall evaluation 
score of the adolescents’ physical and mental health. Both self -report and parent proxy versions are valid and 
reliable.27 Adult  profile PROMIS 29 Symptom Profile  (parent)28 assesses seven domains (depression, anxiety, 
physical function, pain interference, fatigue, sleep disturbance and ability to participate in social roles and 
activities).  
Medication Log  documenting all pain medications given one week prior to and during the intervention period.  
Parent Intervention Log  provided for parent record keeping. These logs will document Reiki session details , 
including the date, time, and length of session, inter ruptions to session, where the session took place, and 
parent comments and reactions (including adolescent reactions).  
Hair collection and assay:  Hair cortisol  concentration  (HCC)  is a measure  of chronic  stress.  A recent  study  
found  that the mean  cortisol  level  assayed  in 1 cm of hair was correlated  (r=0.61,  p<0.01)  with  the mean  
salivary  cortisol .29 A four -week  follow -up period  was chosen  in order  to obtain  an accurate  measure  of 
HCC  to determine  any change  in stress  during  the intervention  period.  Approximately  10-75 mg of hair30 is 
cut from  the posterior  vertex  region  of the scalp  as close  to the scalp  as possible.  The posterior  vertex  has 
the lowest  variation  in cortisol  levels,  and is the preferred  area  for sampling .31 Co-I (Ford)  will train  the PI 
and Co-I (Tate)  on hair collection.  We will take  one cut at the first home  visit (T0) and another  at the four-
week  follow -up home  visit (T2). Assay : Each  1 cm of hair approximates  the mean  cortisol  level  over  the 
prior  1 mont h.32 Samples  are assayed  in duplicate  and inter - and intra -assay  coefficients  of variation  
calculated.  HCC levels  are expressed  in hair as pg/mg.  
Saliva collection and assay : Salivary  alpha  amylase  (sAA)  is a non-invasive  biomarker  that detects  
immediate  changes  in autonomic  nervous  system  response,  signaling  a change  in level  of stress .33,34 
Interventional  studies  have  shown  a decrease  in sAA levels  as a response  to an intervention  meant  to 
stimulate  relaxation .35,36 Collection : The Salimetrics  Drool  Tube  for adults  will be used  for saliva  collection  
from  the parents  and cognitively  aware  adolescents.  The SalivaBio  Swab  for infants  will be used  for the 
remaining  adolescents  to eliminate  any choking  hazards.  Samples  will be collected  for both  parent  and 
adolescent  pre and post  two Reiki  sessions  per week  for four weeks . Storage : The swab  will be placed  in a 
Swab  Storage  Tube.  Tubes  will be put into a sealable  plastic  bag marked  as parent  or adolescent,  the date  
and time  of collection,  and put into the home  freezer  until  the PI or other  team  member  collects  them  at 
the follow  up visit.  Samples  will be transported  on dry ice to the lab, and frozen  at -20C until  processed.  
Assay : The saliva  samples  will be batch  processed  after  thawing  using  the Salimetric  Alpha  Amylase  assay  
following  manufacturer’s  instructions.  The amount  of alpha -amylase  activity  present  in the saliva  sample  
is directly  proportional  to the increase  in absorbance  at 405 nm. 
The primary outcome for the proposed study is the feasibility and acceptability of teaching Reiki to 
parents of adolescents receiving palliative care. Secondary outcomes include : adolescent  global health, pain 
interference, medication use, and stress measu res of hair cortisol (chronic, long term) and alpha amylase 
(immediate, short term) ; and parent  symptom profile (depression, anxiety, physical function, pain interference, 
fatigue, sleep disturbance and ability to participate in social roles and activities ), and stress measures of hair 
cortisol (chronic, long term) and alpha amylase (immediate, short term).  
Because Reiki has not been taught to parents of adolescents receiving palliative care at home, we will 
determine the feasibility and acceptability of th is intervention through calculating the percentage of dyads 
approached to the total participants who  consented to participate in the study as well as completed the study. 
We will also conduct qualitative interviews with parents to examine what they  thought  of the teaching protocol, 
the usefulness of Reiki for stress and other symptoms , as well as their thoughts on the study as a whole. 
Secondary outcomes will be collected in order to explore preliminary evidence on overall health and quality of 
life as well  as medication use for the adolescents and overall quality of life and symptoms of the parent.  
 
3.2.1 Study events description  
Dyads will be in the study for a total of nine weeks from enrollment to the follow -up visit. Screening  
occurs at least weekly and prior to enrollment.  Enrollment  and initial study measure completion , including first 
hair sample collection from both parent and adolescent , will occur at the beginning of Week 0. Parents will fill 
out the Medication Log during Week 0 in order to have a baseline of pain and anxiety medications before study 
intervention begins. The parent will receive Reiki training, a poster with suggested hand positions and a 
commercially -available book about Reiki in the home  on the first day of Week 1. A visit window is defined as a 
week (7days) -1/+3  days  from the initial Reiki training . During Week 2 the parent will receive a Reiki booster 
session with a repeat of the training and may ask questions. The parent will administer at least 5  times per we ek 
for at least 10 minutes each session.  During weeks 1 -4, the parent will collect saliva samples for themselves and 
their adolescent before and after any two Reiki sessions  as long as they are collected on two separate days . At 
the end of Week 4, measures  will be repeated either in person or by phone. During Week 8, measures will be 
repeated, the second  hair sample obtained  from both parent and adolescent , and the parent will participate in a 
qualitative interview . The qualitative  interview will be administered in person  by trained OSU College of Nursing  
study staff as part of the interview session. Interviews will be audio recorded  using a hand -held audio recording 
device . Audio recordings will be transcribed verbatim. Audio recording is voluntary and participants can choose 
to not have their interview recorded and still be a part of the s tudy.  See Appendix 2 for schema.  
 
3.2.2  Exposure/ Outcome measures and i nstruments  
The main data collection will occur during enrollment (T 0), end of the intervention period, Week 4 (T 1), 
and the follow up visit in Week 8 (T 2). Parents will be instructed on how to collect and store alpha amylase  saliva 
samples for themselves and their adolescent. Collection : The Salimetrics Drool Tube for adults will be used for 
saliva collection from the parents and cognitively aware adolescents. The SalivaBio Swab for infants will be used 
for the remaining adol escents to eliminate any choking hazards. Samples will be collected for both parent and 
adolescent pre and post  any two Reiki sessions on two separate  days per week for four weeks. Storage : The 
swab will be placed in a Swab Storage Tube. Tubes will be put into a sealable plastic bag marked as parent or 
adolescent, the date and time of collection, and put into the home freezer until the PI or other team member 
collects them at the follow up visit. Samples will be transported on dry ice to the lab, and frozen  at -20C until 
processed.  
 
3.2.3 Data management  
Data will be collected using either paper measures or electronic measures via iPad per patient 
preference  and/or internet availability . Data collected electronically will use Research Electronic Data Capture 
(REDCap) and entered by study staff into the study -specific electronic database for analysis.  To minimize risks of 
disclosure of participants’ personal information, the study site will ensure management and protection of 
materials and information in compliance with  national, state and institutional guidelines for protection of 
confidentiality of health -related research information.  Any paper measures will be checked for completeness 
during collection by the study team member collecting the data. The Medication Log and the Parent 
Intervention logs will be paper only. Study staff will collect a snapshot of the de -identified medication log and 
intervention log periodically in coordination with study visits. If the Medication Log is blank, parent s will be 
asked  if they h ave given any pain or anxiety medications during the previous period and have the parent fill out 
the log if needed. If the Intervention Log is blank or does not contain at least 5 entries for the previous week, 
parents will be asked about Reiki sessions a nd will fill out the log if needed. Data collected on paper will be 
scanned and emailed to the PI via secure email when each participating dyad has completed the follow -up visit. 
Data entered from paper measures will be entered into a database using double  data entry and checking.  
 
3.2.4 Compensation  
 Each family will be given  a total of $50 incentive  payments,  a $20 gift card  at the first visit (includes  initial 
measures and hair sample collection)  and a $30 gift card  at the follow  up visit (also includes measures and hair 
sample collection ). 
 
 3.3 Interventions  
This is a one -group feasibility study. There is only one intervention group . The Overall -Study PI and Local  PI will 
recruit professional Reiki practitioners who are trained at Level 3 or Master Level and have prior experience 
working with families and children.  A Reiki Master  will perform the initial teaching and instruct the parent how 
to perform a simple 15 -minute Reiki session. Parents will complete a return demonstration using light touch 
with their adolescent. The parent will receive an introductory book on Reiki , an informational article,  and a 
poster showing hand positions for their reference a s well as the intervention log to record sessions. The initial 
teaching session will take about 1.5 hours with breaks. The initial teaching session will be conducted by a Reiki 
Master and will mark the beginning of Week 1. A Reiki practitioner  (Master or L evel 3)  will provide a shorter 
“booster” session the following week to review techniques with the parent and answer questions. This session 
will last 45 minutes with breaks. The “booster” session will count as one day  for that week. Parents will be asked 
to complete a minimum of 15 minutes of Reiki with their adolescent at least five days per week for the four -
week intervention period. Parents will receive a phone call from the research coordinator  once per week during 
weeks three and four to check in with them and ask if they have any questions or problems with the 
intervention and will refer to a Reiki practitioner if needed.  
 
4 Statistic s and Data Handling   
 
4.1 Statistical considerations  
Primary outcomes ( Aims 1): Feasibility will be examined by computing the proportion of approached 
subjects enroll ed in the study, the proportion of subjects who complete Reiki training, and the proportion of 
enrolled subjects ’ who completed data collection.  Qualitative data will be analyzed using a bas ic qualitative 
descriptive approach. Qualitative data (audio recorded interviews and field notes) will be transcribed verbatim, 
checked for accuracy, imported into Atlas.TI37 for data management, and analyzed.38 Portions of text are labeled 
or coded with terms that are descriptive of the user opinions and observations. Codes will be identified and 
defined in an iterative process by investigators independently coding the data and arriving at agreeme nt in 
discussion/review. Codes are sorted and categorized into themes, which will be discussed in research meetings. 
We will use mixed methods to triangulate the qualitative and quantitative data to produce a more accurate 
picture of parental beliefs and e xperiences. These results will be used to refine procedures for future, larger 
studies. Qualitative results will be triangulated with quantitative results to answer questions of feasibility. 
Qualitative results will also be examined to explore the parents’  confidence in delivering Reiki and beliefs in their 
ability to help their adolescent (Aim 3).  
Secondary outcomes ( Aim 2 ): Descriptive statistics will be used to check data distribution, identify 
outliers, examine the balance in baseline measurements, and report outcome measures (e.g. pain) at each time 
point . Trend plot will be used to visualize the trend of change over time. Pair -wise comparisons will be 
conducted to test the difference in the change in outcome measures (T 0 versus T 1, T1 versus T 2, T0 versus T 2) 
using two sample t -tests. We will not adjust for multiple comparisons to avoid further reduction of power. 
Mixed effect modeling for repeated measures will be used to examine the trajectories of treatment effect over 
time, adjusting for within -patient clustering from repeated measures and possible confounders.  
 
4.1.1  Sample size   
 We will enroll 12 adolescent -parent dyads  in order to  achieve study objectives. The emphasis is on Aims 
1 and 3, the feasibility and acceptability of the study as well as the parents’ feelings about learning Reiki and 
their ability to help their adolescents. These aims will inform future study protocols. Aim  2 is exploring both 
parent and adolescent stress, symptoms, and overall quality of life. We are also testing data collection of hair 
and saliva in this population of adolescents receiving palliative care in the home. The preliminary results from 
the prima ry and secondary outcomes will inform the sample size of the next planned study, a two -group 
randomized controlled trial.  
 
 
4.2 Management of data  
 
4.2.1 Source documents  [Site data management]  
Source documents are the original records of participant information. The ICH -GCP guidelines  define 
source documents as "original documents, data, and records." Source documents may include study -specific 
Data Collection Tools (DCTs). DCTs are instruments/tools used to collect/document the requested data at each 
of the sites involved in the project.   The DCTs contain  those variables listed in this protocol.   Examples of DCTs 
may include medication logs, Reiki log , research files, surveys and specific research worksheets used to 
document key research data elements. Consent forms (if applicable) and an enrollment log are kept at the sites 
to know which participants are being followed and to ensure accurate enrollment and comply with local IRB 
regulations. Source documents/DCTs rema in at the site of collection . 
 
4.2.2 Data capture  [Data management]  
Study site personnel will complete screening, enrollment, and make sure initial measures are complete. 
Site personnel will scan and email completed paper forms to the  Overall  PI via secure ema il transmission for 
double data entry or will enter  data collected via research electronic data capture ( REDCap ). Any paper/scanned 
data will be entered into SPSS by the PIs undergraduate students who have been trained in double data entr y 
and data checking.  
 
As part of the NIH data sharing directive, de -identified data from this study will be transferred to the PCRC Data 
Repository located at the University of Colorado.  
 
4.2.3 Record retention  
• Any study records (including DCTs, etc.) will  be retained in t he site’s research record for 10  years 
after the study is completed in accordance with Good Clinical Practice guidelines .  At that time the 
research information will be destroyed by each site’s research document destruction 
rules/regulations.   
• Any research information already included in medical records will be kept indefinitely.  
• The de -identified data that are collected a nd entered will remain in the PCRC Data Repository 
indefinitely.  
4.2.4 Data sharing  [REQUIRED LANGUAGE]  
De-identified study data from this study will be transferred to the PCRC Data Repository located at the 
University of Colorado.  The PCRC fully supports the Final NIH Statement on Sharing Research Data and will 
provide assistance to all investigators and personnel for compliance. Consistent with OMB Circular A -110 and 
subsequent NIH Grants Policy Statements, the PCRC will provide ac cess to all de -identified data collected as part 
of PCRC -supported investigations, insofar as access is consistent with IRB/CHR rules, local, state, and Federal 
laws and regulations, and the HIPAA Privacy Rule.  
 
5 Ethics and Dissemination  
 
5.1 Ethics and regulatory compliance  
We will submit this protocol and supporting documents (i.e., measures, consent) to the IRB s of Ohio 
State University (OSU) and Children’s Hospital. OSU will cede control of the study to Children’s Hospital IRB as 
the IRB of record  per previous studies conducted at the same site with the same study team. We will seek 
additional language required by the PCRC for IRB applications and consent forms as well as advi ce from PCRC 
experts after funding.  
 
5.2 Confidentiality  
Every effort will be taken to ensure the confidentiality of study participants and their data. Only IRB -
approved study team members who have completed human subjects research training will have access to study 
data. All study data, with the exception of co nsent forms, will be identified by a code number only. Consent 
forms and the list linking study participant names and code numbers will be kept in a locked drawer in a locked 
office separate from other study data. Participants will be referred to by code n umber only. All reasonable effort 
will be made to maintain participant confidentiality.  
 
5.3 Data security  
The Ohio State University  (OSU)  College of Nursing has secure electronic data servers that are password 
protected and behind firewalls. All electroni c data will be stored on these secure servers. Additionally, data sent 
electronically will be identified by code number only. Paper data, including consent forms, will be stored onsite. 
Consent forms and the list linking names and code numbers will be stor ed separately from other data. Audio 
recordings from the interview will be recorded using hand -held audio recording devices and the files transferred 
to password protected computers  at OSU . These audio files will be identified with a subject ID only. Files are 
saved on the OSU College of Nursing  server, which is password protected, regularly back ed up, and only 
accessible by authorized study team members. Once the files are saved onto the c omputer, the file will be 
deleted from the recording device. Files may be kept on the server for up to 5 years. Only study personnel will 
have access to either paper or electronic data.  
 
6 Safety Consideration s 
 
6.1 Risks  
The risk of participating in this study are minimal. Reiki is non -invasive and can therefore be used with 
anyone. NCCIH considers Reiki to be safe although little scientific evidence exists about its effectiveness.14 There 
is the possibility that either the parent or adolescent may become uncomfortable during the Reiki session. If this 
happens, they should either take a break or change positions to be more comfortable. There  is a risk for 
becoming  tired  or having  pain due  to the  adolescent’s  illness  during  the Reiki  session.  If either  of these  happens,  
the dyad should take a break and/or change positions to one that is more comfortable. Some of the data 
collection may be uncomfortable or inconvenient for the parent and/ or adolescent . The hair sample collection 
may cause a slight physical discomfort due to the gentle pull on the hair before cutting and may cause social 
discomfort if the parent or adolescent feels as though the small bare spot on the scalp where the hair was 
clipped may show. Any study personnel who will be collecting hair will be trained to perform the sample cut 
gently and in a spot not likely to show. Collecting the saliva samples may be inconvenient for the parent as two 
samples must be collected (pre and post) for both the parent and adolescent (four samples total each time) 
twice per week for four weeks and stored in the home freezer. We will provide pre -labeled sample tubes and 
baggies so that the parent only has to add the date to each baggie in order to decrease the inconvenience as 
much as possible.  
 
Adverse Events . All adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs) will be tracked, 
documented, and reviewed. In one systematic review evaluating the efficacy of Reiki, nine randomized control 
trials reported no adverse events.49 It is anticipated that AEs in this stu dy will be minimal. However, for the 
purpose of this study, AEs will be defined as clinically significant mental status changes,  or any other unusual 
symptom or event (e.g. significant pain, a fall) that occur during the time frame of each Reiki session. A n SAE  will 
be defined as any untoward medical occurrence that results in death, is life threatening, results in  
hospitalization, or results in persistent or significant disability.  Parent participants will be instructed to call the 
research coordinator  for the study to report any adverse or unusual events. Parents will be instructed to call 911 
in the event of a medical emergency and report the emergency to the research coordinator  or the palliative care 
on-call medical provider (physician or nurse practiti oner) when they are able. In either case, the research 
coordinator  will consult with one of the palliative care physicians or nurse practitioners immediately in the case 
of an SAE or within 24 hours of an AE. The PI of the study will be notified of all AEs  and SAEs immediately via 
email for AEs and text message  and email  for SAEs. All AEs and SAEs will be reported to the IRB in a timely 
manner.  
 
  
6.2 Benefits  
The adolescent and/or parent may experience feelings of relaxation and/or decreased stress.  
 
6.3 Monitoring  
 
A. Study monitoring.  
Because this is a small, one -site, low -risk pilot study, t he PI will be responsible for the ongoing 
evaluation of the progress of the proposed research study. The  overall  PI and local PI  will ensure that all 
eligibility criteria and consent requirements are met prior to a participant’s participation and that all 
study procedures and AE reporting occur according to the IRB -approved protocol. The Ohio State 
University College of Nursing has  created a Safety  Monitoring Committee  (SMC ). This group will meet 
quarterly  once recruitment has begun to review the study and any reports of untoward events and to 
monitor their resolution. Minutes will be kept of all meetings and following SMC  meetings, the results of 
the meeting (meeting minu tes) concerning possible negative si de effects will be documented and sent 
to the Overall Study PI, Local PI,  and the IRB. The local PI’s IRB will advise and monitor the design and 
implementation of all safety monitoring and risk management procedures.  
 
 B. Procedures:  
 
1) Monitoring study safety to  include monitoring schedule,  and auditing selected cases for compliance 
with IRB requirements, conformance with informed consent requirements, verification of source 
documents, and investigator compliance . 
 
Monitoring of study safety will occur monthly. Monitoring will begin with the fir st participant 
recruited. To ensure reliability of data entry, the Overall study PI will review a random sample of 
cases and compare the results with the information recorded in the database to monitor for 
compliance with IRB requirements. The Overall stud y PI will look at consent forms, data storage, and 
correct entries. An acceptable error rate is less than 3%, i.e., 3 per 100 entries. If error rate is more 
than 3%, the Overall study PI and a second member of the study team will recheck all data.  
 
Quality  assurance reports will be prepared on a monthly basis by the Overall study PI and reviewed 
by Local P I. The reports will inform about missing, invalid, or inconsistent data on selected key 
variables such as age, sex , or diagnoses . The statistician on the project will oversee preparation of 
the reports. The reports will contain a summary of monthly accrual and cumulative accrual, a 
summary of key characteristics of the study participants, a summary of the completeness and 
quality of data.  
 
Quality assur ance will involve engaging in good data management activities.  Procedures that 
include checking the integrity of data storage and examining frequency distributions to look for data 
anomalies.  
 
2) Minimizing research -associated risk:  This study poses minimal risk to participants.  
 
Consent Procedures. Local P I, a research coordinator  or another member of the study team will 
introduce the study to the adolescent and parent. Recruitment methods used by this palliative care 
center for previous studies  will be used ; these  include approaching potential participants during 
regular clinic visits or mailing study information followed by up to three phone calls. If the study is 
introduced in the clinic, a member of the study team will introduce the study , and if the adol escent 
and parent are interested , a research coordinator  will give more details about the study, go over the 
consent form, answer any and all questions. If by mail, interested participants who meet criteria will 
call the palliative care center and the rese arch coordinator will mail a packet with the consent form 
and study information and will schedule a phone call to discuss the study . The research coordinator 
will meet with the parent and adolescent either in the clinic or in the home to go over the consent 
form. Any and all questions will be answered before the parent gives written consent and the 
adolescent gives written assent , or co nsent if age 18 or over,  if able. Adolescent -parent dyads that 
meet eligibility criteria and give appropriate  consent will be able to participate in the study. To 
protect participant confidentiality, the research coordinator will discuss consent in a priva te room at 
in the clinic , hospital room, or patient’s home . To prevent undue coercion, potential participants will 
be instructed that participation is completely voluntary , that their decision to participate will not 
affect their treatment, and that they m ay discontinue their participation in the study at any time. If 
the potential subject refuses to participate, there will be no further recruitment efforts but the 
subject will be asked about their reasons for refusal.  
 
Risk of measures:  It is possible that the adolescent or parent  may become fatigued while  
completing consent or baseline measures that they may become fatigued. Participant burden was 
considered very carefully due to the nature of this study. Study measures to address the construc ts 
were carefully chosen to minimize undue burden or fatigue.  
 
Fatigue . To minimize fatigue, the adolescent and parent will be offered breaks during the study 
procedures. Participants may choose to discontinue any procedure at any time for any reason. If a t 
any point the adolescent or parent becomes fatigued or the adolescent requires attention, we will 
either take a break or stop altogether depending on the preference of the adolescent or parent.  
 
3) Protecting the confidentiality of participant data:  
 
Risk of breach of confidentiality: There is a possibility of risk of breach of confidentiality of protected 
health information. The Overall study PI and the Local PI will take all necessary steps to ensure that 
this does not happen. All participants will be as signed an ID code upon entry into the study. All 
records relating to the participant’s involvement in this research study will be stored securely within 
a locked office. Participant identities on these records are indicated by an ID code rather than by a 
name, and the file linking these ID codes with their identity are kept separate from the research 
records. Screening and enrollment logs will be kept securely password -protected on the server and 
de-identified when  shared with Overall PI. Only the research coordinators  will have the information 
to link the special ID codes to the participant’s names. The master list will be kept in a password 
protected file on the protected  server.  No information will be used in subsequent publications that 
would identify individual participants.  
 
This study does not involve evaluating drugs or devices.  
 
Adequacy of Protection Against Risks: Efforts will be taken to minimize the risk to breach of 
confidentiality of data and anonymity of the participants. All participants will be assigned a unique 
ID code number under which all data will be stored. Security  of the data will be upheld through the 
use of password protection, encryption, and restricted access to users. Consent forms and a list of 
the match between participant names and code numbers will be retained securely  in a locked office 
area.  
 
C. Procedures for identifying, reviewing, and reporting AEs and unanticipated problems to the IRB, funding 
sources , and FDA (if applicable).  If applicable, the type and number of events that would halt accrual and 
would generate a review of eligibility, monitoring, asse ssments, intervention, and how the resumption 
of accrual would occur.  
 
Throughout the study the Overall study PI and Local PI will be responsible for monitoring participants for 
adverse events. The following will be considered SAE s: patient death, attempt ed suicide, major 
depression, or breach of confidentiality. The following will be considered AE s: patient allegations of 
physical/mental injury during the study, patient allegation of inappropriate consenting or recruitment 
procedures. The Overall study PI and Local PI will review AEs and unanticipated problems within 24 
hours of notification of the event. Unanticipated problems that are SAEs  will be reported within one 
week  of the investigator becoming aware of the problem.  Any other unanticipated probl ems  should be 
reported within two weeks  of the investigator becoming aware of the problem. All fatal or serious/life 
threatening AE will be reported to the IRB  in accordance with IRB policy . Non-serious AEs will be 
reported to the IRB at time of continuing  review. AEs determined as anticipated problems involving risks 
to subjects or others will be reported to IRB at time of continuing review. The Overall study PI and Local 
PI will be inform ed by  team members about any AEs or unanticipated problems  immediately . If protocol 
changes are needed, the research coordinator , with Overall study PI and Local PI  approval,  will submit a 
modification request to the IRB. Protocol changes will not be implemented prior to IRB approval unl ess 
necessary to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to the participants.   
 
At each meeting of the SMC  during the conduct of the trial, the SMC  will make a recommendation to the 
Overall study PI to continue or to terminate the trial. This recommendation will be based on safety 
considerations. The Overall study PI is responsible with the SMC  for safeguarding the interests of 
participants and for the conduct of the trial. The Overall study PI will be responsible for deciding 
whether to continue or to stop the trial based on the SMC  recommendations.  
 
D. For multi -site studies, procedures to ensure compliance with the monitoring plan and reporting 
requirements across study sites.  
 
This is a sing le site study.  
 
E. An assessment of external factors or relevant information (i.e., developments in the literature, results of 
related studies) that may have an impact of the safety of participants or on the ethics for the research 
study.  
 
The Overall study PI will be responsible for reviewing the literature monthly and reviewing with Local PI  
and inform the study team  of any new developments related to the study that may have impact on the 
safety of participants or the ethics for the research study.  
 
F. The ad vanced plans for interim and/or futility analysis.  
 
An interim analysis will occur at six months after study initiation to determine whether e nrollment is 
adequate  or if a revision in recruitment strategies is needed and/or if the study appears to be futil e (no 
participants recruited during six months of active recruitment). The Overall study PI together with Local 
PI will determine if early closure is justified if anticipated accruals cannot meet stated study goals.  
 
G. Description of how often monitoring entity meets, who will record proceedings, what group(s) receives 
SMC  reports, and time period for completing reports should be specified.   
The Overall study PI, and Local PI  and study staff will meet every two weeks  either in person or by 
phone. The research coordinator  will document meeting proceedings. The SMC  will meet quarterly .  
References  
 
1.  The International Center for Reiki Training. Reiki practitioners and teachers list.  
2.  Moody K, Siegel L, Scharbach K, Cunningham L, Cantor RM. Pediatric palliative care. Prim Care . 
2011;38(2):327 -361, ix. doi:10.1016/j.pop.2011.03.011  
3.  Wolfe J, Hinds PS, Sourkes BM. The language of pediatric palliativ e care. In: Textbook of 
Interdisciplinary Pediatric Palliative Care . Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:3 -6. 
4.  Thrane SE, Maurer SH, Cohen SM, May C, Sereika SM. Pediatric palliative care: A 5 -year 
retrospective chart review study. J Palliat Med . 2017 ;20(10):1104 -1111. 
doi:10.1089/jpm.2017.0038  
5.  Anthony K, Bromberg M, Gil K, Schanberg L. Parental Perceptions of Child Vulnerability and 
Parent Stress as Predictors of Pain and Adjustment in Children With Chronic Arthritis. Child Heal 
Care . 2011;40(1):5 3-69. doi:10.1080/02739615.2011.537938  
6.  Cohen LL, Vowles KE, Eccleston C. Parenting an adolescent with chronic pain: An investigation of 
how a taxonomy of adolescent functioning relates to parent distress. J Pediatr Psychol . 
2010;35(7):748 -757. doi:10.1 093/jpepsy/jsp103  
7.  Panicker L. Nurses’ perceptions of parent empowerment in chronic illness. Contemp Nurse . 
2013;45(2):210 -219. doi:10.5172/conu.2013.45.2.210  
8.  Gibson CH. The process of empowerment in mothers of chronically ill children. J Adv Nurs . 
1995;21(6):1201 -1210. doi:10.1046/j.1365 -2648.1995.21061201.x  
9.  Melnyk BM, Alpert -Gillis L, Feinstein NF, et al. Creating Opportunities for Parent Empowerment: 
Program Effects on the Mental Health/Coping Outcomes of Critically Ill Young Children and Thei r 
Mothers. Pediatrics . 2004;113(6):e597 -e607. doi:10.1542/peds.113.6.e597  
10.  Thrane SE, Maurer SH, Ren D, Danford CA, Cohen SM. Reiki therapy for symptom management 
in children receiving palliative care: A pilot study. Am J Hosp Palliat Med . 2016. 
doi:10.1177/104990911663097  
11.  Thrane SE, Cohen SM. Effect of Reiki therapy on pain  and anxiety in adults: An in -depth 
literature review of randomized trials with effect size calculations. Pain Manag Nurs . 
2014;15(4):897 -908. doi:10.1016/j.pmn.2013.07.008  
12.  Kundu A, Dolan -Oves R, Dimmers MA, Towle CB, Doorenbos AZ. Reiki training for caregivers of 
hospitalized pediatric patients: A pilot program. Complement Ther Clin Pract . 2013;19(1):50 -54. 
doi:10.1016/j.ctcp.2012.08.001  
13.  Melnyk BM, Feinstein NF, Alpert -Gillis L, et al. Reducing premature infants’ length of stay and 
improving pare nts’ mental health outcomes with the Creating Opportunities for Parent 
Empowerment (COPE) neonatal intensive care unit program: A randomized controlled trial. 
Pediatrics . 2006;118(5):e1414 -e1427. doi:10.1542/peds.2005 -2580  
14.  National Center for Compleme ntary and Integrative Health. Reiki: An introduction. 
https://nccih.nih.gov/sites/nccam.nih.gov/files/Backgrounder_Reiki.pdf. Published 2015. 
Accessed December 2, 2015.  
15.  National Institute of Nursing Research. The NINR strategic plan: Advancing science , improving 
lives. https://www.ninr.nih.gov/sites/www.ninr.nih.gov/files/NINR_StratPlan2016_reduced.pdf. 
Published 2016. Accessed September 14, 2016.  
16.  United States Census. Age Groups and Sex: 2010. 
http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/ pages/productview.xhtml?pid=DEC_10_SF1
_QTP1&prodType=table. Published 2010. Accessed December 1, 2015.  
17.  Bramlett MD, Read D, Bethell C, Blumberg SJ. Differentiating subgroups of children with special 
health care needs by health status and complexity of  health care needs. Matern Child Health J . 
2009;13(2):151 -163. doi:10.1007/s10995 -008-0339 -z 
18.  Buescher PA, Whitmire JT, Brunssen S, Kluttz -Hile CE. Children who are medically fragile in North 
Carolina: Using Medicaid data to estimate prevalence and med ical care costs in 2004. Matern 
Child Health J . 2006;10(5):461 -466. doi:10.1007/s10995 -006-0081 -3 
19.  Simon TD, Berry J, Feudtner C, et al. Children with complex chronic conditions in inpatient 
hospital settings in the United States. Pediatrics . 2010;126(4):647 -655. doi:10.1542/peds.2009 -
3266  
20.  Post -White J, Fitzgerald M, Savik K, Hooke MC, Hannahan AB,  Sencer SF. Massage therapy for 
children with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs . 2008;26:16 -28. doi:10.1177/1043454208323295  
21.  Nguyen TN, Nilsson S, Hellström A -L, Bengtson A. Music therapy to reduce pain and anxiety in 
children with cancer undergoing lumbar  puncture: a randomized clinical trial. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs . 2010;27(3):146 -155. doi:10.1177/1043454209355983  
22.  Parkes J, Caravale B, Marcelli M, Franco F, Colver A. Parenting stress and children with cerebral 
palsy: A European cross -sectional survey. Dev Med Child Neurol . 2011;53(9):815 -821. 
doi:10.1111/j.1469 -8749.2011.04014.x  
23.  Khanna AK, Prabhakaran A, Patel P, Ganjiwale JD, Nimbalkar SM. Social, Psychological and 
Financial Burden on Caregivers of Children with Chronic Illness: A Cross -sectional Study. Indian J 
Pediatr . 2015;82(11):1006 -1011. doi:10.1007/s12098 -015-1762 -y 
24.  Kashikar -Zuck S, Carle A, Barnett K, et al. Longitudinal evaluation of Patient Reported Outcomes 
Measurement Information Systems (PROMIS) measures in pediatric chronic pain.  Pain . 
2015;157(2):1. doi:10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000378  
25.  Varni JW, Thissen D, Stucky BD, et al. PROMIS(R) Parent Proxy Report Scales: an item response 
theory analysis of the parent proxy report item banks. Qual Life Res . 2012;21(7):1223 -1240. 
doi:10. 1007/s11136 -011-0025 -2 
26.  Vetter TR, Bridgewater CL, Ascherman LI, Madan -Swain A, McGwin GLJ. Patient versus parental 
perceptions about pain and disability in children and adolescents with a variety of chronic pain 
conditions. Pain Res Manag . 2014;19(1): 7-14. 
27.  Forrest CB, Tucker CA, Ravens -Sieberer U, et al. Concurrent validity of the PROMIS® pediatric 
global health measure. Qual Life Res . 2016;25(3):739 -751. doi:10.1007/s11136 -015-1111 -7 
28.  Carle AC, Riley W, Hays RD, Cella D. Confirmatory factor a nalysis of the patient reported 
outcomes measurement information system (PROMIS) adult domain framework using item 
response theory scores. Med Care . 2015;53(10):894 -900. doi:10.1097/MLR.0000000000000413  
29.  Short SJ, Stalder T, Marceau K, et al. Correspon dence between hair cortisol concentrations and 
30-day integrated daily salivary and weekly urinary cortisol measures. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology . 2016;71:12 -18. doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2016.05.007  
30.  Meyer J, Novak M, Hamel A, Rosenberg K. Extraction and an alysis of cortisol from human and 
monkey hair. J Vis Exp . 2014;(83):e50882. doi:10.3791/50882  
31.  Sauvé B, Koren G, Walsh G, Tokmakejian S, Van Uum SHM. Measurement of cortisol in human 
hair as a biomarker of systemic exposure. Clin Investig Med . 2007;30( 5). 
32.  Russell E, Koren G, Rieder M, Van Uum S. Hair cortisol as a biological marker of chronic stress: 
Current status, future directions and unanswered questions. Psychoneuroendocrinology . 
2012;37(5):589 -601. doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2011.09.009  
33.  Granger DA, K ivlighan KT, Blair C, et al. Integrating the measurement of salivary alpha -amylase 
into studies of child health, development, and social relationships. J Soc Pers Relat . 
2006;23(2):267 -290. doi:Doi 10.1177/0265407506062479  
34.  Susman EJ, Dockray S, Grange r DA, et al. Cortisol and alpha amylase reactivity and timing of 
puberty: Vulnerabilities for antisocial behaviour in young adolescents. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology . 2010;35(4):557 -569. doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2009.09.004  
35.  Duchemin A -M, Steinberg BA, Marks  DR, Vanover K, Klatt M. A small randomized pilot study of a 
workplace mindfulness -based intervention for surgical intensive care unit personnel: Effects on 
salivary α -amylase levels. J Occup Environ Med . 2015;57(4):393 -399. 
doi:10.1097/JOM.000000000000037 1 
36.  Sripongngam T, Eungpinichpong W, Sirivongs D, Kanpittaya J, Tangvoraphonkchai K, Chanaboon 
S. Immediate Effects of Traditional Thai Massage on Psychological Stress as Indicated by Salivary 
Alpha -Amylase Levels in Healthy Persons. Med Sci Monit Basic  Res. 2015;21:216 -221. 
doi:10.12659/MSMBR.894343  
37.  Friese S. ATLAS.Ti 7 . Berlin: Scientific Software Development GmbH; 2013.  
38.  Schreier M. Qualitative Content Analysis. In: The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Data Analysis . ; 
2014:170 -183. doi:10.1111/j .1365 -2648.2007.04569.x  
 
  
Appendices  
 
 
  
 
 
Appendix 1 : Study Glossary  
 
Term  Definition  
AE Adverse event  
CHA  Complementary Health Approach  
CI  Confidence interval  
DCT Data collection tools  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
NCCIH  National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health  
NIH National Institutes of Health  
OSU  The Ohio State University  
PCRC  Palliative Care Research Cooperative Group  
PROMIS  Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System  
PTES  Perceived Treatment Efficacy Scale  
PI Principal Investigator  
QOL  Quality of life  
RCT Randomized controlled trial  
SAE Serious adverse event  
T0 Enrollment  
T1 Week 4  
T2 Week 8  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Appendix 2 : Study Schema  
 
 STUDY PERIOD  
# = adolescent  
* = parent  Screening / 
Enrollment  Intervention and Follow up Period  
TIMEPOINT   
(T0) Week 0   Week 1  Week 2  Week 3  Week 4 
(T1) Week 8 
(T2) 
Eligibility screening #*  X       
ENROLLMENT  
Informed consent/assent #*  X       
INTERVENTION  
Initial Reiki teaching    X     
Reiki teaching booster session     X    
ASSESSMENTS  
Demographics #*  X       
PROMIS Global Health 7+2 #  X     X X 
PROMIS Pain Interference #  X     X X 
PROMIS 29 Symptom Profile *  X     X X 
Hair Sample Collection #*  X      X 
Alpha Amylase #*    X*2 X*2 X*2 X*2  
Medication Log #   X X X X X  
Qualitative Interview *        X 
 
         
 
 
 
  
Appendix 3 : Measures  
  
Demographic Data Form         ID # ________  
 
Adolescent:  
 
Where was the adolescent consented: Inpatient  / outpatient clinic  / home  / other  (circle one)  
 
Has the adolescent been hospitalized in the last month? Y/N (circle one)  
If yes, discharge date : _____ _______  
 
Age in years : ______    Birthdate      __________     
Sex: 
 Unknown   Male   Female   Not specified/Decline to answer  
 
Race:  
 Americ an Indian or Alaska Native    Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander  
 Asian    White  
 Black or African American    Unknown  
 
Ethnicity:  
 Hispanic or Latino   Not Hispanic or Latino   Unknown  
 
Religion:  
 Amish   Jewish   None  
 Buddhist   Catholic   Other: _________________  
 Hindu   Protestant/Christian*   Decline to Answer  
 Muslim   (*includes Baptist, Presbyterian, Methodist, Lutheran, 
Episcopalian, Church of Christ, Pentecostal/Foursquare, 
Christian Science, Quaker, Unitarian, etc.)   Spiritual but not 
religious   
Primary diagnosis that resulted in palliative or hospice referral 
_______________________________  
Is the child developmentally delayed?   Yes _____No _____   
(as defined by parent report & PPC provider opinion)  
If yes, Diagnosis: ________________________ ICD -10 __________  
Is the adolescent receiving palliative care?  Yes  _____ No _____   
Date referred to palliative care:  _____/_____/________  
Is the adolescent receiving hospice care?  Yes _____ No _____   
Where is care provided: _______________________  
Date referred to hospice care:  _____/_____/________  
Parent /Legal Guar dian: 
 
Age     __________   Sex     __________    
 
Race:  
 Americ an Indian or Alaska Native    Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander  
 Asian    White  
 Black or African American    Unknown  
 
Ethnicity:  
 Hispanic or Latino   Not Hispanic or Latino   Unknown  
 
Current Marital Status:  
 Single    Widowed  
 Married    Living with romantic partner  
 Divorced    Decline to answer  
 
Employment:  
 Part Time    Family Medical Leave  
 Full Time    Homemaker  
 Seasonal/occasional    Retired  
 Unemployed    Decline to answer  
 
Educational Level:  
 Less than high school    Bachelor’s Degree  
 High school    Master’s Degree  
 Some college    Doctoral Degree  
 Associates Degree    Decline to answer  
 
Total number of people living in the household: _________  
 
Total Family Income (yearly):  
 < $10,000    $60,000 -79,999  
 $10,000 -19,999    >$80,000  
 $20,000 -39,999    Decline to answer  
 $40,000 -59,999     
 
Religion:  
 Amish   Jewish   None  
 Buddhist   Catholic   Other: _________________  
 Hindu   Protestant/Christian*   Decline to Answer  
 Muslim   (*includes Baptist, Presbyterian, Methodist, Lutheran, 
Episcopalian, Church of Christ, Pentecostal/Foursquare, 
Christian Science, Quaker, Unitarian, etc.)   Spiritual but not 
religious   
 
 
 
 
PROMIS  Pediatric  Scale  v1.0 – Global  Health  7+2 
 
Pediatric  Global  Health 7+2  
 
Please respond  to each  question  or statement by marking  one box per row.  
 
   
Excellent  Very  
Good   
Good   
Fair  
Poor   
 
Global01R1  In general,  would  you say your 
health  is:........................................   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
        
 
Global02R1  In general,  would  you say your 
quality  of life is:............................   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
        
 
Global03R1  In general,  how would  you rate 
your physical  health?  ....................   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
        
 
 
Global04R1  In general,  how would  you rate 
your mental health,  including  
your mood  and your ability  to 
think?  ............................................   
 
5  
 
4  
 
3  
 
2  
 
1  
   
Never   
Rarely   
Sometimes   
Often   
Always   
 
PedGlobal2R1  How often  do you feel really  
sad? ...............................................   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
   
Always   
Often   
Sometimes   
Rarely   
Never   
 
PedGlobal5R1  How often  do you have  fun with 
friends?  .........................................   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
        
PedGlobal6R1  How often  do your parents listen  
to your ideas?................................   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
  
In the past 7 days…        
   
Never  Almost  
Never   
Sometimes   
Often  Almost  
Always   
 
2876R1r  I got tired easily  ............................   
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
        
 
3793R1r  I had trouble sleeping  when  I 
had pain.........................................   
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 July 2016  
© 2010 -2016  PROMIS  Health  Organization  and PROMIS  Cooperative Group  Page  1 of 1 
PROMIS  Parent  Proxy  Scale  v1.0 – Global  Health  7+2 
 
Parent Proxy  Global  Health  7+2 
 
Please respond  to each  question  or statement by marking  one box per row.  
 
   
Excellent  Very  
Good   
Good   
Fair  
Poor   
 
Global01_PXR1  In general,  would  you say your 
child's  health is:..........................   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
        
 
Global02_PXR1  In general,  would  you say your 
child's  quality  of life is:..............   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
        
 
Global03_PXR1  In general,  how would  you rate 
your child's  physical  health?......  
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
        
 
 
Global04_PXR1  In general,  how would  you rate 
your child's  mental health,  
including  mood and ability  to 
think?  .........................................   
 
5  
 
4  
 
3  
 
2  
 
1  
   
Never   
Rarely   
Sometimes   
Often   
Always   
 
PedGlobal2_PXR1  How often  does your child feel 
really  sad? ..................................   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
   
Always   
Often   
Sometimes   
Rarely   
Never   
 
PedGlobal5_PXR1  How often  does your child  
have fun  with friends? ...............   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
        
 
PedGlobal6_PXR1  How often  does your child feel 
that you listen  to his or  her 
ideas?  .........................................   
5  
4  
3  
2  
1  
  
In the past 7 days…        
   
Never  Almost  
Never   
Sometimes   
Often  Almost  
Always   
 
Pf4fatigue3r  My child  got tired easily  ............   
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
        
 
Pf2pain5r  My child  had trouble  sleeping  
when  he/she had pain.................   
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 May 2016  
© 2010 -2016  PROMIS  Health  Organization  and PROMIS  Cooperative Group  Page  1 of 1 
PROMIS ® Pediatric  Item Bank  v1.0 – Pain Interference  
 
Pediatric Pain  Interference  
 
Please respond  to each  item  by marking  one box per row.  
 
 In the past 7 days. . . . .   
Never  Almost  
Never   
Sometimes   
Often  Almost  
Always  
 
1698bR1  I felt angry  when  I had pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
2035R1  I had trouble doing  schoolwork  when  I 
had pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
3793R1  I had trouble sleeping  when  I had pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
9004 It was hard for me to pay attention  when  
I had pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
2045R1  It was hard for me to run when  I had 
pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
2049R1  It was hard for me to walk one  block  
when  I had pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
1703R1  It was hard to have  fun when  I had pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
2180R1  It was hard to stay  standing  when  I had 
pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
3582R1  I hurt a  lot.  
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
9009 I hurt all over my body.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
2032R1  I missed  school  when  I had pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
9007 It was hard for me to remember things  
when  I had pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
       
 
1701R1  It was hard to get along  with other  
people when  I had pain.   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
 
 
© 2009 -2012  PROMIS ® Health  Organization  and PROMIS  Cooperative  Group  Page  1 of 1 
PROMIS  Parent  Proxy  Item  Bank  v1.0 – Pain  Interference  
 
Pain  Interference  
 
Please  respond  to each  question  or statement  by marking  one box per row.  
 
 In the past 7 days…   
Never  Almost  
Never   
Sometimes   
Often  Almost  
Always  
 
Pf2pain5  My child  had trouble  sleeping  when  
he/she  had pain ...........................................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf3pain7  My child  felt angry  when  he/she  had pain .  
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf2pain2  My child  had trouble  doing  schoolwork  
when  he/she  had pain .................................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf3pain2  It was hard for my child  to pay  attention  
when  he/she  had pain ................................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf2pain4  It was hard for my child  to run when  
he/she  had pain ..........................................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf1pain4  It was hard for my child  to walk  one block  
when  he/she  had pain ................................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf3pain4  It was hard for my child  to have fun  when  
he/she  had pain ..........................................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf4pain6  It was hard for my child  to stay  standing  
when  he/she  had pain ..................................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf4pain2  It was hard for my child  to remember  
things  when  he/she had pain......................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf4pain4  It was hard for my child  to get along  with 
other  people  when he/she  had pain ...........   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf4pain1  My child  hurt a lot .......................................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf3pain6  My child  hurt all over his/her  body  ...........   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
        
Pf4pain5  My child  missed school  when  he/she  had 
pain ...........................................................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2008 -2012  PROMIS  Health  Organization  and PROMIS Cooperative Group  Page  1 of 1 
PROMIS –29 Profile  v2.0 
 
Please  respond to  each  question or statement  by marking  one box per row.  
 
  
Physical  Function   Without  
any 
difficulty  With  a 
little  
difficulty  With  
some  
difficulty  With  
much  
difficulty   
Unable  
to do 
 
1 Are you able to do  chores  such as 
vacuuming  or yard work?  ..........................        
         
2 Are you able to go up and down  stairs  at a 
normal  pace?..............................................        
         
3 Are you able to go for a walk of at least 
15 minutes?................................................        
        
4 Are you able to run errands and shop?  ......       
 Anxiety  
In the past 7 days…    
Never   
Rarely   
Sometimes   
Often   
Always  
5 I felt fearful................................................        
         
6 I found  it hard to focus  on anything  other  
than my anxiety  .........................................        
        
7 My worries  overwhelmed  me ....................        
        
8 I felt uneasy  ...............................................        
 Depression  
In the past 7 days...    
Never   
Rarely   
Sometimes   
Often   
Always  
 
9 I felt worthless  ...........................................        
        
10 I felt helpless..............................................        
         
11 I felt depressed...........................................        
         
12 I felt hopeless.............................................        
 Fatigue  
During  the past 7 days…    
Not at all  
A little  bit  
Somewhat   
Quite  a bit  
Very  much  
 
13 I feel fatigued  .............................................        
         
14 I have  trouble starting  things  because  I 
am tired......................................................        
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participant  Format  © 2008 -2013  PROMIS  Health  Organization and  PROMIS Cooperative  Group  Page  1 of 3 
PROMIS –29 Profile  v2.0 
 
 
 Fatigue  
In the past 7 days…   
Not at all  
A little  bit  
Somewhat   
Quite  a bit  
Very  much  
 
15 How run -down  did you feel on average?  ...      
       
16 How fatigued  were  you on average?  ..........       
 Sleep  Disturbance  
In the past 7 days…   
Very  poor   
Poor   
Fair  
Good   
Very  good  
 
17 My sleep  quality  was..................................       
 In the past 7 days…   
Not at all  
A little  bit  
Somewhat   
Quite  a bit  
Very  much  
 
18 My sleep  was refreshing.............................       
       
19 I had a  problem with my sleep  ..................       
       
20 I had difficulty  falling  asleep  ....................       
 Ability  to Participate in Social  Roles  
and Activities   
 
Never   
 
Rarely   
 
Sometimes   
 
Usually   
 
Always  
 
21 I have  trouble doing all of my regular  
leisure activities  with others  ....................       
        
22 I have  trouble doing all of the family  
activities  that I want  to do  .......................       
        
23 I have  trouble doing all of my usual  work  
(include work  at home) ...........................       
        
24 I have  trouble doing all of the activities  
with friends  that I want  to do ..................       
 Pain  Interference  
In the past 7 days…   
Not at all  
A little  bit  
Somewhat   
Quite  a bit  
Very  much  
 
25 How much  did pain interfere  with your 
day to day activities?  ..................................       
        
26 How much  did pain interfere  with work  
around  the home?  .......................................       
        
27 How much  did pain interfere  with your 
ability  to participate in social activities?  .      
        
28 How much  did pain interfere  with your 
household  chores?  .....................................       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participant  Format  © 2008 -2013  PROMIS  Health  Organization and  PROMIS Cooperative  Group  Page  2 of 3 
PROMIS –29 Profile  v2.0 
 
 
Pain  Intensity  
In the past 7 days…  
 
29 How  would  you rate your pain on 
average?..........................................   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  
8  
9  
10 
  No 
pain          Worst  
imaginable  
pain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participant  Format  © 2008 -2013  PROMIS  Health  Organization and  PROMIS Cooperative  Group  Page  3 of 3 
INTERVIEW  GUIDE  
Teaching Parents Reiki for Their Adolescents Receiving Palliative Care  
Interviews  with  parents  can take  place  in a setting  of their  choosing.  Assure  that the risk for 
interruptions  is minimized.  
Introductory  Comments:  
We value  your  opinions as parents who  have  been  engaged  in symptom  management  with your  child.  
We’d  like to obtain  some feedback  about  using  REIKI  therapy  to help with  those  symptoms.  All 
opinions  and information  shared  here  will be confidential  and your  participation  is anonymous.  We 
don’t  share your  names  or your  opinions  by name  or attach  any identifying information  to the 
transcript of this session.  I will be recording this session  if it’s OK with  you.  This  is just to make  sure  I 
get an accurate  record  of your  answers.  We will listen  to the recording  and transcribe  the words  into 
text on the computer.  No one will have  access  to your  responses  except  study  personnel.  Do we have 
your permission to proceed with the recording?  
I have  a series  of questions  I want  to cover  and these are open -ended  questions  so think  of this more  
like a conversation  than  a questionnaire  or a survey , and of course  you are free to refuse  to answer  
any questions  or to stop  the interview  at any point.   But,  really,  feel free to raise  any issues  that you 
think  are important  or central  to some  of the things  that we discuss  today.  We really  designed  the 
questions  to try to address  some  of the areas we think  are key to understanding  how  you used  REIKI  
with  your  child.  
Also, I’m going to be using the word “child” even though ____ is an adolescent. Is that okay with 
you?  
Before  we get started,  do you have  any questions  or concerns?  
1. Tell me a little about  your  child.  
a. What kinds  of symptoms  are most  distressing  for your  child?  
b. Can you describe  how  you manage  those  symptoms?  Before  REIKI?  Please describe 
a typical day before the REIKI training.  
2. Tell me about  the REIKI  training.  
a. How  long  did it take to learn?  
b. How  difficult  was it for you to learn?  What  about  the practice  – was it enough  to make  
you feel comfortable  with  your  ability  to administer  REIKI  to your  child?  
c. Was there  anything  about  the training  that you think  should  be changed  for other  
parents?  
3. So, you have  had about  4 weeks  to use REIKI  with  your  child  to help  managing  their  
symptoms.  
a. Can you describe  how  you typically  use it? 
b. How  often  do you use it?  
c. How  do you make  the decision to use it? 
d. Would  there  be a situation that you might  not use REIKI?  
e. Were  there  any particular  symptoms that  you felt were  easier  to manage  using  REIKI?  
f. Were  there  any symptoms  that it just didn’t  work  for? 
g. Can you describe  a situation  where  using  REIKI  was particularly  effective?  
 
 
 
Pain and Anxiety Medication Log        Subject ID _________  
Date  & 
Time   
Medication   
Dose   
Reason   
Comment  
 
/ / 
  am/pm      
 
/ / 
  am/pm      
/ / 
  am/pm      
/ / 
  am/pm      
/ / 
  am/pm      
/ / 
  am/pm      
/ / 
  am/pm      
/ / 
  am/pm      
 
Parent  Intervention  Log Subject  ID    
 
 
 
Date  Start  
Time  Session  
Minutes  Any Session  
Interruptions?  Where did the session  
take place?  Comments/Reactions  to Session  
      
      
      
      
      
Version 1, February 4, 2019  33  