 
1 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  Detailed Protocol: Denosumab and High -dose Teriparatide Administration Study (DATA 2)  
 
I. Background and Significance  
 
As our population ages, osteoporotic fractures are expected to have an increasing impact on the 
health of our population. Today, osteopor osis is estimated to affect over 20 million Americans with 1.5 
million osteoporotic fractures occurring in the United States every year 1. In women, the lifetime risk of 
experiencing a minimal trauma hip fracture, the most devastatin g consequence of osteoporosis, is 
estimated to be 17% 2. In most patients with osteoporosis, the occurrence of a hip fracture is a 
devastating consequence, conveying 24% excess mortality within 12 -months of the fracture and a 
continued increased risk of death for up to 10 -years after the event 3. In patients with the most 
advanced osteoporosis, currently available medications can, at best, de crease hip and non -spine 
fracture rates by 50% and 30%, respectively 4,5. At present, the mainstay of osteo porosis treatment is 
the use of oral and intravenous bisphosphonates (BPs).  These drugs act by suppressing bone 
resorption (as well as formation) and have been shown to increase bone mineral density (BMD) and 
reduce fracture rates in certain populations 6. Teriparatide (TPTD - hPTH 1 -34) has also been shown 
to increase BMD and reduce fractures, but acts by a different mechanism that involves stimulating 
new bone for mation (along with resorption), and reconstituting internal bone microarchitecture 7-14. 
The effects of TPTD are dose dependant both with regard to increases in bone mass and stimulation 
of osteoblast activity 13. Specifically, biochemical markers of bone formation increase more in women 
treated with 40 -μg of TPTD daily comp ared to women treated with 20 -μg (the FDA approved dose) 
and this greater stimulation of bone formation is associated with greater BMD increases, particularly in 
trabecular bone 14,15.   Despite stimulating greater increases in bone mass, TPTD 40 mcg/day reduces 
spine and non -spine fractures no more than TPTD 20 mcg/day in humans. We hypothesize that this 
paradox arises because 40 -mcg/day increases bone resorption more than 20 -mcg/day, a difference 
revealed by biochemical markers of bone resorption 14,16. Unique among osteoporosis medications, 
TPTD has also been shown to stimulate periosteal expansion in animal models though a similar 
property in human studies has yet to be unequivocally shown 8,17-19. 
 
While both TPTD and BPs increase BMD and reduce fracture risk, their beneficial effects are limited 
and neither drug is able to com pletely normalize BMD or restore skeletal integrity in most patients. 
Initially thought to be a promising approach, trials of combination therapy with anabolic agents and 
BPs have demonstrated minimal or no advantage over monotherapy 20-26. In these combination 
studies, the antiresorptive agent inhibited TPTD or PTH -stimulated increases in bone formation and 
resorption but did not suppress turnover to the degree  observed with the antiresorptive agent alone 22-
26. Together, these studies suggest that co -administration of BPs with TPTD blunts the TPTD -
associated stimulation of bone formation in a dose -dependent fashion, particularly in predominately 
trabecular sites such as the spine. The reasons that the combination of BPs and TPTD do not 
stimulate greater gains in BMD are unclear.  BPs presumably interfere with one or more of the 
mechanisms via which TPTD exerts its anabolic effect on bone: increased secretion of IGF -I, bFGF, 
or other paracrine growth factors by osteoblasts, decreased production of sclerostin by osteocytes, 
and/or increased osteoclastic resorption of bone wi th resultant release of these and other pre -formed 
growth factors 23,27,28.  
 
Rodent models have suggested that TPTD in combination with OPG (a molecule aimed at the same 
molecular target as denosumab – see below) has superior skeletal effects compared to TPTD alone 
29,30. Denosumab (DMAB) is an FDA -approved fully human monoclonal antibody that specifically binds 
to receptor activator of nuclear factor -κB ligand (RANKL)31. It inhibits bone resorption by interfering 
with the binding of RANKL to its receptor on pre -osteoclasts and osteoclasts, the final common 
pathway leading to osteoclast activation and bone resorption 32,33. DMAB suppresses bone turnover 
more than intravenous and oral BPs 34,35. DMAB’s potent antiresorptive properties are best 
demonstrated in iliac crest biopsy specimens from postmenopausal osteoporotic women who had 
been taking the drug for 24 -36 months. These biopsies revealed  an 80% reduction in eroded surface 
 
2 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  and the complete absence of osteoclasts in more than 50% of the specimens. Furthermore, 
histomorphometric indices of bone turnover were significantly lower in the patients taking DMAB than 
those taking alendronate 36. Despite this dramatic suppression of osteoclast activity, however, bone 
turnover rapidly normalizes after the drug is discontinued 31. Like other antiresorptive agents, DMAB 
increases BMD at the lumbar spine and hip, but unlike most of these agents also increases BMD at 
diaphyseal sites such as the wrist 37-42. Furthermore, DMAB reduces the risk of vertebral and hip 
fractures in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, and increases indices of bone strength when 
measured by HR -pQCT 43,44. Taken together, the unique mechanism of action of DMAB and the 
suggestive animal studies led us to hy pothesize that the combination of DMAB and TPTD would 
increase BMD, bone quality, and estimated bone strength more than either drug alone.  
 
This hypothesis was tested and confirmed in The DATA Study (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) 45,46 that compared teriparatide and denosumab monotherapy to the combination of 
both drugs in postmenopausal osteoporotic  women . As shown below , the results not only showed that 
the combination increased hip and spine BMD more than either drug alone, but also that i n the 
presence of DMAB, the pro -resorptive effects of TPTD are completely blocked (unlike combinations of 
TPTD and BPs).  
 
 
The combination group is statistically different from both other groups at all sites (P<0.02). TPTD group is 
statistically different from DMAB at total hip only  
 
 
For clarity, changes are shown for combination and DMAB groups only (*P=0.05 f or between -group 
comparison). In the TPTD alone group, typical increases in OC, P1NP  (bone formation markers) , and CTX  
(bone resorption marker)  were observed.  
 
 
These results suggest that even greater gains in BMD, bone quality, and bone strength could be 
achieved if DMAB could be combined with a more potent stimulant of osteoblast function and bone 
formation. Thus, we plan to conduct 15 -month study  that compares TPTD 40 -μg plus DMAB (60 -mg 
every six months) to TPTD 20 -μg plus DMAB in a design that also takes advantage of recent work 
that suggests that starting TPTD before the antiresorptive has some clinical advantages 47,48. 
 
 
3 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  In performing this clinical trial, we will be able to better understand the mechanisms by which 
antiresorptive agents influence  the efficacy of anabolic agents. Furthermore, if our hypothesis is 
confirmed, the findings of this study could define a novel approach to the treatment of high -risk 
osteoporosis patients.  
 
A known limitation of both teriparatide and denosumab therapy is t he rapid loss of bone that occurs 
when these drugs are discontinued.49,50 Moreover, both teriparatide and denosu mab are expensive 
and administered by subcutaneous injection (daily and every 6 -months, respectively). If combination 
teriparatide/denosumab therapy is to become part of a widely used treatment approach, we must 
develop strategies to maintain and expand th e unprecedented improvement in bone density and 
microarchitrecture observed, and do so with acceptable risk of serious adverse effects. Zoledronic 
acid is a highly potent bisphosphonate that has been shown to reduce the risk of both vertebral and 
non-verte bral fractures when given as a yearly 5 -mg infusion over 3 years.51 Despite the FDA -
approved yearly dosing schedule, it has also been reported that the effects of a single 5 -mg 
zoledronic acid infusion are much more prolonged. Specifically, a single administration of zoledronic 
acid continues to reduce bone resorption and increase BMD for an additional 2 -5 years.52-55 Moreover, 
it has also been demonstrated that a single dose of zoledronic acid continues to reduce fracture rates 
for at least 3 -years and to the same degree as do yearly infusions.56 
 
As the optimal treatment for patients who have previously received combination denosumab and 
teriparatide is not defined, we believe that is useful and important to look at how our study su bjects’ 
bone mineral densities have changed a year or more after completion of their participation in our 
study.  
 
II. Specific Aims  
The Specific Aim of this protocol is to test the following hypothesis:  
In postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, the combi nation of DMAB and high -dose TPTD (which 
will be started 3 -months prior to denosumab) will increase BMD, improve bone microarchitecture, and 
increase estimated bone strength more than the combination of DMAB and standard dose TPTD.  
 
The Specific Aim of the  Extension trial (DATA -2-EX): 
The extension trial described (DATA -2-EX) will test the hypothesis that the large increases in cortical 
and trabecular BMD, bone quality, and estimated bone strength achieved with combined DMAB and 
high-dose TPTD therapy can b e extended for up to 27 -months by a single 5 -mg dose of zoledronic 
acid. If this hypothesis is confirmed, it will represent a significant advance in the rational development 
of comprehensive treatment strategies, especially for those with severe disease in  whom single -agent 
therapy does not adequately reduce fracture risk. Additionally, positive results from DATA -2-EX would 
support the initiation of a larger trial assessing the anti -fracture efficacy of this approach.  
 
The Specific Aim of the Observational visit: 
This optional observational visit is specific to subjects who completed the month -15 trial but did not 
enroll in DATA -2-EX. We wish to test the hypothesis that further transitioning to intravenous 
bisphosphonate from the two treatment groups will pr event the bone loss associated with 
discontinuing these therapies and will further increase bone density.  
 
III. Subject Selection  
350 female volunteers will be screened and  70 female volunteers  will be recruited  by advertisement 
in accord with institution al guidelines for clinical studies. Recruitment flyers will be posted in approved 
locations throughout the MGH (including the MGH Bone Mineral Density Center) and email 
announcements will be sent through the Partners Clinical Research Program Network .  Letters will be 
sent to subjects identified through RSVP for Health. Additionally, advertisements w ill be published in 
local newspapers and a mailing will be sent to targeted populations, including subjects who have 
expressed an interest in one of our researc h group’s previous studies.  
 
4 
Last edited : 9/25/2019   
Subjects will be paid $50 after each completed visit (other than the screening visit) for a total of $300. 
 
Parking vouchers will be provided to subjects at each visit, including the screening visit.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
Must satisfy A and B and C and D below:  
A. women aged > 45 
 
B. postmenopausal by either of the following criteria:  
 > 36 months since last spontaneous menses;  
 or 
 > 36 months since hysterectomy, plus serum FSH > 40 units / liter.  
  
C. osteoporosis with high ri sk of fracture' by one or more of the following criteria:  
DXA spine or hip T -score ≤ - 2.5; 
or  
DXA spine or hip T -score ≤ - 2.0 plus > 1 of the following BMD -independent risk factors for 
fracture: fracture after age 50, parental hip fracture after age 50,  prior hyperthyroidism, inability 
to rise from a chair with one's arms elevated, current tobacco smoker.  
or 
DXA spine, hip, or forearm T -score ≤ - 1.0 plus > 1 adult low -trauma fracture ( low-trauma 
fracture = fracture after no trauma; or fracture after fal ling < 6 inches when stationary or 
moving slower than a run.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• confirmed serum alkaline phosphatase above upper normal limit with no explanation  
• liver disease (AST or ALT  > 2 x upper normal limit).  
• renal disease  (serum creatinine > 2. 0 mg/dl).  
• Hypocalcemia or hypercalcemia (Ca <8.5 mg/dL or >10.5 mg/dL)  
• Abnormal blood PTH (intact PTH < 10 pg/mL or > 65 pg/mL)  
• serum 25 -OH vitamin D < 20 ng/ml  
• HCT < 32%.  
• history of malignancy (except non-melanoma skin  carcinoma) or radiation therapy.  
• history of gouty arthritis.  
• significant cardiopulmonary disease including unstable coronary artery disease, stage D 
ACC/AHA heart failure or any other condition that the investigator deems may preclude the 
subject from participating safely or completing the protocol procedures.  
• major psychiatric disease that in the opinion of the investigator would preclude the subject 
from providing adequate informed consent or completing the protocol procedures.  
• excessive alcohol use or substance abuse that in the opinion o f the investigator would 
preclude the subject from providing adequate informed consent or completing the protocol 
procedures.  
• known congenital or acquired bone disease other than osteoporosis (including osteomalacia, 
hyperparathyroidism, Paget’s disease)  
• current use or use in the past 6 months of oral bisphosphonate  
• current use or use within the past 3 months of estrogens, selective estrogen receptor 
modulators, or calcitonin.  
• Current use or use in the past 6 months of denosumab  
• use of oral or parenteral gl ucocorticoids for more than 14 days within the past 6 months  
• any current or previous use of strontium , teriparatide,  or any parenteral bisphosphonate.  
 
5 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  • known sensitivity to mammalian cell -derived drug products.  
• known sensitivity to teriparatide or any of it s excipients.  
• known sensitivity to densoumab or any of its excipients.  
• Extensive dental work involving extraction or dental implant within the past 2 months or 
planned in the upcoming 2 months.  
 
 
DATA -2-EX criteria:  
Subjects completing DATA -2 will be offer ed enrollment in DATA -2-EX if they meet the same entry 
criteria outlined in DATA -2 with the following exce ptions related to fracture risk. Subjects  currently 
enrolled will be offered enrollment in DATA -2-EX by letter and  a follow -up phone call  at least 2 m onths 
prior to their 4th study visit . Subjects being recruited will be informed of the optional extension during 
the screening phone call.  
 
All subjects enrolled in DATA -2 will be eligible for DATA -2-EX or the  optional  observational visit.  
 
In addition to these DATA -2 criteria, to be enrolled in DATA -2-EX, women will be required to have an 
estimated GFR >35 (mL/min), a 25 -(OH) Vitamin -D level >20 (ng/mL), and no known allergy to 
bisphosphonates. Laboratory testing of Cr, GFR and 25 -OH vitamin D will be perf ormed within 3 
months of receiving zoledronic acid. The exclusion criteria will remain the same as the original DATA -
2 exclus ion criteria, as outlined above, with the exception that prior exposure to denosumab and 
teriparatide as part of the DATA -2 protoco l are permitted  and renal function criteria will be assessed 
by estimated GFR (rather than the creatinine level) . Zoledronic acid will not be infused if the 25 -OH 
vitamin D level is <20 ng/mL or GFR is <35 mL/min.    
 
 
IV. Subject Enrollment  
 
This outpatien t study will either be conducted at one or more of the following sites:  the General 
Clinical Research Center (GCRC), the Osteoporosis Research Center or the Endocrine Unit Clinical 
Space (all within t he Massachusetts General Hospital.   
 
The general desig n is a randomized, 2 -arm, open label study.   
 
Groups and Randomization  
Subjects will first be screened, and those who appear eligible will have a medical history and interview 
with a study investigator. Those who remain eligible will be formally accepted i nto the study by a study 
investigator, assigned to one of 4 strata based on age (above or below 65) and previous 
bisphosphonate use (previous use or none) and then randomly assigned  within each strata to one of 
the 2 treatment groups by computer -generated cards.  (1:1: ratio).  Within each of the four strata, the 
randomization block size will vary randomly to minimize the predictability of treatment assignments.  
 
The study period lasts 15 months. There will be 35 subjects in each group.  
 
All subjects compl eting the 15 -month DATA -2 trial be offered enrollment in the DATA -2-EX study.   
 
For subjects who do not enroll in DATA -2-EX, subjects may enroll for an optional observational visit. 
The observational period will start immediately after the DATA -2 study’s 1 5-month visit and will last an 
additional 12 to 24 months. During that interval, each subject will be contacted by phone.  
 
All subjects will be asked if:  
- They continued osteoporosis treatment and if so, with what drug  
 
6 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  - They have sustained any new fractures . 
 
We will request that all subjects return for one visit to complete one bone density scan of the spine 
and hip (by DXA) within 12 to 24 months of the completion of the 15 -month study. Informed consent 
for this visit will be obtained by a research assista nt. The DXA will be performed at no cost to the 
study subjects.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: (Optional one -time observational visit for only DXA may occur between month 27 and month 39 for 
subjects who do not receive zoledronic acid.)  
 
All subjects who report dietary intake of less than 1200mg of calcium daily will be given calcium 
supplementation (600mg elemental calcium) with Vitamin D (400IU). Subjects with a dietary intake > 
1200 mg will receive Vitamin D only.  
 
V. Study Procedures  
 
Telephone screening and Screening Visit : 
Members of research staff will screen all interested subjects over the telephone.  If subjects meet 
initial criteria and are interested in the study, a member of the study staff will schedule a screening 
visit wherein the subject will sign  a separate “screening only” consent form.  This consent form will 
allow for a blood draw and bone mineral density testing.  
 
Prior to signing this screening only consent form, subjects will be offered the option to speak with a 
physician investigator if th ey wish or if they have questions that can't be answered by the RA.  
 
At this visit, bone mineral density of the spine and hip will be obtained and the following will be 
measured in serum or blood:  
• PTH 
• 25-(OH) Vitamin D  
• Routine chemistries (Calcium, Phospha te, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, ALT)  
• Complete Blood Count  
• FSH (if necessary because of prior hysterectomy)  
 
Visit 1: 
If the subject meets the above BMD and laboratory criteria, she will then be scheduled for  visit  1.  At 
this visit, a study physician will obtain written informed consent for participation in the complete study.  
If subjects require more time to consider participating after reading the consent form the screening  

 
7 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  visit will not continue.  If the subject is ready to sign the consent form, the study physician will then 
perform a history and physical on her. If all inclusion/exclusion criteria are met, subjects will then 
continue visit 1 and the subsequent visits.  
 
Visit 1 -6: 
These visits will occur at the following times:  
Visit 1 (month 0)  
Visit 2 (month 3 +/ - 2 weeks)  
Visit 3 (month 9 +/ - 2 weeks)  
Visit 4 (month 15 + 6/- 2 weeks)  
Visit 5 (month 27 +/ -2 weeks)  
Visit 6 (month 42 +/ -2 weeks)  
 
If enrolled in optional observational study, these visits will occur at the following times:  
Visit 1 ( month 0)  
Visit 2 (month 3 +/ - 2 weeks)  
Visit 3 (month 9 +/ - 2 weeks)  
Visit 4 (month 15 +/ - 2 weeks)  
Visit 5 (month 27, up to month 39)  Visit 5 will consist of obtaining informed consent and DXA hip and 
spine scan only. A blood draw will not be performed.  
 
 
Subjects will be seen at MGH prior to 10 a.m. and will be instructed to be fasting, and to skip that 
day's PTH injection (if any).  The following blood/serum tests will be measured:  
 
• Routine chemistries (Calcium, Phosphate, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine,  ALT, PTH, 25OH vit 
D) 
• Complete Blood Count  
• Serum CTX (pooled assay  of de -identified samples  at end of study  to be analyzed by 
collaborator Dr. Richard Eastell ) 
• Serum osteocalcin (pooled assay of de -identified samples at end of study  to be analyzed by 
collaborator Dr. Richard Eastell ) 
• Serum PINP (pooled assay  of de -identified samples  at end of study  to be analyzed by 
collaborator Dr. Richard Eastell ) 
 
After which the subjects will be given breakfast, and then have the following procedures per table 
below:  
 
The following procedures are performed at each visit:  
 Screen  Visit 1  Visit 2  Visit 3  Visit 4  Visit 5  Visit 6  
Month   0 3 9 15 27 42 
        
Routine and hormonal lab 
testing  X X X X X √ √ 
History and Physical Exam  X    √   
Dispense Medications   X X X √   
Bone Turnover Markers   X X X X √ √ 
BMD by DXA of PA spine, hip, 
and 1/3 distal radius  X X X X X √ ,* √ 
HR-pQCT of radius and tibia   X X X X √ √ 
QCT of the hip and spine   X   X  √ 
 
8 
Last edited : 9/25/2019   
X = DATA -2 procedures  
√ = DATA -2-EX procedures  
*= observational visit , DXA spine and hip only  
 
After blood sampling, d enosumab  (sold under the brand name Prolia) will be administered (visits 2 
and 3 only).  Additionally, at visit 1 subjects will be train ed in the use of the teriparatide pen (sold 
under the brand name Forteo) and will give themselves the first injection while observed by a 
member of the study staff. At each visit participants will return their used and unused Forteo  
injection pens, so we  can estimate and record the unused volume in each pen and thereby estimate 
her compliance with Forteo  use.  All subjects in DATA -2-EX receive a single 5 -mg infusion of 
zoledronic acid at month 15.  
 
Study funds  and NIH funding  will cover the costs of all study procedures, ancillary medications and 
the costs of the study drugs if not covered by insurance or the manufacturer.  
 
Note:   Any remaining serum samples will be saved and may be used to measure other variables 
related to bone metabolism at a future ti me. Samples will be stored with  subject code number  and 
date and time of sampling in a locked –80 degree freezer and only approved study personnel will 
have access to the samples. It is understood that any future use of samples must be reviewed and 
approve d separately by the HRC prior to their use.  Personal -Identifying information will be removed 
before any sample is sent out for analysis to a non -Partners affiliated institution.  
 
Note: The Principal Investigator may end the subject's participation without  the subject's consent in 
order to protect the health of the subject, if the subject is unable to attend to study visits, if the sponsor 
decides to stop the study, or due to other administrative reasons.  
 
 
Interpretation of results and study limitations of  the proposed clinical trial:  
This 15 -month RCT will provide scientifically important and potentially groundbreaking clinically 
relevant findings. The combination of anabolic therapy with BPs has not been promising  but the 
DATA study demonstrates that DMAB , through its distinct mechanism of action, may prove to be a 
more effective inhibitor of osteoclast activity in the presence of a potent anabolic stimulus. By 
increasing the TPTD dose, we hypothesize that we will maintain or improve bone formation rates 
while resorption remains powerfully inhibited. If the combination of this higher TPTD dose and 
DMAB increases BMD, improves bone quality, and increase estimated bone strength more than the 
combination of high -dose TPTD and alendronate and the combination of  standard -dose TPTD and 
DMAB, it will represent a significant step forward in osteoporosis therapy. Additionally, analysis of 
the QCT and HR -pQCT assessments will potentially confirm the robust effects of DMAB and TPTD 
co-administration on the cortical com partment of the axial and appendicular skeleton.  
 
 
VI. Study Endpoint and Statistical Analysis  
 
The primary endpoint is the change in PA spine BMD (DXA) between treatment groups at 15 months.  
The method of analysis will be a longitudinal mixed effects ANO VA. This model includes the subject 
level random intercept, time, fixed treatment effect, and the (group)X(time) interaction term. The 
inference of the regression coefficient associated with the interaction term (difference in slopes) will 
determine differ ences between treatment groups. The model will allow us to include all available 
partial observations for the non -completers and this approach will provide more valid estimates (with 
increased efficiency) of the time effects than the last value carried for ward method.  
 
 
9 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  Calculation of Power  
For purposes of estimation, we calculated the sample based on a between -group comparison of the 
mean intra -individual treatment effect over the treatment period for the primary and secondary 
endpoints based on the our o bservations of the standard deviation of the 12 -month treatment effects 
observed in the DATA study. We predict that 30 subjects in each group will complete the study. This 
represents an 86% completion rate, a conservative estimate based on our current with drawal rate of 
less than 6% in DATA.  With this group size, the table below shows our estimated power calculations 
using the Hsu (With Best) multiple comparison test at a 5% significance level and assuming 80% 
power. The Hsu completers -based power analysis  is conservative, and the actual analysis will likely 
attain greater power as the full analysis set can be utilized.  
 
These detectable between -group differences are at the lower lim it of what is considered clinically 
important and generally correspond to the between -group difference that we observed in the DATA 
study.  
 
VII. Risk and Discomforts  
 
Denosumab  
DMAB is an FDA approved medication used to treat osteoporosis in various popul ations, including 
postmenopausal women. More than 13,500 patients have been treated with DMAB in clinical studies, 
and it is generally well tolerated. In clinical studies, it has been reported that DMAB may uncommonly 
produce the following side -effects: ec zema, serious skin infections, low blood calcium (which can 
cause tingling in the fingers or around the mouth, muscle cramps, or abnormal heart rate), pain in the 
joints or extremities, high blood cholesterol, dizziness, cough, difficulty emptying the blad der, and 
decreased skin sensation. Hypocalcemia has been very rarely reported in absence of renal failure. 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw has been reported in the oncology clinical trial program in patients treated 
with DMAB but its relative incidence compared t o placebo is unclear . Atypical, low -energy, or low 
trauma fractures of the femoral shaft have been reported patients who received DMAB. The incidence 
of atypical femur fractures is not well -defined but appears to be extremely rare. If a study subject 
prese nts with thigh or groin pain, she will be immediately evaluated to rule out an incomplete femur 
fracture.  Parameter  Standard Deviation of 12 -month 
change in subjects receiving 
combination therapy in DATA.  Minimum detectable 
difference at a 5% 
significance level assuming 
80% power  
DXA PA Spine (primary 
endpoint)  3.8%  2.5%  
DXA Fem. Neck  4.3%  2.8%  
DXA Total Hip  2.8%  1.9%  
Distal Radius Total vBMD  2.2%  1.5%  
Distal Radius HR -pQCT Cortical 
vBMD  1.5%  1.0%  
Distal Radius HR -pQCT Cortical 
Thickness  4.5%  2.9%  
Distal Tibia Total vBMD  2.1%  1.4%  
Distal Tibia HR -pQCT Cortical 
vBMD  1.5%  1.0%  
Distal Tibia HR -pQCT Cortical 
Thickness  3.1%  2.4%  
CTX 35% 23% 
Osteocalcin  27% 18% 
P1NP  32% 21% 
 
10 
Last edited : 9/25/2019   
Teriparatide  
TPTD is an FDA approved medication used to treat postmenopausal women with osteoporosis who 
are at high risk of fracture. The most comm only reported side effects of TPTD are overall pain, 
asthenia, nausea, headache, leg cramps, sinus tachycardia, arthralgia, rhinitis), and dizziness. TPTD 
can cause transien t hypercalcemia, which is generally mild, even with the 40 -μg dose 13. Repeated 
daily administration of TPTD in high doses to rodents causes dose -dependent osteoscle rosis, bony 
obliteration of the marrow space, and extra -medullary hematopoiesis, followed by osteosarcomas.   
The relevance of these findings to humans is unclear and will remain so for many years, because 
osteosarcoma is rare in adults (4 cases/million/ye ar). Eli Lilly and the FDA are monitoring the 
incidence of osteosarcoma in TPTD treated patients and have not reported a linkage thus far.  
 
The dose of TPTD cho sen (40 -μg) is higher than that currently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (20 -μg once daily) but the same as doses used in other clinical studies, including our 
own. Studies from our group were performed under an IND to Dr Robert Neer (co -investigator) and 
include the following:  
 
Study  Population  Total subjects 
receiving TPTD 
40-μg SC daily  Duration  Hypercalcemia 
incidence (24 -hrs 
post-dose)  
Finkelstein et al. 
NEJM 2003 24 men 55 24 months  <1% 
Finkelstein et al. 
JCEM 2010 23 postmenopausal 
women  62 24 months  <2% 
 
In the largest study of the 40 -μg dose of teriparatide 13, 541 women received the 20 -μg dose and 544 
women received the 40 -μg dose for a mean if 19 months. In this study, both doses were generally well 
tolerated and differences in side effects between doses were small. Side effects included nausea (40 -
μg 18%, 20 -μg 8%, placebo 8%), headache (40 -μg 13%, 20 -μg 8%, placebo 8%), dizziness (40 -μg 
6%, 20 -μg 9%, placebo 6%), and leg cramps (40 -μg 1%, 20 -μg 3%, placebo 1%). Additionally, the 40 -
μg dose was well -tolerated in a group of 122 postmenopausal women when co -administered with 
hormone replacement therapy for 24 month 15. 
 
Zoledronic Acid  
The most common side effects associated with zoledronic acid include flu -like symptoms (e.g., fever, 
chills, muscle/joint aches) occurring after the infusion. The majority of these symptoms occur within 
the first 3 days following drug administr ation and usually resolve within 3 days of onset but resolution 
can take up to 7 -14 days. Taking acetaminophen or ibuprofen after the infusion can mitigate these 
symptoms. Other common side effects include nausea, tiredness, dizziness, headache, or 
pain/re dness/swelling at the injection site.  
 
Renal toxicity: Zoledronic acid, has been associated with renal impairment and in rare cases, acute 
renal failure. There is a transient increase in serum creatinine within 10 days of dosing in 1.8% of 
zoledronic -acid treated patients versus 0.8% of placebo -treated patients.  Renal function is being 
monitored closely in both DATA -2 and DATA -2-EX and patients will be required to have an estimated 
GFR > 50 (mL/min) to receive zoledronic acid  5mg. Subjects with GFR 3 5-50 would receive zoledronic 
acid 2 mg.  As per the approved product labeling, the infusion time for zoledronic acid will be at least 
15 minutes and will be followed by a 10 mL normal saline flush of the intravenous line.  
 
Hypocalcemia:  In clinical trials of zol edronic acid without Vitamin D pre -treatment, approximately 0.2% 
of patients had notable declines of serum calcium levels to values less than 7.5 mg/dL after each 
zoledronic acid administration. No symptomatic cases of hypocalcemia were observed in clinica l trials 
 
11 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  if they had been pretreated with Vitamin D. All patients in DATA -2-EX are being treated with Vitamin D 
and Vitamin D levels are being monitored in both DATA -2 and DATA -2-EX. Patients are required to 
have a pre -treatment 25-(OH) Vitamin -D level ≥20 (ng/mL).  Patients who are administered the renal 
dose of zoledronic acid  (2mg)  will be asked to return for bloodwork 10 days (+/ - 3 days) post -infusion 
to assess calcium and creatinine levels.  
 
Osteonecrosis of the Jaw:  Osteonecrosis of the jaw is an extr emely rare side effect of zoledronic acid 
when given at the doses recommended for osteoporosis treatment. Subjects will not be enrolled in 
DATA -2-EX if they have any major dental work planned during the projected course of the study 
(extractions or implant s). An oral examination will be performed by a study doctor prior to 
administration of zoledronic acid.  
 
Atypical Femur Fractures:  Atypical, low -energy, or low trauma fractures of the femoral shaft have 
been reported in bisphosphonate -treated patients. Aty pical femur fractures may be unilateral or 
bilateral and some patients report prodromal dull or aching pain in the thigh in the weeks to months 
before a complete fracture occurs. The incidence of atypical femur fractures is not well -defined but 
appears to be extremely rare and at least somewhat dose -dependent. If a study subject presents with 
thigh or groin pain, she will be immediately evaluated to rule out an incomplete femur fracture.   
 
 
Imaging studies  
Over the 15-month  study period, subjects will recei ve the following imaging studies:  
 
Study Type  DATA -2 DATA -2-EX Radiation 
exposure per 
scan  
DXA of the lumbar spine, hip, 
and radius.  5 (including 
screen)  2 1 mrem  
HR-pQCT of the distal tibia 
and radius  4 2 <0.5 mrem  
QCT of the hip and spine  2 1 510 mrem  
 
The total dose for the  DATA -2 15-month study is therefore ~1000 mrem . The total dose for DATA -2-
EX (months 15 -42)  is ~500 mrem..  This amount of radiation is equal to the background radiation one 
is exposed from the earth and sky over 3.25 years (for DATA -2) and 1.5 years (for DATA -2-EX).  
 
The total dose for the observational visit alone is 0.05 mSv, equal to backg round radiation one is 
exposed from the earth and sky over 3 days.   
 
VIII. Potential Benefits  
The medications given in this study have been  shown to reduce fracture risk as well or better than all 
other approved osteoporosis therapies and subjects can expect to derive the benefit from these 
medications. It is hoped that the knowledge gained from this study will improve osteoporosis care.  
 
IX. Monitoring and Quality Assurance  
 
A study physician will review all laboratory test results. Subjects will be discontinued from the study if 
they have any finding that in the opinion of the study physician requires withdrawal from the study.  
Disqualifying  findings will be communicated to both the subject and her primary care physician. If the 
subject does not have a primary care physician, the principal investigator will coordinate appropriate 
follow -up with a physician of the subject's choosing. Hypercalc emia is a well -described complication of 
teriparatide treatment.  Elevated blood calcium levels will be handled in the manner recently 
 
12 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  recommended by Antoniucci et al (see below)  57.  
 
 
 
If serum calcium concentration is above 11.2 mg/dl, teriparatide will be stopped and serum calcium 
measured at least daily until normal.  Thereafter teriparatide will be resumed every other day and the 
above algorithm followe d, starting at "Reduce PTH to every other day".  
 
The Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) that is currently monitoring DATA 1 will monitor DATA 2. 
This DSMB is comprised of experienced clinical investigators: Dr. Deborah Wexler (Chair), Dr. Carl 
Pallais, an d Douglass Hayden (biostatistician).  Adverse events and serious adverse events will be 
reported to all appropriate regulatory bodies as required by current regulations.  
 
A NIAMS -appointed DSMB will provide safety oversight for DATA -2-EX. This DSMB will me et as per 
NIAMS/KAI guidelines. As per NIAMS reporting requirements, all adverse events will be reported in 
the routine safety reports and all serious adverse events regardless of relatedness will be reported to 
the DSMB Safety Officer and the NIAMS, throu gh KAI (NIAMS Executive Secretary), within 48 hours 
of the PI receiving notification of the events.  
 
Adverse events or other unanticipated problems will be reported to the Partners Human Research 
Committee (PHRC) within 7 calendar days/5 working days of th e date the investigator first becomes 
aware of the problem  as described in the PHRC policy on Adverse Event Reporting and 
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others.
 
13 
Last edited : 9/25/2019   
 
 REFERENCES  
 
1. Bone health and osteoporosis: A re port of the Surgeon General. In: United States Department 
of Health and Human Services PHS, ed.: Office of the Surgeon General; 2004.  
2. Cummings SR, Melton LJ. Epidemiology and outcomes of osteoporotic fractures. Lancet 
2002;359:1761 -7. 
3. Bliuc D, Nguyen  ND, Milch VE, Nguyen TV, Eisman JA, Center JR. Mortality risk associated 
with low -trauma osteoporotic fracture and subsequent fracture in men and women. Jama 
2009;301:513 -21. 
4. Papapoulos SE. Use of bisphosphonates in the management of postmenopausal ost eoporosis. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 2011;1218:15 -32. 
5. Cosman F. Parathyroid hormone treatment for osteoporosis. Current opinion in endocrinology, 
diabetes, and obesity 2008;15:495 -501. 
6. MacLean C, Newberry S, Maglione M, et al. System atic review: comparative effectiveness of 
treatments to prevent fractures in men and women with low bone density or osteoporosis. Annals of 
internal medicine 2008;148:197 -213. 
7. Dempster DW, Zhou H, Recker RR, et al. Skeletal histomorphometry in subjects on 
teriparatide or zoledronic acid therapy (SHOTZ) study: a randomized controlled trial. The Journal of 
clinical endocrinology and metabolism 2012;97:2799 -808. 
8. Ma YL, Marin F, Stepan J, et al. Comparative effects of teriparatide and strontium ranelate i n 
the periosteum of iliac crest biopsies in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. Bone 2011;48:972 -
8. 
9. Stepan JJ, Burr DB, Li J, et al. Histomorphometric changes by teriparatide in alendronate -
pretreated women with osteoporosis. Osteoporosis internatio nal : a journal established as result of 
cooperation between the European Foundation for Osteoporosis and the National Osteoporosis 
Foundation of the USA 2010;21:2027 -36. 
10. Dobnig H, Stepan JJ, Burr DB, et al. Teriparatide reduces bone microdamage accumu lation in 
postmenopausal women previously treated with alendronate. J Bone Miner Res 2009;24:1998 -2006.  
11. Recker RR, Marin F, Ish -Shalom S, et al. Comparative effects of teriparatide and strontium 
ranelate on bone biopsies and biochemical markers of bone  turnover in postmenopausal women with 
osteoporosis. J Bone Miner Res 2009;24:1358 -68. 
12. Jobke B, Pfeifer M, Minne HW. Teriparatide following bisphosphonates: initial and long -term 
effects on microarchitecture and bone remodeling at the human iliac crest . Connect Tissue Res 
2009;50:46 -54. 
13. Neer RM, Arnaud CD, Zanchetta JR, et al. Effect of parathyroid hormone (1 -34) on fractures 
and bone mineral density in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. The New England journal of 
medicine 2001;344:1434 -41. 
14. Chen P, Satterwhite JH, Licata AA, et al. Early changes in biochemical markers of bone 
formation predict BMD response to teriparatide in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. J Bone 
Miner Res 2005;20:962 -70. 
15. Ste-Marie LG, Schwartz SL, Hossain A, Des aiah D, Gaich GA. Effect of teriparatide 
[rhPTH(1 -34)] on BMD when given to postmenopausal women receiving hormone replacement 
therapy. J Bone Miner Res 2006;21:283 -91. 
16. Orwoll ES, Scheele WH, Paul S, et al. The effect of teriparatide [human parathyroid  hormone 
(1-34)] therapy on bone density in men with osteoporosis. Journal of bone and mineral research : the 
official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 2003;18:9 -17. 
 
14 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  17. Ma YL, Zeng Q, Donley DW, et al. Teriparatide increases b one formation in modeling and 
remodeling osteons and enhances IGF -II immunoreactivity in postmenopausal women with 
osteoporosis. J Bone Miner Res 2006;21:855 -64. 
18. Keaveny TM, McClung MR, Wan X, Kopperdahl DL, Mitlak BH, Krohn K. Femoral strength 
in oste oporotic women treated with teriparatide or alendronate. Bone 2012;50:165 -70. 
19. Fox J, Miller MA, Newman MK, Recker RR, Turner CH, Smith SY. Effects of daily treatment 
with parathyroid hormone 1 -84 for 16 months on density, architecture and biomechanical  properties of 
cortical bone in adult ovariectomized rhesus monkeys. Bone 2007;41:321 -30. 
20. Compston J. The use of combination therapy in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. 
Endocrine 2012;41:11 -8. 
21. Pinkerton JV, Dalkin AC. Combination thera py for treatment of osteoporosis: A review. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 2007;197:559 -65. 
22. Black DM, Greenspan SL, Ensrud KE, et al. The effects of parathyroid hormone and 
alendronate alone or in combination in postmenopausal osteoporosis. The New England journa l of 
medicine 2003;349:1207 -15. 
23. Finkelstein JS, Wyland JJ, Lee H, Neer RM. Effects of teriparatide, alendronate, or both in 
women with postmenopausal osteoporosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:1838 -45. 
24. Finkelstein JS, Hayes A, Hunzelman JL, Wyla nd JJ, Lee H, Neer RM. The effects of 
parathyroid hormone, alendronate, or both in men with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1216 -26. 
25. Finkelstein JS, Leder BZ, Burnett SM, et al. Effects of teriparatide, alendronate, or both on 
bone turnover in oste oporotic men. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism 
2006;91:2882 -7. 
26. Cosman F, Eriksen EF, Recknor C, et al. Effects of intravenous zoledronic acid plus 
subcutaneous teriparatide [rhPTH(1 -34)] in postmenopausal osteoporosis. Journal of bo ne and mineral 
research : the official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 2011;26:503 -11. 
27. Cusano NE, Bilezikian JP. Combination antiresorptive and osteoanabolic therapy for 
osteoporosis: we are not there yet. Curr Med Res Opi n 2011;27:1705 -7. 
28. Bilezikian JP. Combination anabolic and antiresorptive therapy for osteoporosis: opening the 
anabolic window. Curr Osteoporos Rep 2008;6:24 -30. 
29. Valenta A, Roschger P, Fratzl -Zelman N, et al. Combined treatment with PTH (1 -34) and OPG 
increases bone volume and uniformity of mineralization in aged ovariectomized rats. Bone 
2005;37:87 -95. 
30. Kostenuik PJ, Capparelli C, Morony S, et al. OPG and PTH -(1-34) have additive effects on 
bone density and mechanical strength in osteopenic ovar iectomized rats. Endocrinology 
2001;142:4295 -304. 
31. Dempster DW, Lambing CL, Kostenuik PJ, Grauer A. Role of RANK ligand and denosumab, a 
targeted RANK ligand inhibitor, in bone health and osteoporosis: a review of preclinical and clinical 
data. Clin The r 2012;34:521 -36. 
32. Lacey DL, Timms E, Tan HL, et al. Osteoprotegerin ligand is a cytokine that regulates 
osteoclast differentiation and activation. Cell 1998;93:165 -76. 
33. Yasuda H, Shima N, Nakagawa N, et al. Osteoclast differentiation factor is a lig and for 
osteoprotegerin/osteoclastogenesis -inhibitory factor and is identical to TRANCE/RANKL. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:3597 -602. 
34. Brown JP, Prince RL, Deal C, et al. Comparison of the Effect of Denosumab and Alendronate 
on Bone Mineral Density and Biochemical Markers of Bone Turnover in Postmenopausal Women 
With Low Bone Mass: A Randomized, Blinded, Phase 3 Trial. J Bone Miner Res 2009:1 -34. 
35. Brown JP, Prince RL, Deal C, et al. Comparison of the effect of denosumab and alendronate on 
BMD and biochemical markers of bone turnover in postmenopausal women with low bone mass: a 
 
15 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  randomized, blinded, phase 3 trial. Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of the 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 2009;24:153 -61. 
36. Reid IR, Miller PD, Brown JP, et al. Effects of denosumab on bone histomorphometry: the 
FREEDOM and STAND studies. Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of the 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 2010;25:2256 -65. 
37. Simon JA,  Recknor C, Moffett AH, Jr., et al. Impact of denosumab on the peripheral skeleton 
of postmenopausal women with osteoporosis: bone density, mass, and strength of the radius, and wrist 
fracture. Menopause 2012.  
38. McClung MR, Lewiecki EM, Geller ML, et al. Effect of denosumab on bone mineral density 
and biochemical markers of bone turnover: 8 -year results of a phase 2 clinical trial. Osteoporos Int 
2012.  
39. McClung MR, Zanchetta JR, Hoiseth A, et al. Denosumab Densitometric Changes Assessed by 
Quantitative Computed Tomography at the Spine and Hip in Postmenopausal Women With 
Osteoporosis. J Clin Densitom 2012.  
40. Bolognese MA, Teglbjaerg CS, Zanchetta JR, et al. Denosumab Significantly Increases DXA 
BMD at Both  Trabecular and Cortical Sites: Results From the FREEDOM Study. J Clin Densitom 
2012.  
41. Miller PD, Wagman RB, Peacock M, et al. Effect of denosumab on bone mineral density and 
biochemical markers of bone turnover: six -year results of a phase 2 clinical t rial. The Journal of 
clinical endocrinology and metabolism 2011;96:394 -402. 
42. Bone HG, Bolognese MA, Yuen CK, et al. Effects of denosumab on bone mineral density and 
bone turnover in postmenopausal women. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabol ism 
2008;93:2149 -57. 
43. Seeman E, Delmas PD, Hanley DA, et al. Microarchitectural deterioration of cortical and 
trabecular bone: differing effects of denosumab and alendronate. Journal of bone and mineral research 
: the official journal of the American So ciety for Bone and Mineral Research 2010;25:1886 -94. 
44. Cummings SR, San Martin J, McClung MR, et al. Denosumab for prevention of fractures in 
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2009;361:756 -65. 
45. Leder BZ, Tsai JN, Uihlein AV, et al. Two Years of Denosumab and Teriparatide 
Administration in Postmenopausal Women with Osteoporosis (The DATA Extension Study): a 
Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014:jc20134440.  
46. Tsai JN, Uihlein AV, Lee H, et al. Teriparatide and den osumab, alone or combined, in women 
with postmenopausal osteoporosis: the DATA study randomised trial. Lancet 2013.  
47. Muschitz C, Kocijan R, Fahrleitner -Pammer A, et al. Overlapping and Continued Alendronate 
or Raloxifene Administration in Patients on Te riparatide: Effects on Areal and Volumetric Bone 
Mineral Density The CONFORS Study. J Bone Miner Res 2014.  
48. Muschitz C, Kocijan R, Fahrleitner -Pammer A, Lung S, Resch H. Antiresorptives overlapping 
ongoing teriparatide treatment result in additional inc reases in bone mineral density. J Bone Miner Res 
2013;28:196 -205. 
49. Leder BZ, Neer RM, Wyland JJ, Lee HW, Burnett -Bowie SM, Finkelstein JS. Effects of 
teriparatide treatment and discontinuation in postmenopausal women and eugonadal men with 
osteoporosis.  The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism 2009;94:2915 -21. 
50. Miller PD, Bolognese MA, Lewiecki EM, et al. Effect of denosumab on bone density and 
turnover in postmenopausal women with low bone mass after long -term continued, discontinued, and  
restarting of therapy: a randomized blinded phase 2 clinical trial. Bone 2008;43:222 -9. 
51. Black DM, Delmas PD, Eastell R, et al. Once -yearly zoledronic acid for treatment of 
postmenopausal osteoporosis. The New England journal of medicine 2007;356:1809 -22. 
 
16 
Last edited : 9/25/2019  52. Bolland MJ, Grey AB, Horne AM, et al. Effects of intravenous zoledronate on bone turnover 
and BMD persist for at least 24 months. Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of 
the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 2008 ;23:1304 -8. 
53. Grey A, Bolland M, Wattie D, Horne A, Gamble G, Reid IR. Prolonged antiresorptive activity 
of zoledronate: a randomized, controlled trial. Journal of bone and mineral research : the official 
journal of the American Society for Bone and Mine ral Research 2010;25:2251 -5. 
54. Grey A, Bolland MJ, Horne A, et al. Five years of anti -resorptive activity after a single dose of 
zoledronate --results from a randomized double -blind placebo -controlled trial. Bone 2012;50:1389 -93. 
55. Grey A, Bolland MJ, W attie D, Horne A, Gamble G, Reid IR. The antiresorptive effects of a 
single dose of zoledronate persist for two years: a randomized, placebo -controlled trial in osteopenic 
postmenopausal women. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism 2009;94:5 38-44. 
56. Reid IR, Black DM, Eastell R, et al. Reduction in the risk of clinical fractures after a single 
dose of zoledronic Acid 5 milligrams. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism 
2013;98:557 -63. 
57. Antoniucci DM, Sellmeyer DE, Bilezikia n JP, et al. Elevations in serum and urinary calcium 
with parathyroid hormone (1 -84) with and without alendronate for osteoporosis. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2007;92:942 -7. 
 