1 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 A Prospective Randomized Multicenter Trial Comparing Performance of Two 
Intracorporeal Lithotripters for Removal of Large Renal Calculi  
 
The ShockPulse -SE vs. Trilogy Trial  
 
 
  
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION PLAN 
  
Coordinating Principal 
Investigator  Amy E. Krambeck, MD  
Michael O. Koch Professor of Urology  
Indiana University Health Physicians  
1801 N. Senate Boulevard, Suite 220  
Indianapolis, IN 46202  
 Tel: 317 -962- 3700 
Email: akrambeck@iuhealth.org  
 
 
 
 
2 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 Protocol Synopsis  
A Prospective Randomized Multicenter Trial  Comparing Performance of Two 
Intracorporeal Lithotripters for Removal of Large Renal Calculi - The 
ShockPulse -SE vs. Trilogy  Trial  
Study 
Objective(s) To compare the performance, as measured by the stone clearance rate at 
time of percutaneous nephrolithotomy, of the ShockPulse-SE Lithotripsy System to the Trilogy Lithotrite.  
Study Devices 1. ShockPulse -SE Lithotripsy System with the 3.76 mm probe  
2. Trilogy Lithotrite with 3.9  mm probe  
Indications for 
Use Both devices are cleared for use in the USA for the following indications:  
1. The ShockPulse -SE Lithotripsy System  is intended to be used for 
fragmentation of urinary tract calculi in the kidney, urete r, and 
bladder. 
2. The Trilogy  Lithotrite  is intended to be used to fragment urinary 
tract calculi in the kidney, ureter, and bladder. 
Device Sizes 1. Shock Pulse -SE 3.76 mm lithotripsy probe  
2. Trilogy 3.9 mm Probe  
Study Design Prospective, randomized, multicenter, 2 arm, comparative trial  
Planned Number 
of Subjects  N=100  
 
Planned Number 
of 
Investigational Sites  / Countries  A total of 3 sites in the USA  
Primary 
Endpoint  Stone clearance rate defined as the kidney stone surface area measured by 
pre-operative computed tomography (CT) scan divided by the time to 
remove the targeted stone burden.   
• Time to remove the targeted stone burden is measured at time the lithotripter unit starts fragmenting the stone to time all fragments are removed from the kidney based on visual inspection.  This is prior to final visual inspection of the kidney with a flexible nephroscope. 
3 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020   
4 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 Additional 
Endpoints  Additional endpoints include the following:  
1. Device malfunctions 
2. All complications measured by the Clavien Classification of 
Surgical Complications 
3. Stone free status as defined by the presence or absence of stone material on postoperative CT imaging and at final follow up  
• Stone free status must be assessed postoperative day 1 by 
CT scan.  
Method of 
Assigning Patients to Treatment  The patients will be block randomized 1:1 to either stone removal with the 
Trilogy or the ShockPulse –SE device.  
Follow- up 
Schedule  1. Baseline (Clinic Visit) – within 3 months prior to surgical procedure  
2. Procedure (Hospital Visit)  
• Stone free status may be assessed at this time by CT scan on Postoperative day 1 
3. 6-12 Week Follow -up Visit (Clinic Visit)  
• Stone free status may be assessed at this time by KUB scan and/or ultrasound, or CT scan  
4. End of Study 
• End of study will be reached after completion of the 6 -12 Week s 
Follow- up Visit, subject withdrawal or lost to follow -up, 
whichever occurs first.  
Study Duration  It is anticip ated that this study will take 12  months to complete once IRB 
approval is obtained at all participating locations.  
 
  
5 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 Key Inclusion 
Criteria  1. ≥ 18 years of age  
2. Stone burden > 1.5 cm as measured on preoperative CT scan  
3. Patient is scheduled to undergo a percutaneous nephrolithotomy 
procedure 
4. Willing and able to provide informed consent 
Key Exclusion Criteria  1. Pregnant  
2. Active urinary tract infection  
3. Prior shock wave lithotripsy within 3 months of study procedure 
4. Multiple percutaneous access sites are anticipated  
5. Unable or unwilling to provide informed consent 
Statistical Methods   
Primary Statistical Hypothesis  We hypothesize that the Trilogy will increase the stone clearance rate by 
25% compared to the Shockpulse- SE 
Statistical Test Method  Outcomes between treatment groups will be assessed using a t -test to 
compare means.  Values of p <0.05 will be considered significant. 
Sample Size Parameters  For simplicity, sample size calculations were performed using a two -sided 
Student t-test with a power of 90% and a significance level of alpha = 0.05.  
The primary outcome of interest is the clearance rate of the targeted stone burden.  Preliminary in vitro data shows a reduction of approximately 50% in the average lithotripter clearance time of a 1 cm
3 BegoStone for the 
Trilogy lithotrite compared to the ShockPulse -SE.  Given the increased 
variability of use in vivo and across subjects, a more conservative difference was considered for sample size estimation.  Assuming a 25% improvement in clearance rate that results in an effect size of 0.7, a sample 
size of 44 subjects in each group is required. To account for the possibility 
of unevaluable data a total of 100 patients, 50 in each group will be 
enrolled. 
 
 
6 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 Introduction  
Large and complex renal calculi, defined as those with a maximum diameter of ≥ 1.5 cm, can be 
removed from the upper urinary tract by percutaneous nephrolithotomy but the stones usually require 
fragmentation in order to remove them through the access site.  There are a number of commercially available  intracorporeal lithotripters used to fragment or break kidney stones to allow elimination 
including pneumatic, ultrasonic, and combination devices.  Each technology has its own relative advantages and disadvantages.  
New versions of intracorporeal lithotri pter devices have been introduced with improvements meant to 
address prior functional limitations such as probe clogging or breaking and cumbersome hand piece design.  
 
The Trilogy  lithotrite is the newest generation device  stone fragmentation device from Boston Scientific. 
The Trilogy device uses unique technology to efficiently fragment and remove stone material, superior 
to other devices on the market based on preliminary bench testing.   From Olympus, the ShockPulse-SE 
Lithotripsy System (Cybersonics, Er ie, PA, USA  is a constant ultrasonic wave energy lithotripter with 
intermittent shock wave (ballistic/mechanical) energy .  The ShockPulse-SE has a single probe design with 
an OD of 3.76 mm which allows for larger sized stone fragments to be vacuumed from the urothelium.  
The larger, single lumen also allows for a high flow rate to reduce probe clogging events.  The end result 
is faster stone clearance rates based on in vitro studies (company brochure).
2 
 
The objective of this study is to compare the perform ance, as measured by the stone clearance rate at 
time of percutaneous nephrolithotomy, of the ShockPulse-SE Lithotripsy System to the Trilogy lithotrite 
when used for large complex renal calculi. 
2. Device Description 
The Trilogy has been FDA cleared for fragmentation of urinary tract calculi in the kidney, ureter, and bladder.  Trilogy  is a combined piezoelectric/pneumatic device capable of fragmenting calculi and 
aspirating stone debris.  The novel technology in Trilo gy has been demonstrated in bench testing to 
more quickly disintegrate stones  compared to other devices .  The following components are included in 
the Trilogy System:  
  
7 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 REF Description 
Trilogy  Parts  Trilogy  Lithotrite 
M0068402010  Swiss LithoClast® Trilogy Console  
M0068402030  Swiss LithoClast® Trilogy Handpiece Kit  
M0068402050  Swiss LithoClast® Trilogy Foot Switch  
M0068403590  Trilogy Reusable Torque Wrench  
M0068401890  Quick Guide  
M0068401810  Stone Catcher Holder  
M0068401800  HDMI -VDI cable (10m)  
M0068401820  Filling Bottle  
M0068401830  Bottle of Demineralized Water (2.5l)  
M0068401850  Power Cord (US - 6m) 
M0068401860  Swiss LithoClast® Trilogy System IFU  
M0068403540  3.9mm x 350mm Trilogy Probe Kit  
M0068403550  3.9mm x 440mm Trilogy Probe Kit  
M0068402980  Stone Catcher for Trilogy  
 
The ShockPulse-SE Lithotripsy System has been FDA cleared fragmentation of urinary tract calculi in the 
kidney, ureter, and bladder.  The ShockPulse-SE System is an electromechanical device capable of fragmenting calculi and aspirating stone debris.  The novel technology in the ShockPulse-SE Lithotripsy System uses a single transducer and proprietary ShockPulse technology to generate both low -frequency 
mechanical impacts and high-frequency ultrasonic energy which quickly disintegrates stones.  The following components are included in the ShockPulse System:  
 
REF Description  
SPL-S ShockPulse-SE Lithotripsy System  
SPL-T ShockPulse Lithotripsy Transducer  
SPL-CSL ShockPulse Lithotripsy Cleaning Stylet - Large  
SPL-W ShockPulse Lithotripsy Wrench  
SPL-PC ShockPulse Lithotripsy Power Cord  
SPL-G ShockPulse Lithotripsy Generator  
8 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 SPL-NC ShockPulse Lithotripsy Nose Cone  
SPL-IFU ShockPulse Lithotripsy Instructions for Use  
SPL-PDBX376  ShockPulse  Lithotripsy Probe, Sterile Single Use, 3.76 mm 
(3/Box)  
 
Study Objectives  
To compare the performance, as measured by the stone clearance rate at time of percutaneous 
nephrolithotomy, of the ShockPulse-SE Lithotripsy System to the Trilogy Lithotrite.  
Study Endpoints  
Primary Endpoint 
Stone clearance rate defined as the kidney stone surface area measured by preoperative computed 
tomography (CT) scan divided by the time to remove the targeted stone burden.  
 Time to remove the targeted stone burden is measured at time the lithotripter unit starts fragmenting 
the stone to time all fragments are removed from the kidney based on visual inspection.  This is prior to final visual inspection of the kidney with a flexible nephroscope.  
Additional Endpoints  
1. Device malfunctions  
2. All complications measured by the Clavien Classification of Surgical Complications 
Stone free status as defined by the presence or absence of stone material on 
postoperative day 1 CT imaging  
This study is a post -market, prospective, randomized, multicenter, 2 -arm, comparative  trial. 
Scale and Duration 
A total of 100 subjects will be enrolled and treated at 3 study sites across the USA .  Each subject will be 
followed for approximately 6-12 weeks after the study procedure.  It is anticipated for the entire study 
to last approximately 12  months.  
 
 
*All sites will perform 10 independent PCNL cases, outside of the study period, using the Trilogy 
lithotrite to become accustomed with the device prior to enrolling patients.  
9 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 Treatment Assignment  
The patients will be block randomized 1:1  to either stone removal with the Trilogy or the ShockPulse –SE 
device.  All randomization will occur at the central study site via computer randomization by the 
statistician to limit selection bias.   
Justification for the Study Design  
This study will compare performance of two devices for the treatment of large renal calculi.  The study has been designed as a prospective, multi -centric, randomized, comparative study.  The intent of this 
design is to minimize bias and to allow for statistical comparison of the two treatment groups.  
Subject Selection  
Study  Population and Eligibility  
Patients who meet all of  the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria will be considered for 
inclusion in theis study.  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. ≥ 18 years of age  
2. Stone burden  ≥ 1.5 cm as measured on preoperative CT scan  
3. Patient is scheduled to undergo a percutaneous nephrolithotomy procedure  
4. Willing and able to provide informed consent  
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Pregnant  
2. Active urinary tract infection  
3. Prior shock wave lithotripsy within 3 months of study procedure  
4. Multiple percutaneous access sites are anticipate d 
5. Unable or unwilling to provide informed consent  
Subject Accountability  
Point of Enrollment  
A subject will be considered enrolled in the study if they meet all eligibility criteria and after the subject signs and dates the informed consent form (ICF).  No  study -related procedures can take placed until the 
ICF is signed.  
10 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 Withdrawal 
All subjects enrolled in the clinical study (including those withdrawn from the clinical study or lost to 
follow-up) shall be accounted for and documented. If a subject withdraw s from the clinical investigation, 
the reason(s) shall be reported. If such withdrawal is due to problems related to study device safety or performance, the investigator shall ask for the subject’s permission to follow his/her status/condition outside of the clinical study.  
 
Reasons for withdrawal include:    
• Physician discretion  
• Subject choice to withdraw consent  
• Lost to follow -up 
• If the subject dies due to any cause  
 
While study withdrawal is discouraged, subjects may withdraw from the study at any time, with or 
without reason, and without prejudice to further treatment.   
If any treated study patient  is unable to return to the study center after treatment, efforts wil l be made 
to obtain complete follow -up information from the patient’s primary physician. The reason for a 
patient 's failure to return for the necessary follow -up visits or for a patient's discontinuance from the 
study must be determined and recorded in the  case report forms (CRF).  
All applicable CRFs up to the point of subject withdrawal must be completed.  Subjects who are “lost to follow up” should have documented attempts to contact them.  
Additional data may no longer be collected after the point at which a subject has been withdrawn from 
the study or withdraws his/her consent, for whatever reason.  Data collected up to the point of subject withdrawal may be used for study analysis.  
Study Methods  
Data Collection  
The schedule of data collection is illustrated in Table 2.
11 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020  
Procedure/Assess
ment  Screening/ Base
line 
(Clinic Visit)  ShockPulse -SE or 
Trilogy Procedure 
(Hospital Visit)  Follow -up Visits  
6-12 Week Visit3 
(Clinic Visit)  Unscheduled 
Visit2 
(Clinic Visit)  
Visit Window  Within 90 Days 
Prior to 
Procedure     
Informed Consent 
Form  X    
Selection Criteria  X    
Randomization  X    
Demographics  X    
CT Scan & Stone 
Information   X    
Medical History  X    
Pre-operative 
Physical Exam 
and Laboratory 
Data  X    
Lithotripsy 
Procedure   X   
Stone Free Status   X1 X1  
Post-operative 
Stone and 
Laboratory Data   X   
Device 
Malfunctions   X   
Adverse Events   X X X 
 
1 Stone Free Status must be assessed on POD 1 by CT.  2 Unscheduled Visits may be performed between protocol specified visits as deemed 
appropriate by the investigator.3 End of study will be reached after completion of the 6-12  Week Follow -up visit, subject withdrawal , or lost 
to follow -up, whichever occurs first.
12 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 Informed Consent  
All subjects taking part in this clinical study must undergo the informed consent process. Subjects must 
be allowed adequate time to review the consent, raise questions, and make a voluntary decision to 
participate in the clinical study. Each subject must sign and date the IRB approved informed consent form before any clinical study -related procedures are performed. A copy of signed informed consent 
form will be provided to the subject for his/her records. A subject’s participation in the clinical study begins with the signing and dating of the informed consent form.  
Screening (Clinic Visit): 
The following data will be captured during the Screening Visit:  
• Informed consent process  
• Inclusion / exclusion criteria  
• Randomization  
o All randomization will occur at the central study site via computer randomization by the 
statistician to limit selection bias  
Baseline ( Within 90 Days Prior to Procedure) (Clinic Visit ): 
 The following data will be captured during the Baseline Visit:  
• Demographics  
• CT scan  
• Stone burden  
• Stone size (cm)  
o Axial x Coronal  
• Targeted stone surface area (mm2)  
o This measurement is determined by outlining the CT image of the stone using a digital system such as PACS)  
• Previous treatment of targeted stone  
• Medical history 
• Pre-operative physician exam  
o Height, weight, and BMI  
• Pre-operative laboratory data  
o Serum creatinine (mg/dl)  
o Hemoglobin (g/dl)  
o Hematocrit (%)  
o Na (mEq/l)  
o Urine culture  
ShockPulse -SE or Trilogy Procedure (Hospital Visit):  
The following data will be captured during the Lithotripsy Procedure Visit:  
 
13 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 Intraoperative Data: 
o Date of surgery  
o Device accountability  
 The lot number of the disposable devices used shall be captured.  
o Type of Anesthesia  
 General 
 IV Sedation  
 Regional  
o ASA Level  
 1:  A normal, healthy patient  
 2:  A patient with mild systemic disease  
 3:  A patient with severe systemic disease 
 4:  A patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life  
o Number and location of access site s for lithotripsy procedure  
o Total procedure time as measured in minutes from induction of anesthesia to end of 
anesthesia 
 Please ensure these time points exists in the subject’s source documentation  
o Time to clearance of targeted stone burden as measured in  minutes  
 Start time: When the investigator begins to use the lithotriptor on the targeted stone  
 Stop time:  When the investigator has cleared all fragments and prior to final inspection of the kidney with the flexible nephroscope 
 Please ensure these time points exists in the subject’s source documentation  
o Use of other intracorporeal lithotripsy devices including laser  
o Settings utilized for each lithotripter device  
o Stone Free Status  
 Assessed by CT scan performed postoperative day 1.  
o Estimated blood los s (EBL) 
o Device malfunctions  
o Adverse events  
2.1.1.Post -operative Data: 
o Length of hospitalization measured in days  
o Need for blood transfusion  
o Assessment of nephrostomy tube  
o Adverse events  
o Stone Free Status  
 Date of imaging study should  be provided.   
o Stone analysis  
o Stone culture results  
o Post -operative laboratory data 
 Serum creatinine (mg/dl)  
 Hemoglobin (g/dl)  
 Hematocrit (%)  
14 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020  Na (mEq/l)  
 
6-12 Week Follow -up Visit (Clinic Visit):  
The following data will be captured during the 6 -12 Week Follow-up Visit:  
• Stone Free Status  
o Date of imaging study should be provided.  Either a CT or KUB and/or Ultrasound is 
required prior to or during the 6 -12 Week Follow -up Visit.  
• Adverse events  
Unscheduled Visit (Clinic Visit):  
Unscheduled visits may be per formed between visits required by the protocol as deemed necessary by 
the investigator.  Data for unscheduled visits will be captured on the Adverse Event case report form (CRF).  
End of Study  
End of study will be reached after completion of the 6 -12 Week F ollow-up visit, subject withdrawal, or 
lost to follow -up, whichever occurs first. 
Source Documents  
Source documents are the patient records maintained at the study site. In most cases, the source documents will be the physician’s or hospital’s patient chart. In some cases, the source documents may 
be electronic. In both cases, the information captured in the CRF must match the information in the 
chart or electronic source document.  
Statistical Considerations  
Endpoints 
 Primary Endpoint  
Stone clearance rate.  
Hypothesis 
It is hypothesized that the Trilogy will reduce the stone clearance rate by 25% compared to the 
Shockpulse-SE.   
 
 Additional Endpoints  
Additional endpoints include the following:  
1. Device malfunctions  
15 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 2. All complications measured by the Clavien Classification of Surgical Complications  
3. Stone free status as defined by the presence or absence of stone material on postoperative 
imaging  
• Stone free status must be assessed prior POD #1 by CT scan.  
Analysis Sets 
The Intent -To-Treat (ITT) dataset will consist of all patients who were randomized and is defined by all 
subjects being grouped by their initial randomization, regardless of the actual treatment received.  
The Per Protocol (PP) dataset will consist of all randomized subjects who underwent their assigned treatment and full outcome assessment. 
The Safety Analysis (SA) dataset consists of all subjects who received any amount of treatment on 
protocol.  
 
Sample Size  
For simplicity, sample size calculations were performed using a two -sided Student t- test with a power of 
90% and a significance level of alpha = 0.05.  The primary outcome of interest is the clearance rate of the 
targeted stone burden.  Preliminary in vitro data shows a reduction of approximately 50% in the average lithotripter clearance time of a 1 cm3 BegoStone for the Trilogy lithotrite compared to the ShockPulse -
SE.  Given the increased variability of use in vivo and across subjects, a more conservative difference was 
considered for sample size est imation.  Assuming a 25% improvement in clearance rate that results in an 
effect size of 0.7, a sample size of 44 subjects in each group is required. To account for the possibility of 
unevaluable data a total of 100 patients, 50 in each group  will be enrolled.  
 
Statistical Methods  
All demographic data will be summarized using descriptive statistics (for continuous 
measures; mean, standard deviation, median, min and max and for categorical measures; count 
and percent) and tabulated by treatment group. Distributions of continuous measures will be 
investigated and if found to be significantly non -normal appropriate transformations will be 
sought. Demographics will be compared between groups using Student t -tests and Fisher’s exact 
tests, as approp riate. If any demographics measures are found to be unbalanced between 
groups, they will be considered as possible covariates when analyzing the primary outcome.  
The primary outcome, clearance rate, will be calculated by dividing the stone surface 
area by the clearance time. To compare the clearance rate between groups a mixed effects 
model will be used including treatment group as a fixed effect and site (hospital ) as a random 
effect.  Any demographics that were found to be unbalanced between groups may also be 
included in the model as covariates.  
16 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 Device malfunctions will be recorded and summarized by treatment group.  The 
proportion of cases experiencing device m alfunctions will be compared between groups using 
Fisher’s Exact test. All subject complications will be recorded and summarized using the Clavien 
Classification of Surgical Complications. The proportions of subjects experiencing complications will also be  compared between groups using Fisher’s Exact test.  The number (and percent) of 
patients found to be stone free at 6-12 weeks post -op will be summarized and compared 
between groups using Fisher’s Exact test. 
The main analysis of the primary endpoint will be performed on the ITT dataset. Supportive analyses 
may be performed on the PP dataset.  All reporting and analysis of adverse events and complications will be done using the SA data set.  
Control of Systematic Error/Bias  
To minimize selection bias there will be a single randomization schedule managed at the lead investigative site.  Upon subject enrollment, all participating sites will contact the main site for experimental group randomization.  The randomization will be a permuted block randomization tha t will 
help ensure a reasonable balance of group assignment throughout the study enrollment period. 
Number of Subjects per Investigative Site  
The maximum number of subjects for any single site is 85. 
Data Management 
Data Collection, Processing, and Review 
Subject data will be recorded in a limited access, secure, web- based electronic data capture (EDC) 
system called REDCap.  REDCap is designed to comply with HIPAA regulations. REDCap is not 21 CFR Part 11 compliant; however, this data will not be submitted to the FDA as it is part of a post -market study 
comparing two commercialized devices for their cleared intended uses.  
The conduct of clinical studies pertaining to the use of electronic records and signatures. Database 
backups are performed regularly.  
The Investigator provides his/her electronic signature on the appropriate electronic case report forms 
(eCRFs) in compliance with local regulations. A written signature on printouts of the eCRFs must also be provided if required by local regulation. Changes to  data previously submitted to the sponsor require a 
new electronic signature by the Investigator acknowledging and approving the changes.  
Visual and/or electronic data review will be performed to identify possible data discrepancies. Manual 
and/or automati c queries will be created in the EDC system and will be issued to the site for appropriate 
response. Site staff will be responsible for resolving all queries in the database.  
Data Retention 
The Principal Investigator or his/her designee or Investigational site will maintain, at the investigative 
site, all essential study documents and source documentation that support the data collected on the 
17 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 study subjects in compliance with regulatory guidelines.  Documents must be retained for at least 2 
years after the  last approval of a marketing application or until at least 2 years have elapsed since the 
formal discontinuation of the clinical investigation of the product.  
 
Data Safety Review  
Individual Investigators will conduct continuous review of data and patient  safety. Summaries submitted 
to the lead site should include review of data, the number of patients, significant adverse events  as 
described in the risks , and responses observed. A combined summary for all sites will be submitted half 
way through enrollment (50 subjects)  and at the completion of enrollment  (100 subjects)  for review by 
the DSMC.  
Amendments  
If a protocol revision is necessary which affects the rights, safety or welfare of the subject or scientific integrity of the data, an amendment is required. Appropriate approvals (e.g., IRB) of the revised protocol must be obtained prior to implementation.  
Deviations  
An Investigator must not make any changes or deviate from this protocol, except to protect the life and physical well- being of a subject in an emergency. An investigator shall notify the sponsor and the 
reviewing IRB of any deviation from the investigational plan to protect the life or physical well -being of a 
subject in an emergency, and those deviations which affec t the scientific integrity of the clinical 
investigation. Such notice shall be given as soon as possible, but no later than 5 working days after the emergency occurred, or per prevailing local requirements, if sooner than 5 working days.  
All deviations from the investigational plan, with the reason for the deviation and the date of occurrence, must be documented and reported to the sponsor. Sites may also be required to report deviations to the IRB/EC, per local guidelines and government regulations.  
Devia tions will be reviewed and evaluated on an ongoing basis and, as necessary, appropriate corrective 
and preventive actions (including IRB notification, site re-training, or site discontinuation/termination) will be put into place by the sponsor. 
Device/Equi pment Accountability  
The study devices/equipment shall be securely maintained, controlled, and used only in this clinical study.  
18 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 Compliance 
Statement of Compliance  
This study will be conducted in accordance with ICH Guidelines, Good Clinical Practices ISO 14155, 
ethical principles that have their origins in the Declaration of Helsinki, and pertinent individual country laws and regulations. The study shall not begin until the required approval/favorable opinion from the 
IRB authority has been obtained. Any a dditional requirements imposed by the IRB shall be followed, if 
appropriate.  
Investigator Responsibilities  
The Principal Investigator of an investigational site is responsible for ensuring that the study is 
conducted in accordance with the Clinical Study Agreement, the clinical investigation plan, ISO 14155, ethical principles that have their origins in the Declaration of Helsinki, any conditions of approval 
imposed by the reviewing IRB, and prevailing local and/or country laws and/or regulations, whichever 
affords the greater protection to the subject.  
The Principal Investigator’s responsibilities include, but are not limited to, the following.  
• Prior to beginning the study, sign the Clinical Study Agreement and comply with the Investigator responsibilities as described in such Agreement.   
• Prior to beginning the study, sign the Protocol Signature page documenting his/her agreement to conduct the study in accordance with the protocol.  
• Provide his/her qualifications and experience to assume responsibility fo r the proper conduct of the 
study and that of key members of the site team through up -to-date curriculum vitae or other 
relevant documentation and disclose potential conflicts of interest, including financial, that may interfere with the conduct of the clinical study or interpretation of results.  
• Make no changes in or deviate from this protocol, except to protect the life and physical well -being 
of a subject in an emergency; document and explain any deviation from the approved protocol that occurred during the course of the clinical investigation.  
• Create and maintain source documents throughout the clinical study and ensure their availability with direct access during monitoring visits or audits; ensure that all clinical -investigation-related 
records are retained per requirements.  
• Ensure the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data reported to the sponsor in the CRFs and in all required reports.  
• Record, report, and assess (seriousness and relationship to the device/procedure) every adver se 
event as applicable per the protocol and observed device deficiency.  
• Allow and support regulatory authorities and the IRB/EC when performing auditing activities. 
• Ensure that informed consent is obtained in accordance with applicable laws, this protocol and local IRB/EC requirements.  
• Provide adequate medical care to a subject during and after a subject’s participation in a clinical study in the case of adverse events, as described in the ICF.  
19 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 • Inform the subject of the nature and possible cause of any adverse events experienced.  
• Inform the subject of any new significant findings occurring during the clinical investigation, 
including the need for additional medical care that may be required.  
• Provide the subject with well -defined procedures for possible e mergency situations related to the 
clinical study, and make the necessary arrangements for emergency treatment, including decoding procedures for blinded/masked clinical investigations, as needed.  
• Ensure that clinical medical records are clearly marked to indicate that the subject is enrolled in this clinical study.  
• Ensure that, if appropriate, subjects enrolled in the clinical investigation are provided with some means of showing their participation in the clinical investigation, together with identification and compliance information for concomitant treatment measures (contact address and telephone numbers shall be provided). 
• Inform, with the subject’s approval or when required by national regulations, the subject’s personal physician about the subject’s p articipation in the clinical investigation.  
• Make all reasonable efforts to ascertain the reason(s) for a subject’s premature withdrawal from clinical investigation while fully respecting the subject’s rights.  
• Ensure that an adequate investigation site team and facilities exist and are maintained and documented during the clinical investigation.  
• Ensure that maintenance and calibration of the equipment relevant for the assessment of the clinical investigation is appropriately performed and documented, where a pplicable. 
Delegation of Responsibility  
When specific tasks are delegated by an investigator, including but not limited to conducting the 
informed consent process, the Principal Investigator is responsible for providing appropriate training 
and adequate supervision of those to whom tasks are delegated. The investigator is accountable for regulatory violations resulting from failure to adequately supervise the conduct of the clinical study.  
 
Institutional Review Board/ Ethics Committee  
The protocol and infor med consent document must have the approval of a properly constituted 
committee ("Institutional Review Board" / “Ethics Committee”) responsible for approving clinical trials.  
The signed IRB/EC approval letter must identify the documents approved (i.e., li st the Investigator's 
name, the protocol title, and date of approval, and informed consent document). A copy of the approval of the protocol (or permission to conduct the study) and Informed Consent Form, must be received by the sponsor before recruitment of subjects into the study and shipment of investigational 
product/equipment. Prior approval must also be obtained for other materials related to subject 
recruitment or which will be provided to the subject.  
Annual IRB/EC approval and renewals will be obtained throughout the duration of the study as required by local/country or IRB/EC requirements. Copies of the Investigator’s reports and the IRB/EC continuance of approval must be provided to the sponsor.  
20 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020   
Potential Risks and Benefits 
Anticipated Adverse Device Effects  
The following adverse events (AEs) are considered anticipated during percutaneous nephrolithotomy 
procedures and are reflected in the commercial instructions for use (IFU) for each lithotripsy device:  
o Infection  
o Bleeding 
o Damage to the kidney or surrounding organs  
o Other adverse events associated with anesthesia  
 
Each participating site is responsible for recording AEs and classifying them based on the below Clavien 
Classification system:  
Clavien Classification of S urgical Complications 
All adverse events that occur intra-operatively or within the 30 day postoperative period will be assessed using the Clavien Classification of Surgical Complications:  
Grade I:    Any deviation from the normal post-operative course without the need for pharmacological treatment or surgical, endoscopic, and radiological interventions. 
 Allowed therapeutic regimens are: drugs as antiemetics, antipyretics, analgesics , diuretics, 
electrolytes, and physiotherapy.  This grade also includes wound infections opened at bedside.  
Grade II:    Requiring pharmacological treatment with drugs other than such allowed for Grade I complications. Blood transfusions and total parenteral nutrition are also included.  
Grade III:    Requiring surgical, endoscopic or radiological intervention.  
 Grade IIIa:   Intervention not under general anesthesia  
 Grade IIIb:   Intervention under general anesthesia  
Grade IV:  Life-threatening complication (including CNS complications) requiring IC/ICU 
management . 
 Grade IVa:   Single organ dysfunction (including dialysis)  
 Grade IVb:   Multi -organ dysfunction  
Grade V:  Death of a patient  
Suffix “d”:  If the patient suffers from a complication at the time of discharge the suffix “d” (for 
disability) is added to the respective grade of complication.  This label indicates the need for a follow-up to fully evaluate the complication.  
21 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020  
Termination of Study Participation by the Investigator or Withdrawal of IRB/ EC Approval 
Any investigator, or IRB/ EC in this Study may discontinue participation  in the study or withdrawal 
approval of the study, respectively. Investigators, associated IRBs/ECs, and regulatory authorities, as 
applicable, will be notified in writing in the event of these occurrences.  
 
Abbreviation  Definition  
AE Adverse Event  
CA Competent Authority  
CRF / eCRF  Case Report Form / Electronic Case Report Form  
CRO  Clinical Research Organization  
CT Computed Tomography  
EBL  Estimated Blood Loss  
EC Ethics Committee  
EDC  Electronic Data Capture  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
ICMJE  International Committee of Medical Journal Editors  
IFU Instructions for Use  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
ISO Internal Organization for Standardization  
ITT Intent -to-Treat  
KUB  Kidney, Ureter, and Bladder  
22 
Protocol Version 7 .27.2020 NEMA  National Electrical Manufacturers Association  
OD Outer Diameter  
PP Per Protocol  
SA Safety Analysis  
SAE  Serious Adverse Event  
UADE  Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect  
USA  United States of America  
 