 1 The Effects of Disconnection and Reconnection of  Definitive  Abutments on 
Peri-implant Bone Levels  Changes : A 1 - Year Split -Mouth Randomized 
Controlled  Clinical Study  
 
 
This study has been registered in ClinicalTrial.gov ID. [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
 
 
Document Date: Sep 10th, 2024  
 
 
 2 Abstract  
Background:  There  is evidence suggesting non-removal  of a definitive abutment  on an 
implant from  the day of surgery  helps to preserve the peri -implant marginal bone level s. 
However, the limited literature s available still contains contradictory conclusions to this 
finding . 
Objective : The aim of this prospective study was to evaluate  the effects of definitive  
abutment connection at the time of implant placement on peri-implant bone level s and soft 
tissue changes in posterior maxilla  and mandible  regions . 
Materials and Methods:  A total of 38 implants were  placed in 1 7 patients with at least  2 
missing posterior  teeth in  the maxilla  or the mandible  for this  study.  Each patient received 2  
or 4 implants . A definitive prefabricated abutment (test group) was randomly connected to 
one implant at implant placement  (T0) and left undisturbed throughout the  duration of the 
study . On the  other implant, a healing abutment (control group) was connected  and subjected 
to go  through three disconnections and reconnections at  3 months (T3), 6 months (T6), and 
12 months (T12) after the implant placement . Throughout  the study period (1 year), all 
implants remained unrestored. Marginal  bone level changes  (MBLC)  were  assessed using 
standardized  periapical radiographs taken at T0 and T12 . Peri-implant s oft tissue parameters  
including the keratinized mucosa  width and lingual mucosa thickness  were also recorded and 
evaluated.  
Results : At the  1-year follow -up, the test group showed significantly less MBLC compared 
to the control group. The mean MBLC in the test group was 0.32 ± 0.47 mm, which was 
significantly lower than the 0.80 ± 0.92 mm observed in the control group (p=0.009). The 
test group also had a smaller reduction in keratinized mucosa width, with a mean reduction of 
0.42 ± 0.42 mm compared to 0.90 ± 0.77 mm in the control group (p=0.049). Lingual mucosa 
thickness changes were 0.38 ± 0.26 mm in the test group and 0.71 ± 0.59 mm in the control 
 3 group, but this difference did not reach statistical significance (p=0.053). However, a 
significant correlation was identified between changes in keratinized mucosa width and 
MBLC in the test group (p=0.02).  
Conclusio n: The results of this study support the hypothesis that connecting a definitive 
abutment at the time of implant placement results in less MBLC  compared to repeated 
abutment disconnections. Additionally, the  test group demonstrated better preservation of 
peri-implant soft tissue compared to the control group. These findings suggest that the one -
abutment -one-time protocol may contribute to improved peri -implant tissue stability.  
 
Keywords : abutment disconnection -reconnection, one -abutment  one-time, definitive 
abutment , one -time abutment , marginal bone loss  
 4 1. INTRODUCTION  
 
The peri -implant mucosal barrier consists of two key components: (i) a junctional epithelium 
approximately 2 mm, and (ii) a connective tissue compartment about 1 –1.7 mm.1-3 During 
healing, it is hypothesized that the connective tissue adheres to the transmucosal implant 
components, forming a barrier that inhibits epithelial downgrowth and helps prevent peri -
implant bone resorption due to bacterial and mechanical insults.4-7 To preserve the marginal 
bone level around dental implants, it is important to improve the quality and stability of the 
connective tissue integration, in addition to utilizing a minimally invasive surgical 
technique.2 
Several factors may influence the connective tissue -implant interface, including the 
type of implant, initial soft tissue thickness,8 depth of implant placement,9-12 and the stability 
of the implant -abutment connection.10 Additional factors include the size of the microgap at 
the implant -abutment connection, the material and surface topography of the abutment,13-15 
abutment height,16 and the abutment emergence profile.17 The reaction of peri -implant soft 
tissue to repeated disturbance, such as disconnections and reconnections of the abutment, has 
also been shown to impact bone resorption.18-20 
Abrahamsson et al19 were the first to report, in an animal study, that repeated 
abutment disconnections and reconnections can compromise the mucosal barrier, resulting in 
approximately 0.7 mm of additional peri -implant bone loss and soft tissue recession. This 
finding led to  the development of the "one -abutment -one-time"  (OAOT)  concept, which 
advocates placing a definitive abutment at the time of implant surgery to avoid disrupting 
connective tissue adaptation during restorative procedures. However, subsequ ent studies in 
both animals and humans have produced contradictory results regarding peri -implant bone 
changes.21-23 Human studies by Degidi et al reported a significant reduction in horizontal 
bone remodeling around subcrestally placed tapered implants when a definitive abutment 
 5 was delivered at the time of surgery.24,25 Similar studies arrived at the same conclusions for 
implants placed at both immediate post -extraction sites20,26,27  and healed sites.28-33 Other 
studies, however, demonstrated that peri -implant bone levels did not change significantly.34-
39 Several reviews and meta -analyses also found a lack of consensus on this topic.18,40-42 Two 
meta -analysis concluded that multiple abutment disconnections significantly affect marginal 
bone level changes in partially edentulous patients.43,44 The evidence on this concept remains 
controversial due to the wide variation in methodologies employed by the studies and the 
inclusion of confounding factors that may  influence the results.45-47 
Marginal bone changes are critical for the long -term assessment and maintenance of 
dental implants, as they form the basis for implant success criteria and help determine the 
progression of peri -implant pathology.45,46 The present  study aimed to evaluate peri -implant 
bone level changes one year after implant placement with a definitive abutment, before 
functional loading. The null hypothesis was that there would be no significant difference in 
peri-implant bone levels between impla nts with definitive abutme nts delivered at the time of 
surgery using the one -abutment -one-time protocol, and those subjected to multiple abutment 
disconnections and reconnections.  
 
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS  
2.1 Sample size 
Power analysis was carried out to determine the sample size. A sample size of 38 implants 
was needed to achieve 80% power to detect a difference between the null proportion of 0.500 
at a significance level of 0.05.  
2.2 Patient selection  
This study was designed as a single -center, prospective, randomized modified split -mouth 
 6 clinical trial. It was conducted at the Loma Linda University School of Dentistry (LLUSD)  
Center for Implant Dentistry , California, United States . The study followed guidelines 
established by the Loma Linda University Institutional Review Board (IRB No.#5190024) 
and was approved prior to initiation.  
To be included in the study, patients had to meet the following criteria: (i) read, sign, 
and receive a copy of the informed consent form, including consent for photos; (ii) Male or 
female with  at least 18 years of age with good oral hygiene and good general health; (iii) 
have a healed site with two or more missing teeth in the maxillary or mandibular posterior 
region (excluding third molars); (iv) have adequate bone width and height to accommodate at 
least a 4.3 mm diameter and 8 mm length implant at each site; (v) have at least 8 mm of 
interocclusal restorative space; and (vi) be willing to participate and attend the planned 1 -
year follow -up visits before starting the implant restoration procedures.  
Patients were excluded if they had the following: (i) history of alcohol or drug 
dependency, or any medical, physical, or psychological factors that might affect the surgical 
or prosthodontic procedures and follow -up examinations; (ii) history of radiation  therapy to 
the head and neck region; (iii) history or current habit of smoking; (iv) history or current 
habit of bruxism; (v) no opposing occluding dentition or prostheses; (vi) need for bone 
augmentation during implant placement; or (vii) implant inserti on torque value <35 Ncm. 
Each patient received at least two implants in the posterior maxilla or mandible. At implant 
placement (T0), one implant was randomly selected to receive a definitive prefabricated 
abutment (test group) , which was left undisturbed throughout the study. The other implant 
received a healing abutment (control group), which underwent three disconnections and 
reconnections at 3 months (T3), 6 months (T6), and 12 months (T12) after implant surgery. 
All implants  were restored with individu al screw -retained crowns after the 1 -year study 
period.  
 7 2.3 Surgical procedures  
At the time of implant surgery, patients were escorted to the operating room at the LLUSD 
Center for Implant Dentistry. They were instructed to rinse their mouths with 0.12% 
chlorhexidine gluconate solution for 3 minutes prior to surgery. After being seate d, monitors 
were placed to record blood pressure, pulse rate, and oxygen saturation. The patient's 
circumoral area was sterilized with a Povidone -Iodine swab (Aplicare, Aplicare Inc., 
Branford, CT), and the area was then draped for a sterile protocol. Oxyg en was provided to 
the patient through a nasal cannula at a minimum flow rate of 3 liters per minute.  
Following the administration of local anesthetic (2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine 
[Dentsply, York, PA, USA]), a surgical stent was used to determine the position of implant 
placement. Pre -operative keratinized mucosa width was measured and recorded  at the center 
of the future implant placement site with a 1.0 mm marked periodontal probe (Hu -Friedy, 
Chicago, IL, USA). Crestal and intrasulcular incisions were made using a #15 blade (Miltex, 
Japan), and a buccal periosteal flap was reflected, leaving t he lingual mucosal tissue 
undisturbed. Lingual mucosal tissue thickness was measured with a 1.0 mm marked 
periodontal probe from the bone crest at the center of the future implant placement. If 
indicated, lingual periosteal flap reflection and alveoloplast y were performed with a carbide 
bur (H21L, Komet, Rock Hill, SC) to level the alveolar ridge prior to implant placement. 
Osteotomy was performed following the manufacturer’s recommendations, using the surgical 
stent as a guide.  
The implants used in this study were 4.3 or 5.0 mm in diameter and at least 8 mm in 
length. They featured a tapered design with TiUnite surface , symmetric threads, and an 
internal conical connection (NobelReplace Conical Connection, Nobel Biocare, Yorba Linda, 
CA, USA). A one -stage implant surgery protocol was followed, and the implants were placed 
1 mm subcrestally with a minimum insertion torque of 35 Ncm. The minimum distance 
 8 between the implant and the adjacent natural tooth was at least 1.5 mm, and between 
implants, at least 3 mm.  
In the test group, d efinitive abutment (On1 ™ Base, Nobel Biocare, Yorba Linda, CA, 
USA) was randomly assigned to one of the implants, and were torqued to 35 Ncm as 
recommended by the manufacturer. A healing cap (On1 ™ Healing Cap, Nobel Biocare, 
Yorba Linda, CA, USA) was placed over the definitive abutment. In the control group, 
conventional healing abutment ( Healing Abutment CC, Nobel Biocare, Yorba Linda, CA, 
USA) were hand -tightened onto another implant. The flaps were approximated to allow for 
non-submer ged healing using resorbable polyglactin sutures (5 -0 Vicryl Plus Antibacterial 
suture; Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, NJ, USA). Bite registration (Regisil, Dentsply Sirona 
Inc., Charlotte, NC, USA) mounted on a Rinn holder was used to create the custom ji g for 
standardized radiographs. Baseline periapical radiographs were taken at implant placement . 
Patients were advised to avoid functioning over the surgical sites for the first 3 weeks. 
A soft diet was recommended throughout the remaining healing period (16 weeks).  
2.4 Data collection  and outcome variables  
All examinations and data collection were performed by three calibrated examiners (S.B, 
Y.C, Q.F). After implant placement, patients were recalled for follow -up appointments at 3 
months, 6 months, and 12 months. During these follow -up visits, the healing c aps (test 
group) and the healing abutments (control group) were disconnected and reconnected with 
hand torque. Clinical parameters and radiographic evaluations were performed  and recorded 
at T0, and T12. The following parameters were recorded at the final follow -up appointment . 
Implant success Rate  
The overall implant success rate was assessed according to the 2017 classification criteria set 
by the American Academy of Periodontology (AAP). These criteria included factors such as 
the absence of pain, infection, mobility, and radiographic bone loss be yond acceptable 
 9 thresholds. Success was determined by the implant's ability to meet these clinical and 
radiographic standards over the course of the follow -up period.  
Marginal bone loss (MBL) and marginal bone level changes (MBLC)  
Standardized digital periapical radiographs  (VistaScan, Durr Dental AG, Bietigheim -
Bissingem, Germany) were taken at T0 and T12 using the long -cone paralleling technique 
and custom jig. The radiographs were exported as JPEG files and analyzed using ImageJ 
(ImageJ Imaging Software version 2.0, Bethesda, MD, USA) . Mesial and distal MBL were 
assessed by measuring the distance between the implant platform and the first bone -to-
implant contact at T0 and T12. The measurements were calibrated using the known impla nt 
length and were performed twice for each implant. MBLC was calculated as the difference in 
MBL measurements between T0 and T12. All measurements were performed by blinded and 
calibrated one examiner (S.B). Intra -examiner reproducibility was evaluated using double 
assessments on 10 randomly selected radiographs performed 2 months apart, with the intra -
class correlation coefficient (ICC) indicating a strong correlation (ICC = 0.998).  
Keratinized mucosa width 
At implant surgery, a fter the connection of healing abutments in the control group and 
definitive abutments with healing caps in the test group, the flaps were approximated and 
sutured. The width of the keratinized mucosa was recorded from the mid -buccal aspect of the 
abutment s using a 1.0 mm marked  periodontal probe  (PCP UNC -15, Hu-Friedy, Chicago, IL, 
USA ). At the 1 -year follow -up, measurements were taken at the same location before 
disconnection and reconnection of the healing abutments and healing caps.  
Thickness of lingual mucosa  
Lingual mucosa thickness was measured at implant surgery and at the 1 -year follow -up 
appointment. The method used for evaluating lingual mucosa thickness was based on the 
technique described by Linkevicius et al.49 At implant surgery, after crestal and intrasulcular 
 10 incisions, the buccal flap was raised while the lingual mucosa was not elevated to ensure 
direct visibility. Lingual mucosa thickness at each implant site was measured from the bone 
crest using a  1.0 mm marked  periodontal probe  (PCP UNC -15, Hu-Friedy, Chicago, IL, 
USA) . At the 1 -year follow -up, lingual mucosa thickness was measured from the definitive 
abutment platform and implant platform after disconnection of the healing cap and healing 
abutment, respectively.  
Modified plaque index (mP LI) 
Presence or absence of plaque was assessed and recorded at six sites around each implant 
(mesiobuccal, mid -buccal, distobuccal, mesiolingual, mid -lingual, and distolingual). Plaque 
assessment was performed with a periodontal probe following the criteria established by 
Mombelli et al.48 Each site was assigned a score according to  the following criteria:  
• Score 0: No detection of plaque  
• Score 1: Plaque only recognized by running a probe across the smooth marginal 
surface of the healing abutments or healing caps  
• Score 2: Plaque visible to the naked eye  
• Score 3: Abundance of soft matter  
Modified sulcus bleeding index  (mSBI) 
The mSBI was evaluated and recorded at the same six sites as described for the mPLI 
assessment  following the criteria established by Mombelli et al .48 Each site was assigned a 
score according to the following criteria:  
• Score 0: No bleeding  observed when a periodontal probe is passed along the 
gingival margin  
• Score 1: Isolated bleeding spots are visible  
• Score 2: Blood forms a continuous red line along the gingival margin  
 11 • Score 3: Heavy or profuse bleeding is present  
Surgical and prosthetic complications  
Complications were recorded and included soft tissue issue s, the incidence of peri -implantitis 
based on the 2017 classification criteria from the American Academy of Periodontology 
(AAP), and occurrences of prosthetic c omplications . 
2.5 Statistical Analysis  
Implant was considered the unit of analysis. MBLC  at the mesial and distal aspect of the 
implant during 1-year follow -up was considered the primary outcome of this study.  
Descriptive statistics, including means and standard deviations, were calculated for mesial, 
distal, and overall MBLC, keratinized mucosa width changes, and lingual mucosa thickness 
changes across the test and control groups. The Shapiro -Wilk test was used to assess the 
normality of the data. When the assump tion of normality was violated, non -parametric 
methods were utilized alongside traditional parametric tests. Specifically, paired samples t -
tests were used to compare MBLC and soft tissue changes between the two groups. 
Wilcoxon signed -rank tests were cond ucted where normality assumptions were not met.  
Correlation analyses were performed to explore relationships between all measured 
parameters, including MBLC, keratinized mucosa width changes, and lingual mucosa 
thickness changes. All statistical tests were two -tailed, with a significance level set at p≤ 0.05. 
Statistical analyses were conducted using R Statistics version 4.3.3 (The R Project for 
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).   
 
 
 
 
 12  
REFERENCES  
1. Abrahamsson I, Berglundh T, Wennstrom J, Lindhe J. The peri - implant hard and soft 
tissues at different implant systems. A  comparative study in the dog. Clinical Oral Implants 
Research 1996;7:212 –19. 
2. Berglundh T, Lindhe J, Ericsson I, Marinello CP, Liljenberg B, Thomsen P. The soft tissue 
barrier at implants and teeth. Clinical Oral Implants  Research 1991;2:81 –90. 
3. Berglundh T, Lindhe J. Dimension of the peri -implant mucosa. Biological width  revisited.  
Journal  of Clinical  Periodontology 1996;23:971 –73. 
4. Squier CA, Collins, P. The relationship between soft tissue attachment,  epithelial 
downgrowth and surface porosity. J Periodontal Res  1981;16:434 –40. 
5. Chehroudi B, Gould T, Brunette DM. The role of connective tissue in  inhibiting epithelial 
downgrowth on titanium -coated percutaneous implants. J Biomed  Mater Res  1992;26:493 –
515. 
6. Ericsson  I, Persson  LG, Berglundh  T, Marinello  CP, Lindhe  J,  Klinge B.  Different  types  
of inflammatory  reactions  in peri-implant  soft tissues. Journal  of Clinical  Periodontology  
1995;22:255 –61. 
7. Broggini N, McManus LM, Hermann JS, Medina RU, Oates TW,  Schenk RK, Buser D, 
Mellonig JT, Cochran DL. Persistent acute  inflammation at the implant -abutment interface. 
Journal of Dental Research   2003;82:232 –37. 
8. Puisys A, Linkevicius T. The influence of mucosal tissue thickening on crestal bone 
stability around bone -level implants. A prospective controlled clinical trial. Clin Oral 
Implants Res  2015; 26:123 –9. 
9. Schwarz F, Alcoforado G, Nelson K, Schaer A, Taylor T, Beuer F, Strietzel FP. Impact of 
implant -abutment connection, positioning of the machined collar/microgap, and platform 
 13 switching on crestal bone level changes. Camlog Foundation Consensus Report. Clin Oral 
Implants Res  2015;25:1301 –3. 
10. Schwarz F, Hegewald A, Becker J. Impact of implant -abutment connection and positioning 
of the machined collar/microgap on crestal bone level changes: A systematic review. Clin 
Oral Implants Res  2014;25:417 –25. 
11. Schwarz F, Mihatovic I, Ferrari D, Wieland M, Becker J. Influence of frequent clinical 
probing during the healing phase on healthy peri -implant soft tissue formed at different 
titanium implant surfaces: A histomorphometrical study in dogs. Journal of Clinical 
Periodontology  2014;37:551 –62. 
12. Schwarz F, Mihatovic I, Golubovich V, Schar A, Sager M, Becker J. Impact of abutment 
microstructure and insertion depth on crestal bone changes at nonsubmerged titanium 
implants with platform switch. Clin Oral Implants Res  2015;26: 287 –92. 
13. Abrahamsson I, Berglundh T, Glantz PO, Lindhe J. The mucosal attachment at different 
abutments. An experimental study in dogs. Journal of Clinical Periodontology  
1998;25:721 –27. 
14. Welander M, Abrahamsson I, Berglundh T. The mucosal barrier at implant abutments of 
different materials. Clinical Oral Implants Research  2008;19:635 –41. 
15. Lazzara RJ, Stephan SP. Platform switching: A new concept in implant dentistry for 
controlling postrestorative crestal bone levels. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent.  
2006;26:9 –17. 
16. Galindo -Moreno P, Leon -Cano A, Monje A, Ortega -Oller I, O'Valle F, Catena A. 
Abutment height influences the effect of platform switching on peri -implant marginal bone 
loss. Clin Oral Implants Res  2016;27:167 –73. 
17. Souza AB, Alshihri A, Kammerer PW, Araujo MG, Gallucci GO. Histological and micro -
CT analysis of peri -implant soft and hard tissue healing on implants with different healing 
 14 abutments configurations. Clin Oral Implant Res  2018;29:1007 –15. 
 
18. Rompen E. The impact of the type and configuration of abutments and their   (repeated) 
removal on the attachment level and marginal bone. Eur J Oral  Implantol.  2012;5:583 –90. 
19. Abrahamsson  I, Berglundh  T, Lindhe  J. The mucosal  barrier  following abutment 
dis/reconnection. An experimental study in dogs. Journal of Clinical  Periodontology  
1997;24:568 –72. 
20. Canullo L, Bignozzi I, Cocchetto R, Cristalli MP, Iannello G. Immediate  positioning of a 
definitive abutment versus repeated abutment replacements in  post-extractive implants: 3-
year follow up of a randomised multicentre clinical trial.  Eur J Oral Implantol  2010;3:285 –
96. 
21. Becker K, Mihatovic I, Golubovic V, Schwarz F. Impact of abutment  material and dis -/re-
connection on soft and hard tissue changes at implants   with platform -switching. Journal of 
Clinical Periodontology  2012;39:774 – 80. 
22. Rodrıguez  X, Vela  X, Mendez  V, Segala  M, Calvo -Guirado  JL, Tarnow DP. The effect of 
abutment dis/reconnections on peri -implant bone  resorption: a radiologic study of platform -
switched and non -platform -switched   implants  placed  in animals.  Clinical  Oral  Implants  
Research  2013;24:305 –11. 
23. Alves CC, Munos F, Cantalapiedra A, Ramos I, Neves M, Blanco J.  Marginal bone and soft 
tissue behavior following platform switching abutment  connection/disconnection -a dog 
model study. Clin Oral Implants Res  2015;26:983 –91. 
24. Degidi M, Nardi D, Piattelli A. One abutment at one time: non -removal of   an immediate 
abutment and its effect on bone healing around subcrestal  tapered  implants. Clin Oral Impl  
Res 2011;22:1303 –07. 
25. Degidi M, Nardi D, Daprile G, Piattelli A. Non removal of immediate  abutments in cases 
 15 involving subcrestally placed post extractive tapered single  implants: A randomized 
controlled clinical study. Clin Implant Dent Relat Res   2014 ;16:794 –805.  
26. Berberi AN, Sabbagh JM, Moustafa NA, Noujeim ZF, Salameh ZA. A  5-year comparison 
of marginal bone level following immediate loading of  single -tooth implants placed in 
healed alveolar ridges and extraction sockets in   the maxilla. Front  Physiol . 2014;5:29.  
27. Grandi T, Guazzi P, Samarani R, Maghaireh H, Grandi G. One abutment - one time versus 
a provisional abutment in immediately loaded post-extractive   single implants: A 1 -year 
follow -up of a multicentre randomised controlled  trial. Eur J Oral Implantol  2014;7:141 –
49. 
28. Grandi  T, Guazzi  P,  Samarani,  R. Garuti,  G. Immediate  positioning  of definitive abutments  
versus  repeated abutment  replacements in  immediately loaded implants: effects on bone 
healing at the 1 -year follow -up of a  multicentre  randomised  controlled  trial. Eur J Oral 
Implantol  2012;5:9 –16. 
29. Molina A, Sanz -Sanchez I, Martin C, Blanco J, Sanz M. The effect of one - time abutment 
placement on interproximal bone levels and peri -implant soft  tissues: A prospective 
randomized clinical trial. Clin Oral Implants Res  2017;28:443 –52. 
30. Lambrechts T, Doornewaard R, De Bruyckere T, Matthijs L, Deschepper E, Cosyn J. A 
multicenter cohort study on the association of the one -abutment one -time concept with 
marginal bone loss around bone level implants. Clin Oral Implants Res 2021;32:192 –202. 
31. Hamudi N, Barnea E, Weinberg E, Laviv A, Mijiritsky E, Matalon S, Chaushu L, Kolerman 
R. The association of the one -abutment at one -time concept with marginal bone loss around 
the SLA and platform switch and conical abutment implants. J Clin Med  2022;11:74.  
32. Jiang J, Yang H, Zhu H, et al. Clinical efficacy of a two -piece abutment conforming to the 
concept of one abutment one time in the posterior region: A clinical pilot study.  Clin 
Implant Dent Relat Res . Published online June 6, 2024.  
 16 33. Calatrava J, Sanz -Sánchez I, Molina A, Bollain J, Martín C, Sanz M. Effect of one -time 
placement of the definitive abutment versus multiple healing abutment disconnections and 
reconnections during the prosthetic phase on radiographic and clinical outcomes:  A 12 -
month randomized clinical trial.  Clin Implant Dent Relat Res . Published online July 16, 
2024.  
34. Koutouzis T, Koutouzis G, Gadalla H, Neiva R. The effect of healing  abutment 
reconnection and disconnection on soft and hard peri -implant  tissues: a short -term 
randomized controlled clinical trial. Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants  2013;28:807 –14. 
35. Luongo  G, Bressan  E, Grusovin  MG, D’Avenia  F, Neumann  K, Sbricoli L, Esposito M. Do 
repeated changes of abutments have any influence on the stability of peri -implant tissues? 
Four -month post -loading preliminary results   from  a multicentre  randomized controlled  
trial. Eur J  Oral  Implantol . 2015;8:129 –40. 
36. Praca LFG, Teixeira EC, Rego RO. Influence of abutment disconnection on peri -implant 
marginal bone loss: A randomized clinical trial. Clin Oral Implants Res  2020;31:341 –51. 
37. Rios-Santos JV, Tello -Gonzalez G, Lazaro -Calvo P, Gil Mur FJ, Rios -Carrasco B, 
Fernandez -Palacin A, Herrero -Climent M. One abutment one time: A multicenter, 
prospective, controlled, randomized study. Int J Environ Res Public Health  2020;17:9453.  
38. Moreira F, Rocha S, Caramelo F, Tondela JP. One -abutment one -time effect on peri -
implant marginal bone: A prospective, controlled, randomized, double -blind study. 
Materials (Basel)  2021;14:4179.  
39. Sanz -Sánchez I, Molina A, Martin C, Bollain J, Calatrava J, Sanz M. The effect of one -
time abutment placement on clinical and radiographic outcomes: A 5 -year randomized 
clinical trial.  Clin Oral Implants Res . 2024;35(6):609 -620. 
40. Iglhaut  G, Schwarz  F, Winter  RR, Mihatovic  I, Stimmelmayr  M, Schliephake  H. Epithelial  
attachment and downgrowth  on dental  implant abutments - a comprehensive review. J 
 17 Esthet Restor Dent  2014;26:324 –31. 
41. Canullo L, Tallarico M, Gracis S, Vela X, Rodriguez X, Covani U. Clinical Considerations 
on Strategies That Avoid Multiple Connections and Disconnections of Implant 
Abutments.  Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent  2020;40:9 –17. 
42. Pommer B, Danzinger M, Aiquel LL, Pitta J. Long -term outcomes of maxillary single -
tooth implants in relation to timing protocols of implant placement and loading: systematic 
review and meta -analysis. Clin Oral Implant Res  2021;32:56 –66. 
43. Vatenas I, Linkevicius T. One abutment one time vs. repeatable abutment disconnections 
in implants, restored with cemented/screw retained fixed partial dentures: marginal bone 
level changes: A systematic review and meta -analysis. Stomatologija, Baltic Dental and 
Maxillofacial Journal  2021;23:35 –40. 
44. Kang Y, Zheng X, Zhang D, et al. One -Abutment at One -Time in Posterior Edentulism: A 
Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis.  J Craniofac Surg . 2023;34(8):e720 -e724.  
45. Koutouzis T, Gholami F, Reynolds J, Lundgren T, Kotsakis GA. Abutment 
disconnection/reconnection affects peri -implant marginal bone levels: A meta -analysis. Int 
J Oral Maxillofac implants  2017;32:575 –81. 
46. Tallarico M, Caneva M, Meloni SM, Xhanari E, Covani U, Canullo L. Definitive abutments 
placed at implant insertion and never removed: is it an effective approach? A systematic 
review and meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Oral Maxillofac Surg.  
2018;76:316 -324. 
47. Barbara JGC, Luz D, Vianna K, Barboza EP. The influence of abutment disconnections on 
peri-implant marginal bone: A systematic review. Int J Oral Implantol  2019;12:283 –96. 
48. Mombelli A, van Oosten MA, Schurch E Jr, Lang NP. The microbiota associated with 
successful or failing osseointegrated titanium implants. Oral  Microbiology  and 
Immunology  1987;2:145 –151. 
 18 49. Linkevicius T, Apse P, Gryhauskas S, Puisys A. The influence of soft tissue  thickness on 
crestal bone changes around implants: A 1 -year prospective  controlled clinical trial. Int J 
Oral Maxillofac Implants  2009;24:  712–9.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
50. De Pascalis F. Soft tissue integration with a hybrid abutment using the "one abutment -one 
time" therapeutic protocol: case series.  Quintessence Int . 2022;53(7):590 -596. 
51. Waltenberger L, Wolfart S. SafetyCrown: a patient -centered, fully digital concept for 
immediate implant restoration following the one -abutment/one -time concept -a pilot case 
series of a new treatment concept.  Int J Implant Dent . 2022;8(1):35.  
52. Reis INRD, Todescan FF, Ruiz GM, et al. Influence of supracrestal tissue height on peri -
implant hard and soft tissues of single implants placed in the esthetic area using the one 
abutment -one time approach: a 1 -year prospective interventional study.  Quintessence Int . 
2023;54(7):536 -547. 
53. Henao PAR, Queija LC, Linder S, Dard M, González AL, Carrión JB. Clinical and 
Radiographic Outcomes of a New Fully Tapered Implant with the One-Abutment One -
Time Approach: In -Line Clinical Case Series with a 1 -Year Follow -up. Int J Oral 
Maxillofac Implants . 2023;38(5):943 -953. 
54. Ibrahim AM, Elgamal M, Ragheb NA. One -time definitive attachment connection versus 
healing abutment placement for an implant -retained mandibular overdenture: Peri -implant 
metabolic activity.  J Prosthet Dent . Published online April 9, 2024.  
55. Wang YM, He JC. Short -term follow up of treatment effect using one -time one -abutment 
placement in implant restoration in 35 patients with single posterior teeth loss. Shanghai 
Kou Qiang Yi Xue. 2024 Apr;33(2):156 -15.
 19  
 20  