 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 1 of 17 
 The following includes all aspects of the protocol entitled, “ The Impact of Self -Management with 
Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in Individuals with Spinal Cord 
Injury and Spina Bifida” in which we propose use of intravesicular Lactobacillus to reduce 
urinary symptoms in people with neuropathic bladder.  
 
Specific Aim 2 Methods and Procedures : Develop and pilot a UTI Self -Management Protocol 
using Probiotics (SMP PRO) to reduce the severity, frequency and impact of urinary 
symptom s. The validated Urinary Symptom Questionnaire for people with Neuropathic Bladder 
(USQ -NB; developed in Aim 1 of this study , currently in progress  IRB # 2012 -187) will be the 
linchpin of the SMP PRO protocol.  The principal utility of the SMP PRO will be in helping 
individuals i dentify the symptoms that signal recourse to  increase fluid intake to reduce 
symptoms, initiate  probiotic t reatment, or seek medical attention .  
 
Development of the SMP PRO has been  an iterative participatory design process. The 
multidi sciplinary team began  refining the decision tree underlying the protocol, concurrent with 
development of the  USQ -NB, informed by patient focus groups, and later  will be assessed  
through large scale national testing  in conjunction with U nited Spinal Associa tion. The  prototype 
SMP PRO will be shared with a diverse sample of individuals with Spina Bifida ( SB), Spinal Cord 
Injury  (SCI), and Multiple Sclerosis  to develop use cases and scenarios of use to further inform 
the protocol. These patients further informing the SMP PRO will include adults, youth, and 
children, both genders, persons who reuse ca theters and those who don’t,  among individuals with 
SCI, SB, and MS  who use intermittent catheterization for their bladder management .  Participants 
will engage in semi -structured interviews in which they will be asked to recall the onset and 
progression of symptoms in their most recent  episode of urinary symptoms . The interviewer will 
then ask participants to mentally step through th e exp erience of urinary symptoms : 1) to confirm 
that the prototype SMP PRO can be triggered by the items composing the USQ -NB and 2) to 
elucidate the mechanics of implementing the protocol across the diversity of individuals with 
neuropathic bladder due to SB , SCI or MS . Interview data will be managed, coded, and 
thematically analyzed using NVivo 10 qualitative software. Use cases and scenarios of use will 
be developed from themes. The interdisciplinary team will refine and expand the SMP PRO to 
accommodate patien t experience augmented by use cases and scenarios of use.  
  
THE FOLLOWING SECTIO NS REPRESENT ASPECTS  OF THE PROPOSED STU DY 
IN WHICH THE LACTOBACILLUS PROBIOTIC PROTOCOL W ILL BE 
IMPLEMENTED BY PATIE NTS . 
 
Once the SMP PRO has been revised and tailored to the  patient experience, we will  conduct a mu lti 
phase  pilot study  with 1 20 individuals with neuropathic bladder due to SB or SCI / Multiple 
Scleorosis  to study its safety, acceptability and perceived usefulness. Pilot data will include 
weekly USQ -NB and records of any urinary symptoms and UTIs  that are experienced.  
 
Phase I a: Safety study of a single bladder instillation  of probiotic  in adults . A subsample of 
healthy adults  with neuropathic bladder who do not have urinary symptoms meeting the criteria 
for antibiotic treatment  of urinary tract infection  or initiation of the protocol  will undergo a single 
intravesical instillation of Lactobacillus to determine the tolerability  of the instillation, safety of a 
single instillation, and whether the instilled Lactobacillus persists in the urine.  
Study Design: We will recruit N =5 adult subjects with neuropathic bladder due to SCI or SB.  
Clinical Setting: MedStar National Rehabilitat ion Hospital  
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 2 of 17 
 Target Enrollment: 5 subjects at least 18 years of age with SCI or SB and at least 1-year post -
injury (if SCI). 
Informed Consent:  Consent will by obtained by the PI, Study Coordinator, or Research Assistant.  
Inclusion Criteria:  Inclusion cri teria for safety study participants are : 1) age 18-50 years; 2) if 
SCI, at least 1 -year duration; 3) neuropathic bladder, as determined by the attending physician; 4) 
utilizing intermittent catheterization for bladder management; and 5 ) community dwelling.  
Exclusion Criteria:  Study candidates with the following will be excluded: 1) known genitourinary 
pathology beyond neuropathic bladder (i.e., vesicoureteral reflux, bladder or kidney stones, etc.); 
2) use of prophylactic antibiotics; 3) instillation of  other intravesicular agents to reduce  urinary 
symptoms or UTI (i.e., gentamycin); 4) psychologic or psychiatric conditions influencing the 
ability to follow  instructions; 5) participation in another study in whi ch results would be 
confounded; 6) pregnant or b reastfeeding women; 7) individuals with a history of acquired or 
genetic immunodeficiencies; active, acute or chronic serious infections ( e.g., viral hepatitides, 
HIV/AIDs); 8) individuals with cancer/autoimmune disorders; 9) serious allergy to any 
compone nt or excipients in the live bacterial combination product ; 10) no change in neurologic 
status in the previous 2 weeks; 11) taken antibiotic for any reason in the previous 2 weeks; 12) 
any patient with history of sensitivity or allergy to ampicillin or tet racycline;  and 1 3) current 
urinary tract infection or urinary tract infection within the previous 2 weeks ;  (as defined by 
Infectious Diseases Society of America CAUTI Guidelines, 2010 . According to the Infectious 
Disease Society of America Guidelines for Diagnosis of Catheter -Associated UTI , the presence 
of the following urinary symptoms is required for UTI diagnosis in patients using intermittent 
catheterization: new onset or worsening fever, rigors, altered mental status, malaise, lethargy with 
no other identified cause, flank pain, costove rtebral angle tenderness, acute hematuria, pelvic 
discomfort, increased spasticity, autonomic dysreflexia or sense of unease. The Guidelines 
specifically state that “the presence or absence of odorous or cloudy urine should NOT be used as 
an indication for  urine culture or antimicrobial therapy” and “the presence, absence or degree of 
pyuria should NOT be interpreted as an indication for antimicrobial treatment.”  If a subject 
presents with any of t hese symptoms and there are ≥103 cfu/hpf bacterial growth o n urine culture, 
the subject will be excluded  and treated for a UTI according to clinical best practice.  
Baseline Data Collection: At baseline, subjects who do not report urinary symptoms (see below)  
other than cloudy or foul -smelling urine will complete t he validated USQ -NB. Urine will be 
collected for urinalysis and urine culture (see below for methods of urine collection), however 
urinalysis results will be used for post hoc data collection only and not inclusion/exclusion  in 
keeping with the recommendat ions of the IDSA .   
Intervention:  Eligible patients will undergo 1  Lactobacillus  (Culturelle  GG, 20 Billion live 
organisms ) instillation by study personnel at the study site. For the intravesicular Lactobacillus  
instillation,  the contents of 1 Lactobacillus  capsule will be mixed into 45 cc sterile 0.9% saline  
(adult bladder volume is 450cc, so this amount represents 10% of adult bladder volume) . After 
mixing, study personnel will draw up the 45 cc of the liquid Lactobacillus  mixture into a 60cc 
catheter tip syringe and instill via the intermittent catheter. Participants will be observed in the 
clinic for 30 minutes after instillation to assure that no adverse reactions occur.  
Post-Intervention Follow -Up: After completion of the one Lactobacillus  instillation and 30 
minute observation period, participants will be asked to monitor for any symptoms  using  the 
USQ -NB daily for one week. They will be instructed to contact study personnel in the event of 
any urinary symptoms. They will then return to th e clinic 5-10 days after instillation for repeat 
urinalysis and urine culture.  
 
Phase 1b : Safety study of single bladder instillation probiotic in children with SB  or SCI . After 
Phase 1a is complete, accumulated safety data (inclusive of adverse events and laboratory results) 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 3 of 17 
 will be presented to the DSMB. Phase 1b will be initiated only after review and approval of the 
Phase 1a safety data by the DSMB. Once approval demon strates that a single dose of intravesiclur 
Lactobacillus has been determined to be safe in adults, the same safety study will be repeated in 
children. A subsample of healthy children with neuropathic bladder due to SB who do not have 
urinary symptoms meet ing the criteria for antibiotic treatment or initiation of the protocol will 
undergo a single intravesical instillation of Lactobacillus to determine the tolerability of the 
instillation, safety of a single instillation, and whether the instilled Lactobaci llus persists in the 
urine.  
Study Design: We will recruit N=5 children with neuropathic bladder due to SB  or SCI . 
Clinical Setting: MedStar National Rehabilitation Hospital and Children’s National Medical 
Center.  
Target Enrollment: 5 subjects at least 6 ye ars of age with SB or SCI, at least 1 -year post -injury (if 
SCI).  
Informed Consent:  Consent and assent will by obtained by the PI, Study Coordinator, or Research 
Assistant.   
Inclusion Criteria:  Inclusion criteria for safety study participants are: 1) age >= 6 years; 2) if SCI, 
at least 1 -year duration;  3) neuropathic bladder, as determined by the attending physician; 4) 
utilizing intermittent catheterization for bladder management; and 5 ) community dwelling.  
Exclusion Criteria:  Study candidates with the follo wing will be excluded: 1) known genitourinary 
pathology beyond neuropathic bladder (i.e., vesicoureteral reflux, bladder or kidney stones, etc.); 
2) use of prophylactic antibiotics; 3) instillation of intravesicular agents to reduce UTI (i.e., 
gentamycin);  4) psychologic or psychiatric conditions influencing the ability to follow 
instructions; 5) participation in another study in which results would be confounded; 6) pregnant 
or breastfeeding; 7) individuals with a history of acquired or genetic immunodefic iencies; active, 
acute or chronic serious infections (i.g., viral hepatitides, HIV/AIDs); 8) individuals with 
cancer/autoimmune disorders; 9) serious allergy to any component or excipients in the live 
bacterial combination product; 10) no change in neurolo gic status in the previous 2 weeks; 11) 
taken antibiotic for any reason in the previous 2 weeks; and 12) current urinary tract infection or 
urinary tract infection within the previous 2 weeks (as defined by Infectious Diseases Society of 
America CAUTI Guid elines, 2010. According to the Infectious Disease Society of America 
Guidelines for Diagno sis of Catheter -Associated UTI , the presence of the following urinary 
symptoms is required for UTI diagnosis in patients using intermittent catheterization: new onset  
or worsening fever, rigors, altered mental status, malaise, lethargy with no other identified cause, 
flank pain, costovertebral angle tenderness, acute hematuria, pelvic discomfort, increased 
spasticity, autonomic dysreflexia or sense of unease. The Guide lines specifically state that “the 
presence or absence of odorous or cloudy urine should NOT be used as an indication for urine 
culture or antimicrobial therapy” and “the presence, absence or degree of pyuria should NOT be 
interpreted as an indication for antimicrobial treatment.”  If a subject presents with any of these 
symptoms and there are ≥103 cfu/hpf bacterial growth on urine culture, the subject will be 
excluded and treated for a UTI according to clinical best practice.  
Baseline Data Collection: Same as for Phase Ia Safety Study  
Intervention:  Eligible patients will undergo 1 Lactobacillus  pediatric dose (Culturelle GG 10 
Billion live organisms) instillation by study personnel at the study site. For the intravesicular 
Lactobacillus  instillation, th e contents of 1 Lactobacillus  capsule will be mixed into sterile 0.9% 
saline using an age -based estimate of bladder capacity (see Table below). Similar to adults, this 
bladder instillation will represent 10% of the estimated maximum bladder volume based on  age. 
 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 4 of 17 
 Age (yrs)  Estimated Bladder 
Capacity (ml)  Volume Culturelle 
mixture infused (ml)  # of particles 
delivered per dose 
(billions)  
6 270 27 12.0 
7 285 28.5 12.7 
8 300 30 13.3 
9 315 31.5 14.0 
10 330 33 14.7 
11 345 34.5 15.3 
12 360 36 16.0 
13 375 37.5 16.7 
14 390 39 17.3 
15 405 40.5 18.0 
16 420 42 18.7 
17 435 43.5 19.3 
18 450 45 20.0 
    
    
    
    
*Reference:  Kaefer M1, Zurakowski D, Bauer SB, Retik AB, Peters CA, Atala A, Treves ST.  
Estimating normal bladder capacity in children. J Urol. 1997 Dec;158(6):2261 -4. 
 
After mixing, study personnel will draw up the liquid Lactobacillus  mixture into a 60cc catheter 
tip syringe and instill via the intermittent catheter. Participants will be observed in the clinic for 
30 minutes after instilla tion to assure that no adverse reactions occur.  
 
Post-intervention Follow -Up: Same as for Phase Ia Safety Study  
 
Phase II : Pilot s tudy  assessing the USQ -NB and SMP PRO 
We will recruit up to 120 persons from a national sample in who will use the SMP PRO in order to 
estimate the strength of the associations between successful implementation of the probiotic 
self-management program and urinary symptoms.  We will conduct a 18 -month study in 
which each participant will serve as his/her own control through 3 phase s of study: 6 -months 
usual care (baseline), 6 -months probiotic intervention, and 6 -months follow -up.  
Study Design : We will recruit N= up to 120 subjects with neuropathic bladder who will  utilize the 
SMP PRO as directed, and we will follow patient satisfacti on and urinary symptom outcomes, but 
not utilize urinalysis or urine culture (as this is the intended use of the SMP PRO in practice).  
Clinical Setting : Enrollment through a national database  
Target Enrollment:   Adult subjects at least 1 -year post -injury and 18 years of age with 
SCI/Multiple Sclerosis (MS)  or at least 18 years of age with SB or pediatric subjects at least 6 
years of age with SB  or SCI . 
Recruitment Strategy:  SCI/MS and SB subjects will be enrolled with assistance from United 
Spinal Associat ion. Additionally, we will query the MedStar National Rehabilitation Hospital 
inpatient service, the 40+ MedStar National Rehabilitation Network outpatient sites, various 
MedStar Network databases , and Children’s National Medical Center (CNMC) SB database . 
Databases will be queried for participants who meet the eligibility criteria and have already 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 5 of 17 
 provided HIPAA authorization and consent to be contacted for future research. Announcements 
and IRB -approved flyers will be posted on the United Spinal Associati on and study websites and 
at participating institutions.  
Informed Consent:  Informed consent will be  emailed or  mailed (if not in person at MedStar NRH  
or CNMC ) out to participants interested in the study. Paid return envelopes will be included for 
particip ants to return signed informed consent to Study Coordinator. At MedStar NRH  and 
CNMC , consent will by obtained by the PI, Study Coordinator, or Research Assistant.  
Inclusion Criteria:  Inclusion criteria for participants with SCI / MS  includes: 1) age≥18 years; 2) 
SCI/MS; 3) neuropathic bladder  at least 1 year duration , as determined by the attending 
physician; 4) utilizing intermittent catheterization for bladder management; 5) a history of 2 or 
more UTIs in the past year; and 6) comm unity dwelling.  Inclusion criteria for participants with 
SB adults includes: 1) age≥18 yea rs; 2) SB ; 3) neuropathic bladder as determined by the 
attending physician; 4) utilizing intermittent catheterization for bladder management; 5) a history 
of 2 or mor e UTIs in the past year; and 6) community dwelling. Inclusion criteria  for pediatric 
subjects includes: 1) age≥6 years; 2) SB or SCI; 3) neuropathic bladder at least 1 year duration  
(for SCI) , as determined by the attending physician; 4) utilizing intermit tent catheterization for 
bladder management; 5) a history of 2 or more UTIs in the past year; and 6) community dwelling.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  Study candidates with the following will be excluded: 1) known genitourinary 
pathology beyond neuropathic bladder (i.e., vesicoureteral reflux, bladder or kidney stones, etc.); 
2) use of prophylactic antibiotics; 3) instillation of intravesicular agents to reduce UTI (i.e., 
gentamycin); 4) psychologic or psychiatric conditions influencing the ability to follow 
instruc tions; 5) participation in another study in which results would be confounded; 6) pregnant 
or breastfeeding; 7) individuals with a history of acquired or genetic immunodeficiencies; active, 
acute or chronic serious infections (i.g., viral hepatitides, HIV/ AIDs); 8) individuals with 
cancer/autoimmune disorders; 9) serious allergy to any component or excipients in the live 
bacterial combination product ; 10) no change in neurologic status in the previous 2 weeks; 11) 
taken antibiotic for any reason in the prev ious 2 weeks; 12) any patient with history of sensitivity 
or allergy to ampicillin or tetracycline;  and 1 3) current urinary tract infection or urinary tract 
infection within the previous 2 weeks (as defined by Infectious Diseases Society of America 
CAUTI G uidelines, 2010. According to the Infectious Disease Society of America Guidelines for 
Diagno sis of Catheter -Associated UTI , the presence of the following urinary symptoms is 
required for UTI diagnosis in patients using intermittent catheterization: new onset or worsening 
fever, rigors, altered mental status, malaise, lethargy with no other identified cause, flank pain, 
costov ertebral angle tenderness, acute hematuria, pelvic discomfort, increased spasticity, 
autonomic dysreflexia or sense of unease. The Guidelines specifically state that “the presence or 
absence of odorous or cloudy urine should NOT be used as an indication fo r urine culture or 
antimicrobial therapy” and “the presence, absence or degree of pyuria should NOT be interpreted 
as an indication for antimicrobial treatment.”  If a subject presents with any of these symptoms 
and there are ≥103 cfu/hpf bacterial growth on urine culture, the subject will be excluded and 
treated for a UTI according to clinical best practice.  
Baseline Data Collection:  After consent, participants will complete the Health History 
Questionnaire  Thereafter, participants will complete the Urinar y Symptom Questionnaire  (USQ -
NB) weekly.  
Intervention:  After 6 months of baseline data collection, participants will receive the 
Lactobacillus  (Culturelle)  kits. Participants  will be instructed on preparation and intravesicular 
instillation of the Lactoba cillus , and will have a tutorial with a fellow consumer on use of the 
patient -initiated SMP PRO. Participants will receive 10 Culturelle  tablets the beginning of the 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 6 of 17 
 treatment phase. At the end of each week , the coordinator or  RA will ask how many remaining 
tablets the participant has and will  instruct them  to complete the USQ -NB weekly.  
If/when urinary symptoms occur, they will be instructed to follow the SMP PRO protocol  to 
determine whether to initiate intravesicular Lactoba cillus  instillatio n or to seek medical attention . 
The self -management protocol will also direct them to discontinue Lactobacillus  instillation or  to 
seek medical attention  if symptoms remit, persist or worsen. If participants are directed by the 
self-manag ement protoco l to seek medical attention  or s/he feels the need for medical evaluation, 
s/he will be advised to obtain care as they typically would by their health care provider. 
Participants will be supplied with letters to be brought to their health care  provider notifying them 
of the study and requesting sharing of urinalysis and urine culture results with the research team. 
A verified UTI will include those that resulted in antibiotic treatment  prescribed  by a health care 
professional.  
 
For the intraves icular Lactobacillus  instillation, the contents of 1 Lactobacillus  capsule will be 
mixed into 45 cc sterile 0.9% saline (adult bladder volume is 450cc, represent ing 10% of adult 
bladder volume).  After mixing, study participants  will draw up the 45 cc of the liquid 
Lactobacillus  mixture into a 60cc catheter tip syringe and instill via the intermittent catheter  using 
sterile technique . For children volume is based on age (see table on page 4 of protocol).  
 
Study participant will recheck symptoms after 24 hrs (valid range 22 -30 hrs) following the 
SMP PRO  protocol and either perform  another Lactobacillus instillation or seek medical attention , 
per the subjects choice . If symptoms still persist 4 hrs after second instillation, study p articipants 
are instructed to  seek medical attention.  
 
Post-Intervention Follow -Up: After completion of the 6 -month patient -initiated self -management 
protocol intervention period, participants will monitor symptoms weekly using the USQ -NB. 
 
Measurements:  
Health History Questionnaire : After subjects give consent, a brief medical history will be 
conducted using a structured questionnaire, to  obtain  demographic information and relevant 
family history (these items will be collected only at baseline), and genitourinary history  
Urinary Symptom Questionnaire  (USQ -NB): A preliminary urinary symptom questionnaire 
has been developed with consumer input based on the most common typical and SCI /MS-specific 
urinary symptoms. The final version (developed in Specific Aim  1 IRB # 2014 -187) will be used 
in this phase of the study.  USQ -NB will be completed weekly.  All participants will receive a link 
to the questionnaire every Sunday morning. If they have not  responded by Monday morning, they 
will receive another link. If they have not responded by Tuesday, the study participant will 
receive a phone call. If there is no response by noon Wednesday, it is considered a missed event.  
Patient satisfaction : We have developed a simple four item patient satisfaction “survey” that 
will be requested at the end of each timeframe. Participants will be asked to rate their satisfaction, 
thinking only about the preceding time period, with changes in the frequency  of their symptoms; 
the amelioration of the severity  of their symptoms; and changes in the impact  of their symptoms. 
A 5-point Likert scale will be used for each of these items (not at all satisfied; not very satisfied; 
no perceived difference; satisfied; and  very satisfied). A fourth item, “Can you estimate, using a 
scale from 0% <would absolutely never do this>, through 50% <might do this> to 100% <would 
absolutely always do this>, whether or not you would seek this intervention out and pay for it 
yourself i f insurance did not pay for it”.   
 
Medical Information:  
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 7 of 17 
  If participants instill lactobacillus  at any time  during  the intervention phase, and   after 
Lactobacillus instillation  report s a UTI as an Adverse Event (AE) we will request their urinalysis 
and urine culture results to  attempt to determine if Lactobacillus might have been the cause of the 
UTI. If determined necessary by   the PI, Co-PI and/or DSMB other AEs reported could require  
retrieval of medical records.   
 
Phase III : Pilot Study of Multiple (up to 2) Lactobacillus  Bladder Instillations  
We will recruit 30 persons in whom we will collect urine up to 18 timepoints ( up to monthly for 
the first year when not experiencing symptoms , up to two times when subject experience urinary 
symptoms , follow -up after either lactobacillus treatment or antibiotics, and three (3) months into 
the six (6) months  follow -up) in order to estimate the strength of the associations between 
successful impl ementation of the probiotic self -management program and urinary 
symptoms, bladder inflammation, and the urine microbiome.  We will conduct a n 18-month 
study in which each participant will serve as his/her own control through 3 phases of study: 6 -
months usua l care (baseline), 6 -months probiotic intervention, and 6 -months follow -up  
Study Design : We will recruit N= 30 subjects with neuropathic bladder who will contribute urine 
samples for analyses.  
Clinical Setting : MedStar National Rehabilitation Hospital and Children’s National Medical 
Center.  
Target Enrollment:  30 adult subjects at least 1 -year post -injury and 18 years of age with SCI /MS 
or at least 18 years of age with SB   
Recruitment Strategy:  SCI/MS and SB subjects will be enrolled with assistance from Uni ted 
Spinal Association. Additionally, we will query the MedStar National Rehabilitation Hospital 
inpatient service, the 40+ MedStar National Rehabilitation Network outpatient sites, various 
MedStar Network databases, and the CNMC Spina Bifida database. Dat abases will be queried for 
participants who meet the eligibility criteria and have already provided HIPAA authorization and 
consent to be contacted for future research. Announcements and IRB -approved flyers will be 
posted on the United Spinal Association a nd study websites and at participating institutions.  
Informed Consent:  Consent will by obtained by the PI, Study Coordinator, or Research Assistant. 
All project staff are currently CITI certified and have passed all requirements for HIPAA 
certifications.  
Inclusion criteria for participants with SCI /SB/MS includes : 1) age≥18 years; 2) SCI /SB/MS; 3) 
neuropathic bladder  at least 1 -year duration , as determined by the attending physician; 4) utilizing 
intermittent catheterization for bladder management; 5) a history of 2 or more UTIs in the past 
year; 6) community dwelling , 7) Enrollment in Phase II  
Exclusion Criteria:  Study candidates with the following will be excluded: 1) known genitourinary 
pathology beyond neuropathic bladder (i.e., vesicoureteral reflux,  bladder or kidney stones, etc.); 
2) use of prophylactic antibiotics; 3) instillation of intravesicular agents to reduce UTI (i.e., 
gentamycin); 4) psychologic or psychiatric conditions influencing the ability to follow 
instructions; 5) participation in an other study in which results would be confounded; 6) pregnant 
or breastfeeding; 7) individuals with a history of acquired or genetic immunodeficiencies; active, 
acute or chronic serious infections (i.g., viral hepatitides, HIV/AIDs); 8) individuals with 
cancer/autoimmune disorders; 9) serious allergy to any component or excipients in the live 
bacterial combination product; 10) no change in neurologic status in the previous 2 weeks; 11) 
taken antibiotic for any reason in the previous 2 weeks; 12) any patient  with history of sensitivity 
or allergy to ampicillin or tetracycline; and 13) current urinary tract infection or urinary tract 
infection within the previous 2 weeks (as defined by Infectious Diseases Society of America 
CAUTI Guidelines, 2010  14) Not enrol led in Phase II . According to the Infectious Disease 
Society of America Guidelines for Diagnosis of Catheter -Associated UTI, the presence of the 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 8 of 17 
 following urinary symptoms is required for UTI diagnosis in patients using intermittent 
catheterization: new on set or worsening fever, rigors, altered mental status, malaise, lethargy with 
no other identified cause, flank pain, costovertebral angle tenderness, acute hematuria, pelvic 
discomfort, increased spasticity, autonomic dysreflexia or sense of unease. The Gu idelines 
specifically state that “the presence or absence of odorous or cloudy urine should NOT be used as 
an indication for urine culture or antimicrobial therapy” and “the presence, absence or degree of 
pyuria should NOT be interpreted as an indication f or antimicrobial treatment.”  If a subject 
presents with any of these symptoms and there are ≥103 cfu/hpf bacterial growth on urine culture, 
the subject will be excluded and treated for a UTI according to clinical best practice.  
 
Participant Burden :   
Urine samples for urinalysis, urine culture and metagenomic sequencing will be obtained at up to 
monthly for the first year of study participation when not experiencing symptoms , at up to 2 
occurrences of urinary symptoms during SMP PRO intervention phase , and follow -up after either 
lactobacillus treatment or antibiotics  and at follow -up, for a total of up to 18  samples per patient 
depending on the frequency with which urinary symptoms are experienced. When possible, our 
Research Assistant will meet with the patient at a mutually convenient location.  
 
 
 
 
Baseline Data Collection:   
Per IRB protocol # 2014 -211 phase II, after consent, participants will complete the Health History 
Questionnaire, Urinary Symptom Questionnaire, In addition to questionnaires, all participants 
will provide a urine sample using sterile catheterization techniques. Thereafter, participants will 
complete the Urinary Symptom Questionnaire weekly.  
 
Intervention:  
 After 6 months of baseline data collection the intervention phase will begin. Prior to 
implementing the intervention protocol, participants will provide study staff with a urine sample 
either at MedStar NRH, CNMC, or when possible, the study RA will meet with the participant at 
a mutually convenient location. After urine sample is collected, study participants will follow the 
study protocol and complete USQ -NB weekly. If/when urinary symptoms occur, they will be 
instructed to follow the SMP PRO protocol to determine whether to initiate intravesicular 
Lactobacillus  instillation or be evaluated by a physician. The self -management protocol 
(SMP PRO) will also direct them to discontinue Lactobacillus  instillation or be evaluated by a 
physician if symptoms remit, persist or worsen. If participants are directed by the self -
management protocol to seek medical attention or s/he feels the need for medical evaluation, s/he 
will be advised to obtain care as they typically would by their health care provider. Participants  
will be supplied with letters to be brought to their health care provider notifying them of the study 
and requesting sharing of urinalysis and urine culture results with the research team. A verified 
UTI will include those that resulted in antibiotic trea tment by a health care professional. An 
additional urine sample for metagenomics will either be left with the health care provider for pick 
up by the research team, brought to the research site, or obtained by the RA at a mutually 
convenient site. If parti cipant is treating urinary symptoms at home with Lactobacillus, a urine 
sample will be dropped off either at MedStar NRH, CNMC or when possible, the study RA will 
meet with the participant at a mutually convenient location.  
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 9 of 17 
 For the intravesicular Lactobaci llus instillation, the contents of 1 Lactobacillus  capsule will be 
mixed into 45 cc sterile 0.9% saline (adult bladder volume is 450cc, so this amount represents 
10% of adult bladder volume).  After mixing, study personnel will draw up the 45 cc of the liq uid 
Lactobacillus  mixture into a 60cc catheter tip syringe and instill via the intermittent catheter. For 
children volume is based on age (see table on page 4 of protocol). Study participant will recheck 
symptoms after 24 hrs (valid range 22 -30 hrs) follow ing the SMP PRO protocol and either complete 
another Lactobacillus instillation or seek medical attention. If symptoms still persist 4 hrs after 
second instillation, study participants should seek medical attention.  
 
Post-Intervention Follow -Up:  
After completion of the 6 -month patient -initiated self -management protocol intervention period, 
participants will monitor symptoms weekly using the USQ -NB. At the end of follow -up, we will 
obtain another urine sample from all participants.  
 
Measurements:  
In add ition to the measurements described in Phase II the following measurements will occur for 
phase III;  
Urine Acquisition : A 50 -100 ml urine sample will be collected from each subject for (1) 
urinalysis and cultivation, and (2) urine microbiome by SMRT sequen cing. Urine will be 
collected from a new, unused intermittent catheter.  
Urine Preparation : Collected urine will be immediately placed at 4°C. Within 6 hours, 
samples will be taken to CNMC for sequencing preparation. At CNMC, urine samples will be 
centrifu ged at 4°C, 5,000 x g for 20 minutes. The supernatant will be aliquoted in 2 ml cryotubes 
and frozen at -20°C. 10ml PBS will be added to the pellet with the remaining supernatant and 
then centrifuged (5,000xg) at 4°C for 20 minutes. The pellets and aspirat ed PBS wash solution 
will be stored at -20°C. Pellets will later be transferred for DNA isolation and SMRT sequencing.  
Urinalysis : Urine samples will be assessed utilizing standard clinical microbiology 
semiquantitative chemical testing using commercial d isposable test strips for glucose, bilirubin, 
ketone, specific gravity, blood pH, protein, urobilinogen, nitrite, and leukocyte esterase. After 
centrifuging for 5 minutes, microscopic examination for and quantification of WBCs, RBCs, 
epithelial cells, yeas t, bacteria, Trichomonas vaginalis , sperm cells, mucous filaments and 
crystals will be performed using standard microbial techniques.  
Urine Culture : Standard urine culture microbiology will be performed. A measured amount is 
inoculated to each of the appro priate media. A calibrated loop designed to deliver a known 
volume (0.0 I ml per loopful) of urine is used. The sample will be mixed the thoroughly and the 
top of the container removed. A calibrated wire -inoculating loop is flamed and allowed to cool 
witho ut coming in contact with any surface. The sterile loop is inserted into the urine sample 
vertically and urine is allowed to adhere to the loop. The loopful of urine is inoculated over 
MacConkey agar plates using standard methods. Similarly, a second loopf ul is collected and 
inoculated on a blood agar plate. The plates are incubated aerobically at 35 -37oC for at least 24 
hours. The colonies and colony forming units (CFUs) are counted by multiplying with 100 (since 
0.01 ml loop was used).  
SMRT Sequencing Met hods: Thawed urine samples will be clarified by low -speed 
centrifugation and bacterial genomic DNA will be isolated from pelleted bacteria using a DNeasy 
tissue extraction kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturer’s instruction. 16S rRNA genes will be 
amplifi ed using universal primers 28F 5’ - AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG -3’ and 1492R 5’ -
ACCTTGTTACGACTT -3’.  These primers will amplify sequences that correspond to the 
sequence between positions 27 and 1492 in E. coli  16S rRNA and produce amplification products 
of approx imately 1500 bp. These amplification products will be used for sequencing template 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 10 of 17 
 preparation using DNA Template Prep Kit 2.0 (Pacific Biosciences) followed by DNA 
Polymerase binding (DNA Polymerase Binding Kit P4, Pacific Biosciences). Briefly, ends of t he 
16S rRNA will be repaired with the Klenow DNA polymerase, SMRT Bell adapters will be 
ligated with the PCR products, followed by annealing of sequencing primers and ternary complex 
formation with the P4 DNA polymerase. Ternary complexes will be loaded on to SMRT cells and 
sequenced on the Pacific Biosciences RSII instrument using DNA Sequencing Reagent 2.0 and 
one 90 min movie. Resulting circular consensus sequence (CCS) reads will be used for taxonomic 
classification and diversity measurements. The amount  of ternary complex needed for the optimal 
loading of the zero molecular waveguides (ZMW) will be optimized by loading different amounts 
of ternary complex and measuring number of productive ZMWs. Sequenced rRNA genes will be 
analyzed and classified using Pathoscope.  We wi ll use the following formula to determine the 
number of SMRT cells needed to detect most/all bacterial species in our samples: # of SMRT 
cells = (189 * 1 * 87/30,000).  Our preliminary data from 454 sequencing indicated the presence 
of approximately 189 ba cterial species in samples from patients with neuropathic bladder. The 
ratio between most and least abundant bacterial species was 87. CCS protocol yields one accurate 
consensus read per sequenced rRNA gene, representing a member of the microbiome. Therefo re, 
to ensure detection of most/all bacterial species in the sample and accurate sequence 
determination 1 SMRT cell per patient sample will be sufficient.  
     Patient satisfaction : We have developed a simple four item patient satisfaction “survey” that 
will be requested at the end of each timeframe. Participants will be asked to rate their satisfaction, 
thinking only about the preceding time period, with changes in the frequency  of their symptoms; 
the amelioration of the severity  of their symptoms; and ch anges in the impact  of their symptoms. 
A 5-point Likert scale will be used for each of these items (not at all satisfied; not very satisfied; 
no perceived difference; satisfied; and very satisfied). A fourth item, “Can you estimate, using a 
scale from 0% < would absolutely never do this>, through 50% <might do this> to 100% <would 
absolutely always do this>, whether or not you would seek this intervention out and pay for it 
yourself if insurance did not pay for it”.    
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
A Data  Safety Monitoring Board has been established. Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB) reports will be prepared monthly during the Phase I “Baseline: Safety Evaluation  of a 
Single Instillation in Adults ” period, and then two times a year (or as requested b y the DSMB)  for 
Phase II .  Each report will consist of five sections, including: 1) recruitment, 2) adverse effects of 
the investigational product (i.e. the intravesicular Lactobacillus instillation), 3) completion of the 
Urinary Symptom Questionnaire (USQ -NB), 4) completion of, and adherence to, the Self -
Management Protocol (SMP PRO), and 5) data accrual and quality.  The recruitment section will 
include counts for screening (eligible v. ineligible), enrollment (consented v. declined), and 
retention (completion of phase milestones and transitions v. withdrawal or lost -to-follow -up).  For 
reporting purposes, subgroups will include age (adult v. child), neuropathic bladder etiology 
(Spinal Cord Injury v. Spina Bifida), and standard demographics (i.e. ge nder, race, and ethnicity).  
The adverse effects section will report all adverse outcomes that appear to be associated with the 
investigational product, and will include specific event details, relevant tests and laboratory 
results, relevant histories (inc luding pre -existing and co -existing medical conditions), use of 
concomitant medications, and investigational product dose, frequency, route of instillation, timing 
of instillation, manufacturer’s lot number, and manufacturer’s expiration date (as appropria te for 
completion of the MedWatch FDA Form 3500A).  The USQ -NB completion section will report 
the frequency of on -line survey completion, with and without the need for study staff reminders.  
The SMP PRO completion/adherence section will report the frequenc y of on -line survey 
completion, with and without reminders, as well as the appropriateness/correctness of protocol 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 11 of 17 
 implementation, investigational product instillation, and medical care seeking.  The data accrual 
and quality section will report counts of c ompleted surveys and case report forms at phase -
specific time points, as well as counts of specific responses to individual questions.  
 
H1. Compared with usual management, self -management of urinary symptoms with 
probiotics will reduce the frequency, severity and impact of urinary symptoms and UTIs 
(PRIMARY OUTCOMES) .  The goal of aim 2 is to assess the effect of Lactobacillus  
supplementation on the frequency, severity and impact of urinary symptoms and UTIs.  This aim 
can be evaluated with all 100 par ticipants in the SMP pilot study. We expect to find a significant 
difference in these primary outcomes between our three experimental timeframes (6 months prior 
to intervention, 6 months of SMP PRO intervention, and 6  month follow -up period).  Frequency of 
UTI will be defined as the number of verified UTIs occurring during the timeframe. Urinary 
symptoms will be assessed using the USQ -NB where frequency of symptoms, degree of severity, 
and impact on the individual, will be considered.   
We will estimate the average number of symptoms on the USQ -NB endorsed  
(irrespective of frequency, severity and impact) across the weeks during that time frame, for each 
participant. Thus, each participant will have a continuous outcome (average number of USQ -NB 
items endorsed ). We will also compute the number of verified UTIs experienced by each 
participant. These two outcomes are the primary outcomes for our study and analysis; they 
depend solely on the face validity of the  USQ -NB,and on clinically verified UTIs, and so will not 
be affected by a failure to find or establish formal measurement properties for the USQ -NB, 
should any occur. They will also be less subject to any variability in participant perceptions of 
frequency, severity or impact, which can complicate analytic a ssumptions and limit power and 
interpretability of change that might be perceived. We will describe these features of the sample 
over time but will not conduct inference tests on these ratings.  
We propose linear mixed -effects modeling to explore the effect  of introduction to/use of 
the SMP PRO on the number of USQ -NB symptoms (averaged over the entire time frame) and the 
incidence of UTIs. Each model will include gender as a fixed effect, and time (baseline; SMP PRO 
use; post -SMP PRO observation) as the explanatory variable, and random effects for intercept 
(subject) only. This method allows for missing data and the inclusion of covariates where 
appropriate; however we plan post -hoc analyses of the modeling in order to pinpoint potent ial 
interaction effects (e.g., between age or sex and time).  The focus of the analyses is to determine 
whether (irrespective of individual starting values or specific slopes) mean USQ -NB item 
endorsement and UTI counts go down in the SMP PRO time frame rel ative to the baseline values 
(generally negative associations in each regression between the outcome and time) and whether 
these values stay flat (zero slope), continue to decrease (negative slope) or increase (positive 
slope) during the post -SMP PRO follow  up.  
Power calculation : We plan to use mixed effects regression modeling for the most 
precision in our estimated effects of the SMP PRO on the USQ -NB symptom rate and UTI rate. 
However, it is difficult to predict the exact form of the final models since ou r understanding of 
the USQ -NB symptom makeup, and the univariate associations between gender or age (or any 
other of the demographic variables we will collect) and these two outcomes. Therefore, for the 
most conservative estimates, we use the most basic an alytic method to estimate the worst -case 
scenario power calculation, a t -test. In this pair of primary outcomes, alpha is set at 0.025 for each 
power calculation (and for each inference test). We will have data from 100 participants; 
however, to protect ag ainst a possible 20% drop out rate over the course of the 1 8-month study, 
we will recruit 120 persons for this arm, hoping for a final N of 100. If we observe an average of 
25 items on the USQ -NB endorsed over the baseline period, then with alpha = 0.025 w e would 
have 81% power to detect a reduction in this average number of items endorsed as low as five 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 12 of 17 
 (i.e., to detect a change from an average of 25 to an average of 20) during the SMP PRO period, 
assuming that the standard deviation of the average number o f endorsed USQ -NB items is as high 
as 16. If we observe an average of one UTI per month in the initial 6 -month period (for an 
average of six UTIs across this sample of 100 persons), then, with the alpha of 0.025 we would 
have 81% power to detect a reductio n in this average number of UTIs as low as 1.25 (i.e., to 
detect a change from an average of 6 to an average of 4.75) during the SMP PRO period, assuming 
that the standard deviation of the number of UTIs is as high as 4. We will explore the consistency 
of the UTI variable with the assumption of a normal distribution, and if appropriate we may 
utilize Poisson modeling if the assumption of normality is violated.  
 Additionally, because we have the potential to carefully describe the symptom profile for 
neuropat hic bladder generally and for SCI /MS and SB specifically, we also plan secondary 
analyses based on the USQ -NB items. Frequency, severity, and impact of each of the USQ -NB 
symptoms will be estimated for each participant, within each of the study timeframes.  Each of 
these symptom characteristics will be rated on an ordinal scale, so f or each symptom  on the USQ -
NB, the median frequency rating from their weekly USQ -NBs will be computed. These ordinal 
outcomes will be explored for similarities and differences ac ross sex, age, injury (SB/SCI /MS), 
and other demographic variables that could be useful in diagnosis or management of USQ -NB 
symptoms by us and other investigators in future studies. Descriptive statistics for each primary 
outcome (frequency, duration, and  severity of each UTI) and their change from baseline, will be 
produced for each time frame. We will generate preliminary (underpowered and not corrected for 
multiple comparisons) estimates of the strengths of associations between item frequency, 
severity,  and impact with time, sex, age, satisfaction with the SMP -UTI, and etiology 
(SCI/MS/ SB). If the reliability and validity evidence from Aim 1 and that national sample 
supports the estimation of latent factor scores on the USQ -NB factors, we will also compu te 
preliminary estimates of association between these covariates and the factor scores, as well as the 
association between the SMP -UTI and changes in these factor scores. This estimation will only 
be appropriate if measurement invariance across groups is o btained in Aim 1, but since we would 
not yet have evidence of invariance over time, these estimates would be considered preliminary .  
 
H2. Compared with usual management, self -management of urinary symptoms with 
probiotics will reduce bladder inflammation (Secondary outcome) . For those 20 participants 
in the subsample giving urine samples, bladder inflammation will be measured from each urine 
sample using a standard white blood count (WBC) from the urinalysis. WBC counts will be 
obtained only at the start of each timeframe, and so can be analyzed longitudinally as continuous 
variables representing the 6 -month pre -treatment period and the 6 month -SMP PRO period. As such 
we plan a mixed effects linear regression model of WBC counts with time treated as the fac tor of 
interest.  This analysis will assess whether WBC is significantly different from the SMP PRO, and 
post-SMP PRO, relative to the baseline pre -treatment periods.   
 
H3. Compared with usual management, self -management of urinary symptoms with 
probiotics will reduce the need for antibiotics to treat UTI (Secondary outcome) . The 
number of times antibiotics are used for each patient will be obtained from their medical records 
or self report. This value will be analyzed with the same three -point longitudinal mixed effects 
regression model with time as the factor of interest. Depending on the distribution of the outcome 
(i.e. given the count nature of this outcome, it may be Poisson distributed), we will utilize either 
linear or Poisson regression models.  This  analysis will assess whether there is an association 
between UT I rate during use of the SMP PRO, and post -SMP PRO exposure, relative to UTI rate 
during the baseline pre -treatment period.   
 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 13 of 17 
 H4. Compared with usual management, self -management of urinary symp toms with 
probiotics will return the microbiome to baseline (Secondary outcome) . For analysis of the 
microbiome, the fasta and fastq files of each sample’s CCS reads will be retrieved and processed 
using LUCY54 to filter out reads with low quality segments, as well as remove sequences that are 
shorter than the full length 16S rRNA (approximately 1500 bp). The sequences will then be 
aligned against the SILVA 16S rRNA database followed by subsequent implementation  of 
Mothur’s Chimera Slayer  to filter out chimeric reads from sequences in each sample. The 
remaining sequences will undergo taxonomic classification. Bowtie2 will align each sequence 
read to a reference genome derived from the SILVA 16S database and outp ut a SAM file. With 
the resulting SAM file, Pathoscope 51 is capable of characterizing the biological sample to the 
subspecies -level, generating an excel file with the proportions of each classified organism within 
the sample tabled.  
To determine whether bacterial diversity differs between study grou ps the Shannon Diversity 
Index will be used. The Shannon Index is a measure of sample diversity that takes into account 
total number of bacterial types in the sample and relative proportion of the bacterial types. From 
the subsample of 50 participants givi ng urine samples, subjects who did in fact utilize the SMP at 
least once during the 6 -month SMP time frame will be stratified into two groups, those who 
responded to SMP and those who did not; we will define “response” as the observation of a 10% 
or more d ecrease in the average number of USQ items endorsed within any time frame, so that 
each of the 50 persons in this sub -sample will be characterized as either a responder (10% or 
more decrease) or a non -responder (0 -9.99% decrease).  A scatter plot of respon se group versus 
Shannon Index will be produced, and a mixed effects linear regression model will test the 
individual (main) and interaction effects of response group and time on Shannon Index. A 
positive time coefficient is indicative of increased microbio me diversity and a negative time 
coefficient indicates reduces diversity. The magnitude of difference between the response groups 
will be determined using the Yue -Clayton theta similarity index (
 ). The 
  index measures the 
difference in the number and rel ative abundance of bacterial species between samples4,5 when 
=1 two samples have identical community structure and when 
 =0 indicates complete 
dissimilarity between samples. Pathoscope will be used to calculate abundance of different 
taxonomic groups at each time point . 
 
REFERENCES  
 
1.  Litza JA, Brill JR. Urinary Tract Infections. Primary Care: Clinics in Office Practice. 
2010;37(3):491 -507. 
2. Groah SL, Lammertse DP. Factors associated with survivial after bladder cancer in spinal 
cord injury. J Spinal Cord Med. 2003;26(4):339 -344. 
3. Filler G, Gharib M, Casier S, Lodige P, Ehrich JH, Dave S. Prevention of chronic kidney 
disease in spina bifida. International urology and nephrology. Jun 2012;44(3):817 -827. 
4. Cardenas DD, Hoffman JM, Kirshblum S, McKinley W. Etiology and incidence of 
rehospitalization after traumatic spinal cord injury: A multicenter analysis1 1 No 
commercial party having a direct financial interest in the results of the research 
supporting this article has or will confer a benefit upon the author(s) or upon any 
organizat ion with which the author(s) is/are associated. Archives of physical medicine 
and rehabilitation. 2004;85(11):1757 -1763.  
5. Chen Y, DeVivo MJ, Reseman JM. Current trend and risk factors for kidney stones in 
persons with spinal cord injury: a longitudinal s tudy. Spinal Cord. June 2000 
2000;38(6):346 -353. 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 14 of 17 
 6. Bølling H, Biering -Sørensen F, Kvist Kristensen J. Urinary calculi following traumatic 
spinal cord injury. Scandinavian Journal of Urology and Nephrology. 2007;41(2):115 -
119. 
7. Groah SL, Weitzenkamp DA, Lammertse DP, Whiteneck GG, Lezotte DC, Hamman RF. 
Excess risk of bladder cancer in spinal cord injury: Evidence for an association between 
indwelling catheter use and bladder cancer. Archives of physical medicine and 
rehabilitation. 2002;83(3):346 -351. 
8. Haisma JA, van der Woude LH, Stam HJ, et al. Complications following spinal cord 
injury: occurrence and risk factors in a longitudinal study during and after inpatient 
rehabilitation. J Rehabil Med. . 2007;39:393 -398. 
9. Cardenas DD, Moore KN, Dannels -McC lure A, et al. Intermittent Catheterization With a 
Hydrophilic -Coated Catheter Delays Urinary Tract Infections in Acute Spinal Cord 
Injury: A Prospective, Randomized, Multicenter Trial. PM&R. 2011;3(5):408 -417. 
10. Dicianno BE, Wilson R. Hospitalizations of adults with spina bifida and congenital spinal 
cord anomalies. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. Apr 2010;91(4):529 -535. 
11. Ouyang L, Grosse SD, Thibadeau J, Swanson M, Campbell VA. Outpatient medical 
conditions among children and adults with spina bifida in the United States: Frequency 
and expenditures. Journal of pediatric rehabilitation medicine. 2010;3(3):177 -185. 
12. Grieb ling TL. Urologic diseases in America project: trends in resource use for urinary 
tract infections in women. J Urol. Apr 2005;173(4):1281 -1287.  
13. Griebling TL. Urologic diseases in america project: trends in resource use for urinary 
tract infections in m en. J Urol. Apr 2005;173(4):1288 -1294.  
14. Department of Health and Human Services. HHS Action Plan To Prevent Healthcare -
Associated Infections. 2009; http://www.hhs.gov/ash/initiatives/hai /actionplan/ . Accessed 
October 3, 2011, 2011.  
15. United Spinal Association. United Spinal Association Annual Report: Fiscal Year -- July 
1, 2011 to June 30, 2012. East Elmhurst, NY: United Spinal Association;2013.  
16. Ronald A. The etiology of urinary tra ct infection: traditional and emerging pathogens. 
The American Journal of Medicine. 2002;113(1, Supplement 1):14 -19. 
17. Ottolini MC, Shaer CM, Rushton HG, Majd M, Gonzales EC, Patel KM. Relationship of 
asymptomatic bacteriuria and renal scarring in childr en with neuropathic bladders who 
are practicing clean intermittent catheterization. The Journal of pediatrics. Sep 
1995;127(3):368 -372. 
18. NRH RRTC on Secondary Conditions in the Rehabilitation of Individuals with SCI. NRH 
RRTC on Secondary Conditions in the Rehabilitation of Individuals with SCI  Project 
Year 5, Quarter 1 Report: October 1, 2013 - December 31, 2013. Washington, DC: 
MedStar National Rehabilitation Hospital;2014.  
19. Darouiche RO, Hull RA. Bacterial interference for prevention of urinary tra ct infection. 
Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. Nov 15 2012;55(10):1400 -1407.  
20. Darouiche RO, Green BG, Donovan WH, et al. Multicenter randomized controlled trial 
of bacterial interferen ce for prevention of urinary tract infection in patients with 
neurogenic bladder. Urology. Aug 2011;78(2):341 -346. 
21. Grin PM, Kowalewska PM, Alhazzan W, Fox -Robichaud AE. Lactobacillus for 
preventing recurrent urinary tract infections in women: meta -analysis. Can J Urol. Feb 
2013;20(1):6607 -6614.  
22. Chapman CM, Gibson GR, Todd S, Rowland I. Comparative in vitro inhibition of urinary 
tract pathogens by single - and multi -strain probiotics. European journal of nutrition. Sep 
2013;52(6):1669 -1677.  
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 15 of 17 
 23. Stapleton AE, Au -Yeung M, Hooton TM, et al. Randomized, placebo -controlled phase 2 
trial of a Lactobacillus crispatus probiotic given intravaginally for prevention of recurrent 
urinary tract infection. Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication  of the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. May 2011;52(10):1212 -1217.  
24. Uehara S, Monden K, Nomoto K, Seno Y, Kariyama R, Kumon H. A pilot study 
evaluating the safety and effectiveness of Lactobacillus vaginal suppositories in patients 
with recurren t urinary tract infection. International journal of antimicrobial agents. Aug 
2006;28 Suppl 1:S30 -34. 
25. Baerheim A, Larsen E, Digranes A. Vaginal application of lactobacilli in the prophylaxis 
of recurrent lower urinary tract infection in women. Scandina vian journal of primary 
health care. Dec 1994;12(4):239 -243. 
26. Reid G, Bruce AW, Taylor M. Influence of three -day antimicrobial therapy and 
lactobacillus vaginal suppositories on recurrence of urinary tract infections. Clinical 
therapeutics. Jan-Feb 1992 ;14(1):11 -16. 
27. Johnston BC, Goldenberg JZ, Vandvik PO, Sun X, Guyatt GH. Probiotics for the 
prevention of pediatric antibiotic -associated diarrhea. The Cochrane database of 
systematic reviews. 2011(11):CD004827.  
28. Goldenberg JZ, Ma SS, Saxton JD, et a l. Probiotics for the prevention of Clostridium 
difficile -associated diarrhea in adults and children. The Cochrane database of systematic 
reviews. 2013;5:CD006095.  
29. Godaly G, Proudfoot AE, Offord RE, Svanborg C, Agace WW. Role of epithelial 
interleukin -8 (IL -8) and neutrophil IL -8 receptor A in Escherichia coli -induced 
transuroepithelial neutrophil migration. Infection and immunity. Aug 1997;65(8):3451 -
3456.  
30. Karlsson M, Jass J. Lactobacilli differently regulate expression and secretion of CXCL8 
in urothelial cells. Beneficial microbes. Sep 2012;3(3):195 -203. 
31. Hang L, Frendeus B, Godaly G, Svanborg C. Interleukin -8 receptor knockout mice have 
subepithelial neutrophil entrapment and renal scarring following acute pyelonephritis. 
The Journal of infect ious diseases. Dec 2000;182(6):1738 -1748.  
32. Yin X, Hou T, Liu Y, et al. Association of Toll -like receptor 4 gene polymorphism and 
expression with urinary tract infection types in adults. PloS one. 2010;5(12):e14223.  
33. Karlsson M, Scherbak N, Reid G, Ja ss J. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GR -1 enhances NF -
kappaB activation in Escherichia coli -stimulated urinary bladder cells through TLR4. 
BMC microbiology. 2012;12:15.  
34. Kennedy P, Sherlock O, McClelland M, Short D, Royle J, Wilson C. A multi -centre 
study of t he community needs of people with spinal cord injuries: the first 18 months. 
Spinal Cord. Jan 2010;48(1):15 -20. 
35. Pershouse KJ, Barker RN, Kendall MB, et al. Investigating changes in quality of life and 
function along the lifespan for people with spinal cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
Mar 2012;93(3):413 -419. 
36. Clayson D, Wild D, Doll H, Keating K, Gondek K. Validation of a patient -administered 
questionnaire to measure the severity and bothersomeness of lower urinary tract 
symptoms in uncomplicated urinary tract infection (UTI): the UTI Symptom Assessment 
questio nnaire. BJU Int. Aug 2005;96(3):350 -359. 
37. QSR International. NVivo 10©. 2012; 
http://www.qsrinternational.com/products_nvivo.aspx . 
38. Colaizzi P. Psychological research as the phenomenologist views it In: Valle R, King M, 
eds. Existential -phenomenological alternatives for psychology . New York: Oxford 
University Press; 1978:48 -71. 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 16 of 17 
 39. Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L. How many interviews are e nough?: An experiment with 
data saturation and variability. Field Methods. 2006;18(1):59 -82. 
40. Mueller RO, Hancock GR. Structural Equation Modeling.  New York, NY Routledge; 
2010.  
41. Knapp TR, Mueller RO.  Reliability and Validity of Instruments.  New York, NY 
Routledge 2010.  
42. Hancock GR, Mueller RO. Rethinking construct reliability within latent variable systems.  
Lincolnwood, IL: Scientific Software International; 2001.  
43. Bollen KA. Structural equations with latent variables.  New York, NY: Wi ley; 1989.  
44. Akaike H. Factor analysis and AIC. Psychometrika. 1987/09/01 1987;52(3):317 -332. 
45. Tractenberg RE, Yumoto F, Aisen PS, Kaye JA, Mislevy RJ. Using the Guttman scale to 
define and estimate measurement error in items over time: the case of co gnitive decline 
and the meaning of "points lost". PloS one. 2012;7(2):e30019.  
46. Borsboom D, Cramer AOJ, Kievit RA, Scholten AZ, Franić S. The end of construct 
validity.  Charlotte, NC.: Information Age Publisihing, Inc; 2009.  
47. Campbell DT, Fiske DW. Convergent and discriminant validation by the multitrait -
multimethod matrix. Psychological bulletin. Mar 1959;56(2):81 -105. 
48. Kline RB. Principles and practice of structural equation modeling.  Third Edition ed. 
New York, NY: The Gu ilford Press; 2011.  
49. van Nieuwkoop C, den Exter PL, Elzevier HW, den Hartigh J, van Dissel JT. Intravesical 
gentamicin for recurrent urinary tract infection in patients with intermittent bladder 
catheterisation. International journal of antimicrobial ag ents. 2010;36(6):485 -490. 
50. Grabnar I, Bogataj M, Belic A, Logar V, Karba R, Mrhar A. Kinetic model of drug 
distribution in the urinary bladder wall following intravesical instillation. International 
journal of pharmaceutics. Sep 28 2006;322(1 -2):52 -59. 
51. Francis OE, Bendall M, Manimaran S, et al. Pathoscope: Species identification and strain 
attribution with unassembled sequencing data. Genome research. Oct 2013;23(10):1721 -
1729.  
52. Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR. Naive Bayesian classifier for  rapid 
assignment of rRNA sequences into the new bacterial taxonomy. Applied and 
environmental microbiology. Aug 2007;73(16):5261 -5267.  
53. Tractenberg R, Yumoto F, Aisen P. Detecting When “Quality of Life” Has Been 
“Enhanced”: Estimating Change in Quality  of Life Ratings. Open Journal of Philosophy. 
2013(3):24 -31. 
54. Chou H -H, Holmes MH. DNA sequence quality trimming and vector removal. 
Bioinformatics. 2001;17(12):1093 -1104.  
55. Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, et al. Introducing mothur: open -source, pl atform -
independent, community -supported software for describing and comparing microbial 
communities. Applied and environmental microbiology. Dec 2009;75(23):7537 -7541.  
56. Bodner DR, Haas CA, Krueger B, Seftel AD. Intraurethral alprostadil for treatment of  
erectile dysfunction in patients with spinal cord injury. Urology. January 1999;53(1):199 -
202. 
57. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg S. Ultrafast and memory -efficient alignment 
of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biology. 2009;10(3):R 25. 
58. Kong HH, Oh J, Deming C, et al. Temporal shifts in the skin microbiome associated with 
disease flares and treatment in children with atopic dermatitis. Genome research. May 
2012;22(5):850 -859. 
 
The Impact of Self -Management with Probiotics on Urinary Symptoms and the Urine Microbiome in 
Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury and Spina Bifida Protocol  
5/18/20 17 
Page 17 of 17 
 59. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Spina bifida. Data and statistics in the 
United States  2014; http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/spinabifida/data.html . Accessed 01 -18, 
2014.  
60. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Spinal cord injury (SCI): Fact sheet. 2014; 
http://www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/scifacts.html . Accessed 01 -18, 2014.  
61. Fouts D, Pieper R, Szpakowski  S, et al. Integrated next -generation sequencing of 16S 
rDNA and metaproteomics differentiate the healthy urine microbiome from 
asymptomatic bacteriuria in neuropathic bladder associated with spinal cord injury. 
Journal of Translational Medicine. 2012;10(1 ):174.  
62. Libin A, V., Schladen MM, Ljungberg IH, et al. YouTube as an on -line disability self -
management tool in persons with spinal cord injury. Topics in Spinal Cord Injury 
Rehabilitation. 2011;16(3):84 -92. 
63. Schladen MM, Libin AV, Ljungberg IH, Tsai  B, Groah SL. Toward literacy -neutral 
spinal cord injury information and training. Topics in Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation. 
2011;16(3):70 -83. 
64. Campbell DT, Fisk DW. Convergent and discriminant validation by the multitrait -
multimethod matrix. Psychol ogical Bulletin. 1959;56(2):81 -105. 
65. Noreau L, Proulx P, Gagnon L, Drolet M, Laramee MT. Secondary impairments after 
spinal cord injury: a population -based study. American journal of physical medicine & 
rehabilitation / Association of Academic Physiatri sts. Nov-Dec 2000;79(6):526 -535. 
66. Paralysis Resource Center. One degree of separation: Paralysis and spinal cord injury in 
the United States - Ethnicity and Hispanic identity. 2014.  
67. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic 
data capture (REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for 
providing translational research informatics support. Journal of biomedical informatics. 
Apr 20 09;42(2):377 -381. 
 
 