       1 Version Date: 06/27/16  
 
 
MMMeeerrrccckkk   IIInnnvvveeessstttiiigggaaatttooorrr   SSStttuuudddiiieeesss   PPPrrrooogggrrraaammm   (((MMMIIISSSPPP)))   
PPPrrroootttooocccooolll   TTTeeemmmppplllaaattteee   
 
Requirements for Submitting a Full Proposal 
 
 
Section #1 - MISP Protocol Identification 
 
Study Title:   
Tissue Penetration of Ceftolozane/Tazobactam in Dia betic Patients with Lower Limb 
Infections 
 
Request Date: 04-SEP-2015 
Version Date: 27-JUN-2016 
Institution Name Center for Anti-Infective Research and Development 
Hartford Hospital 
Investigator 
Contact 
Information: 
- Full address  
- Phone No. 
- Fax  No. 
- e-mail address   
 
David P. Nicolau, PharmD, FCCP, FIDSA 
80 Seymour Street, Hartford, CT 06102 
Tel: 860.972.3941 
Fax: 860.545.3992 
Email: david.nicolau@hhchealth.org 
 
       2 Version Date: 06/27/16  
 
Section #2- Core Protocol 
 
2.1 Objectives & 
Hypotheses  
 
 
 
 2.1.1 Primary Objectives:   
 
To describe the pharmacokinetic profile of intraven ous ceftolozane/tazobactam in the 
plasma and subcutaneous tissue of diabetic patients  with ongoing wound infections 
of the lower extremities (i.e., below the knee) usi ng in vivo  microdialysis and 
compare the profile with that of a control group of  healthy volunteer participants. 
 
2.1.2 Secondary Objectives:   
 
To describe the safety and tolerability of intraven ous ceftolozane/tazobactam in 
diabetic patients with diabetic foot infections and  in healthy participants. 
 
2.2 Background & 
Rationale, 
Significance of 
Selected Topic & 
Preliminary Data  
 The annual incidence of foot ulcers among diabetics  has been estimated to be  
between 6% to 11.5%, and 10 to 15% of those with di abetes will have at least one 
foot ulcer during their lifetime. 1 The majority (upwards of 60%) of these diabetic 
ulcers become infected. 2 Treatment of these complicated diabetic wound infe ctions 
primarily involves surgical intervention, topical a ntiseptics, and systemic antibiotic 
therapy. 3 However, despite advances in these areas, outcomes  from such infections 
remain poor and often lead to limb amputation in 15 % to 20% of participants within 
5 years. 4    
 
Different pathogens are implicated in diabetic woun d infections, and infections due 
to antibiotic-resistant pathogens are on the rise. Such pathogens include methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA), extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)–
producing Gram-negative bacilli, as well as highly resistant Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa .5 Other pathogens also isolated from these infection s include 
Streptococcus spp.  Therefore, antibiotics targeting these pathog ens are often 
prescribed either as monotherapy or in combination.  The emergence of resistance in 
pathogens causing diabetic wound infections challen ges treatment since limited 
treatment options are available. 
 
Ceftolozane/tazobactam (Zerbaxa , Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc., Lexington, MA), is 
a β-lactam antibiotic and member of the cephalosporin class that demonstrates potent 
activity against antibiotic-resistant Enterobacteri aceae, P. aeruginosa , and 
Streptococcus spp. 6  
 
The pharmacokinetic profile of ceftolozane/tazobact am has been described in healthy 
adult volunteers with some studies being focused on  pulmonary penetration of the 
drug. 7 However, penetration into skin tissue of an active  infection has yet to be 
elucidated. The most accurate method to calculate o verall penetration is to evaluate 
the entire drug exposure, or AUC, in the tissue of interest and compare this with the 
overall AUC in blood. In the setting of clinical in fection, our group has successfully 
applied a technique called in vivo  microdialysis to assess the interstitial (i.e., 
extracellular) concentration profile of antimicrobi als in comparison with their 
systemic exposures. 8-11   This approach involves placing a probe (with a se mi-
permeable membrane at the tip) into tissue and cons tantly perfusing the probe with a 
physiologic solution via a pump; this approach allo ws for the continuous collection 
       3 Version Date: 06/27/16 of extracellular fluid from the tissue and enables assessment of drug concentration 
over a specified time period (i.e., the entire dosi ng interval). Because foot infections 
are very common in the diabetic patients and given the in vitro potency of 
ceftolozane/tazobactam against Enterobacteriaceae, P. aeruginosa , and 
Streptococcus spp., a study examining the tissue penetration of t he drug in this 
patient population would be beneficial to understan d its pharmacokinetics in the 
inflamed tissue of the diabetic foot, and hence pro vide a basis for future clinical 
studies on the drug’s efficacy for this type of inf ection.  A control group of healthy 
volunteer participants will be used to compare pene tration and tissue exposure.  
 
2.3 Study Design 
  
2.3.1 Sites  
The study will be conducted at Hartford Hospital, H artford, CT. The Study Group 
will be admitted to an inpatient unit while the Con trol Group will be studied in the 
Clinical Research Center at Hartford Hospital. 
 
2.3.2 Inclusion Criteria 
 
2.3.2.1 Study Group 
Participants with a documented medical history of T ype 1 or Type 2 diabetes (for 
which they are receiving insulin or oral anti-hyper glycemic agents), and a suspected 
complicated skin and skin structure infection will be included. The suspected 
infection will be an ongoing and infection will be mild or moderate or Grade 2 or 3 
as defined by the Infectious Diseases Society of Am erica (Table 1). 5 Other anti-
infective agents besides the study drug will be per mitted for the purposes of 
treatment except members of the β-lactam group of antibiotics. 
 
Table 1.  Clinical Classification of Infections 
Clinical manifestations of infection Infection severity PEDIS 
grade 
No symptoms or signs of infection present, as defin ed 
by the presence of at least 2 of the following item s: 
• Local swelling or induration 
• Erythema 
• Local tenderness or pain 
• Local warmth 
• Purulent discharge (thick, opaque to white or 
sanguineous secretion) 
  
Uninfected  
1 
Local infection involving only the skin and the 
subcutaneous tissue (without involvement of deeper 
tissues and without systemic signs as described bel ow). 
If erythema, must be > 0.5 cm to ≤ 2 cm around the 
ulcer 
 Mild 2 
Local infection (as described above) with erythema > 2 
cm, or involving structures deeper than skin and 
subcutaneous tissues (e.g., abscess, osteomyelitis,  
septic arthritis, fasciitis), and no systemic infla mmatory 
response signs (as described below) 
 Moderate 3 
Local infection (as described above) with the signs  of 
SIRS, as manifested by ≥ 2 of the following: 
• Temperature > 38°C or < 36°C 
• Heart rate > 90 beats/min 
• Respiratory rate > 20 breaths/min or 
• PaCO2 < 32 mm Hg 
• White blood cell count > 12,000 or < 4,000 
cells/ µL or ≥ 10% immature (band) forms Severe 4 
 
       4 Version Date: 06/27/16 2.3.2.2 Control Group 
Male or female healthy adult ( ≥ 18 years of age) volunteer participants who will b e 
identified via hospital and local advertisements (n ewspaper, postings, and internet) in 
the Greater Hartford area, Connecticut region will be eligible for enrollment. 
 
2.3.3 Exclusion Criteria 
 
2.3.3.1 General Criteria 
 
         Participants will be excluded if any of th e following criteria are met:   
1.  Less than 18 years of age 
2.  History of any reported hypersensitivity or allergy  to 
ceftolozane/tazobactam, piperacillin/tazobactam, or  any β-lactam 
antibiotic 
3.  History of hypersensitivity to lidocaine or lidocai ne derivatives 
4.  Females who are pregnant or breastfeeding 
5.  Concomitant receipt of any β-lactams antibiotic 
6.  Concomitant receipt of probenecid  
7.  Reduced kidney function defined as creatinine clear ance of ≤ 50 
mL/min, as calculated by Cockroft-Gault  
8.  Any other reason felt by the investigator to potent ially affect the 
outcomes of the study  
 
2.3.3.2 Additional Exclusion Criteria for Study Gro up 
 
1.  Participants likely to require multiple surgical in terventions during the 
study period, which therefore could affect placemen t of the 
microdialysis catheter  
 
2.3.3.3 Additional Exclusion Criteria for Control G roup 
 
1.  Positive urine drug screen (cocaine, THC, opiates, benzodiazepines, and 
amphetamines) 
2.  History of regular alcohol consumption exceeding 7 drinks/week for 
females or 14 drinks/week for men (1 drink = 5 ounc es of wine or 12 
ounces of beer or 1.5 ounces of hard liquor) within  6 months of 
screening. 
3.  Use of tobacco- or nicotine-containing products in excess of the 
equivalence of 5 cigarettes per day. 
4.  Use of prescription or nonprescription drugs, vitam ins, or dietary 
supplements within 7 days or 5 half-lives (whicheve r is longer) prior to 
the first dose of study medication, with the except ion of acetaminophen 
at doses of ≤ 1 g/day. Herbal supplements, hormonal methods of 
contraception (including oral and transdermal contr aceptives, injectable 
progesterone, progestin subdermal implants, progest erone-releasing 
IUDs, postcoital contraceptive methods), and hormon e replacement 
therapy must be discontinued at least 14 days prior  to the first dose of 
study medication. Depo-Provera® must be discontinue d at least 6 
months prior to the first dose of study medication.  
 
       5 Version Date: 06/27/16 2.4 Study Flowchart 
 
2.5 Study 
Procedures  
2.5.1 Screening Procedure 
 
2.5.1.1 Study Group 
Electronic medical records of admitted diabetic pat ients who are being followed by 
podiatrists for infections of the lower limbs will be screened to identify patients 
eligible for study enrollment through evaluating ea ch patient’s profile for the 
meeting of inclusion and exclusion criteria. Screen ing will involve accessing 
patient’s age, past medical history, physician’s no tes, laboratory and imaging data, 
and medication administration record. 
 
2.5.1.2 Control Group 
Adult healthy volunteer participants will be identi fied via hospital and local 
advertisements (newspaper, postings, and internet) and will be initially screened via 
phone interview and if eligible all interested volu nteers will be screened by a study 
physician within 28 days of the scheduled study per iod to confirm that inclusion and 
exclusion criteria are met after providing written informed consent.  
 
2.5.2 Informed Consent 
 
Prior to study enrollment, healthy volunteer partic ipants and patients identified as 
eligible for the study will be approached for conse nting, where they will be provided 
with written informed consent that will document th eir election and agreement to 
participate in the study. The consenting process wi ll be conducted by the principal 
investigator, co-investigators, or trained research  staff members. 
 Screening 
Consenting 
Administration of cefolozane/tazobactam (not less 
than 3 doses will be administered) 
Blood samples collection (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 an d 8 hours) 
 
Dialysate samples collection (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 
hours) 
Storage of samples until analyzed At 
steady 
state 
Analysis of samples 
Data analysis 
       6 Version Date: 06/27/16 2.5.3 Study Drug 
 
All participants will receive intravenous ceftoloza ne/tazobactam 1.5 gram (g) every 8 
hours to achieve steady-state prior to the initiati on of the pharmacokinetic study.   
Admitted patients will receive between 3 and 9 dose s (1 – 3 days) prior to 
pharmacokinetic sampling; this is to permit flexibi lity with microdialysis catheter 
insertion and sampling while minimizing interferenc e with standard clinical care. 
Effort will be made to complete the pharmacokinetic  sampling as soon as clinically 
feasible after the third dose.  This is not a treat ment study; all patients will also 
receive standard intravenous antibiotic therapy to treat their diabetic foot infections. 
All healthy volunteer participants will receive exa ctly 3 doses of 
ceftolozane/tazobactam, which is sufficient to achi eve steady-state.  
Ceftolozane/tazobactam will be provided by Merck & Co. 
 
 
2.5.4 Procedures 
 
2.5.4.1 Baseline Participant Evaluations 
At screening, eligibility will be verified using in clusion/exclusion criteria. A general 
physical examination, including pedal pulses, a med ical history and vital signs will 
be conducted by the study physician. Clinical labor atory tests, including serum 
electrolyte panel, serum creatinine, liver function  panel, complete blood count, 
glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c), albumin, and urina lysis will be performed unless 
drawn within the last three days and the participan t is clinically stable. Urine or 
serum pregnancy tests will be required for women of  childbearing potential. 
Concomitant medications will be recorded. 
 
 
2.5.4.2 Microdialysis Procedure 
Prior to the final scheduled dose, a microdialysis probe (63 MD catheter; MDialysis 
Inc., N. Chelmsford, MA) with a membrane length of 30 mm and molecular cut-off 
of 20 kDa will be inserted into subcutaneous tissue  near the margin of the wound 
(study group) or healthy thigh tissue (control grou p) via a guidance cannula, 
following a local injection of lidocaine 0.5% solut ion to minimize pain. 8 Specifically, 
a puncture hole will be made 10 cm away from the ma rgin of the wound, in order to 
place the semi-permeable probe at the tip of the ca theter within 5 cm of the wound 
(i.e., peri-ulcer area). 13  The guidance cannula will be removed, leaving the 
microdialysis probe implanted subcutaneously. 
 
The microdialysis system will be connected and cons tantly perfused with lactated 
Ringer’s solution (perfusate) at a flow rate of 2 µL/min with a microinfusion pump 
(CMA 107 microdialysis pump, CMA Microdialysis AB, Solna, Sweden). After a 
30-minute baseline period, sampling of the intersti tial fluid will begin before the start 
of the final dose of intravenous ceftolozane/tazoba ctam for baseline values. At the 
beginning of the final dose, sampling will occur as  noted in section 5.3.6. Once 
dialysate sampling is complete, the probe will be c alibrated by the retrodialysis 
technique over a 1-hour interval to assess recovery  of the antibiotic through the 
dialysis membrane. A calibration standard concentra tion of ceftolozane/tazobactam 
300/150 µg/mL will be added to the perfusate and its rate of  disappearance through 
the membrane will determine the recovery rate by ob taining a dialysate sample. 
Recovery of ceftolozane/tazobactam via retrodialysi s will be calculated as follows:  
% Recovery = 100 – (Concentration dialysate  / Concentration perfusate  × 100). 
       7 Version Date: 06/27/16  
2.5.4.3 Study Drug Administration 
Ceftolozane/tazobactam 1.5 g will be administered b y the intravenous route every 8 
hours, with each dose  infused over 1 hour. The dos es will be administered by the 
nursing staff with a record log of the date and tim e. 
 
2.5.4.4 Plasma Collection and Concentration Determi nation 
Blood samples to assess ceftolozane/tazobactam conc entrations will be conducted 
over an 8-hour period after the administration of t he final dose. Blood samples of 10 
mL each will be collected through a Jelco ® catheter or a peripherally inserted central 
catheter (PICC), if available, at pre-determined ti me points.  Blood sample times will 
be at 0 (just before administration of the final do se), 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 hours. 
Blood samples will be collected in a 10-mL BD Vacut ainer  containing sodium 
heparin (green top). All blood samples will be imme diately centrifuged (2,000 × g 
for 10 min) to collect the separated plasma, which will be stored in amber-colored 
polypropylene tubes to protect from light at -80 °C until concentration determination. 
 
Concentrations of both ceftolozane and tazobactam i n plasma will be assessed using 
a validated high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) at the Center for Anti-
Infective Research and Development of Hartford Hosp ital. 
 
 
2.5.4.5 Dialysate Collection and Concentration Dete rmination 
Interstitial fluid concentrations of the soft tissu e in the lower extremity will be 
assessed by in vivo  microdialysis. Participants will refrain from exce ssive movement 
during the sampling process. After catheter inserti on, the probe will be perfused with 
lactated Ringer’s solution for 30 minutes prior to sampling. A baseline dialysate 
sample (120 µL) will be taken over an hour after pl acement of the microdialysis 
catheters just before the administration of the fin al dose. Further dialysate samples of 
approximately 120 µL each will be collected at 0 (just before administ ration of the 
final dose of ceftolozane/tazobactam), 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 hours. After sampling 
is complete, recovery of the antibiotic through the  dialysis filter will be assessed by 
the retrodialysis technique over a 1-hour interval (Section 2.5.4.2). All dialysate 
samples will be collected in 200 µL microvials (CMA Microdialysis AB, Solna, 
Sweden), which will be additionally stored within a mber-colored polypropylene 
tubes at -80 °C to protect against light and evaporation until co ncentration 
determination.  The catheter will then be removed b y trained study personnel. 
 
Both ceftolozane and tazobactam concentrations in d ialysate will be assessed using 
HPLC at the Center for Anti-Infective Research and Development of Hartford 
Hospital. 
 
2.5.4.6 Protein Binding Analysis and Determination 
Protein binding studies will be conducted by a mini mum of three independent tests 
using Centrifree ® Ultrafiltration devices (Millipore Corporation, Bi llerica, MA) with 
30 kDa molecular cut-off filters, as per the manufa cturer's package insert. 
Ultrafiltration of an aqueous standard will be perf ormed to assess binding of the drug 
to the ultrafiltration membrane. An additional bloo d sample of 10 mL will be 
collected at the peak concentration (1 hour after f inal dose administration) into a 10-
mL BD Vacutainer  containing sodium heparin (green top). Samples wil l be 
immediately centrifuged to collect the separated pl asma. Exactly 0.9 mL of plasma 
       8 Version Date: 06/27/16 will be transferred into three separate ultrafiltra tion devices and centrifuged for 45 
minutes at 25 °C at 2,000 × g to generate an ultrafiltrate volume of approximate ly 
250 µL.  
 
Drug concentration in the initial aliquot of plasma  and ultrafiltrates will be 
determined by HPLC at the Center for Anti-Infective  Research and Development. In 
addition, non-specific protein binding of ceftoloza ne/tazobactam will be determined 
in aqueous fluid using a concentration that is simi lar to the peak concentration of the 
compound.  
 
Individual protein binding percentages will be appl ied to each participant’s data at all 
time points to determine free plasma concentrations . The percentage of protein 
binding will be calculated using the following form ula: % Protein Binding = 100 – 
(Concentration ultrafiltrate  / Concentration plasma  × 100). 
 
2.5.4.7 Study Exit Evaluation 
A full physical examination, including vital signs and clinical lab tests will be 
performed on the last day of the study. All abnorma l determinations will be followed 
until resolution unless follow-up is determined to be unnecessary by the study 
physician. 
 
2.6 Study Duration IRB Submissions and Approval     2 months 
Enrollment and Sampling of 10 Patients    6-12 mont hs 
Enrollment and Sampling of 6 Healthy Volunteers  4 months 
Ceftolozane/Tazobactam HPLC                         1 month 
Pharmacokinetic Analysis     1 month 
Final Report       2 months   
2.7 Statistical 
Analysis and 
Sample Size 
Justification   
2.7.1 Data Validation and Analysis 
The PI will be responsible for the review, validati on, and analysis of these data as 
collected and recorded by the study staff. 
 
2.7.2 Primary Endpoint 
The primary endpoints of the study are to assess th e penetration of 
ceftolozane/tazobactam into infected skin tissue an d compare it with the penetration 
into healthy skin tissue. 
 
2.7.2.1 Primary Endpoint Definition 
Percentage of tissue penetration of ceftolozane/taz obactam will be defined based on 
the AUC in tissue and in plasma. This will be calcu lated as: AUC tissue  / free AUC plasma  
× 100. Plasma pharmacokinetic parameters that will be estimated include AUC 0-8 
(plasma) , elimination rate constant (K e), half-life (t ½), total plasma clearance (CL T), and 
Volume of distribution (V d). 
 
2.7.3 Statistical Analysis 
This is a descriptive pharmacokinetics study to eva luate the exposure and penetration 
ratio of ceftolozane/tazobactam into the interstiti al fluid of infected tissue of diabetic 
patients compared with healthy volunteer participan ts. 
             
Pharmacokinetic analyses for ceftolozane/tazobactam  will be conducted using 
Phoenix (version 6.3, Pharsight Corporation, Mounta in View, CA). Non-
compartmental pharmacokinetics analysis will be use d. Pharmacokinetic parameters 
       9 Version Date: 06/27/16 for plasma will be determined using each individual ’s plasma concentration-time 
profile. The maximum concentration (C max ) for each participant will be estimated by 
visual inspection of the concentration-time profile s. The log-linear trapezoidal 
method will be used to determine AUC 0-24 (plasma)  for each participant.  The 
elimination rate constant (K e) will be estimated by the slope of the terminal po rtion 
of the concentration-time profile; half-life (t ½) will be calculated by 0.693/K e. Total 
plasma clearance (CL T) will be calculated by Dose/AUC 0-24 (plasma) . Volume of 
distribution (V d) will be calculated by CL T/K e.    
            
All microdialysis concentrations will be corrected for recovery before 
pharmacokinetic analysis as follows:  Concentration tissue  = 100 × (Concentration sample  
/ % in vivo  recovery).  The AUC 0-24 (tissue) will be assessed by the log-linear 
trapezoidal rule. Percentage of penetration into ti ssue will be calculated as follows:  
AUC tissue  / free AUC plasma  × 100. 
 
Student’s t-test will be used to compare the penetration ratio  and pharmacokinetic 
parameter values of ceftolozane and tazobactam betw een study and control groups. 
 
2.7.4 Sample Size Determination 
Ten patients with diabetic foot infection and six h ealthy volunteers are to be enrolled 
in the study. This is primarily a descriptive, cont rolled study to observe the exposure 
and penetration ratio of ceftolozane/tazobactam int o the interstitial fluid of infected 
tissue of diabetic patients and compare it to that of healthy volunteers. In similar 
study designs, 10 study patients were sufficient to  describe the central tendency of 
these penetration estimates and some confidence of dispersion.  Given reduced 
variability in healthy participants, 6 volunteers w ill be utilized. 
  
2.8 Specific Drug 
Supply 
Requirements  Ceftolozane/tazobactam 1.5 g vials will be provided  by Merck & Co. as an open 
label supply. 
2.9 Adverse 
Experience 
Reporting Participants will be monitored for any sign or symp tom of adverse events throughout 
the course of the study. Unanticipated, life-threat ening or fatal adverse events will be 
reported to the IRB, the manufacturer, and the Food  and Drug Administration 
according to federal guidelines. All adverse events  requiring medical attention will 
be treated by the study physician and will be recor ded by the investigator. 
 
 
2.9.1 Definitions 
For the purpose of this study, an adverse event wil l be defined as any pathologic or 
unintended change in the structure (signs), functio n (symptoms), or chemistry 
(laboratory values) of the body associated with the  use of the study drug, whether or 
not considered drug related, and will be categorize d as one of the following:   
• MILD – present, but easily tolerated 
• MODERATE – discomfort that interferes with usual ac tivities 
• SEVERE – incapacitating, inability to work or do us ual activities 
 
 
A serious adverse event will be defined as any of t he above which results in death or 
is immediately life-threatening, requires in-partic ipant hospitalization, or is an 
       10 Version Date: 06/27/16 important medical event that may jeopardize the par ticipant or require medical 
intervention to prevent one of the previously menti oned outcomes.  
 
2.9.2 Relationship to Study Medication 
Relationship of the AE to the study medication (i.e ., causality) will be evaluated 
according to the investigator’s opinion, as one of the following: 
• Concurrent condition – unrelated to study drug 
• REMOTE adverse drug event – little or no temporal r elationship to study 
drug 
• POSSIBLE adverse drug event – temporal relationship  to study drug 
• PROBABLE adverse drug event – commonly associated w ith study drug 
• DEFINTE adverse drug event – reappeared on re-chall enge of study drug 
 
2.9.3 Expectedness of AE 
As AEs are expected with the study medication, pati ents will be closely monitored 
throughout the study for any AE occurrence and will  be managed accordingly by the 
study physician. All AEs will be recorded by the in vestigator as described in Section 
2.9.4 below. 
 
2.9.4 Recording and Reporting an AE 
All adverse events requiring medical attention will  be recorded by the investigator as 
such: categorization by severity (mild, moderate, o r severe), established time frame 
(start and stop time), complete description of even t, all interventions (medical and 
pharmacological), and causality. 
 
2.9.5 Recording and Reporting a SAE 
All serious adverse events will be reported to the Institutional Review Board, 
sponsor, and the Food and Drug Administration accor ding to Federal guidelines. A 
serious adverse event will be defined as any advers e event that results in death, is 
immediately life-threatening, requires or prolongs hospitalization, or is an important 
medical event that may jeopardize the participant o r may require medical 
intervention to prevent one of the previously menti oned outcomes.  
2.10 Itemized Study 
Budget   
2.10.1 Staff Related Costs 
Principal Investigator     $15,000 
Study Coordinator     $26,250 
Research Assistant (1)     $13,000 
Research Assistant (2)     $6,500 
Study Physician      $10,000 
Nursing       $7,250 
Phlebotomy      $480 
Clinical Research Center Medical Coverage (PA, APRN ) $3,600 
 
2.10.2 Participant Fess 
Drug Toxicity Screening     $3,900 
Patient Payments     $5,000 
Healthy Volunteer Fees     $6,000 
Healthy Volunteer Housing    $1,440 
Healthy Volunteer Parking    $600 
Healthy Volunteer Consumables    $3,000 
 
2.10.3 Supplies 
Sample Storage Supplies    $1,920 
       11 Version Date: 06/27/16 Blood Sampling Supplies    $4,000 
Peripherally Intserted Central Catheters   $8,000 
Lidocaine 0.5%, 50ml flip top, pack of 25   $60 
Millipore Ultrafiltration Devices    $2,880 
CMA 60 Microdialysis Probe ($1950 pack of 4)  $7,80 0 
CMA 107 Pump ($3450 per pump, n=2)   $6,900 
CMA 107 Pump Batteries (package of 5)   $700 
CMA 20/107 Sample Collection Vials/Syringes  $2400 
HPLC Analysis of Samples    $29,120 
Laboratory Services     $16,000 
 
2.10.4 Administrative Fees 
Pharmacy Dispensing Fess    $3,200 
Institutional Document Preparation and Submission $ 2,000 
Publication Cost (Medical Writing)   $4,500 
IRB Fees      $2,500 
Meeting-Related Expenses    $2,500 
 
2.10.5 Overhead Costs 
25% 
(excluding IRB Fees and Meeting-Related Expenses) $ 47,875 
 
Total Direct Cost (Less Overhead)     $196,500  
 
TOTAL        $244,375  
2.11 References  
1. Margolis D, Malay DS, Hoffstad OJ, et al. Incidence  of diabetic foot ulcer 
and lower extremity amputation among Medicare  bene ficiaries, 2006 to 
2008. Data Points #2 (prepared by the University of  Pennsylvania DEcIDE 
Center, under Contract No.  HHSA29020050041I). Rock ville, MD: Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality. January 2011. AHRQ Publication No.  
10(11)-EHC009-1-EF   
2. Lipsky BA. New developments in diagnosing and treat ing diabetic foot 
infections. Diabetes Metab Res Rev  2008; electronically published ahead of 
print.   
3. Lipsky BA. Medical treatment of diabetic foot infec tions. Clin Infect Dis  
2004; 39:S104-114.   
4. Ramsey SD, Newton K, Blough D, et al. Incidence, ou tcomes, and cost of 
foot ulcers in participants with diabetes. Diabetes Care  1999; 22:382-387.   
5. Lipsky BA, Berendt AR, Cornia PB, et al. 2012 Infec tious Diseases Society 
of America clinical practice guideline for the diag nosis and treatment of 
diabetic foot infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;54( 12):e132-73. 
6. Zerbaxa ® (ceftolozane/tazobactam) Prescribing Information, Cubist 
Pharmaceuticals Inc. Lexington, MA. 2014. 
7. Zhanel GG, Chung P, Adam H, et al. Ceftolozane/tazo bactam: a novel 
cephalosporin/ β-lactamase inhibitor combination with activity agai nst 
multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacilli. Drugs. 2 014;74(1):31-51. 
8. Müller M, Haag O, Burgdorff T, et al. Characterizat ion of peripheral-
compartment kinetics of antibiotics by in vivo micr odialysis. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother  1996; 40:2703-2709.   
9. Bhalodi AA, Housman ST, Shepard A, Nugent J, Nicola u DP. Tissue 
pharmacokinetics of cefazolin in patients with lowe r limb infections. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother . 2013;57(11):5679-83.   
       12 Version Date: 06/27/16 10. Wiskirchen DE, Shepard A, Kuti JL, Nicolau DP. Dete rmination of tissue 
penetration and pharmacokinetics of linezolid in pa tients with diabetic foot 
infections using in vivo  microdialysis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother . 
2011;55(9):4170-5.   
11. Bulik CC, Wiskirchen DE, Shepard A, Sutherland CA, Kuti JL, Nicolau DP. 
Tissue penetration and pharmacokinetics of tigecycl ine in diabetic patients 
with chronic wound infections described by using in vivo  microdialysis. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother . 2010;54(12):5209-13.   
12. Walker M, Hadgraft J, Lane ME. Investigation of the  permeability 
characteristics of peri-ulcer and whole ischaemic s kin tissue. Int J Pharm  
2008; electronically published ahead of print.  
 
2.12 Publication 
Plan  
The results of this study will be presented at an i nternational congress such as the 
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and  Chemotherapy. A final 
publication would be submitted to a peer-reviewed j ournal such as Antimicrobial 
Agents and Chemotherapy, Journal of Antimicrobial C hemotherapy, or International 
Journal of Antimicrobial Agents. One abstract and o ne manuscript are anticipated to 
be presented at the conference and published. 
2.13 Curriculum 
Vitae  
 A curriculum vita is uploaded online with this subm ission. 
2.13 Protocol 
Submission for 
Investigator-
Initiated Studies  U.S. protocols should be submitted by US investigat ors directly or through the 
Global Research Specialist at  www.merckiisp.com   
 
Non U.S. protocols should be submitted to the MSD o ffice by the investigators.  
 
 