  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 1  
 
 
Smoker -to-Smoker (S2S) Peer Marketing and 
Messaging to Disseminate Tobacco Interventions  
June 2019  
NCT 03224520  
 
 
  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 2 RESEARCH STRATEGY  
A. BACKGROUND  
A.1. Overview  
Building on our PCORI pilot (1IP2P1000582)1,2 and N ational 
Cancer Institute (NCI) f unded studies (R21CA158968, 
1R01CA129091),2-8 we propose “ Smoker -to-Smoker  (S2S) Peer 
Marketing and Messaging to Disseminate Tobacco 
Interventions. ” S2S will test two smoker -driven, social marketing innovations to recruit and engage smokers in 
Decide2Quit , an evidence -based, effective “Digital Intervention for Smoking Cessation ” (DISC ).5,9 These S2S innovations, 
designed to utilize the power of peers and social networks for dissemination are:  
1. Recommender  computer tailored health communication ( recommender  CTHC): Complex machine learning 
algorithms (recommender systems)  that uses smokers’ feedback (explicit and implicit) in the current and prior 
studies to adapt its selection of messages  to smokers (PCORI IP2P1000582).  
2. Access to p eer recruitment  toolset : Access to peer recruitment  tools to facilitate dissemination of the trial 
(recruitment) – with smokers’ recruiting their peers to increase Decide2Quit access (NCI R21CA158968).  
Thus, this study is a  hybrid  effectiveness -dissemination study .  First, to test the effectiveness  of the r ecommender CTHC, 
smokers will be recruited online to a randomized trial hosted on Decide2Quit .10 Smokers will be consented and 
randomized to receive either the recommender CTHC (the enhanced intervention) or a standard tailored messaging 
system (the comparison).  Second, to test dissemination  (after randomization to the enha nced or comparison messaging 
system), some randomized and enrolled smokers will be further allocated to receive access to peer recruitment tools ; and 
these smokers will be encouraged to recruit other smokers in their social network.  Allocation to receive the peer 
recruitment tools occurs in two phases or waves (Wave 1: Half of the enrolled smokers are randomized to receive peer 
recruitment tools, while the others do not receive the tools; and Wave 2: all subsequent smokers who are randomized to 
the effecti veness trial and also report they were peer -recruited are given access to the peer -recruitment tools.  This two -
wave allocation follows principles of respondent driven sampling, as is designed to increase both 1) the Speed  of 
dissemination, and 2) the Dive rsity  of smokers recruited.  Note that in a  prior  NIH-funded  pilot  study, we found peer 
recruitment was particularly effective for engaging African American smokers. Thus, we  will also test the  potential  of peer 
recruitment  to target African  American smokers , a disproportionally affected group due to tobacco use,  compared with  
online recruitment  without peer recruitment,  in this dissemination study.11-17 
A.2. Condition impact (smoking) on health of individuals and populations (Criterion 1)  
Smoking is the number one preventable cause of death in the United States  (USA) .18-22 Yearly, o ver six million deaths in 
the world are attributable to smoking, including 480,000 in the USA.23 The CDC estimates that for every person who dies 
because of smoking, at leas t 30 people live with a serious smoking -related illness , including cancer, heart disease, stroke, 
lung diseases, diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).23 One estimate suggest ed that the proportion 
of USA health care expenditure attributable to smoking ranges between 6 -18% of the budget across different states.24 The 
cost per life year saved from use of pharmacological treatment interventions ranged between US$128 and US$1,450 and 
up to US$4,400 per quality -adjusted life years saved.24 As noted in Section B.3., African Americans are disproportionately 
affected by tobacco and ma ny of their health issues are directly related to their tobacco use.11-17 Thus, reducing tobacco 
use will have considerable health impact , and play an important role in  reducing health  disparities . 
A.3. Evidence gap (RQ -1) 
Our proposal addresses a key question  — What are the effective strategies for increasing consumer demand for and use 
of proven, individually oriented cessation treatments, including among diverse populations? — raised in the St ate-of-the-
Science Conferenc e Statement on Tobacco Use.25 We are focus ed on identifying effective strategies to  disseminate and 
improve effective ness of a DISC  — www.decide2quit.org ( Decide2Quit ). DISC s are health communication programs  
accessible via Internet connections and smart phones. DISC s can include a number of functions designed to support a 
smoker’s cessation attempt . As detailed i n Table 5, Decide2Quit includes self-management functions,  pushed and tailored 
motivational message s (email or text -messages), online community , and peer support. Several studies, including 
systematic reviews,26-28  have shown that  DISC s can be effective. A Cochrane review found a statistically significant effect 
comparing tailored DISC s to usual care or written self -help (RR 1.48, 95% CI 1.11 , 2.78).28 Although this evidence is mixed , 
two factors are typically  associated  with the effectiveness  of DISCs .20,26 -36 These include the use of CTHC  to personalize 
messaging to smokers,  and the engagement of  smokers  (recruitment a nd repeated system use) . In our previous 
randomized trial [1R01CA129091] testing Decide2Quit  (n=900), at 6 -months, 30% of smokers who received the CTHC Acronyms Used  
S2S Smoker -to-Smoker  
Decide2Quit  www.decide2quit.org  
DISC  Digital Intervention for Smoking Cessation  
CTHC  Computer -tailored health communication  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 3 messages reported quitting at 6 months compared to 20% of smokers who received an interactive DISC  but n o messages 
[odds ratio 1.70 (95% CI 1.03 -2.81)].10 We have also demonstrated that  the repeated use of Decide2Quit  functions was 
significantly associated with six -month, 30 -day point prevalence cessation. Using a repeated use measure — an ordinal 
scale of the number of functions u sed after the first visit to the website (0: use of no functions, 1: use of 1 -2 functions, 2:  
> 2-4 functions) — we found a linear association with six -month cessation. For every increase by one in this scale, odds of 
smoking cessation increased (OR= 2.10,  95% CI = 1.03, 4.30).37 In conclusion, DISCs can be an effective resource for 
smokers, but the success depends on  the implementation of CTHC , and  the longitudinal engagement of smokers .    
Outside healthcare, companies have  innovated to use bottom -up, “user -driven” approaches to increase their 
websites’ access and engagement. Peer marketing — engaging one customer to recruit others — has become the 
preferred approach to increase access to their websites. To motivate users to  repeatedly use their system , companies like 
Amazon and Netflix Use recommender systems to deliver enhanced personalization  (Section B.5) .  However, these tools 
have not been rigorously tested for disseminating health interventions in  comparative effectiveness studies . In our prior 
studies [ PCORI IP2P1000582, NCI R21CA158968 ], we have developed and demonstrated the efficacy of peer recruitment  
and recommender  CTHC to disseminate Decide2Quit  — recruit and motivate smokers to repeatedly use the system   — 
and improve its effective ness. We will rigorously test t hese tools in a comparative effectiveness st udy, compared with  the 
standard Decide2Quit  (online recruitment and standard CTHC) . In the RFA, PCORI defines dissemination as the active and 
targeted approach of spreading evidence -based interventions to potential adopters and the target audience through 
determined channels using planned strategies, and its goals as to increase the reach  of information, motivation, and 
patients’ ability to use and apply evidence.38-40 Thus, both recruitment and use measures are needed to appropriate ly 
evaluate our DISC disseminatio n strategy. If recruitment is unsuccessful, then the intervention’s reach is low. If 
recruitment is successful, but the intervention does not  motivate repeated use, then there is low intervention fidelity, 
reducing the patient’s motivation and ability to apply evidence. Beyond measuring dissemination, the primary goal of this 
RFA, we will evaluate our interventions’  effectiveness by measuring s ix-month cessation (as recommended by prior 
reviews), and measuring reduction in cigare ttes, as advised by our patient panel .   
B. SIGNIFICANCE  
Because prior literature and our own preliminary data suggest multiple barriers in the reach of smoking cessation 
interventions, including those online, new approaches to increasing dissemination are needed.41 The majority of smokers 
are not interested in quitting at any given time.42 Even those highly motivated to quit often fail in their attempts.43 Peer 
recruitment and recommender CTHC  are unique in that they harness the power of smokers to disseminate a cessation 
intervention  (recruit  and motivate to repeated ly use), and encourage cessation . In th is section, we describe  the potential 
impact and reach of DISCs, potential to  target those  most in need, and the two patient -centric and patient -driven S2S 
innovations ( peer recruitment  and recommender CTHC ), including their  theoretical foundations.  
B.1. Impact of DISC (Impact = Reach × Effectiveness)  
Per the RE -Aim framework,44 an intervention’s impact is a product of its reach and effectiveness . Although in -person and 
telephone counseling are effective , the y are costly and underused  (reducing their reach) . DISCs can serve as important 
augmentation for those receiving in-person and telephone counseling (to use in between sessions and for longitudinal 
support) . For those who do not have access to the se options, DISCs may serve as the o nly source of tobacco cessation 
support. As noted, Decide2Quit  achieved  a cessation rate of 30%  at six mo nths, much higher than the rate  (7%)  at which 
smokers quit without support .45 Thus, it is important to innovat e and increase dissemination and effectiveness of DISCs .  
B.2. DISCs : Internet, Social Media Use, and Digital divide   
DISCs are health communication programs readily accessible via the Internet and smart phones. Thus, it has considerable 
potential to reach a large and diverse group of smokers.  In 2014, an estimated 87%  of Americans had Internet access .46,47 
Digital divide in Internet access  has decreased considerably, especially with increasing smart phone use. In 2015, an 
estimated  61% of Whites, 70% of African Americans, and 71% of Hispanic s had smart  phones. Most of these smart phone 
users had accessed a wide range of functions , including getting information about a health condition (62%) and online 
banking (57%). The use of onlin e functions on smart phones is higher in lower income than higher income users.48 Use of 
social media has also considerably increased.49 Over 74% of USA Internet users use online social networks including  71% 
that use Facebook . Again, smart phone s have  decreased  the digital divide in use of social networks . A higher proportion  
of African Americans (48%) and Hispanics  (49%) access social networks on their phones than Whites (36%) .48  
 However, because of this lingering perception that vulnerable populations have  little technology access, these 
populations are underrepresented in technology research. It may not be the  lack of  technology  access , but that the 
dissemination strategies have not sufficiently evolved to engage these groups.   
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 4 B.3. Increas ing Reach of DISCs to  African American  Smokers   
 We focus on  African American  smokers for several reasons: 1) These  smokers suffer disproportionately due to smoking -
related diseases including several cancers, cardiovascular disease, and cerebrovascular disease.11-17 Although they smoke 
fewer cigarettes and start smoking at an older age, these  smokers are more likely to die from smoking -related diseases 
than Whites.11 They are less likely to be successful at quitting than White or Hispanic  smokers because they are less likely 
to seek cessation suppo rt, including DISCs .11-14 2) The standard CTHC in Decide2Quit  successful ly motivated African 
American s smokers  to quit (Section C.4.1.2 ). 3) Our NCI funded pilot  demonstrated that  peer recruitment significantly 
enriched the sample with African American smokers ( 11-23%) ( Figure 4 ). This increase happened without our tools 
prompting the peer recruit ment of African American  smokers . In S2S, with our patient advisory panel (See Section F) , we 
will further refine our instructions to encourage African American smokers ’ recruitment . Thus, we anticipate an even 
higher increase in proportion of African American smokers in S2S.  
B.4. Smoker -to-Smoker (S2S) peer recruitment: Peer -referrals as an online marketing Strategy  
Health information and healthy behaviors can be “infectious” — spreading b etween social contacts, creating cascading 
effects throughout the network.50,51  For example, over time, smokers in the Framingham cohort were less likely to smoke 
if someone in their network (spouse, sibling) had quit smoking.51 Public health interventions can use these infectious 
effects by using engaged smokers  to recruit their peers who smoke.52,53 Peer recruitment leverages current online 
marketing trends . Outside of public health, several marketing groups are using peer r ecrui tment  to enhance spread of 
products for a number of reasons. Customers are more likely to trust a peer referral than traditional advertisements.54 
Peer recruited customers are also more profitable than traditional customers.54 There are several examples of successful 
peer -marketing (e.g., Zynga, the online social gaming company) on social media.2,3 To enhance the effectiveness and 
efficiency of these campaigns, companies have developed a more proactive approach, providing customers referral tools 
that allo w them to easily refer others to the produc t (e.g. email referral form).55 As detailed in Section C.4.2.1 , the use of 
Facebook referral plugin  in our peer  recruitment system4 was an example of this approach . Our peer recruitment  
experiment (NCI R21CA158968)  to test whether smokers would recruit other smokers was successful. In a one -year period, 
peer recruitment quadrupled our sample  —from 190 smokers  to 759 smokers .3,56 Peer recruitment also increase d 
proportions  of not ready -to-quit and African American smokers  (11-24%), groups that other recruitment techniques have 
had difficulty  encouraging participation .   .   
B.5. Computer -tailored health communication (CTHC):  Standard and S2S recommender  
Standard “if-then -else” theory -based CTHC systems : Theory -based CTHC  is a tool that is frequently used to support 
behavior change. 57 It builds on the concepts of personal relevance, relatedness, and cultural similarity, constructs of 
multiple behavioral theories including t he transtheoretical model, the theory of reasoned action, social cognitive theory, 
and self -determination theory.58-60  Standard  CTHC systems use selected variables from patients’ baseline profile and if -
then rules to send tailored messages to specific subsets of patients. 57,61 -65  These rules are developed by experts  based on 
their knowledge of the targeted population, literature, and health behavior theories.  These rules  specify how the 
messages should be selected (what messages need to be sent to that patient subset). Table 1 illustrates how a standard  
CTHC system might tailor a  message as part of a smoking cessation intervention.66   
Table 1 : An Example: Tailored messages addressing weight gain on DISC.*  
John Smith, a 38 year old smoker, has been smoking for 15 years. He has made multiple quit attempts in the 
past, but during each attempt he gained between 10 and 20 pounds. Currently, fear of weight gain is a significant 
barrier to another quit attempt.  
John is trying to quit again and registers on Decide2Quit . For eight weeks, the system sends two tailored 
emails per week to John Smith to help him quit.  
Standard  CTHC 
       In this approach, tailoring is based on information that John provides when he registers.  For this example, we 
focus on one characteristic only: gender. Since women are typically more concerned about weight gain after quitting , 
67-71 experts  have specified that half of the emails sent to women should contain information related to weight gain, 
but only one quarter of the emails sent to men should be focused on weight gain.  After registering on Decide2Quit , 
John rece ives the first email that targets weight gain support  in the second week (3rd message) of the intervention. 
John likes the message and finds the tips it offers useful.  He looks forward to receiving similar messages. However, 
the next 5 messages he receives  focuses on other topics.  The next weight gain message arrives only on week 5.  
John does not think the system helped and fails in his attempt to quit.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 5 Recommender CTHC  
In this approach, the selection of the message is based upon the collective -intelligence data, not on preset 
rules.  After registering on Decide2Quit , John visits the weight gain support page on the website (implicit data). The 
system uses this data and se lects one of the messages targeting weight gain and sends it to John on Week 2 (3rd 
message). John likes the messages and rates the message highly (explicit data). The system then notes both of these 
items of implicit and explicit feedback and regularly se nds messages targeting weight gain to John. The system also 
repeats the message that John rates highly. Because the intervention targeted his needs more specifically, John finds 
these messages useful and succeeds in his attempt to quit.  
*This example was kept simple to be easily understandable. We have not included how the group’s feedback can help John.  
Recommender CTHC  systems: New approaches to tailoring based on collective -intelligence may be able to augment 
standard  CTHC systems.  Many people already encounter collective -intelligence tailoring as they interact with companies 
like Netflix and Amazon.  These companies use 
a spec ial class of machine learning algorithms 
(recommender systems ) to tailor content.  
These systems tailor content based on 
collective -intelligence data (i.e., data derived 
from the behavior of users as they interact 
with the system) in addition to user profi les.72-
74  Collective -intelligence data include implicit 
and explicit user feedback.   Implicit data are 
derived from user actions (e.g., website pages 
and products purchased data ).  Explicit data 
consist of self -reported item ratings (e.g., 
ratings provided by users for items like books 
or movies, often on a five -star scale).  
However, in the health promotion arena, 
patients could be asked to rate relevance, 
influence, or other properties of a message or 
product.  Using these data, along with user 
demographic  characteristics , the algorithms 
underlying the recommender system generat e 
personalized item recommendations for each 
user.  As these recommender systems learn 
more about the user, they can continually adapt to improve the recommendations.  
 The lower portion of Table 1 provides an example of how a recommender system could be i mplemented to 
provide tailoring as part of smoking cessation intervention.  It shows how applying a recommender approach to health 
promotion could potentially improve upon the tailoring provided by current rule -based CTHC approaches.  The primary 
difference between current and recommender CTHC systems is how the messages are selected.  In standard  CTHC, 
message selection is based on  preset expert -written if -then -rules.  In recommender CTHC , messages selection is based on 
data, i.e., recom mender systems learn from  the data ( patient profiles and implicit and explicit feedback ratings) to select 
the variables and generate the rules that specify how the message will be selected .  As new data about the users are 
collected, these recommender systems have the ability to refine the message selection algorithm . As summarized in Table 
2 and detailed in our paper,66 there are a number of other potential advantages of using recommender CTHC over 
standard CTHC systems. Our pilot experiment (Section 4.2.2) demonstrated that the recommender CTHC performed 
better than Decide2Quit ’s standard CTHC, a demonstrated to be effective system, even over a short duration of 30 days.  
 
 
 
 
 Table 2: Standard CTHC vs. Recommender CTHC66 
Feature  Standard CTHC  Recommender CTHC  
Message 
Selection  
(Primary 
Difference)  Rules -driven:  Experts develop 
rules based on the literature 
and theory.  These rules link 
user profiles to the messages, 
selecting messages for a 
patient subset.  Data -driven: Recommender 
systems derive the  tailoring 
rules from the collective -
intelligence data of the 
individual, as well as the 
group.   
Complexity 
(Number of 
variables)  The number of variables 
incorporated can become 
quickly unmanageable 
dependent on the 
programming team’s skills, 
project’s timeline and budget.  Recommender systems can 
potentially consider  all the 
variables collected in the 
intervention.  
Use of 
theory  Tailoring limited to theoretical 
constructs  Augments theory by 
deriving recommendations 
from user data  
Adaptation  Limited to predicted changes in 
behavior.  
 System can continuously 
adapt, potentially improving 
with each message 
delivered.  Responds to the 
user’s behavior and to the 
group’s behavior over time.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 6 B.6. S2S Theoretical Foundations — Relatedness and personal relevance to increase engagement and motivation:   
Peer recruitment : By providing peer recruitment tools to smokers, S2S facilitates smokers to reach out to their peer 
smokers to participate in a cessation intervention, thereby extending the intervention’s reach. Peer recruitment  draw 
strength from the constructs of relate dness, as proposed in self -determination theory (SDT).75 Relatedness between 
individuals — the desire to feel connected to others —  can support behavior change. 75,76 When individuals engage in 
activities that are social in nature, such as providing social support, percept ions of relatedness play an important  role in 
predicting motivation and increasing engagement.77 Thus, both the peer recruitment act, and being peer recruited, might 
motivate the smoker to use the DISC, and quit smoking.  
Recommender CTHC : Recommender CTHC draws strength from personal  relevance, relatedness, and cultural similarity, 
constructs of multiple behavioral theories (Table 3). Increasing the personalization of a message, increases the 
relevance and relatedness of 
the message to the user.57 
Personally relevant messages 
are more carefully processed, 
tend to be retained longer, and 
more predictive of behavior 
change.78 By inco rporating 
smoker’s feedback, the 
recommender CTHC is able to 
adapt and continuously 
improve the personalization 
of its messages, which can 
increase the DISC ’s use , as 
well as cessation outcomes . 
In conclusion , our prior work 
has demonstrated the 
benefit of each S2S function, 
and in S2S, we will test the 
dissemination potential of 
these functions in a hybrid 
effectiveness -dissemination 
trial.   
C. STUDY DESI GN 
Using a study design that 
includes both randomized 
and non -randomized 
elements , we will evaluate 
S2S. Our specific Aims:  
C.1. Specific Aims:  (Criterion 
3) 
AIM 1 : Implement the hybrid 
effectiveness -dissemination 
trial of S 2S enhanced  
functions to increase 
dissemination (recruitment 
and repeated use)  and 
effectiveness of Decide2Quit  
with 1200 smokers (See 
Figur es 1a and 1b ).  Table 3: The importance of personalization across multiple theories59 
Methods  Description  Theories  
Persuasive 
Communication  Messages relevant to 
individual’s beliefs  Persuasion -Communication Matrix, 
Elaboration Likelihood Model, Social 
Cognitive Theory  
Tailoring/ 
Individualization  Targeting messages based 
on behavior change 
and/or relevance variables  Transtheoretical Model, Precaution 
Adoption Model, Protection Motivation 
Theory, Persuasion -Communication Matrix  
Figure 1: S2S comparison groups  
     

  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 7 Effectiveness Trial  Components  (Figure 1a) :  
1. Recommender  computer tailored health communication (recommender CTHC): Complex machine learning 
algorithms (recommender systems)  that uses smokers’ feedback (explicit and implicit) in the current and prior 
studies to adapt its selection of messages to smokers.   
2. Stand ard computer tailored health communication (CTHC)  using expert -written rules to tailor messages to 
smokers based on a single factor readiness to quit.  
 
Dissemination Study (peer recruitment, Figure 1b) :  
1. Access to a p eer recruitment tool set: to facilitate smokers’ recruiting the ir peers to increase Decide2Quit  access.  
2. No peer recruitment:   standard online recruitment using search engine and social media advertisements to recruit 
smokers to Decide2Quit.  
As noted above, as the study is enrolling, we will evaluate the potential of peer recruitment to 1) increase the speed of 
dissemination, an d 2) enhance the diversity of smokers recruited.  Related to the Dissemination Study, we have the 
following hypotheses:   
H1: Recruitment   
H1A:  Enhancing Diversity:  Peer recruitment  will recruit a greater proportion of African American smokers, compared 
to standard online recruitment.  
H1B:  Increasing the speed of recruitment:  Peer recruitment  will reduce  recruitment time  (time to recruit each 
participant ), compared to standard online recruitment .  
Further, as the study progresses, we will monitor the use of the Decide2Quit.org online system.   
Note that both the recommender CTHC and the peer recruitment tools are designed to increase engagement with 
Decide2Quit.org.  Thus, we propose that the recomm ender CTHC and peer recruitment tools will be synergistic.  To test 
the potential for increased engagement, we propose the following hypothesis:  
H2:* Increased Engagement (use of Decide2Quit functions over time).    
H2A:  Repeated use among those exposed to the fully enhanced group (access to peer recruitment toolset and 
recommender CTHC) will be greater than repeated use among those exposed to: a) peer recruitment toolset only b) 
recommender CTHC with no peer recruitment toolset and c) standard group ( no peer recruitment toolset and 
standard CTHC ). 
H2B:  Repeated use among those exposed to  peer recruitment toolset will be greater than repeated use among those 
exposed to  the standard group.  
H2C:  Repeated use among those expo sed to  recommender CTHC will be greater than repeated use among those 
exposed to  the standard group.  
Thus, we have preliminary hypotheses for dissemination (H1) and engagement (H2).   The main effectiveness outcome 
is described below in Aim 2.   
AIM 2:  For the Effectiveness  randomized  trial, we will recontact participants after six  month s of enrollment . Compared 
to the standard messaging group, the recommender CTHC is designed to increase smoking cessation rates at follow -up.  
Thus,  we hypothesize the following hypotheses :  
H3: * Quit — six month, 7 -day point prevalence biochemically verified — and risk reduction  in number of cigarettes 
smoked (patient  panel recommended outcome) .   
H3A:  Quit rates among those exposed to the fully enhanced group ( peer recruitment  toolset  and recommender CTHC ) 
will be greater than quit rates among those exposed to a) peer recruitment toolset only b) recommender CTHC  only 
and c) standard group ( no peer recruitment toolset  and standard CTHC ). 
H3B: Quit rates among those exposed to peer recruitment  toolset  will b e greater than quit rates among those exposed 
to the standard group.  
H3C: Quit rates among those exposed to recommender CTHC will  be greater than quit rates among those exposed to 
the standard group . 
H3A, H3B, and H3C will be tested for the risk reduction outcome also.  
*For H3, we will compare all smokers across the groups, and African American smokers across groups, and African 
American and White smokers for assessing heterogeneity of treatment effects.  
 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 8 TABLE 4: S 2S standard and enhanced groups  (Criterion 3)  
  Standard  Enhanced  
  Recruitment  Tailoring (CTHC)  Recruitment  Tailoring (CTHC)  
A Fully Enhanced  
S2S   Access to p eer 
Recruitment  
toolset≠≠≠ recommender CTHC *** 
(pushed motivational 
messages via email and text)  
B Half Enhanced  
Recommender  
CTHC only  Standard Online 
recruitment via search 
engine and social 
media advertisements  
(no access to Peer 
Recruitment Toolset)    recommender CTHC *** 
(pushed motivational 
messages via email and text)  
C Half Enhanced  
Peer 
Recruitment  
toolset  only   Standard CTHC *** (pushed 
motivational messages via 
email and text)  Access to p eer 
Recruitment  
toolset≠≠≠  
D Standard 
Comparator  Standard Online 
recruitment via search 
engine and social 
media advertisements  
(no access to Peer 
Recruitment Toolset)  Standard CTHC *** (pushed 
motivational messages via 
email and text)    
≠≠≠ Peer recruitment starts with the online recruitment of seeds. Peer recruited smokers will be in the same group as their 
recruiters to minimize contamination.  
***The recommender CTHC  adapts to influence ratings provided by current participants in the study  (See Section C.4.2.2). Each 
message will include a link to rate the message. Although our standard CTHC does not adapt to this feedback, we will include the 
ratings question in the standard CTHC groups to minimize differences between the two systems.  
 
C.2. Study Design:   This hybrid effectiveness -dissemination trial uses a combination of study designs.  The effectiveness 
study is a two -group randomized trial comparing the recommender CTHC (enhanced intervention) with standard 
messaging (comparison).  For the dissemination trial, allocation occurs in two waves (as described in Figure 1b).  Allocation 
to receive the peer recruitment tools occurs in two phases or waves (Wave 1: Half of the enrolled smokers are randomized 
to receive peer recruitment tools, wh ile the others do not receive the tools; and Wave 2: all subsequent smokers who 
are randomized to the effectiveness trial and also report they were peer -recruited are given access to the peer -
recruitment tools.   
  Also as  noted above, all Decide2Quit  
functions (Table 5) will be available to all 
groups.  Our goal is to test the 
enhancements offered by peer 
recruitment and recommender CTHC  
(individually and collectively) . (RQ-2)  
Online Randomization:  In our prior 
technology -assisted randomized trials, 
we have embedded randomization within 
the technology, and we will use a similar 
approach  in S2S  for the effectiveness trial . As smokers register on the website, t hey will be allocated to the four  
comparat ors based on a block -randomization allocation table integrated into the website. Our statistician will generate 
a randomization table;  the randomization sequence will be conducted in random blocks of different sizes (8, 12) to ensure 
balance among the grou ps and reduce predictability of allocation process . Thus, randomization will occur automatically 
at the time of initial registration. For the dissemination study, the initial randomization (see description of Wave 1 
allocation above) will occur after rando mization to recommender CTHC or comparison, and will also use the online 
randomization technology.   Table 5:  Major Components of Decide2Quit  
Component  Description  
Online Community  Interact with peer smokers through a resource website  
Health Risks  Information about specific health risks of smoking  
Thinking About 
Quitting  Helpful ideas and motivational recommendations (e.g: 
interactive calculators assessing triggers, decisional balance)  
Family Tools  Tips to get help family support, and deal with nagging,  
Provider Tools  Tips to include healthcare provider in the quit plan  
The Library  Library about smoking risks and treatments  
Web Resources  We’ve identified valuable additional websites  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 9 C.3. Identify, select, recruit, and retain study participants:  In Aim 1, we  will recruit 1200 smokers online. In S2S, 
recruitment is part of the experiment . Smokers will either be recruited through online advertisements or by peer 
recruitment as further detailed below. (PC-2). 
C.4. Comparators:  (RQ-5) 
Smokers in all groups will be given access to all  of the primary  Decide2Quit  functions  (Table 5). We describe the 
comparators below.   
 
C.4.1 Standard Functions  
C.4.1.1. Standard Online recruitment  via search engine and social media advertisements :  
Smokers will be recruited online using search engine advertisements. These advertisements will be customized to appear 
to smokers searching for quit smoking related search terms online. When smokers click on these advertisements,  they will 
be redirected to  Decide2Quit , where they will be provided study information and registration instructions. We will use the 
functions provided in the ad managers of the search and social media websites  to target ads for smokers . For example, 
the Facebook ad manager allows advertisers to target users based on their interests derived from their profile’s  keywo rds, 
pages they like , and groups they visit. Advertisements will be  displayed on the Facebook page  of the user .  We will work 
with our patient  advisory panel  to identify  relevant interests, as well as create advertisements with content that will be 
attractive to smokers. We will continuously monitor and refine these advertisements with our patient panel.   
Supportive evidence  for online recruitment :  
 We are using online advertisements as our recruitment comparison because it is the current “state -of-the-art” approach 
to recruit smokers, with demonstrated efficacy (RQ-5). Several studies, including our own, have shown that these 
advertisements are succe ssful in recruiting smokers.79,80 Over a five -month period (1R01CA129091 -01), we used this 
approach to recruit 300 smokers, 
as well as 100 smokers in 1.5 
months in our PCORI pilot.81 
C.4.1.2 Standard CTHC   
As noted (Section  B.4), the 
difference between the standard 
and recommender  CTHC is how 
messages are selected. Our study 
goal is  to test the ability of the two 
systems to select influential 
messages for indivi dual subjects. 
Thus,  both messaging systems 
will use the same message 
database.  We plan to send 2 
messages weekly  in the first four 
weeks of the intervention . We will 
then send 1 message per week 
until the smoker completes six 
months in the intervention (from 
registration date of a smoker) .  
Below , we first describe the 
messaging database and then the 
standard CTHC system.  
The Motivational Messaging database:  The messaging database include s 500 messages that were developed in our prior 
RCT and include s both expert -written messages and peer -written messages.82  Expert -written m essages (behaviorists, 
physicians, nurses) were developed through an iterative expert group review pro cess.  The se messages was informed by 
current guidelines83 and Social Cognitive Theory.84  The current guidelines provided evidence -based content on successful 
cessation strategie s.  The Social Cognitive Theory, which incorporates vicarious learning and verbal persuasion, guided the 
writing of the expert messages. Messages reflect theoretical determinants of quitting, such as positive outcome Figure 2: Expert vs peer messages: Frequency of codes  
 

  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 10 expectations and self -efficacy enhancin g small goals.84 Peer -written messages were written by current and former 
smokers responding  to an online survey that presented four scenarios tailored by gender, age and readiness -to-quit. These 
messages were then reviewed for use in our system. More details  of our methodology to generate peer written messages 
has been previously published.82 Our messaging database includes a comprehensive coding of the messages. We 
developed these codes to facilitate further understanding of what worked and what did not in these messag es. These 
codes include constructs from multiple behavioral theories such as the Social Cognitive Theory, the Transtheoretical 
Model, and Theory of Reasoned Action.85 We also coded the messages for content that may be pertinent to a specific 
user, including health and lifestyle status, health issues, and treatment options. Overall, we developed 48 codes divided 
into 8 categories (General Treatments, Behavioral Treatmen ts, Over the Counter and Prescription Treatments, 
Motivations, Health, Socio -Cultural Attributes, Author Attributes, and Author Interaction). A higher proportion of expert -
written messages include codes related to behavioral treatments (49%) and motivation s (35%). Peer -written messages 
have more codes related to author attributes and interaction (100%), behavioral treatments (68%), and motivations (52%) . 
(Figure 2) Our messages are also categorized by readiness to quit.  
Standard Decide2Quit  CTHC System:  
As noted, our comparison standard CTHC is a rule -based (if -then -else) system that tailor s messages based on a smoker’s 
readiness to quit. For example, when a smoker logs on to Decide2Quit  and indicates his readiness as “not ready to quit”, 
then a message fro m those categorized for “not ready to quit ” smokers will be picked at random and sent to the smoker. 
Similarly, if the smoker indicates his readiness as “set a quit date ”, then a message categorized for “set a quit date” 
smokers will be sent to the smoker.  The messages can either be sent via emails or text  messages .   
Supportive evidence for Standard CTHC system  
We had previously demonstrated this system to be effective in a large nationwide RCT (N=900), compared to a robust 
website control. This website control included such functions as risk, decisional balance, and cessation barrier calculators; 
games linking the chemicals in smoking with their other uses (e.g., formaldehyde is used in both cigarettes and in 
embalming); and a library of informat ional resources about smoking.10 In the RCT, the messages were sent at the same 
rate as our current plan for the S2S intervention. The messages increased six -month smoking cessation outcomes. Using 
a 6-month, 7 -day point prevalence cessation outcome, smokers who  received the motivational messages were assessed 
to be more likely to quit than those smokers who received the control website (30% Intervention and 20%  comparison , 
Odds Ratio 1.69, 95% CI 1.03 -2.8).10  The difference between those who received the CTHC messages and those who did 
not was more pronounced with African Americans (19% versus 3% control).  The messages also increased DISC  use. 
Compared to non-message days,  Decide2Quit  use was most likely to occur within 3 days after the motivational message 
(OR=5.4, 95% CI=4.02 -7.31). As we also published, the peer messages were most effective in increasing use. Peer messages  
were twice as likely to generat e new activity (OR=2.03, 95% CI=1.74 -2.35), compared with the expert -written messages,82 
after adjusting for time from registration and smoker characteristics. Hearing from other s “just like me” and “in their own 
words” adds value and credibility to smokers regarding how to quit smoking, and successful attempts.  
 
C.4.2. S 2S Functions  
C.4.2.1. Access to p eer recruitment  toolset : 
We will provide smokers access to a peer recruitment toolset to facilitate recruitment of their  peer smokers to the study. 
The first wave of smokers who will be given access to the toolset  will be referred to as seeds. The peer recruitment  toolset 
includes  a Facebook website plugin, an online training video, and a recruitment tracker ( Appendix A ). Our Facebook 
website plugin was developed in our NCI -funded pilot (R21CA15896).3,4 The Facebook plugin will allow smokers to browse 
through their Facebook friends and recruit them by send ing private recruitment messag es. The online training video  will 
teach the recruiter  how to use available tools to recruit other smokers from their social network. The recruitment tracker 
will allow  smokers to track successful peer recruitment. To encourage recruitment, the system also  will email or text a 
weekly recruitment report  to the potential recruiter . The basic flow of a single hypothetical smoker through the peer -
referral, registration, and subsequent initiation of new peer -recruitment is described in Figure 3. Once a seed registers on 
Decide2Quit  and receives the peer recruitment toolset, we expect the following steps:   
1. The seed consents to be in the study and recruit smokers from his/her network using the peer -recruitment tools 
(by sending a Facebook private message).  
2. The successfully peer -recruited smoker (Wave 1 recruit) registers on the system and consents to t hen recruit 
other smokers in their social network.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 11 3. The Wave 1 recruit then continues the peer -recruitment chain, recruiting smokers from their social network.  
4. The successfully peer -recruited smoker then registers (Wave 2 recruit).  
5. The waves progr ess until the target sample size is reached.  
In addition to supporting the smokers’ ability to recruit via Facebook by sending a message, we will also support 
recruitment messaging via emails and text -messaging to further expand reach in this study.  
 
 
  Figu re 3:  Single hypothetical Peer -referral “Lifecycle”  
 

  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 12  
  
 
 In our NCI-funded pilot study , we recruited smokers on Facebook 
to Decide2Quit  using online advertisements. These seeds  (first 
wave smoker) and peer recruits (subsequent wave smokers) were 
provided the peer recruitment  toolset described above to recruit  
other smokers . Smokers were incent ivized for up to seven 
successful recruitments and had 30 days to recruit from date of 
registration. Successful peer recruitment was defined as a peer -
recruited smoker completing Decide2Quit  registration following a 
referral. Our primary questions were 1) whether smokers will 
recruit other smokers and 2) if this peer recruitment process 
increases the reach of the intervention to harder -to-reach groups, 
including those not ready to quit and minority smokers.  In just over 
a year ( July 2013 to Sept 2014) , peer recruitment quadrupled our 
sample (seeds: 190; peer recruit: 569 smokers) resulting in a total 
sample of 759 smokers.  Participants reported being connected to 
6914 smokers [mean 9.1, (SD 5.51), median 8, intra quartile range 
4]. Overall, 15% (n=117) of pa rticipants successfully peer recruited 
(54% recruited 7 smokers, 21% recruited 4 to 6 smokers, 18 
recruited 2 to 3, and 24% recruited one smoker). Peer recruitment 
resulted in four waves of participants after the initial wave of seeds (wave 0 to wave 4).  
          Compared to direct recruits, peer recruits were less likely to be ready to quit (74.2% vs. 95.1%) . They were also  more 
likely to be African American (23.8% vs. 10.8%) (P < 0.01 for all comparisons). (Figure 4) This increase happened without 
our t ools prompting the peer recruitment of African American smokers. As noted (Section B.3), we will work with our 
patient advisory panel (See Section F) to further refine our instructions to encourage African American smokers’ 
recruitment. Thus, we anticipate  an even higher increase in proportion of African American smokers in S2S.   
          Most participants strongly agreed or agreed that peer recruitment was beneficial to their own quit smoking efforts  
(75.4%), motivated them to get support from those around them to quit smoking (64.4%), did not increase their cravings 
(83.1%), and made them feel like they were being helpful to their family and friends who are smokers (71.2%). We will 
test benefit of peer recruitment to cessation in this study.  
 
C.4.2. 2. Recommender CTHC  system:   
As detailed above (Section C.4.1.2), the difference between the standard and the recommender CTHC is the approach to 
message selection and not the messages. We will use the same motivational messages as the standard CTHC system. Our 
recommender CTHC  system is a hybrid recommender system. Recommender  systems can be implemented using either 
a content -based,91 collaborative filtering,92 or hybrid approach.93  Given a sample of rating data, content –based 
recommender systems learn a  function to match users to items based on the provided user profile information (e.g, age, 
gender) and the messages’ metadata description. Metadata is defined as data about data; it describes the structure or 
content of particular resource, object, or ent ity.94 In compu ter engineering, this assignment of messages to categories is 
referred to as metadata.  Our messages coding by the readiness to quit categories in the  comparison standard CTHC is an 
example of the type of metadata that can be used by content -based recommen der systems. Content -based 
recommender systems work similarly to standard CTHC systems, but the matching function can be optimized based on 
rating data instead of specified by experts. In contrast to content -based recommender systems, collaborative filteri ng 
recommender systems match users to items based on past rating history. The simplest examples of this approach are 
nearest neighbor methods.92 These methods match a target user with other users that have given similar ratings to the 
items the users have rated in common. The set of users matched to the t arget user are referred to as the target user’s 
nearest neighbors. The method then recommends items to the target user that their neighboring users have rated highly. Supportive evidence for peer recruitment :  Figure 4:  Increase in proportion of African Americans:  
Seeds vs Peer Recruit in our pilot  
 

  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 13 The assumption behind these methods is that if two users are observed to have close agree ment on the ratings of a 
sufficiently large number of items, they will likely agree closely on the ratings for the remainder of the items.  
For the recommender CTHC , we chose a hybrid  approach because they merge the strengths of content -based 
and collaborative filtering recommender systems.93 Thus, they can potentially benefit from exper t-driven rules (content -
based), and the recommender algorithms. Our h ybrid recommender system use s three  input data sources to generate 
the recommendations, including the 1) metadata description of the messages, 2) implicit, and 3) explicit feedback data  
(smokers in prior and current study) . As explained above, our metadata includes a comprehensive coding of the messages 
(section 4.1.2  and Figure 2). Implicit feedback data are derived from user actions. As our implicit feedback data, we used 
the website ret urn data of 900 smokers that participated in our prior RCT.10 When an email was sent to these smokers, 
we tracked their website usage in the days following the email. Thus, we had data on the frequency at which each 
message promoted  use of Decide2Quit , and the characteristics of the 
smokers that received these messa ges.   
Explicit feedback data consists of self -reported item ratings. Two 
pilot studies were used to generate the explicit feedback data for 
recommender CTHC .95  We first recruited 100 current or former smokers 
to refine the explicit ratings question.  Each subject was asked to provide 
ratings using a 5 point Likert scale of four different aspects of messages: 
influence, emotional response, relevanc e and preference.  Each subject 
provided ratings for five different randomly selected messages.  Per -message analysis showed a positive correlation 
between the means and variances of the ratings for each question.  Thus, balancing the need to obtain multip le ratings 
per message and the resulting cognitive load, we decided to choose only one question for developing the recommender  
CTHC system . We chose the influence question  (Table 6)  because it had demonstrated strong predictive validity  in a prior 
RCT.96 A second pilot test was performed to collect a larger rating dataset to bootstrap the learning and evaluation of 
collaborative filtering models for  the recommender CTHC . 95  We recruited 846 current or former smokers from online 
and local sources to rate the messages on the influen ce scale . Each smoker was asked to rate 20 messages, resulting in 
16,920 ratings.  Several classic and state -of-the art collaborative filtering methods were evaluated for accurate prediction 
methods.  The Bayesian Probabilistic Matrix Factorization (BPMF) was identified as the best single model in our evaluation 
and was used to develo p th e recommender CTHC . The BPMF model estimates a probability distribution over a joint 
embedding of users and items into complementary latent spaces. The rating a given user supplies for a given item is 
approximated by the expected value of the product of th e latent user and item factor vectors representing the user -item 
pair, with the expectation taken over the uncertainty in embeddings .1 In addition to  explicit feedback ratings from 
smokers in prior studies, t he recommender CTHC  is programmed to also use the explicit ratings  of smoker s receiving the 
messages . Thus , when a smoker is sent an email, we will include a link to rate the message  on the influen ce scale  (Table 
6). Although our standard CTHC does not adapt to this feedback , we will include the ratings question in the standard 
CTHC message s to minimize group differences . 
Supportive evidence for recommender CTHC  system  
Using PCORI pilot funding  (1IP2P1000582),1,2 we tested  the efficacy of the recommender CTHC  system in a small 
rand omized experiment.  Our comparison system was the standard Decide2Quit  CTHC system. Smokers in both arms were 
emailed daily motivational messages (30 messages) and incentivized to rate messages  on the influence scale . We tested 
this in a number of ways:  1) daily rati ngs of messages using the influe nce question (Table 6), 2) perceived influence of the 
intervention, and 3) cessation behavior. In all these analyses, the recommender CTHC  system performed better. 
Comparing the daily ratings of the two systems, the proportion of days when smokers agreed/strongly agreed (daily rating 
>= 4) that the messages influenced them to quit was significantly ( P=.02)  higher in the Intervention (74%) than comparison 
(45%) . In our assessment of the perceived influence of the intervention, compared with the standard CTHC system, 
smokers stron gly agreed or agreed that the recommender CTHC  system significantly influenced them to quit smoking and 
use Nicotine Replacement Therapy. Even in the short time span of our study (30 -days) and compared with an effective 
rule-based CTHC, the recommender CTH C system demonstrated a higher influence on cessation behavior. Although not 
significant, more  intervention smokers reported that they had already quit or set a quit date (39.7% versus 29.7%). At 30 -
days, more intervention smokers (36%) stopped smoking for  one day or longer than comparison (32%) (P=.70).  
What messages were selected by the  recommender CTHC system  in the pilo t: We conducted  a coding -level analysis (see 
codes description in Section 4.1.2 ) to understand how the  message  selection differed from  the standard CTHC system. As 
noted  above , in our  pilot  experiment, the standard CTHC system tailored based on readiness to quit, and messages in Table 6:  Influence Question used in 
recommender CTHC  pilot:  
This message influences me to QUIT smoking?  
1. Strongly a gree  
2. Agree  
3. Neutral  
4. Disagree  
5. Strongly disagree  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 14 each readiness category were picked at random. We identified the top 10 most frequentl y selected messages by each 
system . We then calculated the pro portion of messages with each code, and then calculated the difference in the 
proportions of each code .  Compared to the standard CTHC messages  (Figure 5), the recommender CTHC  had a higher 
proportion  of messages  with the codes “Health: Physical Functioning: Smoking Risk ” and “ Motivations:  Aesthetics ”. As 
noted above, messages selected by the recommender CTHC  were rated as more influential than the standard CTHC 
messages  (see Appendix B  for example messages ). 
Fig 5: Differences in Message Codes Between top 10 most frequently selected messages (recommender vs. Standard CTHC)  
 
C.5. Aim 1 : Conduct the S2S RCT testing (A) peer recruitment  and (B) recommender CTHC   
In preparation of the study , we will work with our patient advisory panel to refine our recruitment materials 
(advertisements content, study description, peer recruitment instructions,  etc.), especially focusing on encouraging the 
peer recruiters to recruit  African American s mokers . We will work with our biostatistician to help integrate the new 
randomization table in Decide2Quit . As noted  (Section C.2.) , our program will automatically assign smokers to the groups 
as they register on our site. Our patient -centered measures and analyt ic plan are described below.    
C.5.1. Patient -centered outcome measures. (RQ -6) 
S2S will include multiple d ata collection  stages  (Table 7). We developed our outcome measures based on over 15 years of 
DISC  research with smokers (RQ-6).4-6,56,97,98 As noted  (Section A.3 ), to appropriately measure dissemination , we need both 
recruitment and use measures.  We also will test effectiveness in this study. Ou r primary measure s are described below:   
Dissemination Measures  (Hypothesis 1) : 
H1a:   African -American recruitment:  Related to H1a, we will use the number of African -Americans recruited.  
H1b:  Recruitment time: When smokers register on Decide2Quit , they will be assigned a unique identifier and their 
registration date and time will be recorded. We will compute recruitment time from this data as the time  taken to recruit 
each participant from the time that the firs t participant in the group was recruited. (see equation below).  
𝐑𝐞𝐜𝐫𝐮𝐢𝐭𝐦𝐞𝐧𝐭  𝐭𝐢𝐦𝐞  𝑇𝑖= Xi−X1 
where  Xi is date  of registration  of ith participant ;  X1 is the date  of registration  of 1th participant . 
We also considered number of recruits as a measure. In a “real -world” dissemination project, number of recruits would 
be an ideal measure. However, in a trial with a stated goal of recruiting 600 smokers each in the peer and standard 
recruitment groups and with a time limit, number of  recruits would not be a good comparative measure.  Recruitment 
time would allow us to assess differences between the two groups, and we chose this measure.  
H2: Repeated Use:  We use repeated use over other use measures (number of logins) because of the de monstrated 
association with smoking cessation.37 This is an ordinal scale of number of Decide2Quit functions used after the first DISC 
visit (0: no functions used; 1: use of 1 -2 functions, 2: > 2 functions used).  

  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 15 H3:  Effectiveness Measures:   
 7 day point prevalence cessation 
biochemically verified using saliva 
NicAlert®: 7 day point prevalence will be 
assessed at six months using: Do you 
currently smoke cigarettes (smoked even 1 
puff in the last 7 days) ?100 The Society of 
Nicotine and Tobacco Research h ave 
recommended this measure for multiple 
reasons.101 Point prevalence can capture 
delayed effects of an intervention. 
Continuous or prolonged abstinence 
measures assume that once someone fails 
they are  unlikely to return to long -term 
abstinence during the remainder of study. 
A psychometric analysis comparing 
continuous, prolonged, and point 
prevalence outcomes found that point 
prevalence was the measure that had 
highest concurrent validity.101 The 7 -day 
window provides a n appropriate  stringent m easure  to account for a cross -sectional snapshot.  As recommended by 
reviewers, we will verify quitting using the biochemical measure  — saliva NicAlert® test .102-104 The NicAlert® test (Nymox 
Corporation) is a semi -quantitative method that uses a dipstick to measure the level of cotinine in a sample of s aliva. The 
test strip displays the result in seven zones. Each zone represents a range of levels of cotinine/smoking [e.g. zone 0 (0 –10 
ng/mL, a nonsmoker) to zone 6 (>1000 ng/mL, a heavy smoker)].  The results will be read as 0 -6, and as recommended,  
any value ≥  1 will be considered as tobacco use.105-107 The feasibility of mailed NicAlert testing has been demonstrated.107-
109  We will mail the strips with self -addressed return envelope with clear instructions and a link to a training video. Our 
staff will also be available by phone to help the smokers complete testing.  
Risk reduction  or the reduction in the number of cigarettes smoked  (PC-3): For the smokers participating in our prior 
studies, reduction in number of cigarettes smoked  was an important outcome. In preparing this revision, we further 
confirmed with our pati ent panel that this was an important outcome. We asked each of them an open -ended question – 
besides quitting what would the most meaningful outcome as a result of participating in a smoking cessation intervention ? 
All of them chose risk reduction as their  first choice. If needed, we gave them prompts that included: reduction in number 
of cigarettes smoked, ability to be active without feeling short of breath, increased sense of taste and smell, improved 
dental health, and increased energy level in random o rders. These prompts were selected from a recent study that 
assessed the top patient -centered outcomes of primary care smokers using focus groups.110 In this study, risk reduction 
or decreased use of tobacco (cutting back, not necessarily quitting) was assessed as the top measure  in th e patient 
behavior change category . We will calculate risk reduction using  the belo w formula:   
Risk reduction  =  Number of cigarettes smoked at follow -up – Number of cigarettes smoked at baseline  
C.6.1. Analytical Plan  (IR-4) 
As noted above, our study is powered for our primary effectiveness study.  As the outcome for H3 is the most challenging 
to change, and has a meaningful but modest effect size, H3 requires the most power.  As a results, we will be over -
powered  to detect me aningful differences for H1 and H2.  As the analytic plan for H3 is the most complex, we spend the 
majority of our focus on the analytic plan for this hypothesis.  For H1 and H2, we demonstrate that we will be able to 
detect small differences with the larg e sample size required for H3.   
For the effectiveness trial  (H3) , to preserve randomization, all primary analyses will be on an intent -to-treat basis  (IR-3). 
Secondary analyses will explore dose -response effects among those with variable levels of adherence to the intervention. 
All analyses will be two -sided and alpha error will be set at 0.05. We will begin our analysis by examining univariate 
statistics (means , medians, standard deviations and 95% confidence intervals) and distributions. We will examine the 
balance of participant characteristics by study groups and account for any imbalances in our multivariable analysis. As  
 
 
Table 7:  Key Data Elements  
 
Search Ad Manager  
Baseline during 
registration  
Every Decide2Quit  visit 
Every email message  
6th month Follow -up 
(Online or phone)  
6th month Follow -up 
Mailed)  
Online advertisement stats (no of users who 
saw ads, etc.)  X      
Demographics99   X     
Participant smoking characteristics ( level of 
addiction, allowing smoking at home, quit in 
last 12 months)99   X     
Number of cigarettes/day   X   X  
Readiness to quit   X X    
Use of  website    X    
Explicit influence ratings     X   
7-day point prevalence smoking cessation99      X  
Biochemical verification saliva  NicAlert®       X 
C.6. Aim 2: Follow participants in the randomized trial for six months testing S2S  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 16 appropriate, differences in measured  characteristics (i.e. , demographics and pre -baseline smoking behaviors) by group  
will be tested using chi -square tests of independence (categorical variables), ANOVA (continuous variables) or the 
equivalent non -parametric tests depending on the distributi on of the variables. Per best practice, differences in baseline 
characteristics of the intervention and comparison groups will be assessed .111,112  
For the dissemination study  (H1) , we will compare the speed of recruitment and percent of African -Americans recruited 
in the peer -recruitment and no peer -recruitment groups .  Note that our goal in the dissemination study is  to increase  
speed of dissemination and the  diversity of recruitment  (and dissemination study includes and randomized and non -
randomized wave of recruitment .  Thus, we anticipate that, and hypothesize that, African -Americans will be imbalanced 
(with greate r recruitment in the peer recruitment group ). We will use a chi -square test to compare the difference in 
proportions (H1A).  
We note below that H2 has a has a limitation, in that it relies both on the randomization of the main effectiveness study, 
and the a llocation to peer -recruitment tools (which is, not randomized as required by hypothesis 1).   We also describe 
below our approach to address this limitation.  
H1: Analytic plan, sample size, and power calculation  
H1A Analytic Plan:   To monitor dissemination (H1) through social networks requires a non -randomized allocation for 
those smokers peer -referred.  For H2, we need to consider the Randomized and non -randomized (i.e.: peer referred) 
components of this study.  
Based on our pilot  (Section C.4. 2.1),  we anticipate that peer recruitment will be more effective in recruiting African 
Americans. To test this , we  will categorize the smokers as either African Americans or not, and then use the Chi-Square  
statistic  to test for differences.   
As a seconda ry, exploratory analysis , Within the peer recruitment tools group,  we will conduct a secondary analysis 
examining differences in demographic characteristic between peer recruited and directly recruited smokers. As noted in 
Section C.4.2.1 , peer recruitment resulted in increasing reach of the intervention to harder to reach smokers (not ready 
to quit and African American smokers).   Using data provided by search engine advertisement managers, we will evaluate 
the performance of our online a dvertisements (number of users registered on Decide2Quit following an advertisement 
on the search engine).  
Sample Size and Power Calculations:  In our NCI -funded pilot (R21CA15896),3,4(Section C.4.2.1), peer recruitment 
increased  the proportion of African Americans to 23%, compared to 11% in the initial seeds (those recruited by 
advertisements).  Using 10% as the base rate in the non -peer recruitment group (recruitment by online advertisements), 
we estimated sample size requiremen ts varying the proportion in the peer recruitment from 16 to 20%.  With these 
assumptions, we will need 219 smokers in each group to detect difference of 10% (power = 80%, alpha=.05). If we reduce 
the difference to 8% and 6%, we will need 319 and 525 in ea ch group respectively. Given that we will work with our panel 
to encourage recruitment of African American smokers in the peer recruitment group and may see bigger differences 
than our pilot, we will have adequate power particularly with the proposed sampl e size of 600 in each recruitment 
method.  
H1B Analytic Plan:   For H1B, we will compare mean 
recruitment time between the two types of recruitment 
method using a t -test. .   
Sample Size and Power Calculations:  In the NCI pilot  
(R21CA15896),3,4 we estimated that the mean number of 
days to recruit a sample of 7 00 smokers was 244 days with 
a standard deviation of 81. Assuming that peer 
recruitment proceeds with the same rate and with the 
same standard deviation, we can detect a difference in 
recruitment time as low as 14 days.  Since we expect the 
comparison rate to be much slower, we are adequately powered to detect differences with a sample of 600 (power=0.8). 
See other sample size requirements varying the mean and standard deviation of the number of da ys to recruit in the 
intervention and comparison (Table 8). Calculations were made in STATA.113 Table 8: Power Calculations to estimate the minimum 
difference in the mean number of days to recruit  
Intervention 
(Mean)  Comparison 
Mean  Standard 
Deviation 
(Both groups)  Sample 
Size 
Required  
244 257 81 610 
244 258 81 526 
244 260 100 614 
244 261 100 544 
244 263 120 627 
244 264 120 566 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 17  
H2: Analytic plan, sample size, and power calculation  
H2 An alytic Plan:    
We will analyze across the  four  groups: (A: Fully enhanced; B: Recommender CTHC only; C: Peer recruitment only; D: 
Standard) , as we hypothesize there may be an additive effect on engagement of peer recruitment and the recommender 
CTHC system (See section X above) . We will use the following generalized linear model, which includes indicators of peer 
recruitment and recommender CTHC  and the interaction between the two indicators as independent variables, to test 
H2A:    
𝐸(𝒇(𝒖))= 𝑏0+ 𝑏1×𝑃+𝑏2×𝑅+𝑏3×𝑃×𝑅+𝑝𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠  (𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑝 ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑠,𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠  𝑡𝑜 𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡 ) 
 where 𝑢 is the outcome measure (repeated use measure), the function 𝑓(𝑢)depends on the distribution of 𝑢,   
P=1    for peer recruitment, =0 for standard recruitment,   R=1 for recommender CTHC, =0 for standard CTHC.  
The adjusted 𝑓(𝑢) (i.e., adjusting for the potential confounders) for each of the 4 groups can be expressed in terms 
of the regression coefficients defined  in the box below . 
A B C D 
𝑏0+𝑏1+𝑏2+𝑏3 𝑏0+𝑏2 𝑏0+𝑏1 𝑏0 
 
In the model, 𝑏2+𝑏3 is the estimated difference between group A ( peer recruitment  and recommender CTHC ) and group 
C (peer recruitment  only ); 𝑏1+𝑏3 is the estimated difference between group A and group B ( recommender CTHC  only ); 
and 𝑏1+𝑏2+𝑏3 is the estimated difference between group A  and group D (standard).  Significant positive values of the 
estimated differences will support H2A. In the event t hat there is an interaction effect be tween the two S2S 
enhancements ( peer recruitment and recommender CTHC ), i.e., b3 is si gnificantly different from zero , H2B and H2C will 
be tested by comparing groups C vs. D (peer recruitment alone vs. standard Decide2Q uit; estimated by b1) and groups B 
vs. D (recommender alone vs. standard Decide2Quit ; estimated by b2). If there is no interaction effect, i.e. b3 is not 
significantly different from zero the following model will be used to test H2B and H2C:  
𝑬(𝒇(𝒖))= 𝑎0+ 𝑎1×𝑃+𝑎2×𝑅+𝑝𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠  (𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑝 ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑠,𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠  𝑡𝑜 𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡 ). 
In the model, 𝑎1 is the estimated effect of peer recruitment  [(A+C) – (B + D)];  𝑎2 is the estimated effect of recommender 
CTHC   [(A+B)  – (C+D)]. A significant positive value of 𝑎1 or 𝑎2will support the hypotheses of positive effects of these two 
individual components respectively (H2B and H2C).  
 We will examine the distribution of the dependent variable u to determine the link function  to be used in the 
generalized linear model. In our previous study, we used an ordinal variable for the dependent variable Repeated Use 
with log link function to fit an ordinal logistic regression .37  
We will also conduct a secondary analysis using the influence ratings. As noted above, both standard and 
recommender CTHC will include a link to rate the messages on the influence scale (Table 6). For this analysis, the 
dependent variable for each smoker i s the mean of all influence ratings (an influence score) and the independent variable 
is study arm  [recommender (A+B) or  standard CTHC (C+D)] .  We predict that the mean influence score will be higher in 
recommender CTHC than  the standard CTHC arm .  For thi s analysis, we will start with a t -test for differences in mean, but 
acknowledge that the influence scores may not be normally distributed and only approximate a continuous variable. 
Thus, we will use a Wilcoxon rank -sum. As an exploratory evaluation for H 2, we will also compare African American 
smokers across the groups, and African American and White smokers to test for heterogeneity of effect. This will provide 
us important data for design future interventions.  (HTE)  
 
As noted above,  H 2 will rely both on the randomization of the main effectiveness study, and the allocation to peer -
recruitment tools (which is, not randomized as required by hypothesis 1).  Thus,  we need to consider the Randomized 
and non -randomized (i.e.: peer referred) components of this study. To do this, we will adjust the analyses for measured 
covariates that differ between the non -randomized and non -randomized groups from the dissemination study.”  
 
Sample Size and Power Calculations:  We used the method published by W hitehead to calculate power for this 
hypothesis.114 As noted above, in our prior RCT (1R01CA129091), we found a linear association with six -month cessation 
using the repeated use scale. For eve ry increase by one in this scale, odds of smoking cessation increased (OR= 2.10, 95% 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 18 CI = 1.03, 4.30),37 with the current sample size of 300 per group  for H2 A, we can detect a difference a cumulative odds 
ratio of 1.7 .  Thus,  our study is adequately powered to measure a reasonable difference in the repeated use measure .  
Power for these hypotheses is driven by H2 A, as this analysis is looking at the smaller sample (fully enhanced).  For H2 B 
and H2 C, power is even greater,  as the sample size is 600 per group for each.   
H3: Analytic plan, sample size, and power calculation  
Quitting: We will compare those randomized to enhanced CTHC, against those randomized to standard CTHC. We will 
test the 6-month, 7 -day point prevalence cessation as the dependent variable for these analyses. As described in the 
missing data section  (C.6.2) , we will use a number of approaches to account for missing data, including using a selection 
modeling approach as recomm ended by experts.115  Using mediation analysis, we will examine the potential mechanisms 
through which we anticipate the intervention may produce a beneficial effect.116  We will categorize the NicAlert® test 
into smokers and not categories, and use the Chi -Square statistic to test for differences.  
Sample Size and Power Calculations:   
We assumed a control cessation rate of 15%,117 a 
two-sided significance level of 0.05. A sample size of 
300 in each group (H3c) will achieve 80% power to 
detect a difference of 9% (quit rate in 
intervention=24%) in quit rates between the two 
groups, based on a Z -test with pooled variance.   
  
Risk red uction:   As noted above, risk reduction is 
measured by change in cigarettes smoked from 
baseline to follow -up. If risk reduction is normally distributed, we will use identity link function in the generalized linear 
model.  We will also model risk reduction  using count regression, using a Poisson or negative binomial regression 
modeling if the variance of the distribution of risk reduction is over dispersed.  
 
Sample Size and Power Calculations:   
We calculated the detectable difference in risk reduction with 300 smokers in each group and the mean in the comparison 
group of 3.3 using standard deviations of 2 and 3 with 80% and 90% power ( Table 9 ). We will have 90% power to detect 
a difference of 0.80 (or smaller)  number of cigarette  smoked reduction between two groups.  This difference is likely to 
be achieved based on the results of our PCORI pilot in which we achieved a reduction of 0.85 (4.15 to 3.3)  in 30 days ; 
compared to smokers receiving the standard CTHC messages, smokers rece iving the recommender CTHC had a higher 
reduction in number of cigarettes at 30 days (Standard CTHC: mean 3.3; S2S adaptive CTHC : 4.15).  
Resources needed to replicate the intervention:  As requested by reviewer, we have now added Dr. Bridget Smith to our 
team to help us quantify  the resources needed to successfully replicate our intervention. From the perspective of an 
implementing organization, w e will compare the costs of the four groups . The research team will track staff time 
associated with each intervention arm, including time for training, recruiting, and administering the different aspects of 
the intervention. In addition, we will estimate development costs of each intervention  in our prior NIH and PCORI -funded 
studies and any equipment or supp ly costs. We will compare the costs of the different intervention arms in multiple 
scenarios in which we examine how costs change based on changes in the components of the intervention and the types 
and amount of staffing provided for implementation. The e conomic analyses for  this will primarily consist of descriptive 
statistics. Using the estimates of costs of supplies, equipment, and staff time and the potential savings that result from 
decreased healthcare costs related to smoking cessation, we will cond uct a budget impact analysis to calculate the 
resources needed to implement  any particular treatment strategy from the perspective of an implementing and/or 
disseminating organization. We will follow the guidelines outlined for best practices in budget imp act analysis .121 We will 
create tables to describe the assumptions of our inputs and outputs of our budget impact analysis, and perform sensitivity 
analyses to examine how changing the assumptions of the model impact the potential costs for an organization 
implementing th e intervention .   
C.6.2. Missing data analysis  and handling dropouts   Table 9: Power Calculations to estimate risk reduction using a 
measure of t he mean difference in the number of cigarettes smoked 
(baseline to follow -up) 
Power  Intervention  
(Mean)  Comparison  
(Mean)  Both arms  
(Standard 
Deviation)  Detectable 
difference  
80%  3.76  3.3 2 0.46  
 3.99  3.3 3 0.69  
90%  3.83  3.3 2 0.53  
 4.10  3.3 3 0.80  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 19 For our effectiveness study , missing data due to dropouts  is only an issue for Hypothesis 3  (H3) . For hypothesis 1 and 2, 
missing data  is part of the outcome of interest, and  will be considered as indicative of no recruitment and lack of  use.  For 
hypothesis 3, o ur primary approach to dealing with missing data is to minimize its occurrence. Drawing upon our prior 
experience, our staff  will make multiple attempts to contact the patient and obtain their follow -up (MD -1). We will also 
provide smokers multiple modes (telephone and web) to complete the follow -up (MD -1). However, we recognize that 
there will be missing data. This is especially true in light -touch technology -assisted interventions.115,122,123 As 
recommended in literature, we will  take  multiple approaches to analyzing the data. Our primary analysis will be an intent -
to-treat analysis  where all participants with missing data (MD -4) will be considered smokers (MD -2). We will also conduct 
a complete case analysis . If missing cessation data  is greater than 10 -20%, experts recommend using selection model ing 
to examine the robustness of findings (MD -3).115 Thus, we will implement selection model ing using inverse probability 
weight ing to determine the potential effect of missing data. As a sensitivity analysis, we will compare these results with 
results of complete cases, and last baseline or observation carried over and the multiple imputation method of Hedeker 
et al (MD -5).124 We anticipate missing data in the biochemical verification, and we will use rates of refusal in sensitivity 
analys es.  
 
Addressing multiple outcomes and multiple comparisons:   The statistical literature has reviewed methods for accounting 
for multiple comparisons, and noted that adjustment is controversial and may be over -conservative in some contexts.118-
120 Adjusting for multiple compa risons is highly appropriate in exploratory analyses that are not testing specified 
hypotheses (as example: genome -wide association studies). However, studies that conduct analyses focused on a set of 
specific, pre -analysis -specified hypothesis are concept ually not the same. In these hypothesis -driven studies, the articles 
cited above, would argue that the concept of adjustment for multiple comparisons would be over -conservative.   In this 
project, we are pre -specifying primary and secondary hypotheses, we will present each p -value “as -is” allowing consumer 
of the results to consider the strength of the complete set of findings using his or her preferred way of placing the separat e 
findings in context, without imposing a specific, controversial “multiple com parisons” interpretation.  
 
C.6.3. Strengths, Limitations, and Future Opportunities.  
Our proposal has several strengths. S2S is the first study to evaluate  smoker -driven innovations to disseminate DISCs. S2S 
is an example of a transdisciplinary innovation. We have combined concepts and theories from behavior change, health 
communication, computer recommender system s, and social marketing together to develop the S2S tools. Patients 
developed several of the S2S tools as content ex perts  (see Section F) . The S2S functions have the potential to significantly 
transform the way we disseminate our interventions. By facilitating the spread of the tools from patient to patient, peer 
recruitment  provides a naturalistic approach for spreadin g the intervention reaching hard -to-reach populations that have 
a great need for such tools, leveraging current trends in social networking. One of the challenges with current DISCs is that 
attrition rates are high.  125-128  By continuously ad apting to the behavior and needs of the patient, the recommender CTHC  
may continuously engage the patients and reduce attrition rates.  
 In this study, we  focus on testing peer recruitment  for recruiting  African  American  smokers . While Hispanics or 
Latinos are also disproportionately affected by smoking, we do not have current evidence demonstrating the strategies 
described in this proposal can successfully recruit them. Other strategies  such as adaptive peer recruitment  may be 
needed for engaging Hi spanics in DISCs  and we will explore these  in future projects. While we will make significant advance, 
future methodological and dissemination opportunities  remain. The S2S tools have applications in other health and 
wellness interventions  including motiva tion for weight -loss and compliance. In collaboration with our colleagues at the 
Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval (CIIR) at UMass Amherst, we will develop more complex, machine learning 
algorithms for adaptive recruitment.  These algorithms can learn from the recruitment data and adapt to the changes in 
real-time. We will learn several lessons from the S2S study, which can all be used to train the machine learning algorithms. 
We can also develop the recommender CTHC  to incorporate contextual and physiological information from smart phones 
and sensors , as a form of patient feedback. On the dissemination front, we envision a large, pragmatic study to fully 
evaluate the integration of S2S into health care systems.   Our team has extensively worked wit h multiple clinical systems 
integrating behavioral change research with clinical -system tethered Personal Health Records (PHRs).5,129 -143  We will 
support a warm -handoff between providers and patients using an integrated EHR/PHR that will automatically flag patients 
that are eligible to be champion  recruiters  and support automated motivational messaging to them. This should enable 
us to gain the benefits of having providers recruit while not bu rdening them with additional work. We have conducted 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 20 several large pragmatic studies integrated with healthcare systems.5,7,8,129,144 -146 In our CTSA efforts, we are working to 
create a multi -institutional consortium of Healthcare systems using the same EHR/PHR platform.  In conclusion, in planning 
S2S, we have built on our strong efficacy data from current NIH and PCORI -funded research, integrated several 
methodological innovations, and have a clear plan for further dissemination of S2S tools.  
D.  Patient Population  
We will recruit 12 00 smokers ( 400 smokers per group) for this study  (Table 10) . All current smokers over 19 years of age, 
can read or speak English, and have Internet access at home will be eligible (RQ -3). Our target is any smokers who view 
our advertisements on Google and Facebook and 
register on the website. Thus,  screening is not 
applicable for this study. This is a recruitment 
experiment . Thus, we can only estimate the 
characteristics  of smokers participat ing in our study.  
As noted, we will continuously monitor recruitment 
with our patient panel and revise advertisements as 
needed.  
E. Research Team and Environment  
Research Team:  We have a multidisciplinary 
research team (computer engineers, behavior 
change, tobacco cessation, clinicians, and patient participants), with  an established collaboration  record .5-9,147 Drs. 
Sadasivam, Houston , and Allison  have collaborated  together for over 10 years to develop Decide2Quit ,5,7,8,10,37,56 and the 
S2S innovations1,2.3,4 Dr. Allison has over 20 years of research expertise  in health disparities  and has  successfully 
collaborated with Dr. Houston to develop interventions  targeting African Americans .96,148. In response to reviewer ’s 
critiques , we have recruited Dr. Bridget Smith, a health  economist , to help us conduct a budget impact analysis  of our 
intervention. Drs. Sadasivam, Houston, and Smith have conduct ed a similar budget impact analysis of our prior 
intervention .8 Dr. Marlin, our consultant, colla borated with us to develop the recommender CTHC .1,2 Mr Seward is a 
tobacco treatment cou nselor at the UMass Memorial He alth Care system , and has collaborated with us over  the last 3 
years providing input on various projects, as well as supporting the recruitment and participation of smokers.149 Dr. 
Sadasivam shadowed Mr. Seward as part of his clinical tobacco treatment specialist training  for his career development 
award . Patients will be an integral part of our team, as decision leader s and  content developers (see Section F). 
Environment:  We will make use of the considerable resources available at the University of Massachusetts Medical S chool 
(UMMS , see letter of support ). UMMS ranks near the top among public medical schools in the Northeast in the amount 
of funding awarded by the NIH. Since 2010 (renewed again in 2015), UMMS is home to the prestigious NIH-funded Clinical 
and Translationa l Science Award (CTSA) and have establish ed the UMass Center for Clinical and Translational Science 
(UMCCTS). UMCCTS serves as the academic home for clinical and translational scientists across all UMass campuses and 
has considerably enhanced the UMMS rese arch infrastructure by developing innovative core facilities. The mission of the 
UMCCTS is closely  tied with the  mission of the Quantitative Health Sciences de partment, academic home of Drs. Sadasivam, 
Houston, and Allison. All three investigators  hold leadership position in the UMCCTS.  Dr. Allison is a co -leader of the Special 
Resource Population Center (the SPRC) of the UMCCTS. The SPRC was formed to increase enga gement of special 
populations in translational research through tailored, culturally responsive strategies. Dr. Houston leads the UMCCTS 
Biomedical Informatics (BMI) Component. Under his leadership, BMI has fostered collaborations between the UMMS 
Division  of Health Informatics and Implementation Science, Academic and Research Computing, and the UMass Memorial 
Healthcare Information Systems . This collaboration has resulted in the continued development of multiple core 
infrastructure resources, including the  clinical Data Warehouse, the Biomedical Research Informatics Development Group 
(BRIDG) , and the Technology Usability lab.  Dr. Sadasivam is the director of BRIDG and the Technology Usability lab. Under 
his leadership, the BRIDG has developed a  state -of-the-art infrastructure to support eHealth and m Health research 
projects, and Decide2Quit  and the S2S functions were developed, and is currently housed in this infrastructure. We have 
also developed close  collaboration  with the  UMass Amherst Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval (CIIR), a world -
class group of researchers conducting cutting edge information retrieval research. The recommender CTHC  development 
was a direct result of this relationship.  Dr. Person  is a member  of Quantitative Methods Core (QMC), the statistical core 
of the UMMCCTS  (see details  in People and Places resources ). In summary , UMass academic units and the UMCCTS  
provide an environment uniquely suited to the innovative work proposed in S2S.  Table 10. Estimated Final Racial/Ethnic and Gender Enrollment Table  
Race  Male (N)  Female (N)  Total (N)  
American Indian/Alaska Native  5 5 10 
Asian  60 58 118 
Black/African American  130 110 240 
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander  5 5 10 
White  385 395 780 
Multirace  15 27 42 
Ethnicity  Male (N)  Female (N)  Total (N)  
Hispanic (Latino/Latina)  50 50 100 
Non -Hispanic  550 550 1200  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 21 F.  Engagement Plan  
Engagement:  We strongly believe that interventions will fail if they do not fully address patient perspectives and cultural 
or ethnic experiences as part of the full continuum of patient perspectives (PC-1). Incorporating patient perspe ctives is 
critical to the development of patient -centered interventions that most closely reflect patients’ goals. As noted on the 
Resubmission Letter, reviewers praised our proposal as exemplary in patient -centeredness and patient -engagement. In 
particula r, they noted that the S2S functions wer e driven by patient s (peer recruitment, explicit and implicit feedback ), 
and that several  messages of our motivational messaging system were written by patients . However, reviewers were 
unsure about how we selected members of the patient panel, and their  role in the dissemination plan. Reviewers also 
suggested to  diversify the panel  to include minorit ies. In response, we have significantly expanded the panel, cla rified our 
selection process , and the role of the patients.  In our prior research, patients have participated not just as subjects , but 
as decision leaders and content experts . We will pay them to be a part of the team as research consultants  (see budget 
justification) . We have found that this model works best  as the patients have a bigger ownership, greater motivation and 
assurance to participate in decision -making . We anticipate that our panel will be involved for 10 -15 hours per year 
distributed over 8 -12 meetings.  We detail our approach below.  
Patient selection process:  As noted, we will have 5 patients in our panel (3 , including one African American , are named in 
the proposal and we will recruit 2 others). These pat ients were all participants in our current R01 trial (1R01CA190866 -
01A1 ) and d emonstrat ed an interest and commitment to research.   In addition, our staff identified  these as star 
participan ts, i.e., they were able to understand our research  needs in a complex study that involves gaming and mHealth 
tools and articulate their critiques . Because  of their critiques, we have made several changes to our current R01 trial, 
including modifying our recruitment strategy , our approach to teaching the patients about the study’s mHealth tools, and 
changes to the text messages that will be sent to smokers.  We will continue identifying star participants in our current 
study to recruit the two additional patients to our panel , including one more African American smoker .  Mr. Seward, a 
tobacco treatment specialist at the UMass Medical Center, will also serve in  the panel. He will bring over 30 years of 
experience counseling  smokers in both in -patient and out -patient settings to our panel. Mr. Seward has collaborated with 
us in research, including  helping  identifying  patients for our studies, planning the interve ntion, as well as evaluating and 
writing manuscripts.149   
1. PLANNING THE STUDY:  Stakeholders and patient participants were directly involved in the development of the S2S 
tools and the research question. As noted in Section C.4.1.2 , our motivational CTHC system included messages written by 
smokers.82 In our prior evaluation, we have found that these message s increase d longitudinal engagement with the system 
(OR=2.03, 95% CI=1.74, 2.35), compared to expert messages.82 As noted, our S2S recommender systems also uses explicit 
and implicit patient feedback to adapt the personalization of the system. Our research focus of testing new tools to 
increase engagement with the system was also a result of several years of usability evaluations.81 In preparation of this 
study, Dr. Sadasivam also shadowed the tobacco treatment counselors at the UMass Memorial Health Care and interacted 
with smoke rs. When we assessed barriers to the access of tools such as Decide2Quit , we found that while smokers were 
interested in online tools, they did not use them for several reasons, including lack of awareness of the system, forgetting 
about the system, and la ck of motivation. We have over the years designed several approaches to overcome these barriers, 
including provider referral tools in our prior RCT, and the tools being tested in S2S - the peer recruitment  and 
recommender CTHC  system.  As noted in the propo sal, our outcome measure (risk reduction) was recommended by 
patients in our prior studies, and confirmed by the panel.  
2. CONDUCTING THE STUDY:    Our patient panel will serve as decision leaders  and help us in all phases of the study, 
including helping with 1) Refining our online recruitment strategy (in terms of content or where to place the ads); 2) 
Monitoring our implementation progress and helping refin e our approach in case of issues such as  slow recruitment;  3) 
Evaluating the data and helping present results to smokers and community -based organization s; and 4) Helping us prepare 
for approaches  (EHR integration, community integration)  to disseminate the intervention beyond the scope of the p roject.  
We will use  a semi -structured approach. Our first meeting  will establish the roles, duties, and expectations of all involved 
in this partnership. We will focus on building team cohesiveness and highlighting the important contribution the panel wil l 
make in our study. We will continually stress that the panel’s role is to serve as decision leaders, and not as subjects.   I n 
our later meetings, we will have open -ended discussions followed by a structure d nominal group technique (NGT) process 
to make decisions . NGT is a highly structured, multi -step, consensus building procedure often used in formative research 
to elicit and p rioritize group responses to a specific question.  150,151 We have found that NGT’ s worked well to prioritize 
and establish decisions.  7 Our panel will  continuously  be kept updated using a dashboard available over Web and smart 
phones that  we will collaboratively develop with  them.   
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 22 Patients as content experts: As noted above, patients were directly involved in the development of the tools of the 
intervention. With our panel, we will  continually monitor and refine our recruitment strategy (content and placement of 
advertisements) to increase the likelihood of suc cess . 
3. DISSEMINATING THE STUDY RESULTS:   
Patients as disseminators: We have a detailed plan for dissemination of the tools, including peer recruitment, integration 
with healthcare organizations, and community organizations  (see Dissemination section) . Our patient panel will help 
develop lay summaries o f our tools and results and help lead these efforts. Peer recruitment is a naturalistic way of 
disseminatin g tools , and our panel will help us identify places in various commu nities where we can initiate the peer 
recruitment . Moreover , Dr. Allison is the lead of the Special Population Resource Center, of the UM ass Clinical and 
Translational Science Center,  as well as the Vice P rovost for He alth Disparities research.  Under  his leadership, UMass is 
developing  relationships  with several local and national community organizations. Dr. Allison  (key investigator)  will 
continue to support our efforts to identify different groups with whom we can collaborate . We will work with our  patient 
panel to help us market our intervention to these groups. We also have several prior and ongoing research  in which we 
have established relationship with healthcare organizations  and developed tools for provider to refer patients  to online 
resource s.5,7,8,10 In his role as TTS, Mr. Seward refe rs smokers  to several online tools and he will continue to include 
Decide2Quit  in his referrals , as well as identify new avenues for dissemination . In addition,  all panel members will be 
invited to serve as authors in  the development of manuscripts for peer -reviewed  publications.    
4. PRINCIPLES FOR ENGAGEMENT  
• Reciprocal Relationships: Our panel will be involved in all aspects of study development. As noted,  we will continually 
stress that the panel’s role is to serve as decision leaders, and not as subjects. Through the dashboard and other 
communication channels (e.g., listserv), we will ensure  that the panel is constantly updated of new information. Major 
decisions will be undertaken through the NGT process. The panel will serve as authors in any manuscripts we develop 
to reflect their contributions to the study.   
• Co-learning: Patients and stakeholders will participate as decision leaders and content experts. Patient perspectives 
are essential in the development, implementation, and dissemination of an intervention. Patient input teaches 
researchers about what outcomes are impor tant and methods that are feasible for the intervention’s target 
population. We will ensure that the patient investigators understand the research process by keeping an open line of 
communication and to thoroughly explain all research processes and protoco ls.  
• Partnership: The time and contributions of patient partners are valued due to the patients’ perspectives. Patient 
investigators can provide researchers with feedback and direction that is more pertinent to the patients’ needs than 
what researchers bel ieve to be beneficial for the population. Patient investigators will receive $50 per meeting.  
• Trust, Transparency, Honesty: The patients in our panel have all participated in our research projects.  Thus, we 
already have an ongoing relationship to build on. In our first meeting, our goal is to  establish early the value of the 
patient investigators and the significant contribution they are making to the overall intervention. We will emphasize 
the importance of the patients’ viewpoints and personal experien ces on helping to design and implement the 
intervention. We will demonstrate how patient input has led to se veral of our research success. Each patient 
investigator will receive a “reference handbook” summarizing the research process (e.g., the interventio n process, 
contact information for the researchers, the time commitment for this partnership, the intervention phases, and tasks 
associated with each research step).  Throughout the research process, the researchers will share information about 
the interven tion aims. As noted above, we will collaboratively develop a dashboard to continuously update  the panel 
on the research progress.   
  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 23 DISSEMINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION POTENTIAL  
A. Describe the potential for disseminating and implementing the results of this research in other settings.  
The Decide2Quit.org digital intervention for smoking cessation and the smoker -to-smoker  (S2S)  peer recruitment and 
recommender computer -tailored health communication ( recommender CTHC ) system are all products of over a decade 
of research.  They are integrally tied to the overarching scientific mission of our department of Quantitative Health 
Sciences at UMass Medical School, and we are committed to their ongoing support and dissemination  (see support 
letter) . Consistent with the Communication and Dissemination RFA, our tools have considerable dissemination potential. 
As noted in the proposal (Section B2), DISCs are health communication programs that can be accessed via the Internet 
and smart phones. As the majority of people in the United States, including vulnerable populations, now have Internet 
connectivity through broadband and smartphones, DISCs have the potential to reach a large and diverse gro up of smokers. 
The S2S tools also have the potential to be self -sustaining. Peer recruitment  promotes a naturalistic approach of spreading 
the intervention from one smoker to another.  By adapting to the needs of the user, the recommender CTHC  has the 
potential to continuously engage the user. We will pursue a multipronged dissemination plan  extending beyond the 
traditional venues of presentation at scientific conferences and publication in the peer -reviewed literature. Our patient 
panel will b e central to this effort — in helping shape the strategy as well as the implementation of the strategy. Our plan 
is detailed below:  
• Presentation and Publications:  We have an exemplary track record in publishing and presenting results from our 
funded studi es. We will diligently apply this experience and skill to disseminate S2S results. In addition to presenting 
our findings at scientific meetings and in peer -reviewed literature, we will also present key findings at community -
based meetings, on our webpage,  and social media sites. Our patient panel will be an integral part of this effort.  
• Community -based outreach:  With our patient panel, we will develop lay summaries and marketing materials and start 
identifying opportunities for continued dissemination of Decide2Quit  and S2S tools in community -based settings. As 
noted in Section F, Dr. Allison (key investigator) is the lead of the Special Population Resource Center, of the UMass 
Clinical and Translational Science Center, as well as the Vice Provost for Heal th Disparities research. Under his 
leadership, UMass is developing relationships with several local and national community organizations ). Dr. Allison 
will continue to support our efforts to identify different groups with whom we can collaborate to dissem inate 
Decide2Quit .  
• Integration with EHR/PHR and other healthcare settings: We will also take a proactive approach to dissemination of 
the tools leveraging our past research. In our prior RCT, 5,8,10,152 we tested an electronic referral system to market 
Decide2Quit . As smokers were seen by their primary care providers, providers were trained to refer them into 
Decide2Quit  website by entering their email address into a secure form. Once e -referred, Decide2Quit  website sent 
them up to 10 emails encouraging their parti cipation into the study. This project was highly successful. We had 2166 
referrals from 74 practices, out of which, 672 smokers registered. The next step in this approach is to link the e -referral 
to EHRs around the country. We have several national connec tions with the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) 
and healthcare systems through our Clinical and Translational Sciences Award. Through these connections, we will 
explore adapting the e -referral system to their environment. In our PCORI pilot  (1IP2P10005 82), we also experimented 
with identifying smokers in the EHR and mailing them for participation in the study. As the majority of smokers see a 
healthcare provider, this is potentially a powerful approach for disseminating Decide2Quit  tools. We will again make 
use of our national connections to assess interest in this approach in various healthcare systems.   
• Other social media opportunities:  During initial conversations, our patient panel members were excited about the use 
of social media outlets (e.g., Twi tter, Facebook) for dissemination and outreach with study participants (see below). 
Dr. Sadasivam is the social media chair of the Society of Behavioral Medicine and has expertise in developing social 
media campaigns. For example, we will create a twitter group and work with our patient panel to develop tweets. In 
previous work,153 we found that Twitter tobacco cessation groups whose tweets had a higher frequency of 
socioemotional support and encouraging/engaging tweets had higher followership. We will use these findings to 
increase the followers hip of our group. Our study participants will also be invited to subscribe to social media channels 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 24 after they complete the study (see below), and we will use these mediums to disseminate study results. We will also 
feature the intervention as part of the social media outreach program of our National Institute on Minority Heath and 
Health Disparities funded Center for Health Equity Intervention (CHEIR). Dr. Allison is the lead of CHEIR, and Drs. 
Sadasivam and Houston play a lead role in shaping the social m edia outreach of CHEIR.  
• Other media opportunities:  Dr. Houston’s previous interventions have been incorporated into the Innovations 
Exchange.  Our work have been featured in the in the New York Times,154 the Boston Globe,155 Time Magazine,156  and 
Wall Street Journal.157  We will continue to explore opportunities to have our results featured in these outlets.  
• Technological advancements to support dissemination:  As noted (Section C.6.3), we will pursue technological 
advancements of the S2S tools to further their d issemination potential. With our colleagues at the Center for 
Intelligent Information Retrieval (CIIR) at UMass Amherst (Dr. Marlin), we will develop targeted peer recruitment 
strategies using algorithms to identify potential “best” recruiters. Instead of pursuing everyone, this will allow 
dedicating resources to further the potential of these recruiters. This will also support targeting those that can best 
reach a vulnerable population. We will continually work to enhance the recommender CTHC  algorithm, in cluding 
tailoring the timing of the message delivery, and incorporating additional real -time information from sensors.  
B. Describe possible barriers to disseminating and implementing the results of this research in other settings.  
A primary barrier to di ssemination of research results are funding issues . As noted above, Decide2Quit  and S2S tools are 
integrally tied to our department’s research mission. Thus, we have a strong commitment towards the dissemination and 
implementation of these tools in other s ettings. There are also technical barriers  to linking the tools to EHRs. Our team 
has several years of experience developing plug -ins for EHRs and we have worked with all the major products, including 
AllScripts and Epic. In addition, we have also developed our tools using a “third -party” Web -service model, similar to how 
credit -card companies develop their products. Thus, any EHR tool can use our Web services to request motivational 
messages for their smokers in a secure manner.  Third, there could be buy-in issues . As noted, our goal is to start preparing 
for dissemination throughout the study years for continued dissemination of our tools. Through the UMass Clinical and 
Translational Sciences Award (Dr. Houston is the leader of the Biomedical Informatics core), we are also continually 
interacting  with various healthcare systems and exploring potential opportunities for integrating evidence -based tools in 
their organizations. As we pursue these opportunities, we will also explore the potential of integrating Decide2Quit  within 
these organizations.  
C. Describe how you will make study results available to study participants after you complete your analyses.  
We will work with our patient panel to tailor the results in a manner that is understandable to study participants. We will 
prepare these for dis semination via multiple formats, including on our website, brochures, social media channels, as well 
as video formats. We will use an iterative approach to developing these results. We will first prepare for dissemination of 
study results using mock data, since the final dataset is only available at the end of year 3. We will prepare different 
versions of the report and continue to refine them with the panel until a suitable format is developed. As noted in the 
proposal, we will use nominal group technique (NGT) process to make panel decisions. After the study data is analyzed, 
we will then prepare the final formats of the reports and use the above channels for dissemination. As participants 
complete the study, they will be invited to subscribe to our web an d social media channels for continued updates about 
the study.  
 
In conclusion , our team will pursue multiple opportunities to disseminate the tools tested in this study, and our patient 
panel will lead our marketing efforts, including helping develop the marketing materials and shaping our strategy. Our 
team is committed to the ongoing support and dissemination of these tools.
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 25 REPLICATION AND REPRODUCIBILITY OF RESEARCH AND DATA SHARING  
1. Describe the ability to reproduce potentially important findings from this research in other data sets and 
populations.  
Transparency of study methods and results is essential for replication of research. The Quantitative Methods Core (QMC) 
and the UMass Clinical and Translation Sciences Center (UMCCTS) have dev eloped a rigorous protocol for ensuring 
reproducibility of UMass studies. Under the guidance of Dr. Sharina Person  (our statistician and QMC investigator), we 
will follow this protocol in S2S.  
 
A.1. Documentation of study protocol  
We will develop an overall study protocol that includes an operations manual, information about the study population, 
hypotheses to be tested, data source, and information on primary and derived variables. The analysis  plan will expand 
upon the aims and models included within this proposal. Rationale for analytic decision (e.g. , exclusion of items, selection 
of a scoring approach) will be documented in detail. The development of the study protocol will be completed and 
available in Year 1 of the study. This protocol will be made available to PCORI staff to circulate as they deem appropriate. 
We will also make the protocol available on demand to individuals with an interest in replicating our findings in a research 
settin g or in using the protocol for dissemination of our findings to other healthcare settings and or/validation of our 
approach and resulting measures. All newly developed study documentation materials will be submitted to PCORI with 
the six month progress rep orts.  
 
A.2. Documentation of study datasets  
Documentation of study data sets will be provided within six months of the end of the final funding year.  We will conduct 
ongoing documentation including codebooks, meta -data for the datasets, and programming cod e used to conduct 
outcomes analyses. Our code will be documented and annotated, so that it can be adapted for use in similar projects.  
 
2. Describe your data management and sharing plan, including how you will make study data sets available in a 
manner that is consistent with applicable privacy, confidentiality and other legal requirements, if requested.  
All datasets will be cleaned and provided upon request in SAS, Stata, and CSV format, accompanied by detailed 
documentation describing all procedures us ed in dataset creation.  We will follow similar procedures established by the 
QMC for sharing datasets, including creating a website that designates the contact person and a request form for the 
dataset. Anyone requesting a dataset will be able to access th is form online.   
3. Propose a budget to cover costs of your data -sharing plan, if requested.  
The Department of Quantitative Health Science and the Health Informatics and Implementation Science Division at the 
University of Massachusetts Medical School are c ommitted to this research and will provide support for funding the 
website for data sharing and staff effort. No additional funds for data -sharing are requested.  
 
 
  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 26 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
Describe the protection of human subjects  involved in your research.  
 
1. Risks to the Subjects  
 
A. Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics  
In Smoker -to-Smoker (S2S) Peer Marketing and Messaging to Disseminate Tobacco Interventions (S2S) , we will test the 
dissemination and effectiveness effects of two smoker -driven interventions:  
2. Access to p eer recruitment  tools : Tools to facilitate smokers’ recruiting their peers to increase Decide2Quit access 
(NCI R21CA158968).  
3. Recommender  computer tailore d health communication (recommender CTHC): Complex machine learning 
algorithms (recommender systems)  that uses smokers’ feedback (explicit and implicit) in the current and prior 
studies to adapt its selection of messages to smokers (PCORI IP2P1000582).  
Our goal is to test the enhancements offered by the peer recruitment  and recommender CTHC  (individually and 
collectively) over an active comparison group (recruitment using online advertisements and the motivational messages 
tailoring of the standard CTHC sy stem of Decide2Quit ).  Human subjects will be involved in the study. In this study, we will 
recruit we will recruit 1200 smokers online (Aim 1 and 2).  
 
Table 1: Compensation Type.  
One month online or telephone follow -up $25 
Six month  online or telephone follow -up $25 
Mailed saliva NicAlert® test  $50 
 
B. Data Collection  
There are several data sources in this project  (see plans for collecting and storing this data  in UMass  regulated 
environment).  The regulated environment is located in the data center and maintained by the UMass Information Services 
department. It provides a secure environment for hosting the applications, as well as the database s of the application s. 
The setup of r egulated environment provides the needed security protocols for the regulatory and Federal standards 
required. Access for programmers is restricted through a Virtual Private Network and a secure RSA token and only 
restricted personnel are allowed access to  the regulated environment The Regulated environment is secured using 
hardware and software firewalls, along with access restrictions to enforce governmental policies requiring to enforcement.  
Applications and the database are hosted on different servers t o provide additional security for the data. Web and mobile 
applications  can connect to the application server via HTTPS. HTTPS or secure socket layer (HTTPS) is the current standard 
for secure connectivity to servers on an encrypted channel.  The applicati on sever connects  to the database server on a 
secure, password  protected port. We have programs continually monitoring these ports to detect any unauthorized access.  
 
 
Table 1: Data Collection  
Data Source  Data Elements  Private 
identifiers  Data Stored In  
Search Ad 
Manager  Online advertisement stats (no of 
users who saw ads, etc.)  NO Search ad managers (Aggregate data)  
Baseline during 
registration  Demographics, Participant smoking 
characteristics (allowing smoking at Yes UMass Regulated Environment  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 27 home, quit in last 12 months),  
Number of cigarettes/day  
Every 
Decide2Quit   visit Readiness to quit,  Use Of 
Decide2Quit  Yes UMass Regulated Environment  
Every message 
(email or text -
messaging)  Explicit influence ratings, message 
sent date  Yes UMass Regulated Environment  
6th month Follow -
up (Online or 
phone)  7-day point prevalence smoking 
cessation, number of cigarettes  Yes UMass Regulated Environment; Survey will be 
entered by research staff directly into our 
server.  
6thmonth 
Follow -up 
(mailed)  
 Biochemical verification saliva  
NicAlert®  Yes Our research staff will receive the mailed 
sample, verify the results and, upload  them 
to the database in the UMass Regulated 
Environment. We will then dispose of the 
saliva sa mple.   
 
 
B.1 UMass Regulated Environment:  
 
C. Potential Risks  
The risks of the study are not high, and thus the safety monitoring plan has been matched to the risk to subjects in this 
study. Risks to participants relate mostly to misinterpretation of what is research and what is loss of confidentiality. The 
major ris k is the accidental disclosure of information; however, every precaution will be taken to prevent this and the 
study team has an excellent track record of protection of confidential data. As noted, all data will be stored in the regulat ed 
environment. All data collected will be stored in a HIPAA compliant regulated environment and access will be only through 
a secure VPN network. All smokers’ related identifiers are encrypted in the database. Our biostatistician will organize data 
security and archiving. In  no way will individual participant data be released to the public or cited in a publication. We 
have substantial experience with implementing these methods successfully. All our research staffs are trained in HIPAA 
compliance and will complete all human s ubjects training.  
 
There may be some stress involved in completing the follow -up survey, but we will emphasize that this participation is 
voluntary. Note that all participants will receive saliva NicAlert® test  available over the counter.  The NicAlert de tects 
cotinine, the major metabolite of nicotine. Cotinine is the preferred marker for tobacco use because cotinine stays in the 
body much longer than does nicotine. The presence of cotinine in saliva is a reliable indicator for tobacco use within the 
past  several days.  Every saliva NicAlert® test  kit comes with saliva collection containers, which  will make it easy for 
participants to mail it to us. We will have a research staff available by phone or email to help the participants complete 
the saliva NicAlert® test.  
 
 
 
II. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
A. Recruitment and Informed Consent  
As described above, individuals who are smokers will be recruited for the study. Our  investigators (including patient 
investigators)  and staff   will be traine d in HIPAA compliance and complete all human subjects training.  Smokers will be 
recruited through online advertisements (Facebook and Google) or by peer recruitment. These smokers will be asked to 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 28 provide online consent. We have conducted multiple online studies and will format our online consent to be easily 
understandable to the participants.  
 
B. Protection against Risk  
We have minimized data collection to only data needed to answer study hypotheses. We have stringent protection against 
breach of confidentiality using secured servers and locked office spaces for data entry at UMMS. The study statistician will 
do periodic checks to ensure that participant confidentiali ty is protected at all stages of data management and analysis. 
At the start of the study,  all study staff will be trained in practices that ensure participants’ confidentiality and privacy. We 
will only share aggregate data with our patient panel.   
 
Speci fically, there may  be two situation s that could accidently reveal the participation in an online study.  Our Facebook 
website plugin will facilitate peer recruitment of smokers to the study. Through the website plugin, smokers will be able 
to post private messages. These private messages are only viewable by the person that the message is sent to. We will 
emphasize with the recruiter the importance of using private messages, and the potential risks of posting messages on 
Facebook through other means. We wil l make all effort to minimize risks during biochemical verification. The cover for 
the mailing of the sample will only contain a random n umber and not the participants’  identifier. This random number will 
be stored in another database in the regulated serv er (not our study database) and be linked via another identifier to the 
participants’ data. Only our research staff and the PI will have access to this random number database. This way, we 
reduce the potential of linking the random number to the participan ts’ data by others.  
 
Risks for participation in the intervention are not high, and we anticipate that participation may increase cessation. The 
alternative to participation for smokers is not to participate. Although we do not anticipate any adverse healt h events 
intervention, the participants will be asked to call the project manager and/or IRB at UMMS to report any adverse events 
(AEs) or serious adverse events (SAEs). Again, participants will be informed not to report urgent symptoms (chest pain) to 
the study personnel, specifically not to be reported through the website, but to call their physician or an emergency 
number. Any hospitalizations or deaths discovered by the research team will be promptly reported to the IRB with an 
assessment of whether any  study procedures may have contributed to these outcomes. Should any SAEs occur they will 
be reported immediately to the UMMS IRB and to NIH. Actions taken by the IRB in response to SAEs will also be reported 
to NIH, as will reports of changes or amendment s to the protocol as a result of an SAE.  
 
As noted, in order to ensure patient -centeredness, we will hire 5 patient Investigators to serve on a patient -expert panel. 
These patients will be considered part of the research team and will give input on research design, implementation and 
dissemination . These patients will paid for their time; they will receive $50/meeting and will be invited to 15 meetings/year. 
However, even tho ugh these  patients will have  completed human subjects training, we will only share with them de -
identified and aggregate data . Our study staff will create these reports for them before every meeting. Our interaction 
with participants is minimal, and all data will remain confidential and only reported in aggregate. There may be some 
stress involved in referrals for the direct and  peer recruits, but we will emphasize that this participation is voluntary. The 
study does have the potential to increase smoking cessation, which may likely provide direct health benefits to the 
participant.  
 
 
III. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Resea rch to the Subjects and Others  
The major benefit to smokers is the additional resources to encourage smoking cessation and the potential for supporting 
cessation attempts resulting in quitting smoking and the resulting health benefits.  
 
IV. Importance of  the Knowledge to be Gained  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 29 This project will help to identify effective strategies for increasing use of cessation treatments. This project is focused o n 
the effective dissemination of Decide2Quit, a Digital intervention for Smoking Cessation  (DISC) . Eng aging smokers to DISC s 
has been challenging due to limited reach and limited longitudinal engagement. Even if DISCs  succeed in getting smokers 
to access, they do not longitudinally engage with them limiting their effectiveness. The aim of this study is to test two 
methods for increasing dissemination and effectiveness of DISCs.   
 
V. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
A. OVERVIEW   
The risks associated with the data collection and participation in this study are low. The primary risk to subjects is the 
accidenta l disclosure of information; however, every precaution will be taken to prevent this and the study team has an 
excellent track record of protection of confidential data. There are no health or safety risks for participation in the S2S 
study. To that end th e purpose of this Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) is to specify the procedures and rationales 
of the current study to ensure the safety of participants’ data and the validity and integrity of the data.  
For smokers, the major benefit of participatio n in the S2S study, is the additional resources to encourage smoking 
cessation and the potential for supporting cessation attempts resulting in quitting smoking and the resulting health 
benefits.  
 
B. OVERSIGHT RESPONSIBILITIES  
Oversight of the trial is pr ovided by the Principal Investigator (PI), Dr. Sadasivam, Dr. Person , the faculty statistician and 
co-investigators, Dr. Thomas Houston and Dr. Jeroan Allison (“co -investigators” throughout).   
 
C. MONITORING PROCEDURES  
Dr. Sadasivam assures that informed consent is obtained prior to performing any research procedures, that all subjects 
meet eligibility criteria, and that the study is conducted according to the IRB -approved research plan.   
 
Study data are accessible at a ll times for the PI and co -investigators to review. The PI, Dr. Sadasivam, the biostatistician, 
the project manager and the analyst will regularly review database admin reports to inspect for data collection 
completeness. Furthermore study recruitment and retention will be monitored using the aggregated summary reports 
available on the admin site. Project team monitoring includes regular review (monthly) reports which present statistics 
regarding recruitment, retention and general tracking of study particip ants in a CONSORT type diagram in order to monitor 
study progression. In addition study data will be assessed every three months (once a quarter) to examine completeness 
of survey responses. In addition to these reports, the Decide2Quit website has an Admi n Portal which provides real -time 
reports with the following metrics:  
• user lists provides data such as the user’s contact information, consent date, randomization arm, their follow -up 
survey status, referral source, registration date, basic demographic cha racteristics coded into categories, email 
message counts (to track the number of messages sent to them from the system)  
• exports of follow -up data which includes all the data collected on the follow -up surveys  
• summary reports which provide us an aggregated count of the total number of registered users overall and within 
each randomization arm. In addition, we have summary reports to provide us aggregated counts of users within 
racial/ethnic and gender categories.  
 
All of these reports require login authentic ation and are only accessible behind the UMMS firewall. The PI ensures all 
protocol deviations and unanticipated events are reported to the IRB according to the applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
D. COLLECTION AND REPORTING OF SAEs AND AEs  
For this study , the following standard AE definitions are used:  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 30 Adverse event:   Any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom or 
disease temporally associated with the use of a medical treatment or procedure, regardless of wheth er it is 
considered related to the medical treatment or procedure.  
Serious Adverse Event:   Any AE that results in any of the following outcomes:  
• Death  
• Life-threatening  
• Event requiring inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• Persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
AEs are graded according to the following scale:  
Mild:   An experience that is transient, & requires no special treatment or intervention.  The experience does not 
generally interfere with usual daily activitie s.  This includes transient laboratory test alterations.  
Moderate:   An experience that is alleviated with simple therapeutic treatments.  The experience impacts usual 
daily activities.  Includes laboratory test alterations indicating injury, but without long -term risk.  
Severe:   An experience that requires therapeutic int ervention.  The experience interrupts usual daily activities. If 
hospitalization (or prolongation of hospitalization) is required for treatment it becomes an SAE.  
The study uses the following AE attribution scale:  
Not related:   The AE is clearly not relate d to the study procedures (i.e., another cause of the event is most 
plausible and/or a clinically plausible temporal sequence is inconsistent with the onset of the event).   
Possibly related:   An event that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from the i nitiation of study procedures, 
but that could readily have been produced by a number of other factors.  
 Related:   The AE is clearly related to the study procedures.   
Identification of AEs  
As previously stated, given that this is not a medical or therapeutic intervention there are no health or physical safety 
risks associated with participation in the S2S study. Furthermore, contact between the study participants and study 
research staff is extremely limited and occurs primarily via email with some limited contact over the phone.  
Should an AE involving a single participant occur it could potentially be identified is through notification from the 
participant directly to the study staff, PI or  UMMS IRB. The only other occasion might be if a participant chose to 
complete a follow -up survey over the phone and the participant informed the study staff of an issue at that time.  
Reporting of Unanticipated Events  
With regard to unanticipated events, o ur study adheres to the University of Massachusetts Medical School IRB’s SOPs. In 
particular we follow the “SOP HRP -112: Reportable New Information” which states that should our project team become 
aware of any information that represents an unanticipated problem involving risk to subjects or others, we will notify 
the IRB chair or vice -chair within 24 hours of becoming aware of the information for consideration of whether any 
immediate actions are necessary to protect the rights and welfare of subjects in advance of the meeting and then we 
will submit the report to the IRB Committee for review.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 31 Should participants have any questions or concerns they are provided with the contact information for our study team 
as well as the UMass IRB.  
E. MANAGEMENT OF RISK S TO SUBJECTS  
Expected AEs  
As previously stated, there are no health or physical safety risks associated with participation in the S2S study. The 
primary risk to subjects is the accidental disclosure of information or a data security breach of the decide2q uit website. 
Our site is located on servers setup as part of the regulated environment maintained by the University of Massachusetts 
Medical School Information Services (UMMS IS). Please reference the Data Management section for a detailed 
description of t he UMMS IS servers. These servers are continuously monitored for any suspicious activity.  
Management of AEs  
Should a data breach occur UMMS IS will immediately inform the PI and take necessary steps to fix the breach. The PI 
will work collaboratively with UMMS IS to ascertain the scope of the breach to determine which participants may have 
been affected and what data were leaked. The UMMS IRB would also be notified within 24 hours of the PI becoming 
aware of the breach and a decision would be made as to how  to proceed with regards to the study protocol.  
Dose Escalation and Dose -Limiting Toxicities  
Not applicable.  
F. DATA ANALYSIS PLANS  
This study does not involve an intervention which requires safety or efficacy monitoring nor does it have any study 
stoppin g rules. Ongoing data monitoring as described above in the Monitoring Procedures Section is focused on 
recruitment and retention. In addition we will perform limited checks on overall data quality to ensure that our data 
capture system is operating correct ly and that the survey data is written to the database.  
G. PLAN FOR DATA MANAGEMENT  
Compliance of regulatory documents and study data accuracy and completeness will be maintained throughout the 
study duration.  
Our approach to maintaining confidentiality is as follows:  
1) Only collect the necessary Information and ensure that it is as anonymous or de -identified as possible  
a. We have minimized data collection to that which is needed to answer our hypotheses. Or to 
operationally execute our study’s protocol. The only identifiable information collected are email 
(necessary for logging into the system) and phone number also critic al for the follow -up data collection. 
Data that is collected solely for the purposes of the protocols operations include first name and last 
name and mailing address. However, we only request the mailing address if a participant indicates that 
they are wil ling to complete a NicAlert test at their six month follow -up. 
b. To ensure that the study data is held confidential, consented participants will be assigned a study ID 
(identifier).  We will not be collecting Social Security numbers, Date of Birth, or other unique identifiers 
other than those previously mentioned.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 32 c. In no way will individual participant data be released to the public or cited in a publication. Our group 
has substantial experience with implementing these methods successfully.  Our interaction wi th 
participants is minimal, and all data will remain confidential and only reported in aggregate.  
2) Training Staff  
a. All project team members will be trained in practices that ensure participants’ confidentiality and 
privacy. In order to obtain access to any identifiable participant data, staff must be added to our IRB and 
complete CITI training on HIPAA protections and Good Clinical Practices.  
b. Furthermore, research staff are instructed to only access identifiable information when it’s necessary to 
conduct the ir work on the protocol. For example, if they are conducting follow -up phone calls to 
participants who have not completed the online survey or if they are mailing out gift cards to those who 
have completed the survey. At no time will they download the iden tifiable data from the secure UMMS 
servers.  
3) Security of our Decide2Quit Website  
a. The data will be encrypted and stored in a HIPAA compliant UMMS regulated environment and access 
will be only through a secure VPN network. The UMMS Regulated Environment provides applications a 
secure network for confidential data.  The Regulated Environment has been securely configured to allow 
application access via the secure socket layer (HTTPS) protocol — a protocol that delivers server 
authentication, dat a encryption, and message integrity.  The setup of Regulated environment provides 
the needed security protocols for the regulatory and Federal standards required.  The Regulated 
Environment is secured using hardware and software firewalls, along with acces s restrictions to enforce 
governmental policies requiring to enforcement.   
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 33  
CONSORTIUM CONTRACTUAL ARRANGEMENTS  
 
Describe the proposed research projects that subcontracted organizations will perform. Explain the strengths that these 
partners bring to the overall project.  
 
This study will primarily be conducted at the University of Massachusetts Medical School. We have two aims.  
• AIM 1:  Implement the hybrid effectiveness -dissemination trial of S2S enhanced functions to increase dissemination 
(recruitmen t and repeated use) and effectiveness of Decide2Quit with 1200 smokers  
• AIM 2:  For the Effectiveness randomized trial, we will recontact participants after six months of enrollment. Compared 
to the standard messaging group, the recommender CTHC is designed to increase smoking cessation rates at follow -
up.   
 
As recommended by reviewers, we have added Dr. Bridget Smith ( Feinberg School of Medicine at Northwestern University 
in Chicago, IL)  to our team to help us quantify the resources needed to successfully replicate our intervention. From the 
perspective of an implementing organization, we will compare the costs of standard Decide2Quit , the peer recruitment  
enhanced Decide2Quit , and the recommender CTHC  enhanced Decide2Quit , and the fully enhanced Decide2Quit .  As a 
research associate professor at Northwestern and a research health scientist at the Center of Innovation for Complex 
Chronic Healthcare and formerly the co -director of the Spinal Cord Injury Quality En hancement Research Initiative (SCI 
QUERI), Dr. Smith has over 15 years of experience in the areas of health economics and outcomes . She has experience 
designing methods and performing economic and statistical analyses. She has extensive experience with cos t, primary 
data collection using surveys and medical record reviews, and with studies integrating qualitative and quantitative 
methods and has previously collaborated with Dr. Sadasivam to examine costs associated with a tobacco cessation 
intervention.  Dr. Smith will help the team track staff time associated with each intervention arm, including time for 
training, recruiting, and administering the different aspects of the intervention. In addition, she will help us will estimat e 
development costs of each i ntervention in our prior NIH and PCORI -funded studies and any equipment or supply costs. 
Using best practices outlined budget impact analysis, she will use these information to will create tables to describe the 
assumptions of our inputs and outputs of our  budget impact analysis, and perform sensitivity analyses to examine how 
changing the assumptions of the model impact the potential costs for an organization implementing the intervention.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 34  
REFERENCES  CITED  
1. Adams RJ, Sadasivam RS, Balakrishnan K, Kinney RL, Houston TK, Marlin BM. PERSPeCT: collaborative filtering for 
tailored health communications. RecSys; 2014; New York, NY.  
2. Marlin BM, Adams RJ, Sadasivam R, Houston TK. Towards collaborative filtering recommender s ystems for 
tailored health communications. AMIA ... Annual Symposium proceedings / AMIA Symposium. AMIA Symposium. 
2013;2013:1600 -1607.  
3. Sadasivam RS, Cutrona SL, Volz E, Rao SR, Houston TK. Web -based peer -driven chain referrals for smoking 
cessation. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2013;192:357 -361.  
4. Sadasivam RS, Volz EM, Kinney RL, Rao SR, Houston TK. Share2Quit: Web -Based Peer -Driven Referrals for 
Smoking Cessation. JMIR Res Protoc. 2013;2(2):e37.  
5. Houston TK, Sadasivam RS, Ford DE, Richman J, Ray MN,  Allison JJ. The QUIT -PRIMO provider -patient Internet -
delivered smoking cessation referral intervention: a cluster -randomized comparative effectiveness trial: study 
protocol. Implementation science : IS. 2010;5:87.  
6. Sadasivam RS, Allison JJ, Ray MN, Ford  DE, Houston TK. Using a resource effect study pre -pilot to inform a large 
randomized trial: the Decide2Quit.Org Web -assisted tobacco intervention. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 
2012;2012:789 -798.  
7. Sadasivam RS, Delaughter K, Crenshaw K, et al. Development of an interactive, Web -delivered system to 
increase provider -patient engagement in smoking cessation. Journal of medical Internet research. 
2011;13(4):e87.  
8. Sadasivam RS, Hogan TP, Volkman JE, et al. Implementing point of care "e -referrals" in 137 clinics to i ncrease 
access to a quit smoking internet system: the Quit -Primo and National Dental PBRN HI -QUIT Studies. 
Translational behavioral medicine. 2013;3(4):370 -378.  
9. Houston TK, Ford DE. A tailored Internet -delivered intervention for smoking cessation design ed to encourage 
social support and treatment seeking: usability testing and user tracing. Inform Health Soc Care. 2008;33(1):5 -
19. 
10. Houston TK, Sadasivam RS, Allison JJ, et al. Evaluating the QUIT -PRIMO clinical practice ePortal to increase 
smoker engag ement with online cessation interventions: a national hybrid type 2 implementation study. 
Implementation science : IS. 2015;10:154.  
11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. African Americans and Tobacco Use. 2014; 
http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/disparities/african -americans/index.htm . 
12. Kulak JA, Cornelius ME, Fong GT, Giovino GA. Differences in Quit Attempts and Cigarette Smoking Abstinence 
Between Whites and African Americans in the United States: Literature Review and Results From the 
International Tobacco Control US Survey. Nicotine T ob Res. 2016;18 Suppl 1:S79 -87. 
13. Nollen NL, Cox LS, Yu Q, et al. A clinical trial to examine disparities in quitting between African -American and 
White adult smokers: Design, accrual, and baseline characteristics. Contemp Clin Trials. 2016;47:12 -21. 
14. Webb MS, Francis J, Hines BC, Quarles FB. Health disparities and culturally specific treatment: perspectives and 
expectancies of African American smokers. J Clin Psychol. 2007;63(6):567 -583.  
15. Webb MS. Science Brief: Addressing Tobacco -Associated Health  Disparities through Behavioral Science.  May 
2010.  
16. American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts & Figures for African Americans.  
http://www.cance r.org/research/cancerfactsstatistics/cancer -facts -figures -for-african -americans . Accessed Apr, 
2016.  
17. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Tobacco use among U.S. racial/ethnic minority groups — 
African Americans, American Indians and Alaska Nat ives, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, and Hispanics: A 
report of the surgeon general. . Atlanta, Georgia: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 35 Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and He alth Promotion, Office 
on Smoking and Health.  
18. Murray CJ, Lopez AD. Alternative projections of mortality and disability by cause 1990 -2020: global burden of 
disease study. The Lancet. 1997;349:1498 -1504.  
19. Critchley JA, Capewell S. Mortality risk redu ction associated with smoking cessation in patients with coronary 
heart disease: a systematic review. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. 2003;290(1):86 -97. 
20. Fiore MC, Croyle RT, Curry SJ, et al. Preventing 3 million premature deaths  and helping 5 million smokers quit: a 
national action plan for tobacco cessation. American journal of public health. 2004;94(2):205 -210.  
21. Trosclair A, Husten C, Pederson L, Dhillon I. Cigarette smoking among adults – United States, 2000. Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report. 2002;51(29):642 -645.  
22. Fiore C, Jaen CR, Baker TB. Treating Tobacco Use And Dependence: 2008 update. Rockville, MD:  U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service; 2008 2008.  
23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention OoSaH. Smoking & Tobacco Use. 2015; 
http://ww w.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/fast_facts/ . Accessed April 27, 2015.  
24. Ekpu VU, Brown AK. The Economic Impact of Smoking and of Reducing Smoking Prevalence: Review of Evidence. 
Tob Use Insights. 2015;8:1 -35. 
25. NIH State -of-the-Science Co nference Statement on Tobacco Use: Prevention, Cessation, and Control. NIH 
Consens State Sci Statements. 2006;23(3):1 -26. 
26. Shahab L, McEwen A. Online support for smoking cessation: a systematic review of the literature. Addiction. 
2009;104(11):1792 -1804 . 
27. Myung SK, McDonnell DD, Kazinets G, Seo HG, Moskowitz JM. Effects of Web - and computer -based smoking 
cessation programs: meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169(10):929 -937.  
28. Civljak M, Sheikh A, Stead LF, Car J. I nternet -based interventions for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2010(9):CD007078.  
29. Lancaster T, Stead LF. Self -help interventions for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2005(3):CD001118.  
30. Sciamanna CN, Ford DE, Flynn JA, La ngford C. An evidence -based interactive computer program to assist 
physicians in counseling smokers to quit. MD Computing. 1999;16(5):54 -60. 
31. Strecher VJ. Computer -tailored smoking cessation materials: a review and discussion. Patient Education and 
Coun seling. 1999;36:107 -117.  
32. Bental DS, Cawsey A, Jones R. Patient information systems that tailor to the individual. Patient Education and 
Counseling. 1999;36:171 -180.  
33. Ramelson HZ, Friedman RH, Ockene JK. An automated telephone -based smoking cessation  education and 
counseling system. Patient Education and Counseling. 1999;36:131 -144.  
34. Lubalin J. Consumer Health Informatics and Patient Decision -Making.  Rockville MD: U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services, U.S. Government Printing Office; 1997.  
35. Ossip -Klein DJ, McIntosh S. Quitlines in North America: evidence base and applications. Am J Med Sci. 
2003;326(4):201 -205.  
36. HHS 'Quitline' helps Americans stop smoking. FDA Consum. 2005;39(1):4 -5. 
37. Sadasivam RS, Allison JJ, Ray MN, Ford DE, Houst on TK. Using a Resource Effect Study Pre -Pilot to Inform a Large 
Randomized Trial: The Decide2Quit.Org Web -Assisted Tobacco Intervention (in press: AMIA -0373 -A2012.R1). 
AMIA ... Annual Symposium proceedings / AMIA Symposium. AMIA Symposium. 2012.  
38. PCORI  Communication and Dissemination Research - Cycle 1. 2016; 
http://www.pcori.org/sites/default/files/PCORI -PFA-2016 -Cycle -1-Communic ation -and-Dissemination -
Research.pdf . Accessed May, 2016.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 36 39. McCormack L SS, Lewis M BV, Melvin CL, et al. Communication and Dissemination Strategies To Facilitate the 
Use of Health -Related Evidence.  Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quali ty; No. 13(14) -E003 -
EF;November 2013.  
40. Brownson RC, Colditz GA, Proctor EK. Dissemination and implementation research in health : translating science 
to practice.  Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press; 2012.  
41. Graham AL, Cobb NK, Papandonatos GD, et al. A randomized trial of Internet and telephone treatment for 
smoking cessation. Arch Intern Med. 2011;171(1):46 -53. 
42. Hughes JR, Carpenter MJ. The feasibilit y of smoking reduction: an update. Addiction (Abingdon, England). 
2005;100(8):1074 -1089.  
43. Smit ES, Hoving C, Schelleman -Offermans K, West R, de Vries H. Predictors of successful and unsuccessful quit 
attempts among smokers motivated to quit. Addictive b ehaviors. 2014;39(9):1318 -1324.  
44. Glasgow RE, Klesges LM, Dzewaltowski DA, Estabrooks PA, Vogt TM. Evaluating the impact of health promotion 
programs: using the RE -AIM framework to form summary measures for decision making involving complex 
issues. Healt h Educ Res. 2006;21(5):688 -694.  
45. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Quitting Smoking Among Adults --- United States, 2001 --2010. 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR). 2011;60(44):1513 -1519. 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6044a2.htm . Accessed November 11, 2011.  
46. Pew Research Center. Broadband vs. Dial -up Adoption Over Time. 2014; http://www.pewinternet.org/data -
trend/internet -use/connection -type/ . Accessed October 10, 2015.  
47. Pew Research Center. Internet Use Over Time. 2014; http:/ /www.pewinternet.org/data -trend/internet -
use/internet -use-over -time/ . Accessed October 10, 2015.  
48. Pew Research Center's Internet and American Life Project. Chapter Two: Usage and Attitudes Toward 
Smartphones. 2015; http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/01/chapter -two-usage -and-attitudes -toward -
smartphones/ . Accessed 2016, May.  
49. Pew Research Center's Internet and American Life Project. Social Media Fa ct Sheet. 2014; 
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact -sheets/social -networking -fact-sheet/ . Accessed 2016, May.  
50. Huang GC, Unger JB, Soto D, et al. Peer influences: The impac t of online and offline friendship networks on 
adolescent smoking and alcohol use. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2013.  
51. Christakis NA, Fowler JH. The collective dynamics of smoking in a large social network. New England journal of 
medicine. 2008;358(21) :2249 -2258.  
52. Swider SM. Outcome effectiveness of community health workers: an integrative literature review. Public Health 
Nurs. 2002;19(1):11 -20. 
53. Eng E, Parker E, Harlan C. Lay health advisor intervention strategies: a continuum from natural helpin g to 
paraprofessional helping. Health Educ Behav. 1997;24(4):413 -417.  
54. Carroll B. The hidden power of your customers : four keys to growing your business through existing customers.  
Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley; 2011.  
55. Wuyts S. The connected customer : the changing nature of consumer and business markets.  New York: 
Routledge; 2010.  
56. Sadasivam RS, Kinney RL, Delaughter K, et al. Who participates in Web -assisted tobacco interventions? The 
QUIT -PRIMO and National Dental Practice -Based Research Network Hi -Quit studies. Journal of medical Internet 
research. 2013;15(5):e77.  
57. Kreuter M. Tailoring health messages : customizing communication with computer technology.  Mahwah, N.J.: L. 
Erlbaum; 2000.  
58. DiClemente CC, Prochaska JO, Fairhurst SK, Velicer WF, V elasquez MM, Rossi JS. The process of smoking 
cessation: an analysis of precontemplation, contemplation, and preparation stages of change. J Consult Clin 
Psychol. 1991;59(2):295 -304.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 37 59. Bartholomew LK. Planning health promotion programs : an intervention mapping approach.  3rd ed. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey -Bass; 2011.  
60. Bandura A. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: a social cognitive theory.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall; 1986.  
61. Shiffman S, Paty JA, Rohay JM, Di Marino ME, Gitchell J. The efficacy of computer -tailored smoking cessation 
material as a supplement to nicotine polacrilex gum therapy. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160(11):1675 -1681.  
62. Strecher VJ. Computer -tailored smoking cessation materials: a review and discussion. Patient education  and 
counseling. 1999;36(2):107 -117.  
63. Brug J, Steenhuis I, van Assema P, de Vries H. The impact of a computer -tailored nutrition intervention. Prev 
Med. 1996;25(3):236 -242.  
64. Kreuter MW, Strecher VJ. Do tailored behavior change messages enhance the ef fectiveness of health risk 
appraisal? Results from a randomized trial. Health Educ Res. 1996;11(1):97 -105.  
65. Kreuter MW. Community health promotion ideas that work : a field -book for practitioners.  Sudbury, Mass.: Jones 
and Bartlett Publishers; 1998.  
66. Sadasivam RS, Cutrona SL, Kinney RL, et al. Collective -Intelligence Recommender Systems: Advancing Computer 
Tailoring for Health Behavior Change Into the 21st Century. Journal of medical Internet research. 2016;18(3):e42.  
67. Bush T, Hsu C, Levine MD, Mag nusson B, Miles L. Weight gain and smoking: perceptions and experiences of 
obese quitline participants. BMC Public Health. 2014;14(1):1229.  
68. Levine MD, Bush T, Magnusson B, Cheng Y, Chen X. Smoking -related weight concerns and obesity: differences 
among normal weight, overweight, and obese smokers using a telephone tobacco quitline. Nicotine Tob Res. 
2013;15(6):1136 -1140.  
69. Pisinger C, Jorgens en T. Weight concerns and smoking in a general population: the Inter99 study. Prev Med. 
2007;44(4):283 -289.  
70. Pirie PL, Murray DM, Luepker RV. Gender differences in cigarette smoking and quitting in a cohort of young 
adults. Am J Public Health. 1991;81(3 ):324 -327.  
71. Bush T, Levine MD, Zbikowski S, et al. Weight Gain After Quitting: Attitudes, Beliefs and Counselling Strategies of 
Cessation Counsellors. J Smok Cessat. 2008;3(2):124 -132.  
72. Segaran T. Programming collective intelligence : building smart web 2.0 applications.  1st ed. Beijing ; Sebastapol 
CA: O'Reilly; 2007.  
73. Tom Vanderbilt. The Science Behind the Netflix Algorithms That Decide What You’ll Watch Next. 2013; 
http://www.wir ed.com/2013/08/qq_netflix -algorithm/ . Accessed August, 2014.  
74. Joseph A. Konstan, Riedl J. Deconstructing Recommender Systems: How Amazon and Netflix predict your 
preferences and prod you to purchase. 2012 http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/deconstructing -
recommender -systems . Accessed August, 2014.  
75. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self -determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social devel opment, and 
well-being. The American psychologist. 2000;55(1):68 -78. 
76. Deci EL, Ryan RM. The "what" and "why" of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self -determination of behavior. 
Psychological Inquiry. 2000;11:227 -268.  
77. Vallerand RJ. Deci and Ryan's self-determination theory: A view from the hierarchical model of intrinsic and 
extrinsic motivation Psychological Inquiry. 2000;11(4):312 -318.  
78. Flynn BS, Worden JK, Bunn JY, Connolly SW, Dorwaldt AL. Evaluation of smoking prevention television messages 
based on the elaboration likelihood model. Health Educ Res. 2011.  
79. Gordon JS, Akers L, Severson HH, Danaher BG, Boles SM. Successful participant recruitment strategies for an 
online smokeless tobacco cessation program. Nicotine Tob Res. 2006;8 Suppl 1:S 35-41. 
80. Wei SJ, Metz JM, Coyle C, et al. Recruitment of patients into an internet -based clinical trials database: the 
experience of OncoLink and the National Colorectal Cancer Research Alliance. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 
2004;22(23):4730 -4736.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 38 81. Sadasivam RS, Allison JJ, Ray MN, Ford DE, Houston TK. Using a Resource Effect Study Pre -Pilot to Inform a Large 
Randomized Trial: The Decide2Quit.Org Web -Assisted Tobacco Intervention. AMIA Annual Symposium 
Proceedings. 2012;2012:789 -798.  
82. Coley HL, Sad asivam RS, Williams JH, et al. Crowdsourced peer - versus expert -written smoking -cessation 
messages. American journal of preventive medicine. 2013;45(5):543 -550.  
83. Fiore M, Jaen C, Baker T, et al. Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence:  2008 Update.  Clinic al Practice Guideline.  
Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.  Public Health Service; May2008.  
84. Bandura A. Social Foundations of Thought and Action:  a social cognitive theory.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall; 1986.  
85. U.S. De partment of Health and Human Services. Making health communication programs work. National 
Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute: 
http://www.cancer.gov/cancer topics/cancerlibrary/pinkbook/Pink_Book.pdf . 
86. Heckathorn D. Respondent -driven sampling II.  Deriving valid population estimates from chain -referral samples 
of hidden populations. . Social Problems.  2002;49:11 -34. 
87. Teitcher JE, Bockting WO, Bauermeist er JA, Hoefer CJ, Miner MH, Klitzman RL. Detecting, preventing, and 
responding to "fraudsters" in internet research: ethics and tradeoffs. J Law Med Ethics. 2015;43(1):116 -133.  
88. Bauermeister JA, Zimmerman MA, Johns MM, Glowacki P, Stoddard S, Volz E. In novative recruitment using 
online networks: lessons learned from an online study of alcohol and other drug use utilizing a web -based, 
respondent -driven sampling (webRDS) strategy. J Stud Alcohol Drugs. 2012;73(5):834 -838.  
89. Erickson BH. Some problems of inference from chain data. Sociological Methodology. 1979(10):276 –302.  
90. Heckathorn DD. Respondent -Driven Sampling II: Deriving Valid Population Estimates from Chain -Referral 
Samples of Hidden Populations. Social Problems. 2002;49(1):11 -34. 
91. Belkin NJ , Croft WB. Information filtering and information retrieval: two sides of the same coin? Commun. ACM. 
1992;35(12):29 -38. 
92. Goldberg D, Nichols D, Oki BM, Terry D. Using collaborative filtering to weave an information tapestry. Commun. 
ACM. 1992;35(12):61 -70. 
93. Melville P, Mooney RJ, Nagarajan R. Content -Boosted Collaborative Filtering for Improved Recommendations. 
Proceedings of the Eighteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI -02). Edmonton, 
Alberta2002:187 -192.  
94. Press N. Understanding Metadata. NISO Press; 2004: 
http://www.niso.org/publications/press/UnderstandingMetadata.pdf . Accessed 20.  
95. Adams RJ, Sadasivam RS, Balakrishnan K, K inney RL, Houston TK, Marlin BM. PERSPeCT: collaborative filtering for 
tailored health communications. RecSys'14; 2014; Foster City, Silicon Valley, CA.  
96. Cherrington A, Williams JH, Foster PP, et al. Narratives to enhance smoking cessation interventions among 
African -American smokers, the ACCE project. BMC Res Notes. 2015;8:567.  
97. Houston TK, Sands DZ, Jenckes MW, Ford DE. Experiences of patients who were  early adopters of electronic 
communication with their physician: satisfaction, benefits, and concerns. Am J Manag Care. 2004;10(9):601 -608.  
98. Sciamanna CN, Novak SP, Houston TK, Gramling R, Marcus BH. Visit satisfaction and tailored health behavior 
comm unications in primary care. American journal of preventive medicine. 2004;26(5):426 -430.  
99. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2010 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey 
Questionnaire.  http://www.cdc.gov/brfss/pubs/index.htm#users . Archived at 
http://www.webcitation.org/6BGROyW6b . 
100.  Jarvis MJ T -PH, Feyerabend C, Vesey C, Saloojee Y. Comparison of tests used to distinguish smokers from non -
smokers. American journal of public health. 1987;77(11):1435 -1438.  
101.  Velicer WF, Prochaska JO. A comparison of four self -report smoking cessation outcome measures. Addictive 
behaviors. 2004;29(1):51 -60. 
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 39 102.  Gaalema DE, H iggins ST, Bradstreet MP, Heil SH, Bernstein IM. Using NicAlert strips to verify smoking status 
among pregnant cigarette smokers. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2011;119(1 -2):130 -133.  
103.  Marrone GF, Paulpillai M, Evans RJ, Singleton EG, Heishman SJ. Breath carbon monoxide and semiquantitative 
saliva cotinine as biomarkers for smoking. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2010;25(1):80 -83. 
104.  Raja M, Garg A, Yadav P, Jha K, Handa S. Diagnostic Methods for Detection of Cotinine Level in Tobacco Users: A 
Review. J Clin Diagn Res. 2016;10(3):ZE04 -06. 
105.  Rabe -Hesketh S, Skrondal A, Pickles A. Reliable estimation of generalized linear mixed models using adaptive 
quadrature. Stata Journal. 2002;2(1):1 -21. 
106.  Velicer WF, Prochaska JO, Rossi JS, Snow MG. Assessing outcome in smoking c essation studies. Psychol Bull. 
1992;111(1):23 -41. 
107.  Cooke F, Bullen C, Whittaker R, McRobbie H, Chen MH, Walker N. Diagnostic accuracy of NicAlert cotinine test 
strips in saliva for verifying smoking status. Nicotine Tob Res. 2008;10(4):607 -612.  
108.  Ramo DE, Thrul J, Chavez K, Delucchi KL, Prochaska JJ. Feasibility and Quit Rates of the Tobacco Status Project: A 
Facebook Smoking Cessation Intervention for Young Adults. Journal of medical Internet research. 
2015;17(12):e291.  
109.  McRobbie FCaH. Use of N icAlertTM cotinine test strips for verification of smoking cessation. Paper presented at: 
UK National Smoking Cessation Conference; June 26 -27, 2006; London.  
110.  Halladay JR, Vu M, Ripley -Moffitt C, Gupta SK, O'Meara C, Goldstein AO. Patient perspectives on tobacco use 
treatment in primary care. Prev Chronic Dis. 2015;12:E14.  
111.  Austin PC, Manca A, Zwarenstein M, Juurlink DN, Stanbrook MB. A substantial and confusing variation exists in 
handling of baseline covariates in randomized controlled trials: a r eview of trials published in leading medical 
journals. Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2010;63(2):142 -153.  
112.  Senn S. Testing for baseline balance in clinical trials. Stat Med. 1994;13(17):1715 -1726.  
113.  NCSS and PASS. Number Cruncher Statistical Syst ems [computer program]. Version 2004. Kaysville, UT.: NCSS, 
LLC. 
114.  Whitehead J. Sample size calculations for ordered categorical data. Stat Med. 1993;12(24):2257 -2271.  
115.  Hall SM, Delucchi KL, Velicer WF, et al. Statistical analysis of randomized tria ls in tobacco treatment: longitudinal 
designs with dichotomous outcome. Nicotine Tob Res. 2001;3(3):193 -202.  
116.  MacKinnon DP. Introduction to statistical mediation analysis.  New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 2008.  
117.  Carpenter MJ, Hughes JR, Gray KM, Wahlquist AE, Saladin ME, Alberg AJ. Nicotine therapy sampling to induce 
quit attempts among smokers unmotivated to quit: a randomized clinical trial. Arch Intern Med. 
2011;171(21):1901 -1907.  
118.  Nakagawa S. A farewell to Bonferroni: the problems of l ow statistical power and publication bias. Behavioral 
Ecology. 2004;15(6):1044 -1045.  
119.  O'Keefe DJ. Colloquy: Should Familywise Alpha Be Adjusted? Human Communication Research. 2003;29(3):431 -
447.  
120.  Perneger TV. What's wrong with Bonferroni adjustment s. BMJ. 1998;316(7139):1236 -1238.  
121.  Sullivan SD, Mauskopf JA, Augustovski F, et al. Budget impact analysis -principles of good practice: report of the 
ISPOR 2012 Budget Impact Analysis Good Practice II Task Force. Value Health. 2014;17(1):5 -14. 
122.  Jackson D, Mason D, White IR, Sutton S. An exploration of the missing data mechanism in an Internet based 
smoking cessation trial. BMC medical research methodology. 2012;12:157.  
123.  Smolkowski K, Danaher BG, Seeley JR, Kosty DB, Severson HH. Modeling missing binary outcome data in a 
successful web -based smokeless tobacco cessation program. Addiction. 2010;105(6):1005 -1015.  
124.  Hedeker D, Mermelstein RJ, Demirtas H. Analysis of binary outcomes with missing data: missing = smoking, last 
observation carried forward, and a little multiple imputation. Addiction. 2007;102(10):1564 -1573.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 40 125.  Robroek SJ, Lindeboom DE, Burdorf A. Initia l and Sustained Participation in an Internet -delivered Long -term 
Worksite Health Promotion Program on Physical Activity and Nutrition. Journal of medical Internet research. 
2012;14(2):e43.  
126.  Postel MG, de Haan HA, ter Huurne ED, van der Palen J, Becker ES, de Jong CA. Attrition in web -based treatment 
for problem drinkers. Journal of medical Internet research. 2011;13(4):e117.  
127.  Manzoni GM, Pagnini F, Corti S, Molinari E, Castelnuovo G. Internet -based behavioral interventions for obesity: 
an updated sy stematic review. Clin Pract Epidemiol Ment Health. 2011;7:19 -28. 
128.  Neve MJ, Collins CE, Morgan PJ. Dropout, nonusage attrition, and pretreatment predictors of nonusage attrition 
in a commercial Web -based weight loss program. Journal of medical Internet research. 2010;12(4):e69.  
129.  Crenshaw K, Curry W, Salanitro AH, et al. Is physician engagement with Web -based CME associated with 
patients' baseline hemoglobin A1c levels? The Rural Diabetes Online Care study. Acad Med. 2010;85(9):1511 -
1517.  
130.  Salanit ro AH, Funkhouser E, Agee BS, et al. Multiple uncontrolled conditions and blood pressure medication 
intensification: an observational study. Implementation science : IS. 2010;5:55.  
131.  Kovac SH, Houston TK, Weinberger M. Inappropriate nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drug use: prevalence and 
predictors. J Patient Saf. 2010;6(2):86 -90. 
132.  Yu F, Menachemi N, Houston TK. Hospital patient safety levels among healthcare's "most wired" institutions. J 
Healthc Qual. 2010;32(2):16 -23. 
133.  Willett LL, Wellons MF, Hartig JR, et al. Do women residents delay childbearing due to perceived career threats? 
Acad Med. 2010;85(4):640 -646.  
134.  Schoen MJ, Tipton EF, Houston TK, et al. Characteristics that predict physician participation in a Web -based CME 
activity: the MI -Plus study. J Contin Educ Health Prof. 2009;29(4):246 -253.  
135.  Ashton CM, Houston TK, Williams JH, et al. A stories -based interactive DVD intended to help people with 
hypertension achieve blood pressure control through improved communication with their doctors. Patient Educ 
Couns. 2010;79(2):245 -250.  
136.  Sales AE, Ti pton EF, Levine DA, et al. Are co -morbidities associated with guideline adherence? The MI -Plus study 
of Medicare patients. J Gen Intern Med. 2009;24(11):1205 -1210.  
137.  Roblin DW, Houston TK, 2nd, Allison JJ, Joski PJ, Becker ER. Disparities in use of a pe rsonal health record in a 
managed care organization. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2009;16(5):683 -689.  
138.  Levine DA, Allison JJ, Cherrington A, Richman J, Scarinci IC, Houston TK. Disparities in self -monitoring of blood 
glucose among low -income ethnic minority populations with diabetes, United States. Ethn Dis. 2009;19(2):97 -
103.  
139.  Crenshaw K, Shewchuk RM, Qu H, et al. What should we include in a cultural competence curriculum? An 
emerging formative evaluation process to foster curriculum development. Acad Me d. 2011;86(3):333 -341.  
140.  Qu H, Houston TK, Williams JH, Gilbert GH, Shewchuk RM. Cognitive mapping tobacco control advice for 
dentistry: a dental PBRN study. Am J Health Behav. 2011;35(2):228 -239.  
141.  Funkhouser E, Houston TK, Levine DA, Richman J, All ison JJ, Kiefe CI. Physician and patient influences on provider 
performance: beta -blockers in postmyocardial infarction management in the MI -Plus study. Circ Cardiovasc Qual 
Outcomes. 2011;4(1):99 -106.  
142.  Bradley KA, Rubinsky AD, Sun H, et al. Alcohol sc reening and risk of postoperative complications in male VA 
patients undergoing major non -cardiac surgery. J Gen Intern Med. 2011;26(2):162 -169.  
143.  Houston TK, Coley HL, Sadasivam RS, et al. Impact of content -specific email reminders on provider participa tion 
in an online intervention: a dental PBRN study. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2010;160(Pt 2):801 -805.  
144.  Allison JJ, Kiefe CI, Wall T, et al. Multicomponent Internet continuing medical education to promote chlamydia 
screening. American journal of prev entive medicine. 2005;28(3):285 -290.  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 41 145.  Levine DA, Funkhouser EM, Houston TK, et al. Improving care after myocardial infarction using a 2 -year internet -
delivered intervention: the Department of Veterans Affairs myocardial infarction -plus cluster -randomiz ed trial. 
Arch Intern Med. 2011;171(21):1910 -1917.  
146.  Houston TK, Richman JS, Ray MN, et al. Internet delivered support for tobacco control in dental practice: 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of medical Internet research. 2008;10(5):e38.  
147.  Rajani  S. Sadasivam, Thomas K. Houston, Midge N. Ray, et al. An integrated clinical -public health informatics 
system for smoking cessation: Pragmatic clinical trial in 174 practices. 41st APHA Annual Meeting and Exposition 
November 02 - 06, 2013; Boston, MA.  
148. Houston TK, Allison JJ, Sussman M, et al. Culturally appropriate storytelling to improve blood pressure: a 
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154(2):77 -84. 
149.  DeLaughter LK, Sadasivam SR, Kamberi A, et al. Crave -Out: A Distraction/Motivation Mobile  Game to Assist in 
Smoking Cessation. JMIR Serious Games. 2016;4(1):e3.  
150.  Grant A, Berlin A, Freeman GK. The impact of a student learning journal: a two -stage evaluation using the 
Nominal Group Technique. Med Teach. 2003;25(6):659 -661.  
151.  Miller D, Sh ewchuk R, Elliot TR, Richards S. Nominal group technique: a process for identifying diabetes self -care 
issues among patients and caregivers. Diabetes Educ. 2000;26(2):305 -310, 312, 314.  
152.  Ray MN, Allison JJ, Coley HL, et al. Variations in tobacco control in National Dental PBRN practices: the role of 
patient and practice factors. Spec Care Dentist. 2013;33(6):286 -293.  
153.  Rocheleau M, Sadasivam RS, Baquis K, et al. An observational study o f social and emotional support in smoking 
cessation Twitter accounts: content analysis of tweets. Journal of medical Internet research. 2015;17(1):e18.  
154.  Chen PW. When Patients Share Their Stories, Health May Improve. 2011; 
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/10/health/views/10chen.html?_r=3&ref=health& . Accessed 11/13/2013.  
155.  Weintraub K. Talk therapy: Storytelling may help what ails her - just as her story has hel ped others. 2011; 
http://www.boston.com/lifestyle/health/articles/2011/03/21/patients_benefit_ from_listening_to_the_stories_
of_those_dealing_with_similar_ailments/ . Accessed 11/13/2013.  
156.  Park A. Storytelling May Help Lower Blood Pressure. 2011; http://healthland.time.com/2011/01/17/story -
telling -may -help -to-lower -blood -pressure/ . Accessed 11/13/2013.  
157.  Gopinath B, Baur LA, Hardy LL, et al. Relationship between a range of sedentary behaviours and blood pressure 
during early adolescence. Journa l of human hypertension. 2012;26(6):350 -356.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 42 APPENDIX   
 
APPENDIX A  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (SADASIVAM , RAJANI , SADASIVAM ): 
 
  
PCORI Cycle 1  2016 Research Plan Template                                                                        
 43  
APPENDIX B  
 
 What's in your wallet? A Message from Your Online Community  
Darcy, a 39 -year -old, has thought about the financial savings of quitting 
smoking and say.   Plan to save all the money you spent on cigarettes just 
like you were still buying them and put it away to see how much you can 
save and use it for something great :).  
 Saving to reward yourself for quitting can be really motivating.  
Remember to use the money you save for something you really want and 
not for something you need!  
To learn more, please visit www.decide2quit.org   
      Socio -Cultural Attributes -Money  
       Behavioral treatment g eneral  
 
General Treatment -Decide2Quit.org  
Smoking hurts more than just your lungs: A Message from Your Online 
Community.  
 
Tina, a 21 -year -old, realizes that when quitting, it's important for women 
to think about longevity of life. Many women have children and want to 
see them grow, but you can't if you die of cancer. Smoking harms nearly 
every organ in the body.  Not only do smokers potentially shorten their 
life but they also are sick more often, take more days off work, and have 
longer hospital stays.   
To learn more, please visit www.decide2quit.org . 
 Socio -Cultural  Family/Friend Problem  
 
Health:   Physical Functioning - Smoking Risk  
 
General Treatment -Decide2Quit.org  
It's not too late  
Even though smoking really harms your body, it's not too late – 
 you can undo much of the damage by quitting smoking now.  
To learn more, please visit www.decide2quit.org . 
 Health: Physical Functioning - Smoking Risk  
Health: Physical Functioning -Quit Benefit  
General Treatment -Decide2Quit.org  
How do I love thee?  
Are you concerned about how your smoking affects your family and 
friends?  Until you are ready to quit, try to avoid smoking around your 
loved ones by going outside or not smoking in the car.  Taking small steps 
may help you prepare to quit.      
To learn more, please visit www.decide2quit.org . 
 Socio -Cultural  Family/Friend Problem  
Behavioral treatments - general  
General Treatment -Decide2Quit.org  
And the list goes on…  
Long term risks of smoking include heart attacks and stroke, cancer of all 
types, osteoporosis, long -term disability,  and the need for extended care.  
Think about what your life will be like if you keep smoking.  
To learn more, please visit www.decide2quit.org . Health -Medical problems  
Health: Physical Functioning - Smoking Risk  
General Treatment -Decide2Quit.org    