0 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
  
Photodynamic Therapy for Papulopustular Rosacea  
 
 
 
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
 
GWU IRB #  031416  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
 
Alison Ehrlich, MD, MHS  
Professor and Chair of Dermatology  
George Washington University  
 
Medical Faculty Associates  
2150 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20037  
(202) 741 -2619   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1. STATEMENT OF HYPOTHESIS AND OBJECTIVES  
2. BACKGROUND, SIGNIFICANCE, AND RATIONALE  
3. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
3.1 OVERVIEW OF DESIGN  
3.2 SAMPLE SIZE, INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
3.3 SCREENING PHASE  
3.4 TREATMENT PHASE  
3.5 STUDY COMPLETION AND WITHDRAWAL CRITERIA  
3.6 STRENGHTS AND LIMITATIONS OF PROPOSED RESEARCH  
4. DATA VARIABLES, COLLECTION, AND EVALUATION  
4.1 DATA VARIABLES  
4.2 DATA COLLECTION  
4.3 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
5. HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION  
5.1 SUBJECT SELECTION  
5.2 RISKS AND BENEFITS  
5.3 CONFIDENTIALITY  
5.4 ADVERSE EVENTS AND SAFETY MONITORING  
6. REFERENCES  
 
 
 
  
2 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
  
1. STATEMENT OF HYPOTHESIS AND OBJECTIVES:  
 
Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory disorder that is characterized by severe flushing (transient 
erythema), non -transient erythema, papules, pustules, and telangiectasia. Topical therapy is not 
always effective in treating symptoms of rosacea. Furthermore, rapid recurrence is common 
following the use of systemic antibiotics, resulting in the chronic us e of these medications to 
control the disease. Although the exact pathogenesis of rosacea is unknown, treatment for this 
condition has been investigated based on its similarity to acne and photodamaged skin. Case 
reports have sho wn promising results in rosacea  patients  treated with methyl aminolevulinate 
photodynamic therapy ( MAL – PDT).  Other than a case report which observed significant 
improvement of papules, pustules, erythema, and flushing following 5 - aminolevulinic acid 
photodynamic therapy ( ALA-PDT) treatment of a patient with rosacea, the role of ALA -PDT in 
the treatment of rosacea has not been reported .   
We have designed a pilot study investigating the efficacy  of ALA -PDT in treating papulopustular 
rosacea. The objectives of the study are as follows:   
Primary objective:  
1. To evaluate improvement of the inflammatory lesions (papules, pustules, nodules) , 
erythema, and telangiectasia  of rosacea as assessed by the Investigator’s Global 
Assessment (IGA).  
 
2. To evaluate improvement of the inflammatory lesions (papules, pustules, nodules) of 
rosacea as assessed by the Inflammatory Lesion Investigator’s Global As sessment 
(ILIGA).  
 
Secondary objective s:  
3. To evaluate improvement of rosacea associated erythema as assessed by the Clinical 
Erythema Assessment (CEA) scale.  
 
4. To evaluate improvement of the inflammatory lesions (papules, pustules, nodules) of 
rosacea as measured by a difference in inflammatory lesion count.  
 
5. To evaluate improvement of rosacea as assessed by the Patient Overall Assessment 
Scale.  
 
  
2. BACKGROUND, SIGNIFICANCE, AND RATIONALE  
 
 
Rosacea  
3 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
  
Rosacea is a chronic inflamma tory disorder that is characterized by severe flushing  (transient 
erythema) , non transient  erythema, papules, pustule s, and telangiectasia. It primarily affects the 
central third of t he face . Secondary features of rosacea include burning or stinging, 
erythematous plaques, edema, dry appearance, peripheral locations, ocular manifestations, and 
phymatous changes.1 It has a prevalence of about 10%. The majority of patients with rosacea 
are between the ages of 30 -60 years of age.2,3   
There are four subtypes of rosacea ( erythematotela ngiectatic, papulopustular, phymatous, and 
ocular ); patients may have characteristics of more than one subtype. Although the  exact 
pathogen esis of rosacea is unknown, increased blood flow, excess ive sun exposure, hair follicle 
mites ( Demodex folliculorum and Demodex brevis ), and inflammatory mediators (neutrophils, 
macrophages, and lymphocytes)  are thought to play role.3  
Treatmen t for rosacea consists  of topical azelaic acid, sodium s ulfacetamide, sulfur, topical and 
systemic metronidazole, antibiotics (e rythromycin, clindamycin, tetracycline), and, in resistant 
cases, isotretinoin. The therapeutic effect of these medications on rosacea is related more 
towards their anti -inflammatory than their antibacterial actions.3, 4  
Topical t herapy is not always effe ctive in treating symptoms of rosacea. Furthermore, rapid 
recurrence is common following th e use of systemic antibiotics , resulting in the chronic use of 
these medications in order to control the disease .4  Pharmacological treatment  is partially 
effective  in treating the papulopustular lesions of rosacea, but the t reatment of erythema, 
flushing,  and telangiectasia is limited and at times requires the use of  lasers, including pulse -
dye laser.5   
Photodynamic Therapy  
Photodynamic therapy (PDT)  has been used for various dermatological conditions . It involves 
the administrati on of a photosensitizer  which is absorbed  by target cells . Absorption occurs 
preferentially by  hyperproliferative tissue compared to normal  tissue. Illumination with a light 
source of a spe cific wavelength results in the release of reactive oxygen specie s within the 
target tissue and results in the phototoxic destruction of tissue and bacteria.4,6   
5 - amino levulinic acid (ALA) and its methylated ester , methyl  aminolevulinate (MAL) , are two 
commo n photosensitizers used in PDT. Both ALA and MAL are converted to protoporphyrin IX 
(PpIX), a cytotoxic intermediate that des troys tissues through necrosis and apoptosis . ALA, 
which is activated by blue light (417 +/ - 5nm) , is approved by the FDA  for the treatment of 
hypertrophic actinic keratoses (AKs)  of the face and scalp. It has also been used off -label  in 
treating acne vulgaris, photodamaged  skin, sebaceous hyperplasia, and skin cancer. MAL, 
which is activated by red light, is approved by the  FDA for the treatment of nonhyperkeratotic 
AKs of the face and s calp. MAL is also approved in some European countries for the treatment 
of superficial and nodular basal cell carcinoma (BCC)  and Bowen’s disease.4,6  
4 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
 Both ALA and MAL – PDT have been effecti ve in treating acne vulgaris. Studies have shown 
that PDT results in significant reductions in the number of inflammatory acne lesions.6 The role 
of PDT in the treatment of acne may be due its  antibacterial properties, its ability to damage 
sebaceous glands , reduce follicular obstruction, and decrease sebum production  and gland 
size.7,8 Hair follicles  and sebaceous glands accumulate  PpIX  after administration of topical ALA. 
PpIX  also accumulate s more in acne lesions compared to surrounding skin. Propinobacterium 
acnes , a bacteria involved in the pathogensis of acne, produces por phyrins, a metabolic 
byproduct, which, when activated  by light, results in the destruction of the bacteria .9 Topical ALA 
cause s a preferent ial accumulation of additional  porphyrins in  Propinobacterium acne s, further 
enhancing the destructive effect of light.  
The mechanism of PDT in the treatment of rosacea is not completely understood. One theory is 
that rosacea is a folliculitis induced  by gram -negative bacteria that are destroyed by a similar 
mechanism as Propinobacterium acnes  following PDT . It is uncertain  if these gram -negative 
bacteria also produce endogenou s porphyrins.10 It is possible that PDT could also result in the 
destruction of Demodex follicularis . PDT has also been used in the treatment of actinic 
keratoses and photo damaged skin. Since rosacea may be induced a nd worsened by sunlight , 
the effect of PDT in treating rosacea could be related to its skin rejuvenating  properties. The role 
of PDT in the treatment of neoplastic cells by inducing apoptosis, necrosis, and affec ting the 
microvasculature could be another potential mechanism by which it treats rosacea.11  
Although the exact pathogenesis of rosacea is unknown, treatment for this condition has been 
investigated b ased on its similarity to acne and photodamaged skin. Since  follicular 
inflammation occurs in rosacea and there is a therapeutic ov erlap between acne and rosacea, 
the role of PDT in the treatment of rosacea is being investigated. Nybaek et al observed clearing 
of rosacea in 3 out of 4 patients  treated with MA L-PDT. They suggested that a total of two to 
three treatments with PDT may result in remissions for more than three months  following 
treatment .4 Katz et al observed significant improvement of papules, pustules, erythema, and 
flushing  following ALA -PDT treatment of a 45 year old female with rosacea .12  
In light of the above work we have designed a pilot study further investigating  the ability of ALA-
PDT in treating papulopustular rosacea. If successful, this study c ould provide further  evidence 
for the use of PDT in the treatment of rosacea. The results of this study may lead to the 
development of larger studies that are statistically powered  to determine improvement of 
rosacea using ALA -PDT.  
3. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
3.1 Overview  of Design  
All participants will be patients that have been screened within the Department of Dermatology 
at the Medical Faculty Associates. Individuals meeting inclusion and exclusion  criteria (see 
Section 3.2 ) will be randomized to one of three groups (groups A, B, or C) ; each group will 
contain 10 patients. Those in group A will have their entire face treated with 20% 5 -ALA 
(Levulan® Kerastick®, Dusa Pharmaceuticals)  and Blu-U light (DUSA ®) . Those in group B will 
5 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
 have their entire face treated with the vehicle (Kerastick®  without 5 -ALA) and Blu -U light (DUSA 
®). Those in group C will have their entire face  treated with the vehicle  (Kerastick® without 5 -
ALA) only.  All patients will have their face treated with either 20% 5 -ALA (Levulan® Kerastick®, 
Dusa  Pharmaceuticals)  or the vehicle  (Kerastick® without 5 -ALA), which will remain in cont act 
with the skin for one hour and, for those in group A and B,  subsequently irradiated with a 417nm 
blue light set at 10 J/cm2 from a Blu -U light (DUSA ®)  for 16 minutes  and 40 seconds . Each 
subject will receive a total of 4 treatments with a 2 -3 week interval between each treatment  (See 
Section 3.4) . In addition, the face will be photographed and assessed by a blinded investigator 
(See Section 4 ). If ≥ 30% of patients in group A experience improvement in the Investigator’s 
Global Assessment Score (IGA) by at least one point (See Section 3)  we will  offer subjects in 
group B and group C one treatment  with 20% 5 -ALA (Levulan® Kerastick®, Dusa 
Pharmaceutica ls) and Blu -U light (DUSA ®) , which will occur 2 -3 weeks after the completion of 
the blinded study period . 
 
3.2 Sample Size, Inclusion and Exclusion criteria  
We will enroll a total of 3 0 patients for this study. Each group (A, B, or C) will contain 10 
patients. The inclusion and exclusion criteria for the study are as follows:  
 
Inclusion Criteria :  
 
1. Ages 18 -79 years  
2. Clinical d iagnosis of papulopustular rosacea based on physician evaluation . Only 
patients with 3-50 papule s and/or pustules, and a CEA total score ≥ 5 , (See Section 
4.1.3)  will be enrolled .  
3. History of failing  at least one conventional  treatment for rosacea (metronidazole, 
sodium sulfacetamide,  tetracycline, azaleic acid) or not interested in continu ous 
treatment with these  agents .  
 
 
Exclusion Criteria :  
 
1. < 18 or > 79 years of age  
2. Allergy to 5 - aminolevulinic acid (ALA) or any component of the vehicle   
3. Use of topical acne or rosacea trea tments (on the face) within 2 weeks prior to Treatment  1 
4. Use of systemic antibioti cs within 1 month prior to Treatment 1  
5. Use of topical retinoids (on the face) within 1 month  prior to Treatment  1  
6. Use of systemic retinoids, including isotretinoin , within  6 months  prior to Treatment 1.  
7. Use of laser or light based rosacea treatments (on the face) within 1 month  prior to 
Treatment  1 
8. Cosmetic procedures (e.g., superficial chemical peels, exfoliation or microdermabrasion of 
the face) within 2 months prior to Treatment  1 
9. Use of topical cortic osteroids (on the face) 1 month prior to Treatment  1 
6 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
 10. Use of systemic corticosteroids 3 months prior to Treatment  1   
11. Known or suspected history of drug or alcohol abuse within the past 6 months as 
determined by the medi cal record or patient interview  
12. History of adverse reaction to light exposure   
13. History of disorder of porphyrin metabolism  
14. Scarring or infection in the area being treated  
15. Extensive facial hair that would either impair blue light exposure or interfere with lesion 
evaluation  
16. Inability to make study visits  or anticipated poor compliance  
17. Pregnant females or nursing mothers. Eligible women of reproductive age will be required 
to have a negative ur ine pregnancy test at screening . They will also be required to be on at 
least one reliable form of effective birth control [examples: barrier method (condoms, 
diaphragm), oral, injectable, implant birth control or abstinence]  during the course of this 
study and 30 days following the las t treatment period . 
18. Life threatening illness that would interfere with the patient’ s ability to complete the study   
19. Participation in another clinical experimental therapeutic study wi thin 30 days of screening 
visit  
20. Any history or evidence of severe illnes s or any other condition that would make the 
patient, in t he opinion of the investigator, unsuitable for the study.  
 
3.3 Screening Phase  
Prior to the first treatment  session , potential participants will be evaluated for study eligibility. All 
other inclus ion and exclusion criteria must be met prior to study entry /enrollment .  The 
screening phase will be 7 -30 days prior to visit 2.  If Visit 2 is unable to be scheduled within that 
window the subject will need to have the inclusion/exclusion reviewed again prior to completing 
Visit 2.  
3.4 Treatment Phase  
After the screening phase , subjects (ages 18 – 79 yea rs) with papulopustular rosacea, will be 
randomized  into one of three groups (groups A, B, or C).  Each group will contain 10 patients.  
Those in group A wi ll have their entire face treated with 20% 5 -ALA (Levulan® Kerastick®, 
Dusa Pharmaceuticals) and Blu -U light (DUSA ®). Those in group B will have their entire face 
treated with the vehicle (Kerastick® without 5 -ALA) and Blu -U light (DUSA ®). Those in group  C 
will have their entire face treated with the vehicle (Kerastick® without 5 -ALA) only. All subjects 
will have th eir face cl eansed with acetone; each subjects face should be clean and dry prior to 
application of 20% 5 -ALA (Levulan® Kerastick®, Dusa Pharmaceuticals)  or vehicle ( Kerastick® 
without 5 -ALA).  20% 5 -ALA (Levulan® Kerastick®, Dusa Pharmaceuticals)  or vehicle 
(Kerastick® without 5 -ALA) will be crushed and prepared for application after shaking for at 
least 3 minutes.  Topical 5 -ALA or vehicle  will be liberally applied on skin ( entire face) with extra 
pressure on lesions and allowed to remain in contact with the skin for 1 hour . Those in groups A 
and B will then have their entire face  irradiated with a 417nm blue light set at 10 J/cm2 from a 
Blu-U light (DUSA ®) for 16 minutes  and 40 seconds . After irradiation, the face will be washed 
with soap and water and sunscreen will be applied. Each subject will receive a total of 4 
treatments with a 2 -3 week interval between each treatment  session. If ≥30% of patients in 
7 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
 group A experience improvement in the Investigator’s Global Assessment Score (IGA) by at 
least one point (See Section 3) we will offer subjects in group B and group C an additional full 
face treatment with 20% 5 -ALA (Levulan® Kerastick®, Dusa Pharmaceuticals) and Blu -U light 
(DUSA ®)  2-3 weeks after the completion of the blinded study period.  Assessments 
(Investigator’s Global Assessment (IGA), Inflammatory Lesion Investigator’s Global Assessment 
(ILIGA), Clinical Erythema Asse ssment (CEA) Scale, inflammatory lesion count, and 
photographs (See Section 4.1.3))  will be performed at baseline, p rior to ea ch treatment session, 
and at study completion  by a blinded investigator.  A Patient Overall Assessment will be 
performed prior to e very treatment visit ( except week 0), and at study completion.  
3.5 Study Completion and Withdrawal Criteria  
Completion of the blinded component of the study will occur for each individual after 4 
treatments with 20% 5 -ALA (Levulan® Kerastick®, Dusa Pharmaceuticals) and Blu -U light 
(DUSA ®)  (group A), vehicle (Kerastick® without 5 -ALA) and Blu -U light (DUSA ®)  (group B), or 
vehicle (Kerastick® without 5 -ALA) only (group C) . Participants will have final assessments 
performed 2 months (+/ - 2 weeks)  after their last treatment  of the blinded period , as outlined in 
Table 1. If ≥30% of patients in group A experience improvement in the Investigator’s Global 
Assessment Score (IGA) by at least one point (See Section 3) we will offer subjects in group B 
and group C an additional full face treatment  with 20% 5 -ALA (Levulan® Kerastick®, Dusa 
Pharmaceuticals) and Blu -U light (DUSA ®) , which will occur 2 -3 weeks after the completion of 
the blinded study period.  
Subjects may choose to withdraw from the study at any time and for any reason.  The principle 
and co -investigators may also withdraw any individual that develops worsening rosacea. All 
serious adverse events that are probably or definitely related to the p rotocol will be reported to 
the George Washington University Medical Center Institutional Review Board in accordance 
with IRB policies and procedures.  
3.6 Strength and Limitations of Proposed Research  
Strengths of the study include its relatively simple design and the potential for its completion 
within a short period of time due to the smal l number of participants (ten).   
Limitations of this study include the inability to conduct robust statistical analysis due to its small 
sample size.  However, the res ults of this project may lead to the development of larger studies 
that will have the statistical power to detect improvements.  
4. DATA VARIABLES, COLLECTION, AND EVALUATION  
4.1 Data Variables  
The following data will be evaluated in patients fulfilling in clusion and exclusion criteria and who 
agree to participate in the study.   
1. Sociodemographic Variables : Age, gender, race  
8 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
  
2.   Clinical History : 
a. Rosacea history : The patient's disease and treatment history will be obtained. All past 
and current medications for rosacea will be recorded.  
b. Past medical history : All current and past medical conditions will be documented, 
allowing us to screen for the presence of any condition that, in the opinion of any of the 
investigators, would make the patient uns uitable for study inclusion.  Allergies to 
medications will also be noted.  
c. Current medications : All medications will be recorded.    
d. Social History : We will screen for the presence of any drug or alcohol abuse within 
the past 6 months as determined by the m edical record or patient interview.  
 
3.   Rosacea  - specific Variables : All variables described below will be assessed by the  
 same blinded investigator at various points throughout the study.  
      a.   Investigator’s global assessment of rosacea (IGA). The IGA  is a subjective 7-     
       point , static scoring system. Scores range from 0 to 6: 0 (clear) = no papules and/or            
       pustules, no residual erythema, no or mild to moderate telang iectasia; 1(minimal) =    
       rare papules and/or pustules, residual to mild erythema, mild to moderate              
       telangiectasia; 2 (mild) few papules and/or pustules, mild erythema, mild to moderate   
       telangiectasia; 3 (mild to moderat e) = distinct number of papules and or/pustules;         
       mild to moderate erythema; mild to moderate telangiectasia; 4 (moderate) =          
       pronounced number of papules and/ or pustules, moderate erythema, mild to         
       moderate tel angiectasia; 5 (moderate to severe) = many papules and/ or pustules,     
       occasionally with large inflamed lesions, moderate erythema, moderate          
       telangiectasia ; 6 (severe) = numerous papules and/or pustules occasionally with     
       confluent areas o f inflamed lesions; moderate or severe erythema, moderate or      
       severe telangiectasia.  This assessment will be performed at baseline, prior to                 
       every treatm ent visit, and study completion . Improvement will be indicated by          
a decrease in the IGA score by ≥ 1 point  compared to the previous assessment.              
Worsening will be indicated by an increase in the IGA score of ≥ 1 point compared to         
the previous assessment.  
 
  b.   Inflammatory Lesion  Investigator’s Global Assessment ( ILIGA) . The I LIGA is a  
       subjective 5-point measure of the overall disease severity. Scores range from 0 to 4:      
                  0 (clear) = no papules/pustules/nodules ; 1 (almost clear) = 1 to 2 papules/pustules; 2     
                  (mild) = 3 to 10 papules/pustules; 3 (moderate) = 11 to 19 papules/pustules or ≤ 2   
                  nodules; 4  (severe) = ≥ 20 papules/pustules, or >  2 nodules. This assessment will be 
       performed at baseline, prior to every treatment visit,  and study completion .          
       Improvement will be indicated by a decrease in the ILIGA score by ≥ 1 point   
       compared to the previous assessment. Worsening will be indicated by an increase in  
       the ILIGA score of ≥ 1 point compared to the previous assessment.             
 
9 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
             c.   Clinical  Erythema Assessment (CEA) scale . The CEA scale is an assessment of                                
         erythema. It has a score range from 0 to 4: 0 (none) = no redness; 1 (mild) = slight     
        pinkness; 2 (moderate) = definite redness; 3 (significant) = marked erythema; 4       
        (severe)  = fiery redness. Th e total score is based on the evaluation of all areas of       
        the face (forehead, chin, right cheek, left cheek, and nose). Each of these areas will   
        be scored from 0 -4, giving a maximum total score of 20.  Improvement will be      
                   indicated by a decrease in the total CEA score by ≥ 1 point compared to the          
                   previous assessment. Worsening will be indicated by an increase  in the total CEA      
        score of ≥ 1 point compared to the previous as sessment.  The CEA will be   
                   performed  at baseline, prior to every treatment visit, and  study completion.  
 
  d   Inflammatory lesion count.  The number of inflammatory lesions (papules, pustules,   
       nodules) will be recorded at baseline, prior to every treatment visit, and                  
                  at study completion . The inflammatory lesion count will be used to grade the     
                  ILIGA (See 4.1.3.a above).  
    
 
e.   Photographs: Photographs of the face will be taken at baseline, prior to every   
treatment visit, and at study completion. These  photographs will be used by the blinded 
invest igator in completing the IGA, CEA  scale, and in determining the  number of 
inflammatory lesion s present.  
 
f.   Patient Overall  Assessment  Scale . Patients  will assess the  overall improvement of                
      their rosacea using a 4-point scale, where 1 =  excellent improvement , 2 = good /    
      moderate improvement, 3 = no change,  4 = worsening. This assessment will be     
      performed prior to every treatment visit  (except week 0) , and at study    
                  completion . Improvement will be indicated by a decrease by ≥ 1 point compared to        
the previous asse ssment. Worsening will be  indicated by an increase  in this scale by ≥ 1  
point compared to the previous assessment.      
 
4.2 Data Collection  
All data variables will be stored in a secure database using coded identifiers in place of name.  
Most of the data will initially be recorded on approved study forms containing the participant's 
study ID code. After transfer of data into the computerized database, all paper forms will be kept 
in a secure locked cabinet within a locked office within the department.  Pho tographs will be stored 
with a secure electronic file and will be labeled with the participant's study ID code and date they 
were taken .  
4.3 Statistical Considerations  
 
Since this is a pilot study, we will perform only basic descriptive statistical analysis o f our 
results.  Due to the small number of subjects, it is unlikely that any statistical test would have the 
10 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
 power to detect a significant difference in any of the measured variables. Instead, we will look 
for a decrease in IGA, ILIGA, and CEA scores, decr ease in  inflammatory lesion count , and an 
improvement in the Patient Overall Assessment Scale . The results of this project may lead to 
the development of larger studies that will have the statistical power to detect significant 
differences in these variabl es after treatment with 5 -ALA-PDT.  
5. HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION  
5.1 Subject Selection  
 
At the time of recruitment, each potential subject will be provided with an informed consent form 
to read. The potential subject will be allowed to take the consent form home to discuss its 
content with family members or friends. All individuals will be given a contact number that they 
may call to obtain answers to any questions regarding the study and their participation.  All 
subjects must sign a consent form prior to an y study procedures being performed.  
Involvement of special subjects such as pregnant women, institutionalized individuals, 
prisoners, or impaired and non -competent individuals are not anticipated in this study. Eligible 
women of reproductive age will be re quired to be on one reliable form of effective birth control 
during the treatment period. They will also be required to have a negative urine pregnancy test 
during the screening perio d and prior to each treatment session  for the duration of the study. 
Individuals from all racial/ethnic groups, regardless of gender, and those that are economically 
and educationally disadvantaged are eligible for this study if they meet the eligibility 
requirements.  
 
5.2 Risks and Benefits  
 
A temporary burning or stinging sensati on may occur during lig ht exposure following ALA 
application . A minority of patients may experience these symptoms after light exposure.  Pruritus  
may also occur.6   
 
Patients with AKs and BCC usually experience a phototoxic reaction (edema, erythema, vesicles, 
crusting, erosion s) when treated with ALA -PDT. This is an expected reaction that eve ntually 
results in the resolution  of the treated lesions . These phototoxic reactions can  be associated with 
pain, burn ing, and peeling and can last for up to 2 we eks.6 The severity of the phototoxic reaction 
increases with longer application ti mes of ALA. Exposure to  artificial lights or sunlight within the 
first 2 days following PDT treatment can result in a m ore severe phototoxic reaction. To decreases 
this risk,  all subjects will have their faces washed with soap and water and will also have 
sunscreen applied following PDT treatment. Each subject will be  advised to avoid sunlight or  
artificial light exposure for at least 48 hrs following PDT treatment and to also  wear a wide -
brimmed hat  or other protective apparel to shade the treated area from sun light or other bright 
light. 
 
Hyperpigmentation and occasionally hypopigmentation may oc cur following ALA -PDT treatment . 
These pigment changes usually resolve within six months . In one study, < 3% of patients treated 
with 5 -ALA patch -PDT for AK s showed hypopigmentation after one year.13  Hyperpigmentation of 
11 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
 healthy skin following ALA -PDT is dependent on th e dose of ALA. It  usually occurs within 48 -72 
hours following  treatment and increases for the following two weeks . It occur s more frequently in 
individuals with psoriasis who are treated with PDT. In on e study, all twenty -one subjects  with 
psoriasis experienced mild to moderate hyperpigmentation of their p soriasis les ions following 
PDT. In another study,  PDT resulted in hyperpigmentation of  psoriasis lesions in seven out eight 
subjects . Pigmentary change occurs less frequently in patients treated with PDT for non 
melanoma skin cancer.  The Scottish PDT Centre reported that 1% of 762 patients treated with 
PDT for non melanoma skin cancer developed pigmentary changes. Prolonged 
hyperpig mentation has been observed  when treating hirsutism  with PDT .6,14   
ALA-PDT for the treatment of acne has  also been associated with erythema, crusting, 
discomfort/pain, and hyperpigmentation.14  In one study, skin exfoliation and postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation was observed on the back for 1-3 months following the use of  ALA – PDT (1-
4 treatment sessions)  for the treatment of acne on the back of all 22 subjects .6 In another study, 
20 patients with moderate to severe acne vulgaris of the face had one side of their face treated 
with ALA -PDT and the other side treated with blue light alone. Patients experience d erythema, 
pain, stinging, peeling, pruritis, oozing, and pustules  on their face . Fifty-five percent of patients 
experienced stinging  and 25% experienced pain during  ALA-PDT treatment. ALA -PDT resulted 
in erythema in 65% of patients,  exfoliation in  70%, pruritus in 65%;  these symptoms were more 
severe on acne lesions. These symptoms resolved within a few days following treatment and 
were less severe on the side of the face  treated with blue light alone. Two patients experienced 
edema, crusting, and oozing and another two patients experienced transient pustular lesions on 
the side of the face treated with ALA-PDT treatment. Hyperpigmentation was observed in fifty -
five percent of patients  on the side of the face treated with blue light  alone and in 65% of patients  
on the side of the face  treated with ALA - PDT.15  
 
Hair loss is another potential side -effect.  Localized permanent hair loss, though uncommon, has 
been observed wh en treating BCC  and Bowen’s disease.  
 
Scarring following topical PDT is very rare.  Of the 762 patients treated with PDT for non melanoma 
skin cancer  at the Scottish PDT Centre (See Above), only  0.8% developed mild to moderate 
scarring.6,14 
Topical PDT has a low risk of carcinogenicity.  Porphyrin -like molecules have antioxidant and 
antim utagenic properties. Only two cases of skin cancer have been reported in patients receiving 
PDT. The first case involved a n 82 year old male who developed melanoma on one of his skin 
sites 6 months after being tre ated with seven sessions of PDT, over 4 yea rs, for actinic keratosis 
and squamous cell carcinoma.  Although the development of melanoma in this case was probably  
coincidental, multiple treatments of PDT has the potential to possibly  promote  its development.  
The other case involved a 38 year old male  who responded to ALA -PDT for the treatment of SCC 
in situ of the glans penis. He was started on topical 5 -fluoro uracil  and was later found to  have 
SCC on his penis, which was  likely due to incomplete clearance and  progression of the  SCC in 
situ. The potential role of PDT in causing this progression is unknown.14  
12 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
 Systemic ALA given at higher dosages than that contain ed in a Kerastick ® has been associated 
with elevated liver enzymes. Elevated liver enzymes have not been associated with the topical  
application of ALA.  
Blue light may cause irreversible damage to the retina. Therefore, during each treatment session, 
patients will be required to wear protective goggles to decrease this risk.6  
ALA is a Category C drug. The safety of ALA during pregnan cy and the risk to the unborn child 
are unknown. Therefore, we are not enrolling pregnant women in this study. Women who are 
able to have children must have a negative pregnancy test result at screen .  A repeat pregnancy 
test must be done if they miss any periods or their menstrual cycle becomes very irregular. If a 
pregnancy occurs, there may be a risk of miscarriage, birth defects or other unknown medical 
conditions.  All women must  use at least one reliable form  of effective birth control [example: 
barrier method (condoms, diaphragm), oral, injectable, implant birth control or abstinence] 
during the treatment period and for 30 days following the completion of this study. Treatment will 
be discontinued if a subject becomes pregnant. They will, however, con tinue to be observed 
through the conclusion of pregnancy. This observation will entail one telephone call visit at the 
conclusion of the first trimester, one telephone call visit at the conclusion of the second 
trimester, and one telephone call at the end of each month thereafter until the conclusion of the 
pregnancy. With the subject’s permission, any serious adverse events, abnormal lab results, or 
abnormal diagnostic test results pertaining to the subject or her developing fetus, as reported by 
the subje ct, will be recorded in our data base and reported to the GWU IRB in accordance to 
their policies and procedures.  
Patients may benefit from study participation by experiencing an improvement of their rosacea. It 
is still possible that their rosacea may not improve with the treatment under investigation.  
5.3 Confidentialit y 
 
      All information collected as part of this study will b e treated as confidential. Subject consent forms 
and data collection sheets will be stored in a locked office in the MFA Dermatology Department.  
These documents will be accessible to study investigators only. A computer database will be 
created. This data base will not contain any subject identifiers. The data within the database will 
be labeled with each subject's study identification number.  Database information will be 
maintained in a password -protected file.  All the data included in this study will on ly be accessible 
to the investigators listed on the title page, and they will not be released for use by other 
researchers.  
 
5.4  Adverse Events and Safety Monitoring  
 
Patients will be closely monitored for any adverse events experienced during this study, as 
described in Section 5.2: Risks and Benefits.  Adverse events monitoring will be performed by 
the principal inve stigator during each treatment session  starting at visit 3 , during  the blinded and 
post-treatment  period of the study . Any event occurring more than two months after the final 
treatment will not b e considered an adverse event. Patients will be educated as to the possible 
side effects and complications related to 5 -ALA-PDT therapy, and will be instructed to notify any 
13 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
 investigator should they experience signs or symptoms of an adverse event.  Because the 
anticipated risks associa ted with this study are low, we feel that an independent monitoring 
board will not be necessary.   
All events that meet the Prompt Reporting Requirements (HRP -801) (including but not limited to 
new or increased risk, harm experienced by the subject, noncompliance with the federal 
regulations governing human research, and state medical  board actions) will be reported to the 
GW OHR via a Problem Report and Promptly Reportable Inf ormation Form (HRP -204) within 5 
business days of knowledge of the event.  
 
0 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
  
 
Table 1 : Example Study Schedule of Events*  
Week  Screen  W0** W3 W6 W9 W17***  
Visit  V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 
Informed Consent  X      
Clinical History/ Screening Form  X      
Urine Pregnancy Test  X      
IGA X X X X X X 
ILIGA X X X X X X 
CEA Scale  X X X X X X 
Inflammatory Lesion Count  X X X X X X 
Patient Overall Assessment Scale    X X X X 
Photographs  X X X X X X 
Adverse Events    X X X X 
Treatment: 5-ALA-PDT (Group A);   
vehicle - PDT(Group B); vehicle (Group C)   X X X X  
IGA, investigator’s global assessment; ILIGA, inflammatory lesion investigator’s global assessment; CEA, clinical erythema assessment;  5-ALA-PDT,  5 - aminolevulinic acid (ALA).  *Actual schedule and time 
between treatments ma y vary for each subject . Each visit’s assessment and treatment day may occur 2 -3 weeks after the previous treatment/assessment visit . **The first treatment will occur after the 
washout periods have been met. Re -evaluation of entry criteria will be performed  at V2 when more than 30 days have passed since screening  or to confirm a washout has been met . *** Final evaluation/study 
completion will occur  2 months (+/ - 2 weeks) after the final treatment session  of the blinded period of the study .  
14 
 
0 
Version Date: March 14, 2017  
  
REFERENCES:  
 
1. Thiboutot  D, Thieroff -Ekerdt  R, Graupe  K. Efficacy  and safety  of azelaic  acid (15%) gel 
as a new treatment for papulopustular rosacea: results from two vehicle -controlled, 
randomized phase III studies. J Am Acad  Dermatol.  2003 Jun;48(6):836 -45. 
2. Elewski  BE, Fleischer  AB Jr, Pariser DM. A comparison  of 15%  azelaic  acid gel and 
0.75% metronidazole gel in the topical treatment of papulopustular rosacea: results of 
a randomized trial. Arch Derma tol. 2003 Nov;139(11):1444 -50. 
3. Buechner  SA. Rosacea : an update . Dermatology.  2005;210(2):100 -8. 
4. Nybaek  H, Jemec  GB. Photodynamic  therapy  in the  treatment  of rosacea . 
Dermatology.  2005;211(2):135 -8. 
5. Pelle  MT, Crawford  GH, James  WD. Rosacea : II. Therapy. J Am Acad  
Dermatol.  2004  Oct;51(4):499 -512; quiz 513 -4. 
6. Morton  CA, McKenna  KE, Rhodes  LE. Guidelines  for topical  photodynamic  therapy : 
update. Br J Dermatol.  2008 Dec;159(6):1245 -66. Epub 2008 Oct 13.  
7. Hongcharu W, Taylor CR, Chang Y et al. Topical ALA -photodynamic therapy for the 
treatment of acne vulgaris. J Invest Dermatol. 2000; 115:183 –92. 
8. Pollock B, Turner D, Stringer MR  et al. Topical aminolaevulinic acid -photodynamic 
therapy for the treatment of acne vulgaris: a study of clinical efficacy and mechanism 
of action. Br J Dermatol. 2004; 151:616 –22. 
9. Ramstad S, Futsaether CM, Johnsson A. Porphyrin sensitization and intracell ular 
calcium changes in the prokaryote, Propionibacterium acnes. J Photochem Photobiol 
B. 1997; 40:141 –8. 
10. Neubert  U, Jansen  T, Plewig  G. Bacteriologi c and immunologic aspects of gram -
negative folliculitis: a  study  of 46 patients. Int J Dermatol . 1999  Apr;38( 4):270 -4. 
11. Bryld  LE, Jemec  GB. Photodynamic  therapy  in a series of rosacea patients. J Eur 
Acad  Dermatol  Venereol.  2007 Oct;21(9):1199 -202. 
12. Katz B, Patel  V. Photodynamic  therapy  for the treatment  of erythema , papules, 
pustules, and severe flushing consistent with rosacea. J Drugs  Dermatol.  2006 
Feb;5(2 Suppl): 6-8. 
13. Szeimies RM, Stock fleth E, Popp G, Borrosch F, Brüning H, Dominicus R, Mensing H, 
Reinhold U, Reich K, Moor AC, Stocker M, Ortland C, Brunnert M, Hauschild A. Long -
term follow -up of photodynamic therapy with a self -adhesive 5 -aminolaevulinic acid 
patch: 12 months data. Br J  Dermatol. 2010 Feb 1;162(2):410 -4. Epub 2009 Jun 30.  
14. Morton  CA, Brown  SB, Collins  S, Ibbotson  S, Jenkinson  H, Kurwa  H, 
Langmack , McKenna  K, Moseley  H, Pearse  AD, Stringer  M, Taylor  DK, Wong  
G, Rhodes  LE.Guidelines  for topical  photodynamic  therapy : report of a workshop of 
the British Photodermatology Group. Br J Dermat ol. 2002  Apr;146(4):552 -67.  
15. Akaraphanth  R, Kanjanawanitchkul  W, Gritiyarangsan  P. Efficacy  of ALA-
PDT vs blue light in the  treatment  of acne .Photodermatol  Photoimmunol  
Photomed.  2007 Oct;23(5):186 -90. 
 
 
15 
 