Study Title:  Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Effect of Music Listening on Brain Activity 
Under Anesthesia
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
PI:  Anthony Hudetz, PhD
IRB Document Approval Date:  4/1/2021
1 MR imaging of the Effect of Music Listening on Brain  Activity under Anesthesia  
Dr. Zirui Huang, Dr. George A. Mashour, and Dr. Anthony G. Hudetz   
Gener
al Goal  
The goal of this study  is to better understand the systems -level neuronal mechanisms by which 
general anesthetics produce loss of consciousness  under our NIH -funded project ( R01-
GM103894 ). Our general hypothesis has been that anesthetics suppress consciousness by 
disrupting the  functioning of large -scale brain networks that support information integration in the 
brain. We will study brain processes involved in rich and naturalistic situations using complex, 
temporally structured stimuli ( i.e. music). We will determine the neural  correlates of distorted 
perception under sedation by using blood- oxygen level -dependent (BOLD) functional MRI (fMRI). 
This study  should yield insight into how sedation may alter the temporal integration of complex 
stimuli along the brain’s functional hier archy  that supports  conscious experience. Taken together, 
the study  should advance our understanding of the fundamental neuronal mechanisms of 
anesthetic modulation of conscious cognition with a significant translational impact for the clinical 
assessment of the state of consciousness.  
Rationale and Hypothesis  
Real-world events are processed via hierarchically organized temporal receptive windows 
(TRWs) in the brain  (1–5). The TRW of a neuron is defined as the length of time before a response 
during which sensory information may affect that response  (1). Hence, the TRWs reflect the 
timescale on which specific brain region typically processes information. Namely, short TRW of 
early sensory areas process rapid sensory information, whereas longer TRW of higher order brain 
areas integrate perceptual and cognitive events that unfold over longer time periods  (6). 
Therefore, the lengths of TRWs across brain regions can delineate the brain’s spatially distributed 
functional hierarchy . How sedation  alters the brain’s  functional hierarchy  accounting for the  
distorted  perception of complex, temporally extended stimuli is an important scientific question. 
We hypothesize that sedation breaks down the functional hierarchy by prolonging  the brain’s 
intrinsic  timescales (increase the TRWs; Fig. 1) . This disr upts the functioning of large- scale brain 
networks that support perceptual  integration. To test this hypothesis, we will measure the TRWs 
from resting- state ( intrinsic ) and music listening ( extrinsic ) periods  during both conscious 
wakefulness and sedation. We anticipate observing a global prolongation of intrinsic TRWs , 
where the enlarged TRWs  act as a low -pass filter of extrinsic  sensory inputs , and caus e the failure 
of high -order information integration over longer timescales (e.g. in prefrontal regions ) during 
sedation.  

2 
 Fig. 1. Hierarchical organization of temporal receptive windows (TRWs) and their measurement during wakefulness 
and sedation. During wakefulness, music is processed via hierarchical TRWs in the brain, where the timescales of 
neural responses (frequencies in Hz) to stimuli are matched with the multiple timescale s of sensory stimuli. During 
sedation, the TRWs are enlarged such that they act as a low -pass filter or sparse sampling of the sensory inputs. The 
mismatch between the brain’s TRWs and the timescales of sensory inputs may not only affect information acquisition at relatively short timescales but may also fail high-order information integration over longer timescales in, for instance, prefrontal regions with long TRWs . 
Number of Subject s, Re cruitment and Informed Consent  
Statistical power analysis (see below) requires a group of 25 subject s. We plan to recruit  a total 
of 30 subject s (ages between 18- 40 years old) to complete the study  considering the possible 
failure or attrition . Healthy participants will be recruited by listing on UMClinicalStudies.org  and by 
postings at area colleges and community groups in Ann Arbor . Interested volunteers will call the 
phone number of a designated recruiter  for an initial phone screening.  The initial phone screening 
will consist of questionnaires related to medical history, demographic information, handedness,  
inclusion and exclusion criteria and procedure standard MRI screening questionnaire. If 
interested, the participant  will complete the ques tionnaires, which will be reviewed by the study 
team . The health status will be confirmed by the attending anesthesiologist before the study on 
site. Once eligibility is confirmed by the study team, the one -time research study session will be 
scheduled.   All eligible participants will be required to take a COVID -19 nasal swab test within 48 
hours of their scheduled study visit date, consistent with the Michigan Medicine Operating Room 
Covid Testing Policy. The study team will place the order and will provide a list of MLAB locations where this test can be performed.  This screening test will be paid for by the study.  A negative 
COVID -19 test must be resulted prior to their scheduled study visit date.  Participants will again 
be screened for COVID- 19 prior to entry into the hospital per hospital guidelines.  A standard face 
mask will be provided upon hospital entry if participants do not have one.  
All participants will give written informed consent according to institutional guidelines prior to any 
testing. The Principal Investigators or their designee will obtain consent using a written consent 
form approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the University of Michigan Medical School  
(IRBMED ). It will contain detailed information regarding the purpose, risks and benefits of 
participating. Copies of the signed consent form will be given to the subject s; the original consent 
will remain with the study team.  Subject s will be compensated for their involvement.   
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Volunteers are screened using a medical history and demographics questionnaire.  
Inclusion Criteria . The subject population will consist of healthy study subject s with ASA -1 
status . The participants’ health status wil l be assessed by the attending anesthesiologist prior to 
inclusion in the study.  The participants will be  right-handed adults between the ages of 18 and 40  
with a body mass index (BMI) less than 30. All subject s will be English speakers.  
Exclusion Criteria.  Participants will be excluded if they have any medical contraindication to MRI 
scanning; are unable to undergo MRI scanning because of possible pregnancy  or currently 
breastfeeding, BMI>30 , metallic substances in the body, claustrophobia, anxiety, or 
cardiopulmonary disease; or have an intracranial structural abnormality on T1- weighted MRI 
scans. Potential subject s will be excluded if they have a history of allergy to propofol, eggs  or egg 
products, soybean or soybean products , neurological, cardiovascular, or pulmonary illness; 
significant head injury with loss of consciousness; learning disability or other developmental 
disorder; sleep apnea or any severe snoring history; gastroesophageal reflux disease (GER D) or 
heartburn; pancreatitis  or a history of pancreatitis , or sensory/motor loss sufficient to interfere with 
performance of the study.  Participants with tattoos in the head or neck region will be excluded 
from study ; other tattoos are subject to determination by investigators based on their assessment 
regarding participant safety. To eliminate aspiration risk s ubject s will also be excluded if they have 
3 
 had recent food or liquid intake (within 8 hours).  Subjects will be excluded if they have a history 
of drug  use, have a  positive drug screen, are unwilling to abstain from alcohol for 24  hours prior 
to dosing, or have a current  history of nicotine use.  Women will be required to take a pregnancy 
test prior to participation to ensure a negative result.  The pre- scan drug screen and pregnancy 
test will be paid for by the study.  
 
Procedures  
Imaging. Noninvasive functional magnetic resonance imaging will be performed in the Philips 3T 
(MR2) Research MRI  (standard 32- channel transmit/receive head coil ) at the University of 
Michigan Health System, University Hospital,  Department of Radiology .  
 1) SPGR high -resolution images.  T1 weighted spoiled gradient recalled echo (SPGR) images 
will be  acquired for high spatial resolution of anatomical images with parameters: 170 sagittal 
slices, 1.0mm thickness (no gap), TR=8.1s, TE=3.7ms, flip angle=8o, FOV=24cm, i mage matrix 
256×256.  
 2) Functional MRI images.  A gradient -echo EPI pulse sequence will be employed to acquire 
functional images over the whole brain with parameters: 28 slices, TR/TE=800/25ms (multiband 
fMRI acquisition), slice thickness=4mm, in- plane resolution=3.4×3.4mm; MB factor=4; field of 
view (FOV)=220mm, flip angle=76°, image matrix: 64×64. Verbal instructions were presented 
through earphones. Eight  fMRI scans  (16-min per scan)  will be  conducted throughout the 
experiment.  The eight scans will include 16-min resting- state and 16 -min music -listening  during 
wakefulness  baseline; 16-min behavioral test during propofol induction; 16-min resting -state and 
16-min music -listening  after loss of behavioral responsiveness;  16-min behavioral test during 
emergence period (after propofol infusion is terminated);  16-min resting -state and 16 -min music -
listening  after recovery of behavioral responsiveness.  There will be a 1-5 minute break in between 
scans . The imaging protocols  and data acquisition will be completed within 2.5 hours scanning 
session for each subject .  
Anesthesia. Sedation will be achieved by target -controlled IV infusion of propofol  (see Appendix 
I below  for detailed plan) . The IV line  will be placed after application of a local anesthetic. Propofol  
will be administered by intravenous infusion. N asal cannula will be used for supplemental O2 and 
CO2 sampling. All anesthesia equipment, supplies , and drugs will be provided by 
anesthesiologist s from the University of Michigan Health System . We will manually control the 
infusion of propofol to achieve target effect -site concentrations of 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0 μg/ml in a 
stepwise fashion. Each target concentrations will be maintained for 4 minutes. In this way, w e will 
be able to  titrate the anesthetic level using those dose increments to reach the point of loss of 
behavioral responsiveness (LOR). In order to minimize head motion -related artifacts, the effect -
site concentration will be maintained at one step above the expected concentration for LOR for 
approximately 32 minutes . For example, if a participant loses responsiveness at 2.5  μg/ml , we 
will maintain 3.0 μg/ml  effect -site concentration during the entire LOR period (Fig. 2). For 
exceptional cases when  participant s retain responsiveness at 3.0 μg/ml  (occurrence rate of ~5.6% 
in our previous studies) , we will increase  target effect -site concentrations to  3.5 μg/ml  (assuring 
LOR in 99.5% population)  and maintain  at maximum of 4.0 μg/ml . After that, the infusion will be  
terminated and the propofol concentration is allowed to gradually decrease. Participants will be 
instructed to perform a behavioral test, taking a rest,  or listen to the music  as described below.  
 
4 
  
Fig. 2. Experimental design for fMRI. Figure shows hypothetical case in which the participant loses responsiveness 
(LOR) at propofol effect -site concentration (ESC) of 2.5 μg/ml.  
fMRI Protocol . During the rest -state period, participants will be asked to lay at res t with eyes 
closed, while trying to stay awake with out think ing of  anything in particular,  and trying not to move . 
During the music presentation period, participants will be asked to listen to the music, keeping 
their eyes closed , try not to move, and  stay awake . Four types of music, including Jazz, Rock, 
Pop and Country, will be presented in a pseudo- randomized order. We will select well-known 
music excerpt and being evaluated by all participants using familiarity and meaningful scales before the experiment. Each piece of music will be edited into 2 -min duration. During the 
behavioral test period, participants will be asked to squeeze an MRI compatible grip dynamometer 
(a rubber ball) for every 10- second periods ( 96 cycles in total ). The beginning of each cycle will 
be cued with the spoken word “squeeze”.  
The verbal instructions will be  programmed using E -Prime 3.0 (Psychology Software Tools, 
Pittsburgh, PA) and delivered via an audiovisual stimulus presentation system designed for an 
MRI environment. The volume of the headphones will be  adjusted for subject comfort  during 
wakefulness. The volume will be increased to 150% after loss of responsiveness. Behavioral responses will be  measured in mmHg of air pressure during squeezing the rubber ball, using 
BIOPAC (https://www.biopac.com) MP160 system with AcqKnowledge software (V5.0). By 
comparing the timing of “ squeeze” instructions (expected motor response) and the actual motor 
response during and after stepwise propofol infusion, the periods during which a subject loses  of 
responsiveness (LOR), and recovery of responsiveness (ROR) will be  determined. The onsets of 
LOR and ROR were defined at the time of first failure to squeeze, and the first success to squeeze, 
respectively.  
All testing will be performed by the attending anesthesiologist s. Spontaneous respiration, end-
tidal CO
2, heart rate, and electrocardiogram will be continuously monitored. Noninvasive arterial 
pressure will be measured with magnetic resonance (MR)- compatible automatic monitor  
(BIOPAC). Post anesthesia care will consist of checking vital signs for 1 hour by the nursing staff. A wheelchair will be provided to assist the participant if needed.  An anesthesiologist will be 
present during the entire duration of the study.  
Primary ou tcome measure:  Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) Response to sensory 
stimuli during sedation (timeframe: baseline to 90 minutes).  
Secondary outcome measure: Squeeze Pressure, defined as measurement of force of 
participants’ hand squeezing on a rubber ba ll in response to instructions (timeframe: baseline to 
90 minutes).  
Data Analysis  

5 
 Image analysis will be conducted using AFNI ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni). 1) The first two frames 
of each fMRI run will be  discarded; 2) Slice timing correction; 3) Rigid head motion 
correction/realignment within and across runs; frame- wise displacement (FD) of head motion will 
be calculated using frame- wise Euclidean Norm (square root of the sum squares) of the six -
dimension motion derivatives. A frame and its each previous frame will be  tagged as zeros (ones, 
otherwise) if the given frame’s derivative value has a Euclidean Norm above FD=0. 5 mm; 4) 
Coregistration with high- resolution anatomical images; 5) Spatial normalization into Talaraich 
stereotactic space; 6) Using AFNI’s function 3dTproject, the time- censored data will be  high- pass 
filtered above 0.008 Hz. At the same time, various undesired components (e.g., physiological 
estimates, motion parameters) will be  removed via linear regression. The undesired components 
include linear and nonlinear drift, time series of head motion and its temporal derivative, binarized 
FD time series (output data included zero values at censored time points), and mean time series 
from the whi te matter and cerebrospinal fluid; 7) Spatial smoothing with 6 mm full -width at half -
maximum isotropic Gaussian kernel; 8) The time -course per voxel of each run will be  normalized 
to zero mean and unit variance, accounting for differences in variance of non- neural origin (e.g., 
distance from head coil).  
The music  evoked activity, will be quantified by inter -subject correlation (inter -SC) of the fMRI 
responses  (7), depends systematically on the music structure coherence. For instance, early 
auditory areas respond reliably to low -level acoustic features of music, whereas frontal areas 
process long- timescale musical structures, on the order of minutes. This analysis provides a 
measure of the reliability of the responses  through the functional hierarchy  by comparing the 
BOLD response time courses across different subjects. T he inter -SC analysis will be performed 
on a voxel -by-voxel basis. First, the Pearson product -moment correlation will be computed 
between a voxel’s fMRI time course in one individual and the average of that voxel’s fMRI time courses in the remaining subjects. Next, the average correlation coefficient will be calculated at  
every voxel. Finally, it will produce an average inter -SC map during music presentation period. 
Statistical significance of inter -SC for each state (i.e. wakefulness  baseline,  LOR period, and ROR 
period)  and the difference between states (e.g. wakefulness  baseline vs.  LOR period) will be 
assessed using a phase -randomization procedure  (forming a null distribution) .   
Intrinsic TRWs  will be calculated from the resting- state data. We will use Mean Frequency (MF) 
of fMRI signal fluctuations to index the TRW length ( 8). Specifically, p ower spectrum will be  
obtained by computing the periodogram of each voxel time series using AFNI program 
3dPeriodogram. Tapering was applied using the Hamming window to reduce bias and error variance for spectral estimation in finite data  (9). The MF of a spectrum will be  calculated as the 
sum of the product of the spectrogram power intensity and the frequency, divided by the total sum of spectrogram power intensity:  
 
where n is the number of frequency bins in the spectrum, Fi is  the frequency of spectrum at bin i 
of n, and Pi is the power intensity of spectrum at bin i of n. Lower MF indicates a shift toward a longer timescale or slower dynamics . 
Anticipated Results  and Implications  
We expect to find a spatial hierarchy with reliable responses (inter -SC) to  music starting in the 
primary auditory cortex and adjacent areas of auditory cortex (A1+), processing along the superior 
temporal sulcus (STS) and further up to the middle and inferior frontal gyrus during conscious 
wakefulness. We anticipate that during LOR, inter -SC in especially the frontal areas, which 
process long- timescale musical structures, will be reduced.  We also expect to observe that , during 

6 
 LOR,  the intrinsic timescales  derived from the resting- state  are overall prolonged, and the intrinsic 
functional gradient of hierarchy is also shrunk . The degree of the intrinsic TRW prolongation and 
the degree of the functional gradient shrinkage may show a negative correlation with the spatial 
extension of  inter-SC during sedation.  
Together, the  results  should advance our understanding of how the brain processes information 
at increasing levels of abstraction along the functional hierarchy , and how this information 
processing may be altered during sedation. The information gained should add further insight into 
the neural mechanisms for temporal integration in the brain supporting conscious experience of 
complex stimuli and their degradation under sedation.  
Power Analysis  
For an fMRI study of cognitive function, Desmond and Glover ( 10) reported that about 25 subjects 
are necessary to achieve 80% power for a 0.5% increase of activity. We also conducted power 
analysis based on our previous study with graded sedation of propofol  (11). The average Cohen’s 
d as a measure of the effect size was 0.56. For 80% power and alpha=0.05, N=24 human subjects 
will be needed. The obtained subject number is also very close to the suggested optimal group 
size for reliable statistics in functional MRI studies  (12). To account for possible failure or attrition, 
we plan for 30  as the maximum number of subjects.  
Biological Variables  
We will recruit participants of both sexes with various ethnic/racial backgrounds, aiming for 
diversity and equal representation. The age range will be limited to 18- 40 years in order to limit 
age-dependent variation in anesthetic requirement for sedation and for participant safety.  
Potential R isks 
There are no known risks associated with magnetic resonance imaging, as long as technical 
parameters remain within FDA guidelines.  A licensed MR technologist is instructed in these 
guidelines and performs all machine manipulations.  Complete histories, physical examinations 
and stringent medical guidelines exclude many potential subjects before they enter the study, 
thereby further minimizing risks.  A crash cart is always present and regular safety drills are 
performed by the medical and experimental staff to prepare for any untoward effects.  
Risks related to MRI scanning:  
MRI Static Magnetic Fields : FDA guidelines for clinical product scanners limit  the main magnetic 
field to 3 Tesla.  Our studies will be performed on a standard, clinical 3 T Phi lips scanner.  A 
substantial body of literature exits that supports the safety of field strengths up to 7 T.  There are 
no known risks of exposure to 3 or 7 T fields for MR imaging.  
Among the reported biological effects of exposure to strong static magnetic fields are the following:  1) Dizziness (with nausea) or stimulation of the sensory nerves in the soft palate has 
been reported as a result of the subject’s head being moved while in the magnet.  2) Rapid eye 
movement has been reported (at 4 and 7 T) to cause magnetophosphene effects.  First described 
in 1896, these flickering light sensations are similar to visual phenomena caused by direct electric 
current passage across the head or retina.  
Radiofrequency (rf) Magnetic Fields : Radiofrequency energy burns are the result of high electric 
fluxes in the immediate vicinity of the patient.  All MRI systems create some rf electric fields 
incidental to the production of the intended rf magnetic fields.  The potential causes are 
malfunctions in the rf coil switching circuitry, improper use of the surface coils, design flaws in 
some clinical MRI system surface coils or cardiac gating patient connection leads.  Nationally, 60 
burn incidents have been reported to the FDA in the course of approximately 11 million exams.  
Our site has never experienced any difficulty in this regard. 
7 
 Acoustic Noise : The sound generated by an MR system usually consists of a series of repetitive 
pulses. The relevant safety parameters required to characterize such a noise are the peak 
impulse sound pressure level (L peak) and the time integral of the A- weighted sound pressure level 
(Leq). In MR applications, the peak impulse sound pressure level is dependent upon the peak 
amplitude of the individual pulses, while the time integral of the A -weighted sound pressure level 
is dependent upon the continuous exposure to a series of such pulses.  Acoustic noise is a result 
of the mechanical vibration produced by t he gradient coils when the nominally large currents are 
applied to them to create time varying imaging gradient fields.  The sound produced can be loud 
enough to produce temporary deafness (up to 95 dB).  Foam earplugs will attenuate this noise by 
up to 30 dB.  They are in routine use at the 3T systems, and have been proven effective. 
Claustrophobia: While inside the magnet, subjects may experience an acute panic attack due to 
claustrophobia.  Subjects are all prescreened for fear of tight places . Once inside t he magnet, the 
subject will be given a squeeze ball to signal the MR operator if he or she is under acute distress.  
Risks related to anesthesia:  
Risks  associated with intravenous catheter placement include brief, local discomfort and possible 
bruising, which can occur at the site of the IV line.  There is also a possible (rare) chance of 
infection, but every precaution will be taken to reduce this risk by ke eping the IV site clean and 
dry.  
Risks associated with propofol administration include: infection due to microbial contamination, 
pain at the site of injection, possible allergic reaction to the drug, respiration depression which 
may necessitate placement of an endotracheal tube to assist breathing, and mechanical ventilation, or a decrease in blood pressure which may necessitate giving a drug or IV fluids to 
bring the subject's blood pressure up, and hyperlipidemia. These effects will be minimized by 
employing individualized dosing utilizing the STANPUMP software  (Shafer, 1996) , avoiding large 
bolus doses or rapid increases in drug administration , and careful clinical monitoring during drug 
administration. These effects disappear when propofol is discontinued. 
Justification for the risks involved  
Although the risk of this study is m inor increase over minimal,  the importance to mankind of the 
potential knowledge gains is substantial, making the risk/benefit ratio very low.  We combine the 
state -of-the-art brain imaging facility currently in place in the University of Michigan Health System  
with the experience of the imaging staff and clinic anesthesiologists in the Department of 
Anesthesiology.  These experiments will provide a unique opportunity to understand the 
neurophysiological mechanisms of anesthesia modulation of human consciousness. Therefore, 
we will provide a unique opportunity to expand our knowledge of anesthesia- modulated human 
consciousness.  
Procedures for minimizing risks  
All research subjects will go through a screening process for inclusion and exclusion criteria 
performed by licensed physician.  A licensed physician will be present at all MRI scanning 
sessions to monitor the subjects.  When subjects express or exhibit  anxiety regarding the scanner 
setting, they will be allowed to discuss these feelings. Attempts will be made to minimize the discomfort and anxiety.  When in the scanner, subjects will be provided with a squeeze- ball alarm 
that will alert the scanner technician and the researcher that the subject desires to come out of 
the scanner.  In such instances, the subject will immediately be removed from the scanner and 
appropriate measures will be taken to ensure his or her psychological health. Earplugs, demonstrated to reduce scanner noise to a non- damaging level, will be used to minimize hearing 
risks.  
8 
 In addition, any other health problem that would be aggravated by an MRI scan will also be a 
cause for terminating the subject’s participation.  In the event of serious cardiac -respiratory 
problems or other medical emergencies, the hospital code team will be activated.  Other medical 
problems will be treated by the monitoring physician.  Any medical problems that arise after 
release, although unlikely, will be treated by a physician from the research team.  All subjects will 
have to arrange transportation after the study, and agree to not drive, work, operate machinery , 
or make legal decisions  for 24 hours after the study. Subjects will be informed of their right to 
withdraw from the study at any time.  
A protocol has been established to handle unexpected medical emergencies arising in the 
scanner suite.  This protocol deals with medical issues and the duties of each team member.  This 
includes stopping the scanner, removing the patient and calling for outside medical assistance.  
All members of the research team participate in periodic emergency protocol drills in the scanner suite and a copy of the written protocol and protocol termination guidelines are present at all 
times.  Subjects requiring intervention for any neurological or cardiovascular adverse event will be 
transferred to the Emergency Department for further evaluation and treatment as seen fit by the attending physician.  More serious cardiac events such as ventricular tachycardia, ventricular 
fibrillation or any unstable rhythm will be immediately treated according to current Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support  (ACLS) protocols. Research team physicians have immediate 
access to valium, diphenhydramine, epinephrine, lidocaine, and NTG for emergency use, in 
addition to a fully supplied and operational “crash cart” with EKG, defibrillator, suction, oxygen, 
and airway management equipment.  
Confidentiality  
Strict subject confidentiality will be maintained.  Subjects will be assigned a code number following 
their first contact in the protocol.  This number will be used throughout the experiment and will be 
the only identifier on behavioral and physiological archival data, and magnetic resonance (MR) scans. The identity of subjects will not be revealed at scientific meetings, in publications or other 
vehicles of public communication.  Data will be pooled across subjects where appropriate.  Only 
the PIs, Co -investigators, and the study coordinator  will have access to the ID code, which will be 
stored in a locked file separate from the data.  
Any behavioral data collected on the subjects will be coded by study ID numbers and entered 
directly into notebook computers used in the field.  These computers are password protected and 
stored behind a locked door when not in use.  Clinical and biographic data are entered into the 
database using the ID number only.  Only select staff members have access to the actual  paper 
copies.  Medical information will be released by name only to health care providers, and then only 
with written permission from the subject.   
References  
1.  U. Hasson, E. Yang, I. Vallines, D. J. Heeger, N. Rubin, A hierarchy of temporal receptive windows in human cortex. J. Neurosci.  28, 2539– 50 (2008).  
2.  C. J. Honey, T. Thesen, T. H. Donner, L. J. Silbert, C. E. Carlson, O. Devinsky, W. K. 
Doyle, N. Rubin,  D. J. Heeger, U. Hasson, Slow cortical dynamics and the accumulation 
of information over long timescales. Neuron. 76, 423 –434 (2012).  
3.  Y. Lerner, C. J. Honey, L. J. Silbert, U. Hasson, Topographic mapping of a hierarchy of 
temporal receptive windows using a narrated story. J. Neurosci. 31, 2906– 15 (2011).  
4.  J. D. Murray, A. Bernacchia, D. J. Freedman, R. Romo, J. D. Wallis, X. Cai, C. Padoa-Schioppa, T. Pasternak, H. Seo, D. Lee, X. -J. Wang, A hierarchy of intrinsic timescales 
across primate cortex. Nat. Neurosci.  17, 1661–3 (2014).  
9 
 5.  G. J. Stephens, C. J. Honey, U. Hasson, A place for time: the spatiotemporal structure of 
neural dynamics during natural audition. J. Neurophysiol.  110, 2019–26 (2013).  
6.  R. Chaudhuri, K. Knoblauch, M. A. Gariel, H. Kennedy, X. J. Wang, A large- scale circuit 
mechanism for hierarchical dynamical processing in the primate cortex. Neuron. 88, 419 –
431 (2015).  
7.  M. M. Farbood, D. J. Heeger, G. Marcus, U. Hasson, Y. Lerner, The neural processing of hierarchical structure in music and speech at different timescales. Front. Neurosci.  9, 157 
(2015).  
8.  Z. Huang, X. Liu, G. A. Mashour, A. G. Hudetz, Intrinsic neural timescales and functional 
connectivity in pharmacologic and neuropathologic states of unconsciousness. J. 
Neuros ci. (2017).  
9.  B. Babadi, E. N. Brown, A Review of Multitaper Spectral Analysis. IEEE Trans. Biomed. 
Eng. 61, 1555– 1564 (2014).  
10.  J. E. Desmond, G. H. Glover, Estimating sample size in functional MRI (fMRI) neuroimaging studies: Statistical power analy ses. J. Neurosci. Methods . 118, 115– 128 
(2002).  
11.  X. Liu, K. K. Lauer, B. D. Ward, S. M. Rao, S. J. Li, A. G. Hudetz, Propofol disrupts 
functional interactions between sensory and high- order processing of auditory verbal 
memory. Hum. Brain Mapp.  33, 2487– 2498 (2012).  
12.  B. Thirion, P. Pinel, S. Mériaux,  A. Roche, S. Dehaene, J. B. Poline, Analysis of a large 
fMRI cohort: Statistical and methodological issues for group analyses. Neuroimage. 35, 
105– 120 (2007).  
 
 
10 
  
Appendix I. Sedation Protocol  
 Anesthesia. Sedation will be achieved by target- controlled IV bolus+constant rate infusion of 
propofol (see similar protocol in Huang et al., 2018, 2020). The IV line will be placed after 
application of a local anesthetic. All anesthesia equipment, supplies, and drugs will be provided by anesthesiologists from the University of Michigan Health System. Propofol is provided as a 
ready -to-use formulation  with a concentration of 10mg/ml . However, should dilution be necessary, 
it will be diluted with 5% Dextrose Injection, USP, and will not be diluted to a concentration less 
than 2 mg/mL because it is an emulsion. Vials will not be accessed more than once, or used on more than one subject.  
We will manually control the infusion of propofol to achieve target effect -site concentrations of 
1.5, 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0  μg/ml in a stepwise fashion (no other drugs will be administered). The target 
concentrations are based on our previous study (Huang et al., 2018, 2020). The bolus dose, 
infusion rate and infusion duration for each target concentration and for each participant will be 
pre-determined based on a pharmacokinetic model (Marsh et al., 1991) developed for target -
controlled propofol infusion and implemented in software (STANPUMP; Shafer, 1996). The dosing (bolus+infusion) will be incremented at every 4 minutes until the final target is reached. The incremental dosing will be used to titrate the anesthetic level to the point of loss of behavioral 
responsiveness (LOR); that is, a clinical end point. In order to minimize head motion- related 
artifacts, the final effect -site concentration in each participant will be one step above that produces 
LOR and will be maintained at this level for approximately 32 minutes. For example, if a participant 
shows LOR at 2.5  μg/ml target concentration, we will use as final target 3.0 μg/ml. Fig. 2 illustrates 
the propofol dosing for this case, as an example. Note that bolus and infusion rate is given in 
mcg/kg (ug/kg) and mcg/kg/min  (ug/kg/min) , respectively.  
The table below provides the pre -calculated propofol dosing for a female participant (age, 21yrs; 
height, 170cm; weight, 70kg).   
 Target Site 
Conc. (μg/ml)Time (min)Bolus Dose 
(µg/kg)Bolus (mg)Pump Off After 
Bolus (min)Time Infusion 
Start (min)Infusion Rate 
(µg/kg/min)
1.2 0 420 29 1:40 1:40 69.7
1.6 4 201 14 1:00 5:00 87.8
2.0 8 213 15 1:00 9:00 105.3
2.4 12 224 16 0:50 12:50 122.0
2.4 16 - - - 16:00 104.7
2.4 48 Pump Stop
11 
  
For each effect -site target concentration (Column 1) propofol bolus is given at  4-minute intervals 
(Time, Column 2) followed by a wait period for equilibration (Pump Off, Column 5) after which 
constant -rate infusion starts (Time Infusion Start, Column 6) at pre- determined infusion rate 
(Infusion Rate, Column 7). At the final target ( 3.0 μg/ml), a second infusion is initiated at 16 
minutes (Column 6) at an infusion rate of 128.2 µg/kg/min in order to maintain the effect -site 
concentration of 3.0 μg/ml. At 48 minutes, the infusion is terminated (Pump Stop) and the propofol 
concentration is allowed to gradually decrease. 
Participants will be instructed to perform a behavioral test, tak e a rest, or listen to the music as 
described above . 
 
References  
Shafer S (1996) STANPUMP User’s Manual. Stanford University, Stanford, CA: Source. 
http://opentci.org/code/stanpump . 
Marsh B, White M, Morton N, Kenny GN (1991) Pharmacokinetic model driven infusion of propofol in children. Br J Anaesth 67:41– 48. 
Huang Z, Vlisides PE, Tarnal VC, Janke EL, Keefe KM, Collins MM, McKinney AM, Picton P, Harris RE, Mashour GA, Hudetz AG (2018) Brain imaging reveals covert consciousness during behavioral unresponsiveness induced by propofol. Sci Rep 8(1): 13195. 
PM30181567/PMC6123455 
Huang Z, Zhang J, Wu J, Mashour GA, Hudetz AG (2020) Temporal circuit of macroscale dynamic 
brain activity supports human consciousness. Sci Adv 6(11): eaaz0087. 
PM32195349/PMC7065875 
 Target Site 
Conc. (μg/ml)Time (min)Bolus Dose 
(µg/kg)Bolus (mg)Pump Off After 
Bolus (min)Time Infusion 
Start (min)Infusion Rate 
(µg/kg/min)
1.5 0 525 37 1:40 1:40 87.0
2.0 4 265 19 1:00 5:00 110.1
2.5 8 282 20 1:00 9:00 131.7
3.0 12 301 21 0:50 12:50 152.5
3.0 16 - - - 16:00 128.2
3.0 48 Pump Stop