 Human Studies Committee  
Tel: 617 -573-3732  
Email: HSC@meei.harvard.edu  
 
HUMAN SUBJECT RESEARCH PROTOCOL -FORM I  
NOTE: For the purpose of this Form, Mass. Eye and Ear (MEE) include the Massachusetts Eye and Ear 
Infirmary (MEEI), and Schepens Eye Research Institute, Inc. (SERI). MEEI is a HIPAA -covered entity; SERI 
is not consi dered a covered entity.
DATE: 10/06/14  
TITLE OF PROJECT: Prophylactic antibiotics after functional endoscopic sinus surgery: a randomized, 
double -blind placebo controlled trial  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Eric Holbrook  
FUNDING SOURCE: Dr. Ho lbrook / Dr. Gray  
 
1)   Does your research involve the following? Check all that apply:  
 
 Use of investigational drugs or biologics   
 Use of investigational devices  
 Use of human embryonic stem cells   
 Use of rDNA, microbiological agents, gene transfer, transplantation of animal tissues    
 
 2)  Is this study a Clinical Trial ?   YES        NO       
  
IF YES,  submission of an industry -sponsored protocol or SUPP M is required. If no, SUPP N should be 
submitted.  
 
2b)  Who will register the study with clinicaltrials.gov ?  
   This is a Phase I or a pilot study -registration is not required     Sponsor      PI     
other:Already registered -  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]                                   
 
3)  Provide a brief summary of the  proposed research (in language that can be understood by a non -
 scientist):   
RESPONSE: Functional e ndoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) is a commonly performed procedure in the United 
States to treat chronic rhinosinusitis.  Common practice is to prescribe pro phylactic antibiotics postoperatively.  
This is similar to the long tradition of prophylactic antibiotics after tonsillectomy.  The American Academy of 
Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery recently strongly recommended against prophylactic antibiotics af ter 
tonsillectomy.  In this light, this study would demonstrate the lack of need for antibiotics after FESS.  Currently 
Dr. Holbrook does not prescribe antibiotics except when evidence of active infection was found during surgery.  
Dr. Gray currently presc ribes antibiotics.  This study would prospectively compare the two groups in a 
randomized fashion.  Two previous studies have been performed (Jiang et al. Postoperative antibiotic care after 
functional endoscopic sinus surgery. Am J Rhinol 22, 608 -612, 200 8); (Albu, et al.  Prophylactic antibiotics in 
endoscopic sinus surgery: A short follow -up study. Am J Rhinol 24 306 -309, 2010.)  These studies were both 
randomized, placebo controlled prospective studies.  Albu et al found that amoxicillin/clavulanate imp roved the 
outcome in the "early blood crust healing" and the endoscopic score was improved.  Jiang et al. showed that 
amoxicillin/clavulanate did not not improve short term outcomes of FESS.  Both studies were limited by a lack 
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  2 of a prospective instrument to evaluate symptoms.  We plan to use the Sinonasal outcomes test -22 (SNOT -22), 
which is a validated quality of life intrument in sinusitis.    
4)  What is the estimated completion date? (MM/YYYY)  
RESPONSE: 06/2015  
5)   Who specifically (name, title, and department) is going to perform the coordinator function? Discuss 
 his/her relevant qualifications (training, education, experience):  
The PI, Dr. Holbrook, has assumed coordinator function .  He has had experience and training through the 
Harvard Catalyst education offerings in clinical studies.  
6a)  Who is going to supervise the study coordinator(s)? When applicable, indicate if support and oversight 
 will be provided by the Ophthalmology Clinical Research Office (OCRO).  
6b)  Describe the PI’s plan to prov ide adequate training, and supervision (e.g., regular meetings, training 
 opportunities):  
Dr. Holbrook will be supervising all aspects of the study and meets regularly (weekly) with Dr. Gray on matters 
of enrollment, patient compliance, and monitoring of adverse events.   
7)  Delegation of Significant Study -Related Tasks -  If non -physicians are tasked to assess clinical response 
 to an investigational therapy, provide medical care to subjects during the course of the study, assess 
 inclusion/exclusion crite ria, and evaluate adverse events, list their names in the table below and 
 complete:  
Name  Delegated  Tasks  Qualifications - Licensing, or 
Certification  Training  
Dr. Holbrook / Dr. Gray  Enrollment, follow -up, 
evaluation for adverse 
reactions, data collect ion MD Residency and fellowship 
training in otolaryngology 
and rhinology  
Pharmacy staff 
(supervised by Dr. 
Christine Finn)  Distribution of study drug  Pharm D  Doctorate in pharmacy  
    
    
 
8)  Indicate all MEE sites where research activities occur:  
 
 Boston -MEEI 243 Charles Street      
 Boston Longwood Medical Area – 800 Huntington Ave  
 Boston -SERI 20 Staniford St.   
 Braintree - 250 Pond St   
 Concord - 54 Baker Ave Ext 
 Duxbury - 20 Tremont St, Route 3A   
 East Bridgewater - 400 N. Bedford St  
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  3  Milton - 100 Highland St.   . 
 Newton - 2000 Washington St   
 Quincy - 500 Congress St, Crown Colony Office Park  
 Stoneham - One Montvale Ave  
 Stoneham - Retina Consultants -3 Woodland Rd    
 Weymouth - 825 Main St              
9)   Are there any non -MEE sites involved in this study?     YES       NO (If NO, skip to question 11)  
__________________________________________________________________________________________  
 
IF YES, Is MEE the lead site or coordinating center?     YES        NO  
 
10)  In the table below, list each non -MEE sites where research activities will occur, and the status of IRB 
 review at each site (indicate if the intent is for MEE to serve as the IRB of record for all study sites (cede 
 review) or if IRB review wi ll be required at other sites:  
 
Non-MEE Sites  IRB Review Status (i.e., review pending, approved, seeking cede 
review)  
  
  
  
SUBJECT INFORMATION
11)  In the table below, please indicate age range, gender, total number of subjects to be enrolled at MEE,  
 and if multi -site, total number for the study:  
 
 Age Range  Total Number at MEE  Total Number for the Study  
(if multi -site) 
Adults (over 18)  18- no limit  140 140 
Children  
(under 18)  NA 0  
 
12)  Is a gender being excluded from this study?       YES       NO  
 
IF YES , provide scientific justification:  
Response:       
13)  Select all populations that may/will be enrolled (will not be excluded from the study) below. For some 
 populations you may be asked t o provide additional information.   
  Pregnant Women  
  Employees/Staff of MEEI or SERI -please specify:       
  Healthy Controls  
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  4   Students/ Residents/ Fellows or other train ees  
  Children  
  Prisoner  
  Non-English Speaking Subjects  
  Adults with Decisional Impairment - If checked, please describe below the type and range of decisional 
impairment and a ration ale for why it is necessary to include adults with decisional impairment:  
  Other Populations with Potentially Diminished Capacity (i.e., socially, educationally, economically 
disadvantaged, elderly, terminally ill) - If checked, specify population below and describe what 
additional safeguards will be in place to protect the rights and welfare of these subjects:  
RESPONSE: We have enrolled approximately 25 patients so far.  We would prefer to enroll non -english 
speaking patients.  We are aw are of the new IRB protocol regarding non English speaking patients’ consent.  
We would like to apply for the “short -form” consent process in order to continue to enroll non -English speaking 
patients. 
14)  Explain how the Investigator has access to a popu lation that would allow recruitment of the required 
 number of subjects within the proposed timeframe:  
RESPONSE: Dr. Holbrook and Dr. Gray both have busy rhinology practices from which to enroll patients.   
15)  If subjects are recruited from the investiga tor’s patient population or MEE/SERI employees will be 
 recruited, describe what measures are taken to minimize coercion or undue influence:  
 
RESPONSE: The investigators discuss with the patient the voluntary nature of the study, and the fact that the 
subjects can withdraw at any time from the study.  Also it is discussed with the patient that by not enrolling they 
will not affect their clinical care at all.   
 
SUBJECT SCREENING/RECRUITMENT
16)  Describe any screening methods used to determine eligible subj ects (i.e., search of medical records or 
 recruitment databases, completion of screening tests, response to interview questions, etc.):  
RESPONSE: Patients will be recruited by Dr. Gray and Dr. Holbrook in their clinics from patients that are 
determined to be candidates for endoscopic sinus surgery and have agreed to undergo surgery.  The patient will 
decide to undergo surgery first, and will then be asked to participate in the study.  A script to be used for oral 
invitation in the study is provided in the a pplication packet.  
 
17)  Is protected health information  accessed during the screening process?     YES     NO 
 
IF YES , specify the information system(s) and the location of the database(s) you will be accessing during the 
screening process:  
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  5 RESPONSE: LMR is accessed for patients’ clinical information.  This is accessed in the MEEI sinus center.   
18)  Is protected health information  recorded during the pre -screening process?   YES     NO  
 
IF YES,  list the identifiers that are recorded prior to obtaining consent:  
RESPONSE:       
19)  Describe the recruitment process (the process by which potential subjects are informed about the 
 availability of the research), who is responsible for recruitment, and how (i.e., use of flyers, 
 advertisements, letters, and oral scripts, etc.)  and when subjects will be recruited:  
 
RESPONSE: Patients will be recruited by Dr. Gray and Dr. Holbrook in their clinics from patients that are 
determined to be candidates for endoscopic sinus surgery and have agreed to undergo surgery.  The patient will 
decide to undergo surgery first, and will then be asked to participate in the study.  A script to be used for oral 
invitation in the study is provided in the application packet.  
 
20)  Does the recruitment strategy involve contacting individuals multiple ti mes?    YES     NO  
 
IF YES,  describe the frequency and in what manner individuals will be contacted:  
 
RESPONSE:       
 
21)  Are you using email to recruit subjects?      YES        NO  
 
IF YES,  describe the use of email and include a copy of the email text below:  
 
RESPONSE:       
22)  Will fliers, letters and/or brochures be posted, mailed or otherwise distributed?     YES         NO 
  
IF YES,  please describe how each document will be used:  
 
RESPONSE:       
NOTE: HIPAA does not permit non -MEE physicians to disclose patient information to Mass. Eye and Ear for research 
recruitment purposes other than for treatment  purposes or pursuant to a HIPAA authorization.  Non -MEE physicians may 
inform their patients of a research study and allow the patients to self -disclose their interest to the study team.  
23)  Describe whether physician referral is used and whether subject s healthcare providers be notified of 
 their patients’ participation in the study?  
 
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  6 RESPONSE: Dr. Gray and Holbrook are rhinology specialists.  They are referred patients from community 
otolaryngologists for management of chronic sinusitis.  This involves  medical as well as surgical management.  
Referring otolaryngologists would not be notified of patient participation.    
COMPENSATION/COSTS  
24)  Will subjects be paid/offered a recruitment incentive or reimbursed for participating in the research?    
   YES    NO  
 
IF YES,  please describe the amount and type of payment or reimbursement (e.g. parking vouchers) and the 
proposed method and timing of disbursement and why this is reasonable and non -coercive:  
 
RESPONSE:       
 
25)  Will there be any out -of-pocket costs to subjects and/or expenses likely to be covered by their insurance 
 for participating in the study?    YES    NO  
 
IF YES , please specify in detail the costs to subje cts and/or their insurance (e.g. co -pays):  
 
RESPONSE: The study drug is provided by the pharmacy free of charge.   The study medication supplies are 
charged to the study’s cost center by the pharmacy.    
 
26) If applicable, how will the cost of reasonably fo reseeable medical care in the event of a research -related 
injury be covered (e.g., sponsor agreement, likely to be covered by insurance, grant, departmental 
funds)?  
 
RESPONSE: This would be covered by patients’ insurance.   
 
RISK
 
Risk is the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated as a result of participation in the 
research. Any risks of harm to subjects and/or anticipated discomfort(s) that are reasonably foreseeable, even if 
unlikely, and the safeguards in place to minimize these ri sks and discomfort(s) must be identified and discussed 
below. Risks of harm and discomfort may include: physical harm/discomfort, psychological harm/discomfort, 
legal harm/discomfort, social harm discomfort, and economic harm.  
 
27)  Describe any risks of h arm to subjects that are reasonably foreseeable, even if unlikely:  
These are listed below:  
1. amoxicillin/clavulanate arm:  
From the FDA monograph  
Gastrointestinal  
 
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  7 Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, indigestion, gastritis, stomatitis, glossitis, black “hairy” t ongue, mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, enterocolitis, and hemorrhagic/pseudomembranous colitis. Onset of pseudomembranous colitis 
symptoms may occur during or after antibiotic treatment  
 
Hypersensitivity Reactions  
Skin rashes, pruritus, urticaria, angioedema, s erum sickness−like reactions (urticaria or skin rash accompanied 
by arthritis, arthralgia, myalgia, and frequently fever), erythema multiforme (rarely Stevens -Johnson syndrome), 
acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, and an occasional case of exfoliat ive dermatitis (including toxic 
epidermal necrolysis) have been reported. These reactions may be controlled with antihistamines and, if 
necessary, systemic corticosteroids. Whenever such reactions occur, the drug should be discontinued, unless the 
opinion of the physician dictates otherwise. Serious and occasional fatal hypersensitivity (anaphylactic) 
reactions can occur with oral penicillin.  
 
Liver  
A moderate rise in AST (SGOT) and/or ALT (SGPT) has been noted in patients treated with ampicillin -class 
antibiotics but the significance of these findings is unknown. Hepatic dysfunction, including increases in serum 
transaminases (AST and/or ALT), serum bilirubin, and/or alkaline phosphatase, has been infrequently reported 
with Augmentin. It has been reported more commonly in the elderly, in males, or in patients on prolonged 
treatment. The histologic findings on liver biopsy have consisted of predominantly cholestatic, hepatocellular, 
or mixed cholestatic -hepatocellular changes. The onset of signs/symptoms of hepatic dysfunction may occur 
during or several weeks after therapy has been discontinued. The hepatic dysfunction, which may be severe, is 
usually reversible. On rare occasions, deaths have been reported (less than 1 death reported per estimated 4 
million  prescriptions worldwide). These have generally been cases associated with serious underlying diseases 
or concomitant medications.  
 
Renal  
Interstitial nephritis and hematuria have been reported rarely. Crystalluria has also been reported  
 
Hemic and Lymph atic Systems  
Anemia, including hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopenic purpura, eosinophilia, leukopenia, 
and agranulocytosis have been reported during therapy with penicillins. These reactions are usually reversible 
on discontinuation of ther apy and are believed to be hypersensitivity phenomena. A slight thrombocytosis was 
noted in less than 1% of the patients treated with Augmentin. There have been reports of increased prothrombin 
time in patients receiving Augmentin and anticoagulant therapy  concomitantly.  
  
Central Nervous System  
Agitation, anxiety, behavioral changes, confusion, convulsions, dizziness, insomnia, and reversible 
hyperactivity have been reported rarely.  
 
Miscellaneous  
Tooth discoloration (brown, yellow, or gray staining) has been rarely reported. Most reports occurred in 
pediatric patients. Discoloration was reduced or eliminated with brushing or dental cleaning in most cases.  
 
2. Placebo Arm:  
The main theoretical risk from not giving antibiotics post operatively would be  a risk of postoperative 
infection.  This would manifest as sinusitis -like symptoms.  Worst case scenario would result in complications 
of sinusitis (orbital infection, meningitis, brain abscess).  These complications are rare, and Dr. Holbrook has 
not experi enced them while not giving routine postoperative antibiotics as is his usual practice.  
 
3. Privacy:  
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  8 Personal data will be collected from subjects.  The data will be saved under a unique subject number , which w ill 
remove personal identifying information fr om the research data.  Data w ill be secured under a password 
protected computer in a locked office of the PI.  
 
 
28)  If applicable, describe any group harms (i.e., research that focuses on a specific group or population):   
 
RESPONSE: NA  
 
29)  Do you anti cipate any circumstances in which a “breach of confidence” associated with a mandated 
disclosure (e.g. reporting abuse to authorities) may occur as part of this study?  
 
RESPONSE: No we do not anticipate a breach of confidence  
 
30)  In the view of the PI, w hat risk classification (taking into consideration the probability and magnitude of 
 harm) is appropriate for the proposed research?  
 
       Minimal Risk     Greater than Minimal Risk     Unknown  
 
Minimal  risk means the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not 
greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine 
physical or psychological examinations or tests.  
 
31)  Please explain why you feel this category is appropriate based on the definition above (when more than 
 minimal risk describe the likelihood and seriousness of such risks):  
 
RESPONSE: In patients that are randomized to receive post operative a ntibiotics, there is a risk of adverse 
reaction to augmentin as detailed above.  For patients that are randomized to placebo, there is a risk of post 
operative infection as detailed above as well.   We believe the study is low risk to participants, however  as 
defined above, it is more than the risk encountered in daily life.    
 
32)  What provisions are in place to minimize harm or discomfort?  
 
RESPONSE: Patients are seen one week after surgery to undergo endoscopic evaluation to  ensure that the 
patient is healing well without evidence of infection.  At all times during the day they can call the sinus center 
to speak to a nurse if they have any concerns.  At night there is a resident on call to answer questions and the 
MEEI ED is always open.   
 
ALTERNATIVES   
 
33)  Describe any alternatives, especially other treatment(s) that are available to potential patients outside of 
the research:  
 
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  9 RESPONSE: If patients do not elect to enroll in the study, t hey would receive standard post -operative care.  
They would be prescribed antibiotics at the discretion of the surgeon.   
 
BENEFITS
 
34)  Are there any potential direct benefits to individual subjects related to the research?    
   YES     NO    
 
IF YES , please explain (address whethe r these benefits (e.g., clinical, therapeutic) would be available to 
subjects outside of the research):  
 
RESPONSE:       
 
35)  Explain the potential benefits to science, and/or society (indirect benefits) which may accrue as a result 
 of this  research:  
 
RESPONSE: Antibiotic resistance is growing in the world, and this study may provide prospective, randomized 
data that antibiotics do not result in a benefit to patients.  Hopefully surgeons would stop giving postoperative 
antibiotics, and decre ase the risk of side -effects from antibiotics (allergic reactions, clostridium dificile 
infection, GI upset, etc) to future patients.  Also health care costs would be decreased by reducing antibiotic 
prescriptions.    
 
36)  If more than minimal risk, addre ss how risks relate to benefits:  
 
RESPONSE: While not “minimal risk”, the risk to patients is low, as detailed above.  Many patients have 
adverse reactions to antibiotics, and if this study shows that the outcomes of patients undergoing sinus surgery 
without antibiotics are not worse, then hopefully less patients will be prescribed antibiotics.   
 
CONSENT PROCESS  
 
37)  Describe the consent process in detail. Include who specifically will be obtaining consent, describe their 
knowledge/experience in obtaini ng consent from research subjects, and include the location where study 
information will be exchanged, how (consent form, orally, information sheet, etc.) information is being 
conveyed to subjects, and when the consent will be obtained (e.g. during pre -surgical visit, about one 
week before the screening visit):  
 
RESPONSE: Consent will be obtained by Dr. Gray, Dr. Meier or Dr. Holbrook in the clinic during the subject's 
preoperative visit in the MEEI sinus center.  There is a formal consent form that is sign ed by patients and an 
oral script (these are on IRBNET).  Subjects can think about the study and opt out of randomization at the time 
of surgery (usually 2 -4 weeks elapse between preoperative visit and surgery).   
38)  Indicate which of the following conse nt procedures you are contemplating for this research:  
 
   Written consent form  
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  10  
     Short form  process (only appropriate for minimal risk studies)  
   * If checked, answer question 42 below.  
 
    Assent from adults with diminished decision -making capacity  
   *If checked, provide justification below:  
 
              Assent from children and parental permission  
 
   Oral consent or implied consent (e.g. completing a survey)  
  *If checked, provide justification based on 45 CFR 46.117(c)  below:  
 
   Requesting a waiver of informed consent from the HSC    
  *If checked, provid e justification based on 45 CFR 46.116(c) and (d)  below:  
 
RESPONSE:       
 
39)  Describe any foreseeable circumstances and/or reasons under which the subj ect’s participation in the 
 research may be terminated:  
 
RESPONSE: If the patient does not want to participate further then they may opt out at any time during the 
study.   
 
40)  How is subject comprehension assessed initially and throughout the consent p rocess? Is the manner in 
 which information is presented appropriate for the population? In cases where subject comprehension is 
 severely limited what special provisions have been made (is there a third party involved in the consent 
 process)? Discuss bel ow:  
 
RESPONSE: The investigators will describe the study according to the oral script and ask the patient if they 
understand everything that has been explained to them.  We will ask them if they have any questions and 
answer them to their satisfaction.  I f the patients’ comprehension is severely limited then we will not include 
them in the study.    
 
41)  If the research -related intervention or interaction will occur on the same day that the subject initially 
 receives information about the study, justify why this is appropriate/necessary:  
 
RESPONSE:  It will not be on the same day, patients will be enrolled at their post operative visit.      
 
42)  Describe additional provisions in place for non -English speaking subjects (view guidance ), including 
 the availability/presence of translators (fluent i n both English and the subject’s spoken language) during 
 the consent process and the translation of consent documents in a language understandable to them 
 (when consent documents are translated all translated versions must be accompanied by an attestatio n 
 from the translator) OR justify why non -English speaking subject are being excluded from the research:  
 
RESPONSE: We would like to apply for use of the short form consent process for patients that do not speak 
English.  We have used translators for pati ents that are not English speakers previously.   
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  11  
43)  How will literacy be assessed? If subjects cannot read the consent form, describe the process for 
 providing information to these subjects (i.e., reading the information aloud) and for documenting 
 consent, including whether or not the short form ( 45 CFR 46.117(b) (2) ) process will be utilized:  
 
RESPONSE: This has not come up in the year of our trial.  We would ask subjects if they understand the 
written consent form.  If they are not literate, then we would use the oral script and document their 
understanding.   
 
44)  For Ophthalmology related studies, describe if the cohort is capable of reading the consent form an d if 
 not, describe exacerbating factors (visual impairment, eyes dilated at the onset of the study, etc.).  In 
 these cases, describe additional measures you will take to ensure comprehension of study -related 
 information to promote informed decision -maki ng by the subject:  
 
RESPONSE: NA  
 
45)  For Otology related studies, describe if the cohort is capable of comfortably hearing the Investigator 
 during the consent process and if not, describe exacerbating factors (hearing aid, cochlear implant, 
 hearing imp aired, etc.).  In these cases, describe additional measures you will take to ensure 
 comprehension of study -related information to promote informed decision - making by the subject:  
 
RESPONSE: NA  
INCIDENTAL FINDINGS  
46)  Is there a possibility of clinicall y significant incidental findings (information relating to previously 
 undiagnosed medical or psychiatric conditions) being discovered during research procedures?  
  YES      NO    
 
IF YES,  please outline the plan for addre ssing incidental findings (i.e., contacting the subject’s primary care 
provider, referral etc.) including if and how subjects will be informed:  
 
RESPONSE:       
 
DISSEMINATION OF RESULTS  
 
47)  Describe any plans to share research results wit h subjects, this may include sharing individual results 
and/or aggregate results and may also serve as an opportunity to follow -up with subjects and thank  
them for participating in the research, particularly in cases where there is no direct benefit to the  subject. 
If there are no plans to share results explain why this is not feasible, appropriate or applicable to this 
research:  
 
RESPONSE: We would plan on disseminating the final publication paper to the subjects with a note of thanks 
when the research is  completed.   
 
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  12 48)  How will results be published, and in what form (i.e., subjects will not be individually identifiable in 
publications):  
 
RESPONSE: Results will be published in an otolaryngology peer -reviewed journal.  There will be no 
identifiable inf ormation in the publication.   
 
PRIVACY/CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
Insofar as they apply, investigators are required to adhere to MEE Information Security Policies and 
Procedures . Therefore, research protocols must be designed in accordance with these requirements.  On 
occasion the HSC may require additional provisions related to the use and security of research data. The HSC 
evaluates the collection and use of data based on the minimum necessary standard, the data necessary to satisfy 
the purposes of the research to  carry out research -related activities. The HSC may require that when a research 
project collects personally identifiable , sensitive information  that the PI obtain a Certificate of Confidentiality .   
 
 
49)  Describe the provisions in place to respect the privacy of subjects throughout the re search:  
 
RESPONSE: For each subject in the study, a unique identification number will be generated, this number will 
be used with their study responses and all results from the study.  A list linking patients’ names, MRN and 
unique ID will be created and s tored on a password -protected computer only accessible by the PI.  The survey 
responses with the unique identifiers will be locked in the PI’s office.  Only the PI will have access to this list. 
Pharmacy will have access only to the unique ID, and will be in charge of randomization.       
 
50)  Check all identifiers that will be obtained by investigators for the purposes of this study.   
 
 Name          Telephone Number  
 Social Security Number        Fax Number  
 Medical Record Number         Email Address  
 Address by Street Location       Web URLs  
 Address by Town/City/Zip Code       Internet P rotocol (IP) Address  
 Health Plan Beneficiary Number       Account Number  
 Certificate/License Number       Ages over 89  
 Full Face Photographic Image   
 Elements of Dates except Year (Admission/Discharge Date, Procedure Date, Date of Birth or Death)  
 Vehicle ID Number and Serial Number Including License Plate Number  
 Medical Device Identifiers and Serial Number  
 Biometric Identifiers (e.g. finger or voice prints, retinal images)  
 None of the listed identifiers will be recorded as part of this study.   
 Other unique identifiers or code that can be used to identify the participa nt:       
 
51)  Investigators should only obtain the minimum data necessary to achieve research goals. Please justify 
 why the data you are obtaining is the minimum necessary:  
 
RESPONSE: We need the patients’ names, date of birth, and MRN to  identify patients.  A unique number will 
be generated that will deidentify the patients to the pharmacy.   
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  13  
52)  Will data about individual subjects be collected from sources outside of Mass. Eye and Ear?    
  YES     NO   
 
IF YES,  list each source (include if the source is considered a covered entity), the data collected, and any 
agreements in place to allow transfer of this data:  
 
RESPONSE:       
53)  Sensitive information  includes (but is not limited to) information relating to sexual attitudes, preferences, 
 or practices; information relating to the use of alcohol, drugs, or other addictive products; information 
 pertaining to illegal cond uct; information  that, if released, might be damaging to an individual’s 
 financial standing, employability, or reputation within the community or might lead to social 
 stigmatization or discrimination; information pertaining to an individual’s psychologic al well -being or 
 mental health; and genetic information or tissue samples.  
  
 Will this research collect sensitive information?   YES          NO (If NO, skip to question 55)  
 
IF YES,  list the data that will be collecte d and provide a rationale under the minimum necessary standard:  
 
RESPONSE:       
 
54)  Has a Certificate of Confidentiality  been sought for this research?     YES      NO  
__________________________________________________________________________________________  
 
IF YES,  include a copy of the certificate at the time of submission or provide information related to the status 
 of your applic ation  
 
IF NO,  justify your response below:  
 
55)  Please indicate the specific safeguards in place to protect the confidentiality of subject data:  
 
Administrative Safeguards:  
 
 YES    NO Each member of the study team has co mpleted Mass. Eye and Ear Privacy Training and 
Information Security Awareness Training and this training is up to date.  
 
 YES    NO Paper files, electronic data, computing devices and storage media will be safeguarded in 
accordance with Mass. Eye and Ear Privacy and Information Security policies and 
procedures, including, but not limited to the safeguards more specifically identified 
below:  
 
Physical Safeguards:  
 
 YES    NO    N/A  Paper files will be locked in cabinets when not in use  
 
 YES    NO    N/A  Paper files will be protected from inappropriate access when in use  
 
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  14  YES    NO    N/A  Mobile computing devices and storage media will be locked in cabinets  
  when not in use  
 
 YES    NO    N/A  Computing devices will be protected from inappropriate access when in  
  use 
 
 Yes    No      N/A  Research data will be coded using a subject identification number that  
     does not include the subject’s initials and is not derived from the subject’s  
     identifiable informati on.   
 
                                        IF YES:  The key linking the subject identification number to the   
     subject’s identifiable information is available only to the following study  
     team members:  
 
     Mass. Eye and Ear  PI 
     Other Mass. Eye and Ear study team members  
     External investigator  
     External sponsor  
 
 Yes    No                        The key will be stored separately a nd in a locked cabinet (if paper)  
 
 Yes    No  The key will be stored separately and on a password protected network drive with 
 access limited to those people identified above  
 
Technical Safeguards:  
 
 YES    NO  Electronic data will be stored on Mass. Eye and Ear network folders for which 
 access is limited to authorized members of the study team only  
 
 YES    NO  To the extent that electronic data is co llected on the hard drive of a computing 
 device, it will be promptly and securely transferred to a secure folder within 
 the Mass. Eye and Ear network  
 
 YES    NO  Mobile devices (including but not limited to laptops, tab let computers, smart 
 phones, external hard drives and USB drives) containing electronic data will be 
 encrypted  
 
 YES    NO  Remote access to electronic data will be gained through Information Systems  
 
 YES    NO  Electronic data will be encrypted when transmitted outside of Mass. Eye and Ear  
 
 
Please describe any additional safeguards that will be used to protect the study data and explain any “No” 
responses:  
RESPONSE: We will not use rem ote access, and we will not send data outside of MEEI.  
 
56)  Will data that identifies individual subjects be disclosed to parties outside of Mass. Eye and Ear (e.g. 
 sponsor and/or coordinating center, research registry) for purposes of the research?    YES     NO    
 
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  15 IF YES , list the parties and explain how and what information will be shared:  
 
RESPONSE:       
 
57)  Where will research data, including the signed informed consent form and assent be stored (e.g., MEEI 
 medical record, research record, etc.).  
 
RESPONSE: In the MEEI Sinus center under lock and key.   
 
58)  Please provide the plan for destroyi ng identifiers (at the earliest opportunity as consistent with the 
 research plan) or provide a health or research justification for retaining identifiers. For protocols subject 
 to future and secondary data analysis, provide justification for not destroyi ng identifiers permanently 
 and explain plans for future use (i.e., establishment of a data or specimen repository):  
 
RESPONSE: When the research is complete, we will destroy all identifiable information by following 
MEEI protocols.  
 
CONFLICTS OF INTERES T 
If the research involves any of the following: 1) for -profit sponsor or funding source; 2) a marketed drug, 
device, or other technology; or a drug, device, or other technology in development; or 3) a new 
technology, software, or therapeutic approach , all investigators are required to complete and submit (at the 
time of initial submission and thereafter in accordance with the policy) a Conflict of Interest in Research: 
Project -Specific Disclosure (SUPP L) in accordance with the HSC Conflicts of Interest: C linical Research  
policy. Please refer to the policy and SUPP L for further guidance on disclosure and submission requirements. 
FAQ guidance on this topic is also available.  
 
59)  Does the research involve (check all that apply):  
 
 For-profit sponsor or f unding source?    YES    NO 
 
 Marketed drug, device, or other technology; or a drug or device, or other technology in development? 
  YES    NO  
 
We are using amoxicillin / clavulinate as t he study drug.  This drug is generically available in the US.  We 
are not seeking a new indication for this already FDA approved medication.   
 
 New technology, software, or therapeutic approach?    YES    NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VERSION 1.0: 07/30/2013  16  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 