NSS-2 Bridge  Device  for Post -Cesarean Pain  Management  Katherine  Grace  Lim, MD,  MSc  
1 of 12  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
Official Title: An Open -Label Application of the NSS- Bridge Device for Post -Cesarean Pain  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID (NCT number ): [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Document Date: 2/1/2019 
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
NSS-2 Bridge  Device  for Post -Cesarean Pain  Management  Katherine  Grace  Lim, MD,  MSc  
2 of 12  
  
Project  Title:  Feasibility  and Tolerability  of the Use of NSS-Bridge Device for  Post- Cesarean Pain  
Management  
Introduction  
 
The current  opioid epidemic  has led to a renewed  interest  in exploring non -pharmacological  
techniques  to treat post -operative  pain.  An increasing  number  of patients  are suffering from  the adverse  
effects  of opioid use  following surgery,  including post -operative  nausea  and vomiting,  respiratory  
depression,  immunosuppression,  constipation,  and most  recently,  addiction.  In the United States,  over  
$600  billion is spent every  year  on opioid  addiction,  including $79 billion related  to opioid  addiction  
following  surgery.  Despite  many  initiatives  to decrease  the use of opiates  in the  preoperative  setting,  
opioids  continue  to be regularly  prescribed  before,  during  and after surgery.  Although the  risk of opioid  
addiction following  surgery  is recognized, the  percentage  of patients  becoming addicted to opioids  
following  surgery  is not well understood.  To date,  there  has been  virtually  no agreement regarding the  
duration and dosage  that qualify  for opioid dependence  following  surgery,  nor that a clear estimation of  
the factors  such as biological,  psychosocial and socioeconomic  that increase  the risk of using opioids  for 
extended  periods  of time  after  surgery.  Therefore,  in order  to combat  this growing health  crisis  at the 
ground level,  it is incumbent  upon the  medical  community  to explore  alternative  methods  of pain  
control  to treat  the surgical  population  in order  to reduce  the incidence  of post -operative  opioid  
addiction.  
Project  Aims/Goals  
 
Percutaneous  Nerve  Field Stimulation (PNFS)  is one of these recognized  methods  that ongoing  
research  has shown  to be effective  as a complementary  method of  pain  management.   While  PNFS  is 
not a novel  concept,  clinical  indications  of auricular field stimulation have  been limited in the past  due 
to requirement  of bulky,  stationary  and non- disposable  stimulators  and electrodes. These  technological  
NSS-2 Bridge  Device  for Post -Cesarean Pain  Management  Katherine  Grace  Lim, MD,  MSc  
3 of 12  
  
 
limitations  made  it difficult  to establish  the real clinical  potential  of auricular stimulation for  the 
perioperative  management  of pain in surgical  patients,  despite  the demonstration  that auriculotherapy  
has been  shown  to relieve  pain  in the postoperative  setting.  
The NSS-2 BRIDGE  (Appendix  1) is a battery  operated  and disposable  percutaneous  auricular  nerve  field  
stimulator  (Innovative  Health  Solutions,  Versailles, IN,  USA),  that was recently  cleared by the FDA and 
assigned  a Class  II Risk  Designation;  a class  which  includes  surgical drapes,  pumps  and power  
wheelchairs . The indication  for the NSS-2 BRIDGE  is for the treatment  of clinical symptoms  related to  
opioid  consumption and opioid withdrawal.  These  symptoms  include  abdominal  pain,  anxiety  and post - 
operative  nausea  and vomiting;  conditions  which  are also present  following  Cesarean -Section  surgery.  
The use of the NSS-2 BRIDGE  device  has been demonstrated  to provide  significant  analgesia in patients  
with abdominal  pain  syndrome,  and clinical trials  are ongoing to  assess the benefit  of this approach for  
post -operative  pain  management. As compared to the present use of opioids  for perioperative  pain  
management,  the use of a complementary,  non-pharmacologic  approach  offers  the advantage  of 
analgesia without  the associated  side effects. This  is especially  true in  the post  Cesarean Section  
population,  in that many  of these  women  want  to breast  feed  and because of this are very  motivated to  
not use opioids  and other  analgesics,  allowing  us to explore  the additional  benefits  of non-  
pharmacological  complementary  pain  management techniques.  
Mechanism  of action of  the Auricular  Percutaneous  Electrical  Nerve Field  
 
The NSS-2 BRIDGE  devise allows  for stimulation  to branches  of Cranial Nerves  V, VII, IX and X, 
and the  occipital nerves,  identified  by transillumination.  Such a stimulation is transmitted  to the central  
nervous  and especially  the limbic  system, which is known  to be a key component  of the central nervous  
system  response  to stress,  anxiety  and the pain  pathwa y. The nucleus  involved  by the stimulation  
include  the amygdala  (structure  involved  in the response  to fear and anxiety),  the thalamus  (structure  
NSS-2 Bridge  Device  for Post -Cesarean Pain  Management  Katherine  Grace  Lim, MD,  MSc  
4 of 12  
  
 
involved  in the management  of visceral and somatic  pain,  addiction),  the nucleus  of tractus  solitarie  
(structure  involved  in the control  blood pressure)  etc….  The stimulation of these nucleus  produces  a 
decrease  in the transmission of pain impulses  from  visceral and/or  somatic  structures  to supraspinal  
areas, a  reduction in anxiety  and control  of blood pressure  and associated  changes  of the sympathetic  
and parasympathetic  nervous  system.  
The primary  end point  will be the frequency  of patients  who experience  an excellent tolerability  
along with  a decrease  of at least  20%  in pain score.  Also  pain score  and opioid  consumption  will be 
compared to  data obtained 5 consecutive  who  underwent a C-section the month  before.  
Specific Aims  
 
Specific Aims:  
 
1. Tolerability  and feasibility  of applying the  device  following  Cesarean Section  
 
2. Look at the trend  of opioid consumption and pain in five post - Cesarean section  women  wearing  
device,  compared  to five historical  consecutive  controls  of women  who  underwent  cesarean section in 
January  2019 
Study  Design  
 
The proposed  pilot  study  will be conducted as a single -center  prospective open -label trial at the 
University  of Pittsburgh  Medical Center  (UPMC)  Magee -Womens  Hospital.  The data  collected  during this  
period will  be compared  to historical controls  who  have  had elective  C-Sections  in the period  of January,  
2019.  Institutional  review  board approval  will be obtained  before  eligible  patients  are recruited and 
consented. Trial  will be registered at www.clinicaltrial.gov  before  beginning recruitm ent. 
NSS-2 Bridge  Device  for Post -Cesarean Pain  Management  Katherine  Grace  Lim, MD,  MSc  
5 of 12  
  
 
Recruitment  
Potential  subjects  will be recruited in the Magee  Womens Hospital obstetrical  unit when  they arrive  for 
elective  Cesarean Section  surgery.  The Principal Investigator,  Dr. Katherine Grace  Lim,  will already  have  
access  to these patients  as their primary  OB Anesthesiologist.  Patients  will be asked  for their interest  in 
pursuing a research  study  that involves  wearing a percutaneous,  auricular field stimulator  for five days  
as a supplementary  method of post -operative  pain  control  after  their  Cesarean -Section.  Patients who  
agree  to participate  in the  trial will sign an IRB  approved Informed  Consent  Form.  
Inclusion Criteria: 
 
Over  18 years  of age 
 
Elective  Cesarean -Section Surgery  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
 
History  of active  depression,  anxiety  or catastrophizing  
Active  alcoholism or drug abuse  
Severe  chronic  pain condition that  requires daily  preoperative  opioid  dependence  
History  of hemophilia  
Patients  with  cardiac  pacemakers  
Patients  with psoriasis  vulgaris  diagnosis  
Data Collection and Outcome  Measures  
 
The primary  purpose  of this pilot  study  is to demonstrate  feasibility/acceptability  of the NSS -2 Bridge  
device  applied  after  a C-section.  Is the acceptability  is confirmed, the  C-section  model  will be included  in 
an RFA NIH request  (RFA -NS-19-018:  HEAL  Initiative:  Clinical Devices  to Treat  Pain  (UH3  Clinical Trial  
Optional)  DEADLINE  IS MARCH 8, 2019)  for proposal  related  to the use of devises  for reduction of opioid  
use. In this pilot,  no changes  will be made  in the other  analgesia/postpartum  care.  Potential  subjects  will 
NSS-2 Bridge  Device  for Post -Cesarean Pain  Management  Katherine  Grace  Lim, MD,  MSc  
6 of 12  
  
 
be recruited  in the Magee -Womens  Hospital  obstetrical unit when they  arrive  for cesarean delivery.  
Patients  will be asked if they  are interested in using  the NSS-2 Bridge  system  as a way to  control  pain  
after the C-section.  They  will offer to review  a video  explaining the  mechanism  of action  of the NSS -2 
Bridge  system.  Subject  will be informed  of the purpose  of this pilot  evaluation and if they agree  to 
participate  in the trial,  they  will sign an IRB  approved  Informed  Consent  Form.  
Once  patient has  given  and signed  informed  consent to  participate  in the study,  demographic  
information and medical  history  will be collected from each  participant  on the day of the C-section.  Data  
will be de-indemnified  and kept  in a lock cabinet.  The NSS-2 BRIDGE  device  will be applied  to one ear by 
trained  research staff  in the immediate  post -operative  setting.  The patient  will be informed  at the time  
of consent  and after  the implantation  of the device  that they can  have  the device  removed  any time  
after its application.  
As per standard  of care,  at 12, 24, 48, 72, 96 and 120 hours  post -operatively  will be collected  pain score  
at rest and movement,  total  opioid  consumption,  as well as the devise  tolerability.  Additionally  as per 
other pain pilot  IRB approved  projects,  we shall  also collect  common  medical information  including  time  
to bowel  movement,  PONV,  time  to oral intake (liquid and  regular diet), time  to hospital  discharge,  
intensive  care  unit (ICU)  admission,  readmission to  the hospital,  readmission due  to pain  related  issues, 
quality  of recovery  after  cesarean  delivery,  overall patient  satisfaction,  and patient  satisfaction related  to 
pain  management.  When the  patient  is discharged from  the hospital,  they will be asked  to complete  a 
patient  satisfaction survey.  For patients  discharged  with  the device  attached,  removal  instructions  will  
be given  to patient  to remove  and dispose  of the device  at 120 hours.  
 
 
 
Standard opioid  conversion  table  will be used  to convert  the oral and IV narcotic  utilized  by the patients  
to IV morphine  equivalent  doses (MED)  for analysis  purposes.  
NSS-2 Bridge  Device  for Post -Cesarean Pain  Management  Katherine  Grace  Lim, MD,  MSc  
7 of 12  
  
 
Overall  patient  satisfaction  and satisfaction  of pain  management  during hospitalization  will be measured  
by a numerical rating scale  with  0- worst  satisfaction  and 10 being the  best  satisfaction.  The patient  
satisfaction test  will be administered  by a member  of the research  team.  
No statistical  analysis  will be performed. The primary  end point  will be the frequency  of patients  who  
experience an excellent  tolerability  along with  a decrease  of at  least  20%  in pain score. Also  pain  score  
and opioid  consumption  will be  compared  to data  obtained  5 consecutive  who underwent a C-section  
the month before  
Pre-and-Post  Metric Evaluation 
The use of a non-pharmacological NSS -2 BRIDGE  has the possibility  of providing analgesia to  
post -surgical patients  and reducing the  number  of opioids  required following  Cesarean -Section  surgery.  
This will significantly  impact  patient  outcomes,  as patients  will experience  fewer  opioid -related side  
effects  (such as  respiratory  depression,  post -operative  nausea  and vomiting,  constipation and delirium,  
as well  as transfer  of opioids  to the breast  milk).  This will also impact  clinicians  caring for post -operative  
patients,  as there  is the real potential  they  will have  fewer  conditions  to monitor  and treat as the patient  
recovers  from  surgery.  The projected number  of patients  served  by this project  will initially  be five (5) 
enrolled  participants  at Magee -Womens Hospital  however,  the data  collected from  this trial will serve  
countless  patients  and the community  at large  as physicians  strive  to move  away  from  opioid use  
following  surgery.  Data  collected  from  this pilot  study  will support  a future  proposal  to the National  
Institute of Heath  (NIH)  to fund a full-scale,  randomized , placebo -controlled  trial using the  NSS-2 BRIDGE  
device.  
Perhaps  most  importantly,  the investigative  use of the non-invasive  NSS-2 BRIDGE  device  has 
the ability  to significantly  increase  patient  satisfaction in individuals  who  are opioid naïve  or adverse  to 
taking  opioids  as a method of pain control. Being able  to offer  the post -partum  patients  at Magee  
NSS-2 Bridge  Device  for Post -Cesarean Pain  Management  Katherine  Grace  Lim, MD,  MSc  
8 of 12  
  
 
Womens  Hospital  of UPMC such an alternative  represents  a great  opportunity  to increase  patient  
satisfaction,  outcomes  and compliance  as many  patients  increasingly  fear the use of opioids.  The NSS-2 
BRIDGE  will remain  effective  on the participant  for five days,  and will have  lasting effects  even  after 
discharge  from the hospital,  which is a time  when  many  patients  turn to opioids  to control  pain.  The way 
the efficacy  of this device  will be measured  will be by comparing total  perioperative  opioid consumption  
between  study  participants  (n=5)  historical controls  who  have  had C -Sections  at Magee  Womens   
hospital in January  2019.  Other  outcome  measures  include  the incidence  of respiratory  depression,  
PONV,  constipation and length  of stay between  the study  group and historical  control  group.  
 
      
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
    
 
Appendix  1: NSS-  2 BRIDGE  device 
NSS-2 Bridge  Device  for Post -Cesarean Pain  Management  Katherine  Grace  Lim, MD,  MSc  
9 of 12  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
