Study  Title: Digital delivery of parent 
training for disruptive behaviors: Increasing 
Access to Care  
 
 
HIC Protocol Title: Cognitive -Behavioral Therapy for Disruptive Behavior in Children and 
Adolescents  
*Note: Study is included within a broader HIC Protocol  
 
Unique Protocol ID: 0102012121 -E 
 
 
 
 
Date of Document Approval: 8/28/2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sukhodolsky Lab  
Yale Child Study Center  
 
AACAP Pilot Research Award Letter of Intent  Andrea Diaz Stransky (Page 1) 
Digital delivery of  parent tr aining for disruptive behaviors: Increasing Access to Care  
 
I. Significance  and Specific Aims : Disruptive behaviors are among the most common reason s for mental 
health referral in children, and among the most costly childhood condition s.1 One-third to one -half of 
children with disruptive behavior disor ders also meet criteria for ADHD, and comorbidity typically worsens 
the prognosis.2,3 Parent training programs are clinically effective in the  treatment of  children’s disruptive 
behaviors , and are included in the  recommendations set forth in AACAP and AAP treatment guidelines.  
However, such behavioral treatment is inaccessible to most families in need .4 Barriers include  distant 
location, high cost, parents’ limited time availability, lack of trained staff, stigma and skepticism of the 
pediatric mental health system .4 The underutilization of parent behavior management training for disruptive 
behaviors was identifi ed as a practice gap by AACAP in 2017 .5 Despite AACAP and AAP  guidelines, 
children  are often prescribed psychotropic medication without  evidence -based behavioral  interventions 
such  as parent training .6 To overcome some of these barriers  to high quality care , online delivery of 
evidence -based  parent management training  (Digital Parent Training  (DPT))  has been developed .7 While 
most  DPT interventions have demonstrated feasibility and acceptability, the majority provide  only self-
guided static content without clinical guidance, or the capacity for  ‘dose -adjustment’ or  gradual escalation of 
care based on participants’ needs .8 Thus, existing web-based approaches miss the opportunity to ide ntify 
treatment obstacles  early  and to refer children to a higher level of care if needed.  We propose to test a 
model of interactive  DPT (iDPT)  for disruptive behavior s and irritability in young children that augments 
traditional  digital  parent training with interactive clinic al guidance and consultation.  Content for  this iDPT 
approach closely follows  core principles and techniques of parent -training methods  that have been 
thoroughly  tested in clinical trials at the Yale Child Study Center .9-11 Through the iDPT program, clinicians  
will provide  parents with support  and guidance  through  “in-app” asynchronous messaging , scheduled 
video -conferencing and can facilitate referral to  the Yale Child Study Center Outpatient Clinic when 
necessary.  Our long -term goal  is to run a large RCT to study the clinical efficacy of  interactive  DPT for 
disruptive behaviors in children across multiple sites and populations . We must first establish acceptability 
and feasibility of this approach  with an open trial before proceeding to a larger RCT.  
 
Specific aim #1:  Examine acceptability and feasibility of  iDPT in children  with clinically significant levels of 
irritability and disruptive behavior , ages  4 to 9 years. Acceptability and feasibility will be assessed by 
percentage of enrollment, completion of the online modules, and the Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire 
(PSQ) .6  
We hypothesize that >80% of enrolled subject s will complete all of the online modules and attend 2 of the 3 
videoconferencing sessions. We hypothesize that  the majority of  parents will rate the iDPT  as acceptable 
based on the Patient Satisfaction Questionn aire (PSQ) , as evidenced by an average score of 3.0 . 
 
Specific Aim #2:  Analyze the effect  of iDPT on child disruptive behaviors  as measured with the Disruptive 
Behavior Rating Scale (DBRS) .12 
We predict that children  whose parents complete the intervention  will demonstrate a significant decrease in 
disruptive behavi ors as assessed by the  Disruptive Behavior Rating Scale (DBRS).    
 
III. Background and Rationale : Disruptive behavior disorders in children include conduct disorder, 
oppositional defiant disorder, and disruptive behavior disorder not otherwise specified. According to the 
Centers for Disease Control approximately 3.5% of US children have a diagnosable disruptive behavior 
disorder .13 Nearly 30% of children who present oppositional defiant behaviors develop a conduct disorder .14 
Those who present conduct problems between 7 to 9 years of age are at significantly elevated risk of poor 
outcomes in adulthood including higher likelihood of committing crime, substance dependence, mental 
AACAP Pilot Research Award Letter of Intent  Andrea Diaz Stransky (Page 2) 
health problems and relationship difficulties, even after controlling for confounding factors .2 A sub -
population that is in higher need of treatment are children with ADHD. This is because n early 50% of 
children with ADHD have co -occurring  disruptive behavior disorders, and this worsens clinical prognosis .1,2  
The gold standard for prevention and treatment of behavioral problems in children is parent training, a 
systematic  approach to help parents manage their children’s disruptive behaviors .15 Nevertheless, parent 
participation in in-person treatment is estimated between 10 -34%, and those who enroll attend 35 -50% of 
sessions .16 Parent -related barriers to participation include cost, schedule conflicts, transportation, need for 
child -care, and other competing family demands. Provider -related barriers include lack of trained staff, 
space and limited  resources to provide families with parent training .17-19 Recent NIMH announcements 
have emphasized the priority of using technology to disseminate evidence -based practice.20 
In order to improve accessibility to evidence -based treatments, digital  delivery of parent training 
interventions has been explored by several groups. A recent review of available digitally delivered  
interventions indicates that it is efficacious and demon strates potential for increased accessibility among 
families of children with disruptive behaviors .8 To the best of our knowledge, only one other intervention 
provides individualized parent training to target the problem behaviors identified by parents .21 This protocol 
investigates a new model of DP T that is augmented with  individualized goal -identification and clinical 
guidance with video -conferencing.  In addition, the proposed program is the only one of its kind that can be 
accessed via mobile devices  as well as on computers, which may further increase acceptability among 
parents.   A dose -adjustment component will not be tested in the proposed pilot trial. However, it will be an 
important element of the intervention in future trials, as it could help funnel the most severe cases to clinical 
settings and thus optimize use of resources.  It is necessary to conduct  an open trial, without a comparison  
group initially, to establish acceptability and feasibility. If this pilot trial demonstrates acceptability and 
feasibility of online behavioral parent  training with  an integrated personalized component , it w ill provide the 
investigators  preliminary data to apply for an NIMH grant to test this intervention in a  larger  Randomized  
Control Trial.   
 
IV. Research Plan  
Participants . In this pilot study, we will enroll 16 children with disruptive behaviors disorder  recruited at 
Yale Health  and Yale Medicine  Pediatric Outpatient Service s.  
Inclusion criteria:  i. Child is ages 4 to 9 years  old, ii. Child meets diagnostic criteria for one of the 
Disruptive Behavior Disorders or Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorde r, iii. Parents have access to a 
mobile device  and/or computer devic e, iv. Parents speak English as native language , v. Affective Reactivity 
Index parent -report score is above  3.6, which is the mean for children with severe irritability , vi. Families 
agree not to initiate new mental health treatments for the duration of this study.  The sample will be enriched 
with children with ADHD, by ensuring that at least 50% of participant s meet criteria for ADHD based on 
parent and teacher ratings above 1.8.  
Exclusion criteria:  i. Child is non -verbal or minimally verbal; or ii. Child’s tantrums or aggressive behavior 
pose significant risk of injury or property damage and require immediate treatment ; or iii. child has 
untreated medical or psychiatric disorder that requires immediate intervention ; or iv. parents have 
previously received parent -training . 
Design  This is an open , feasibility  pilot study o f interactive digital parent training for  children with disruptive 
behaviors . iDPT is  a novel web -based , interactive parenting intervention for disruptive behavior in children. 
Following the principles of testing feasibility and acceptability  as the first step in developing new 
psychosocial inter ventions17, a comparison group will not be included in this pilot trial. Participants will be 
recruited through the Yale Health  and Yale Medicine  Pediatrics outpatient service s. Parents who choose to 
enroll will undergo telephone screening, and if likely to be  eligible , they will be invited to a n in-person 
AACAP Pilot Research Award Letter of Intent  Andrea Diaz Stransky (Page 3) 
clinical characterization visit. As an incentive to participate, parents will be offered $50 upon completion of 
in-person clinical characterization visit and $50 for attending  final study visit , and parking compensation .   
Telephone  Screening  and Clinical  Characterizatio n. Screening and characterization will be 
conducted to ensure eligibility and establish a baseline for the Disruptive Behavior Rating Scale , the 
outcome measure. Parents who express interest in the study will be contacted by the lead clinician (the 
Principal Investigator) . A brief description of the study will be provided, and eligibility will be determined 
based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria that do not require clinical assessment. I f the subject is 
deemed likely to be eligible , they will be invited to attend an in -person clinical characterization assessment 
at the Yale Child Study Center Outpatient Clinic.  At the in -person  characterization  visit, a desc ription of the 
study will be provided . Formal consent will be obtained  from the parent and assent from the child . The 
Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School -Age Children -Present and Lifetime Version 
(K-SADS -PL)22, a structured  interview  will be conducted  with parent and child by the Principal Investigator, 
to establish Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. (DSM -5) diagnoses . The items, 
which are drawn directly from DSM -IV, are scored from 0 (never) to 3 (very often) and can be scor ed in two 
different ways: symptom count (number of items rated 2 or 3) and symptom severity (sum of the scores for 
the specific diagnostic subscale). Of interest in the current study are the following subscales: attention -
deficit/ hyperactivity disorder [A DHD; 18 items], oppositional defiant disorder [ODD; 8 items], pervasive 
developmental disorder [PDD; 12 items], and the 16 -item anxiety scale.  In addition, parents will complete 
the Affective Reactivity Scale to select children whose disruptive behaviors are above  3.6, the mean for 
children with severe irritability.23,24  Parent and teacher scales of the Swanson, Nolan and Pelham 
Questionnaire (SNAP) will be used to ascertain ADHD di agnosis . This is to enrich the sample with 50% or 
more children with ADHD,  a proportion of the sample that is reflective of prevalence in children with 
disruptive behaviors .24 In addition, the Child Symptom Inventory will be administered.  It is a 108 -item 
parent report on child behavior.25 At this visit, the DBRS  will be administered  to ascertain  eligibility  and 
obtain  a baseline  of disruptive  disorder  symptom  severity.  Upon  completion  of the assessment , if the 
subject  is deemed  eligible  to enroll  in the study , parents  will be provided  with login  and password  to access  
the iDPT program . 
Intervention.  The iDPT that will be utilized is on an online platform called MindNest Health . This 
platform  is a parent -focused  learning management system that was accepted into the Yale Entrepreneurial 
Institute Venture Creation Program. The iDPT program  comprises 8 modules  that closely adhere in content 
to evidence -based Parent Management Training (PMT. The digital platform has undergone comprehensive  
user testing with parents of children with disruptive behaviors to assess the software functioning . The 
content is delivered in parent -friendly and accessible language and the parent training principles are 
illustrated using animate d simulations of a parent and child, with voice -over from a narrator.  A demo is 
available at https://dev.mindnesthealth.com/#/demo . The modules are delivered as follows:  Week s 1-2: 
The first two modules  (“Introduction to tantrums” and “The ABC’s of Behavior”) provide background and 
foundational concepts of behavioral management .  After completion of module  2, parents will be scheduled 
for a 30 -minute videoconference with the lead cli nician to identify specific disruptive  or noncompliant 
behaviors in their child that parents want to decrease.  Week s 3-4:  Modules  3, 4, and 5 teach parents 
antecedent management skills.  Parents will be instructed to choose  different skills , one skill at  a time , to try 
out at home for 1 week, with clinician  support via in -app messaging. After 2 week s of practice, during 
videoconference #2, the lead clinician  will address any barriers to implementation and instruct parents  on 
track ing their child’s behaviors and progress.  Week s 5-6:  Modul es 6, 7, and 8 address reinforcement of 
positive behaviors.  Parents will be instructed to try out several reinforcement techniques for 2 week s.  The 
final videoconference #3 will address barriers to  implementation, goal tracking, and further instruction for 
continued implementation.  
AACAP Pilot Research Award Letter of Intent  Andrea Diaz Stransky (Page 4) 
At the end of the study, participants will be asked to complete the Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire 
(PSQ)6, which is an 8 -item measure of satisfaction with treatment. Parent and child version s are available, 
and both will be administered. Items such as “how satisfied were you with the treatment you have 
received?” and “would you recommend this treatment to a friend?” are rated on a 4 -point scale with higher 
scores reflecting greater satisfaction. PSQ has excel lent reliability and has been used in feasibility 
treatment studies of internet delivered behavioral interventions for pediatric populations.26,27  We predict 
(Hypothesis 1) that parent ratings of patient satisfaction with this iDPT  will be high as evidenced by av erage 
score of 3.0 on the PSQ. In addition, families will complete the DBRS to assess post -intervention change in 
disruptive behaviors. If families wish to remain in contact for continuity of care, they will be referred to the 
Yale Child Study Center Outpa tient Clinic for follow -up. 
 
Data Analysis : 1. Acceptability  and Feasibility Analysis.  Feasibility will be examined with three 
measures : a) completion of 80 or more of the modules and b) attendance to two of the three 
videoconferencing sessions. Parent’s p erspective on acceptability of the intervention will be assessed 
utilizing the Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire . We will deem the treatment acceptable if parents select  
responses ‘Slightly Agree’ or ‘Agree’ on the 15 Acceptability factor items.  This will be reflected as a score of 
3.0 or above on the PSQ.  We will use fixed effects analysis of variance to compare session 
attendance/online course completion and scores on the PSQ.   2. Child  Outcome. At baseline and 
endpoint, parents will complete t he DBRS . We will compute  pre-to post -treatment differences on the DBRS 
and examine the number of subjects showing clinically meaningful reduction in the DB RS total score. By 
convention, a DBRS score of 12 is considered clinically significant . A 35% reducti on in DBRS score is 
considered “improved” and a 50% reduction is considered “much improved.”  Given that traditional parent -
training interventions show clinically significant improvement in approximately 60% of participants, we 
predict that 10 of 16 subjects in this open study (63%) will show a clinically meaningful reduction of the 
DBRS score. Because the primary aim of this study is to determine feasibility, the data analysis for the 
second aim of estimating the magnitude of change in the continuou s outcome measure, DBRS, will be 
straightforward. We will use paired -samples t -test to examine the differences between baseline and 
endpoint DBRS scores.  Based on previous studies from our group23, we can project for a change from 
DBRS mean score of 15 (S D=5) at baseline to 10 (SD=5) and endpoint. This difference can be detected 
with statistical power > 80% and alpha level < 0.05 in a sample of 1 6 subjects.   
Feasibility :  Dr. Diaz Stransky, t he principal investigator and lead clinician, is a  Solnit  adult and child 
psychiatry fellow at the Yale Child Study Center who will be in her Post -graduate year 5 of training. She has 
completed a course of training on PMT for child psychiatry fellows conducted by Dr. Sukhodolsky  and has 
extensive experience of p roviding PMT to families of children with disruptive behavior.  Her research has 
been also focused on parent -training interventions aimed to improve child mental health . She is fluent in 
English, Spanish, Portuguese and French and could inform future versi ons of this program. Her mentors 
will be Dr. Denis Sukhodolsky  and Dr. David Grodberg. The principal investigator will meet weekly with both 
mentors for supervision. Dr. Sukhodolsky  is associate professor in the Yale Child Study Center and a 
licensed psych ologist who has conducted large randomized control trials of parent -management training for 
disruptive behavior  in children . Dr. Grodberg is a board -certified child psychiatrist , Director of the Yale Child 
Study Center Outpatient Clinic and founder of  Mind Nest Health . Both mentors are trained to research 
fidelity in parent -management -training.  
Relevance to AACAP Pilot Award Mission:   The principal investigator is a talented young physician -scientist 
with significant protected research time , pursuing an academic career in this field . The intervention is an 
innovative solution that may help a major child mental health problem.   This study can provide the principal 
investigator with pilot data for a larger research award.   
AACAP Pilot Research Award Letter of Intent  Andrea Diaz Stransky (Page 5) 
V. Project Timeline  
 
August 2018:  Recruitment  and Screening  will begin  
 
August  2018 :   
- Participant enrollment  will begin  
- Pre-intervention data collection  will begin  
August 2018 – July 2019:  
- Intervention delivery  for enrolled participants  
- Post-intervention data collection for participants after completing the intervention  
- Study team meetings will be held weekly with Principal Investigator and mentors  
May 2019:  
- Participant enrollment will  stop at the end of May  
- Preliminary Data Analysis fo r New Research Poster submission  
July 2019: Last participants will complete intervention by the end of July 2019  
 
August -September 2019 :  
- Data Analysis  
- Preparation of poster for presentation at annual meetings for AACAP, American Psychiatric 
Association, American Academy of Pediatrics.  
- Final report writing.  
- Preparation of grant proposal for NIMH funding.  
October 2019: AACAP  Poster presentation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AACAP Pilot Research Award Letter of Intent  Andrea Diaz Stransky (Page 6) 
VI. Budget and Budget Justification  
Personnel:     Andrea Diaz Stransky, MD  – (Principal Investigator, 40% effort) – Dr. Diaz Stransky is a 
PGY -4 Resident in a six -year Integrated Training Program in Adult Psychiatry, Child Psychiatry, and 
Research at the Yale Child Study Center  (YCSC) . As a PGY -5, Dr. Diaz Stransky will be funded on the 
Child Study Center’s institutional  training grant T32 MH018268 , which  provides full -time stipend support 
and allows her to work on the research project(s) of her choice.  Dr. Diaz Stransky will carry ou t the 
baseline assessment of participants and  provide videoconference sessions  for all the participants. She will 
conduct the statistical analyses, interpret the results, write the manuscript, and present findings at national 
psychiatric meetings.       
    Denis Sukhodolsky, PhD ( Primary Mentor ) – Dr. Sukhodolsky is an Associate Professor at the YCSC  
and is the PI of an R01 study that uses cognitive -behavioral therapy to examine the neural circuitry of 
aggression in children across diagnostic categories. Dr . Sukhodolsky will oversee the intervention, 
including  screening, videoconferencing and any other interactions with participants as the need arises. He 
will supervise the statistical data analysis , interpretation of results and preparation of the manuscript.  As a 
mentor, there is no measurable effort provided.  
    David Grodberg, MD – (Secondary Mentor )- Dr. Grodberg is a board -certified Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatrist and  serves as medical d irector of the YCSC  Outpatient Clinic. He is the creato r of the 
MindNest Health Platform .  He will provide mentorship and supervision to Dr. Diaz -Stransky . He will 
facilitate liaison between the research team and the MindNest Health team for any technology support or 
project management needs. As a mentor, ther e is no measurable effort.  
   To be named Postgraduate Associate  – (Postgraduate Associate, 25% Effort) – The Postgraduate 
Associate will schedule in -person baseline and endpoint assessment visits, collect paper -and-pencil rating 
forms and enter data in the data -management system.  
Materials:  Payment to participants for each visit considers $50 dollars per 15 participants for two visits, as 
well as additional visits by participants who attend the first visit but do not qualify for enrollment . In addition, 
$10 dollars per visit for parking will be included.  The Child Sym ptom Inventory will be administered at the 
first visit  and the Disruptive Behavior Rating Scale will be administered at each visit. Thus,  one package of 
50 response sheets will be needed  of each scale . 
 PERSONNEL  
Name  Role on Project  % Time  Salary 
Request  Fringe Benefits  Amount 
Requested  
Andrea Diaz 
Stransky  Principal Investigator  40 % $0 $0 Not allowed  $0 
Denis Sukhodolsky  Primary Mentor  0 % $0 $0 $0 
David Grodberg  Secondary Mentor  0 % $0 $0 $0 
To Be Named  Post Grad  Associate  25% $9,500  $2,898  $12,398  
    SUBTOTAL  $12,398 
MATERIALS  
Description  Quantity  Unit Cost  Amt. Requested  
(DBRS -1) Disruptive Behavior Rating Scale Kit   1 $ 208  $ 208 
(DBRS -3) Parent Version Response Forms  1 package (50)  $35 $ 35 
Child Symptom Inventory  1 package (50)  $63 $ 63 
Study payment for each session  33 $60 $1980  
AACAP Travel Expenses    $316  
    GRAND TOTAL  $15,000 
AACAP Pilot Research Award Letter of Intent  Andrea Diaz Stransky (Page 7) 
VII. Exclusion of Women and Minorities  
 
This protocol  does  not exclude women or minorities from the study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AACAP Pilot Research Award Letter of Intent  Andrea Diaz Stransky (Page 8) 
References  
1. Cohen MAP, A.R. New evidence on the monetary value of saving a high risk youth. Journal of 
Quantitative Criminology. 2008;25(1):25 -49. 
2. Waschbusch DA, Pelham WE, Jr., Jennings JR, Greiner AR, Tarter RE, Moss HB. Reactive 
aggression in boys with disruptive behavior disorders: behavior, physiology, and affect. J Abnorm 
Child Psychol. 2002;30(6):641 -656. 
3. Larson K, Russ  SA, Kahn RS, Halfon N. Patterns of comorbidity, functioning, and service use for 
US children with ADHD, 2007. Pediatrics. 2011;127(3):462 -470. 
4. Lundahl B, Risser HJ, Lovejoy MC. A meta -analysis of parent training: moderators and follow -up 
effects. Clin Psychol Rev. 2006;26(1):86 -104. 
5. Committee AC. AACAP Global Practice Gaps. American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry;2017.  
6. Kazak AE, Hoagwood K, Weisz JR, et al. A meta -systems approach to evidence -based practice for 
children and adolescents . Am Psychol. 2010;65(2):85 -97. 
7. Olfson M, Blanco C, Wang S, Laje G, Correll CU. National trends in the mental health care of 
children, adolescents, and adults by office -based physicians. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71(1):81 -90. 
8. Breitenstein SM, Gross D, Ch ristophersen R. Digital delivery methods of parenting training 
interventions: a systematic review. Worldviews Evid Based Nurs. 2014;11(3):168 -176. 
9. Scahill L, Bearss K, Lecavalier L, et al. Effect of Parent Training on Adaptive Behavior in Children 
With Autism Spectrum Disorder and Disruptive Behavior: Results of a Randomized Trial. J Am 
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2016;55(7):602 -609 e603.  
10. Bearss K, Lecavalier L, Minshawi N, et al. Toward an exportable parent training program for 
disruptive behavio rs in autism spectrum disorders. Neuropsychiatry (London). 2013;3(2):169 -180. 
11. Sukhodolsky DG, Bloch MH, Panza KE, Reichow B. Cognitive -behavioral therapy for anxiety in 
children with high -functioning autism: a meta -analysis. Pediatrics. 2013;132(5):e1341 -1350.  
12. Barkley RA. Defiant children : a clinician's manual for assessment and parent training. Third 
edition. ed. New York: The Guilford Press; 2013.  
13. Mary EST. The Behavior Intervention Rating Scale: Development and Validation of a  Pretreatment 
Acceptability and Effectiveness Measure. Journal of School Psychology. 1991;29:43 -51. 
14. Perou RB, Rebecca H; Blumberg, Stephen J; Pastor, Patricia; Ghandour, Reem M; Gfroerer, 
Joseph C; Hedden, Sarra L; Crosby, Alex E; Visser, Susanna N; Sc hieve, Laura A; Parks, Sharyn 
E; Hall, Jeffrey E; Brody Debra; Simile, Catherine M; Thompson, William W; Baio, Jon; Avenevoli, 
AACAP Pilot Research Award Letter of Intent  Andrea Diaz Stransky (Page 9) 
Shelli; Kogan, Michael D; Huang, Larke N. Mental Health Surveillance Among Children — United 
States, 2005 –2011. Center for Diseas e Control and Prevention; May 17th, 2013 2013.  
15. Fergusson D, New Zealand. Ministry of Education., Dunedin Multidisciplinary Health and 
Development Research Unit., New Zealand. Treasury., New Zealand. Ministry of Social 
Development., Christchurch Child D evelopment Study. Comorbidity and coincidence in the 
Christchurch and Dunedin longitudinal studies : a report for the New Zealand Ministry of Social 
Development, Ministry of Education and the Treasury. Wellington, N.Z.: Ministry of Social 
Development; 2004 . 
16. Pearl ES. Parent management training for reducing oppositional and aggressive behavior in 
preschoolers. Aggression and Violent Behavior. 2009;14(5):295 -305. 
17. Baker CN, Arnold DH, Meagher S. Enrollment and attendance in a parent training prevention  
program for conduct problems. Prev Sci. 2011;12(2):126 -138. 
18. Thornton S, Calam R. Predicting intention to attend and actual attendance at a universal parent -
training programme: a comparison of social cognition models. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry. 
2011;16(3):365 -383. 
19. Breitenstein SM, Gross D, Fogg L, et al. The Chicago Parent Program: comparing 1 -year 
outcomes for African American and Latino parents of young children. Res Nurs Health. 
2012;35(5):475 -489. 
20. (NIMH) NIoMH. Funding Topic Details. 201 8; https://www.sbir.gov/sbirsearch/detail/67052 , 2018.  
21. Baumel A, Pawar A, Mathur N, Kane JM, Correll CU. Technology -Assisted Parent Training 
Programs for Children and Adolescents With Disrupt ive Behaviors: A Systematic Review. J Clin 
Psychiatry. 2017;78(8):e957 -e969.  
22. Birmaher B, Ehmann M, Axelson DA, et al. Schedule for affective disorders and schizophrenia for 
school -age children (K -SADS -PL) for the assessment of preschool children --a pre liminary 
psychometric study. J Psychiatr Res. 2009;43(7):680 -686. 
23. Stringaris A, Goodman R, Ferdinando S, et al. The Affective Reactivity Index: a concise irritability 
scale for clinical and research settings. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2012;53(11):110 9-1117.  
24. Swanson JM, Kraemer HC, Hinshaw SP, et al. Clinical relevance of the primary findings of the 
MTA: success rates based on severity of ADHD and ODD symptoms at the end of treatment. J Am 
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2001;40(2):168 -179. 
25. Ache nbach TM, Dumenci L. Advances in empirically based assessment: revised cross -informant 
syndromes and new DSM -oriented scales for the CBCL, YSR, and TRF: comment on Lengua, 
Sadowksi, Friedrich, and Fischer (2001). J Consult Clin Psychol. 2001;69(4):699 -702. 
26. Comer JS, Furr JM, Kerns CE, et al. Internet -Delivered, Family -Based Treatment for Early -Onset 
OCD: A Pilot Randomized Trial. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2017;85(2):178 -186. 
AACAP Pilot Research Award Letter of Intent  Andrea Diaz Stransky (Page 10) 
27. Baker S, Sanders MR, Turner KMT, Morawska A. A randomized controlled trial  evaluating a low -
intensity interactive online parenting intervention, Triple P Online Brief, with parents of children with 
early onset conduct problems. Behav. Res. Ther. 2017;91:78 -90. 
 