Page 1 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
  
SOCIAL NETWORK DIFFUSION OF COVID -19 PREVENTION FOR DIVERSE CRIMINAL 
LEGAL INVOLVED COMMUNITIES  
 
 
Lead Investigators:  
 
JOHN  SCHNEIDER,  MD,  MPH  
ASSOCIATE  PROFESSOR  
THE  UNIVERSITY  OF CHICAGO  
CHICAGO,  ILLINOIS  
 
RUSSELL  BREWER,  DRPH, MPH  
RESEARCH  ASSOCIATE  PROFESSOR   
THE  UNIVERSITY  OF CHICAGO  
CHICAGO,  ILLINOIS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Version 2023.11.20 (Appendice s not included); University of Chicago IRB Approved 2024 .02.14  
NCT0550027 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
  
List of Appendices  
Appendix A   Multisite Study  Activities   
Appendix B  Recruitment Materials  - Main Study (Social Media, Flyer and Script)  
Appendix  C Covid -19 Symptom Screener  
Appendix  D Locator Form  
Appendix E  C3 ROI 
Appendix  F Baseline Survey  
Appendix G  Curricula Outline  
Appendix H  Day 30 Assessment and Booster - Motivational Group  
Appendix I  Day 30 Assessment and Booster - Educational Group  
Appendix J  Day 90 Assessment  
Appendix K  How To Collect Anterior Nasal Specimen for COVID -19  
Appendix L  What Your Test Results Mean  
Appendix M  Key Things to Know About COVID -19 Vaccines  
Appendix N  Qualitative Study Addendum  Protocol  
Appendix O  Qualitative Study Interview Guide  
Appendix P  Qualitative Study Survey  
Appendix Q  Recruitment Materials  - Qualitative Study (Phone/Email Scripts ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
  
 
BACKGROUND  
The “Social network diffusion of COVID -19 prevention for diverse Criminal Legal Involved 
Communities”, will implement a situation appropriate COVID -19 testing and vaccination social network 
diffusion intervention – C3. C3 builds upon RADx -UP Phase I lessons an d successful social network 
prevention interventions developed previously by the research team.1-3 COVID -19 prevention 
messaging can no longer be simplified to “everyone test and/or everyone vaccinate” as testing and 
vaccination personal decisions are situation appropriate  and sensitive to prior histories (i.e., prior 
infection), local infection rates (i.e., low rates) and testing/vaccination availability. As COVID -19 
prevention efforts have become more situation appropriate (i.e., test if exposed), people tend to focus 
on the messenger33, and particularly those that are close to them. Those who are vaccine hesitant, for 
example, report that the top reason they would change their mind is if close friends or family were 
vaccinated4, a finding similar to other  health behaviors.4,5,6 Personal connections and communications 
within existing personal network structures, such as families and friends represent the cornerstone to 
increase situation appropriate testing and overcoming COVID -19 vaccine hesitancy. Appropriate and 
timely messagi ng that local networks can utilize to make situation specific decisions (i.e., test if 
symptomatic) is urgently required for disenfranchised populations that do not want testing/vaccination, 
are concerned about safety or are not sure .  
 
Social network driven diffusion of innovation interventions (Type 1 or popular opinion leader network 
interventions)8 utilize peer change agents who are trained as part of the intervention to motivate 
network members around behavior change and represents an approach that can rapidly move beyond 
individual -level behavioral change interventions.8  Our work and that of others suggests that biomedical 
innovation uptake can be driven by information and influence within personal networks that organically 
exist.1,2,4,5, Reaching vulnerable and disenfranchised populations can be straightforward as many 
community members often obt ain and transmit information primarily through their informal social 
networks, especially their friends and family.9,10 By leveraging trusted voices and support systems that 
already exist within affected populations11, network interventions embody more than a process of 
information diffusion and behavioral modeling via influential peers (i.e., the influence dimension); they 
also strengthen community connectedness12, build community resilience13 and facilitate community -
directed action14 (i.e., the empowerment dimension). We believe that these cascading network effects 
are key for facilitating longer -term community -level change.  
 
C3 builds upon RADx -UP I, by using a network diffusion approach facilitated through motivational 
interviewing purposefully geared to mobilize one’s own organic social network to increase situation 
appropriate testing and vaccine uptake. Through this proces s we will maximize the primary benefit and 
impact of this type of intervention which also has the intended effect of increasing likelihood that the 
messenger themselves will undergo the same behavior change  that they have been trained to 
promote.15-20 We w ill leverage infrastructure developed in RADx -UP Phase I, which includes 4 high -
impact sites across the Central US that are also the highest recruitment sites from Phase I: Baton 
Rouge LA, Little Rock AR, Indianapolis IN, and Chicago IL and engage individuals who have directly 
and/or indirectly interacted with law enforcement (ILE) . We will utilize established engagement efforts 
already in place and continue to fully integrate communities in the strategic application of the 
intervention through our COVID -19 Community Advisory Board.  
STUDY DESIGN  
Page 4 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 The scientific premise of C3  is to engage people who have been interacted with law enforcement in 
COVID -19 prevention (testing and/or vaccination)  through social network mobilization  combined with 
theory -driven COVID -19 prevention messaging delivered in an interactive group format. Eligible 
individuals will be enrolled into C3. Using a two -arm 1:1 randomized controlled trial design, 800 
participants will be enrolled into  either a : 1) COVID -19 prevention education arm (Education Arm)  or, 2) 
a network mobili zation change agent intervention  (Motivation al Arm) ; the latter is a Type I network 
intervention that includes specific training on mobilization of network members which we have adapted 
to COVID -19 from HIV prevention .2,3 Training occurs in a group -based setting of 8 -10 enrolled 
participants facilitated by a community facilitator and Motivational Interviewing trained interventionist. A t 
30 days, a 15-20-minute  phone booster communication session reinforces the intervention content . 
Information on the personal social network members of these participants will be collected during the 
study visit (estimated at n~2 -4/participant, total~ 3,200 ) using a network elicitation and collection 
approach prior to randomization as in previous work.1,2 
 
Primary outcomes are: 1) the number of study participants who undergo COVID -19 testing (situation 
appropriate) at 3 months; and 2) the number of study participants who receive at least one COVID -19 
vaccine dose at 3 months. Secondary outcomes are the same as primary, except measured among 
people  who are in the networks of primary participants  (referred to as secondary subjects moving 
forward) . Additional secondary outcomes include: COVID -19 testing and vaccination knowledge; intent 
to receive a COVID -19 tes t or vaccination, and intent to participate in a future vaccine trial. Additional 
analyses will begin to understand the complex relationships between testing and vaccine statuses and 
proclivity to test (and potentially obtain a vaccine booster) among both study participants and their 
network members. For example, do those who  are vaccinated serve as more effective change agents? 
Are vaccinated persons more or less likely to test compared to unvaccinated persons? Are people with 
prior COVID infection less li kely to get vaccinated than those without a known history of infection? We 
have leveraged the RADx -UP phase I infrastructure to adapt the intervention resulting in C3 .  
 
AIMS  
Aim 1a . Test the efficacy (3-month situation appropriate testing or vaccination)  of a network diffusion 
motivational intervention versus a n educational intervention among: 1) primary study participants 
(primary outcome); and 2) secondary study subjects connected to primary participants (secondary 
outcome) using a randomized controlled trial design.     
 
Aim 1b . Examine differential intervention effects  by individual and network -level characteristics that 
may increase situation appropriate testing and/or vaccination uptake, such as  age, prior COVID -19 
infection, mental health status,  historical trauma,  early adopter status, COVID -19 prevention behaviors , 
government mistrus t, network testing/vaccination and prior infection, and network density . We will also 
explore hypothesized individual and network level mechanisms through which the intervention works 
(e.g., increased knowledge, self -efficacy, trust).   
 
STUDY SITES  
The sample (n= 800 primary participants and n~3,200 secondary subjects (~2 -4 network members per 
participant ) will be spread across four jurisdictions: Baton Rouge, LA ; Little Rock, AR; Chicago , IL and 
Indianapolis, IN.  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
  
 
 
 
Table 1: Breakdown of study sites  
 
This multi -site study will be completed at four  sites as shown in Table 1. Upon IRB approval, these sites 
will participate in research activities as listed in Appendix A,  including recruitment, participant 
engagement and interviews. Study activities will be conducted by IRB approved study staff and faculty 
at the study center shown in Table 1, or in a private room at a community based organization, public 
library or school.  If the study interaction takes place at these locations, study activities will be 
conducted by IRB approved study staff who will e nsure that subjects have complete privacy .   
 
University of Chicago will provide pre -programmed laptops  to all study sites. These laptops  have been 
programmed by the Research Computing Group within the Department of Public Health Sciences 
(leadership Phil Schumm) at the University of Chicago to ensure data protection and enable data 
transfer. All data collection will be conducted electronica lly via laptops  and data will be uploaded into 
databases hosted by University of Chicago. These are similar procedures as have been developed with 
Schumm for NIDA’s  Methodology and Advanced Analytics Research Center (PI Schneider).  
 
The University of Chicago BSD IRB will act as IRB of Record for Chicago, Arkansas, and Baton Rouge. 
Indiana University will utilize their own IRB  due to  their enrollment of juvenile CJI populations.   
 
METHODS  
 
Aim:  Test the efficacy (3 -month situation appropriate testing or vaccination) of the Motivation 
Intervention versus the Education intervention among: 1) primary study participants (primary Study Sites  Site Lead  Stakeholders  IRB of Record  Sample Size(n)  
Chicago, IL  
University of Chicago  Schneider  Chicago Dept. of Public Health  University of 
Chicago IRB  150 
Pulaski Cnty., AR  
University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences  Zaller,  
 Arkansas Dept of Health  and Central 
Arkansas Housing Corporation  
(CAHC)  University of 
Chicago IRB  250 
Baton Rouge, LA  
Capitol Area Reentry 
Program (CARP)  Brewer  Aspire Health Care  
 University of 
Chicago IRB  250 
Indianapolis, IN  
Indiana University  Aalsma, 
Knopf  Inner Beauty, New B.O.Y., VOICES    Indiana University 
IRB 150 
Northwestern 
University  
Evanston, IL  Pyra NA University of 
Chicago IRB  NA 
NORC  Leslie Watson   
All study sites.  NORC will assist with 
site management and training, as well 
as study design and d ata analysis . 
 University of 
Chicago IRB  NA 
Page 6 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 outcome); and 2) secondary study subjects  connected to primary participants (secondary 
outcome) using a randomized controlled trial design.     
 
We hypothesize that primary study participants randomized to receive the Motivational intervention 
condition (tailored motivational messaging plus network diffusion in a group setting with 1 -month 
booster communication)  will be more likely to  get tested and/or vaccinated within 3 months of the 
intervention as compared to COVID -19 Education condition alone (attention control).  We also 
hypothesize that Motivational intervention will result in more secondary study subjects (network 
members of primary participants) will receive testing and/or vaccination within 3 months.  Finally, we 
anticipate that there may be differential intervention effects  across participant characteristics  across 
study sites, by mental health , exposure to law enforcement, prior COVID -19 infection, testing 
frequency , age and network composition, and will explore  these sub-group differences in the context of 
any power limitations.  
 
 
RECRUITMENT OF STUDY PARTICIPANTS  
We will enroll 800 study participants ages ≥18 years of age across all four sites. Study participants  will 
be recruited by local research assistants ( RAs) embedded within community settings that provide a 
number of in -person and remote social and care services, including community COVID -19 testing and 
vaccination. We will utilize several strategies that we have utilized previously.22,54 -58  
 
Recruitment activities may include:  
• In-person recruitment may be conducted at the study center (Table 1), during regular drop -in 
and community -based services, and events occurring at the study center and its outreach 
programs. This may include providing a study flyer or contact card so that a client can contact 
the study team directly about participation. A sign -up sheet may also be pro vided, where 
interested clients can provide their contact information if they wish to be contacted by the study 
team about the study.  
• Flyers posted at study centers  
• Social media postings  
• Contacting individuals from previous studies who have indicated interest in being contacted for 
future work or from existing community programs.  
All participants will be asked to sign a release of information so that the study team receives COVID -19 
testing/vaccination results as part of existing COVID -19 testing and vaccine registries in the four 
locations.  
 
Inclusion and Exclusion C riteria.   
 
Inclusion Criteria :  
(1) ≥18 years o f age   
(2) spend majority of their time in the metropolitan area or county where recruited  
(3) primary communication in English  
(4) previous direct or indirect exposure to law enforcement  
(5) has covid vaccination and applicable boosters  (self-report, not required to show proof)  
 
Exclusion Criteria :  
(1) inability to provide informed consent;  and  
(2) active COVID -19 symptoms per CDC .56  
Page 7 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 (3) Parolees currently living in a court ordered treatment center as part of parole  and/or individuals 
otherwise meeting the definition of a prisoner  
 
We include participants with prior COVID -19 vaccination (completed series) or recent COVID -19 
infection in past 3 months given that they may be important change agents. We will remove the 
estimated numbers (n=160) who are vaccinated/recent infection from our primary analysis if there are 
no future vaccine boosters or new vaccines required (i .e., new variant). Candidate p articipants with 
COVID -19 symptoms will be referred for free testing at existing partners for each of the study  sites.  
 
Sex as a Biologic Variable.  Both sexes and all genders will be included in this study with exploratory 
analyses to determine any differences in intervention effects.  
 
 
STUDY VISIT PROCEDURES   
Study procedures include:  
1) Informed consent , locator form  
2) Baseline survey  with network elicitation   
3) Randomization  
4) Motivational or Education intervention  
(approximately 3 hours)   
5) Booster/Communication 30 -day ±7 days  
phone follow -up  
6) 3-month follow -up phone survey  ±7 days to 
assess participant and network COVID -19 
testing/vaccination history   
 
Eligible candidate study participants will 
undergo written i nformed consent. Following 
consent, study participants will complete a 
survey  (Baseline Assessment) includes 
variables of interest and the social network 
inventory.  Randomization will occur following 
the survey, and participants will be assigned 
to one of two concurrent Motivational or 
Educational group -level sessions. Sessions will be held weekly , also with availability , in the evening or 
on weekends. Study staff will be notified of g roup allocati on and bring study participants to the 
appropriate group session/intervention rooms.   
 
Between 8 -10 study participants will participate in each intervention room and the interventions (either 
Motivational or Educational ) co-facilitated by both trained research staff and community members. 
Please note that community members will either be part of an IRB approved study site  or will have an 
Individual Investigator Agreement with approved reliance on the University of Chicago IRB . All study 
sites have approved COVID -19 infection control plans for research participant studies and guidance 
updates will be continuously monitored by multi -PI Schneider . The entire study visit including group 
intervention will take 4 -5 hours. All participants (irrespective of study arm) will receive referral 
information for COVID -19 testing/vaccination. The group sessions may be conducted in -person or  
virtually depending on changes in the COVID -19 response.   
 
 
Informed Consent: Eligible participants will be asked to participate in written informed consent using 
either a paper consent or electronic consent. The following consent processes applies to both the 
study consent form and the release of information form.   
 
Analysis            t=30 days    Allocation(t=0)  
Assessed for Enrollment (n=800)  
Informed Consent and Baseline Data 
Collected (t=0)  
1:1 Randomization (n=800 ) 
Motivational Intervention Condition 
(n=400) 
Mini-Booster and survey  
Motivation intervention participants ( n=400) 
and participant network members ( n ̴ 1,600 )  
Education Condition (n= 400) 
 
COVID -19 education booster and survey  
Education participant ( n=400) and participant 
network members ( n ̴ 1,600 ) 
 
Consort Diagram of C3  Study  
 
Page 8 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 In-person Consent Methods:  
 
Paper Consent : 
A study team will provide the subject with a copy of the study consent. The consent document will be 
reviewed and any questions regarding the study will be answered by the study team. If the subject 
agrees to participate in the study, they will be instruct ed to sign the consent form. Staff will also sign 
and t he subject will be provided with a final signed copy. A signed copy will be stored by the study 
team.  
 
Electronic Consent : 
Consent may be obtained in -person electronically via RedCAP. Study staff can present the consent to 
the subject on the tablet or on paper depending upon subject preference. The consent document will be 
reviewed and any questions regarding the study will be  answered by the study team. If the subject 
agrees to participate in the study, the subject will be instructed to sign the consent form via RedCAP e -
consent signature. Staff will also sign the consent form and update the RedCAP link to provide the 
subject with a final, signed version of the consent form via email. The final signed consent document 
will be stored in RedCAP.  
 
Remote Consent Methods:  
 
Written consent signature using paper mail:  
If the subject agrees to participate in the study, a paper consent will be mailed to the subject.   The 
subject will be instructed to contact the study team once it is received.   The consent will then be  
discussed in full over the phone and any questions will be answered. If the subject wishes to 
participate, he/she will sign the consent, then send back to the study team via direct mail. After the 
signed consent form is received, staff will also sign the consent form and send the subject a final, 
signed version via direct mail.  A signed copy will be stored by the study team.  
 
Electronic Consent Remote  using RedCAP:  
Remote consent would be conducted via telephone or video call (with preference being video call 
whenever possible) using a link through REDCap.  A link to the to the consent in RedCAP will be sent 
to the subject via text and/or  email. The study staff will discuss the consent form with the subject, and 
any questions regarding the study will be answered by the study team.  The subject's identity will be 
verified as described below.  If the subject agrees to participate in the study , he/she will be instructed to 
sign the consent form via RedCAP e -consent signature. Staff will also sign the consent form and 
update the RedCAP link in order to provide the subject with a final, signed version of the consent form. 
The final signed consent document will be stored in RedCAP.   
 
The study team will do due diligence to verify the subject’s identity before beginning the consent 
process. Traditional means of verifying subject identity may be challenging in this subject population. 
Most will not be patients with local medical records to reference, some will not have formal state IDs, 
some may not have permanent residence, etc. Strict enforcement of state ID could disenfranchise 
those who may well be the most important group to reach and the very population that needs to be 
studied. Sub ject identity will be verified using the following methods, in the following order of 
requirement:  
1) Visually display a driver’s license or state ID  
2) Visually display an alternative photo ID (employee ID, school ID, etc) in combination with a 
piece of mail displaying the subject’s name.  
3) Visually display an alternative photo ID (employee ID, school ID, etc) alone  
Page 9 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 4) Visually display one of the following pieces of mail with subject’s name and address: utility bill, 
cellphone bill, correspondence from the secretary of state or other government organization  
5) Visually displaying any piece of mail listing the subject’s name and address  
6) Asking the subject to verbally state their name  
 
 
Baseline Surve ys: 
The Locator Form and Baseline Assessment is completed at the time of enrollment. These  are 
completed electronically and may be done in person using a stud y laptop or remotely via telephone or 
video call.  
 
Randomization.  Study participants will be randomized to receive  the Education or Motivational 
intervention at a 1:1 ratio . Randomization will be performed at the participant level, meaning that in 
general, participants within a site will be assigned to different groups. Randomization will be stratified 
by site as well as by key participant characteristics  such as prior infection/vaccination , to ensure 
balance. Random assignments will be provided via a web -based API, with the touchpads programmed 
to retrieve an assignment  at the appropriate time and deliver message to staff so they can direct the 
participant to the appropriate room . 
 
C3 Intervention : COVID -19 Testing and V accination  Network Intervention Condition.  Study 
participants randomized to the Motivational Intervention  will receive the intervention using a social 
network diffusion approach . The Motivational intervention  will be  based upon a previous workshop 
divided into four learning and practice modules (Table  2 below ).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The first module introduces COVID -19 prevention (testing and vaccination)  in an interactive Fact or 
Myth  activity that will provide a n overview for understanding the implications of COVID -19 tailored to 
the specific audience .  
 
C3 Intervention  Components  adapted from RADx -UP Phase I  and PrEPChicago . 
Strategy  Content  Duration  Intervention Strategy 
Source(s)  
Fact or Myth session 
with s ub-group role -
play COVID -19 prevention  Fact or 
Myth session  
1) different types of tests and 
vaccines;  2) technology , clinical 
development and effectiveness; 
3) vaccine dosing 
administration and relationship 
to prior COVID -19 infection; 4) 
potential side -effects; and 5) 
how to access it.  45 minutes  PrEPChicago /RADx -UP 
Phase I  
Situation  Approp riate 
COVID -19 Prevention   Knowing the network member’s 
COVID -19 history (ie. prior 
infection, recent exposure). 
Discussion of indications for 
testing (ie. COVID -19 
symptoms, known exposure) 
and vaccination post -infection. 
Testimonial s around 
misinformation, correction  and 
discussion . 45 minutes  RADx -UP Phase I  
Empowering  
Appropriate COVID -19 
Prevention  Reasons for vaccination and 
group -selected topics of 
discussion  
(1) prompting individuals to 
generate and verbalize their 
own reasons  for testing and 
vaccination and (2) allowing 
individuals to choose testing 
and vaccination topics  most 
relevant   30 minutes  Project Voice /RADx -UP 
Phase I  
Network engagement 
and Motivational 
Interviewing  Effective Delivery of Information  
and MI strategy discussion  
(1) how the conversation will be 
raised, (2) how potential 
barriers to testing and 
vaccination will be addressed, 
(3) how network members can 
be assisted to make a visit to a  
COVID -19 services  site, and (4) 
what sort of follow -up is 
required to motivate network 
members who have yet to be 
tested/ vaccinated after earlier 
conversations.  60 minutes  PrEPChicago /RADx -UP 
Phase I  
 Table 2.  Motivation Intervention  
Page 11 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 The second  module builds upon RADx -UP Phase I to provide situation -appropriate recommendations 
given the diversity of COVID -19 spaces network members find themselves in (previously infected, 
congregate setting, recently exposed etc.). This module also utilizes video  testimonials developed in 
RADx -UP Phase I that feature community members with lived testing and vaccination experiences . The 
videos will be viewed in a group setting using a large computer or TV monitor. A list of videos will be 
provided with de scriptive information about the factual content they present. Content will be updated in 
real time as testing/vaccination recommendations change, and these changes will also be matched to 
outcome assessment.  
 
The third module will e nsure participants actively engage with COVID -19 prevention information and 
content . We will  facilitate  an empowerment process that  will direct participants to choose testing and/or 
vaccination topics  that they would like to consider (e.g., prevent health risks, protect others from 
infection, vaccine safety, future regret) and then prompt them to generate and verbalize their own 
reasons for testing/ vaccin ation based on those topics.  
 
The fourth  module aims to develop the social network motivation strategy which will be reinforced by 
interventionists who have completed motivational interviewing training. Through role -playing scenarios, 
participants will rehearse conversational strategies for addressing some of these personal barriers and 
develop their ability to deliver information in effective and productive ways. Walkthrough and scenario 
play will be str ategies to assist with planning regarding : 1) how the conversation will be raised; 2) how 
potential barriers to testing/vaccination will be addressed; 3) how network members can be assisted to 
make a testing/vaccine site visit; and 4) what sort of follow -up is required to motivate network mem bers 
who have yet to engage in COVID -19 prevention  after earlier conversations. This strategy  develops 
participants’ communication skills in order to increase their effectiveness as COVID -19 testing/ vaccine 
change agents.62  
 
 
COVID -19 Prevention Education Intervention .  
The Education condition  will include COVID -19 prevention messaging and  an interactive activity  
reinforcing the messages. RADx -UP Phase I testimonial video messages were developed based on  
previous focus group data, featuring community advocates recruited from those focus groups and have 
undergone adaptation and have been vetted by  the COVID -19 CAB . Testimon ial videos will be played 
including those that describe the testing experience and their motivations fo r testing. This approach 
combine s self-affirmation with misinformation correction to ta ke advantage of the  ability to promote 
adaptive COVID -19 prevention behaviors. The self -affirmation activity will always precede the 
presentation of the testimonial videos  as leading with misinformation correction can be construed by 
some as a threat to one's self -adequacy. An active control group , as opposed to clinic standard of care 
(i.e., provision of limited COVID -19 information and/or materials) was selected for C3 for several 
reasons. First, provision of standard of care would not c ontrol for the  attention that study participants 
will receive from study staff as well as the time to d eliver the intervention (both Motivational and 
Education conditions will take 4 hours ). In addition, there is an ethical mandate to provide the best 
tailored control available in the context of ongoing COVID -19 morbidity and mortality. Finally, 
community feedback and CAB input clearly delineates the requirement that community members are 
receiving meaningful education and COVID -19 prevention engagement activities as part of  this 
research and not “substandard care”.  
 
 
Mini-Booster Communication Session at 30 -day follow -up 
Additional  contact with project staff following initial interventions is an important component of sustained 
beha vior change and study engagement . For this reason, staff trainers will maintain contact with 
participants after the initial training through a telephone check -in referred to as a “ mini-booster ”, which 
Page 12 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 the C3 team has utilized successfully in previous work.1-3 A staff member  will conduct the mini-booster 
with each pa rticipant, lasting 10 -20 minutes.  
 
Each mini-booster consists of four components: 1) collecting information  about specific network 
members that the participant has engaged with about testing/ vaccination  (both Education/Motivation al 
arm);  2) devising personalized conversational strategies for approaching these network members  (C3);  
3) troubleshooting communication barriers  (C3);  and 4) setting personal outreach goals  (C3). The 
Education condition will also have a 30-day follow -up conversation and review of any questions that 
may come up. Meas urement of testing/vaccine barriers for participants and participants’ report on 
network members will be collected during the booster session for both Motivational and Education 
conditions. The same staff member who provided the initial intervention will conduct the booster with a 
given participant in order to  continue rapport building . 
 
Subject Compensation. Compensation will be provided for study participation - up to $200 will be 
provided for study participation  and all participants will receive snacks/refreshments during the 
Education and Motivation al arm sessions. Compensation will be provided as follows:  
1) $150 will be provided for completing the first study interaction (i.e., consent, ROI, Education or 
Motivation group session, baseline survey  and short locator form ); 
2) $25 for completing the second study interaction (i.e., short phone booster session and second 
survey 30 days later ); and  
3) $25 for completing the third study interaction (i.e., final survey 90 days post enrollment ). 
Payments will be in cash, gift cards or e -payments such as CashApp, PayPal or Venmo.  
Staff Training and Fidelity . Site teams consisting of existing research staff and community facilitators 
will deliver the study conditions. Separate staff will deliver the Educational and Motivational intervention 
group sessions (described below). Site teams will undergo two full day training sessions that include 
study procedures and group session activities. All research and community facilitators will undergo 
initial motivational interviewer training  with a certified MINT trainer on core motivational interviewing 
(MI) principals and then monthly follow -up sessions providing clear and objective feedback. In addition, 
research staff will be trained to have capacity to support multiple participants simul taneously in the self -
administered portion of the study visit: clarifying any survey ite ms, troubleshooting any technology/data 
collection issues, and transitioning to interviewer administered for people with limited literacy. Fidelity to 
Educational and Motivational intervention  conditions will be evaluated using a self -monitoring fidelity 
check -list for interventionists . A sample of 10% of the sessions will be recorded (video and/or audio) for 
quality improvement purposes and reviewed  by project managers/ PIs. These recordings may be shared 
amongst the respective site -specific study team, but will not be shared outside of the subject’s study 
site). Subjects will be asked whether they are willing to have the session recorded and can indicate yes 
or no on the stu dy consent form.  
 
Primary Outcome s.  Two primary outcomes will be assessed at the level of the participant: the 
probability of receiving at least one 1) test and 2) vaccination dose within 3 months of baseline. 
Outcomes will be ascertained specifically by testing/vaccine registry data held b y city and state held 
vaccine registries ( Letters , Huang, Arwady, Zohoori).  Study participants will sign release of information 
forms, as in RADx -UP Phase I, in order for study staff to obtain 3 -month testing/vaccination disposition 
statuses.  Covid testing/vaccination status may also be provided by subject showing a copy of their 
covid testing result and/or vaccination information.  This may be provided in person, shown during a 
video call , emailed or texted as a picture.  Finally, study staff will reach out to all study participants  
(N=800)  at 3 months following baseline to collect information on testing and vaccination uptake among 
study participants and barriers and facilitators for both network members and study participants. During 
Page 13 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 this assessment, information on situation appropriate testing will be collected to better understand the 
circumstances and context of testing. At the time of this writing, situation appropriate testing includes 
testing if symptomatic, if exposed to someone  with COVID -19 infection and if entering a congregate 
living setting. Only participants reporting symptoms, exposure, and/or congregate housing will be 
included in the primary testing outcome analysis; post -hoc analysis will include all participants tested  
irrespective of the situation/context.  
 
Secondary Outcome.  Two secondary outcomes will be assessed at the level of the secondary 
subjects (network member connected to primary participant): the probability of receiving at least one 1) 
test and 2) vaccination dose within 3 months of baseline. Network member information, including 
identifying information will be collected during the baseline as sessment through specialized network 
canvas software (described above). The secondary outcome will be determined based upon self-report 
from participants duri ng the 30 and 90 -day follow -up surveys.  Note that this information is collected 
based asking the study subject whether the social network contact underwent these activities and not 
from contact with or medical record data collection of the social network member.  Analyses for our 
secondary outcome will account for variability in network size across individuals.  
 
Other V ariables  for Analysis.   Additional variables for analysis  will be obtained from the JCOIN  
Community Measures database  that is stored in the JCOIN Data Core and which the PIs have 
access.69,70 These measures have been collected from other validated scales and items and include 
items from the Phenx toolkit64 including vaccine hesitancy. Measures to be included in analyses include  
the following: age, race, ethnicity, gender, sex at birth, mental health (e.g., PHQ -9), symptoms of 
anxiety/depression, and CLI history; as well as COVID -19 knowledge, testing history, 
infection /treatment history, access to medical care, substance use history, prevention behaviors , 
attitudes/beliefs about prevention effic acy, vaccine knowledge/attitudes  and vaccination practices (e.g., 
flu vaccination),  medical mistrust, perceptions about COVID -19 risk and severity, prior contact by 
contact tracer, experiences of racism, fears about immigration status, housing status  and household 
composition , food insecurity, employment /occupation , mobility,  experience of violence, workplace 
resources, PPE availability, and known COVID -19 contact.  Social n etwork size,  density , social control, 
influence and trust  will be from the Community Measures database and collection will be facilitated by 
NC.63  
 
Primary and Secondary Outcome A nalysis . Two sets of analyses will be performed. The first will 
focus on testing and vaccination among participants and the second will focus on testing and 
vaccination among the networks of participants. Testing and vaccination will be analyzed as separate 
outcome s throughout. The primary outcome analysis  will compare  the probability of testing and the 
probability of vaccination among participants assigned to Educational vs. Motivational intervention. 
Secondary analyses will compare the total number  of network members  tested and vaccinated and the 
probability of testing/ vaccination among network members of participants  assigned to Educational vs. 
Motivational intervention  (Aim 1). All analyses will use generalized linear models with link functions 
based on the distribution of the outcome (logistic or log binomial for binary outcomes; negative binomial 
regression for count outcomes) and random effects as appropriate to account for cl ustering of network 
members within participants. The  initial analysis wil l include an indicator for intervention assignment as 
the only independent variable and will not adjust for covariates since  the randomi zation should ensure 
comparability between the groups on measured and unmeasured confounders, though group 
characteristics at baseline will be inspected visually for imbalances (Aim 1a). We will  then incorpor ate 
participant (e.g., mental health, early adopter status) and network level (e.g., network thresholds, 
density) covariates to improve the precision of the estimates a nd to identify socio demog raphic and 
network  characteristic s associat ed with differences in testing and vaccination yield. In addition, we will 
explore  interactions between intervention group ( Education  vs. Motivational intervention ) and 
participant characteristics to determine whether the intervention  is more effective in certain groups than 
Page 14 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 others ( Aim 1b). Because we will likely have limited power to detect small to medium sized interaction 
effects in subgroup analyses, we will consider these analyses exploratory, with the goal of generating 
insights to guide future work. P artial pooling within a Bayesian estimation framework71 will be used to 
avoid bias and address the issue of multiple  comparisons  when testing interactions . We will also 
include an indicator for time trends to control for potential changes in testing recommendations, vaccine 
availability, infection rates, or other factors that could impact testing and vaccination outcomes over the 
study. The small number of sites precludes inclusion of a site-level random effect so site will be 
included as a fixed effect to account for between site differences in participant characteristics and local 
epidemic trends. T he clustered version of the robust (i.e., sandwich) variance estimator will be used in 
all analyses to ensure correct inference even in the presence of other sources of within -cluster 
correlation in the data not captured in the model .72 For the participant outcomes, the probability of 
testing and vaccination (binary outcomes) will be modeled using logistic or log binomial regression 
based on model fit and consistency with model assumptions. The total number of tested/vaccinated 
network me mbers  will be modeled using negative binomial regression  with total network size as an 
offset to accoun t for differences among participants in the number of named network members .73 A 
second analysis will treat each network member as an observation (tested/vaccinated or not) and will 
model the  likelihood that network members are tested/vaccinated using logistic regression  with random 
effects at the level of t he study participant. We will also include a fixed effect for site. This approach will 
also allow us to examine whether characteristics of the network members (e.g., trust, social influence 
and social co ntrol within a dyad ) are associated with probability of testing/vaccination.   
 
Power Calculations.  Statistical power for Aim 1 was computed across a range of plausible effect sizes 
and outcome prevalence estimates. Power was estimated conservatively, assuming that of the 800 
total participants and their network members, 10% would meet the current CDC r ecommended criteria 
for testing (recent exposure, symptoms, or congregate housing) and thus the sample size for the 
primary testing outcome was estimated at N=80 eligible participants. We assumed that 30% would 
previously have been fully  vaccinated or infected with COVID -19 in the past 6 months, resulting in an 
analytic sample size for vaccination outcomes of N=560 participants and their network members. 
Power may change depending on the evolution of the pandemic (e.g., changes in infecti on rates, 
prevalence of variants, and/or local public health guidance regarding testing and booster vaccine 
recommendations), and will be higher with broader testing eligibility, higher outcome prevalence, and 
for analyses treating each network member as a  separate observation. For each outcome, we 
computed minimum detectable effect sizes given estimated rates of testing and vaccination in the 
control group. We estimated 3 -month testing rates among those eligible for testing of 10% in the control 
group. Bas ed on our ongoing influenza vaccination work , as a starting point for calculations we 
estimated 3 -month vaccination rates among study participants and their network members of 
approximately 30%. All calculations were conducted in Stata/SE version 15.1 with  alpha=0.05, two -
sided tests, and a 2:1 ratio of randomization to the intervention vs. control group. For participant testing 
(primary outcome 1), with a sample size of 80 eligible participants and control group testing prevalence 
of 10%, we would have 80%  power to detect differences of 28 percentage points or more (proportion 
tested in the intervention group ≥38%. For participant vaccination (primary outcome 2), with a sample 
size of 560 and vaccination prevalence of 30% in the control group, we would have  80% power to 
detect differences of ≥12 percentage points (proportion vaccinated in the intervention group ≥42%). For 
evaluating interaction effects (Aim 1b), with a sample size of 560 we would have >80% power to detect 
an interaction between intervention assignment and an evenly distributed binary covariate (50% in 
group A and 50% in group B) when vaccination prevalence in the control group is 30% and the 
intervention increases vaccination to 40% in group A and 69% in group B (e.g., the intervention is mor e 
effective in group B). For the participant testing outcome, we will have limited power to detect 
interaction effects except those of very large magnitude, but will explore differences in testing across 
Page 15 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 subgroups to guide future work.  For the network outcomes (secondary outcome 1&2), we assume that 
the number of network members tested/vaccinated follows a negative binomial distribution with an over  
dispersion parameter equal to 2 to reflect variability among participants in terms of testing and 
vaccination referrals. For network testing, with a sample size of 800 participants (with an average of 2 -3 
named network members per participant), we would ha ve ≥80% power to test the null hypothesis of no 
difference between groups if the mean number of tested network members per participant is 0.12 in the 
control group and 0.25 in the intervention group (i.e., the intervention increases the proportion of 
participants with any network members tested from 10% to 18% and the proportion with >2 network 
members tested from 0.2% to 1.3%). For network vaccination, with a sample size of 560, we would 
have >80% power to test the null hypothesis of no difference between groups if the mean number of 
vaccinated network members per participant is 0.51 in the control and 0.92 in the intervention group, 
which reflects a scenario where the intervention increases the proportion of participants with any 
network members vaccinated  from 30% to 41% and the proportion with more than 2 network members 
vaccinated from 5.1% to 12.1%. Thus, we will have sufficient power to detect effect sizes consistent 
with our previous work.  
Attrition and missing data.  All participants enrolled in the study will be included in our analyses; since 
the primary outcome will be measured based on testing/vaccine registry data we are confident that 
there will be limited missing data given that this type of registry has consid erable resources to support it 
and is required for the EUA status. As an additional precaution, all participants will be interviewed to 
assess for testing/vaccination status among themselves and network members at 3 months. Thus,  we 
anticipate very little missing outcome data. Any missing data will be addressed using multiple 
imputation74 or by using a fully Bayesian approach to estimate the model75 (in which missing data are 
essentially treated as additional unknown parameters).  
POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS TO SUBJECTS  
In general, protection against risk to participants will be accomplished through thorough training of 
research staff; careful orientation of potential participants as to the nature, risk, and benefits of the 
research; strict adherence to study protocols; a nd regular surveillance for adverse events. Additionally, 
this study will receive an NIH Certificate of Confidentiality  to further protect information shared . 
• The following steps will be taken to protect the confidentiality of all data generated and collected 
throughout the course of the study:  
• Data access will be limited to a specified group of programmers and researchers identified as 
study personnel . An audit trail will be maintained to track all user -access to the data.  
• All study investigators and research team personnel will be trained in the importance of 
confidentiality and trained to follow all rules related to handling confidential data.  
• All data sets resulting from this study will be kept exclusively in the BSD CRI system at the 
University of Chicago, access to which requires administrative approval and password. The 
internal server is encrypted at the storage, backup, and sharing levels, thereby maximizing 
protections against breaches of confidentiality.  
• The research team will not be permitted to copy the raw data or to transmit the raw data other than 
through a secure server connection.  
• Results of the study will be reported only in the aggregate and without other identifiable data, with 
attention to issues of statistical disclosure.  
 
Protection of privacy.  All stu dy procedures will be performed in quiet, private spaces to ensure 
confidentiality. If covid test results and/or vaccine status is communicated via  email or  text picture  using 
a cell phone , this communication would occur with the subject’s site study personnel only. The 
testing/vaccination data would be recorded and the email/ text picture would be deleted.  The images 
Page 16 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 are not retained or shared.   
 
Protection against psychological discomfort.  Survey questions may touch on potentially sensitive topics. 
Participants will be informed of this possibility through assent/consent procedures and they will be 
reminded that they may skip questions or discontinue participation altogether. If a participan t expresses 
distress directly to the research team, they will be provided the name and contact information of several 
licensed behavioral health providers on our research team and other local resources as needed.   
Protection against testing risks.  Testing Procedures and Infection Control Measures. All COVID -19 
testing procedures will take place according to SOPs at each of the participating partnering health 
departments and clinics. These procedures ensure that appropriate infection control measure s, a 
COVID -19 screener (Appendix C), counseling, including quarantine and isolation procedures, masking 
and results disclosures are provided in accordance to the current standard of care and CDC guidelines. 
Monetary, food, other tangible supports, and/or  linkage to further medical evaluation and will be 
provided for individuals who test positive and require resources to adhere to quarantine and social 
distancing requirements. Performance of surveys and interviews will abide by social distancing 
guidelines . 
 
Benefits:  The potential benefits  of this research far outweighs the risks. For individual participants , 
benefits include COVID -19 testing/vaccination information  and reduced likelihood of COVID -19 severe 
complications and hospitalizations, with provision of financial and other tangible resources for 
quarantine and isolation as well as linkage to medical care if necessary. Possible risks (i.e. discomfort 
answering questions, potential confidentiality breaches, stigma) are outweighed by the ne w knowledge 
gained as described above and the di rect clinical benefits and supportive services to participants.  
  
DATA STORAGE AND SHARING  
We will take several steps to ensure the security of the identifiers and data collected for this study. All 
data will be collected using dedicated laptops purchased by the project and configured and certified by 
BSDIS to meet their requirements for portable computers (e.g., timed log -out, whole -disk encryption, 
use of BigFix and antivirus software, etc.). Data will be entered into REDCap (web -based applicati on 
hosted by the CRI at the University of Chicago).   This data will be maintained on a HIPAA compliant, 
secure server hosted at the University of Chicago.  
 
The identifiers of social network members (first name and last initial only) will be uploaded and stored in 
a separate, dedicated file share held on a secure, HIPAA compliant server at the University of Chicago, 
accessible only by the data analyst team who  will be located at the University of Chicago and NORC. 
Social network identifiers will not be shared outside of the data analyst team and will not be accessible 
to the w ider study team. The data analyst team will monitor the incoming files to ensure 
confi dentiality.   Social network identifiers are used to analyze whether the study interventions affect the 
study subject and their social network members’ likelihood of becoming vaccinated and/or testing for 
COVID (based on the study subject’s survey response) . Once this analysis has been completed, all 
files containing network member identifiers will be destroyed.  
 
Upon study termination, participant identifiers will be removed from the  study  dataset. All recordings of 
study trainings will be destroyed upon study termination. The de -identified study data may be maintained 
indefinitely at the University of Chicago.  
 
UAMS will destroy any raw data received from Arkansas Dep artmen t of Health upon study completion.  
 
Data Transfer:  
Page 17 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 Before any data transfer, the University of Chicago will encrypt the data both at rest and in transit to 
provide a high level of security of sending and receiving file transfers. The encrypted data products will 
be securely uploaded to a server using a cyb erinfrastructure service such as Globus 
(https://www.globus.org/) via the Biological Science Division Information Services (BSDIS). This will 
ensure high security features that meet authentication and authorization standards for sensitive data 
containing p rotected health information. Additionally, data management and transferring services for 
personally identifiable data will be with a High Assurance or HIPAA BAA subscription. If an institution is 
responsible to provide data (incoming), they will be respons ible for encryption.  
 
Northwestern University  
Northwestern (NWU) will assist with data analysis for the planned qualitative interviews and survey data. 
NWU will receive text transcripts from interviews as well as survey data for analysis.  These data may 
contain dates and zip codes but will not contai n any other identifying information (such as names). Shared 
data will be linked to the subject’s unique ID number, but the key will be kept by the University of Chicago 
team and not shared.  
 
NIH and DCRI  
The Duke Clinical Research Institute (DCRI) has been chosen by the National Institute of Health (NIH) 
to serve as the data coordinating center for all of the RADx -UP study centers  (note, outside of our multi -
center studies, there are other institutions who have received funding from the NIH to conduct related 
research under the RADx funding initiative) . A limited study data set (includes zip codes and dates) will 
be shared  with DCRI to link area level data sets  and to add context to the socioeconomic, environmental, 
and public health outcomes in larger data sets.   DCRI will maintain a database that can be shared with 
RADx -UP consortium members (those who are conducting the RADx -UP st udies) for future research. 
The consortium database  will include zip codes and dates and will be maintained by DCRI indefinitely.   
RADx -UP c onsortium members will be required  to apply to use this dataset.  All data shared for future 
research in this manner would be de -identified and could be used indefinitely.  
 
DCRI will also transfer  a de-identified study data set  to the NIH  for purposes for future research i n keeping 
with the NIH’s policy .  All data shared  for future research in this manner  would be de -identified and could 
be used indefinitely.  
  
 
REFERENCES:  
1. Bouris A, Jaffe K,  Eavou  R et al. Project  nGage: Results of a randomized controlled trial of a dyadic 
network support intervention to retain young black men who have sex with men in HIV 
care.  AIDS  Behav.  2017;21:3618 –3629. doi:10.1007/s10461 -017-1954 -8   
2. Bouris  A, Voisin  D, Pilloton  M, et al. Project  nGage: Network  Supported HIV Care Engagement for 
Younger Black Men Who Have  Sex with Men and Transgender Persons . J AIDS  Clin 
Res. 2013;4:10.4172/2155 -6113.1000236. doi:10.4172/2155 -6113.1000236   
3. Schneider JA, Young L, Ramachandran A, et al. A Pragmatic Randomized Controlled Trial to 
Increase PrEP  Uptake for HIV Prevention: 55 -Week 
Results  From  PrEPChicago.  J Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr . 2021;86(1):31 -37. 
doi:10.1097/QAI.0000000000002518   
4. Schneider JA. JCOIN 26: Amerspeak Brief Stigma Survey. Oral presentation at: JCOIN Steering 
Committee Meeting; January 2021. HEAL Initiative, NIDA.  
Page 18 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 5. Centola D. An experimental study of homophily in the adoption of health behavior. Science . 
2011;334:1269 –1272. doi:10.1126/science.1207055  
6. Brewer NT, Chapman GB, Rothman AJ, Leask J, Kempe A. Increasing vaccination: putting 
psychological science into action.  Psychol Sci in the Public Interest . 2017;18(3):149 -207. 
doi:10.1177/1529100618760521  
7. Schneider JA. Preliminary Focus Group Data : Emerging Themes. Oral presentation at: Community 
Advisory Board (CAB) Meeting; January 2021. (NIDA, PI Schneider, UG1 DA050066)  
8. Valente TW. Network Interventions. Science. 2012;337(6090):49 -53. doi:10.1126/science.1217330  
9. Elford J, Sherr L, Bolding G, Serle F, Maguire M. Peer -led HIV prevention among gay men in 
London: process evaluation.  AIDS care.  2002;14:351 -60. doi: 10.1080/09540120220123739  
10. Kelly JA, St Lawrence JS, Stevenson LY, et al. Community AIDS/HIV risk reduction: the effects of 
endorsements by popular people in three cities. Am J of Public Health 1992;82:1483 -9. doi: 
10.2105/ajph.82.11.1483  
11. Boutin -Foster C, Scott E, Rodriguez A, et al. The Trial Using Motivational Interviewing and Positive 
Affect and Self -Affirmation in African -Americans with Hypertension (TRIUMPH): From theory to 
clinical trial implementation. Contemporary Clinical Trials . 2013;35(1):8 -14. 
doi:10.1016/j.cct.2013.02.002  
12. Brayne S. Surveillance and System Avoidance: Criminal Justice Contact and Institutional 
Attachment. Am Sociol Rev . 2014;79(3):367 -391. doi:10.1177/0003122414530398  
13. Hawks L, Woolhandler S, McCormick D. COVID -19 in Prisons and Jails in the United States. JAMA 
Intern Med . 2020;180(8):1041. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.1856  
14. Tai DBG, Shah A, Doubeni  CA, Sia IG, Wieland ML. The Disproportionate Impact of COVID -19 on 
Racial and Ethnic Minorities in the United States. Clinical Infectious Diseases.  Published online 
June 20, 2020:ciaa815. doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa815  
15. Festinger  L. A theory of cognitive dissonance.  Stanford , CA: Stanford  University Press ; 1957  
16. Stone J. Consistency as a basis for behavioral interventions: Using hypocrisy and cognitive 
dissonance to motivate behavior change. In Cognitive consistency: A fundamental principle in social 
cognition . New York, NY: Guilford Press;  2012: 326–347 
17. Briñol P, McCaslin  MJ, Petty  RE. Self-generated persuasion: Effects of the target and direction of 
arguments. J of Personality and Soc Psychol.  2012; 102(5) :925–40. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027231  
18. Baldwin  AS, Rothman AJ, Vander Weg  MW, Christensen AJ. Examining causal components and a 
mediating process underlying self -generated health arguments for exercise and smoking cessation. 
Health Psychol . 2013;32(12):1209 -17. doi: 10.1037/a0029937  
19. Aronson  E. The power of self -persuasion. Am Psychol.  1999; 54:875–84. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0088188  
20. Greenberg S, Brand D, Pluta A, Moore D,  DeConti K. Nudging resisters toward change: Self -
persuasion interventions for reducing attitude certainty. Am J Health Promot.  2018;32(4):997 -1009. 
doi:10.1177/0890117117715295  
21. Lieberman -Cribbin W, Tuminello S, Flores RM, Taioli E. Disparities in COVID -19 Testing and 
Positivity in New York City. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. Published online June 
2020:S0749379720302634. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2020.06.005  
22. Cerise FP, Moran B, Bhavan KP. Delivering COVID -19 vaccine by building community trust. Nejm 
Catalyst . 2021. https://catalyst.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/CAT.20.0692  
23. Dube E, Vivion M, MacDonald NE. Vaccine hesitancy, vaccine refusal and the anti -vaccine 
movement: influence, impact and implications. Expert Rev Vaccines.  2015;14(1):99 -117. 
doi:10.1586/14760584.2015.964212  
24. The Sentencing Project. Reducing racial disparity in the Criminal Justice  System: A manual for 
practitioners  and policymakers, Ed. 2.  The Sentencing Project.  2000. 1 -66.  
Page 19 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 25. Coustasse A, Kimble C, Maxik K. COVID -19 and Vaccine Hesitancy: A Challenge the United States 
Must Overcome. J Ambul Care Manage. 2021 Jan/Mar;44(1):71 -5. doi: 
10.1097/JAC.0000000000000360. PMID: 33165121.  
26. Bajaj SS, & Stanford FC. Beyond Tuskeegee – Vaccine distrust and everyday racism. New England 
J or Med. 2021. doi: 10.1056/ NEJMpv2035827  
27. Nowotny  KM, Bailey  Z, Brinkley -Rubinstein  L. The contribution of prisons and jails to US racial 
disparities during  COVID -19. Am J  of Public Health.  2021; 111:197-99, 
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2020.306040  
28. Saloner B, Parish K, Ward JA, DiLaura G, Dolovich S. COVID -19 Cases and Deaths in Federal and 
State Prisons. JAMA . 2020;324(6):602 –3. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12528  
29. Fisher KA, Bloomstone SJ, Walder J, Crawford S, Fouayzi H, Mazor KM. Attitudes toward a 
potential SARS -CoV-2 vaccine: A survey of U.S. adults. Annals of Intern Med. 2020;173(12):964 -
73.  
30. Day M. COVID -19: Israel  advises  against foreign travel after recording 125 new 
cases.  BMJ;373n:n1617. doi:10.1136/bmj.n1617  
31. Lieberman -Cribbin W, Tuminello S, Flores RM, Taioli E. Disparities in COVID -19 Testing and 
Positivity in New York City. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. Published online June  
32. Ayón C, Marsiglia FF, Bermudez -Parsai M. Latino family mental health: exploring the role of 
discrimination and familismo. J Community Psychol. 2010;38(6):742 -756. doi:10.1002/jcop.20392  
33. Elder JP, Ayala GX, Parra -Medina D, Talavera GA. Health Communication in the Latino 
Community: Issues and Approaches. Annu Rev Public Health. 2009;30(1):227 -251. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.031308.100300  
34. Davila YR, Reifsnider E, Pecina I. Familismo: influence on Hispanic health behaviors. Applied 
Nursing Research. 2011;24(4):e67 -e72. doi:10.1016/j.apnr.2009.12.003  
35. Pagkas -Bather  J, Young  LE, Chen  YT, et al. Social Network Interventions for HIV Transmission 
Elimination. Curr HIV/AIDS Rep.  2020; 17:450–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11904 -020-00524 -z 
36. Rogers EM. Diffusion of innovations . 5th ed. New York: Free Press; 2003.  
37. Young LE, Schumm P, Alon L, et al. PrEP Chicago: A randomized controlled peer change agent 
intervention to promote the adoption of pre -exposure prophylaxis for HIV prevention among young 
Black men who have sex with men. Clin Trials. 2018;15(1):44 -52. doi:1 0.1177/1740774517730012  
38. Patel VV, Ginsburg Z, Golub SA, et al. Empowering With PrEP (E -PrEP), a Peer -Led Social Media -
Based Intervention to Facilitate HIV Preexposure Prophylaxis Adoption Among Young Black and 
Latinx Gay and Bisexual Men: Protocol for a Cluster Randomized Control led Trial. JMIR Res 
Protoc . 2018;7(8):e11375. Published 2018 Aug 28. doi:10.2196/11375  
39. Langellier BA. Policy Recommendations to Address High Risk of COVID -19 Among Immigrants. Am 
J Public Health . 2020;110(8):1137 -9. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2020.305792  
40. Ortega AN, McKenna RM, Kemmick Pintor J, et al. Health Care Access and Physical and 
Behavioral Health Among Undocumented Latinos in California . Med Care.  2018;56(11):919 -26. 
doi:10.1097/MLR.0000000000000985  
41. Laster Pirtle WN. Racial Capitalism: A Fundamental Cause of Novel Coronavirus (COVID -19) 
Pandemic Inequities in the United States. Health Educ Behav.  2020;47(4):504 -8. 
doi:10.1177/1090198120922942  
42. Straub AM, Gray BJ, Ritchie LA, Gill DA. Cultivating disaster resilience in rural Oklahoma: 
Community disenfranchisement and relational aspects of social capital. J of Rural Studies.  
2020;73:105 -13. doi:10.1016/j.jrurstud.2019.12.010  
43. Whetten K, Leserman  J, Whetten R, et al. Exploring Lack of Trust in Care Providers and the 
Government as a Barrier to Health Service Use. Am J Public Health . 2006;96(4):716 -21. 
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2005.063255  
44. Adams G, Tormala TT, O’Brien LT. The effect of self -affirmation on perception of racism. J of Exp 
Soc Psychol . 2006;42(5):616 -26. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2005.11.001  
Page 20 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 45. Solis J, Franco -Paredes C, Henao -Martínez AF, Krsak M, Zimmer SM. Structural Vulnerability in the 
U.S. Revealed in Three Waves of COVID -19. The Am J of Tropical Med and Hygiene.  
2020;103(1):25 -27. doi:10.4269/ajtmh.20 -0391  
46. Dorn A van, Cooney RE, Sabin ML. COVID -19 exacerbating inequalities in the US. The Lancet . 
2020;395(10232):1243 -44. doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(20)30893 -X 
47. Kantamneni N. The impact of the COVID -19 pandemic on marginalized populations in the United 
States: A research agenda. J of Vocational Behav . 2020;119:103439. 
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2020.103439  
48. Palmer -Wackerly AL, Chaidez V, Wayment C, Baker J, Adams A, Wheeler LA. Listening to the 
Voices of Community Health Workers: A Multilevel, Culture -Centered Approach to Overcoming 
Structural Barriers in U.S. Latinx Communities. Qual Health Res . 2020;30(3):423 -36. 
doi:10.1177/1049732319855963  
49. Macias Gil R, Marcelin JR, Zuniga -Blanco B, Marquez C, Mathew T, Piggott DA. COVID -19 
Pandemic: Disparate Health Impact on the Hispanic/Latinx Population in the United States. J of 
Infect Dis eas. Published online July 30, 2020:jiaa474. doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa474  
50. AmeriSpeak. Accessed August 4, 2020.  https:/ /www.amerispeak.org/  
51. Pazzanese C. Social media used to spread, create COVID -19 falsehoods.  Harvard Gazette. 
Published May 8, 2020. Accessed August 5, 2020. 
https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2020/05/social -media - used -to-spread -create -covid -19-
falsehoods/  
52. Baton Rouge, LA Census Place. Available at  https://datausa.io/profile/geo/baton -rouge -
la/#covid.  Accessed June 28, 2021.   
53. ACLU. Louisiana is no longer the world’s prison capital. 2018. Available at 
https://www.aclu.org/blog/criminal -law-reform/louisiana -no-longer -worlds -prison -capital -heres -
whats -next. Accessed June 28, 2021.   
54. Long, A, Mathew S, Alvarez KS, et al. Culturally Specific Messaging to Improve Influenza 
Immunizations in an At -Risk Hispanic Population in  Dallas. 2021. Manuscript under review.  
55. Stanford KA, Hazra A, Friedman E, et al.  Opt-out, routine emergency department syphilis screening 
as a novel intervention in at -risk populations. Sex Transm Dis.  2020. doi: 
10.1097/OLQ.0000000000001311. Epub ahead of print.  
56. Zaller ND, Neher TL, Presley M, et al. Barriers to linking high -risk jail detainees to HIV pre -exposure 
prophylaxis. PLoS One . 2020;15(4):e0231951. eCollection 2020.  
57. Zaller N, Donadeo K*, Coffey J*, Zielinski M* and Brinkley -Rubinstein L*. Screening for Opioid Use 
Disorder in the Largest Jail in Arkansas: A Brief Report. J of Correctional Healthcare . 
2019;25(3):214 -218. Epub 2019 Jun 13. doi: 10.1177/1078345819852133.  
58. Balasubramanian BA, Cohen DJ, Jetelina KK, et al.  Outcomes of integrated behavioral health with 
primary care . J Am Board Fam Med  imary Care. 2017;30(2):130 -139. doi: 
10.3122/jabfm.2017.02.160234  
59. Baldwin  AS, Denman  DC, Sala M,  et al. Translating self -persuasion into an adolescent HPV 
vaccine promotion intervention for parents attending safety -net clinics. Patient Educ Couns . 
2017; 100(4) :736-41. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2016.11.014  
60. Baldwin  AS, Zhu H, Rochefort  CR, et al. Mechanisms of self -persuasion intervention for HPV 
vaccination: Testing memory and autonomous motivation. Health Psychol.  2021;  in press  
61. Tiro JA, Marks EG, Rochefort C, et al. Factorial randomized controlled trial of parental self 
persuasion for adolescent HPV vaccination. 2021. Manuscript under review.  
62. Schneider JA, Zhou AN, Laumann EO. A new HIV prevention network approach: sociometric peer 
change agent selection. Soc Sci Med.  2015;125:192 -202. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2013.12.034  
63. Hendershot T, Pan H, Haines J, et al. Using the PhenX Toolkit to Add Standard Measures to a 
Study. Curr Protoc Hum Genet . 2011;Chapter 1:Unit1.21. doi:10.1002/0471142905.hg0121s71  
64. PhenX Toolkit. Accessed August 4, 2020.  https:/ /www.phenxtoolkit.org/  
Page 21 of 21     Version 2023.11.20 
 65. AmeriSpeak AP -NORC Survey, Fisher KA, Bloomstone SJ, et al. Attitudes Toward a Potential 
SARS -CoV-2 Vaccine: A Survey of US Adults. Annals of Intern Med . 2020.  
66. Network Canvas. Accessed August 4, 2020.  https://networkcanvas.com/  
67. Shah NS, Iveniuk J, Muth SQ, et al. Structural bridging network position is associated with HIV 
status in a younger Black men who have sex with men epidemic. AIDS Behav . 2014;18(2):335 -45. 
doi:10.1007/s10461 -013-0677 -8 
68. Schneider J, Schumm LP, Fraser M, et al. A gold -standard for entity resolution within sexually 
transmitted infection networks. Sci Rep.  2018;8:8776. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -018-26794 -7 
69. JCOIN Core Measures Files. Accessed August 3, 2020. 
https://gmu1.app.box.com/s/iut67mwcl9rv6e8b3wb7rje3hw5k5wqv  
70. Login & Registration. Justice Community Opioid Innovation Network (JCOIN). Accessed August 3, 
2020. https://www.jcoinctc.org/login/  
71. Gelman A, Hill J. Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models. Cambridge 
University Press; 2006. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511790942  
72. Rogers W. Regression standard errors in clustered samples. Stata Technical Bulletin.  
1994;3(13):88 –94. 
73. Cameron AC, Trivedi PK. Regression Analysis of Count Data. Second edition. Cambridge 
University Press; 2013.  
74. Harel O, Zhou X -H. Multiple imputation: review of theory, implementation and software. Statist Med . 
2007;26(16):3057 -3077. doi:10.1002/sim.2787  
75. Gelman A. Bayesian Data Analysis. Third edition. CRC Press; 2014  
76. Glasgow RE, Harden SM, Gaglio B, et al. RE -AIM planning and evaluation framework: Adapting to 
new science and practice with a 20 -year review. Front  Public  Health . 2019;7:64. 
doi:10.3389/fpubh.2019.00064  
77. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion 
interventions: the RE -AIM framework. Am J Public Health . 1999;89(9):1322 -7. 
doi:10.2105/AJPH.89.9.1322  
78. Gale RC, Wu J, Erhardt T.  et al.  Comparison of rapid vs in -depth qualitative analytic methods from 
a process evaluation of academic detailing in the Veterans Health Administration.  Implementation 
Sci. 2019;14(11). Doi:10.1186/s13012 -019-0853 -y  
79. Sullivan SD, Mauskopf JA, Augustovski F, et al. Budget Impact Analysis —Principles of Good 
Practice: Report of the ISPOR 2012 Budget Impact Analysis Good Practice II Task Force. Value in 
Health.  2014;17(1):5 -14. doi:10.1016/j.jval.2013.08.2291  
 