                 Research protocol for GRIN  feasibility  evaluation  
 
A-1 
  
GUARDIANS RECEIVING INFORMATION THROUGH NAVIGATORS (GRIN)  
STUDY PROTOCOL  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
MARCH , 3 2022 
 
                   
                     
                 Research protocol for GRIN  feasibility  evaluation  
 
A-2 
 KDH  RESEARCH & COMMUNICATION  
RESEARCH PROTOCOL FOR GRIN  FEASIBILITY  EVALUATION  
EVALUATION STUDY  
 
 
BACKGROUND  
  
Purpose of Research  
KDH Research & Communication (KDHRC) received funding from the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities (NIMHD) to develop and evaluate Guardians Receiving Information through Navigators (GRIN). GRIN is an online 
professional development course that aims to prepare community health workers  (CHWs
1), 
trusted community members familiar with their communities’ needs and resources, to provide oral health outreach to low -income Black guardians of children and adolescents (henceforth, 
Black guardians) . 
 In Phase I, KDHRC will convene a steering 
committee to inform an architecture plan that includes the full course content outline, video storyboards, and virtual interactive learning experience storyboards. Then, KDHRC will develop the GRIN prototype with two full course mod ules with text, video animatics, 
and rough- cut virtual client experiences. 
Finally, KDHRC will conduct a feasibility 
evaluation study (henceforth, study) to 
explore changes in CHWs’ knowledge, 
attitudes, beliefs, perceived self -efficacy, and 
intentions  to conduct oral health outreach to low-income Black guardians of children and 
adolescents after exposure to the GRIN prototype. This study will provide insight for future GRIN expansion, finalization, and randomized control trial (RCT) evaluation to measure 
behavior change among CHWs and guardians in  a small business innovation research (SBIR) 
Phase II  project . 
 Specifically, KDHRC proposes to conduct a two-group, randomized pretest/posttest  feasibility  
study to evaluate the extent to which the GRIN protytype increases CHWs’ knowledge, attitudes and beliefs, perceived self -efficacy, and intentions to conduct oral health care outreach to low-
income Black guardians. KDHRC will conduct the study with CHWs  nationwide.  
 
The study will consist of pretest and posttest surveys and a virtual education session with two 
GRIN modules  (treatment) or no intervention (control), pending Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) approval.  The participants in the study are CHW s. KDHRC will partner with community -
based organizations (CBOs) to assist with CHW  recruitment.  
 
 
1 CHWs  include community health workers (CHWs), community health representatives (CHRs), lay health 
workers, and other titles.  Terminology  
• CBO: Community-based organizations serving low-income Black guardians (e.g., National Association of Community Health Workers) 
• Potential participants: CHWs recruited 
through CBOs   
• Participants : CBO- recruited CHW s with 
completed consent forms 
 
 
 
                 Research protocol for GRIN  feasibility  evaluation  
 
A-3 
 This protocol describes the procedures for the study. 
Responsible Parties  
Dexter Cooper, MPH, is the Principal Investigator with  oversite of the GRIN project.  Nicole 
Wanty, KDHRC’s senior research associate, is the Project Director. Morgan Fleming, a KDHRC 
researcher , will manage the study. 
 Specifically, KDHRC will:  
• Contract and share study materials with CBOs  (recruitment subcontractors) to recruit 
participants   
• Program and manage the online eligibility  and consent forms , pretest survey , and posttest 
survey 
• Send follow-up communications to consented participants 
• Manage, clean, and analyze data  
• Manage incentive distribution 
• Report on study findings 
 KDHRC will contract with CBOs serving low- income Black guardians to be the recruitment 
subcontractors. To be eligible, each CBO must demonstrate organization stability and their 
capacity to participate in the study by having: 
(1) Federal nonprofit tax -exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
Code 
(2) Internet access to share the recruitment materials with their network of CHWs  
(3) At least one active program that conducts health care outreach to low -income Black 
clients  with a minimum of 15 active CHWs on staff (paid or volunteer)  
(4) A dedicated point of contact (POC) who will participate in a kick -off call with KDHRC 
and oversee the study at their CBO  
 Prior to sharing the study  materials with each CBO, KDHRC will schedule a kick -off call with 
each CBO POC. During each kick- off call, KDHRC will briefly explain the study and provide an 
overview of the study requirements, time commitment, and consent process.  
 Each CBO will share the  KDHRC-developed and IRB approved recruitment materials  (e.g., 
flyer, email template) with potential participants .  
 R
ESEARCH DESIGN  
 
Goal  
The goal of the  GRIN study  is to examine the impact of the GRIN online professional development 
course  prototype . Specifically, the study  aims to address the following research question: “ To what 
extent does the GRIN prot otype increase CHWs’ knowledge, attitudes and beliefs, perceived self -
efficacy, and intentions to conduct oral health care outreach to low-income Black guardians of children and adolescents ?”  
 
Approach  
The study  will use a two -group, pretest/posttest design . KDHRC will program the  eligibility and 
consent forms, pretest survey and posttest surveys  in Alchemer (formerly SurveyGizmo), a 
                 Research protocol for GRIN  feasibility  evaluation  
 
A-4 
 secure online survey platform.  This  Phase I SBIR  requires KDHRC to  create content for two 
modules only: “Tooth decay impact on children and adolescents” and “Preventive oral health 
care.” Each module will be 20 – 30 minutes to complete and cover several expert -approved and 
reviewed topics.  The participants in the intervention group will be sent a link to a KDHRC 
webpage where they will access the videos. Participants will access the videos by computer or cell phone to begin their virtual education session .  
 CHW s will be recruited through the CBOs and directed to an online link for eligibility screening 
and informed consent. KDHRC will confirm consent for each participant and after confirming consent, KDHRC will randomize each participant with completed  consent into the treatment or 
control group using a 1:1 randomization. KDHRC will alternate assigning each participant with completed consent to the treatment group or the control group. Then, KDHRC will send each participant the link to the online pretest surve y. After completing the pretest survey, each 
treatment group participant will receive access to  a virtual education session with two GRIN 
modules. The control group will not receive an intervention. Each participant will receive the posttest survey two weeks after completing the pretest survey.   
Participants  and recruitment  
CBOs  with signed contracts to participate in the study will designate a POC who will be 
responsible for sharing recruitment materials with potential participants  at their respective CBO. 
KDHRC will require each CBO to participate in a kick- off call with KDHRC staff during which 
time KDHRC staff will review the study protocol and answer additional questions. After the call, each CBO will be required to  sign and return the certification  form (see Attachment X ) that 
states that the  CBO POC understands the process and will follow the procedures outlined during 
the kick- off call . KDHRC will send the certification form via email or DocuSign to the CBO 
POC to sign prior to the CBO receiving the recruitment materials.  If the CBO  POC fails to 
follow the provisions of the certification  form,  the CBO will be removed from the study  and will 
not receive full compensation.  
 CBOs will recruit potential participants in their network s, including potential participants within 
their CBOs, by sharing KDHRC -developed and IRB -approved recruitment materials (e.g., email 
template, fly er) thru email (e.g., listervs) and message boards. The recruitment materials will 
contain the link to the eligibility form , information on the time commitment, and instructions to 
contact KDHRC with questions. The study will include up to 120 CHWs nationwide (60 
treatment, 60 control) from up to 16 CBOs. Although CBOs will recruit participants and may 
have access to potential particip ant information (e.g., name, email address) from their listservs, 
CBOs will not have knowledge of who actually serves as study participants and will not have access to enrolled participants’ data. KDHRC will remind participants that participation in the study is completely voluntary, that the  CBO that shared recruitment materials with the 
participant will not have knowledge of who actually serves as study participants, and that his or 
her participation  is no way tied to his or her position at and/or relatio nship with the CBO that 
shared recruitment materials with him or her.  Eligibility criteria for CHWs  include: 
• Must  be at least 18 years old  
• Must  self-identify as a community health worker 
                 Research protocol for GRIN  feasibility  evaluation  
 
A-5 
 • Must  conduct outreach to Black clients  
• Must  have six months of field experience. KDHRC defines “field experience” as 
conducting outreach activities in their community, for example, working with clients in a 
clinic, conducting home visits, or educating clients at health fairs or community events  
• Must  be an active CHW.  KDHRC define s “active” as conducting outreach activities, 
such as working with clients in a clinic, conducting home visits, or educating clients at health fairs or community events, in the last six months 
• Must  have Internet access either at home or at work to access the GRIN virtual education 
session and/ or online surveys. 
 Each p articipant in both the treatment group and the control group will receive a $25 e- gift card 
(Amazon or Walmart) incentive after completing the pretest survey, and a $25 e- gift card 
(Amazon or Walmart) incentive after completing the posttest survey for a total of up to $ 50 in e-
gift card incentives (Amazon or Walmart). Each p articipant  in the treatment group will receive 
an additional $25 incentive for completing the  virtual education session with two GRIN 
modules.
2 
 
Methods  
Upon completing and submitting the consent form to participate, each  participant will be 
randomly assigned to either the treatment group or the control group. Then, KDHRC will send each participant the link to the online pretest survey.  Participants will have two week s to 
complete the pretest  survey . A KDHRC researcher will send approximately three reminders 
(email, phone, text ) per week to each consented participant to complete the pretest survey.  
 KDHRC will email the treatment group participants the  information to access a virtual education 
session . When each participant accesses th e virtual education session for the first time, each 
participant will be prompted to create a user ID and password and provide the last two letters  of 
his or her last name, his or her three letter initials, and his or her year of birth, to access the 
virtual education session. Participants in the treatment group will have two weeks to complete 
the virtual education session. Participants in the control group will not receive an intervention for the two weeks between surveys. KDHRC will send one reminder (email or phone) per week to participants to promote continued engagement with the study (e.g., remind treatment participants to complete the  virtual education session; remind control participants of the date when they will 
receive their posttest survey ). 
 Then, two -weeks after pretest completion, KDHRC will email all participants the links and 
instructions for posttest survey completion. Each participant  will have two week s to complete the 
posttest survey . A KDHRC researcher will send approximately three reminders (email , phone, 
text) per week to each consented participant to complete the posttest survey.   The links to the pretest  and posttest surveys will be used to collect participant data, therefore 
only KDHRC staff will have access to raw data.  Each survey will take no more than 45 minutes 
to complete.   
 
 
2 We provide an additional incentive for treatment participants because treatment participants will access a 
virtual education session with two GRIN modules  while the control group does not have to access anything.  
                 Research protocol for GRIN  feasibility  evaluation  
 
A-6 
 Analysis 
KDHRC will program the eligibility  and consent form s, pretest survey , and posttest survey s in 
Alchemer , a secure online survey platform. After completion of the study, KDHRC will 
download the raw data from Alchemer into encrypted Excel spreadsheets.  
 KDHRC will import the data into STATA , a quantitative statistical software , to analyze and 
assess the extent to which the GRIN prototype increases CHWs’ knowledge, attitudes and 
beliefs, perceived self -efficacy, and intentions to conduct oral health care outreach to low-
income Black guardians . 
 
Timeline  
The study will begin immediately upon obtaining IRB approval . All data collection will conclude 
by June 30, 2022.   DATA COLLECTION KDHRC will collect quantitative data from up to 120 CHWs ( 60 CHWs  per group) through 
online survey s only. If KDHRC encounters low recruitment numbers and/or high attrition rates, 
then KDHRC will contract with additional CBOs and utilize additional recruitment methods (e.g., social media) to reach additional participants. This will not impact the rights of or risk to study participants.   
Identifying Information  
CBOs  will not have access to  enrolled participants’ survey responses. Although CBOs will 
recruit participants and may have access to potential participant information (e.g., name, email address) from their listservs, CBOs will not have knowledge of who actually serves as study 
participants and will not have access to enrolled participants’ data.  
 KDHRC will not share consented participants’ names or contact information with CBOs. KDHRC will collect participants’ names, email addresses, and phone numbers to share study information and send reminders. KDHRC will not link names or other identifying information to the responses. Each p articipant will create an ID number based on several survey questions ( last 
two letters  of his or her last name, his or her three letter initials, and his or her year of birth ). 
KDHRC will collect this information solely to match  participant data.  
 KDHRC will use an Alchemer -developed system to match each participant’s pretest and posttest 
survey responses using URL redirects and a “gateway survey.”
3 When participants click the 
KDHRC-provided link to access the pretest survey, participants  will first be directed to a 
separate page (the “gateway survey”)  where they will be prompted to enter their ID number and 
select that they need to complete the pretest survey. The participant will then automatically be redirected to the pretest survey questions. After the two -week intervention period, KDHRC will 
email participants the same link  that directs participants to the “gateway survey .” Participants 
will enter the same ID number and select that they have alrea dy completed the pretest survey two  
weeks prior. Participants will automatically be redirected to the posttest survey questions. Alchemer, the secure online survey platform, will automatically match each participant’s  pretest 
and posttest survey question responses and create one composite complete , matched pretest and 
 
3 Create a Pre- Test and Post -Test Survey | Alchemer Help  
                 Research protocol for GRIN  feasibility  evaluation  
 
A-7 
 posttest dataset  per participant . Although each participant’s ID number will be collected in the 
back end of the online survey platform, participants will not enter their ID number on the pretest 
survey questions or the posttest survey questions. Full names will not be recorded on surveys and participants will not provide other identifying information to researchers through the surveys.   
 KDHRC will save all raw data on KDHRC’s secure server in a project specific, password protected  folder . KDHRC will destroy all raw data and related forms one year after the end of 
data analysis.  
 
Assurance of Confidentiality  
Confidentiality is crucial to the protection of human subjects. Therefore, KDHRC will strictly follow its established procedures on the protection of confidential information. Moreover, all KDHRC staff who have access to these data will sign confidentialit y pledges. Only links to the 
pretest  and posttest  surveys will be used to collect participant data, therefore only KDHRC staff 
will have access to raw data. KDHRC will keep information that participants provide private and confidential. KDHRC will offer to  share the research report with  CBOs  at the conclusion of the 
study. KDHRC will inform participants prior to their participation that their responses are confidential. KDHRC will also advise participants of the nature of the activity, the length of time it will require, and that participation is purely voluntary and that th ey can stop at any time. 
KDHRC will assure participants that no penalties will occur if they wish not to respond, either to the information collected as a whole or to specific questions.   As a further confidentiality guarantee, KDHRC will present data in reports in aggregate form only and will not preserve links to individuals. KDHRC will track consent electronically and collect data through Alchemer, the online platform that is only access ible with the KDHRC 
username and password. Further, KDHRC will store participant responses in a password-protected files on the KDHRC server.  