 
 
 
Safety of a Sheath Cryoprobe Bronchoscopic 
Transbronchial Biopsy Technique  
  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
 
Document Creation Date: October 1, 2020  
page 1 of 27 
 Safety of a Sheath Cryoprobe  Bronchoscopic  Transbronchial  Biop sy Technique  
ACRONYM : FROSTBITE  
  
Principal Investigator:  Yarmus, Lonny  
    
Draft or Version Number: v.0. 8 
01 Oct 2020  
 
    
page 3 of 27 
  
 
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE  
 The trial will be conducted in accordance with the ICH GCP E6, the Code of Federal Regulations on the 
Protection of Human Subjects (45 CFR Part 46), and the STTR  Terms of Award. The Principal Investigator 
will assure that no deviation from, or changes to the protocol will take place without prior agreement from the sponsor  and documented approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB), except where 
necessary to  eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to the trial participants. All personnel involved in the 
conduct of this study have completed Human Subjects Protection Training.  
 
I agree to ensure that all staff members involved in the conduct of this study are informed  about their 
obligations in meeting the above commitments.  
Principal Investigator: ________________________________ 
Print/Type Name  
Signed: _____________________________________   Date: ______________  
     Signature  
  
page 4 of 27 
 STUDY CONTACT INFORMATION  
 
Coordinat ing Center   
Core Lab   
 
Johns Hopkins University  
 
Principle Investigator  (Lead PI) : 
 
Lonny Yarmus, DO  
Associate Professor of Medicine  
Johns Hopkins University  
Phone: 410 -502-2533  
Email:  lyarmus@jhmi.edu  
 
Research Coordinator:  
 
Jenna Los  
Research Program Manager  
Phone:  410 -955-5288  
Email: jlos1@jhmi.edu  
 
  
Pathology:  
Peter Illei, MD  
Associate Professor of Pathology  
Johns Hopkins University  
pillei1@jhmi.edu  
 
Radiology:  
Cheng Tin (Tony) Lin  
Associate Professor of Radiology  
Johns Hopkins University  
clin97 @jhmi.edu  
Additional Site Contact  
 
Fabien Maldonado, MD  
Associate Professor of Medicine  
Vanderbilt University  
Phone: 615 -322-3412  
Email: fabien.maldonado@vanderbilt.edu  
  
 
 
  
page 6 of 27 
 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
Title:  Safety of a Sheath Cryoprobe Bronchoscopic 
Transbronchial Biopsy Technique  
 (The FROSTBITE  Trial)  
Study Objective : To determine the safety profile of a 1.1mm 
flexible single -use cryoprobe with oversheath  
used for transbronchial  lung biopsy via a 
bronchoscopic approach  
Study Device:  ERBE 1.1mm flexible single -use cryoprobe with 
oversheath  
Design:  A multi -center, non -randomized, single -arm, 
prospective trial designed to determine the 
safety profile of a novel cryo probe  and generate 
preliminary efficacy data.  
Phase:  Post -Market  
Number of Sites enrolling participants:  2 
Number of Subjects:  50 
Study Participant Duration:  30 days  
Study Duration:  3 months  
Population : Inclusion Criteria:  
• Male or Female, ≥ 18 -years -old 
• Scheduled to undergo bronchoscopy with transbronchial  biopsy  as the 
standard medical care  determined by 
their treating pulmonologist  
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Pregnant or nursing females, or females 
of child bearing potential who refuse to take a pregnancy test prior to enrollment  
• Individuals with current or recent systematic conditions, such as 
uncontrolled hypertension (systolic > 
200 mmHg or diastolic > 110 mmHg), 
type 1 diabetes, severe pulmonary 
hypertension, acute kidney injury, stroke (within the last 6 mo nths) or myocardial 
infarction (within the last 3 months)  
• Presence of bleeding disorder  
• Platelet count <50,000  
• Current use of systemic anticoagulation  
or antiplatelet therapy without the 
ability to hold therapy for the 
recommended amount of time prior to 
an invasive procedure (aspirin 
monotherapy is acceptable)  
page 7 of 27 
 • International Normalized Ratio (INR) 
<1.5  
• Robotic Bronchoscopy  
• Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) status  
• Do Not Intubate (DNI) status  
 
Endpoints:  The primary endpoint will be the number of 
serious adverse events in those enrolled in the 
study. Serious adverse events are defined as : 
• Grade 3 or 4 bleeding 
• Pneumothorax requiring chest tube 
placement  (Grade ≥2)  
• 30-day respiratory failure and death.  
 
Secondary endpoints include minor adverse 
events (bleeding Gra de 1 or 2), pneumothorax 
not requiring chest tube placement  (Grade 1) , 
histologic accessibility, diagnostic yield  
Statistical Methodology  This study is designed to ensure the serious 
adverse event rate using the 1.1mm flexible single -use cryoprobe with ov ersheath  will not 
exceed the  expected serious adverse event rate 
of transbronchial  biopsy using standard biopsy  
procedures  (30%)  
Safety Monitoring  After each 10 consecutive  patients are enrolled, 
the DSMB will review safety. Additionally, after each serious  adverse event , the study will be 
halted until adjudicated by the DSMB.  
 
  
page 8 of 27 
 1. BACKGROUND  
The current standard method for obtaining bronchoscopic lung biopsy specimens is transbronchial 
forceps biopsy (FBx). However, the utility and diagnostic capability of FBx is limited by poor specimen quality due to small biopsy size, crush artifact and cellular artifact.
1 In part d ue to these restraints, the 
diagnostic yield of FBx has remained limited to 34 -58% in diffuse lung disease1-3 and 54 -58% for 
pulmonary nodules4,5. With the promise of obtaining higher quality tissue samples, cryoprobe biopsy 
(CBx) offers a similarly minimal invasive alternative to standard FBx.  
 Cryoprobes have been used in the bronchoscopic management of malignant endo bronchial disease and 
for transbronchial  biopsy. The CBx operates using the Joule -Thomson effect, in which compressed gas 
undergoes adiabatic expansion and rapidly cools the probe s’ tip. This allows for adequate anchoring of 
the probe to lung parenchyma and biopsy specimen retrieval. There have been numerous recent studies evaluating the performance of CBx. Higher diagnostic yields and larger biopsy sizes with better quality have bee n observed using CBx over FBx
2,3,6- 8. However, these benefits might come at a cost of higher 
complication rates, spe cifically, higher bleeding risks.  
1.1. STUDY RATIONALE  
One of the drawbacks of the current available CBx system (Erbe Elektromedizin GmbH) is the need for 
en bloc removal of the cryoprobe, specimen, and bronchoscope out of the patient’s airway to retrieve 
the sample. This timeframe when the scope is removed  may  increase bleeding complications  usually 
mitigated by keep ing the scope wedged after each biopsy . This nec essitates a secure airway to permit 
rapid re -entry of the bronchoscop e, and placement of a prophylactic bronchial blocker which limited this 
procedure to advanced bronchoscopists . To overcome this obstacle, a novel, smaller 1.1mm flexible 
single -use cryoprobe (SCBx) with oversheath has been developed that can retract the tissue sample 
through the overs heath via the working channel of the bronchoscope while the scope remains  wedged  
in the airway. This permits a technically less cumbersome biopsy while the scope remains in place to 
manage potential complications. It is reasonable to hypothesize  that due to these advancements in 
procedural technique , the safety profile of this new SCBx would be superior to traditional CBx . That said, 
no prospective trials  have been performed evaluating the safety of the SCBx.  Here, we propose the first 
human studies to evaluate the safety of the SCBx for bronchoscopic transbronchial  lung biopsy.  
1.2. DEVICE DESCRIPTION   
The ERBE 1.1mm flexible single -use cryoprobe with oversheath has been approved by the  US Food and 
Drug Agency (FDA) under  a 510(k)  application  (ERBECRYO ® 2 Cryosurgical Unit and Accessories -  
K190651). It is to be used with the ERBECRYO 2 unit.  The ERBECRYO 2 is a device which was designed and 
optimized to address many of the clinical variables known to affect previous generations of the 
technology. This device contains an advanced flow -control system which is intended to provide 
optimized and r eproducible CO2 gas flow for each individual probe specification, including the 
miniaturized 1.1mm cryoprobe. This optimized gas flow is an important variable to support 
standardization of the technical and clinical performance.  
 The use of an  oversheath  with the 1.1mm single -use flexible cryoprobe  enables the working channel of 
the bronchoscope to be protected during retrieval of cryobiopsy specimens . This enables retrieval of the 
biopsy specimen through the working channel of the bronchoscope in a simila r fashion to transbronchial  
forceps , brush  and needle biopsy, permitting the bronchoscope to remain in place while biopsy samples 
are retrieved.  In this study, the 1.1mm single -use flexible cryoprobe with oversheath  will be used 
according to the associated  Instructions for Use (IFU).   
page 9 of 27 
 1.3. PRIOR CLINICAL DATA  
Preliminary  studies were performed in a porcine model to better evaluate the performance of SCBx.6 In 
a prospective, randomized, single blinded study, a 1.1mm SCBx probe, 1.9mm CBx probe, and standard 
2.0mm FBx forceps were compared, assessing histologic adequacy and accessibility, sample quantity and 
quality, and procedure time. Samples adequate for s tandard pathologic processing were retrieved with 
82.1%  of the SCBx specimens, 82.9%%  of the CBx specimens, and 30%  of the FBx specimens. The 
histologic accessibility and biopsy area of both SCBx and CBx was superior to FBx (Figure 1  6). Procedure 
time for FBx was faster than for both SCBx and CBx, but SCBx was significantly faster than CBx (P  < 
.0001). Fluoroscopy time was lower for both SCBx and CBx compared with FBx. This preliminary study 
demonstrate d SCBx is a feasible technique to retrieve specimens through the working cha nnel of a 
bronchoscope resulting in higher quality biopsy specimens compared with FBx.   
 
1.4. POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS  
This is the first-in-human  dedicated  post -market  safety  study  using the new  1.1mm  single -use flexible  
cryoprobe  with  oversheath . Prior  larger reusable  cryoprobes  (1.9mm,  2.4mm)  of the prior  generation  
have  been  shown  to be safe and efficacious.  The risks of using the smaller 1.1mm  single -use flexible  
cryoprobe  with  oversheath  are similar to use of the larger probes.  The risks  associated  with  
bronchoscopy  and cryoprobe  transbronchial biopsy  include:  
Figure 1:  Comparison of histologic accessibility and 
biopsy area between SCBx, CBx and FBx  
page 10 of 27 
 • Alteration of vocal cords (hoarse)  • Pharyngitis  
• Hypertension  • Dysrhythmias  
• Bronchospasm  • Pneumonia  
• Injury to mouth or pharynx  • Hemoptysis  
• Injury to teeth or related soft tissues  • Pulmonary edema  
• Chills/fever  • Empyema  
• Laryngospasm  • Pulmonary infiltrate  
• Coughing  • Excessive bleeding  
• Lung parenchymal infection  • Puncturing of the airway  
• COPD exacerbation  • Thromboembolism  
• Myocardial ischemia  • Spasm of the airway  
• Dyspnea   
  
Only  trained  and experienced  bronchoscopists  will perform  the study  procedure.  
Possible Risks of Participation in this Clinical Study  
There are standard risks of participating in a research stud y such as accidental disclosure of subject’s 
confidential information. Every effort will be made to protect the privacy of research subjects. Subject 
names and protected health information (PHI) will be kept confidential to the extent possible and as required by applicable laws and regulations. All records and data related to the study will be maintained 
in a secure protected space, with access restricted to study personnel only . 
 
1.5. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
It is possible  that subjects  will not receive any benefits  from  transbronchial cryobiopsy . Subjects  may  
benefit  from  optimized  medical management  of their  disease.  Potential  benefits  of the procedure  may  
be increased  size of the biopsy  specimen,  providing additional tissue  for pathologic  analysis.  This may  
lead  to increases  in the diagnostic  yield  of the bronchoscopy.  
2. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
This is a multi- center, non -randomized, single -arm, prospective trial designed to evaluate the safety of a  
novel 1.1mm single -use flexible cryoprobe with oversheath . Consecutive patients who have been 
referred for transbronchial  biopsy by their treating pulmonologists will be enrolled. Transbronchial 
biopsy will be performed using the ERBE 1.1mm single -use flexible cryoprobe with ove rsheath together 
with the ERBECRYO 2 unit . 
2.1. OBJECTIVE  AND PURPOSE  
The objective  of this study  is to evaluate  the safety  profile  of the new  1.1mm  single -use flexible  
cryoprobe  with  oversheath  for the sampling of lung tissue.  The safety  profile  will be assessed  across  the 
page 11 of 27 
 various  indication s for transbronchial lung biopsy  (i.e. lung transplant  rejection  surveillance,  lung nodule  
biopsy,  diffuse  parenchymal lung disease , pneumonitis ). Safety  will be assessed  by collecting  AE and SAE 
information  up to 30 days.  
2.2. PRIMARY SAFETY ENDPOINT  
The primary safety outcome will be the proportion of participants enrolled that underwent a device 
related Serious Adverse Events. A complication will be considered ‘device related’ if it occurs following 
the index procedure o f an attempt at cryo probe insertion into the working channel of the 
bronchoscope.   
 A device related Serious Adverse Event is defined by the presence  of any of the following:  
• bleeding grade ≥ 3 (see Adverse Events  for bleeding grading system)  
• pneumothorax requiring chest tube placement  (Grade ≥2, see Adverse Events for pneumothorax 
grading system)  
• post -procedure respiratory failure defined as the need for non -invasive or mechanical 
ventilation requiring ICU admission  within 30 days after  procedure  
• Death wit hin 30 days after  procedure  
2.3. SECONDARY ENDPOINTS   
Secondary Outcomes will include (for definitions, see Data Collection):  
1) Mild or Moderate  Adverse Events: Rate of bleeding grade ≤2, pneumothorax not requiring chest 
tube placement  (Grade 1)  
2) Histologic Accessibility Grade   
3) Total Histologic area (mm
2) 
4) Alveolated Area (mm2) 
5) Open alveoli percent  
6) Percent crush artifact  
7) Artifact free lung parenchyma percent  
8) Activation time  
9) Diagnostic Yield: defined as proportion of patients for which the cryobiops y sample led  to a 
specific diagnosis  on histologic examination  
10) Procedure time  
2.4. STUDY SITE PARTICIPATION  
This study will require a minimum of two participating sites. Each site will have a sufficient patient 
population to enroll 20 -30 subjects over the enrol lment period (3 months). Each site must have 
sufficient transbronchial  biopsy volume (defined as at least 100 cases per year). To ensure adequate 
access to patients across the various indications for transbronchial  biopsy, each site must have 
institutional centers for Lung Cancer, Lung Transplantation and Interstitial Lung Disease.  In addition, the 
principal investigator and each participating co -investigator at each site must have cryobiopsy 
experience, defined as c ompletion of at least 10 cryobiopsies.  
2.5. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
Patients presenting to their pulmonologist in need of a standard of care assessment of a transbronchial  
lung abnormality via bronch oscopic biopsy  and who meet inclusion/exclus ion criteria will be in vited to 
participate. The PI will confirm subject eligibility.   
 
page 12 of 27 
 Patients  who sign the informed consent form will be considered enrolled. Patients who undergo 
bronchoscopy with at least one cryobiopsy attempt will be included within the analysis population.  
 
2.6. PARTICIPANT INCLUSION CRITERIA  
• Male or Female , ≥ 18 -years -old 
• Scheduled to undergo bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsy  as the standard medical care 
determined by their treating pulmonologist  
2.7. PARTICIPANT EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
• Pregnant or nursi ng females, or females of child bearing potential who refuse to take a 
pregnancy test prior to enrollment  
• Individuals with current or recent systematic conditions, such as uncontrolled hypertension 
(systolic > 200 mmHg or diastolic > 110 mmHg), type 1 diab etes, severe pulmonary 
hypertension, acute kidney injury, stroke (within the last 6 months) or myocardial infarction 
(within the last 3 months)  
• Presence of bleeding disorder  
• Platelet count <50,000  
• Current use of systemic anticoagulation  or antiplatelet th erapy without the ability to hold 
therapy for the recommended amount of time prior to an invasive procedure  (aspirin 
monotherapy is acceptable)  
• International Normalized Ratio (INR) <1.5  
• Robotic Bronchoscopy  
• Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) status  
• Do Not Intubate (DNI) status  
2.8. WITHDRAW AL OF SUBJECTS 
Subjects  who  have  signed  an informed  consent  form  may  be withdrawn  from  this study  if they  withdraw  
their  consent,  or if the investigator  determines  the subject  should  no longer  continue  in the study.  
Subjects  may  be excluded  early  from  the study  at the discretion  of the investigator if continued  
participation  in the trial would  in some  way jeopardize  the subject’s  health  or welfare,  or as a result  of 
voluntary  withdrawal,  being  lost to follow -up (LTFU),  death,  or other  reasons  not related  to SAEs .  
Regardless  of the reason  for withdrawal,  data  available  for the subject  at the time  of withdrawal,  
including the reason  for withdrawal,  will be entered  on the Case  Report  Forms  (CRFs).  Data  collected  up 
to the time  of withdrawa l may  be used  by the sponsor  and supporting medical device  manufacturer  for 
regulatory  submissions,  publications  and other  study  related  data  analyses.  In cases  of withdrawal or 
LTFU,  the study  Investigator  should  document  the contact  attempts  and reasons  for subject  withdrawal 
or lost to follow  up with  other  supporting information  as requested  on the appropriate  CRFs.  
3. STUDY PROCEDURES  
3.1. SCREENING AND INFORMED CONSENT  
Patient screening will follow each participating institution’s standard of care. A member of  the Research 
Team at the site will review the subject’s previously documented standard of care medical information (including CT from the referring doctor) for eligibility and inclusion into the study. Subjects will be approached to obtain informed consen t prior to any study -specific procedure.  Informed consent will 
take place in a private environment (e.g. patient exam room), free from distractions. The PI or study 
page 13 of 27 
 team member will approach the subject at their standard of care clinic appointment or prio r to their 
scheduled bronchoscopy and will explain the study to qualified subjects prior to obtaining consent. All 
individuals who obtain consent (PI, Sub -investigators, and study coordinators) must have completion 
certificates for the CITI Human Subjects Research Education Course. Interviews to obtain consent will 
not follow any stressful situation (e.g. patient being informed he/she may have cancer) and will not be 
conducted if the patient has received any mind -altering medications or anesthesia. Patients  will be 
assessed for their capacity to consent by the ability to show comprehension of the procedure, ask 
appropriate questions, and appear properly oriented. A signed copy of all consents and the HIPAA 
authorization document will also be given to consent ing subjects.  
 
3.2. SCREEN FAILURES  
Subjects who provide informed consent, but are determined to be ineligible prior to the index procedure (insertion of the cryoprobe into the working channel of the bronchoscope ) will be considered 
screen failures.  The reason  for screen failure will be documented.  
 
3.3. SEDATION/AIRWAY  
Patients will undergo the procedure under deep sedation with an artificial airway (endotracheal tube, laryngeal mask airway or tracheostomy) in place . The use of a rigid bronchoscope will be left to the 
discretion of the physician performing the procedure. Deep sedation medications and route of 
administration are at the discret ion of the sedating physician.  
 
3.4. BRONCHOSCOPIC BIOPSY  
Prior to induction of an esthesia, the 1.1mm flexible single -use cryoprobe will be connected to the 
ERBECRYO 2 unit via the plug (see IFU for full details).  The cryoprobe should be tested  as described in 
the instruction for use (IFU)  by immersing the cryotip to a depth of at least  5 cm in sterile warm water  at 
a temperature of approx. 20°C (68°F) and by activating the freeze function of the ERBECRYO 2  for 
approx imately  5 seconds. A clearly visible, homogenous ball of ice  must form at the cryo tip when 
freezing capacity is sufficient. Gas bubbles must not escape under any circumstances . Once tested, 
induction of anesthesia may be performed.  
 
Once appropriate sedation has been achieved and a  secure airway has been placed, an airway 
inspection is to be performed. Following airway inspection and after the appropriate airway has been 
selected , the cryoprobe multiadapter will be secured to the working channel connector  of the 
bronchoscope . The oversheath  can then be inserted and secured to the multiadapter. The cryoprobe 
can then be inserted through the oversheath via the bronchoscope into the targeted airway using tactile 
control until in the targeted location  is reached . It is optional to place a deflat ed prophylactic bronchial 
blocker prior to biopsy.  The freeze function is then activated.  The initial freeze time will be 4 seconds  as 
measured on the device timer . At the discretion of the bronchoscopist, should inadequate tissue be 
collected due to incomplete freeze, the freeze time can be extended by 1 second on each consecutive 
attempt, up to a maximum of 8 seconds. The cryoprobe along with the biopsy specimen i s removed with 
a jerk motion analogous  to the same motion used for standard forceps .  The sample is then extracted 
through  the oversheath  with the bronchoscope remaining in the airway , thereby maintaining freezing  
activation  until the specimen is completel y out of the bronchoscope .  It is important, that the specimen 
is pulled quickly into the oversheath with the first movement as far as possible in order to squeeze soft tissue in the oversheath. The freeze function is then deactivated and the specimen shou ld immediately 
page 14 of 27 
 be placed in  saline . The removal tool accompanying each cryoprobe  can be used to  carefully remove the 
specimen from the tip of the cryop robe  only after the specimen was defrosted . Specimens will then be 
transferred into a fixative ( i.e. formalin) per institutional policy  and sent to the local institutional 
pathology lab for processing and interpretation.  Each biopsy sample will then be sent for central 
pathology interpretation . If tissue cultures are clinically indicated, an additional specimen may be placed 
in sterile saline  
For non -lung transplant rejection related  biopsies , a minimum of 3  biopsies must be taken using the 
1.1mm sheath cryoprobe. For lung transplant rejection surveillance biopsies, a minimum of 5 
cryobiopsies must be ta ken (more if needed), as per IHSLT guidelines , at least 5 pieces of well -expanded 
alveolated lung parenchyma are required for an assessment of acute rejection.9 As part of this study, 
only cryobiopsy with the  1.1mm single -use flexible cryoprobe with oversheath  is permitted for 
transbronchial lung biopsy.  This excludes the use of needle, fo rceps, and brush biopsy.  In case of 
cryoprobe  failure  a new 1.1mm sheath cryoprobe should be used. A b ronchoalveolar  lavage  or wash  is 
allowed if clinically indicated but must be performed after the index procedure is performed.  
Following the procedure, the patient will be returned to the post- anesthesia care unit and a post -
procedural chest x -ray will be obtained  and results will be documented .  
3.5. COMBINED  LOCALIZATION  PROCEDURES  
It is expected (in fact encouraged) that additional localization modalities i n additional to standard optical 
bronchoscopy will be used in combination with the cryobiopsy  as would be done with traditional biopsy 
techniques under standard of care . These include, but are not limited to, fluoroscopy, radial 
endobronchial ultrasound, a nd electromagnetic navigation. Robotic Broncho scopy is excluded due to 
the fact that a standard flexible bronchoscope is not used. That said, as part of this trial, for tissue 
acquisition, the only biopsy tool permitted to be used is the cryoprobe . If convex EBUS with rapid onsite 
pathologic examination (ROSE) is being performed as part of the planned bronchoscopy, this should be 
performed prior to transbronchial  cryobiopsy .  
3.6. DATA COLLECTION  
Collected data include: radiographic characteristics, procedural characteristics, diagnostic yield, and 
adverse events, as follows:  
 Radiographic Characteristics : 
If a target location is present ( i.e. biopsy for lung nodule), t he location of the target lesion (side, lobe 
and segment, i.e. right upper lobe anterior segment, etc.) will be determined and recorded. The 
radiographic information collected will include size of the lesion (longest axis), distance from a visible bronchus, and distance from the pleural surface perpendicular to the lesion  on axial cuts . If 
the patient has undergone a PET scan, the metabolic activity (measured SUV) will be recorded . 
 If target lesion s exists , to assess centrality, we will utilize  proprietary software to map zones of the 
lung to determine if a lesion falls into the outer, middle,  or central 1/3 of the lung parenchyma. “CT 
Pulmo 3D” workflow using Siemens Syngo via software automatically analyzes the lung parenchyma and define the contours of both lungs  (Figure 1) .  This will be performed by the core radiology 
laboratory at Johns H opkins.  External sites to Johns Hopkins (Vanderbilt University) will submit the 
de-identified CT scan via a secure program (Ambra) that is in clinical use for secure image sharing.  
page 15 of 27 
  
 
Figure 2: CT Pulmo 3D  software output defining central, middle and peripheral lung zones10 
 
 
For diffuse lung disease, the CT characteristic pattern will be recorded (i.e. UIP, NSIP, cystic, reticular 
nodular). Additionally, localization and distribution of infiltrates will be collected. If no specific lung 
abnormalities are noted on CT ( i.e. lung transplant surveillance), this will be recorded.  
 
 Procedural Characteristics : 
Collected procedural information will include the number of biopsy attempts , freeze time for each 
biopsy , procedural time  (scope in to scope out)  and use of prophylactic bronchial blocker. The  type  
(general or moderate)  of sedation administered as  well as  artificial airway selection  (ETT, LMA, rigid 
bronchoscopy)  will also be recorded.  Room temperature  and gas pressure , number of probes used.  
 
• Pathology Core Lab Assessment : 
An independent pathology core lab will review all study cases.  The core lab  will be graded on a 
previously validated histologic accessibility on a 7 -point Likert Scale6,11 as follows:  
• Grade 0: The specimen does not contain alveolar structures and can therefore not be 
assessed  as transbronchial biopsy specimen  
• Grade 1:  Due to very poor specimen quality, it is not possible to assess the relevant 
morphologic and histologic features  
• Grade 2:   Due to poor specimen quality, assessment of relevant morphologic and histologic 
structures and features is severely compromised and not possible  
• Grade 3: D espite high limitations in specimen quality, assessment of the relevant 
morphologi c and histologic structures and features is severely compromised but possible  
• Grade 4: Des pite moderate limitations in specimen quality, assessment of the relevant 
morphologic and histologic structures and features is compromised but possible  
• Grade 5: D espite low limitations in specimen quality, assessment of the relevant 
morphologic and histologic structures and features are compromised but possible  

page 16 of 27 
 • Grade 6: The specimen allows for complete and unrestricted assessment of all relevant 
morphologic and histologic structures and features  
 
Additionally , the pathologic core lab will determine, the total h istologic area (mm2), alveolated a rea 
(mm2), open alveoli percent, p ercent crush artifact , and a rtifact free lung parenchyma percent . The 
underlying diagnosis will be confirmed or rebutted . 
 
 Diagnostic Yield:  
Diagnostic yield is defined as proportion of patients for which cryobiops y led to a diagnosis . 
Diagnostic  yield will be determined from the results of cryobiopsy specimen  only . A biopsy that 
results in a specific diagnosis, either malignant or benign (granuloma, inflammation, fibrosis, 
infection) will be assumed to be a true positive .  Atypia , minimal inflammation  or lung parenchyma 
without pathologic findings on final pathology re ads are considered non -diagnostic.  
 
 Room Temperature and G as Pressure : 
 
The room temperature of the OR (by a thermometer  fixed to the ERBECRYO 2  unit) and the gas 
pressure which is displayed on the cryo unit will be collected prior to the index procedure.  This 
ensures standardized results throughout the study. The gas pressure and the room temperature 
must be at least 56bar and 68°F (20°C), respectively.   
3.7. Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
3.7.1.  Adverse Events  
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease or injury, or untoward clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory findings) in subjects, users or other persons, whether or not 
related to the investigational medical device.   Note:  Pre -existing conditions are not consid ered to be 
adverse events unless there is a change in the nature or severity of the condition.  
3.7.2.  Serious Adverse Event  
A serious adverse event (SAE) is an event that has:  
1) Led to death,  
2) Led to serious deterioratio n in the health of the subject, that either resulted in  
a) a life -threatening illness or injury, or  
b) a permanent impairment of a body structure, or  
c) in-patient or prolonged hospitalization, or  
d) medical or surgical intervention to prevent life -threatening illnes s or injury or permanent 
impairment to a body structure or a body function,  
3) led to fetal distress, fetal death or a congenital abnormality or birth defect  
 
Note: Planned hospitalization for a pre -existing condition, or a procedure required by the study, wi thout 
serious health deterioration is not considered a SAE.   
3.7.3.  Adverse Event Relationship   
The PI will assess the relationship of an adverse event to the device and/or procedure as follows:  
 Not Related:   No relationship appears to exist between the AE and th e device and/or procedure  
 Related:   The AE follows a plausible temporal sequence following administration of the study device 
or execution of the procedure.  
page 17 of 27 
  Undetermined:   It is not possible to determine the relationship of the AE with the study treatment.  
3.7.4.  Adverse Event Outcome  
The outcome of AEs will be recorded as follows:  
 Resolved:  The event is considered fully resolved.  
 Continuing:  At study exit the event is considered ongoing.  Note: Any unresolved AE ongoing past 
study exit will be monitored by the ph ysician per institutional standard of care.  
3.7.5.  Adverse Event Recording 
AEs will be documented in the applicable source documentation (i.e. medical record).  As possible, study 
data collection forms should capture the event diagnosis as opposed to symptoms (e. g. Infection vs. 
fever).  The adverse events of pneumothorax and bronchopulmonary hemorrhage (including 
hemoptysis) will be documented as follows:  
 
Pneumothorax:   Pneumothorax will be documented by both post -biopsy CXR and  chest ultrasonography.  
Pneumothorax severity and required intervention, such as chest tube placement, will be recorded.  
Severity will be classified according to Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) grade 
as follows:  
 Grade 1:   Asymptoma tic; clinical or diagnostic observation only; intervention not indicated  
 Grade 2:   Symptomatic; intervention indicated (e.g. tube placement without sclerosis)  
 Grade 3:   Sclerosis and/or operative intervention indicated; hospitalization indicated.  
 Grade 4:   Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated  
 Grade 5:   Death  
 
Bleeding:   Bleeding will be categorized on an adapted grading system.12 The grades are as follows:  
• Grade 0:  No bleeding or only traces of blood not requiring suctioning  
• Grade 1 : Bleeding requiring suction to clear  
• Grade 2:  Bleeding requiring wedging of the biopsied segment with the flexible bronchoscope 
and/or iced saline  
• Grade 3:  Bleeding requiring inflation of a bronchial blocker  
• Grade 4:  Bleeding causing cardiopulmonary instability  
 
3.7.6.  SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
 
A Serious Adverse Event is defined as the occurrence of  bleeding grade ≥ 3 (see Adverse Events for 
bleeding grading system), pneumothorax requiring chest tube placement (Grade ≥2, see Adverse Events for pneumothorax grading system), post -procedure respiratory failure defined as the need for non -
invasive or mec hanical ventilation requiring ICU admission, or death , which have occurred within 30 
days after procedure, respectively .  
 All device and/or procedure related adverse events will be reported. Device related e vents will be 
collected from initiation of the index procedure  (insertion of the cryoprobe into the working channel of 
the bronchoscope) , intra- procedure, and during the standard of care follow -up period of  30 days.  30 
day follow up will be assessed by chart review, if data is not able to extracted by chart review a phone call will be made to assess any adverse events that may have occurred.  Study sites are responsible to 
report adverse events and complications to their IRBs according to institutional requirements . 
 
page 18 of 27 
 The study clinician at the site will complete a SAE Form within the following timelines:  
• All deaths  and immediately life -threatening events, related to the device or the procedure  will 
be recorded on the S AE Form and submitted to the DSMB /study sponsor , lead coordinating 
center,  and device manufacturer  within 24 hours of site awaren ess.  
• Other SAEs  will be submitted to the DSMB /study sponsor  and lead coordinating center within 72 
hours of site awareness.  
 
All SAEs will be followed until satisfactory resolution or until the site investigator deems the event to be 
chronic or the adherence to be stable. Other supporting documentation of the e vent may be requested 
by the DSMB /study sponsor and should be provided as soon as possible. The study sponsor will be 
responsible for notifying  FDA of any unexpected fatal or life -threatening suspected adverse reaction as 
soon as possible but in no case later than 7 calendar days after the sponsor's initial receipt of the information.  
 
3.8. SAFETY OVERSIGHT  
Safety oversight will be under the direction  of a DSMB composed of individuals with the appropriate 
expertise, includi ng interventional pulmonology. Out of an abundance of caution, t he DSMB will meet to 
review cases and assess safety  after each 10 consecutive patients have been enrolled  (cases will be 
consecutively batched in groups of 10) . The DMSB will operate under the rules of an approved charter 
that will be written and reviewed at the organizational meeting of the DSMB. At this time, each data element that the DSMB needs to assess will be clear ly defined.  
 
Proposed DSMB members:  
 Gerard Silvestri, MD: DSMB Chair, Pulmonary and Critical Care, Medical University of South Carolina  
Momen Wahidi, MD: Interventional Pulmonary, Duke University  
Nadia Hansel, MD, Division Chief, Pulmonary and Critical C are, Johns Hopkins University  
Roy Semaan, MD, Interventional Pulmonary, University of Pittsburgh  
Anil Vachani, MD, Pulmonary and Critical Care, University of Pennsylvania  
3.9. STUDY HALTING RULES  
Any SAE will serve as a stopping rule. The DSMB will convene to adjudicate the event. Enrollment will resume if the SAE is adjudicated by the DSMB.  Additionally, if the SAE rate rises above 30% for two 
consecutive batches (10 cases per batch), the study will be halted.  
4. CLINICAL MONITORING  
Clinical site monitoring is co nducted to ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are 
protected, that the reported trial data are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of 
the trial is in compliance with the currently approved protocol/amendment(s), wit h GCP, and with 
applicable regulatory requirement(s).  
• Monitoring for this study will be performed by Johns Hopkins University   
• Centralized, initial assessments and monthly assessments, and comprehensive review of all 
primary and secondary endpoint data.  
page 19 of 27 
 • Details of clinical site monitoring are documented in a CMP. The CMP describes in detail who 
will conduct the monitoring, at what frequency monitoring will be done, at what level of detail 
monitoring will be performed, and the distribution of monitoring re ports.  
• Independent audits will be conducted by Johns Hopkins University  to ensure monitoring 
practices are performed consistently across all participating sites and that m onitors are 
following the CMP.  
5. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
5.1. STATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL  PLANS  
The study  is not powered  to make  a statistical conclusion  due to the small sample  size and the safety  
phase in which  the treatment is. As the true  safety  profile  of the 1.1mm  flexible  single -use cryoprobe  
with  oversheath  is not known,  we will base  our statistical plan  based  on current  standard  method  for 
transbronchial biopsy,  forceps  biopsy.  
5.2. STATISTICAL HYPOTHESES  
1. To determine  the serious adverse event rate  of a 1.1mm flexible single -use cryoprobe with 
oversheath for transbronchial  bronchoscopic biopsy .  
 
We hypothesize that the serious adverse event proportion using the novel smaller, 1.1mm flexible single -use cryoprobe with oversheath will not exceed 30%, the adverse event proportion 
for the current standard method of transbronchi al biopsy using forceps . 
 
2. To determine baseline performance characteristics for the use of the  1.1mm flexible single -use 
cryoprobe with oversheath.  
 We hypothesize that data generated during the performance of this safety trial will generate meaningful descriptive statistics for pathologic evaluation (histologic adequacy), procedural 
characteristics ( activation  time, number of biopsies taken, type of airway used), and diagnostic 
yield across various disease states necessitating transbronchial biopsy. This descriptive data will 
be crucial in the planning of future clinical trials.
 
 
5.3. ANALYSIS DATASETS  
All analyses will be done using intention -to-treat analyses to properly identify safety and 
baseline p erformance characteristics . As participants will not be randomized, the  index action 
for inclusion will be insertion of the cryoprobe into the working channel of the bronchoscope .  
5.4. DESCRIPTION OF STATISTICAL METHODS  
5.4.1.  GENERAL APPROACH  
This is a multi- centered, prospective, single arm trial aimed at establishing the safety profile of a novel 
1.1mm flexible single -use cryoprobe with oversheath. Secondary outcomes will be descriptive 
procedural characteristics that will be used to power future trials.  
 All continuous data will be presented as means with standard deviations. Categorical data will be 
represented by percentages. Statistical comparisons will be made using linear and logistic regression  
page 20 of 27 
 analysis where applicable. Sensitivity, specificity, pos itive and negative predictive value and accuracy of 
all procedures will be calculated.  
 
5.4.2.  ANALYSIS OF THE PRIMARY SAFETY  ENDPOINT  
The primary endpoint is the incidence of serious adverse events  defined as occurrence of  bleeding grade 
≥ 3 (see Adverse Events  for bleeding grading system), pneumothorax requiring chest tube placement 
(Grade ≥2, see Adverse Events for pneumothorax grading system), post- procedure respiratory failure 
defined as the need for non -invasive or mechanical ventilation requiring ICU admis sion, or death , which 
have occurred within 30 days after procedure, respectively . The incidence will be calculated as the 
proportion of patients in whom a serious adverse event occurred divided by those who underwent the 
index procedure ( insertion of the c ryoprobe into the working channel of the bronchoscope ).  
 As the true safety profile of the 1.1mm flexible cryoprobe with oversheath is not currently known, and 
no standard minimally significant difference in a combined bleeding and pneumothorax outcome (such as in this study) is known, we will use current ly available literature on a comparable biopsy method, 
(forceps biopsy and the larger 1.9mm and 2.4mm cryoprobes ). 
 Based on review of the published literature ( Table 1 ), we conservatively estimate the c urrent combined 
bleeding and pneumothorax proportion to be 30% for transbronchial biopsy in standard practice. The 
procedure will be considered safe if the final proportion of serious adverse events is 30% or less.  This 
will infer a standard of safety for the 1.1mm flexible single -use cryoprobe with oversheath comparable 
to current transbronchial  biopsy standard of care.  
 
   
 
      
 
   
page 21 of 27 
 Table 1: Literature review of bleeding and pneumothorax rates  
Author  Definition of bleeding as per study  Number of 
patients in 
CBx, n (%) Number of patients in 
FBx, n (%) 
Aktas et al . (2010)13, 
(n = 41); All performed CB 
and FB; CB = 41, FB = 41  No bleeding  26 (63.4)  27 (65.9)  
 Simultaneous bleeding  5 (12.2)  5 (12.2)  
 Mild: cold water + adrenaline  8 (19.5)  9 (21.9)  
 Moderate: APC application  2 (4.9)  0 (0)  
 Severe : hemodynamic  compromise  0 (0)  0 (0)  
 Pneumothorax  not reported  not reported  
    
Hetzel et al . (2012)14, 
(n = 593); CB = 296, FB = 297  No bleeding  59 (19.9)  91 (30.6)  
 Mild: suctioning  183 (61.8)  153 (51.5)  
 Severe: ice cold saline, diluted 
vasoconstrictive drug, balloon tamponade, APC, MV, conversion to 
rigid bronchoscope.  54 (18.2)  53 (17.8)  
 Pneumothorax  not reported  not reported  
    
Pajares et al. (2014)3, 
(n = 77) ; CB = 39, FB = 38  Grade 0: no bleeding  5 (12.8)  8 (21.1)  
 Grade 1: suction  12 (30.8)  17 (44.7)  
 Grade 2: occlusion, use of endoscopic 
procedures and/or ice cold saline  22 (56.4)  13 (34.2)  
 Grade 3: hemodynamic  compromise, 
admission to ICU  0 (0)  0 (0)  
 Pneumothorax  3 (7.7)  2 (5.2)  
 
Fruchter et al.  (2014)15, 
(n=75) CB single arm  No bleeding  70 (93)  NA 
 Significant bleeding  3 (4)   
 Pneumothorax  2 (2.6)   
 
Hagmeyer et al.  (2016)16, 
(n=32) CBx only  No or mild bleeding   NA 
 Moderate: wedge of bronchoscope  8 (25)   
 severe: use of bronchial blocker or blood 
transfusion  17 (53)   
 Pneumothorax  6 (19)  NA 
page 22 of 27 
  
 
5.4.3.  ANALYSIS OF THE SECONDARY ENDPOINTS(S)  
1. Description  of histologic  performance . The mean  histologic  adequacy  score , total  histologic  area  
(mm2), alveolated  area  (mm2), open  alveoli  percent,  percent  crush  artifact,  and artifact  free lung 
parenchyma  percent  will be reported  as mean  (+/- SD) or Median  (Range).  This data  will be used  
for statistical  planning for future  trials.  
2. Procedural characteristics  such  as activation  time,  procedure  time,  number  of biopsies  taken  and 
type  of airway  (proportion  used  LMA,  ETT,  rigid  bronchoscope)  used  will be reported  as mean  (+/- 
SD) or Median  (Range).  Logistic  regression  will be used  to determine  if procedural  characteristic  
significantly  affect  the presence  of a significant  adverse  event  (primary  outcome).  Additionally,  
linear regression  will be used  to determine  if any of the procedural  characteristics  effect  histologic  
performance  characteristics.   
3. Diagnostic  yield  of cryobiopsy  will be calculated  as the proportion  of patients  for which  cryobiops y 
led to a specific  diagnosis . A biopsy  will be considered  diagnostic , if it results  in a specific  
diagnosis,  either  malignant  or benign  (granuloma,  inflammation,  fibrosis,  infection)  will be 
assum ed to be a true  positive.    
5.5. PLANNED INTERIM ANALYSES  
Out of an abundance of caution for safety, following each 10 consecutively completed cases , the serious 
adverse event rate will be calculated. This data will only be available to the DSMB for review.  
5.6. SAFETY REVIEW  
After  any serious  adverse  event,  a safety  review  will take place  and recruitment  at all sites  will be halted.  
The DSMB  will meet  to review  the case  and overall safety  of the trial,  once  adjudicated  by the DSMB,  
the trial can be resumed.  
5.7. SAMPL E SIZE  
This is a safety study. The goal of this study is to identify any high frequency adverse events, as well as 
collect preliminary data on the potential efficacy of the novel 1.1mm flexible  single -use cryoprobe with 
oversheath . As no current data exists to accurately estimate  the variance in SAE rates,  there is no 
reliable data to power this study. We conservatively estimate that a stable estimation will of the SAE rate will occur after 50 cases. Thus in this initial study, we will include 50 participants.
 
6. MEASURES TO MINIMIZE BIAS : ENROLLMENT/RANDOMIZATION/MASKING PROCEDURES  
Participants will be enrolled at each institution participating in the study on a referral basis to 
interventional pulmonology. Due to the nature of the study, patients and bronchoscopists will not be 
blinded.  The treating bronchoscopist will be the outcome assessor.  
7. SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO SOURCE DATA/DOCUMENTS  
Both  PI’s (Fabien Maldonado  and Lonny  Yarmus),  as well as supporting manufacturer (Erbe  
Elektromedizin  GmbH,  Germany)  will have  acce ss to de-identified  study  data . The site-specific  
investigators  will have  access  to the source  data  available  for their  site only.  Patients  will be informed  in 
the informed  consent  that their  de-identified  data  will be access ible to third  parties  (monitors,  industrial 
funder).  
page 23 of 27 
 8. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  
QC procedures will be implemented  at both sites  beginning with the data entry system and data QC 
checks that will be run on the database  by the lead coordinating center  will be generated. Any missing 
data or data anomalies will be communicated to the site(s) for clarification/resolution.  
Following written SOPs, the monitors will verify that the clinical trial is conducted and data are 
generated, documented (recorded), and r eported in compliance with the protocol, GCP, and the 
applicable regulatory requirements (e.g., Good Laboratory Practices (GLP), Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)).  
The investigational site will provide direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, and 
reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by local and 
regulatory authorities.  
9. ETHICS/PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
9.1. ETHICAL STANDARD  
The principal investigator(s)  will ensure that this study is conducted in full conformity with Regulations 
for the Protection of Human Subjects of Research codified in 45 CFR Part 46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, and/or the ICH GCP E6. 
 
9.2. INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
The protocol, info rmed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant materials  – which will 
be consistent across both sites, except where the use of specific institutional templates is required -will 
be submitted to the  site’s local  IRB for review and approval. Approval of both the protocol and the 
consent form must be obtained before any participant is enrolled  at the clinical site . Any amendment to 
the protocol will be communicated to all sites by the lead coordinating center and w ill require review 
and approval by the  local IRB before the changes are implemented to the study. All changes to the 
consent form will be approved  by each site’s local IRB ; a determination will be made regarding whether 
previously consented participants ne ed to be re- consented.   Direct and frequent communication via 
email and phone with Vanderbilt’s PI and research team will be maintained to ensure that both sites are using the most current version of the protocol and consent.  
 
10. INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS  
10.1. CONS ENT/ASSENT AND OTHER INFORMATIONAL DOCUMENTS PROVIDED TO 
PARTICIPANTS  
Before  undergoing the study  procedure,  the subject  or his legal  representative  must  give written  
consent  to participate  in the study  using the ICF approved  by the clinical site’s  IRB, and all applicable  
signatures  and dates  must  be obtained.   
The background  of the therapy  and study,  the reason  for the study,  possible  benefits,  and any inherent  
risks  shall be carefully  explained  to the subject.   The subject  will be given  adequate  time  to review,  
discuss  with  physician,  discuss  with  others  and to have  questions  answered  prior to signing the IRB 
approved  consent  form.   
page 24 of 27 
 A copy  of the signed  consent  form  shall be given  to the subject,  an original shall be filed  in the subject’s  
medical  record,  and a copy  maintained  with  the site’s  research  documentation.   
10.2. CONSENT PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTATION  
Informed consent is a process t hat is initiated prior to the individual’s agreeing to participate in the 
study and continues throughout the individual’s study participation. Extensive discussion of risks and 
possible benefits of participation will be provided to the participants and the ir families. Consent forms 
will be IRB- approved and the participant will be asked to read and review the document. The 
investigator will explain the research study to the participant and answer any questions that may arise. 
All participants will receive a verbal explanation in terms suited to their comprehension of the purposes, 
procedures, and potential risks of the study and of their rights as research participants. Participants will 
have the opportunity to carefully review the written consent form and as k questions prior to signing. 
The participants should have the opportunity to discuss the study with their surrogates or think about it prior to agreeing to participate. The participant will sign the informed consent document prior to any 
procedures being done specifically for the study. The participants may withdraw consent at any time 
throughout the course of the trial. A copy of the informed consent document will be given to the 
participants for their records. The rights and welfare of the participants w ill be protected by 
emphasizing to them that the quality of their medical care will not be adversely affected if they decline 
to participate in this study.  
 
10.3. PARTICIPANT AND DATA CONFIDENTIALITY  
Participant confidentiality is strictly held in trust by the participating investigators, their staff, and the sponsor(s) and their agents  as well as the supporting manufacturer. This confidentiality is extended to 
cover testing of biological samples in ad dition to the clinical information relating to participants. 
Therefore, the study protocol, documentation, data, and all other information gene rated will be held in 
strict confidence. No information concerning the study or the data will be released to any unauthorized 
third party without prior written approval of the sponsor.  
 
The study monitor, other authorized representatives of the sponsor, representatives of the IRB or supporting manufacturer supplying study product may inspect all documents and records  required to be 
maintained by the investigator, including but not limited to, medical records (office, clinic, or hospital) and pharmacy records for the participants in this study. The clinical study site will permit access to such records.   
The study part icipant’s contact information will be securely stored at each clinical site for internal use 
during the study. At the end of the study, all records will continue to be kept in a secure location for as long a period as dictated by local IRB and Institutional regulations.  
Study participant research data, which is for purposes of statistical analysis and scientific reporting, will be transmitted to and stored at the Johns Hopkins Hospital. This will not include the participant’s contact or identifying information. Rather, individual participants and their research data will be identified by a unique study identification number. The study data entry and study management systems used by clinical sites and by the Johns Hopkins Hospital research staff will be secu red and 
password protected. At the end of the study, all study databases will be de -identified and archived at 
the Johns Hopkins Hospital.  
page 25 of 27 
 10.4. RESEARCH USE OF STORED HUMAN SAMPLES, SPECIMENS OR DATA  
There will be no stored human samples or specimens in this st udy except the taken biopsy specimens . 
Data collected for this study will be analyzed and stored at the Johns Hopkins Hospital. After the study is 
completed, the de -identified, archived data will be transmitted to and stored at the Johns Hopkins 
Hospital, under the supervision of Lonny Yarmus , for use by other researchers including those outside of 
the study. Permission to transmit data to the Johns Hopkins Hospital will be included in the informed consent.  
11. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  
11.1. DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES  
Data c ollection is the responsibility of the clinical trial staff at each site under the supervision of the 
site PI. The investigator  at each site  is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, 
and timeliness of the data reported.  
All sourc e documents should be completed in a neat, legible manner to ensure accurate interpretation 
of data. Black ink is required to ensure clarity of reproduced copies. When making changes or corrections, cross out the original entry with a single line, and init ial and date the change. Do not erase, 
overwrite, or use correction fluid or tape on the original.  
 Copies of the electronic CRF (eCRF) will be provided for use as source documents and maintained for 
recording data for each participant enrolled in the study. Data reported in the eCRF derived from source 
documents should be consistent with the source documents or the discrepancies should be explained and captured in a progress note and maintained in the participant’s official electronic study record.    All 
sites will communicate any discrepancies to the lead coordinating center , sponsor , and DSMB which will 
also have access to the de -identified  electronic study records on REDCap.  
Clinical data (including AEs, concomitant medications, and expected adverse reactions data) and clinical laboratory data will be entered into REDCap, a 21 CFR Part 11 -compliant data capture system provided 
by the Johns Hopkins Hospital. The data system includes password protection and internal quality checks, such as automatic range checks, to identify data that appear inconsistent, incomplete, or inaccurate. Clinical data will be entered directly from the source documents  by research staff at each 
site.   
 
11.2. PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS  
A protocol deviation is any noncompliance with the c linical trial protocol, GCP, or MOP requirements. 
The noncompliance may be either on the part of the participant, the investigator, or the study site staff. 
As a result of deviations, corrective actions are to be developed by the site and implemented promp tly. 
These practices are consistent with ICH E6:  
• Compliance with Protocol, sections 4.5.1, 4.5.2, and 4.5.3  
• Quality Assurance and Quality Control, section 5.1.1  
• 5.20 Noncompliance, sections 5.20.1, and 5.20.2.  
 It is the responsibility of each  site to use continuous vigilance to identify and report deviations to the 
local IRB, the lead coordinating center, the sponsor , and the DSMB  within 5 working days of 
identification of the protocol deviation, or within 5 working days of the scheduled protoc ol-required 
activity. Protocol deviations must be sent to the local IRB per their guidelines. The site PI/study staff is 
page 26 of 27 
 responsible for knowing and adhering to their IRB requirements.  
 
11.3. PUBLICATION AND DATA SHARING POLICY  
The International Committee of Med ical Journal Editors (ICMJE) member journals have adopted a 
clinical trials registration policy as a condition for publication. The ICMJE defines a clinical trial as any 
research project that prospectively assigns human subjects to intervention or concurrent comparison or 
control groups to study the cause -and-effect relationship between a medical intervention and a health 
outcome. Medical interventions include drugs, surgical procedures, devices, behavioral treatments, process -of-care changes, and the like.  Health outcomes include any biomedical or health -related 
measures obtained in patients or participants, including pharmacokinetic measures and adverse events. 
The ICMJE policy, and the Section 801 of the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 , 
requires that all clinical trials be registered in a public trials registry such as ClinicalTrials.gov , which is 
sponsored by the National Library of Medicine. Other biomedical journals are considering adopting 
similar policies. For interventional clinic al trials performed under NIH IC grants and cooperative 
agreements, it is the grantee’s responsibility to register the trial in an acceptable registry, so the research results may be considered for publication in ICMJE member journals. The ICMJE does not 
review specific studies to determine whether registration is necessary; instead, the committee 
recommends that researchers who have questions about the need to register on the side of registration 
or consult the editorial office of the journal in which they  wish to publish.  
FDAAA mandates that a "responsible party" (i.e., the sponsor or designated principal investigator) 
register and report results of certain "applicable clinical trials":  
• Trials of Drugs and Biologics: Controlled, clinical investigations, other than Phase I investigations,  
of a product subject to FDA regulation;  
• Trials of Devices: Controlled trials with health outcomes of a product subject to FDA regulation  
(other than small feasibility studies) and pediatric post -market surveillance studie s. 
 
12. CONFLICT OF INTERESTS POLICY  
The independence of this study from any actual or perceived influence, such as by  medical device  
industry, is critical. Therefore any actual conflict of interest of persons who have a role in the design, 
conduct, analysis, publication, or any aspect of this trial will be disclosed and managed. Furthermore, persons who have a perceived conflict of interest will be required to have such conflicts managed in a way that is appropriate to their participation in the trial. The stu dy leadership has established policies 
and procedures for all study group members to disclose all conflicts of interest and will establish a mechanism for the management of all reported dualities of interest.  
13. LITERATURE REFERENCES  
1. Pourabdollah M, Shamaei M, Karimi S, Karimi M, Kiani A, Jabbari HR. Transbronchial lung biopsy: 
the pathologist's point of view. The clinical respiratory journal 2016;10:211 -6. 
2. Babiak A, Hetzel J, Krishna G, et al. Transbronchial cryobiopsy: a new tool for lung biopsies. 
Respiration 2009;78:203 -8. 
3. Pajares V, Puzo C, Castillo D, et al. Diagnostic yield of transbronchial cryobiopsy in interstitial 
lung disease: a randomized trial. Respirology (Carlton, Vic) 2014;19:900 -6. 
page 27 of 27 
 4. Ost DE, Ernst A, Lei X, et a l. Diagnostic Yield and Complications of Bronchoscopy for Peripheral 
Lung Lesions. Results of the AQuIRE Registry. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 
2016;193:68 -77. 
5. Chechani V. Bronchoscopic diagnosis of solitary pulmonary nodul es and lung masses in the 
absence of endobronchial abnormality. Chest 1996;109:620 -5. 
6. Yarmus LB, Semaan RW, Arias SA, et al. A Randomized Controlled Trial of a Novel Sheath 
Cryoprobe for Bronchoscopic Lung Biopsy in a Porcine Model. Chest 2016;150:329 -36. 
7. Dhooria S, Sehgal IS, Aggarwal AN, Behera D, Agarwal R. Diagnostic Yield and Safety of 
Cryoprobe Transbronchial Lung Biopsy in Diffuse Parenchymal Lung Diseases: Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. Respiratory care 2016;61:700 -12. 
8. Kendall DM, Gal AA. Interpretation of tissue artifacts in transbronchial lung biopsy specimens. 
Annals of diagnostic pathology 2003;7:20 -4. 
9. Stewart S, Fishbein MC, Snell GI, et al. Revision of the 1996 working formulation for the 
standardization of nomenclature in the  diagnosis of lung rejection. The Journal of heart and lung 
transplantation : the official publication of the International Society for Heart Transplantation 2007;26:1229- 42. 
10. Thiboutot J, Lee HJ, Silvestri GA, et al. Study Design and Rationale: A Multi center, Prospective 
Trial of Electromagnetic Bronchoscopic and Electromagnetic Transthoracic Navigational Approaches for the Biopsy of Peripheral Pulmonary Nodules (ALL IN ONE Trial). Contemporary clinical trials 2018;71:88 -
95. 
11. von Renteln D, Quaas A, Rosch T, et al. A novel flexible cryoprobe for EUS -guided pancreatic 
biopsies. Gastrointestinal endoscopy 2013;77:784 -92. 
12. Yarmus L, Akulian J, Gilbert C, et al. Cryoprobe transbronchial lung biopsy in patients after lung 
transplantation: a pilot safety  study. Chest 2013;143:621 -6. 
13. Aktas Z, Gunay E, Hoca NT, et al. Endobronchial cryobiopsy or forceps biopsy for lung cancer 
diagnosis. Annals of thoracic medicine 2010;5:242 -6. 
14. Hetzel J, Eberhardt R, Herth FJ, et al. Cryobiopsy increases the diagnos tic yield of endobronchial 
biopsy: a multicentre trial. The European respiratory journal 2012;39:685 -90. 
15. Fruchter O, Fridel L, El Raouf BA, Abdel- Rahman N, Rosengarten D, Kramer MR. Histological 
diagnosis of interstitial lung diseases by cryo -transbron chial biopsy. Respirology (Carlton, Vic) 
2014;19:683 -8. 
16. Hagmeyer L, Theegarten D, Wohlschlager J, et al. The role of transbronchial cryobiopsy and 
surgical lung biopsy in the diagnostic algorithm of interstitial lung disease. The clinical respiratory j ournal 
2016;10:589 -95. 
 