Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 1  
Intervention Trial to Decrease Cardiovascular Risk in Persons With Serious Mental Illnes s 
 
 
September 3, 2018  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 2  
  
STUDY  PROTOCOL  
 
COMPREHENSIVE CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE RISK REDUCTION TRIAL  
IN PERSONS WITH SERIOUS MENTAL ILLNESS   (IDEAL)  
 
September 3, 2018  
 
 
 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 3                                                               Table of Contents  
1. ABSTRACT  3 
2. SPECIFIC AIMS  3 
3. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  4 
4. DESIGN SUMMARY  6 
5. STUDY POPULATION AND ELIGIBILITY  7 
6. RECRUITMENT  7 
7. DATA COLLECTION AND MEASUREMENTS  8 
8. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  11 
9. RANDOMIZATION  AND BLINDING  11 
10. INTERVENTION  11 
11. DATA MANAGEMENT  17 
12. DATA ANALYSIS  17 
13. DATA SECURITY  21 
14. SAFETY  21 
15. REFERENCES  24 
 
 
  
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 4 IDEAL  Trial Protocol  
 
1. ABSTRACT     
 
Persons with serious mental illness (SMI), such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, die on average 25 
years earlier than persons without SMI.  Much premature death in SMI is attributable to CVD with CVD -related 
mortali ty rates twice those of the overall population.  Accordingly, this vulnerable group, comprising at least 15 
million Americans, has a high burden of modifiable CVD risk factors including smoking, obesity, hypertension, 
diabetes, and dyslipidemia.  The Ameri can Heart Association (AHA) recently set ambitious strategic Impact 
Goals to improve the cardiovascular health of all Americans and reduce deaths from CVD by 20 percent by 
2020.  Substantial efforts are underway to meet these goals in the general populatio n.  Still, interv entions need 
to be adapted for persons with SMI who often have substantial barriers related to cognitive impairment and 
psychiatric symptoms .  Hence, without special efforts to promote CV health and control risk factors in 
vulnerable popul ations like the SMI, it is unlikely that CV health will improve in SMI patients, and disparities in 
CV health will not only persist , but likely worsen.   In view of their extraordinary burden of CVD risk factors, the 
overarching objective of this protocol  is to develop and test a scalable intervention that could be widely 
adopted to reduce risk in this vulnerable population.   Our multidisciplinary research t eam has expertise 
designing and rigorously testing interventions to decrease CVD risk in the general  population and in persons 
with SMI .   
 
The IDEAL Trial is a community organization -based, two -arm clinical trial that will test the hypothesis that an 
18-month comprehensive, practical CVD risk reduction program will be superior to control in improving CV  
health in persons with SMI.  W e will partner with Mosaic Community Services, Inc., a large mental health care 
organization, and enroll a target of 250 persons with SMI who attend 4 psychiatric rehabilitation day programs 
(PRPs) or adjoining mental health clinics.  Rehabilitation programs provide opportune  setting s to implement 
CVD risk reduction program s because patients attend several days a week and environmental components 
can take place on -site.  We will provide a common background of  exercise classes and healthy changes to 
meals served.  Participants will then be randomized to receive this control condition or the 18-month active 
IDEAL intervention with a Heart Health Interventionist, who will provide  on-site: 1) individual CVD risk reduction 
behaviora l counseling (e.g., for smoking cessation, diet); 2) coordination with primary care providers to ensure 
appropriate management of risk factors (e.g., blood pressure control ); and 3)  collaboration with mental health 
staff and social supports to encourage and motivate participants to reach goals.  The primary outcome will be 
the change in estimated CVD risk from the global Framingham Risk Score; secondary outcomes will include 
AHA metric s for CV health.  Accomplishing meaningful reductions in CVD throughout the population will require 
targeted interventions focusing on vulnerable, high -risk groups such as those with SMI. If successful, this trial 
will provide persuasive evidence for use of  a practical, comprehensive CVD risk reduction strategy in SMI to 
reduce health disparities.  
 
2. SPECIFIC AIMS  
     Accomplishing meaningful reductions in CVD throughout the  US population will require implementation of 
targeted interventions that focus on vulnerable, high -risk groups such as those with serious mental illness. In 
this context, we propose the following Specific Aims:  
Primary Aim:  
1. Test the hypothesis that the acti ve IDEAL intervention is more effective than the control condition in 
reducing CVD risk using the global Framingham Risk Score (FRS).  
Secondary Aims:  
2. Determine the effect of the active intervention compared to control on AHA metrics for ideal CV health 
risk behaviors and health risk factors:  
a. Weight and BMI;  
b. Physical fitness with 6 -minute walk test;  
c. Healthy diet measured by self -report;  
d. Smoking cessation with biochemical validation ; 
e. Fasting plasma glucose levels and diabetes mellitus treated to goal (HgBA1c ); 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 5 f. Blood pressure levels and hypertension treated to goal;  
g. Lipid levels (total cholesterol, LDL -C, HDL -C, triglycerides) and dyslipidemia treated to goal;  
3.   Determine the effects of the active intervention on other outcomes: health status (SF -12); quali ty of 
life (Euroqol); medication use for CVD risk factors; and medication adherence.  
 4.   Assess costs per participant and perform a cost effectiveness analysis.  
        Exploratory Aims:  
        5.   Conduct analyses to identify potential mediator variables (e.g., intervention participation,  
         medication use for CVD risk factors and adherence) ; 
        6.   Assess organizational factors that could facilitate the most effective future disseminat ion. 
  
The primary outcome variable will be reduction in CVD risk with global FRS from randomization to 18 months.  
Six-month FRS and 6 and 18 -month changes in health risks comprise secondary outcomes.  
 
 
3. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
Public Health Burden  of Cardiovascular Disease in Persons with Serious Mental Illness  
 Persons with SMI, over 5 percent of the population or 15 million Americans, comprise a high -risk group for 
CVD -related mortality with rates approximately twice those of the overall US.1-5  SMI frequently produces 
challenges in everyday functioning due to cognitive impairment and ongoing psychiatric symptoms;6 
accordingly, populations with SMI are often characterized by socioeconomic and environmental risk factors for 
CVD such as unemployment, low -income and social  isolation.7  The AHA Strategic Plan (co -authored by Dr. 
Appel) defines 7 goals for ideal CV health for all Americans including ideal health behaviors (BMI <25 kg/m2, 
physical activity at goal levels, healthy diet, nonsmoking) and ideal health factors (fasting blood glucose 
<100mg/dl, untreated blood pressure <120/<80mmHg, untreated total cholesterol <200mg/dl).8  Persons with 
SMI experience increased prevalence of unhealthy levels of these CVD risk factors, summarize d below.  
 
Overweight and obesity  are at epidemic levels in SMI, particularly in women, where 60% are obese.9-12 
Physical inactivity and unhealthy diet contribute.  The vast majority of SMI require ≥1 long -term psychotropic 
medication, yet many psychotropic classes cause weight gain, in part from increased appetite.13-17 In particular, 
2nd generation antipsychotics lead to substantial weight increases; in the case of ola nzapine, up to 0.9 kg/mo .18 
 
Physical inactivity is prevalent in SMI; Dr. Daumit reported persons with SMI report 50% higher leisure time 
inactivity than the general population.19  An accelerometry study showed only 4% of persons with SMI in a 
psychiatric rehabilitation program (PRP) met r ecommended moderate to vigorous physical activity in bouts of 
≥10 minutes.20  Lack of affordable, safe places to exercise, and ne gative affective states such as depression 
may be  important barriers .   
 
Unhealthy diet  is reported in persons with SMI with some studies reporting higher fa t and lower fruit an d 
vegetable intake and others show higher overall caloric intake .21-23 Persons with SMI are also likely to depend 
on others for meals; preliminary baseline data from Dr. Daumi t’s study show 40% of participants relying on 
others to buy or prepare food when they eat at home.  
 
Tobacco smoking  is extremely prevalent in SMI, with 70 to 80% reporting lifetime and half to more than two -
thirds reporting current smoking.22,24-26 Smokers with SMI report using more and high er tar cigarettes and 
consuming more nicotine compared with other US smokers .27,28 Smoking may be reinforced in SMI by 
lessening extrapyramidal effects from decreased blood antipsychotic levels, enhanced cognitive functioning 
from nicotine, socioeconomic factors and relative lack of other pleasurable pursuits.26,29 
 
 
Diabetes mellitus  is estimated ≥ 1.5 -2 times higher in SMI than the overall population.30-35 Multiple factors  
converge to increase risk of diabetes, and related emerging risks of glucose intolerance/insulin resistance and 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 6 the metabolic syndrome in SMI including obesity and physical inactivity.  Several antipsychotic medications 
also are implicated generally in pr oportion to their impact on weight gain and adiposity.18,30,36-40   
 
Hypertension  prevalence is 50% higher in persons with SMI than those without.24  Obesity, physical inactivity,  
and alcohol use are likely contributing factors to elevated blood pressure.34,41-44 
 
Dyslipidemia s are also prevalent in SMI; in parti cular, certain antipsychotics lead to elevated triglycerides and  
low HDL.18,34,45-49  With glucose intolerance, hypertension, dyslipidemia and abdominal adiposity all increased  
in SMI, metabolic syndrome prevalence is correspondingly 1.5 to 2 times higher in SMI as well.34,50 
 
Interventions to Reduce CVD Risk in Persons with SMI  
 
In order to accomplish meaningful reductions in CVD risk, targeted interventions will be required for 
populations with SMI, who urgently need to adopt healthy behaviors and decrease health risk factors.51  
Lifestyle interventions require tailoring for many with SMI,  where cogn itive deficits as well as other competing 
demands (e.g., psychiatric symptoms, economic stresses) are highly prevalent.  Although few studies have 
been conducted in PRPs, these facilities are well suited for implementing comprehensive CVD risk reduction 
interventions as infrastructure facilitates collaboration with staff for patients with SMI.  
Interventions to Improve Health Risk Behaviors:  
Weight loss and physical activity lifestyle interventions including those addressing multiple health behaviors are 
effective in the general population, yet these trials systematically exclude persons with SMI who have pressing 
need. Several studies  of behavioral weight loss interventions  in SMI have shown success; most focus on diet 
changes alone and are short -term.52-58 The ACHIEVE trial was the first long -term trial of a tailored behavioral 
weight loss intervention resulting in clinically significant weight loss for persons with SMI.59  
 
Tobacco cessation interventions are underutilized for persons with SMI despite their modest success with this 
population. A recent literature review reported more than half of smokers with mental illness are contemplating 
quitting within 6 months or planni ng to quit in the next 30 days.60  The 2009 evidence -based PORT 
schizophrenia treatment recommendations, co -authored by Dr. Dickerson, recommend smoking cessation  
treatment, specifically a psychosocial intervention and bupropion +/ - nicotine replacement ther apy (NRT).61  
These treatments produce evidence of smoking reduction and up to 33% abstinence .62-70 Since the PORT, 
varenicline has been found effective for abstinence and well -tolerated in smokers with schizophrenia, bip olar 
disorder and depression .71-85 Attendance levels in  smoking cessation program s are associated with abstinence 
outcomes .65 To-date, interventions addressing all major CVD behavioral risks comprehensively have  not been 
tested in persons with SMI.  
 
Interventions to Improve Health Risk Factors:    
In the general population, there is substantial evidence that non -physician interventionists (e.g., care 
managers) facilitating treatment and coordination with PCPs can improve single and multiple CVD risk 
factors.86-92 These interventions are thought beneficial by addressing patient environment and psychosocial 
factors and decreasing barriers to medication adherence.91 Other evidence shows interventions focusing 
directly on medication adherence in primary care are also effective in improving risk factors.93,94  
 
Several studies  concentrating on multiple CVD risks have targeted SMI. In SMI, a small literature  describes 
interventions in mental health clinics to improve primary care delivery including co -locating primary care (e.g., 
with nurse practitioner) or a care management model facilitating preventive screening and referral to primary 
care.95-98 These programs generally focus on overall health status and have not been specifically designed or 
staffed (i.e., with skilled interventionist) to effect changes in multiple CVD risk behaviors and factors. More 
recent evaluations of the behavioral health home incorporating primary care coordination into the specialty 
mental health care setting and other integrated care programs have shown mixed results with no or minimal 
effects on CVD risk factors.  97,99-104 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 7 Summar y of significance : Persons with SMI are at extremely high risk for CVD morbidity and mortality. Unless 
effective interventions are developed and tested, this population will continue to lag far behind the nation in 
CVD goals, and disparities will likely persist if not worsen.  If the CVD risk reduction goal that the trial aims to 
attain could be applied widely to the millions with SMI in the US, tens of thousand of lives could be saved  each 
year.3,105-107  Psychiatric rehabilitation programs ( PRPs ) provide an available, yet untapped structure for 
multifactor CVD risk reduction interventions in SMI.  
 
4. DESIGN SUMMARY  
 
 The IDEAL Trial is a community organization -based, two -arm clinical trial that will test the hypothesis 
that an 18 -month comprehensive, practical CVD risk reduction program will be superior to control in improving 
CV health in persons with SMI.  W e will en roll a target of 250 persons with SMI who attend 4 psychiatric 
rehabilitation day programs or adjoining mental health clinics.   We will promote a common background of  
exercise classes and healthy changes to meals served.  Participants will be randomized to  receive this control 
condition or the 18-month active IDEAL intervention with a health coach and nurse, who will provide  on-site: 1) 
tailored  CVD risk reduction education and counseling (e.g., for smoking cessation, diet); 2) collaboration  with 
physicians  to advocate for appropriate management of risk factors (e.g., blood pressure control ); and 3)  
coordination  with mental health staff and social supports to encourage and motivate participants to reach 
individually tailored CV health goals.   
 
  
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 8  
5. STUDY POPULATION AND ELIGIBILITY  
The study population will consist of adults, ages 18 and older from 4 psychiatric rehabilitation programs 
and affiliated out patient mental health clinics. Table 1  lists eligibility criteria . To enhance the generalizability of 
this trial, we have few exclusion criteria.  
 
 
 
Participant eligibility is determined by completio n of several screening measures .  Screening visits  will occur 
on-site at rehabilitation centers  and outpatient clinics . Study instruments are administered in -person by data 
collectors.  
 
 
6. RECRUITMENT   
 
Recruitment and retenti on strategies are  facilitated because patients  come  on-site to the psychiatric 
rehabilitation programs or near by to affiliated mental health clinics .  
 
For participant recruitment for the trial at psychiatric rehabilitation programs, we will recruit in several ways 
including announcements to mental health consumers (i.e. , patients); posters; brochures and  working with 
rehabilitation  staff. We will make announcements during regular consumer meetings at the sites. We will also 
post posters and have flyers and brochures available in the rehabilitation c enter. We will work with 
rehabilitation staff to identify potential participants by reviewing their list  of program attendees with them . 
Rehabilitation counselors may mention the trial to their consumers. Interested individuals will be directed to 
contact the study staff  by phone or in person at the rehabilitation program. Study staff will be at the 
rehabilitation sites to discuss the study with any interested consumers.  The study will be a behavioral health Table 1 : Eligibility Criteria  
Inclusion criteria  
▪ Age 18 and older  
▪ Body mass index at least 25 kg/m2 OR 
 one of the following CVD risk factors:  
     -Hypertension (SBP>= 140mmHg or DBP>= 90mmHg or on antihypertensive medications;  
     -Diabetes mellitus (fasting blood sugar> 125mg/dl or hemoglobin A1c>6.5 or on a hypoglycemic 
medication);  
     -Dyslipidemia (LDL >130 mg/dl , HDL<40 or total chole sterol >=200 or on a lipid lowering agent);  
     -Current tobacco smoker  
▪ Able and willing to give informed consent   
▪ Completion of baseline data collection  
▪ Willing to accept randomization  
▪ Willing to participate in the intervention  
 
Exclusion criteria  
▪ Cardiovascular event (unstable angina, myocardial infarction) within the past 6 months  
▪ Serious medical condition which either limits life expectancy or  requires active ma nagement (e.g., 
certain cancers ) 
▪ Condition which interfere s with outcome measurement (e.g., dialysis)  
▪ Pregnant or planning a pregnancy during study period.  Nursing mothers would need approval from 
physician.  
▪ Alcohol or substance use disorder if not sober/abstinent for 30 days  
▪ Planning to leave rehabilit ation center or clinic within 6 months or move out of geographic area within 
18 months  
▪ Investigator judgment (e.g., for concerns about participant or staff safety)  
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 9 organization -wide program offered to all consumer s who may be eligible. Recruitment activities will be parallel 
to/ similar at the outpatient clinics as in the psychiatric rehabilitation programs, except there are no mental 
health consumer meetings.   
 
Participant retention  is a very  high priority. We will use strategies successful in the teams’ prior studies. In 
addition to maintaining strong participant rapport, we collect and review contact information throughout and will 
ask for relatives /friends ’ contacts  who can facilitate comm unication if needed. We also will have access to 
information through the PRP and clinic . We will make home visits to collect data on those  who move out of the 
area.  
 
 
7. DATA COLLECTION AND MEASUREMENTS  
 
We will collect follow -up measures at 6, 12 , and 18 months after baseline with in -person contacts at the study 
sites. (Table 2). The 12 -month visit primarily serves as a way to maintain contact with participants.  
 
Measurements will be conducted using standardized operating procedures and quality control methods.  
Specific study forms will be used to collect data.  Table 3 summarizes the data collection schedule.  
 
Detailed measures are described below.  
Demographics and Medical History:  We will collect demographic and contact information, medical history with 
a short checklist of conditions, Rose Angina Questionnaire, and assess alcohol or substance use using the 
ASI-Lite.108,109 
Mental health diagnoses and  medications  will be abstracted from PRP (or mental health clinic) charts. 
Participants and providers will confirm medications.  
Physical measures.  
Blood pressure  will be determined by the OMRON 907 XL, a validated device which records BP  using an 
oscillometric technique.110  Blood pressure  will be obtained by trained , certified dat a collectors.  At each data 
collection time point that blood pressure is obtained (3 baseline visits and 1 randomization visit for pre -
enrollment time point, 3 visits for follow -up at 6 and 18 months respectively), measurements for blood pressure 
occur 1we ek apart, and 3  measurements (each separated by 30 seconds) will be obtained on the right arm of 
participants after they rest quietly in the seated position for at least 5 minutes.111 
Weight  will be measure d to the nearest 0.1 lb by a high quality digital scale with participants wearing light 
indoor clothes without shoes.  Duplicate measurements  will be made.  Weight will be measured in lbs . for ease 
of interpretation by participants and converte d to kg for ca lculation of BMI, calculated as the Quetelet index 
(kg/m2).   
Height  to the nearest 0.1 cm will be measur ed at entry using a wall-mounted  stadiometer.  The participant 
stands shoeless on a firm, level surface, with head in the horizontal  (Frankfort)  plane.   
Waist  circumference  will be  measure d with an anthropometric  tape, in a horizontal plane 1 cm above the navel.  
Physical fitness  will be measured by the 6 -minute walk test.  This measure is a valid predictor of VO2 max and 
has been show n to be responsive to increases in regular moderate physical activity.112-114 
Fasting bloo d measures  will be collected at Mosaic, centrifuged, aliquoted and sent for processing. Total and 
HDL cholesterol, triglycerides, glucose, Hemoglobin A1C will be measured directly, and  LDL cholesterol will be 
estimated by Friedwald equation unless direct m easurement is needed.115  Serum CRP and insulin, kidney 
function (creatinine)) will also be mea sured.116-118 We will measure antibodies to viruses and bacteria such as 
herpes simplex virus and toxoplasma as previous studies have found an association between antibodies to 
infectious agents and clinical outcomes in serious mental illness.  Blood from part of the collected spec imens 
will be frozen at -70° at Johns Hopkins for future investigation of putative risk factors related to cardiovascular 
disease.  Candidate assays include inflammatory markers, leptin and adiponectin. We also will store samples 
of whole blood at base line for DNA for later studies. As this study will collect detailed information on 
medication, blood pressure, BMI, tobacco smoking and traditional laboratory markers of cardiovascular risk 
pre/post intervention, future analyses of stored serum samples wil l be able to be interpreted in the valuable 
context of these other risk factors. Approximately seven teaspoons of blood total will be collected at each study 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 10 time point with one teaspoon stored for future investigation and ½ teaspoon stored for future DNA testing (DNA 
storage at baseline only). We plan to store blood samples indefinitely.  
   Potential participants have specific choices on the consent form to decline or agree to have their 
blood stored and to DNA testing.  The serum samples will be identifie d with a code that does not include any 
identifying participant information and will be stored in a secure Johns Hopkins facility . There are currently no 
plans to re -contact subjects regarding their individual stored serum samples, and we will not release the results 
of future tests from serum samples to individual subjects.   We believe these procedures described above 
constitute minimal risk for the participants.  Study samples may be shared with other researchers partnering 
with the study team for future research. If we do share any study samples with outside investigators not directly 
addressing the research questions in this protocol, an amendment/change in resea rch or a new protocol would 
be submitted to the IRB.  
 
Expired carbon monoxide  from the Micro Pro  Smokerlyzer ( Covita ) will be collected and will confirm smoking 
status (see below).119  Urinary cotinine will be substituted for CO if the validity of CO is expected to be low 
(e.g., COPD or difficulty formin g an adequate seal on the smokerlyzer) and if the participant is not using 
nicotine replacement therapy.120,121 
 
Urine will also be  collected for Na, K, creatinine and protein.  
 
Questionnaires  will be used for a variety of purposes including baseline data to describe participants, 
outcomes to assess intervention effects, and mediating variables to assess potential causal pathways. The 
study team has experience with these and similar instruments  for persons with SMI.70  Instruments are 
described here:  
Healthy diet . Block Fat, Fruit, Vegetable and Fiber  and Sodium  Screener  Questionnaires provide self -report of 
daily fruit, vegetable intake,  and percent energy from fat .122 We also will use a questionnaire on sugar 
sweetened beverages.  
Tobacco smoking  will be ass essed with questions current smoking, 7 -day and longer -term abstinence, 
Fagerstrom Test of Nicotine Dependence ( FTND ), a 6 -item measure of behaviors re lated to dependence on 
nicotine, and self -efficacy questions related to quitting.123,124 123,124 Self-report of no cigarettes smoked in the 
past 7 days confirmed by carbon monoxide <7 will be used to calculate 7 -day point prevalence 
abstinence.120,125 
 
Health status  will be measured by the Medical Outcomes Study SF -12.126 
Physical activ ity will be collected by self -report with the Godin Leisure Time Exercise Questionnaire.  
Quality of life  will be measured with the Euroqol EQ -5D, a brief 6 item instrument that is valid in persons with 
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder , and can be used for cost -effectiveness analyses.127-129  
Medication adherence  will be measured with an adapted questionnaire based on the  Morisky Medication 
Adherence Scale for each class of medications for  CVD risk factors (e.g., antihypertensives, lipid lowering 
medications).130   
Mental health symptoms  will be assessed by The Center for Epidem iologic Studies Depression Scale  (CES -D) 
to measure depressive sy mptoms131,132 and the Behavior and Sympto m Identification Scale (BASIS -24), a brief 
comprehensive mental status measure for overall mental health status.133-135 
Social Support  will be measured with the Medical Outcomes Study Social Support Questionnaire136,137 
Other health measures  related to CVD risk relevant in SMI population . We will use the Neighborhood 
Questionnaire  to assess participants’ home environments for safe places to exercise and places to purchase 
healthy food, a questionnaire on food and shopping habits, the  Questionnaire for Eating and Weight Patterns -
Revised to measure Binge Eating, and the Pittsburgh Sleep Q uality Index.138-140 We will assess health literacy 
with the Health Literacy Skills Ins trument.  
 
 
Participant s emi-structured interviews  (approximately 15 -20 minutes) will be conducted at the end of the 18 -
month intervention to gain an understanding of participant  perceptions of and satisfaction with the heart health 
program and  exercise classes. Interviews will be conducted with a convenience sample of participants across 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 11 the study locations. Interviews will be audio -recorded and transcribed. Transcripts will not contain names and 
will be kept in a secure location . Audiotapes wi ll be destroyed after transcription is completed.  
 
 
Table 2 : Data Collection 
Schedule  Baseline  6 mo  12 mo  18 mo  
Informed consent  X    
Contact information  X X X X 
Demographics  X X  X 
Medical conditions, 
substance use  X X  X 
Mental heath diagnoses  X    
Medications  X X x X 
Physical measures      
   Blood pressure  X X  X 
   Weight  X X x X 
   Height  X    
   Waist circumference  X X  X 
    6 minute fitness walk  X X  X 
Fasting blood measures  X X  X 
Urine measures  x x  x 
Expired Carbon Monoxide  X X  X 
Accclerometery  x x  x 
Questionnaires      
  Healthy diet  X X  X 
  Tobacco measures  X X x X 
  Physical activity  X X  X 
  Health status  X X  X 
  Quality of Life  X X  X 
  Medication Adherence  X X  X 
  Mental health symptoms  X X  X 
  Social Support  X X  X 
  Other -Neighborhood,  
  Binge Eating, Sleep ,     
  Health literacy  X X  X 
Semi -structured interview     x 
Event surveillance   X X X 
 
Event surveillance . We will collect data related to health care utilization and medical records related to CVD 
outcomes of interest.  This will include consent documents and medical release forms with appropriate text and 
a surveillance process that is applied identically to each randomized group.  
Food envi ronment:  We will analyze a random sample of menus at baseline, 6 and 18 mos. and use ESHA 
software to assess changes in total calories/nutrients in site meals as a result of dietary consultation .141  
 
Staff semi -structured interviews for o rganizational factors:  To better understand the intervention 
implementation process and perspectives of intervention staff, non -intervention staff and leadership at Mosaic  
concerning the sustainability and future acceptability for dissemination of IDEAL, we will conduct semi -
structured in terviews.  We will ask about the intervention’s perceived effectiveness, ease of or barriers, fit 
within the organization and financial models for continued support. We will interview before the intervention for 
baseline information and then at end of the 18-month intervention  to assess changes  due to the intervention . 
We will gain an understanding of factors that impact the intervention being acceptable and workable, and 
prepare for dissemination to other organizations. We expect to conduct interviews with  75 peopl e, or a total of 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 12 150 interviews . Questions will include topics of perceived effectiveness of the intervention, ease or barriers for 
the intervention, fit within the organization and suggestions for future dissemination. The interview will be 
appro ximately 30 minutes in length . 
Interviews will be audio -recorded and transcribed. Transcripts will not contain names and will be kept in a 
secure location by Dr. Daumit. Audiotapes will be destroyed after transcription is completed. Individuals  will not 
be identified by name in any publication. Mosaic leadership agrees that staff p articipation in the interview  and 
any information shared will not affect employment or evaluation at Mosaic.  
 
 
8. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  
 
Quality Assurance pertains to activities that promote collection of high quality data, and Quality Control 
refers to activities that detect emerging data issues with sufficient time to implement appropriate corrective 
actions.  Our approach to Quality Assurance includes: 1)  preparing a manual of operations; 2) implementing a 
master trainer model to train and certify other staff; 3) train and certify all data collectors; 4) recertify data 
collectors at least annually; 5) routinely calibrate equipment; 6) maintain logs of cert ified staff and calibrated 
equipment.  Our approach to Quality Control includes: 1) monitoring counts of completed data collection items; 
2) monitoring distribution of trial outcomes, overall, by data collector and site; 3) record lag time in data entry; 
4) issue queries on missing data, out of range values or illogical data relations; 4) review types and distribution 
of data entry errors; and 5) prepare reports for staff, investigators and DSMB on Quality Control .  Investigators 
will review CVD risk factor  data to determine study endpoints and adjudicate as needed in a masked fashion.   
 
 
9. RANDOMIZATION AND BLINDING  
 
     Randomization to the IDEAL intervention or control will be stratified by gender and site. Within each 
stratum, blocked randomization assignments are computer generated by the trial statistician in equal allocation 
within each block, where the block size is randomly generated to be either a size of 2 or 4. A data table 
containing these generated  assignments is loaded into the trial’s REDCap database for web -based delivery to 
randomize eligible participants after confirmation of eligibility and informed consent. This REDCap 
randomization assignment table is accessible only to the statistician and the data manager.  Prior to obtaining 
the assignment, the study coordinator will confirm the participant meets all eligibility criteria and all required 
baseline data have been collected. Then the coordinator  logs into REDCap  to receive  the group assignment  for 
the specific participant and communicates the treatment  assignment to the participant.  Due to the nature of the 
intervention, participants and interventionists will be aware of group assignment, however, data collection staff 
will be kept blinded  Due to the nature of the intervention, both participants and interventionists will be aware of 
the assignment.  Until the trial end, investigators, other staff and participants are masked to outcome data, with 
the exception of trial statistician, stu dy coordinator, data manager and data analyst .  We will take considerable 
efforts to ensure data collection staff will be kept blinded to assignment (e.g.,  exclude them from all parts of 
intervention delivery , remind  participants not to share group assignment , designate/track unmasked staff).   
 
10. INTERVENTION  
  
Intervention:  
Common Background : To establish environments conducive to healthy behaviors and standardized across 
sites, the study will provide training for group physical activity classes open to all participants, and a dietician to 
consult to improve the health of meals served.  We train PRP staff to deliver g roup exercise classes using a 
DVD we provide, and recommend classes are held three times per week. Classes focus on aerobic condition 
and fo llow a progression appropriate for sedentary adults , gradually building to 40 minutes of moderate 
intensity physical activity, and be designed to build exercise confidence .142  We have used this successfully in 
SMI.70,143,144  In order to support active intervention participants’ ability to select healthy foods, a study dietician 
will work with  PRP staff to identify healthier menu choices , so that food served is more consistent with AHA 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 13 Healthy Steps. The dietician will be sensitive to budgetary issues and federal food guidelines. This common 
background will make available a needed foundation fo r physical activity and healthy diet choices to occur. 
However, these offerings are very unlikely to be sufficient alone for significant behavior change.  
Randomized groups:  
   Control condition : The control group will receive this common background.  
   Active intervention:  The active group will receive this common background and the IDEAL intervention.  
    Figure 1 displays our active IDEAL intervention framework. PRP staff, social supports, ment al health 
providers (e.g., psychiatrists) and PCPs already have relationships with individual patients.  For a participant 
randomized to the IDEAL intervention, the intervention staff (health coach and nurse) work directly with the 
participant on health ri sk behaviors and catalyze support from others, serving as a bridge between these 
individuals and the participant in moving toward ideal health risk behaviors and factors, resulting in improved 
CV health and quality of life.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IDEAL Intervention goals  include heart healthy behaviors ( weight loss, phys ical activity, diet , smoking 
cessation)  and heart healthy factors (blood sugar, BP, cholesterol) (Table 3 ).  We use AHA goals and modify 
some (e.g.,10 lb. weight loss instead of BMI<25) to provide intermediate targets achievable with the study 
sample over 18 -months.8  Strategies combine individual counseling and goal -setting, consulting  with the 
physician to optimize CV risk factor  treatment, and working with PRP staff, social supports and mental health 
providers.  
Health coaches  coordinate resources and work with participants to develop tailored strategies to achieve the 
heart healthy goals.  Coaches will be physically located on -site at Mosaic. Embedding health coaches at 
community sites will enable optimal  coordination of heart  healthy planning with other PRP staff and allow 
coaches the opportunity, in addition to scheduled sessions, to take advantage of everyday occurrences to 
reinforce healthy choices and behavior change (e.g., encouraging participant to go to exercise class, checking 
in and giving positive reinforcement for reporting decreased cigarette use, healthy vending machine choice or 
improved medication adherence, rewarding  a participant for self -monitoring at a weigh -in). Coaches will be 
skilled facilitators with trai ning in health behavior change and individual -level counseling, with a skill level 
typical for a community health educator, and will not require a Master’s degree.145 Health coaches will receive 
training,146,147 content supervision and will have ongoing, regular interaction with the Intervention Director and 
the nurse. The health coach is modeled after a position that would be feasible and sustainable in a community 
mental he alth setting, with back -up nurse support.  
Individual  
 
Health Coach 
& Nurse  
Improved CV Health 
Risks  
 
Risk Behaviors  
Weight  
Physical activity  
Diet 
Smoking  
 
Risk Factors  
Diabetes mellitus  
Cholesterol  
Blood pressure  
 
Improved 
CV Health  
Improved 
Quality of 
Life 
 
Primary care 
provider 
(PCP)  
Rehabilitation 
program staff 
+ social 
supports  
 
Mental 
health 
providers  
Figure 1.  IDEAL Intervention Framework for Moving 
Towards CV Health in Persons with SMI  
-Dashed lines designate 
new relationships  
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 14 A study nurse will be a Registered Nurse or equivalent with responsibility to support health coaches  by serving 
as an ongoing clinical resource. The nurse regularly will review participants’ progress on heart healt h factors  
with the coach . He/she  will collaborat e with PCPs in advocating for participants’ CV health. The nurse will be 
trained in smoking cessation pharmacotherapy principles and will provide NRT and education and monitoring 
to interested and eligible participants using established guidelines (Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 
2008).  
The co ach and nurse report to an intervention director with motivational interviewing and health behavior 
change expertise. The intervention director implem ents quality assurance , and may also provide direct 
services to participants.  
Individual Coaching  Session s (20-30 mins.) will be held at least weekly for up to 6  months, then at least bi-
weekly for 12-15 months with the health coach, based  on participant  need .  The initial sessions will focus on 
building rapport and using motivational interviewing to review c urrent heart healthy risk behaviors and factors, 
medication adherence, and to identify individual goals.  Guided by the FRS score, the participant’s abilities , 
interests  and readiness to address each risk factor , risks and targeted behaviors will be addres sed either 
simultaneously or sequentially.148 (See Table 1 ). Participants will work with their health coach  to identify 
behavioral changes topics from a list of recommended sessions  (e.g., healthy weight management, becoming 
smoke free, staying physically active) . The coach  will use solution -focused therapy to encourage attainment of 
individual goals and provide  reinforcements. The nurse provides educational and counseling sessions related 
to specific CVD risk factors tailored to participant needs.  
Primary Care Provider ( PCP) and Psychiatrist Coordination : The nurse  will review the participant’s baseline 
labs, physical measurements and medications and then initiate contact with the PCP to share data on baseline 
CVD risk factors and on any uncontrolled CV health risks and medication adherence . The nurse  will 
accompany  the participant on selected  visits to the PCP in the community in order to facilitate a collaborative 
relationship and assist the participant in reaching CV health goals. T he nurse identifies  modifiable components 
of the FRS taking into consideration participants’  preferences for change  and individual abilities . The nurse or 
coach  will follow up with the PCP and psychiatrist as needed to facilitate  coordination of behavioral strategies 
and any pharmacologic treatment and coordinate additional visits as nee ded. Guidelines for DM, HTN, lipid 
control and smoking cessation consistent with AHA, JNCVII, ATP -III and ADA and other prevailing guidelines 
and evidenced -based approaches including those emerging during the conduct of the trial are made available 
to phys icians.30,41,71,84,85,149-158 Intervention staff communicate with participants and providers about tailoring 
goals as needed (e.g., higher HgbA1c target). SMI patients often have communication barriers, may have 
medication adherence issues due in part to lack of medication r econciliation across service settings, and often 
require advocates to make appointments and follow -up on tests. The coach and nurse  will facilitate  this 
coordination for improved CV health.  For participants who smoke and are interested in pharmacotherapy, t he 
nurse will communicate with PCPs or psychiatrists to advocate for  prescription of  varenicline or bupropion  
and/or nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), and may provide NRT. . 
Staff and Social Supports Coordination : The health coach serves  as a change agent, leveraging  PRP staff and 
social supports around the participant’s CV health goals. (Figure 1)  Coaches  when possible attend regular 
PRP staff case management meetings, which include residential staff for participants in supported housing .  
Here the coach updates  staff on participants’ progress with reaching CV health goals .  Having the coach  on-
site enables two -way communication about participant CV health: 1) The coach  encourages staff to promote 
adherence to heart health recommendations (e.g., attending exercise class) and individually identified plans 
(e.g., setting quit date); 2) PRP staff inform coaches  about ongoing issues that could interfere with participant  
progress towards CV health goals (e.g., change in living situation). The coaches also will encourage social 
support and may include family members  or peers in intervention sessions to support the participant for better 
control of risk factors (e.g., tobacco smo king). Through all of these pathways, the health coach and nurse 
coordinate a team -based approach to improve participants’ CV health.  
Mental Health Provider Coordination:   Participants have therapists and psychiatrists they see for mental care 
and psychotr opic medication treatment; for the most part they will be in the adjoining mental health clinics. For 
uncontrolled risk factors, the health coach or nurse may work with mental health providers to strategize on how 
to improve CV health (e.g., adherence to d iet and medication for diabetes). Psychotropic prescribing  practices 
are not specific intervention targets, however, the psychiatrist may decide to modify medications based on the 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 15 participant’s CVD risks.  The health coach and nurse will facilitate communi cation between the psychiatrist and 
PCP as needed.  
Program materials:  Individual visit manuals  are developed to guide coaches  in conducting sessions . Options 
tools, cards with pictures of modifiable behaviors based on the participant’s risk factors, are u sed to identify 
conversation topics. These tools give the participant the autonomy to choose specific behaviors to discuss, 
while also allowing the coach to provide direction for the session.  
Self-monitoring:  Participants will be encouraged to self -monitor eating, exercise and smoking behaviors  
as appropriate to their individually tailored behavioral goals and cognitive abilities. Simple paper trackers are 
made available for this purpose. . 
Reinforcements : We p lan a points system to reinforce behavior change. Points are awarded for  
recommended behaviors (e.g., decreased cigarette smoking, group exercise) and can be traded for cheaper 
items (e.g., pen, key chain) or saved for larger rewards (e.g., CD player).  Re wards are used to reinforce 
healthy habits that forgo immediate gratification (e.g., eating candy now) for larger, delayed gratification 
(e.g.,weight maintenance).  
Quality assurance : We will ensure high -quality intervention delivery  through training, case  management 
meetings and fidelity measurement. Coaches receive initial training on CVD risk behaviors and risk factors, 
and all intervention staff are trained in behavior change theories, working with persons with SMI, motivational 
interviewing and impleme nting the intervention according to the manual of procedures. Follow -up training 
occurs quarterly. Case management intervention meetings with the study team are used to review each 
participant’s CVD risk factors and current treatment plan and help facilita te behavior change and/or appropriate 
monitoring or treatment. The meetings ensure that all participants are reviewed regularly, and those with 
uncontrolled risk factors are prioritized. The intervention director facilitates meetings for the intervention t eam, 
and as needed, investigators with expertise in CVD risk reduction strategies participate. To ensure high fidelity, 
health coach and nurse sessions are either observed in person or audio recorded and reviewed by the 
intervention director for adherence to the protocol. Fidelity reviews occur at least quarterly.  
Process measures:  For active intervention participants, we will track intervention  session completion, exercise 
class participation, and interim  progress towards goals (e.g., weight, pedometer cou nts, expired CO) for 
participant feedback, case management and analysis of potential mediators.  
 
NRT:  Nicotine patches and nicotine lozenges are FDA approved and available as over the counter 
pharmacotherapy for tobacco cessation. F or interested participants in the active intervention arm who are 
smokers and would like to quit or reduce their smoking, we will provide and supervise the use of nicotine 
patches and nicotine lozenges as nicotine replacement therapy for them. Nicotine pat ches are dosed every 24 
hours; nicotine lozenges (2 and 4mg doses) are used as needed initially every 1 -2 hours and then tapering 
down to every 4 -8 hours over several weeks.  Nicotine patch initial dosing is based on the level of smoking at 
baseline, with 21mg generally used for those smoking 1 pack of cigarettes per day; 44mg may be used for 
those smoking 2 packs per day. Patches and lozenges may be used in combination.  
 
 
 
 
  
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 16 Table 3 . Features of IDEAL Active Intervention  
CVD Risk 
Targets  AHA Strategic Goals  
 IDEAL Trial Goals  Traditional Behavioral 
Modification Approach  IDEAL Intervention Approach   
Healthy Weight  Weight: BMI<25 
kg/m2* 
 
 Encourage 10 lb. weight loss. 
Normal weight participant s 
encouraged to maintain 
weight . -Lifestyle behavioral 
counseling  
-Health education  
-Self-monitor calories, 
weight  
-Participant identifies focus 
of change  
-Self-reward  -Patient -centered weight loss counseling   
-Simplified Healthy Eatin g tracker  
-Health coach  weighs participant and 
monitors weight progress  
-Coach guides participant towards  directs 
high impact behavioral goals  
-Coach  rewards attendance behavior s 
 Encourage and incentivize exercise class , 
participation and home exercise  
Physical 
Activity  Physical Activity: 150+ 
min/wk moderate  Physical Activity: 150+ min/wk 
moderate  -Health education  
-Role of social support  -Provide PRP with exercise resources  
-Encourage class attendance, incentivize 
participation,  
-Provide pedometer and instructions, 
provide exercise DVD, reinforce use  
Diet Healthy Diet: 4 -5 AHA 
components  
 Customized to clinical 
condition  
Healthy diet approach similar 
to DASH emphasizing 
avoidance of sugar 
beverages, salty/greasy and 
processed food, sugar drinks 
and sweets. Eat smart 
portions and more 
fruits/vegetables.  -DASH Diet education  
-Participant identifies focus 
of dietary change  
-Role of social support  
 -Simplified diet education messages  
-Wallet size card with dietary messages  
-Coach  recommends specific dietary 
target s 
-Coach  communicates with residential 
staff/social supports  
-Pre-printed shopping lists  
-“Field Trips” to model decision making  
-Consult with PRP staff to provide healthier 
meals on -site 
Smoking  Stop smoking  
 Stop smoking  
 
Increased readiness to quit 
smoking  
 -Provide general 
information about risks of 
smoking and benefits of 
quitting  
-5As: Ask, Advise, Assess, 
Assist, Arrange  
-4D’s (Delay, Deep 
Breathe, Drink water, Do 
something to take your 
mind of smoking)  
-Provide information on 
nicotine replacement 
therapy  and other 
pharmacotherapy  -Counseling tailored to readiness to quit  
-Motivational  interviewing and 4D’s 
-Coach  communicates with PRP staff, 
residential program counselor and/or home 
social support about goals and strategies 
for smoking cessation  
▪ -Facilitate access/provide nicotine 
replacement therapy (NRT) and work with 
physician  and individual to incorporate 
reducing/quitting  into treatment plan, --
Communicate with PCP and psychiatrist to 
advocate for pharmacotherapy for smoking 
cessation includi ng varenicline, bupropion 
and NRT  
-Contingency management with CO testing      
Control Blood 
Sugar  Fasting glucose: <100  
 HbA1c<7% for diabetes  -Heath education  
-Self monitoring: 
carbohydrate intake and 
blood sugar  
-Problem solving to 
increase medication  and 
diet adherence  -Teach/reinforce self -management skills  
-Assist with glucose monitoring  
-Simplified dietary messages: (e.g., “No 
sugar drinks”)  
-Solution -focused therapy for medication 
adherence.  
- Coordinate with PCP regarding HbA1c 
targets  and any suggested  medication 
changes -Communicate with PRP staff, 
residential counselor and/or home social 
support about diet and medication  
-Encourage  and incentivize exercise  class 
participation  and home exercize  
Control BP  Blood Pressure 
<120/80 or treated to 
goal Control blood pressure, SBP 
<140 mmHg, DBP<90mmHg  -Heath education  
-Self monitoring: sodium 
intake and blood pressure  
-Problem solving to 
increase medication and 
diet adherence  -Simplified messages (“Avoid 
packaged/canned foods”)  
-Solution -focused therapy for medication 
adherence -Coordinate with PCP about BP 
therapeutic goals and any medication 
adjustments  
-Coach c ommunicates with PRP staff, 
residential counselor and/or home social 
support about diet and medication  
-Encourage  and incentiviz e exercise  class 
participation  and home exercise  
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 17 Lower 
Cholesterol  Total Cholesterol 
<200 or treated to 
goal 
 Lower cholesterol, total 
cholesterol <200mg/dl, 
LDL<130 mg/dl*  -Heath education  
-Self monitoring: calorie and 
fat intake  
-Problem solving to 
increase medication and 
diet adherence  -Simplified dietary messages (e.g., “Avoid 
junk food”)  
-Solution -focused therapy for medication 
adherence  
-Coordinate with PCP regarding cholesterol 
thera peutic goals and medication  
-Coach  communicates with PRP staff, 
residential counselor and/or home social 
support about diet and medication  
-Encourage  and incentivize exercise class 
participation and home exercise  
  
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 18 11. DATA MANAGEMENT  
 We will store data in R EDCap.159 Built-in range and logic checks will  prompt data checks and confirmation 
in real -time during data collection. The analyst  will routinely conduct thorough  checking and cleaning, 
examining distributions and data patterns and evaluation to detect inconsistencies. Outliers (e.g., extreme 
weight changes) will be identified using Rosner’s extreme Studentized  deviate  (ESD).160 Every effort will be 
made to determine correctness of outl iers in a timely manner . Confirmed outliers will be flagged and set as ide 
in the principal secondary analyse s. Those removed will be treated as all other missing data ; sensitivity 
analyses will be conducted to assess influence of outliers on results. T he data manager will create detailed 
variable  documentation and the data analyst will conduct analysis  per protocol  under direction of the study  
statistician.   
 
 
 
12.  DATA ANALYSIS  
Our target is to enroll t wo-hundred and fifty  participants recruited from 4 sites in 1 health organization , 
randomized in equal allocation to active intervention (Group A) and  control (Group B), stratified by site.  Formal 
assessments are at baseline, 6, and 18 months. Primary anal yses will be conducted under the  intention to treat 
principle.161   
Core analytical model : Let Y ijk denote the log -transformed FRS for the ith participant at the jth visit (j = 0, 1,  
or 2), corresponding to the baseline, 6, and 18 -month visits), in the kth treatment group (k = 0 or 1 
corresponding to intervention groups A and B). X ik is a vector of pre -randomization covariates (which will  
include study site indicators). The longitudinal regression model for the primary  analysis is: E[Y ijk ] = X ik +  + 
j + k + jk + e ijk with the constraints that each of ( j , k ,jk ) equals 0 when an  index is as its lowest value.  
The e ijk are independent unless the (i, k) subscripts are the same.  For participant (i,k) the e ijk have an 
unstructured 3 3 covariance matrix.  The  measure the influence of baseline covariates, the j give visit 
effects  within Group A, k baseline treatment effects (which under effective randomization should be close to 0) 
and the jk are the treatment by  visit interactions, “the treatment effects.” The primary testing contrast is to 
compare baseline to 18 -month changes in FRS (the primary outcome) between intervention groups, i.e. testing 
the hypothesis that 21 = 0. Data at 6 months, though  not the primary outcome, will help  determine whether the 
changes over 18 months are linear. The primary analysis will follow the intention to treat principle and will not 
adjust for post randomization variables. This core model is also applicable to other secondary continuous 
outcomes such  as weight, blood pressure and lipids, and other CVD risk scores, in their original scale or log -
transformed as appropriate.  Modeling will be implemented via SAS PROC Mixed (or the Stata or R -
equivalents ). Site effects will be included to account for possible within -site clustering.  
Missing and incomplete data:  Prevention is far superior to statistical treatments; every effort will be made to 
collect outcome data on all randomized.  The underlying missing d ata process determines the biasing effects 
of missing data and structures valid analytic strategies.162 The primary analysis above treats all missing 
primary outcomes as resulting from a MAR process, through which the probability of missing can depend on all 
observed information (Observed FRS, covariates) but does not depend on any FRS scores that are not 
recorded. If the probability of a potential observation being missing depends on what has, but not on what 
hasn’t been observed, ter med missing at random (MAR), then estimates based on an appropriate analytic 
model (both the mean and error structure) for the observed data will not be biased. A valid model for the 
observed data allows the missing data process to be ignored. If the missi ng is informative, meaning that the 
probability of an observation being missing depends on th e value of that observation, then bias cannot be 
avoided by modeling the observed data alone, and the im pact of such bias would be evaluated using sensitivity 
analysis.  Data set aside (censored) due to protocol defined high-leverage events such as pregnanc y or a 
serious medical event (e.g., liver failure ) that may strongly influence components of the FRS  will be treated as 
missing at random.  
 
Secondary Analyses  
Analysis of  secondary outcomes :  We will repli cate the foregoing analyses for measured outcomes (BP  [raw 
scale], lipid levels and Hg bA1c levels [log scale].  For dichotomous outcomes (e.g., HTN control, lipid control, 
diabetes control, smoking cessation) GEE based logistic regression modeling will be conducted using SAS 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 19 Proc Genmod (or the Stata or R -equivalents) with a logistic link and a within -individual, unstructured correlation 
structure. We will use data for all participants to compare changes in outcomes over time between intervention 
arms. For certain dichotomous outcomes we will include only “at risk” participants (e.g., smoking cessation in 
smokers). Medication use for CVD risk factors and psychotropics will be assessed and compared between 
arms and adherence examined using conventional method s.163-165  
Sensitivity Analyses: We will conduct sensitivity analyses with multiple imputation with respect to departures 
from the MAR assumption. The model will be derived from our primary analytical model under MAR, 
maintaining the covariance structure and modifying the imputation mean according to informative missing data 
scenarios. Second, to evaluate potential impact of out of window FRS scores on the robustness of findings 
from the primary analysis, we will set aside all the out of window measurements and repeat the analyses 
following the core analytic modeling approach described previously. When the number of out of window FRS 
scores is high, w e will modify the core analytic model with more flexible mean (e.g. use the actual follow -up 
time as a continuous variable rather than a categorical variable with prespecified follow -up time window) and 
covariance (e.g., heterogeneous TOEP or heterogeneous  AR) structure to accommodate the more variable 
intervals for follow -up times between 2 outcome assessments. We will produce model -based estimate on 
mean outcome changes at 6 and 18 months between groups and utilize robust inferences. Third, we will 
conduc t analyses restricting the study sample to those in age range to 30 -79, which corresponds to the 
suggested age range of the FRS.  
 
Exploratory Analyses : We will perform several types of exploratory analyses related to other outcomes of 
interest, and potential moderators or mediators.  We will explore the effects of the IDEAL intervention using 
other potential outcomes of interest. For example, we will investigate the AHA/ACC ASCVD risk score which 
became available during the trial. We will systematical ly evaluate the efficacy of the IDEAL intervention in 
study subgroups defined by baseline (pre -randomization) variables. We are especially interested in baseline 
variables related to psychiatric conditions (psychiatric diagnosis, symptoms, substance use an d psychotropic 
medications). We will also explore the efficacy of the intervention in subgroups by baseline cvd risk, 
race,gender and medications for CVD risk factors. These analyses will be performed by including the 
interaction (product) terms in the ana lysis models for study outcomes. The trial is not powered for these 
exploratory analyses, and we will be careful in interpreting any findings.  
 
 In addition to  these and for  analyses that preserve the intention to treat principle, we will also perform 
informative exploratory analyses based on subgroups defined post -randomization to characterize aspects of 
the intervention that may be related to improved outcomes in the active group. Such analyses will use post -
randomization variables that are potential med iators - interventionist visit and exercise class participation, 
medication modifications, medication adherence and self -monitoring activities.166  For example, for patients 
with BP controlled at baseline with medications, medications may be lowered if lifestyle changes occur. As a 
result, gauging intervention effects based on measured BP or HTN control alone may underestimate such 
effects as effects coul d partially be reflected though reduced use of medications. These analyses are more 
prone to biases so that protection from confounding afforded by randomization is not likely applicable. 
Propensity score stratifications will be used to manage potential co nfounding in these analyses. Nevertheless, 
these findings will be interpreted with caution and will be considered exploratory.  
 
Cost Analysis . The primary analysis will be conducted from  the perspective of an adopting organiz ation or 
payer (e.g., Medicaid) . The main goal is to estimate the incremental implementation costs of the active 
intervention relative to the control. Resource measurement will focus on sampling and tracking intervention 
staff time.  We will sample at specified intervals throughout the intervention at each site for one week at a time. 
Tracking specific tasks will allow us to eliminate time spent strictly on research and perform sensitivity analyses 
with different potential levels of efficiency (e.g., amount of active client involvement v ersus administrative time).  
We will also have data on self -reported utilization of office visits and hospitalizations and medication data that 
can be used to calculate cost per participant and total costs. With estimates of total costs for the active grou p 
and control, we will be able to estimate incremental co sts for the active intervention  and the incremental costs 
per incremental improvement in 1°and 2°outcomes.   To extend the time horizon forward, we will use the global 
FRS to project the proportion in each group expected to have  a CV event within 10 years and the present 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 20 value of costs and QAL Ys associated with event s.  This will allow us to perform a societal perspective cost -
utility analysis.167  For all analyses, we will conduct univariate sensitivity analyses by varying assumptions and 
assess the uncertainty of our estimates by  bootstrapping for 10000 replications, drawing  
samples with replacement where samples have the same number of observations as the main study .168   
 
Qualitative Analysis :  Interviews will be transcribed and coded. NVivo will be used to enter and  
group discrete passages from data into themes. We will use the constant comparative method169 to categorize 
transcript statements that demonstrate common attributes, then combine categories into broader, recurrent 
themes using a hybrid approach  where we will start with larger categories and then  add nodes and subnodes 
as new concepts emerge until saturation of ideas is reached. Findi ngs will be compiled to inform ongoing 
implementation and future sustainability and dissemination.  
Power analyses :  The trial has sufficient resources to enroll a target of 250 participants.  With this sample 
size, our  objective was to determine the minimum detectable difference (MDD) in relative risk reduction in the 
global Framingham Risk Score (FRS). Our assumptio ns are as follows:  
  Two-sided type I  error=0.05; type II  error=0.20; 90% follow -up. 
  Baseline absolute CVD risk with global FRS =11% from ACHIEVE Trial (n=291, Table 1);  
  Standard deviation of change in global FRS=3% from ongoing ACHIEVE Trial (from Dr. Daumit’s 
pilot  weight loss intervention in SMI, similar SD of 2.9%);  
 Global FRS change in controls=5% relative  risk red uction. C ontrols cou ld experience some 
reduction in  CVD risk because of secular trends and offerings of physical activity c lasses on -site.  
However, aging increases CVD risk and might counterbalance these effects.  We conservatively 
assume a 5% relative reduction in the control group , even though their risk might not change or 
might increase over time.  
With these assumptions, our MDD is a 10.7% reduction in relative risk in global FRS.  
 Table 4 demonstrates the relation between baseline and 18 -month follow -up and absolute and relative 
changes in global FRS with the example of a percent risk reduction in the control group of 5% and an MDD of 
10.7% .  The reduction in relative risk ratio of 10.7% (MDD= 1 – RRR) is very similar in magnitude to the direct 
difference in relative risks [95% - 84.8% = 10.2%] at 18 months. If risk is unch anged or rises in the controls, 
our MDD will be lower.   
Table 5 . Minimal Detectable Differences for Relative 
Framingham Risk Score Reduction by follow -up rates and % 
risk reduction in controls  
 MDD, assuming a Relative Reduction  
in Control Group of:  
Follow -up rate  0% 2.5%  5% 
100%  9.7%  10.0%  10.1%  
95% 9.9%  10.2%  10.4%  
90% 10.3%  10.5%  10.7%  
85% 10.5%  10.8%  11.1%  
80% 10.9%  11.1%  11.4%  
 
 
 Table 4: Calculation of Relative Risk Reduction to 10 year Framingham Risk Score from Baseline to Follow -up  
 Baseline 
FRS Risk  Follow -up 
FRS Risk  Relative Reduction,  
within -group  Relative Reduction, 
between -group  Minimum Detectable 
Difference (MDD)  
 10yr Probability of  
CVD Event  Relative Risk  Percent  
 Risk Reduction  Relative Risk Ratio 
(RRR)  MDD=1 -RRR  
Active  11% 9.33%  9.33%/11%=0.848  1 - 0.848 = 0.152 
(15.2%)  0.848/0.95=0.893  1 - 0.893 = 0.107 (10.7 %) 
Control  11% 10.45%  10.45%/11%=0.95  1 - 0.95 =0.05 (5%)  
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 21  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5  displays MDD for ranges  of follow -up rates and relative risk reduction in the control group. The MDD of 
10.7% is very achievable.  IDEAL will combine lifestyle/behavioral modification with improved  clinical 
management of CVD risk factors. In studies of lifestyle interventions, reported relative reductions in CV risk 
scores range from  9-16%,172,178,179  and for care management interventions,  91,174 from 12% -23%.  Table 6  
displays ranges of changes in individual CV risk factors and corresponding estimated changes in global FRS 
from interventions in the literature with components similar to IDEAL. Even with the understanding that 
intervention components will not likely be f ully additive, and that except for smoking cessation, these estimates 
are from studies in the general population and  not SMI , Table 6  provides support for many scenarios where the 
MDD  in FRS of 10.7% would be attainable.  We have precision for estimating cl inically significant intervention 
effects in secondary outcomes.  The 95%confidence interval (CI) for an effect estimate is +/ -1.96* sqrt(2/n)* , 
where n is the sample size per group and  the common SD for change in the measured outcome of interest for 
both groups. Assuming 90% follow -up, the 95% CI for the intervention effect of difference in change between 
groups would be: glucose 7.9 mg/dl; SBP 3.5mmHg, weight 4.0 lbs; total cholesterol 9.0 mg/dl; HDL 2.9mg/dl; 
SF-12 Physical Functioning 7.9. The SDs for  change are derived from the ACHIEVE Trial. For smoking 
cessation, we assume 75 smokers  per group with 1.3% quit rate in the controls (i.e., 1 of 75). We will have 
80% power to detect a quit rate of 14% or higher in the active group using a 2 -sided alpha of 0.05.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 6 . Reported  CVD risk factor  changes and estimated relative reduction in global FRS  
Risk Factor  Reported r ange of change in risk factor  Corresponding Δ in  
Global FRS♯ 
SBP Lifestyle interventions: 3.7 -8mmHg 170-172  5-15% 
Care management: 6 -11mmHg 93, 173, 174 6-19% 
Total cholesterol  Lifestyle intervention: 19mg/dl 172   10% 
Care management: 12.9 -15.5 mg/dl 91, 175 7-7.5%  
HDL Lifestyle interventions: 2 -2.4mg/dl171, 172  4-5% 
Smoking cessation  Psychosocial /buproprion +/ -NRT* 12 -33%62-68 1 -3.3%± 
Fasting 
glucose/HgbA1C  Lifestyle interventions: HgbA1c 0.5 -0.99171, 176 
Care management: fasting glucose, 7.7 -20mg/dl, HbgA1c 1.191, 174, 177 
*in SMI.  ±After weighting by the an ticipated prevalence of smoking.   ♯ To estimate global 
FRS Δ, we used  median risk factor levels in ACHIEVE. Then, for each risk factor separately, 
we applied literature -reported changes in that risk factor to the global FRS equation.  
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 22 13. DATA SECURITY  
Each participant will be assigned a study ID number that will be used, instead of name or other identifying 
information, on all study data collection materials. The link between identifying information and the study ID will 
be kept in a separate database w ith password access available only to the data analyst and principal 
investigators. Paper records will be kept in locked file cabinets. Data will be published only in aggregate, with 
no identifying characteristics of individuals published or presented. All  study staff annually sign a confidentiality 
statement attesting to their understanding of, and willingness to abide by, written policies on research ethics 
and confidentiality. For data entry and management, we will use REDCap, a web -based application for  building 
and managing data entry and databases. 159  REDCap data is housed on secure servers at the Johns Hopkins 
Biostatistics Center under firewall protection with offsite access through VPN. The database will contain 
embedded checks for internal consistency and data completeness. Missing and questionabl e data will be 
queried in source documents and corrected, and double data entry will be performed for primary outcome data. 
Database access is password protected and restricted to authorized personnel only (e.g., data collectors 
cannot see intervention dat a), and REDCap provides audit trails for tracking data manipulation and user 
activity. Data will be exported from REDCap to SAS for analysis. Analytic files will be stored on secure Johns 
Hopkins network servers and accessed on encrypted and password -prote cted computers.  
 
 
14. SAFETY  
 
Safety Monitoring  
      
Participant safety will be closely monitored. Protection of research participants begins with the eligibility criteria, 
which are designed to exclude individuals with a serious medical condition that would preclude their ability to 
participate in a cardiovascular risk reduction program.  During the st udy, clinical care will be provided by the 
participants’ usual specialty mental health providers and the primary care physician, not by the study.  
 
 If a participant develops a medical or psychiatric issue, the safety of continuing or resuming the interve ntion 
will be ascertained by the study clinician in collaboration with the participant’s regular providers. Surveillance 
for serious adverse events and other relevant clinical event s will occur by questionnaire at regularly scheduled 
intervals. We may be c ome aware of medical problems including abnormal blood pressure or laboratory tests. 
Results of routine clinical labs and physical measures obtained as a part of data collection will be provided to 
participants and physicians at baseline and after study co mpletion. Measures meeting criteria for alert values 
will be commun icated more quickly .  
 
 
 
 
Potential Risks  
 
The study should not involve any major risk to screenees and trial participants.  Recommended treatments, 
both lifestyle and pharmacologic, are ba sed on prevailing national guidelines.  However, there are some risks.  
Sources of risk include medication -related adverse events, such as hypoglycemic events, side effects from 
medications for CVD risk factors prescribed by the patient’s primary care physician  and side effects from 
nicotine withdrawal or over -the-counter nicotine replacement therapy . For example, improved health behaviors 
from the intervention (e.g., physical activity, weight loss) may lead to hypoglycemia or hypotension in those 
alrea dy taking medications and necessitate adjusting diabetes or blood pressure medications.  In addition, 
physical activity is associated with a small risk of cardiovascular complications (less than 1 per 187,500 
person -hours of exercise).180  Physical activity can also increase the risk of muscu loskeletal discomfort or 
injury.  Blood drawing may cause some discomfort and/or bruising at the site of the venipuncture. The methods 
that participants may use to restrict calories (e.g. extreme calorie restriction or unbalanced dietary pattern) may 
lead to inadequate energy intake or lower than recommended intake of essential nutrients. In addition, 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 23 participants run the risk of a breach in confidentiality. These risks should be rare. Plans to minimize these risks 
are described  below . 
 
Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
 
Informed  consent.   Procedures for recruitment, consent, intervention, data collection and analysis will be 
reviewed and  approved by the Johns Hopkins Institutional Review Boards and the DSMB.  
We will use a two -stage consent procedure: one consent form will be signed upon entry that covers 
screening and baseline data collection for the study. Another will be signed at the time of randomization. The 
cons ent forms will detail the purpose of the study, the requirements for participation, and the potential benefits 
and risks. In consenting individuals to participate in the study, the following procedures will be used: 1) 
Procedures involved in the study will  be fully explained to participants by study staff trained in informed 
consent procedures for persons with serious mental illness. 2) Participants will complete a brief test of 
comprehension of study procedures to demonstrate that they understand the risks  and benefits of study 
participation and clearly consent, before consent is accepted.  Any wrong answers are corrected and additional 
information given to clarify, until a person can easily answer all items successfully or they indicate they do not 
wish to  continue.  3) Those agreeing to participate will sign the consent form.  
 
Protection against risk: General  
The safety approach will be implemented similar to the investigators’ other trials (e.g., POWER Trial). We 
will have a medical safety officer who  will be in charge of developing the safety protocol for the trial, and he will 
promote and monitor safety throughout the study. As in our previous studies, the safety officer does not 
provide direct medical care and is not involved in the intervention. We wil l use standardized materials including 
a manual of procedures and forms. NHLBI has considered materials that we developed in the POWER Trial as 
models which are now used in other NHLBI -supported lifestyle intervention trials.  
 
Hypoglycemia, hypotension or  other potential consequences of improved health behaviors or changes in 
medication:  These  will be minimized by having the intervention team communicate closely with the primary 
care physician and rehabilitation  program staff about medication changes, exer cise participation and 
coordinate assistance for participants in blood sugar monitoring. For example, if an active intervention group 
participant is taking a sulfonylurea and has significantly increased exercise frequency, the intervention team 
will commun icate with the PCP and raise the suggestion of a glucose -lowering agent that would have lower 
risk of hypoglycemia , such as metformin. The interventionist will also ensure appropriate follow -up with the 
PCP after any medication changes.  
Physical activity:  The small risk of physical activity will be minimized by emphasizing moderate (as opposed to 
vigorous) activity, and by following American College of Sports Medicine guidelines regarding need for medical 
examination prior to beginning an exercise program.  Participants who wish to progress to vigorous activity will 
be advised to obtain approval from their primary care physician.  Risk of injury is further minimized by 
instruction on proper exercise technique, the importance of warm -up and cool -down exercises , and proper 
stretching techniques.  
Blood drawing:  All phlebotomy is performed by an experienced phlebotomist. Participants will be given 
information on how to contact Dr. Daumit if complications occur.  
Extreme weight loss methods.  The interventionist and mental health  program staff will be aware of the 
possibility that intervention subjects  could use extreme methods to lose weight. Participants will be reminded 
regularly of the importance of safe weight loss. Those who have a sudden , marked weight reduction will be 
interviewed to determine if extreme measures hav e been taken. The intervention  staff will be trained to detect 
evidence of extreme measures and will be given strategies for responding.  
Nicotine replacement therapy and smok ing cessation. We will educate participants about symptoms of nicotine 
withdrawal and teach coping strategies. NRT including in combination (patches and lozenges) is considered 
safe and risks are far less than those associated with tobacco use, even in smo kers with known cardiovascular 
disease and in those who continue smoking while using NRT.181-188 Certain plasma levels of medications 
including olanzapine, clozapine  and fluvoxamine may be higher after smoking cessation.  We will discuss use 
of NRT with participants’ primary care physicians and psychiatrists and monitor symptoms carefully at each 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 24 weekly to bi -weekly intervention visit so that risks are minimized. We w ill communicate with providers regarding 
smoking cessation so that psychotropic medication dosage adjustment may be made if needed.  
 
Breach of confidentiality:  All participant information will be considered confidential. This confidentiality will be 
assure d through several mechanisms.  For the study, each participant will be assigned an anonymous study 
ID, which will be used on all study forms. In addition, all study forms and paper records that contain participant 
information will be kept in secured , locke d areas when not in use.  Such materials, when in use, will be kept 
away from public scrutiny.  Forms that need to be discarded will be destroyed.  Moreover, access to all 
participant data and information will be restricted to authorized personnel. In the case of computerized study 
data, acc ess will be password protected.  When the study database is ready for analysis, it will not contain 
actual identities of participants.  During active data collection, hard copies of data collection forms will be 
stored in locked areas with access o nly by authorized personnel.   Finally, neither the mental health  program s 
nor participants will be identifi ed by name in any publications.  Data will not be presented in such a way that 
the identity of individual partici pants can be inferred.  
 
Similarly, for staff semi -structured interviews, all information will be considered confidential. This confidentiality 
will be assured through several mechanisms. T ranscripts will not contain names and will be kept in a secure 
locat ion by Dr. Daumit. Audiotapes will be destroyed after transcription is completed. Individuals  will not be 
identified by name in any publication. Mosaic leadership agrees that staff p articipation in the interview  and any 
information shared will not affec t staff employment or evaluation.   
 
Participant reimbursement : At baseline and 6 months, for completing data collection activities, participants will 
receive 15 dollars. At 18 months, for completing data collection activities, participants will receive 25 dol lars. 
This increase in payment as participants’ time in the study progresses is to recognize their commitment to the  
study. Staff will receive a 25 dollar gift card for completing a semi -structured interview.  
 
 
Importance of knowledge to be gained : Persons with serious mental illness have high burdens of each major 
cardiovascular risk behavior, yet persons with SMI have been systematically excluded from interventions to 
decrease cardiovascular risk. If successful, this proposed cardiovascular risk reduction  intervention could be 
disseminated widely. The minimal health risks to participants are offset by the potential benefits to participants 
and to the greater population with chronic mental illness.  
 
Potential benefits to the study participants who receive  the active  intervention include improved health 
behaviors and improved cardiovascular risk factor profiles. The physical activity classes are available for active 
and control participants. Potential benefits to others include the possibility that t he research will lead to the 
dissemination of effective interventions to decrease CVD risk in persons with serious mental illness.  
There is no specific benefit to staff for participating in interviews. Information learned from their perspectives 
potential ly will help disseminate health interventions in mental health organizations in the future.  
Data  and safety monitoring plan:   Protection of research participants begins with the eligibility criteria, which 
are designed to exclude individuals with a seriou s medical condition that would preclude their ability to 
participate in a cardiovascular risk reduction program.  During the study, clinical care will be provided by the 
participants’ usual specialty mental health providers and the primary care physician, not by the study.  
Participants will be made aware of this delineation of responsibility.  However, recognizing the opportunity for 
early detection of clinical problems and the small risk of study -related morbidity, we will perform periodic  safety 
assessments.  W e will inquire about cardiovascular and musculoskeletal symptoms at 6 -month intervals.  
Safety monitoring will consist of a symptom questionnaire and the Rose Angina questionnaire.  Any positive 
responses to these questions will be review ed by the safety officer;  clinically significant results will lead to 
referral  to the primary care physician.  Information that comes to the attention of study personnel informally 
(e.g., through data collection or intervention activities at the center) ma y also lead to referral. Symptoms that 
will lead to referral include (but are not limited to) those that suggest cardiovascular disease (e.g., exertional 
chest pain, dyspnea, presyncope or syncope), uncontrolled hypertension, uncontrolled diabetes or 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 25 compl ications of physical activity.  Participants are also queried at these same timepoints about possible 
adverse events (defined below).  Positive responses trigger an adverse event (AE) record, which is reviewed 
and classi fied as either gastrointestinal, car diovascular, musculoskeletal, or other in nature.  This information is 
then reported to the DSMB.  Similar information reported by participants at other times (e.g., during 
intervention classes) is duly noted and followed up with as needed  to assure partic ipant safety. The following 
constitute adverse events (AEs): heart attack, stroke, transient ischemic attack, heart failure, coronary 
angioplasty or bypass surgery, angina pectoris, broken bone, torn ligament, and any other serious injury to the 
bone or mu scle.  Evidence of the occurrence of these events is based on participant self -report that a health 
care professional has diagnosed the condition.  We will attempt to verify the diagnosis  through contact with the 
primary care physician.  Though not conside red AEs for this study, we also track and report the incidence of 
hyperlipidemia, gallb ladder disease, diabetes, cancer and hospitalization .  All other outcomes that may be 
construed as being an adverse consequence of study participation, such as an injury  while performing a study 
measurement, are documented, reviewed, and followed up on as needed by a study clinician.  
 
A Data and Safety Monitoring Board will be  established and will meet at least annually during the study. 
The DSMB members will be research scientists not otherwise connected to the study whose expertise includes 
the disciplines and skills needed to initially review the protocol and then monitor intervention progress, quality 
of the data and safety of the participants.   Members will include ex perts in CVD prevention, mental health and 
clinical trials. Prevailing NIH and IRB policies will dictate the specific roles of this committee, which will review 
the protocol before the start of fieldwork. Adverse events will be reviewed initially by the sa fety officer  and Dr. 
Daumit and then reported locally to the IRB, the DSMB and the NIH project office according  to prevailing 
policies of these review bodies. This plan should ensure participant safety.  
 
 
 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 26 15. REFERENCES  
 
 
1. Health, United States, 2009: With special features on Medical Technology. Hyattsville, MD: National 
Center for Health Statistics; 2010.  
2. Brown S. Excess mortality of schizophrenia. A meta -analysis. Br J Psychiatry 1997;171:502 -8. 
3. Daumit GL, Anthony CB, Ford DE, et al. Pattern of mortality in a sample of Maryland residents with 
severe mental illness. Psychiatry Res 2010;176:242 -5. 
4. Osby U, Correia N, Brandt L, Ekbom A, Sparen P. Mortality and causes of death in schizophrenia in 
Stockholm county, Sweden. Schizophr Res 2000;45:21 -8. 
5. Saha S, Chant D, McGrath J. A systematic review of mortality in schizophrenia: is the differential 
mortality gap worsening over time? Arch Gen Psychiatry 2007;64:1123 -31. 
6. Mueser KT, McGurk SR. Schiz ophrenia. Lancet 2004;363:2063 -72. 
7. Primm AB, Vasquez MJ, Mays RA, et al. The role of public health in addressing racial and ethnic 
disparities in mental health and mental illness. Prev Chronic Dis 2010;7:A20.  
8. Lloyd -Jones DM, Hong Y, Labarthe D, et al. Defining and setting national goals for cardiovascular 
health promotion and disease reduction: the American Heart Association's strategic Impact Goal through 2020 
and beyond. Circulation 2010;121:586 -613. 
9. Allison DB, Fontaine KR, Heo M, et al. The d istribution of body mass index among individuals with 
and without schizophrenia. J Clin Psychiatry 1999;60:215 -20. 
10. Coodin S. Body mass index in persons with schizophrenia. Can J Psychiatry 2001;46:549 -55. 
11. Daumit GL, Clark JM, Steinwachs DM, Graham CM, Lehman A, Ford DE. Prevalence and correlates of 
obesity in a community sample of individuals with severe and persistent mental illness. J Nerv Ment Dis 
2003;191:799 -805. 
12. McElroy SL. Correlates of Overweight and Obesit in 644 Patients with Bipolar D isorder. J Clin 
Psychiatry 2002;63:207 -13. 
13. Depression Guideline Panel: Depression in Primary Care, vol. 2. Rockville, MD: AHCPR; 1993. Report 
No.: 93 -0551.  
14. Allison DB, Mentore JL, Heo M, et al. Antipsychotic -induced weight gain: a comprehensive res earch 
synthesis. Am J Psychiatry 1999;156:1686 -96. 
15. Baptista T, Kin NM, Beaulieu S, de Baptista EA. Obesity and related metabolic abnormalities during 
antipsychotic drug administration: mechanisms, management and research perspectives. Pharmacopsychiatr y 
2002;35:205 -19. 
16. Macritchie KAN, Geddes JR, Scott J, Haslam DRS, Goodwin GM. Valproic acid, valproate and 
divalproex in the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder (Cochrane Review).  The Cochrane Library2002.  
17. Sachs GS, Guille C. Weight gain ass ociated with use of psychotropic medications. J Clin Psychiatry 
1999;60 Suppl 21:16 -9. 
18. Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, et al. Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with 
chronic schizophrenia. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1209 -23. 
19. Daumit GL,  Goldberg RW, Anthony C, et al. Physical activity patterns in adults with severe mental 
illness. J Nerv Ment Dis 2005;193:641 -6. 
20. Jerome GJ, Young DR, Dalcin A, et al. Physical activity levels of persons with mental illness attending 
psychiatric rehabil itation programs. Schizophr Res 2009;108:252 -7. 
21. Amani R. Is dietary pattern of schizophrenia patients different from healthy subjects? BMC Psychiatry 
2007;7:15.  
22. McCreadie RG, Scottish Schizophrenia Lifestyle G. Diet, smoking and cardiovascular risk  in people 
with schizophrenia: descriptive study. Br J Psychiatry 2003;183:534 -9. 
23. Strassnig M, Brar JS, Ganguli R. Nutritional assessment of patients with schizophrenia: a preliminary 
study. Schizophr Bull 2003;29:393 -7. 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 27 24. Goff DC, Sullivan LM, McEvo y JP, et al. A comparison of ten -year cardiac risk estimates in 
schizophrenia patients from the CATIE study and matched controls. Schizophr Res 2005;80:45 -53. 
25. Holmberg SK, Kane C. Health and self -care practices of persons with schizophrenia. Psychiatr Serv 
1999;50:827 -9. 
26. Ziedonis D, Hitsman B, Beckham JC, et al. Tobacco use and cessation in psychiatric disorders: National 
Institute of Mental Health report. Nicotine Tob Res 2008;10:1691 -715. 
27. Tidey JW, Rohsenow DJ, Kaplan GB, Swift RM. Cigarette s moking topography in smokers with 
schizophrenia and matched non -psychiatric controls. Drug and alcohol dependence 2005;80:259 -65. 
28. Williams JM, Ziedonis DM, Abanyie F, Steinberg ML, Foulds J, Benowitz NL. Increased nicotine and 
cotinine levels in smoker s with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder is not a metabolic effect. 
Schizophrenia research 2005;79:323 -35. 
29. Goff DC, Henderson DC, Amico E. Cigarette smoking in schizophrenia: relationship to 
psychopathology and medication side effects. Am J Ps ychiatry 1992;149:1189 -94. 
30. Consensus Development Conference on Antipsychotic Drugs and Obesity and Diabetes. Diabetes Care 
2004;27:596 -58. 
31. Bresee LC, Majumdar SR, Patten SB, Johnson JA. Prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors and disease 
in peopl e with schizophrenia: A population -based study. Schizophr Res 2010.  
32. Bushe C, Leonard B. Association between atypical antipsychotic agents and type 2 diabetes: review of 
prospective clinical data. Br J Psychiatry Suppl 2004;47:S87 -93. 
33. Dixon L, Weide n P, Delahanty J, et al. Prevalence and correlates of diabetes in national schizophrenia 
samples. Schizophr Bull 2000;26:903 -12. 
34. McEvoy JP, Meyer JM, Goff DC, et al. Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in patients with 
schizophrenia: baseline results from the Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) 
schizophrenia trial and comparison with national estimates from NHANES III. Schizophr Res 2005;80:19 -32. 
35. Sokal J, Messias E, Dickerson F, et al. Co -morbidity of medical illnes ses among adults with serious 
mental illness who are receiving community psychiatric services. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 
2004;192:421 -7. 
36. Casey DE. Metabolic issues and cardiovascular disease in patients with psychiatric disorders. Am J Med 
2005;118 Suppl 2:15S -22S. 
37. Dwyer DS, Pinkofsky HB, Liu Y, Bradley RJ. Antipsychotic drugs affect glucose uptake and the 
expression of glucose transporters in PC12 cells. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 1999;23:69 -80. 
38. Haupt DW, Newcomer  JW. Hyperglycemia and antipsychotic medications. J Clin Psychiatry 2001;62 
Suppl 27:15 -26; discussion 40 -1. 
39. Newcomer JW. Comparing the safety and efficacy of atypical antipsychotics in psychiatric patients with 
comorbid medical illnesses. J Clin Psych iatry 2009;70 Suppl 3:30 -6. 
40. Newcomer JW, Haupt DW, Fucetola R, et al. Abnormalities in Glucose Regulation during antipsychotic 
treatment of Schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002;59:337 -45. 
41. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The Seventh Rep ort of the Joint National Committee on 
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA 
2003;289:2560 -72. 
42. Koskinen J, Lohonen J, Koponen H, Isohanni M, Miettunen J. Prevalence of alcohol use disorders in 
schizophrenia --a systematic review and meta -analysis. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2009;120:85 -96. 
43. Newcomer JW. Medical risk in patients with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. J Clin Psychiatry 
2006;67 Suppl 9:25 -30; discussion 6 -42. 
44. Dixon L, Postrado L, Delahanty J, Fischer PJ, Lehman A. The association of medical comorbidity in 
schizophrenia with poor physical and mental health. J Nerv Ment Dis 1999;187:496 -502. 
45. Casey DE. Dyslipidemia and atypical antipsychotic drugs. J Clin Psychiatry 2004;65 Suppl 18:27 -35. 
46. Daumit GL, Goff DC, Meyer JM, et al. Antipsychotic effects on estimated 10 -year coronary heart 
disease risk in the CATIE schizophrenia study. Schizophr Res 2008;105:175 -87. 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 28 47. L'Italien GJ, Casey DE, Kan HJ, Carson WH, Marcus RN. Comparison of metabolic syndrome 
incidence among schizophrenia patients treated with aripiprazole versus olanzapine or placebo. J Clin 
Psychiatry 2007;68:1510 -6. 
48. Meyer JM, Davis VG, McEvoy JP, et al. Impact of antipsychotic treatment on nonfasting triglycerides i n 
the CATIE Schizophrenia Trial phase 1. Schizophr Res 2008;103:104 -9. 
49. Newcomer JW. Second -generation (atypical) antipsychotics and metabolic effects: a comprehensive 
literature review. CNS Drugs 2005;19 Suppl 1:1 -93. 
50. Sharpe JK, Hills AP. Anthropom etry and adiposity in a group of people with chronic mental illness. 
Aust N Z J Psychiatry 1998;32:77 -81. 
51. Newcomer JW, Hennekens CH. Severe mental illness and risk of cardiovascular disease. JAMA 
2007;298:1794 -6. 
52. Brar JS, Ganguli R, Pandina G, Turk oz I, Berry S, Mahmoud R. Effects of behavioral therapy on weight 
loss in overweight and obese patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry 2005;66:205 -12. 
53. Evans S, Newton R, Higgins S. Nutritional interventio n to prevent weight gain in patients commenced 
on olanzapine: a randomized controlled trial. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2005;39:479 -86. 
54. Faulkner G, Soundy AA, Lloyd K. Schizophrenia and weight management: a systematic review of 
interventions to control weig ht. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2003;108:324 -32. 
55. Kwon JS, Choi JS, Bahk WM, et al. Weight management program for treatment -emergent weight gain 
in olanzapine -treated patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder: A 12 -week randomized controlled 
clinical trial. J Clin Psychiatry 2006;67:547 -53. 
56. Littrell KH, Hilligoss NM, Kirshner CD, Petty RG, Johnson CG. The effects of an educational 
intervention on antipsychotic -induced weight gain. J Nurs Scholarsh 2003;35:237 -41. 
57. McKibbin CL, Patterson TL,  Norman G, et al. A lifestyle intervention for older schizophrenia patients 
with diabetes mellitus: a randomized controlled trial. Schizophr Res 2006;86:36 -44. 
58. Weber M, Wyne K. A cognitive/behavioral group intervention for weight loss in patients treat ed with 
atypical antipsychotics. Schizophr Res 2006;83:95 -101. 
59. Daumit GL, Dickerson FB, Wang NY, et al. A behavioral weight -loss intervention in persons with 
serious mental illness. N Engl J Med 2013;368:1594 -602. 
60. Siru R, Hulse GK, Tait RJ. Assessi ng motivation to quit smoking in people with mental illness: a 
review. Addiction 2009;104:719 -33. 
61. Kreyenbuhl J, Buchanan RW, Dickerson FB, Dixon LB, Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research T. 
The Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT): upd ated treatment recommendations 2009. 
Schizophr Bull 2010;36:94 -103. 
62. Evins AE, Cather C, Deckersbach T, et al. A double -blind placebo -controlled trial of bupropion 
sustained -release for smoking cessation in schizophrenia. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2005;25: 218-25. 
63. Evins AE, Cather C, Rigotti NA, et al. Two -year follow -up of a smoking cessation trial in patients with 
schizophrenia: increased rates of smoking cessation and reduction. J Clin Psychiatry 2004;65:307 -11; quiz 452 -
3. 
64. Evins AE, Mays VK, Rigo tti NA, Tisdale T, Cather C, Goff DC. A pilot trial of bupropion added to 
cognitive behavioral therapy for smoking cessation in schizophrenia. Nicotine Tob Res 2001;3:397 -403. 
65. Baker A, Richmond R, Haile M, et al. A randomized controlled trial of a smoking cessation intervention 
among people with a psychotic disorder. Am J Psychiatry 2006;163:1934 -42. 
66. Ziedonis DM, George TP. Schizophrenia and nicotine use: report of a pilot smoking cessation program 
and review of neurobiological and clinical issu es. Schizophrenia bulletin 1997;23:247 -54. 
67. Weiner E, Ball MP, Summerfelt A, Gold J, Buchanan RW. Effects of sustained -release bupropion and 
supportive group therapy on cigarette consumption in patients with schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry 
2001;158:635 -7. 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 29 68. George TP, Vessicchio JC, Termine A, et al. A placebo controlled trial of bupropion for smoking 
cessation in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry 2002;52:53 -61. 
69. George TP, Ziedonis DM, Feingold A, et al. Nicotine transdermal patch and atypical antipsyc hotic 
medications for smoking cessation in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry 2000;157:1835 -42. 
70. Casagrande SS, Jerome GJ, Dalcin AT, et al. Randomized trial of achieving healthy lifestyles in 
psychiatric rehabilitation: the ACHIEVE trial. BMC Psychiatry 20 10;10:108.  
71. Tsoi DT, Porwal M, Webster AC. Interventions for smoking cessation and reduction in individuals with 
schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;2:CD007253.  
72. Dutra SJ, Stoeckel LE, Carlini SV, Pizzagalli DA, Evins AE. Varenicline as a smoking cessation aid in 
schizophrenia: effects on smoking behavior and reward sensitivity. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2011.  
73. Williams JM, Anthenelli RM, Morris CD, et al. A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled study 
evaluating the safety and eff icacy of varenicline for smoking cessation in patients with schizophrenia or 
schizoaffective disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 2012;73:654 -60. 
74. Weiner E, Buchholz A, Coffay A, et al. Varenicline for smoking cessation in people with schizophrenia: 
a double bli nd randomized pilot study. Schizophr Res 2011;129:94 -5. 
75. Pachas GN, Cather C, Pratt SA, et al. Varenicline for Smoking Cessation in Schizophrenia: Safety and 
Effectiveness in a 12 -Week, Open -Label Trial. J Dual Diagn 2012;8:117 -25. 
76. Evins AE. Reasses sing the Safety of Varenicline. Am J Psychiatry 2013;170.  
77. Gibbons RD, Mann JJ. Varenicline, Smoking Cessation, and Neuropsychiatric Adverse Events. Am J 
Psychiatry 2013.  
78. Wu BS, Weinberger AH, Mancuso E, et al. A Preliminary Feasibility Study of Var enicline for Smoking 
Cessation in Bipolar Disorder. J Dual Diagn 2012;8:131 -2. 
79. George TP, Vessicchio JC, Termine A, et al. A placebo controlled trial of bupropion for smoking 
cessation in schizophrenia. Biological psychiatry 2002;52:53 -61. 
80. Heffner JL, Anthenelli RM, Delbello MP, Stahl L, Strakowski SM. Mood management and nicotine 
patch for smoking cessation in adults with bipolar disorder. Nicotine Tob Res 2012;15:1805 -6. 
81. Weinberger AH, Vessicchio JC, Sacco KA, Creeden CL, Chengappa KN, George TP. A preliminary 
study of sustained -release bupropion for smoking cessation in bipolar disorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol 
2008;28:584 -7. 
82. Evins AE. Extended Duration Pharmacotherapy for Sustained Tobacco Abstinence in People with 
Serious Mental Illness I n Symposium: α 4β2-Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors In Schizophrenia: Implications 
for Comorbid Tobacco Smoking and Therapeutics.  Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2013; 
Boston, MA.  
83. Chengappa KN. Varenicline for Initiating Smoking Cessation  in Persons with Bipolar Disorder A 
Random -Assignment, Placebo -Controlled, Parallel Group Clinical Trial (PowerPoint). American Psychiatric 
Assoication 166th Annual Meeting San Franciso, CA.(5/18/2013).  
84. Evins AE, Cather C, Pratt SA, et al. Maintenance treatment with varenicline for smoking cessation in 
patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2014;311:145 -54. 
85. Anthenelli RM, Benowitz NL, West R, et al. Neuropsychiatric safety and efficacy of varenicline, 
bupropion, and nicotine patch in smokers with and without psychiatric disorders (EAGLES): a double -blind, 
randomised, placebo -controlled clinical trial. The Lancet 2016;387:2507 -20. 
86. Renders C, Valk G, Griffin S, Wagner E, Thm van Eijk J, Assendelft W. Int erventions to improve the 
management of diabetes mellitus in primary care, outpatient and community settings. Cochrane database of 
systematic reviews 2000:CD001481.  
87. Glynn L, Murphy A, Smith S, Schroeder K, Fahey T. Interventions used to improve control  of blood 
pressure in patients with hypertension. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010;3:CD005182.  
88. Schedlbauer A, Davies P, Fahey T. Interventions to improve adherence to lipid lowering medication. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010:CD004371.  
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 30 89. Haskell WL, Berra K, Arias E, et al. Multifactor cardiovascular disease risk reduction in medically 
underserved, high -risk patients. The American journal of cardiology 2006;98:1472 -9. 
90. Haskell WL, Alderman EL, Fair JM, et al. Effects of intensive multip le risk factor reduction on coronary 
atherosclerosis and clinical cardiac events in men and women with coronary artery disease. The Stanford 
Coronary Risk Intervention Project (SCRIP). Circulation 1994;89:975 -90. 
91. Becker DM, Yanek LR, Johnson WR, Jr., e t al. Impact of a community -based multiple risk factor 
intervention on cardiovascular risk in black families with a history of premature coronary disease. Circulation 
2005;111:1298 -304. 
92. Katon WJ, Lin EH, Von Korff M, et al. Collaborative care for patie nts with depression and chronic 
illnesses. N Engl J Med 2010;363:2611 -20. 
93. Ogedegbe G, Chaplin W, Schoenthaler A, et al. A practice -based trial of motivational interviewing and 
adherence in hypertensive African Americans. Am J Hypertens 2008;21:1137 -43. 
94. Schedlbauer A, Davies P, Fahey T. Interventions to improve adherence to lipid lowering medication. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010:CD004371.  
95. Druss BG, Rohrbaugh RM, Levinson CM, Rosenheck RA. Integrated medical care for patients with 
serious psychiatric illness: a randomized trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2001;58:861 -8. 
96. Druss BG, von Esenwein SA. Improving general medical care for persons with mental and addictive 
disorders: systematic review. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2006;28:145 -53. 
97. Druss BG, von Esenwein SA, Compton MT, Rask KJ, Zhao L, Parker RM. A randomized trial of 
medical care management for community mental health settings: the Primary Care Access, Referral, and 
Evaluation (PCARE) study. Am J Psychiatry 2010;167:151 -9. 
98. Umbric ht-Schneiter A, Ginn DH, Pabst KM, Bigelow GE. Providing medical care to methadone clinic 
patients: referral vs on -site care. Am J Public Health 1994;84:207 -10. 
99. Breslau J, Leckman -Westin E, Han B, et al. Impact of a mental health based primary care pro gram on 
emergency department visits and inpatient stays. General Hospital Psychiatry 2018;52:8 -13. 
100. Breslau J, Leckman -Westin E, Yu H, et al. Impact of a Mental Health Based Primary Care Program on 
Quality of Physical Health Care. Administration and Po licy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services 
Research 2018;45:276 -85. 
101. Druss BG, von Esenwein SA, Glick GE, et al. Randomized Trial of an Integrated Behavioral Health 
Home: The Health Outcomes Management and Evaluation (HOME) Study. Am J Psychiatry  2017;174:246 -55. 
102. Gilmer TP, Henwood BF, Goode M, Sarkin AJ, Innes -Gomberg D. Implementation of Integrated Health 
Homes and Health Outcomes for Persons With Serious Mental Illness in Los Angeles County. Psychiatr Serv 
2016;67:1062 -7. 
103. Krupski A, W est, II, Scharf DM, et al. Integrating Primary Care Into Community Mental Health 
Centers: Impact on Utilization and Costs of Health Care. Psychiatr Serv 2016;67:1233 -9. 
104. Tepper MC, Cohen AM, Progovac AM, et al. Mind the Gap: Developing an Integrated Be havioral 
Health Home to Address Health Disparities in Serious Mental Illness. Psychiatr Serv 2017;68:1217 -24. 
105. Heidenreich PA, Trogdon JG, Khavjou OA, et al. Forecasting the future of cardiovascular disease in the 
United States: a policy statement from  the American Heart Association. Circulation 2011;123:933 -44. 
106. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics — 2010 Update2010.  
107. Incidence and Prevalence: 2006 Chart Book on Cardiovascular and Lung Diseases. Bethesda, MD2006.  
108. Rose G, McCartney P, Reid D D. Self -administration of a questionnaire on chest pain and intermittent 
claudication. Br J Prev Soc Med 1977;31:42 -8. 
109. Cacciola JS, Alterman AI, McLellan AT, Lin YT, Lynch KG. Initial evidence for the reliability and 
validity of a "Lite" version of th e Addiction Severity Index. Drug Alcohol Depend 2007;87:297 -302. 
110. White WB, Anwar YA. Evaluation of the overall efficacy of the Omron office digital blood pressure 
HEM -907 monitor in adults. Blood Press Monit 2001;6:107 -10. 
111. Vollmer WM, Appel LJ, S vetkey LP, et al. Comparing office -based and ambulatory blood pressure 
monitoring in clinical trials. J Hum Hypertens 2005;19:77 -82. 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 31 112. Laboratories ATSCoPSfCPF. ATS statement: guidelines for the six -minute walk test. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2002;166:1 11-7. 
113. Grant S, Corbett K, Amjad AM, Wilson J, Aitchison T. A comparison of methods of predicting 
maximum oxygen uptake. Br J Sports Med 1995;29:147 -52. 
114. Johnson DJ, Oliver RA, Terry JW. Regression equation for prediction of performance in the twel ve 
minute run walk test. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 1979;19:165 -70. 
115. Friedewald WT, Levy RI, Fredrickson DS. Estimation of the concentration of low -density lipoprotein 
cholesterol in plasma, without use of the preparative ultracentrifuge. Clin Chem 1972 ;18:499 -502. 
116. Bingham SA, Gill C, Welch A, et al. Validation of dietary assessment methods in the UK arm of EPIC 
using weighed records, and 24 -hour urinary nitrogen and potassium and serum vitamin C and carotenoids as 
biomarkers. Int J Epidemiol 1997;2 6 Suppl 1:S137 -51. 
117. Martini MC, Campbell DR, Gross MD, Grandits GA, Potter JD, Slavin JL. Plasma carotenoids as 
biomarkers of vegetable intake: the University of Minnesota Cancer Prevention Research Unit Feeding Studies. 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Pre v 1995;4:491 -6. 
118. van Kappel AL, Steghens JP, Zeleniuch -Jacquotte A, Chajes V, Toniolo P, Riboli E. Serum carotenoids 
as biomarkers of fruit and vegetable consumption in the New York Women's Health Study. Public Health Nutr 
2001;4:829 -35. 
119. Jarvis MJ , Russell MA, Saloojee Y. Expired air carbon monoxide: a simple breath test of tobacco smoke 
intake. Br Med J 1980;281:484 -5. 
120. Verification SSoB. Biochemical verification of tobacco use and cessation. Nicotine Tob Res 
2002;4:149 -59. 
121. Acosta M, Buch halter A, Breland A, Hamilton D, Eissenberg T. Urine cotinine as an index of smoking 
status in smokers during 96 -hr abstinence: comparison between gas chromatography/mass spectrometry and 
immunoassay test strips. Nicotine Tob Res 2004;6:615 -20. 
122. Block G, Gillespie C, Rosenbaum EH, Jenson C. A rapid food screener to assess fat and fruit and 
vegetable intake. Am J Prev Med 2000;18:284 -8. 
123. Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, Fagerstrom KO. The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine 
Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addict 1991;86:1119 -27. 
124. Hughes JR, Keely JP, Niaura RS, Ossip -Klein DJ, Richmond RL, Swan GE. Measures of abstinence in 
clinical trials: issues and recommendations. Nicotine & tobacco research :  official journal of the Society for 
Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2003;5:13 -25. 
125. Karelitz JL, Michael VC, Perkins KA. Analysis of Agreement between Expired -Air Carbon Monoxide 
Monitors. J Smok Cessat 2017;12:105 -12. 
126. Salyers MP, Bosworth HB, Sw anson JW, Lamb -Pagone J, Osher FC. Reliability and validity of the SF -
12 health survey among people with severe mental illness. Medical Care 2000;38:1141 -50. 
127. Bobes J, Garcia -Portilla P, Saiz PA, Bascaran T, Bousono M. Quality of life measures in schiz ophrenia. 
Eur Psychiatry 2005;20 Suppl 3:S313 -7. 
128. Fryback DG, Dunham NC, Palta M, et al. US norms for six generic health -related quality -of-life indexes 
from the National Health Measurement study. Med Care 2007;45:1162 -70. 
129. Hayhurst H, Palmer S, Ab bott R, Johnson T, Scott J. Measuring health -related quality of life in bipolar 
disorder: relationship of the EuroQol (EQ -5D) to condition -specific measures. Qual Life Res 2006;15:1271 -80. 
130. Morisky DE, Ang A, Krousel -Wood M, Ward HJ. Predictive validit y of a medication adherence 
measure in an outpatient setting. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 2008;10:348 -54. 
131. Radloff L. The CES -D Scale:  A self -report depression scale for research in the general population. 
Applied Psyhcological Measurement 1977;1:385 -401. 
132. Weissman MM, Sholomskas D, Pottenger M, Prusoff BA, Locke BZ. Assessing depressive symptoms in 
five psychiatric populations: a validation study. Am J Epidemiol 1977;106:203 -14. 
133. Eisen SV, Normand SL, Belanger AJ, Spiro A, 3rd, Esch D. The Re vised Behavior and Symptom 
Identification Scale (BASIS -R): reliability and validity. Med Care 2004;42:1230 -41. 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 32 134. Eisen SV, Ranganathan G, Seal P, Spiro A, 3rd. Measuring clinically meaningful change following 
mental health treatment. J Behav Health Serv  Res 2007;34:272 -89. 
135. Niv N, Cohen AN, Mintz J, Ventura J, Young AS. The validity of using patient self -report to assess 
psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia. Schizophr Res 2007;90:245 -50. 
136. Sallis JF, Pinski RB, Grossman RM, Patterson TL, Nader PR. The development of self efficacy scales 
for health -related diet and exercise behaviors. Health Education Research 1988;3:283 -92. 
137. Sherbourne CD, Stewart AL. The MOS social support survey. Soc Sci Med 1991;32:705 -14. 
138. Celio AA, Wilfley DE, Crow SJ, Mitchell J, Walsh BT. A comparison of the binge eating scale, 
questionnaire for eating and weight patterns -revised, and eating disorder examination questionnaire with 
instructions with the eating disorder examination in the assessment of binge eating disor der and its symptoms. 
Int J Eat Disord 2004;36:434 -44. 
139. Mujahid MS, Diez Roux AV, Morenoff JD, Raghunathan T. Assessing the measurement properties of 
neighborhood scales: from psychometrics to ecometrics. American journal of epidemiology 2007;165:858 -67. 
140. Buysse D, Reynolds C, Monk T, Berman S, Kupfer D. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI): A 
new instrument for psychiatric research and practice. Psychiatry Research 1989;28:193 -213. 
141. Casagrande SS, Dalcin A, McCarron P, et al. A Nutritional  Intervention to Reduce the Calorie Content 
of Meals Served at Psychiatric Rehabilitation Programs. Community Ment Health J 2011.  
142. American Heart Association and National Heart L, and Blood Institute. Exercise and Your Heart:  A 
guide to physical activ ity AHA; 2001.  
143. Daumit GL, Dalcin AT, Jerome GJ, et al. A behavioral weight loss intervention for persons with serious 
mental illness in psychiatric rehabilitation centers. International Journal of Obesity 2010:1 –10. 
144. Daumit G, Appel L, Leatherman E, et al. Randomized Trial of Peer -Supported Physical Activity for 
Persons with Severe Mental Illness in Community Psychiatry. Journal of General Internal Medicine 
2010;25:378 -9. 
145. Gary TL, Batts -Turner M, Yeh HC, et al. The effects of a nurse case mana ger and a community health 
worker team on diabetic control, emergency department visits, and hospitalizations among urban African 
Americans with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 2009;169:1788 -94. 
146. Campbell MK, Re snicow K, Carr C, Wang T, Williams A. Process evaluation of an effective church -
based diet intervention: Body & Soul. Health Educ Behav 2007;34:864 -80. 
147. Hill-Briggs F, Batts -Turner M, Gary TL, et al. Training community health workers as diabetes educat ors 
for urban African Americans: value added using participatory methods. Prog Community Health Partnersh 
2007;1:185 -94. 
148. Hyman DJ, Pavlik VN, Taylor WC, Goodrick GK, Moye L. Simultaneous vs sequential counseling for 
multiple behavior change. Arch Inte rn Med 2007;167:1152 -8. 
149. Standards of medical care in diabetes --2011. Diabetes care 2011;34 Suppl 1:S11 -61. 
150. Third Report of the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Choles terol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III) final report. 
Circulation 2002;106:3143 -421. 
151. Appel LJ, Brands MW, Daniels SR, Karanja N, Elmer PJ, Sacks FM. Dietary approaches to prevent and 
treat hypertension: a scientific statement from the American Hea rt Association. Hypertension 2006;47:296 -308. 
152. Evins AE. Reassessing the safety of varenicline. Am J Psychiatry 2013;170:1385 -7. 
153. Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood 
cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2014;129:S1 -45. 
154. Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update U.S. Public  Health Service Clinical Practice 
Guideline executive summary. Respir Care 2008;53:1217 -22. 
155. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence -based guideline for the management of high blood 
pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointe d to the Eighth Joint National Committee (JNC 8). 
Jama 2014;311:507 -20. 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 33 156. Ebbert JO, Hughes JR, West RJ, et al. Effect of Varenicline on Smoking Cessation Through Smoking 
Reduction: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama 2015;313:687 -94. 
157. American Diabet es Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes —2014. Diabetes Care 
2014;37:S14 -S80. 
158. Buchanan RW, Kreyenbuhl J, Kelly DL, et al. The 2009 schizophrenia PORT psychopharmacological 
treatment recommendations and summary statements. Schizophr Bull 2 010;36:71 -93. 
159. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap) - A metadata -and workflow process for providing translational research informatics support. J 
Biomed Infor 2009;42:377 -81. 
160. Rosne r B. Fundamentals of biostatistics: Volume 1 6th ed ed. Belmont, CA: Duxbury Press; 2006.  
161. Piantadosi S. Clinical Trials:  A Methodologic Perspective. Second ed. Baltimore, MD: Wiley 
Interscience; 2005.  
162. Little R, Rubin D. Statistical Analysis with  Missing Data, Second Edition: Wiley and Sons; 2002.  
163. Redmon JB, Bertoni AG, Connelly S, et al. Effect of the look AHEAD study intervention on medication 
use and related cost to treat cardiovascular disease risk factors in individuals with type 2 diabe tes. Diabetes Care 
2010;33:1153 -8. 
164. Muntner P, Joyce C, Holt E, et al. Defining the minimal detectable change in scores on the eight -item 
Morisky Medication Adherence Scale. Ann Pharmacother 2011;45:569 -75. 
165. Krousel -Wood M, Joyce C, Holt E, et al. Predictors of decline in medication adherence: results from the 
cohort study of medication adherence among older adults. Hypertension 2011;58:804 -10. 
166. Kraemer HC, Wilson GT, Fairburn CG, Agras WS. Mediators and moderators of treatment effects in 
random ized clinical trials. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002;59:877 -83. 
167. Gold M, Siegel J, Russell L, Weinstein M. Cost -Effectiveness in Health and Medicine. New York: 
Oxford University Press; 1996.  
168. Briggs AH, O'Brien BH, Blackhouse G. Thinking outside the box:  recent advances in the analysis and 
presentation of uncertainty in cost -effectiveness studies. Annu Rev Public Health 2002;23:377 -401. 
169. Glaser BG. The Constant Comparative Method of Qualitative -Analysis. Social Problems 1965;12:436 -
45. 
170. Appel L, C hampagne C, Harsha D, et al. Effects of Comprehensive Lifestyle Modification on Blood 
Pressure Control:  Main results of the PREMIER Clinical Trial. Writing Group of the PREMIER Collaborative 
Research Group. JAMA 2003;289:2083 -93. 
171. Pi-Sunyer X, Blackbu rn G, Brancati FL, et al. Reduction in weight and cardiovascular disease risk 
factors in individuals with type 2 diabetes: one -year results of the look AHEAD trial. Diabetes care 
2007;30:1374 -83. 
172. Bove AA, Santamore WP, Homko C, et al. Reducing cardiov ascular disease risk in medically 
underserved urban and rural communities. Am Heart J 2011;161:351 -9. 
173. Hiss RG, Armbruster BA, Gillard ML, McClure LA. Nurse care manager collaboration with 
community -based physicians providing diabetes care: a randomize d controlled trial. Diabetes Educ 
2007;33:493 -502. 
174. Ma J, Berra K, Haskell WL, et al. Case management to reduce risk of cardiovascular disease in a county 
health care system. Arch Intern Med 2009;169:1988 -95. 
175. Barr Taylor C, Miller NH, Reilly KR, e t al. Evaluation of a nurse -care management system to improve 
outcomes in patients with complicated diabetes. Diabetes Care 2003;26:1058 -63. 
176. Spencer MS, Rosland AM, Kieffer EC, et al. Effectiveness of a Community Health Worker Intervention 
Among Afric an American and Latino Adults With Type 2 Diabetes: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Am J 
Public Health 2011.  
177. Welch G, Garb J, Zagarins S, Lendel I, Gabbay RA. Nurse diabetes case management interventions and 
blood glucose control: results of a meta -analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2010;88:1 -6. 
Protocol: Comprehensive Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Trial in Persons with Serious Mental Illness (IDEAL)  
 
 34 178. Randomised controlled trial evaluating cardiovascular screening and intervention in general practice: 
principal results of British family heart study. Family Heart Study Group. BMJ 1994;308:313 -20. 
179. Maru thur NM, Wang NY, Appel LJ. Lifestyle interventions reduce coronary heart disease risk: results 
from the PREMIER Trial. Circulation 2009;119:2026 -31. 
180. ACSM. ACSM's guidelines for exercise testing and prescription/American College of Sports Medicine. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000.  
181. Benowitz NL, Gourlay SG. Cardiovascular toxicity of nicotine: implications for nicotine replacement 
therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997;29:1422 -31. 
182. Dale LC, Hurt RD, Offord KP, Lawson GM, Croghan IT, Schroeder DR. High -dose nicotine patch 
therapy. Percentage of replacement and smoking cessation. JAMA 1995;274:1353 -8. 
183. Heishman SJ, Balfour DJ, Benowitz NL, Hatsukami DK, Lindstrom JM, Ockene JK. Society for 
Research on Nicotine and Tobacc o. Addiction 1997;92:615 -33. 
184. Jorenby DE, Smith SS, Fiore MC, et al. Varying nicotine patch dose and type of smoking cessation 
counseling. JAMA 1995;274:1347 -52. 
185. Zevin S, Jacob P, 3rd, Benowitz NL. Dose -related cardiovascular and endocrine effects  of transdermal 
nicotine. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1998;64:87 -95. 
186. Gourlay SG, Benowitz NL. The benefits of stopping smoking and the role of nicotine replacement 
therapy in older patients. Drugs Aging 1996;9:8 -23. 
187. Rose JE, Behm FM, Westman EC, Kukovich  P. Precessation treatment with nicotine skin patch 
facilitates smoking cessation. Nicotine Tob Res 2006;8:89 -101. 
188. Rose JE, Herskovic JE, Behm FM, Westman EC. Precessation treatment with nicotine patch 
significantly increases abstinence rates relative  to conventional treatment. Nicotine Tob Res 2009;11:1067 -75. 
 
 