1				Evaluation	of	Intraoperative	use	of	Dexycu	on	the	Signs	and	Symptoms	of	Dry	Eye		Sponsor:				SR	Cornea	Consultants					16	Kimberley	Circle,	Oak	Brook,	IL	60523	847	668	5498	Name	and	title	of	person(s)	authorized	to	sign	the	protocol	for	the	sponsor:		Sanjay	Rao,	MD		Monitor:			Sanjay	Rao,	MD	Medical	Expert:		Sanjay	Rao,	MD								Investigators:			Sanjay	Rao,	MD					Clinical	Laboratory(ies):		NA										Study	Product:			DEXYCU	(dexamethasone	intraocular	suspension)	9%		Protocol	Number:		[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]					April	10,	2019																				
2		Table	of	Contents		Study	Summary		1. Introduction	1.1 Background	1.2 Investigational	or	Study	Product	1.3 Preclinical	Data	1.4 Clinical	Data	to	Date	1.5 Dose	Rationale		1.6 Risks/Benefits	2. Study	Objectives	3. Study	Design	3.1 General	Design	3.2 Primary/Secondary	Study	Endpoints	4. Subject	Selection	and	Withdrawal							4.1	Inclusion	Criteria							4.2	Exclusion	Criteria							4.3	Subject	Recruitment	and	Screening							4.4	Early	Withdrawal	of	Subjects								5.	Investigational	Product								5.1	Description								5.2	Treatment	Regimen								5.3	Method	for	Assigning	Subjects	to	Treatment	Groups								5.4	Subject	Compliance	Monitoring									5.5	Prior	and	Concomitant	Therapy									5.6	Packaging,	Receiving,	Storage,	Dispensing	and	Return										6.			Study	Procedures									7.			Statistical	Plan							7.1	Sample	Size	Determination							7.2	Statistical	Methods							7.3	Subject	Population(s)	for	Analysis									8.		Safety	and	Adverse	Events							8.1	Definitions							8.2	Assessment	of	Safety	and	Efficacy								8.3	Recording	and	Reporting	of	Adverse	Events							8.4	Unblinding	Procedures							8.5	Stopping	Rules							8.6	Medical	Monitoring									9.		Data	Handling	and	Record	Keeping							9.1	Confidentiality							9.2	Source	Documents							9.3	Records	Retention								10.		Study	Monitoring,	Auditing,	and	Inspecting								11.		Ethical	Considerations										
3															
4		STUDY	SUMMARY	Title	Evaluation	of	intraoperative	use	of	Dexycu	on	the	Signs	and	Symptoms	of	Dry	Eye	Protocol	Number	10	Phase	Phase	IV	Methodology	Prospective	Randomized	Controlled	Trial	Study	Duration	3	weeks		Study	Center(s)	Single-Center			Objectives	To	evaluate	the	impact	of	intraoperative	Dexycu	during	cataract	surgery	on	the	signs	and	symptoms	of	dry	eye	Number	of	subjects	40	Main	Inclusion	and	Exclusion	Criteria	Inclusion:		Patients	undergoing	bilateral	cataract	surgery	Exclusion:		Patients	with	severe	ocular	surface	disease	as	defined	by	central	corneal	staining	with	fluorescein	and/or	a	tear	film	osmolarity	of	greater	than	340	in	either	eye	Study	product,	Dose,	Route,	Regimen	DEXYCU	(dexamethasone	intraocular	suspension)	9%,	administered	as	a	single	dose,	intraocularly	in	the	posterior	chamber	at	the	end	of	surgery.		The	dose	is	.005	mL	of	dexamethasone	9%	(equivalent	to	517	micrograms)	Duration	of	subjects	participation		Patients	scheduled	to	undergo	bilateral	cataract	surgery	will	be	screened	and	have	dry	eye	testing.		If	enrolled	in	the	study,	patients	will	have	dry	eye	testing	at	1	week	and	3	weeks	after	surgery.	Reference	product	The	control	group	will	utilize	a	standard	post-cataract	surgery	regimen	of	topical	gatifloxacin	and	topical	prednisolone	acetate.							
5			
6		1 Introduction	Evaluation	of	intraoperative	use	of	Dexycu	on	the	Signs	and	Symptoms	of	Dry	Eye	is	a	clinical	research	protocol	and	the	study	will	be	conducted	in	accordance	with	the	protocol,	Good	Clinical	Practice	Standards,	and	applicable	regulatory	requirements.			1.1 Background	Multiple	studies	have	established	the	relationship	between	dry	eye	and	cataract	surgery.	First,	a	majority	of	patients	undergoing	cataract	surgery	have	dry	eye	signs	including	decreased	tear	break	up	time	(63%)	and	positive	corneal	staining	(77%).	Second,	patients	experience	an	increase	in	dry	eye	symptoms	after	cataract	surgery	compared	to	baseline.	Third,	Snellen	visual	acuity	and	contrast	sensitivity	are	impacted	by	dry	eye	after	cataract	surgery.				The	objective	of	this	clinical	research	is	to	evaluate	whether	the	signs	and	symptoms	of	dry	eye	after	cataract	surgery	improve	with	the	addition	of	a	DEXYCU	intraocular	injection.		1.2 Investigational/Study	Product	DEXYCU	contains	dexamethasone	9%	as	a	sterile	suspension	for	intraocular	ophthalmic	administration.		DEXYCU	is	provided	as	a	kit	for	administration	of	a	single	dose	of	0.005	mL	of	9%	dexamethasone.				1.3	Preclinical	Data			Not	applicable.		1.4	Clinical	Data	to	Date		Clinical	efficacy	was	evaluated	in	a	randomized,	double	masked,	placebo	controlled	trial	(NCT2006888)	in	which	subjects	received	either	DEXYCU	or	placebo	(vehicle).		A	dose	of	5	microliters	of	DEXYCU	or	vehicle	was	administered	by	the	physician	at	the	end	of	the	surgical	procedure.		The	primary	efficacy	endpoint	for	the	study	was	the	proportion	of	patients	with	anterior	chamber	cell	clearing	on	postoperative	day	8.		The	percentage	of	patients	with	anterior	chamber	clearing	at	Day	8	was	2-%	in	the	placebo	group,	and	57%,	and	60%	in	the	342	and	517	microgram	treatment	groups.		1.5	Dose	Rationale			See	section	1.4		1.6	Risk/Benefits		The	following	adverse	events	rates	are	derived	from	three	clinical	trials	in	which	339	patients	received	the	517	microgram	dose	of	DEXYCU.		The	most	commonly	reported	adverse	reactions	occurred	in	5-15%	of	subjects	and	included	increases	in	intraocular	pressure,	corneal	edema,	and	iritis.		Other	ocular	adverse	reactions	occurring	in	1-5%	of	subjects	included,	corneal	endothelial	cell	loss,	blepharitis,	eye	pain,	cystoid	macular	edema,	dry	eye,	ocular	inflammation,	posterior	capsular	opacification,	blurred	vision,	reduced	visual	acuity,	vitreous	floaters,	foreign	body	sensation,	photophobia,	and	vitreous	detachment.				2		Study	Objectives	The	objective	of	this	clinical	research	is	to	evaluate	whether	the	signs	and	symptoms	of	dry	eye	after	cataract	surgery	improve	with	the	addition	of	a	DEXYCU	intraocular	injection.		Multiple	studies	have	established	that	dry	eye	worsens	after	cataract	surgery.		There	is	also	
7		a	strong	body	of	evidence	that	shows	that	dry	eye	is	inflammatory.		The	objective	of	this	study	is	to	evaluate	whether	the	intraocular	use	of	steroid	impacts	dry	eye.				3	Study	Design	3.1		General	Design	• The	type/design	of	the	study:		o 	Prospective	randomized	controlled	trial	• A	description	of	the	measures	taken	to	minimize/avoid	bias:		o Patients	undergoing	bilateral	cataract	surgery	will	be	randomized	to	the	DEXYCU	group	(standard	postoperative	cataract	regimen	+	intraoperative	DEXYCU)	in	one	eye	or	the	STANDARD	group	(standard	postoperative	cataract	regimen).		Randomization	will	be	done	after	screening	visit,	prior	to	surgery	on	the	first	eye	and	will	be	done	by	coin	flip.		Standard	cataract	regimen	to	be	used:	topical	prednisolone	acetate	1%	qid	and	topical	gatifloxacin	qid	for	1	week,	then	tid	for	1	week,	then	bid	for	1	week.		• Expected	duration	of	subject	participation		o 3	weeks	after	cataract	surgery	o Patients	undergoing	cataract	surgery	will	have	dry	eye	testing	prior	to	surgery,	1	week	after	surgery,	and	3	weeks	after	surgery	• A	summary	description	of	the	sequence	and	duration	of	all	trial	periods	including	follow-up,	if	any	o Patients	undergoing	cataract	surgery	will	have	dry	eye	testing	prior	to	surgery,	1	week	after	surgery,	and	3	weeks	after	surgery			3.2	Primary/Secondary	Endpoints		Primary	endpoints:		1) Tear	film	Osmolarity	as	measured	on	Tear	Lab	system	2) Corneal	Staining	(Oxford	grading	scale	0-15)			Secondary	endpoint:	3) Satisfaction	questionnaire	–	How	satisfied	are	you	with	your	surgery?	(Graded	0-4)					
8		4	Subject	Selection	and	Withdrawal	4.1	Inclusion	Criteria	1)	Patients	diagnosed	with	bilateral	cataracts	and	scheduled	to	undergo	bilateral	cataract	surgery	2)	Must	be	able	to	understand	and	sign	an	informed	consent	from	that	has	been	approved	by	an	Institutional	Review	Board	3)	Patient	is	over	the	age	of	18	4)	Patient	must	agree	to	comply	with	visit	schedule	and	other	requirements	of	the	study	5)	Females	who	are	not	pregnant	and	are	not	lactating.		Females	who	are	post-menopausal	or	surgically	sterilized.					If	the	answer	to	any	of	the	inclusion	criteria	are	NO,	the	subject	is	ineligible	to	continue	study	participation									4.2	Exclusion	Criteria	1)	Patients	with	several	ocular	surface	disease	as	defined	by	central	corneal	staining	with	fluorescein	and/or	a	tear	film	osmolarity	of	greater	than	340	in	either	eye										4.3	Subject	Recruitment	and	Screening		Subjects	will	be	recruited	for	the	study	from	principal	investigator’s	clinical	practice.		As	part	of	the	informed	consent	process,	patients	will	be	offered	a	DEXYCU	injection	and	given	a	brochure/handout	discussing	DEXYCU.		As	part	of	the	standard	cataract	evaluation	process,	both	tear	film	osmolarity	and	corneal	staining	will	be	performed.		4.4	Early	Withdrawal	of	Subjects		Subjects	will	be	carefully	monitored	after	surgery,	including	visual	acuity	measurements,	intraocular	pressure	measurements,	anterior	and	posterior	segment	evaluation,	as	well	as	dry	eye	testing.		If	patients	have	an	intraocular	pressure	elevation	over	35mm	that	requires	additional	medication,	they	will	be	withdrawn	from	the	study.		Also,	if	patients	require	a	deviation	from	the	standard	cataract	postoperative	regimen,	they	will	be	withdrawn	from	the	study.		5					Investigational	Product		5.1	Description		Each	kit	of	DEXYCU	contains	a	single	dose	for	a	single	patient.		The	2	mL	glass	vial	is	filled	with	0.5	mL	of	9%	dexamethasone.			5.2	Treatment/Dosing	Regimen	DEXYCU	(dexamethasone	intraocular	suspension)	9%,	administered	as	a	single	dose,	intraocularly	in	the	posterior	chamber	at	the	end	of	surgery.		The	dose	is	.005	mL	of	dexamethasone	9%	(equivalent	to	517	micrograms)											5.3	Method	for	Assigning	Subjects	to	Treatment/Dosing	Groups		Patients	undergoing	bilateral	cataract	surgery	will	be	randomized	to	the	DEXYCU	group	(standard	postoperative	cataract	regimen	+	intraoperative	DEXYCU)	in	one	eye	or	the	STANDARD	group	(standard	postoperative	cataract	regimen).		Randomization	will	be	done	after	screening	visit,	prior	to	surgery	on	the	first	eye	and	will	be	done	by	coin	flip.			Patients	who	are	randomly	assigned	to	the	DEXYCU	group	will	receive	a	sequentially	numbered	drug	kit.										5.4	Subject	Compliance	Monitoring		
9		The	study	team	will	assess	and	track	compliance	on	each	study	visit	(1	day,	1	week,	3	weeks).		At	all	postoperative	visits,	the	study	team	will	monitor	adherence	to	the	eyedrop	regimen.		If	there	is	a	significant	deviation	from	the	eyedrop	regimen,	the	principal	investigator	will	determine	continuation	in	the	study.		A	case	report	binder	will	be	created	for	each	subject	in	the	study.		Binder	tabs	will	include:	Screening	Visit	Day	1	Visit	Day	7	Visit	Day	21	Visit	Exit	Form	Early	Exit	Visit	Nonserious	Adverse	Event	Forms	Serious	Adverse	Event	Forms																	5.5	Prior	and	Concomitant	Therapy			All	medications	that	subjects	are	taking	prior	to	cataract	surgery	will	be	permitted.		Subjects	are	also	permitted	to	utilize	artificial	tears	in	addition	to	the	therapeutic	regimens.		The	use	of	artificial	tears	will	be	tracked	by	the	study	team.										5.6	Packaging,	Receiving,	Storage,	Dispensing	and	Return	Dexycu	will	be	stored	in	a	locked	cabinet.		Usage	of	the	medication	will	be	logged.			6	Study	Procedures	Screening	Visit	Day	1	Postoperative	Visit		Day	7	Postoperative	Visit	Day	21	Postoperative	Visit				At	all	visits,	visual	acuity,	eye	pressure	measurements,	tear	film	osmolarity,	and	corneal	staining	will	be	measured	and	recorded.		At	days	7	and	21,	patient	satisfaction	scores	will	be	measured.										7	Statistical	Procedures									7.1	Sample	Size	Determination	The	determination	of	sample	size	was	based	on	a	review	of	similar	cataract	and	dry	eye	studies.			As	this	is	a	single	center,	pilot	study,	it	was	determined	that	a	sample	size	of	40	patients	would	be	feasible.						7.2	Statistical	Methods	An	ANOVA	analysis	will	be	performed	to	compare	the	dry	eye	testing	data	between	the	DEXYCU	group	and	the	standard	regimen	group.						7.3	Subject	Population(s)	for	Analysis	All	patient	who	met	inclusion	criteria	and	complete	the	study	will	be	included	in	the	selection	of	subjects	to	be	included	in	the	analyses.											8	Safety	and	Adverse	Events										8.1	Definitions	
10		An	adverse	event	is	any	untoward	medical	occurrence	in	a	patient	who	is	administered	a	test	article	(DEXYCU).		The	adverse	event	does	not	necessarily	have	a	causal	relationship	with	the	treatment.		An	adverse	event	can	therefore	be	any	unfavorable	and	unintended	sign,	symptom,	or	disease	temporally	associated	with	the	use	of	the	test	article,	whether	or	not	related	to	the	test	article.		A	nonserious	adverse	event	is	defined	as	a	change	in	a	patient’s	ophthalmic	and	or	medical	health	that	is	not	life-threatening,	does	not	require	hospitalization,	does	not	prolong	a	current	hospitalization	and	is	not	disabling.		Nonserious	adverse	events	must	be	reported	by	use	of	a	Nonserious	Adverse	Event	Form	and	may	also	be	reported	by	a	telephone	call.		All	nonserious	advese	events	must	be	reported	on	a	Nonserious	Adverse	Event	Form	whether	they	are	considered	related	or	unrelated	to	the	test	article.		A	serious	adverse	event	is	defined	as	any	adverse	experience	occurring	at	any	dose	that	results	in	any	of	the	following	outcomes:	death;	a	life	threatening	adverse	event,	inpatient	hospitalization,	prolongation	of	existing	hospitalization,	or	a	persistent	or	significant	disability/incapacity.							8.2	Recording	and	Reporting	of	Adverse	Events	An	Adverse	Event	Form	must	be	completed	for	all	serious	adverse	events	within	24	hours	of	the	investigator’s	knowledge	of	the	event	and	to	the	Institutional	Review	Board	according	to	their	requirements.															8.4	Randomization	Codes	Patients	undergoing	bilateral	cataract	surgery	will	be	randomized	to	the	DEXYCU	group	(standard	postoperative	cataract	regimen	+	intraoperative	DEXYCU)	in	one	eye	or	the	STANDARD	group	(standard	postoperative	cataract	regimen).		Randomization	will	be	done	after	screening	visit,	prior	to	surgery	on	the	first	eye	and	will	be	done	by	coin	flip.			Patients	who	are	randomly	assigned	to	the	DEXYCU	group	will	receive	a	sequentially	numbered	drug	kit.							8.5	Stopping	Rules	Upon	completion	of	the	study,	an	“Exit	Form”	will	be	completed	and	signed	by	the	Principal	Investigator.		Patients	who	withdraw	early	from	the	study	will	complete	an	“Early	Exit	Visit”	form	detailing	the	last	visit	and	reasons	for	early	withdrawal.				8.6	Medical	Monitoring	The	medical	monitoring	plan	will	be	dictated	by	the	protocol	and	recorded	in	the	patient	case	report	binder.											
11							9			Data	Handling	and	Record	Keeping				9.1	Confidentiality	A	confidential	study	binder	will	be	maintained	and	secured	in	a	locked	cabinet	by	the	principal	investigator.				All	identifiable,	sensitive	information	will	be	protected	on	a	password	protected,	encrypted	device.		What	information	is	being	collected?	Visit	Date	Date	of	Surgery	Eye	Concomitant	Medication	Ocular	Symptoms	(Graded	0-3)				Foreign	Body	Sensation				Tearing				Photophobia	Visual	Acuity	Intraocular	Pressure	Tear	Film	Osmolarity	Corneal	Staining	Patient	satisfaction	score																			Will	identifiers	be	removed?	When?			Identifiers	will	be	removed	3	months	after	study	completion																		How	will	the	information	be	used?	The	information	will	be	used	to	determine	if	Dexycu	treatment	impacts	dry	eye	parameters	after	cataract	surgery																		Will	the	information	be	sold	to	third	parties?			No	
12																			Will	the	information	be	used	for	future	research?			No																		Who	has	access?			Only	Principal	Investigator																		When	will	the	information	be	destroyed?			12	months	after	study	completion						9.2	Source	Documents	A	case	report	binder	will	be	created	for	each	subject	in	the	study.		Binder	tabs	will	include:	A.		Screening	Visit	B.		Day	1	Postoperative	Visit	C.		Day	7	Posteoperative	Visit	D.		Day	21	Postoperative	Visit	E.		Exit	Form	F.		Early	Exit	Visit	G.		Nonserious	Adverse	Event	Forms	H.		Serious	Adverse	Event	Forms		A	copy	of	the	Source	Documents	are	included.						9.4	Records	Retention					Study	records	will	be	retained	in	a	locked	cabinet	for	2	years.												10		Study	Monitoring,	Auditing,	and	Inspecting				The	study	and	patients	will	be	monitored	on	a	weekly	basis	by	the	Principal	Investigator.		Patient	will	be	followed	as	part	of	the	study	and	will	receive	further	follow-up	per	a								standard	cataract	surgery	protocol	3	months	and	1	year	after	the	study,	as	well	as	on	as	clinically	needed	basis.														11		Ethical	Considerations	There	are	no	significant	ethical	considerations	as	the	study	is	evaluating	an	FDA	approved	therapy.							