 
 
 
Title: Repeated Sub -anesthetic Ketamine to Enha nce Prolonged Exposure Therapy in Post -
traumatic Stress Disorder : A Proof -of-concept Study 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 Date of document: 1/18/2019 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
A. BACKGROUND  
A.1. Limitations of Pharmacological Interventions for PTSD.  
Currently, only 02 selective serotonin reuptake inhi bitors, sertraline and paroxetine, are FDA - approved as 
pharmacological treatment for PTSD. The 2017 VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for The Management 
of PTSD and Acute Stress Disorder  (https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/mh/ptsd/ ) added 
fluoxe tine and venlafaxine as monotherapy.  Unfortunately, even after an adequate medication trial, 
response and remission rates are approximately 60% and 30%, respectively (Stein, Ipser, & Seedat, 2006) . 
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) investigating the use of alternative drugs or combination of 
mainstream pharmacological interventions including atypical antipsychotics, anticonvulsants, and 
benzodiazepines have shown limited to no benefit (Berger et al., 2009) , leaving considerable room to 
improve treatment options for PTSD. On the other hand, the VA/DOD clinical practice guidelines recommend individual, manualized trauma - focused psychotherapy , such as Prolonged Exposure (PE) 
therapy , over other pharmacologic interventions for the primary treatment of P TSD. Moreover, when given 
a choice, most patients will select psychotherapy treatment for PTSD rather than medications.  
A.2. Limitations of Trauma -based Psychotherapy in the veteran/military  populations.  
PE is considered a first -line evidence -based treatment fo r PTSD with compelling evidence to effectively 
reduce PTSD symptoms relative to waiting list(Powers, Halpern, Ferenschak, Gillihan, & Foa, 2010). A 
multi -center study (Schnurr et al., 2007) showed that female veterans and active -duty military personnel 
with PTSD were more likely than those in the present -centered therapy (PCT) group to no longer meet PTSD 
diagnostic criteria (41% vs 28%); however, PE  achieved only an overall remission rate of 15% (vs 7% in PCT),  
the dropout rate was almost double in PE (38%) than in PCT (21%), and there was no significant difference 
in PTSD severity scores on the CAPS at 6 ‐month follow ‐up with rates of PTSD remission at 40% in PE and 
33% in PCT. A recent review of clinical trials of trauma- based therapies for PTSD (PE and Cognitive 
Processing Therapy [CPT]) in the military and veteran population found that between 30% to 50 % of 
participants failed to attain clinically meaningful symptom improvement (defined as a 10 - to 12 -point 
decrease in interviewer - assessed or self -reported symptoms) (Steenkamp, Litz, Hoge, & Marmar, 2015) . The 
mean posttreatment scores for CPT and PE remained at or ab ove clinical criteria for PTSD, and 
approximately two -thirds of patients retained their PTSD diagnosis after treatment (range, 60% -
72%) (Steenkamp et al., 2015) . These results suggest that despite its efficacy, PE (and CPT) in the 
military/veteran  population is suboptimal to relieve PTSD a s an elevated number of patients drops out 
from treatment and most  patients remain with considerable post -treatment residual symptoms.  
A.3. Medication -enhanced  psychotherapy.  
Medication -enhanced psychotherapy (MEP) has re- emerged as one of the most exciting are as in the 
treatment of PTSD. Current work in this area has been driven by the translation of preclinical research of 
the biology of fear learning and memory into human clinical trials (i.e., d -cycloserine, propranolol, MDMA, 
yohimbine, methylene blue, rapa mycin, hydrocortisone). Cumulative research (Dunlop, Mansson, & 
Gerardi, 2012) indicates that PE may be improved by administration of medications that target one or m ore 
therapeutic mechanisms such as 1) augmenting the biological processes of extinction memory formation 
(“cognitive enhancer” ); 2) disrupting the reconsolidation of feared memories ( “memory disrupter” ); or 3) 
enhancing the trust in the therapist by reducing the anxiety of re -engaging with traumatic material 
(“therapy facilitator” ). Ketamine, an FDA -approved anesthetic that blocks glutamate neurotransmission at 
high anesthetic doses (Mogh addam, Adams, Verma, & Daly, 1997)  but that a t subanesthetic doses, induces 
a paradoxical increase in gluta mate neurotransmission(Abdallah et al., 2016)  has shown to enhance 
neuroplasticity in mood disorders(Li et al., 2011) and PTSD (Girgenti, Ghosal, LoPresto, Taylor, & Duman, 
2017) . Ketamine’s putative mechanism (e.g., sustained increase in prefrontal synaptic connectivity) 
persists beyond its bioavailability (Duman & Aghajanian, 2012)  which is translated into a clinical durability 
that ranges between 7 -14 days by a single infusion through 16-26 days by repeated infusions in PTSD  
(Feder et al., 2014)  (Albott et al., 2018)  and mood disorders (Murrough et al., 2013)  (Shiroma, Johns, et al., 
2014) . The therapeutic window created by k etamine ’s lasting brain effect s was recently examined in a MEP 
study for OCD patients.  A  single IV ketamine followed by a brief course of CBT ( e.g., 10 one -hour exposure 
sessions)  resulted in a  63% response rate (Rodriguez et al., 2016). 
A.4. Glutamate Dysregulation in PTSD.  
The neurobiological mod el of PTSD has shifted from monoaminergic to a more complex neuroplasticity 
hypothesis . Glutamate is heavily implicated in learning, memory, experience -dependent forms of synaptic 
plasticity, such as long -term potentiation (LTP) (Malenka & Nicoll, 1999), and ultimately in the formation of 
traumatic memories and their treatment(Myers, Carlezon, & Davis, 2011) . A cascade of neural events that 
alter both structural and functional glutamatergic connectivity is triggered when the brain’s adaptive 
neuroplasticity respo nse to stress is surpassed by severe trauma. Based primarily  on preclinical  data,  it is 
proposed  that trauma triggers  pro-inflammatory  processes and dysregulation  of HPA -axis that leads to 
paradoxical extra -synaptic glutamate spillover secondary to reduce astrocyte function and astrocyte loss. 
Excessive glutamate input causes excitotoxicity and reduction of synaptic connectivity in corticolimbic 
circuits that regulate response to stress and emotion (i.e., medial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus) which 
ultimately translate into PTSD  symptomatology (Averill et al., 2017) . 
A.5. Neurocircuit of Fear Extinction in PTSD and glutamatergic  receptors.  
Trauma -exposed patients suffering from PTSD experience deficits in the extinctio n of learned fear 
associations when compared to those who do not develop PTSD (Lommen, Engelhard, Sijbrandij, van den 
Hout, & Hermans, 2013) . During extinction, repeated exposure to a cue previously associated with a fear-
provoking event results in the gradual formation of a new memory that is 
thought to suppress fear expression by establishing an inhibitory memory rather than erase the conditioned stimulus. While extinction is procedurally 
simple, it involves multiple  extinction mechanisms.  
The neural circuitry of extinction ( Figure 1 ) is based on a model composed 
by interactions among 3 structures: the amygdala, medial prefrontal cortex 
(mPFC), and hippocampus (Milad et al., 200 7) (Pitman et al., 2012) . The 
amygdala is a central locus underlying the encoding, consolidation, and 
expression of extinction memory. In the amygdala, the basolateral complex (BLA), GABAergic intercalated 
cell masses  (ICMs)  and the central nucleus (CeA), are critical structures that modulate within- session 
extinction and extinction retention process (Milad & Quirk, 2002) . The hippocampus is responsible for 
encoding contextual information during extinction training and subsequently using that information to promote or block expression of extinct ion memory by its interactions with the amygdala and mPFC (Corcoran 
& Maren, 2001) . Within the mPFC, afferents from glutamatergic pyramidal neurons in the infralimbic (IL) 
sub region activate glutamatergic neurons in the BLA that synapse onto inhibitory GABAergic interneurons 
which gate signaling from the BLA to the CeA (Rosenkranz, Moore, & Grace, 2003)  (Bloodgood, Sugam, 
Holmes, & Kash, 2018) . The IL -mPFC specifically modulates the consolidation and/or expression of 
extinction memory (Hsu & Packard, 2008)  while having little to no effect on within- session extinction (Quirk, 
Russo, Barron, & Lebron, 2000; Sierra -Mercado, Corcoran, Lebron -Milad, & Quirk, 2006) . Neural activation 
in the IL shortly f ollowing extinction training correlated with success of long- term extinction retention and 
recalling of extinction memories (Burgos -Robles, Vidal -Gonzalez, Santini, & Quirk, 2007) . 
A.6. Proposed Mechanisms of Ketamine -enh anced PE  Therapy.  
A.6.1. K etamine as a Cognitive Enhancer of Extinction Learning: Based on the information described 
above, we propose that repeated ketamine treatment will increase the synaptic connectivity and neural 
activation in the mPFC  (Figure 2) . These cellular and molecular changes will augment the top -down 
mPFC’s inhibitory drive over the excitatory responses of amygdala during extinction 
learning . Given that ketamine preferentially activates mPFC, we also hypothesize that ketamine will 
exert its therapeutic effect on the expression/consolidation of 
extinction memory (Santini, Ge, Ren, 
Pena de Ortiz, & Quirk, 2004)
 without 
interference  of 
within -session extinction. As 
extinction memories are labile and fragile, ketamine could bolster the 
formation, persistence, and possibly context independence of extinction 
memories and thus, preventing relapse. This proposed mechanism received support from a recent study using 
a rodent paradigm for preclinical  assessments of PTSD. Girgenti
7 and colleagues demonstrated  that a single 
dose of ketamine  followed by extinction training for three consecutive days  enhances the recall of extinction 
learning (i.e., reduced freezing behavior to cue) and decreases fear renewal 8 days later. This study also 
showed that ketamine plus extinction exposure  increased synaptic proteins promoter (mTORC1) and 
neuronal activation (cFos) in the mPFC. Moreover, AMPA receptor i nhibitor (NBQX) partially but 
significantly blockaded the effects of ketamine supporting previous find ings that the rapid ketamine effect 
requires activation of AMPA receptors (Zarate & Machado -Vieira, 2017)  and that AMPA rece ptor agonist 
infused systematically or directly into the mPFC facilitate contextual fear extinction (Milad & Quirk, 2002)  
(Zushida, Sakurai, Wada, & Sekiguchi, 2007)  (Zarate & Machado -Vieira, 2017) . While this study did not 
specifically elucidate the role of IL -mPFC in the enhancement of  fear extinction by ketamine, optogenetic 
stimulation of the IL -mPFC produces behavioral and synaptic responses similar to the antidepressant actions 
of systemic ketamine (Fuchikami et al., 2015) . Other mouse studies  (Ju et al., 2017) of PTSD have revealed that 
the long- term treatment with  ketamine in combination with extinction training may accelerate extinction of 
fear memories by normalization of DNA methylation of BDNF gene leading to an increased in the levels of 
BDNF in the mPFC and hippocampus.  
A.6.2. Ketamine  as a Therapy Facilitato r of PE : Co-occurrence of PTSD and major depressive disorder 
(MDD) or anxiety disorders is closely to 50% across diverse epidemiological samples  (Kessler, Sonnega, 
Bromet, Hughes, & Nelson, 1995) (Zayfert, Becker, Unger, & S hearer, 2002)  (Rytwinski, Scur, Feeny, & 
Youngstrom, 2013) . Higher dropout rates are more likely in comorbid PTSD suggesting that strategies 
specifically target depression and/or anxiety may increase retention by enhancing delivery of the trauma-
focused interventions. Several studies reported an exacerbation of PTSD, anxiety, and depression symptoms (10.5% -20%, 21.1%, and 9.2% -22%, respectively) after the introduction of imaginal exposure 
(IE) (Foa, Zoellner, Feeny, Hembree, & Alvarez -Conrad, 2002)  (Larsen, Wiltsey Stirman, Smith, & Resick, 
2016)
 in PE session 3. Given ketamine’s robust and ra pid antidepressant and anxiolytic effects, another 
MEP approach would be to facilitate the initial stages  of engagement in the therapeutic process by 
diminishing the severity of comorbid depression as well as the initial fear, anxiety, and avoidance associ ated to emotionally intense trauma -based therapies. Rapid improvements in depression symptom 
(Beck Depression Inventory score>7 in one between session interval) was associated with lower rates of dropout and lower post - treatment severity score during PTSD  treatment (PE or  sertraline) (Keller, Feeny, & 
Zoellner, 2014) . 
B. PRELIMINARY  STUDIES  
B.1. Research Team is Well Qualified to Undertake this  pilot study . 
The proposed clinical trial builds directly on the previous experien ce. Dr. Shiroma , PI for this proposal has 
conducted  clinical studies using IV ketamine in depression and PTSD. Dr. Shiroma is currently meeting 
recruitment benchmarks of a 4 -year Merit Review Award aimed to investigate serial ketamine in refractory 
depression. He was the P.I. (Co -P.I. by Dr. Albott) in the most recent study of serial ketamine and PTSD 
which provides foundation for this proposal. Dr. Erbes , Co-I, is a nationally certified trainer for PE and 
senior PTSD investigator at the Center for Chronic Disease Outcomes Research (CCDOR ) at the Minneapolis 
VA (MVA). H e will oversee PE training and adherence of nationally -certified therapists. Dr. Thuras , Co-I, 
is a biostatistician with more than 20 years of experience at the MVA. Dr. Thuras has provided ex pertise in 
study design, power, data management, and analysis using multilevel and latent variable models examining change over time in multiple VA clinical  trials.  
B.2. Experience and pilot data on ketamine in  PTSD.  
3.3.1. Preliminary  data found high ef ficacy and rapid effect of serial ketamine infusions on the severity of both 
depressive and PTSD symptoms: Several studies have been published by the P.I. research group on the use of 
repeated ketamine in TRD (Shiroma , Johns, et al., 2014)  (Shiroma, 
Albott, et al., 2014)  (Shiroma et al., 2015) (Albott et al., 2017)  
(Albott et al., 2018) . Expanding previous investigations, a pilot 
study (Albott et al., 2018)  examined  the safety and efficacy of 
repeated ketamine treatment among veterans with comorbid TRD 
and PTSD. Sixteen Veterans completed 6 ketamine infusions at 0.5 
mg/kg for 40 minutes per treatme nt during a 12 -day period.  The 
mean within -subject  change  in self-reported  PTSD  symptoms,  as 
assessed by PCL -5 total  score,  significantly decreased from baseline 
52 (S.D.=12) to 19 
(S.D.=17) at 24 hours after 
the sixth ketamine 
infusion (F 6, 90= 54.49, p < 0.0005) (Cohen’s d’ = 2.17) ( Figure 3B ). 
The remission rate for PTSD defined by PCL -5 total symptom 
score<33 was 80.0 %. PTSD symptom severity assessed by clinician 
interview (CAPS- 5) also demonstrated a significant reduction in 
total score from a PTSD bas eline of 39.7 (S.D.=9.3) to 20.8 (S.D.= 
7.2) after treatment (Cohen’s d’ = 1.85).  Figure 4 showed PCL -5 sub -clusters which significantly decreased  
after completion of treatment. Regarding depression, Montgomery - Åsberg Depression Rating Scale 
(MADRS) total  score decreased over the course of  treatment (F 2.62, 36.70 = 30.17, p < 0.0005), and was 
associated with a large effect size (d’ = 4.69) ( Figure 3A ). The remission rate for depression defined by 
MADRS total score ≤ 9 was 62%.  
3.3.2. Pilot  data suggest  that repeated  ketamine  sustain response  of depression  and PTSD  for short  period : Of 
the 12 individuals in remission from PTSD after the infusion series, 
the median time to relapse was  41 days with the 50th and 75th 
percentiles at 41 and 27 days,  respectively  (Figure 5B). Six 
individuals (50% of the individuals who remitted; 40% of the total sample) remained in remission throughout the follow -up period. 
Paired samples t -tests showed that the mean PTSD symptom 
severity was significantly higher at four -weeks foll ow-up (n = 10), 
compared to symptoms 24 - hours after the sixth infusion ( t= 3.42; 
df=9; p=0 .008). The median time to depression relapse was 26 days with the 25th and 75th percentiles at 34 and 13 days, respectively (severity was also significantly  higher at follow -up (n = 12), Figure 5A ). The mean MDD symptom compared 
to symptoms 24 -hours after the sixth infusion ( t= 5.08; df=11, p < 0.0005).  
3.3.3. Pilot data suggest repeated ketamine infusion treatment is a tolerable intervention: Side effect were 
ascer tained prior to each infusion, immediately following the infusion 
(+40 min), and at one (+100 min) and two (+160 min) hours post - 
infusion ( Figure 6 ). Three participants (18.8%) required beta- blockers to 
lower blood pressure (systolic blood pressure >160 m m Hg and/or 
diastolic blood pressure >100 mm Hg). Dissociative symptoms peaked 
immediately after each ketamine infusion (+40 min) and rapidly 
resolved during post -infusion monitoring. No significant increase in 
psychotic or manic symptoms were observed. Of  note, no veterans 
experienced a worsening of PTSD symptoms from baseline at any point during the study, despite the known dissociative effects of ketamine infusions.  
C. STUDY MILESTONES  
During Stage I , we will o btain IRB approval. Nationally -certified PE therapists will receive one- time refresher 
session during quarter 1  with  ongoing supervision by Co -I Dr. Erbes.  Dr. Erbes will train raters on the CAPS -5 
assessment  during months 1 -3 with ongoing fidelity checks. The study  will be conducted during Stage  2 for 12 
months including enrollment, interventions and follow -up. Data entry will be an ongoing process but 
completed by quarter 5  coincident with last data collection. Data analysis/generation of manuscripts  and 
funding application for clinical trial will occur during Q6 (Table 1). 
Table 1 : Timeline  
 Stage 1  Stage 2  
 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 
Start -up       
Enrollment        
Intervention        
Outcome assessment        
Data entry/cleaning        
Statistical analysis        
Report writing        
Application for clinical trial (R01 or VA Merit 
Award)        
 
D. RESEARCH DESIGN AND  
METHODS  
D.1. Design  Overview. 
The proposed pilot is an open -label 
interventional study designed to inform 
and strengthen the feasibility of protocol 
implementation on sub -anesthetic do ses of intravenous ketamine as augmenting strategy of standardized, 
manually -driven PE in PTSD  (Figure 7 ). For this purpose, we aim to: 1) clarify research hypotheses 
on the efficacy, safety and tolerability of this MEP approach; 2) assess the acceptabilit y of 
methods and instruments to participants; 3) identify potential barriers to subsequent study 
completion, and 4) obtain estimates of means, standard deviation and 95% confidence 
intervals on outcome measures as well as the expected rates of missing data  and participant 
attrition . We estimate that analysis of data obtained from participation of 1 0 patients will provide 
responses to our scientific aims. Participants will be male and female veterans (18 to 75 years old) of any 
era or military background dia gnosed with  PTSD. Potential participants will be recruited from Mental 
Health clinics and screened for eligibility using a two -stage process (phone/chart review, followed by 
interview). Those who meet eligibility criteria will complete baseline assessment one week  prior to starting 
treatment. Then, treatment will consist of 1) 3 -week k etamine -PE phase composed by weekly single 
intravenous ketamine (0.5 mg/kg for 40 minutes)  followed within 24 hrs.  by PE session;  and 2 ) ketamine -
free PE phase from week 4 thr ough 12.  After PE is  completed  (session 12), patients will be assessed during a 
2-month follow -up period at various time points. We estimate that 10  veterans will reach time point for 
primary outcome measure (CAPS score at week 12 ) and will be considered f or primary analysis. 
Independent evaluation of PTSD, cognitive function, depression, anxiety and other potential covariates  
(i.e., pain)  will be ascertained at baseline, at several time points during treatment, and at follow - up. 
D.1.1. Design Consideratio ns: As with any pilot study , several factors have been considered in the design of 
this proposal. The goal is to provide a design that is feasible, efficient, and above all, able to answer study 
aims. Some of the possible alternative designs, and reasons w e did not select them, are  listed.  
Table 2. Considerations and Rationale for Choosing the Current Design  
 
Consideration  Rationale  
Doses of ketamine  Several studies (Xu et al., 2016)  have shown that ketamine doses at 0.5 mg/kg have 
higher antidepressant and similar adverse  effects than  lower (e .g., 0.1 mg/kg or 0.2 
mg/kg) or  higher (e.g., 1.0 mg/kg) doses , respectively . The presence of an inverted  U-
shaped relationship between dose and response is supported by  higher  doses of 
ketamine having no effect inducing  mTOR activation (Li et al., 2011) . Moreover, a 
single ketamine at 0.5 mg/kg, and not at 0.2 mg/kg, showed procognitve effects by 
improving sustained attention and cognitive response control among 71 patients with 
TRD (Chen et al., 2018). Studies (Feder et al., 2014) (Albott et al., 2018) in PTSD 
using a single as well as repeated ketamine infusions were dosed at 0.5 mg/kg with 
rapid, safe but short -lived  reduction of PTSD symptom severity .  
Interval between ketamine and 
PE Ketamine has an  elimination half -life is 186 minutes (Clements, Nimmo, & Grant, 
1982)  with t emporary dissociative/psychoto mimetic effects observed at doses  of 0.5 
mg/kg between 40 and 120 minutes posttreatment, which resolve within 240 
minutes of administration(Zarate et al., 2006) (Murrough et a l., 2013) . However, 
ketamine’s pu tative therapeutic mechanism ( e.g., sustained increase in prefrontal 
synaptic connectivit y (Abdallah et al., 2016) (Duman, Aghajanian, Sanacora, & 
Krystal, 2016) ) persists beyond its bioavailability (Duman & Aghajanian, 2012). The se 
lasting  physiological brain changes, which  is reached within 24 hrs.  of treatment,  
have proved to be  a therapeutic window to enhance the outcomes of psychological 
interventions in pre- clinical and clinical studies (i.e., extinction learning  in animal 
PTSD (Girgenti et al., 2017)  model  and CBT  in OCD (Rodriguez et al., 2016) , 
respectively). St udies  in TRD suggested that the peak of antidepressant effects to 
ketamine occur  24 hours after administration (Zarate et al., 2006)(Zarate et al. 
2006a) (Mathew et al., 2010).  Moreover, t his notion  of peak of efficacy following an 
intravenous ketamine a dministration is further supported by the temporal overlap of 
subacute functional  network modulation after 24 hours  reported by neuroimaging 
studies  (Scheidegger et al., 2012)  (Murrough et al., 2015)  . 
Single vs repeated 
ketamine infusions.  Our pilot study (Albott et al., 2018)  demonstrated that repeated ketamine infusion 
provides higher efficacy  (80% remission)  as compared to single in fusion  (24.1%  CAPS -
IV score<50 )(Feder et al., 2014). Mild transient increases in dissociative symptoms 
without the emergence of mania or psychotic symptoms were similar in both studies.  
Number of ketamine 
infusion s During PE, session 1 and provide a rationale of PE and understanding of trauma. 
Imaginal exposure  (IE) begins at session 3. Two independent studies (Foa et al., 200 2) 
(Larsen et al., 2016) found post -IE exacerbation of PTSD, anxiety, and depressive 
symptoms at session 4. We will measure  the effect of administering three single 
ketamine treatments prior to IE  aiming  to target a key component of PE with the 
potential to enhance the efficacy PE outcomes . 
 
Inclusion of comorbid 
condition to PTSD . Traumatic experiences have a variety of psychiatric sequelae, often including multiple 
comorbid psychiatric diagnoses. Depressive disor ders have been found to co -occur in 
most individuals who develop PTSD (Rytwinski et al., 2013) and may act as an indicator 
of a more severe response to trauma exposure. The high rates of comorbidity between 
PTSD and depression have thus led to suggest that their co -occurrence may be bett er 
conceptualized as a general traumatic stress construct, rather than discrete co -
occurring disorders  (Dekel, Solomon, Horesh, & Ein -Dor, 2014) (Bedard -Gilligan et al., 
2015)  
Wash -out vs a period of stable 
doses of current psychotropic 
medications . Patient taking psychotropics with potentially serious drug -drug interactions with 
ketamine (e.g., barbiturates) will be excluded. The therapeutic effect of psychiatric medications  is prolonged beyond clearance of active compound or their metabolites 
from blood and brain so pharmacological ”isolation” of ketamine will not likely occur 
with a brief medication washout. Washout from psychiatric medications would 1) limit 
recruitment and result in a sample that is not characteristic of many veterans seeking 
treatment; 2) raise ethical concerns as severe conditions (e.g., agitation) require rapid 
stabilization usually through pharmacological interventions. However, keeping stable 
doses for at least 4 weeks of prior psychotropic regimen will decrease confounding 
effect s on the study of ketamine on PTSD, depression, and anxiety.  
Open -label vs u se of active 
placebo.  While the use of active placebo, such as midazolam, w ould  serve to enhance m asking 
intention  by mimicking ketamine’s side effects profile, the purpose of this pilot is to test 
the feasibility to conjointly use ketamine and PE rather than to  formally assess evidence 
of efficacy.  
Ideal vs actual body weight to 
calculate ketamine d oses  Ketamine is initially distributed to highly perfused tissues, including the brain, to 
achieve levels four to five times that in plasma. Ketamine has high lipid solubility and low plasma protein binding (Clements et al., 1982) , which facilitates rapid transfer 
across the blood -brain barrier. Since plasma  volume is more consistently and directly 
proportional to ideal body weight but not actual body weight in obese patients, using 
ideal body weight would help insure that all the study subjects receive the same “brain 
dose”.  
D.2. S tudy  Site . 
The clinical facilities for the proposed study are: 1) The Post -Traumatic Stress Recovery (PTSR) Service Line 
(Team L; Acting Director: Matthew Kaler, Ph.D.) within the outpatient psychiatry department; and 2) the 
Primary & Specialty Medicine Service Line, 3 E Stepdown Un it (Nurse Manager: Britta Dass, RN), a 21 -bed 
medical step -down  unit is on the located on the 3rd floor of the main MVA hospital building and staffed by 
RNs, LPNs, and ancillary personnel. 3E clinical rooms are fully equipped with mobile desktop PCs, cardi ac 
and respiratory monitors, infusions pumps, and crash carts. A conference room is available for conducting 
private clinical assessments and interviews with study participants. Secure file space for the primary (hard 
copy) records is available at the VA i n Dr. Shiroma’s locked office within the outpatient service. There are 
several private offices in the mental health department available for conducting private clinical assessments 
and interviews with study participants.  
D.3. Subject Recruitment and Selec tion.  
Our planned enrollment includes 1 0 patients to receive three weekly ketamine -PE treatment followed by 
ketamine -free PE treatment for 9 additional weeks. Participants will be recruited from veterans receiving 
mental health treatment. Referrals will oc cur from VA clinicians and clinics, and responses from posted 
fliers and study pamphlets. Potential participants will be provided with information about the study and 
screened through medical records, chart review, and by telephone to determine whether they meet basic 
inclusion/exclusion criteria. Those who qualify will be scheduled for a more rigorous assessment ( see 
further details below ). 
D.3.1. Eligibility Criteria:  The following eligibility criteria will be used to identify a broad array of 
participants with PTSD considered suitable for the study.  
Table 3 : Eligibility  Criteria  
 
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
1. Male or female Veterans aged  18- 
75 years old. 
2. Diagnosis of chronic  (minimum 
of three months) PTSD 
(Clinician -Administered PTSD 
Scale for DSM -5 -CAPS -5 
score>33).  
3. Voluntarily eligible to participate 
in PE. 
4. Severity of PTSD  symptoms 
defined by PCL- 5>33.  
5. Psychotropic medications on 
stable doses (no dosing 
adjustments/changes for ≥4 
weeks ; ≥6 weeks for  fluoxetine ) 
prior to prior to beginning of  the 
study.  1. Unwillingness/unable to sign informed  consent.  
2. Previous or current participation in trauma -exposed therapy   and/or 
ketamine treatment.  
3. Evidence of mental retardation, pervasive developmental disorder  and/or 
moderate/severe cognitive impairment (MMSE scores  ≤27).  
4. Any unstable medical or non- psychiatric CNS  condition.  
5. Lifetime history of psychosis- related disorder, bipolar disorder I or  II 
disorder, or any condition other than PTSD judged to be the primary 
presenting psychiatric diagnosis.  
6. Moderate  to severe traumatic  brain  injury  (mental  status  change  or loss of 
consciousness>30 min; Glasgow Coma Scale <13; post -traumatic 
amnesia>24hours; visible lesion on CT/MRI brain  scan).  
7. Active alcohol/illicit substance use disorder within 6  months of initial 
assessment;  presence of illicit drugs by positive urine  toxicology.  
8. For women: pregnancy (confirmed by lab test), initiation of female 
hormonal treatments within 3 months of screening, or inability/ 
unwillingness  to use a medically  accepted  contraceptive method  durin g the 
study.  
9. Imminent risk of suicidal/homicidal ideation and/or behavior with  intent 
and/or  plan  
D.3.2. Feasibility  of recruitment:  The study will recruit 10 Veterans  over  12 months . In the last 12 months, 289 
Veterans were diagnosed with PTSD and 114 have received at least 02 PE sessions at the  MVA.  While we do 
not anticipate any difficulties , we could expand recruitment to satellite clinics from M VA Health Care System.  
D.3.3. Pre-Screening: To reduce subject burden, we will obtain a waiver of HIPAA aut horization to allow 
potential  subjects  to be pre-screened  by chart review  followed  by an in-person  or phone interview  prior  to 
scheduling further assessment visits. Potential participants will be provided with information about the 
study and asked a series of questions to determine if they meet basic inclusion/exclusion criteria (e.g., 
indicators of current PTSD). They will be informed that the treatment involves multiple infusions of sedatives at subanesthetic doses followed by PE therapy. Those interested  will be scheduled for an in -person 
interview for eligibility.  
D.3.4. Informed Consent : Voluntary informed consent will be obtained in accordance with local IRB 
approvals. At the consent session, all assessments, and information on treatment will be explai ned. Subject 
comprehension of information will be assessed by the Modified Dysken Screening Tool, an instrument 
commonly used at MVA to determine the decision- making capacity of a potential research subject to provide  
informed consent. Willingness  to parti cipate in assessments will be confirmed and information about 
confidentiality and study payments will be provided.  
D.4. Study Intervention.  
D.4.1. Ketamine infusions : Table 4  describes the schedule of assessments on the day of infusion. Patients will 
arrive in the morning after an overnight fast of at least 8 hours. An indwelling catheter will be placed in the 
non-  dominant arm for medication administration. Digital pulse oximetry, respiratory rate, pulse rate, and 
blood pressure will be recorded every 10 m in for 1 hour beginning 10 min before infusion. Based on the dose, 
rate of infusion, and endpoint/purpose of the study, the infusions do not fall into the category of “moderate 
sedation” and therefore no cardiac monitoring will be required. Subjects will then receive IV infusion of 0.5 
mg/Kg of ketamine hydrochloride solution over 40 minutes. The dose of ketamine will be calculated by ideal body weight based on sex, age, height, and body frame in the Metropolitan Life Insurance tables. 
Psychotogenic effects  will be measured with the four -item positive symptom subscale of the Brief Psychiatric 
Rating Scale (BPRS+) consisting of suspiciousness, hallucinations, unusual thought content, and conceptual 
disorganization; dissociative effects and manic symptoms will  be measured with the Clinician-  Administered 
Dissociative States Scale (CADSS) and Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS), respectively. Additionally, the 
patients will be regularly questioned during the infusions about any dysphoric emotions or altered sensory 
experiences. However, there will be no psychological intervention or directive to the subjects during the immediate effect of study medications. Potential side effects related to ketamine (CADSS, YMRS, and BPRS+) 
will be measured within 60 minutes prior to  and immediately upon completion of each infusion and then an 
hour later or until all safety measures (e.g., rating scales and vital signs) return to pre -infusion measures.  
Standard Operating Procedures for ketamine infusions is attached. Guidelines establ ished for clinically 
significant changes in vital signs and mental status during the ketamine infusions will be as follows: systolic 
blood pressure (BP) >161 or <89, diastolic BP >110; heart rate <40 or >130 beats/min; respiratory rate <10 or 
>30 per minute; pulse oximetry <90%; severe hallucinations, confusion, delusions, irrational behavior, or 
agitation. The site study anesthesiologist will assist during infusions if necessary. Medications such as 
labetalol or hydralazine (hypertensive episode), ondanset ron (nausea, vomiting), and flumenazil 
(oversedation) as well as a crash cart will be available to manage unanticipated side effects. The infusion will 
be discontinued if adverse events do not respond to interventions. Before leaving the infusion unit, sub jects 
must demonstrate that all cli nically significant side effects are resolved by obtaining a score≥9 in the modified 
Aldrete (mAldrete) scoring system. Written instructions about rare but serious side effects and several measures to improve recovery at home will be provided at discharge.   
Table 4: Assessment Schedule on Infusion Day 
 Measure  t0-60 min  Baseline  (t0) t0+40  min  t0+100  min  t0+x* min  
BP, pulse, RR,  
SatO 2  X X X X X 
Dissociative  
Symptoms  CADSS  X X X X X 
Psychotogenic  
Symptoms  BPRS+  X X X X X 
Manic Symptoms  YMRS  X X X X X 
Recovery from  
ketamine  mAldrete      X 
*Patient will be monitored an hour after infusion or hourly until vital signs, side effects from ketamine return 
to pre -infusion measures and mAldrete score≥9.  
  
D.4.2. PE therapy : PE is an evidence -based psychotherapy for PTSD that is based on the Emotional 
Processing Theory of PTSD; the four components of PE are: 1) exposure to safe situations, objects, or people 
that cause distress and are avoided because they are trauma reminders (in vivo exposure), 2) revisiting and 
processing of the trauma memory (imaginal exposure), 3) psychoeducation about trauma -related symptoms, 
and 4) breathing retraining(Rothbaum, 2007) . Session 1 includes the presentation of treatment rationale and 
program overview, information gathering, and breathing retraining. Session 2 includes ed ucation about 
common reactions to trauma, rationale for in vivo exposure, and construction of an in vivo exposure hierarchy. The hierarchy includes safe or low -risk activities and situations that were avoided because of their 
association with the trauma. T hroughout the treatment, participants will be assigned homework to confront 
items on the hierarchy in a gradual fashion, working up to the most anxiety -arousing situations. During 
Session 3, the rationale for confronting the trauma memory in imagination is  presented and initiation of 
imaginal exposure and processing is conducted. In this procedure, participants will be asked to close their 
eyes, visualize the trauma, and recount it aloud in the present tense for 45 –60 min. The memory recounting 
will be repeated if necessary to allow total reliving of 45 –60 min. The exposure will be audiotaped; 
participants will be instructed to listen daily to the tape. Sessions 4 –10 will be conducted in a similar fashion: 
therapists review homework, conduct imaginal exposur e to trauma memory for 30 –45 min, discuss the 
imaginal exposure, and assigned in vivo and imaginal exposure homework. In the final session, participants 
summarize learning in treatment, discuss their progress, plans, and relapse prevention  
D.5. Assessment  Procedures.  
Assessments will take place in two contexts:1) at baseline, throughout treatment, and at follow -up, and 2) 
during each infusion. These assessments are summarized in Table 5 . Clinical interviews will be conducted by 
trained evaluators. Subject c ompensation will also be provided to increase participant retention and reduce 
missed assessments (see further details below).  
D.5.1. Eligibility and Baseline Assessment: The Eligibility and Baseline Assessment (EBA) will be 
accomplished during 1 -2 visits  over a 7 - day period prior to starting trea tment. It will take a total of 3  hours. 
Provisional diagnosis of PTSD and its severity would be obtained by PCL -5 score>33. The CAPS -5 would be 
then administered to established PTSD diagnosis. The M.I.N.I. International Neuropsychiatric Interview 
(M.I.N.I. 6.0) (Sheehan et al., 1998) will be used for psychiatric evaluation to confirm the absence of 
exclusionary diagnoses. Lack of moderate/severe cognitive impairment will be ascertained with an MMSE score≥28. Evaluation of exclusionary criteria involving unstable medical illnesses will be based on brief 
physical examination, medical record review by study M.D. in consultation with on- site study 
anesthesiologist, basic metaboli c laboratory tests, and ECG. A urine pregnancy , if applicable,  and drug 
screen will also be obtained . Secondary outcomes at baseline will include  cognitive function (CogState), 
severity of depressive symptoms (MADRS), levels of anxiety (Beck Anxiety Invent ory-BAI), suicide risk 
(Columbia - Suicide Severity Rating Scale - C-SSRS), pain intensity (Numeric Rating Scale -NSR for pain), 
clinical impression of illness severity (Clinical Global Impression -CGI) quality of life (World Health 
Organization Quality of Lif e–Brief -WHOQOL -BREF), and expectation of treatment (CEQ).  
D.5.2. Treatment Assessment:  The research staff will measure  PTSD symptoms severity by administering 
the CAPS -5 at weeks 4 , 12 and 2 -month follow -up. Secondary outcomes  that includes  cognitive func tion, 
anxiety, depression, pain, suicide , and general side effects  (Patient Rated Inventory of Side Effects - PRISE/ 
Frequency, Intensity, and Burden of Side Effects Rating- FIBSER ) will be obtained  24 hrs. post -ketamine 
and prior to PE session at week 1, 2,  and 3 (ketamine -PE phase) . We will administer rating scales again at 
week 4, 6, 8, and 1 2 (ketamine -free phase) , and at 2-month follow -up. Fear activation and extinction during 
PE sessions would be measured by the Subjective Units of Distress Scale (SUDS) .  
D.5.3. Follow -up Assessment:  Following completion of treatment, participants will attend  Post -Treatment  
Assessment monthly for 2 months  (total of 0 2 follow -up visits). Each visit will take about 2 hours. Follow -
up assessments will involve self -report fo r PTSD symptoms (PCL -5), cognitive assessment (CogState), 
depressive symptom severity (MADRS), clinical impression of illness severity and improvement (CGI), as 
well as self -reported measures of pain intensity (NRS for pain), level of anxiety (BAI), suicid e risk (C -
SSRS), general adverse events (PRISE /FIBSER) and quality of life (WHOQOL -BREF). The CAPS- 5 will be 
administered once at 2 -month follow -up. 
Table 5: General Assessment Schedule  
Construct  Measure  Eligibility and 
Baseline 
Assessment  Treatment 
Assess ments  Follow- Up 
Assessment  
1-2 weeks  Week 1 to 12 2 months  
Primary Outcome Measure  
PTSD symptoms  CAPS -5 X X X 
Interview Based Assessments  
Decision -making capacity  Dysken 
Screening Tool  X   
PTSD severity  PCL -5 X X X 
Diagnostic interview for 
comorbi d conditions  M.I.N.I.  X   
Rule -out moderate/severe 
cognitive impairment  MMSE  X   
Infusion Safety Measures  
Physical Exam/ECG/Pregnancy 
test/Urine toxicology   X   
Recovery from infusion  mAldrete   X  
Side Effects (dissociative, 
psychotogenic, and manic 
symptoms)  CADSS, BPRS+, 
YMRS   X  
Secondary Outcome Measures  
Subjective units of distress (a 
proxy for extinction)  SUDS   X  
Cognitive  function  CogState  X X X 
Depressive Symptoms  MADRS  X X X 
Suicide Risk  C-SSRS  X X X 
Anxiety Symptoms  BAI X X X 
Pain Int ensity  NRS  X X X 
Quality of Life  WHOQOL -BREF  X X X 
General Adverse Events  PRISE/FIBSER   X X 
Global Rating of Illness Severity 
and Improvement  CGI X X X 
Credibility/Expectation of 
Outcome Treatment  CEQ X   
 
D.5.4. Independent Evaluation Integrity : The PI will oversee assessment core to ensure that independent 
evaluators will 1) undergo standardized training in all assessment instruments, 2) demonstrate reliability of 
assessment at the beginning of the protocol; and 3) receive reliability checks on their  evaluations throughout 
the protocol. Initial competency will be established by on -site didactic training for all clinical assessments and 
data collection procedures followed by the establishment of inter -rater reliability. Inter -rater reliability will be 
accomplished using a train- to-criterion protocol with recorded patient interviews (for symptom scales all total 
scores will be required to be within 2 points of the standardized score and all individual item scores were 
required to be within 1 point of the  standardized score; for diagnostic assessments 100% agreement will be 
required for the primary diagnosis). To maintain competency and reduce “drift,” in -person didactic re -
training sessions will be conducted annually and inter -rater reliability established at 6-month  intervals to 
ensure that they meet at least 80% reliability of their measurement. Remediation and additional training will be provided as needed until competency was  achieved.  
D.5.6. PE Training, fidelity and supervision : Licensed doctoral -level psychologists and masters- level clinical 
social workers will deliver the PE treatment. Therapists will be existing VA clinicians who have been approved 
to donate time to the study and treat participants as part of their regular caseload. Supervision of PE will 
include regular review of session video to determine presence or absence of essential PE component, and 
monitor for protocol violations. Treatment sessions will be videotaped and 12% will be randomly selected and 
reviewed by PE expert (Dr. Erbes ) to ensure fidelity to the treatment manual (1 5 sessions will be selected from 
sessions 1 –2, session 4, sessions 6 –9, and sessions 10 and above).  
D.6.  Outcome  Measures. 
D.6.1. Primary Outcome Measure : The primary outcome is the difference in PTSD symptom se verity from 
baseline to week 1 2 measured by the 30 -item CAPS -5 past month version (for current PTSD) total 
score (Weathers et al., 2018) . 
D.6.2. Interview based Assessments: We will collect demographic data using the PhenX Measures for 
Mental Health  (https://www.phenxtoolkit.org ). History of psychia tric risk factors will be obtained by initial 
interview. Comorbidity and potential exclusionary diagnosis will be determined by M.I.N.I. (Sheehan et al., 
1998) We will exclude individuals with psychosis related diso rders, bipolar I and II disorder, and 
alcohol/illicit substance use disorder within 6  months of initial assessment as the use of ketamine will be 
contraindicated. A widely used brief screening test, the MMSE will quantitatively assesses for exclusion of 
moderate -to-severe cognitive impairment cognitive . All study -related audio recordings will be maintained in 
accordance with the Record Control Schedule (i.e., 6 fiscal years after study closure).  
D.6.3. Secondary Outcome Measures : Severity of depression woul d be measure by the MADRS, a semi - 
structured 10 -item scale designed to be particularly sensitive to change over time in patients treated with 
antidepressant medication. The MADRS is psychometrically sensitive to assess the rapid onset of 
antidepressant ef ficacy  (Johnson et al., 2016) . The PCL -5 is a 20 -item self- report measure that assesses the 
20 DSM -5 symptoms of PTSD. For the study, the PCL -5 will serve to screen potential candidates for PTSD 
and to monitor symp tom changes during and after treatment. A PCL -5 cut- point score of 33 has been advised 
as a reasonable value until further psychometric work is available. The time frame for PCL -5 has been 
modified to meet research needs as in other studies (e.g., NCT02655 692). Moreover, the Mental Illness 
Research, Education and Clinical Centers (mirecc.va.gov) stated that “The PCL can be easily modified to fit 
specific time frames or events. For example, instead of asking about ‘the past month,’ questions may ask 
about ‘the past week’ or be modified to focus on events…” . The BAI will serve as the gold standard self -report 
measure of general anxiety symptoms to distinguish anxiety from comorbid conditions such as depressive 
symptoms. The C- SSRS-  last visit version will be used to count prospective or treatment emergent 
suicidal behaviors. The C - SSRS has been used in many treatment trials, and to measure treatment emergent 
suicidal events during pharmacotherapy (Mann et al., 2006) . SUDS(Jaycox, Foa, & Morral, 1998) is a self -
rating measure of distress ranging from 0 (comp lete relaxation) to 100 (maximum distress) and will measure 
activation of fear structure, decrease in fear during exposure sessions (within- session extinction); and 
decrease in initial reactions to the feared stimuli across sessions (between-  session extin ction). SUDS ratings 
correspond well with other indices of fear expression, including physiological indicators. Based on the PE protocol, the therapist will initially generate with the patient anchor examples at 0, 25, 50, 75, and 100 (e.g., 
25: riding a r oller coaster). SUDS will then be recorded every 5 min during the imaginal exposure. Peak SUDS 
scores, highest reported distress during first (Session 3) and last imaginal exposure session (Session 10 -12), 
and mean SUDS scores, average reported distress du ring first (Session 3) and last imaginal exposure (Session 
10-12), will be calculated. NRS (Ferreira -Valente, Pais -Ribeiro, & Jensen, 2011) is a one -dimensional 
measure of pain intensity in adults. The NRS is a segmented numeric version of the visual analog scal e in 
which a whole number (0 –10 integers) is selected to reflect the intensity of their pain anchored at 0 
representing “no pain” and at 10 representing” worst pain imaginable”. The CGI (Busner & Targum, 2007) is a 
brief assessment consisting of a 3 -item observer -rated scale that measures illness severity, global 
improvement or change, and therapeutic response. The CGI has been widely used in clinical trials concerning 
psychotropic treatments.  The WHOQOL -BREF ("The World Health Organization Quality of Life assessment 
(WHOQOL): position paper from the World Health Organization," 1995)  is a 26-item brief assessment  of 
quality  of life in four factor -analytically confirmed dimensions: Physical, Psychological, Social, and 
Environmental. The Credibility/Expectancy Questionnaire (CEQ) (Devilly & Borkovec, 2000)  is an 8 -
item scale of belief in the rationale and logic of a treatment (credibility) and belief in a likely positive outcome 
from a treatment (expectancy). The CEQ has been shown to predict treatment reactions in expected ways. The 
CEQ was modified slightly for this protocol to include questions about expectancy regarding changes in PTSD symptoms.  
D.6.4. Side Effects Measures : We will monitor side effects during intervention and at follow -up visits.  The 
PRISE (Rush et al., 2004) assess for the last 7 days the side effects in the following symptom domains; 
Gastrointestinal, Heart, Skin, Nervous System, Eyes/Ears, Genital/Urinary, Sleep, Sexual Functioning, and 
Other. Each domain has multiple symptoms which can be endorsed. The PRI SE is use in combination with 
FIBSER (Wisniewski, Rush, Balasubramani, Trivedi, & Nierenberg, 2006)  which rates the intensity, 
frequency and overall burden due to side effects in a 7 -point Likert -type scale. During ketamine infusions, 
we will assess potential side effects by 1) the CADSS (Bremner et al., 1998) , a clinician- administered tool 
validated in healthy subjects and patients with PTSD and designed to measure present -state perceptual, 
behavioral, and attentional alter ations occurring during dissociative experiences; 2) the four -item positive 
symptom subscale of the BPRS  (Zanello, Berthoud, Ventura, & Merlo, 2013)  a clinician- rated tool that 
assess change in severity of psychopat hology consisting of suspiciousness, hallucinations, unusual thought 
content, and conceptual disorganization; and 3) the YMRS  (Young, Biggs, Ziegler, & Meyer, 1978), item #1 
to evaluate possible manic symptoms. Finally, the Modified Aldrete  score system  (mAldrete) (Aldrete, 
1995) is a set of criteria commonly used to assess transition from anesthesia to recovery. Numeric scores of 
0, 1, or 2 are assigned to motor activity, respiration, circulation, consciousness, and SpO2 level for a 
maximal score of 10. A score≥ 9 is required for discharge from post- anesthesia care unit.  
6.7. Data Analysis  Plan.  
6.7.1. Sample Details : We propose a sample of 10 patients in this proof -of-concept pilot study . 
6.7.2. Data Collection:  Study data will be collected and managed using VA REDCap (Research Electronic Data 
Capture) hosted behind the VA firewall on a VINCI server . REDCap is a secure, web- based application 
designed to support data capture for research studies, providing 1) an intuitive interface for validated data 
entry; 2) audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export procedures; 3) autom ated export procedures 
for seamless data downloads to common statistical packages; and 4) procedures for importing data from 
external sources.  
6.7.3. Data Analysis : The data analyses will be performed by Dr. Paul Thuras, Co -I on this project. Each 
subject will be assessed for the primary outcome variable ( CAPS-5 score) at baseline (1 -2 weeks prior to 
starting the intervention), week 4, and at the end of PE treatment (week 1 2).  Statistical analysis for this 
study will be essentially descriptive in nature. We will assess means, standard deviations, and 95% confidence intervals in symptoms at key assessment points.  We will also examine 
distribution of missing data.  In addition to the CAPS -5, we will also examine change in our 
secondary measures (PCL- 5, CogSt ate, MADRS, etc.), again these analyses will be 
descriptive in nature and will be used to refine our RCT proposal . 
6.7.4. Data Safety.  
After the recruitment of 6 subjects, an independent, 3 -person panel of physicians and researchers will conduct 
a reassess ment of the risks and benefits to study participants.  This panel will review all adverse events for 
severity and frequency.  
6.8. Anticipated potential problems and alternative strategies.  
The research infrastructure and SOPs  to run ketamine  infusions , and a well- established PTSD service are 
currently in placed at MVA  to assure timely start -up within 3 months.  However, possible problems and 
solutions during execution of the study might be: 1) Slow recruitment/enrollment: We cautiously propose recruiting about 10 veterans  aim to  complete the primary outcome for our study. Nevertheless, if recruitment 
is slow, we would expand to include recruitment from satellites clinics within the Minneapolis VA Health Care 
System. In addition, we could reach out the Veteran’s population served at the St. Cloud VA Health Care 
System (SCVAHCS) (see. 6.3.2. Feasibility of recruitment . 2) Dropouts and missing data: In our own sample, 
out of 16 subjects, only 2 dropped out in agreement with the literature that consistently suppor ts tolerability 
of serial ketamine infusions. However, if risk of dropping out due to assessment burden occurs, subjects will 
have the option of completing a minimum core of primary outcome measures and maintain a flexible routine 
for recurrent appointments. For missing values, we will handle it by data imputation strategies, by last-
observation -carried -forward, and by the exclusion of dropouts (completers -only analyses); 3) Lost of follow -
up: We would initiate outreach procedures and safety checks.  
E. STUD Y COMPENSATION  
Participants will be compensated for completing the assessment sessions throughout the study. Assessment 
sessions involve individual clinical interviews, self -report, and semi -structured questionnaires. Compensation 
for assessment sessions w ill be delivered according to the following schedule: $75 for Eligibility Screen and 
Baseline (1 week prior to starting treatment, approximately 3 hours), $50 for each assessment during medication phase (total of 03 over 3 weeks; +/ -02 hrs. each), $30 at p ost-ketamine PE sessions 4, 6, 8 and 12 
(total of 04 over 2 months; +/ - 02 hrs. each), and $30 for monthly follow -up post -treatment (twice for+/ - 02 
hrs.) for a total of up to $405. Participants who prematurely withdraw from study assessments will not be compensated for assessment sessions that have not yet taken place.  
 F. BIBLIOGRAPHY AND CITED REFERENCES  
 
Abdallah, C. G., Adams, T. G., Kelmendi, B., Esterlis, I., Sanacora, G., & Krystal, J. H. (2016). KETAMINE'S 
MECHANISM OF ACTION: A  PATH TO RAPID -ACTING ANTIDEPRESSANTS. Depress Anxiety, 
33(8), 689- 697. doi:10.1002/da.22501 
Albott, C. S., Lim, K. O., Forbes, M. K., Erbes, C., Tye, S. J., Grabowski, J. G., . . . Shiroma, P. R. (2018). 
Efficacy, Safety, and Durability of Repeated Ketami ne Infusions for Comorbid Posttraumatic Stress 
Disorder and Treatment -Resistant Depression. J Clin Psychiatry, 79 (3). doi:10.4088/JCP.17m11634  
Albott, C. S., Shiroma, P. R., Cullen, K. R., Johns, B., Thuras, P., Wels, J., & Lim, K. O. (2017). The 
Antidepre ssant Effect of Repeat Dose Intravenous Ketamine Is Delayed by Concurrent Benzodiazepine 
Use. J Clin Psychiatry, 78 (3), e308 -e309. doi:10.4088/JCP.16l11277  
Aldrete, J. A. (1995). The post -anesthesia recovery score revisited. J Clin Anesth, 7 (1), 89- 91.  
Averill, L. A., Purohit, P., Averill, C. L., Boesl, M. A., Krystal, J. H., & Abdallah, C. G. (2017). Glutamate 
dysregulation and glutamatergic therapeutics for PTSD: Evidence from human studies. Neurosci Lett, 649, 147 -155. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2016.11.064  
Bedard- Gilligan, M., Duax Jakob, J. M., Doane, L. S., Jaeger, J., Eftekhari, A., Feeny, N., & Zoellner, L. A. 
(2015). An Investigation of Depression, Trauma History, and Symptom Severity in Individuals Enrolled in a Treatment Trial for Chronic PTSD. J Clin Psychol, 71 (7), 725 -740. doi:10.1002/jclp.22163  
Berger, W., Mendlowicz, M. V., Marques -Portella, C., Kinrys, G., Fontenelle, L. F., Marmar, C. R., & Figueira, I. 
(2009). Pharmacologic alternatives to antidepressants in posttraumatic stress disorder: a systematic 
review. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry, 33 (2), 169- 180. 
doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2008.12.004  
Bloodgood, D. W., Sugam, J. A., Holmes, A., & Kash, T. L. (2018). Fear extinction requires infralimbic cortex 
projections to the basolateral amygdala.  Transl Psychiatry, 8 (1), 60. doi:10.1038/s41398 -018-0106 -x 
Bremner, J. D., Krystal, J. H., Putnam, F. W., Southwick, S. M., Marmar, C., Charney, D. S., & Mazure, C. M. 
(1998). Measurement of dissociative states with the Clinician- Administered Dissociative  States Scale 
(CADSS). J Trauma Stress, 11 (1), 125- 136. doi:10.1023/a:1024465317902  
Burgos -Robles, A., Vidal- Gonzalez, I., Santini, E., & Quirk, G. J. (2007). Consolidation of fear extinction 
requires NMDA receptor- dependent bursting in the ventromedial pr efrontal cortex. Neuron, 53 (6), 871-
880. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2007.02.021  
Busner, J., & Targum, S. D. (2007). The clinical global impressions scale: applying a research tool in clinical 
practice. Psychiatry (Edgmont), 4(7), 28 -37.  
Chen, M. H., Li, C. T., Lin, W. C., Hong, C. J., Tu, P. C., Bai, Y. M., . . . Su, T. P. (2018). Cognitive function of 
patients with treatment -resistant depression after a single low dose of ketamine infusion. J Affect 
Disord, 241 , 1-7. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2018.07.033  
Clements, J. A ., Nimmo, W. S., & Grant, I. S. (1982). Bioavailability, pharmacokinetics, and analgesic activity of 
ketamine in humans. J Pharm Sci, 71 (5), 539- 542.  
Corcoran, K. A., & Maren, S. (2001). Hippocampal inactivation disrupts contextual retrieval of fear memor y 
after extinction. J Neurosci, 21 (5), 1720 -1726.  
Dekel, S., Solomon, Z., Horesh, D., & Ein -Dor, T. (2014). Posttraumatic stress disorder and depressive 
symptoms: joined or independent sequelae of trauma? J Psychiatr Res, 54, 64- 69. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpsychir es.2014.03.003  
Devilly, G. J., & Borkovec, T. D. (2000). Psychometric properties of the credibility/expectancy questionnaire. J 
Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry, 31 (2), 73 -86.  
Duman, R. S., & Aghajanian, G. K. (2012). Synaptic dysfunction in depression: potential therapeutic targets. 
Science, 338 (6103), 68 -72. doi:10.1126/science.1222939 
Duman, R. S., Aghajanian, G. K., Sanacora, G., & Krystal, J. H. (2016). Synaptic plasticity and depression: new 
insights from stress and rapid -acting antidepressants. Nat Med, 22(3), 238- 249. doi:10.1038/nm.4050  
Dunlop, B. W., Mansson, E., & Gerardi, M. (2012). Pharmacological innovations for posttraumatic stress 
disorder and medication - enhanced psychotherapy. Curr Pharm Des, 18 (35), 5645- 5658.  
Feder, A., Parides, M. K., Murroug h, J. W., Perez, A. M., Morgan, J. E., Saxena, S., . . . Charney, D. S. (2014). 
Efficacy of intravenous ketamine for treatment of chronic posttraumatic stress disorder: a randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA psychiatry, 71 (6), 681- 688. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatr y.2014.62  
Ferreira -Valente, M. A., Pais -Ribeiro, J. L., & Jensen, M. P. (2011). Validity of four pain intensity rating scales. 
Pain, 152 (10), 2399- 2404. doi:10.1016/j.pain.2011.07.005  
Foa, E. B., Zoellner, L. A., Feeny, N. C., Hembree, E. A., & Alvarez -Conrad, J. (2002). Does imaginal exposure 
exacerbate PTSD symptoms? J Consult Clin Psychol, 70(4), 1022 -1028.  
Fuchikami, M., Thomas, A., Liu, R., Wohleb, E. S., Land, B. B., DiLeone, R. J., . . . Duman, R. S. (2015). 
Optogenetic stimulation of infralimbic PF C reproduces ketamine's rapid and sustained antidepressant 
actions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 112(26), 8106 -8111. doi:10.1073/pnas.1414728112  
Girgenti, M. J., Ghosal, S., LoPresto, D., Taylor, J. R., & Duman, R. S. (2017). Ketamine accelerates fear 
extinction via mTORC1 signaling. Neurobiol Dis, 100, 1 -8. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2016.12.026  
Hsu, E., & Packard, M. G. (2008). Medial prefrontal cortex infusions of bupivacaine or AP -5 block extinction of 
amphetamine conditioned place preference. Neurobiol Learn Mem, 89 (4), 504 -512. 
doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2007.08.006  
Jaycox, L. H., Foa, E. B., & Morral, A. R. (1998). Influence of emotional engagement and habituation on 
exposure therapy for PTSD. J Consult Clin Psychol, 66 (1), 185- 192.  
Johnson, K. M., Devine, J. M., Ho, K. F., Howard, K. A., Saretsky, T. L., & Jamieson, C. A. (2016). Evidence to 
Support Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale Administration Every 24 Hours to Assess Rapid 
Onset of Treatment Response. J Clin Psychiatry, 77 (12), 1681- 1686. doi:10.4088/JCP.15m 10253  
Ju, L. S., Yang, J. J., Lei, L., Xia, J. Y., Luo, D., Ji, M. H., . . . Yang, J. J. (2017). The Combination of Long -term 
Ketamine and Extinction Training Contributes to Fear Erasure by Bdnf Methylation. Front Cell Neurosci, 11 , 100. doi:10.3389/fncel. 2017.00100  
Keller, S. M., Feeny, N. C., & Zoellner, L. A. (2014). Depression sudden gains and transient depression spikes 
during treatment for PTSD. J Consult Clin Psychol, 82(1), 102 -111. doi:10.1037/a0035286 
Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Bromet, E., Hughe s, M., & Nelson, C. B. (1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder in the 
National Comorbidity Survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 52(12), 1048 -1060.  
Larsen, S. E., Wiltsey Stirman, S., Smith, B. N., & Resick, P. A. (2016). Symptom exacerbations in trauma-
focused trea tments: Associations with treatment outcome and non -completion. Behav Res Ther, 77 , 68-
77. doi:10.1016/j.brat.2015.12.009  
Li, N., Liu, R. J., Dwyer, J. M., Banasr, M., Lee, B., Son, H., . . . Duman, R. S. (2011). Glutamate N- methyl -D-
aspartate receptor antagonists rapidly reverse behavioral and synaptic deficits caused by chronic stress exposure. Biol Psychiatry, 69 (8), 754 -761. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.12.015  
Lommen, M. J., Engelhard, I. M., Sijbrandij, M., van den Hout, M. A., & Hermans, D. (2013). Pre -trauma 
individual differences in extinction learning predict posttraumatic stress. Behav Res Ther, 51 (2), 63 -67. 
doi:10.1016/j.brat.2012.11.004  
Malenka, R. C., & Nicoll, R. A. (1999). Long -term potentiation-- a decade of progress? Science, 285 (5435), 
1870 -1874.  
Mann, J. J., Emslie, G., Baldessarini, R. J., Beardslee, W., Fawcett, J. A., Goodwin, F. K., . . . Wagner, K. D. 
(2006). ACNP Task Force report on SSRIs and suicidal behavior in youth. Neuropsychopharmacology, 31(3), 473 -492. doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1300958  
Mathew, S. J., Murrough, J. W., aan het Rot, M., Collins, K. A., Reich, D. L., & Charney, D. S. (2010). Riluzole 
for relapse prevention following intravenous ketamine in treatment -resistant depression: a pilot 
randomized, placebo -controlled continuatio n trial. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol, 13 (1), 71- 82. 
doi:10.1017/s1461145709000169  
Milad, M. R., & Quirk, G. J. (2002). Neurons in medial prefrontal cortex signal memory for fear extinction. 
Nature, 420 (6911), 70 -74. doi:10.1038/nature01138  
Milad, M. R., Wri ght, C. I., Orr, S. P., Pitman, R. K., Quirk, G. J., & Rauch, S. L. (2007). Recall of fear extinction 
in humans activates the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus in concert. Biol Psychiatry, 
62(5), 446 -454. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.10.011 
Mog haddam, B., Adams, B., Verma, A., & Daly, D. (1997). Activation of glutamatergic neurotransmission by 
ketamine: a novel step in the pathway from NMDA receptor blockade to dopaminergic and cognitive 
disruptions associated with the prefrontal cortex. J Neurosci, 17 (8), 2921 -2927.  
Murrough, J. W., Collins, K. A., Fields, J., DeWilde, K. E., Phillips, M. L., Mathew, S. J., . . . Iosifescu, D. V. 
(2015). Regulation of neural responses to emotion perception by ketamine in individuals with 
treatment -resistant maj or depressive disorder. Transl Psychiatry, 5 , e509. doi:10.1038/tp.2015.10  
Murrough, J. W., Iosifescu, D. V., Chang, L. C., Al Jurdi, R. K., Green, C. E., Perez, A. M., . . . Mathew, S. J. 
(2013). Antidepressant efficacy of ketamine in treatment -resistant major depression: a two -site 
randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry, 170(10), 1134 -1142. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.13030392  
Myers, K. M., Carlezon, W. A., Jr., & Davis, M. (2011). Glutamate receptors in extinction and extinction- based 
therapies for psychiatric illness. Neuropsychopharmacology, 36 (1), 274 -293. doi:10.1038/npp.2010.88  
Pitman, R. K., Rasmusson, A. M., Koenen, K. C., Shin, L. M., Orr, S. P., Gilbertson, M. W., . . . Liberzon, I. 
(2012). Biological studies of post -traumatic stress disorder. Nat Rev Neurosci, 13 (11), 769- 787. 
doi:10.1038/nrn3339  
Powers, M. B., Halpern, J. M., Ferenschak, M. P., Gillihan, S. J., & Foa, E. B. (2010). A meta -analytic review of 
prolonged exposure for posttraumatic stress disorder. Clin Psychol Rev, 30(6), 635 -641. 
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2010.04.007  
Quirk, G. J., Russo, G. K., Barron, J. L., & Lebron, K. (2000). The role of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in the 
recovery of extinguished fear. J Neurosci, 20(16), 6225- 6231.  
Rodriguez, C. I., Wheaton, M., Zwerling, J., S teinman, S. A., Sonnenfeld, D., Galfalvy, H., & Simpson, H. B. 
(2016). Can exposure -based CBT extend the effects of intravenous ketamine in obsessive- compulsive 
disorder? an open -label trial. J Clin Psychiatry, 77 (3), 408 -409. doi:10.4088/JCP.15l10138  
Rose nkranz, J. A., Moore, H., & Grace, A. A. (2003). The prefrontal cortex regulates lateral amygdala neuronal 
plasticity and responses to previously conditioned stimuli. J Neurosci, 23 (35), 11054 -11064.  
Rothbaum, E. B. F. E. A. H. B. O. (2007). Prolonged exp osure therapy for PTSD : therapist guide : emotional 
processing of traumatic experiences :  
New York ; Oxford : Oxford University Press  
Rush, A. J., Fava, M., Wisniewski, S. R., Lavori, P. W., Trivedi, M. H., Sackeim, H. A., . . . Niederehe, G. (2004). 
Sequenced treatment alternatives to relieve depression (STAR*D): rationale and design. Control Clin 
Trials, 25 (1), 119- 142.  
Rytwinski, N. K., Scur, M. D., Feeny, N. C., & Youngstrom, E. A. (2013). The co -occurrence of major depressive 
disorder among individu als with posttraumatic stress disorder: a meta -analysis. J Trauma Stress, 
26(3), 299- 309. doi:10.1002/jts.21814 
Santini, E., Ge, H., Ren, K., Pena de Ortiz, S., & Quirk, G. J. (2004). Consolidation of fear extinction requires 
protein synthesis in the media l prefrontal cortex. J Neurosci, 24(25), 5704 -5710. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0786- 04.2004  
Scheidegger, M., Walter, M., Lehmann, M., Metzger, C., Grimm, S., Boeker, H., . . . Seifritz, E. (2012). Ketamine 
decreases resting state functional network connectivity  in healthy subjects: implications for 
antidepressant drug action. PloS one, 7 (9), e44799. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0044799; 
10.1371/journal.pone.0044799  
Schnurr, P. P., Friedman, M. J., Engel, C. C., Foa, E. B., Shea, M. T., Chow, B. K., . . . Bernardy, N. (2007). 
Cognitive behavioral therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder in women: a randomized controlled trial. 
Jama, 297 (8), 820 -830. doi:10.1001/jama.297.8.820  
Sheehan, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan, K. H., Amorim, P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., . . . Du nbar, G. C. (1998). The 
Mini- International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a 
structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD -10. J Clin Psychiatry, 59 Suppl 20 , 22-
33;quiz 34 -57.  
Shiroma, P. R., Albo tt, C. S., Johns, B., Thuras, P., Wels, J., & Lim, K. O. (2014). Neurocognitive performance 
and serial intravenous subanesthetic ketamine in treatment -resistant depression. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol, 17 (11), 1805- 1813. doi:10.1017/S1461145714001011 
Shirom a, P. R., Albott, C. S., Johns, B., Thuras, P., Wels, J., & Lim, K. O. (2015). The Effect of Repeated 
Ketamine Infusion Over Facial Emotion Recognition in Treatment- Resistant Depression: A Preliminary 
Report. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci, 27 (4), 362 -364. doi:10.1176/appi.neuropsych.14100243  
Shiroma, P. R., Johns, B., Kuskowski, M., Wels, J., Thuras, P., Albott, C. S., & Lim, K. O. (2014). Augmentation 
of response and remission to serial intravenous subanesthetic ketamine in treatment resistant depression . J Affect Disord, 155 , 123 -129. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2013.10.036  
Sierra -Mercado, D., Jr., Corcoran, K. A., Lebron -Milad, K., & Quirk, G. J. (2006). Inactivation of the 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex reduces expression of conditioned fear and impairs subseque nt recall of 
extinction. Eur J Neurosci, 24(6), 1751- 1758. doi:10.1111/j.1460 -9568.2006.05014.x  
Steenkamp, M. M., Litz, B. T., Hoge, C. W., & Marmar, C. R. (2015). Psychotherapy for Military -Related PTSD: 
A Review of Randomized Clinical Trials. Jama, 314 (5), 489 -500. doi:10.1001/jama.2015.8370  
Stein, D. J., Ipser, J. C., & Seedat, S. (2006). Pharmacotherapy for post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev (1), CD002795. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD002795.pub2  
Weathers, F. W., Bovin, M. J., Lee, D. J., Sloan, D. M., Schnurr, P. P., Kaloupek, D. G., . . . Marx, B. P. (2018). 
The Clinician- Administered PTSD Scale for DSM -5 (CAPS- 5): Development and initial psychometric 
evaluation in military veterans. Psychol Assess, 30 (3), 383 -395. doi:10.1037 /pas0000486  
Wisniewski, S. R., Rush, A. J., Balasubramani, G. K., Trivedi, M. H., & Nierenberg, A. A. (2006). Self -rated 
global measure of the frequency, intensity, and burden of side effects. J Psychiatr Pract, 12(2), 71 -79.  
The World Health Organization Quality of Life assessment (WHOQOL): position paper from the World Health 
Organization. (1995). Soc Sci Med, 41 (10), 1403 -1409.  
Xu, Y., Hackett, M., Carter, G., Loo, C., Galvez, V., Glozier, N., . . . Rodgers, A. (2016). Effects of Low -Dose and 
Very Low -Dose Ketamine among Patients with Major Depression: a Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol, 19 (4). doi:10.1093/ijnp/pyv124  
Young, R. C., Biggs, J. T., Ziegler, V. E., & Meyer, D. A. (1978). A rating scale for mania: reliability, validity and 
sensitivity. Br J Psychiatry, 133 , 429 -435.  
Zanello, A., Berthoud, L., Ventura, J., & Merlo, M. C. (2013). The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (version 4.0) 
factorial structure and its sensitivity in the treatment of outpatients with unipolar depression. 
Psychiatry Res, 210(2), 626 -633. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2013.07.001  
Zarate, C. A., Jr., & Machado -Vieira, R. (2017). Ketamine: translating mechanistic discoveries into the next 
generation of glutamate modulators for mood disorders. Mol Psychiat ry, 22(3), 324 -327. 
doi:10.1038/mp.2016.249  
Zarate, C. A., Jr., Singh, J. B., Carlson, P. J., Brutsche, N. E., Ameli, R., Luckenbaugh, D. A., . . . Manji, H. K. 
(2006). A randomized trial of an N -methyl -D-aspartate antagonist in treatment -resistant major 
depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 63 (8), 856- 864. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.63.8.856  
Zayfert, C., Becker, C. B., Unger, D. L., & Shearer, D. K. (2002). Comorbid anxiety disorders in civilians seeking 
treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder. J Trauma Stress, 1 5(1), 31- 38. 
doi:10.1023/A:1014379127240  
Zushida, K., Sakurai, M., Wada, K., & Sekiguchi, M. (2007). Facilitation of extinction learning for contextual 
fear memory by PEPA: a potentiator of AMPA receptors. J Neurosci, 27 (1), 158 -166. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI. 3842 -06.2007  
 