ORI IRB# 00000278  
 
Protocol Version 6/1/20 21 
 
Official Title: Walk With Me (WWM) for Perinatal Grief  
 
Principal  Investigators: Camille C. Cioffi, Ph.D.  and David Smith, Ph.D.  
 
Oregon Research Behavior Interventions Strategies, dba Influents Innovations  
 
Award No. R43 MH126788  
 Final Version Dated: 6/1/2021  
  
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
Participant Recruitment , Enrollment , and Overall Design  
Recruitment for the 52 parents for the evaluation testing was  coordinated in collaboration 
with PeaceHealth staff members who provided potentially eligible parents with a brief 
description of the project and obtained  consent to share their information with Influents 
Innovations staff for our research to contact them to provide further information about the study 
two weeks following their loss to mirror the in -app referral process that will occur in phase II. 
Parents t hat d id not give permission for PeaceHea lth staff w ere not contacted by Influents 
Innovations, though they c ould contact Influents Innovations directly using the contact 
information in a brochure that they receive d from PeaceHealth. Once PeaceHealth staff received 
permission from a parent for Influents Innovations to contact them, project staff called  to further 
explain the details of the project, confirm eligibility requirements and discuss confidentiality. If the parent expressed interest in participating, we sent  them an electronic informed co nsent and 
survey to complete intake. We were available by phone or email to answer any questions.  
After consent, parents completed the baseline survey (T1) via the Qualtrics online assessment 
form and then be provided download access to the Walk With Me ( WWM ) prototype. After 6 
weeks, parents were administered the post -treatment survey s (T2 and T3) . This design allow ed 
us to evaluate baseline to follow -up change in the proposed study outcomes and acceptability of 
the prototype WWM program.  
We evaluated feasibility and initial eﬃcacy of WW M in a within -subjects pre -post design 
study (pretest, 4 - and 8- week posttests  [T1-T3]). We provide d the mobile -based provider 
component for use by Health Care Providers ( HCP s) who worked  in our partner hospital.  
 
Walk with Me (WWM)  Prototype Intervention  Program  
We develop ed professional training and modules for health care professionals (HCPs) and 
grief processing and healing activities for bereaved parents, via an iterative formative 
development process with stakeholder input. We  embed ded the core intervention components in 
administrative, provider, and client interfaces which will comprise the protype Walk with Me (WWM) intervention.  
 Measures  
T1, T2, and T3 surveys  measured parents’ parenting traumatic stress (Impact of Events Scale-
revised with 22 items), grief intensity (Perinatal Grief Intensity Scale with 12 items), grief 
management self -efficacy (3 items that rate bereaved parents
 confidence in their ability to cope 
with grief, use knowledge of mindfulness skills to cope, and engage in positive behaviors to help 
coping), care experiences  (6 items of experiences of care at the time of loss and follow -up 
appointments after loss ), and difficulties with emotional regulation  (11 items from the Emotional 
Regulation Scale) . The T3 survey also contained measures of pa rent satisfaction, acceptability, 
and usabilit y of the WWM intervention program . Demographics were collected at T1, and usage  
data measured parents’ usage of WWM . 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
Preliminary analyses included a descriptive summary of the sample, summary of 
participation and missing data, and attrition analysis.  
For change in study outcomes, we used mixed effects growth models estimated with full 
information maximum likelihood using PROC MIXED from SAS (Version 9.4). The model 
included a fixed effect of time that was coded in weeks and the pretest assessment was d efined as 
a random intercept. The time term is a test of the efficacy of the intervention to produce favorable change in the study outcomes.  
 A critical element of evaluation is the acceptability of the program for the targeted 
population. To address this factor, we provide a descriptive summary parent satisfaction with the program, and program use metrics.  
 