1 
 03/04/2018 
IRB #17-0815- F2L 
University of Kentucky  
College of Dentistry  
Division of Periodontology  
 
 
Ridge Preservation with Leukocyte Platelet Rich Fibrin : A Clinical, Radiographic, and 
Histomorphometric Study  
 
 Mhd firas Al Yafi, DDS  
Committee Chair  
Dr. Mohanad Al-Sabbagh 
Committee Advisors  
Dr. Dolphus Dawson 
Dr. Galal Omami  
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 
 Background and significance: 
     After a tooth extraction,  the alveolar process  loses a mean of 3.8 mm  horizontally and 1.2 to 
1.6 mm vertically , mostly within the first 3  months of healing . 1, 2 It loses up to 50% of its original 
dimension during the first year . 3 This dramatic ridge resorption compromises prosthetically -
driven implant placement. Resorption is more pronounced in the mandible than in the maxilla, and  
usually the buccal side loses more volume than the lingual.4, 5 Alveolar r idge preservation has been 
used effectively to limit ridge reduction post  tooth extraction .6-9 Current methods  in socket grafting 
or ridge preservation  include the use of autogenous grafts (graft from the same individual) , 
allografts  (graft from different individual of the same species ), xenografts  (graft from different 
species), and alloplasts ( synthetic graft materials). These methods include  naturally derived or 
synthetic, resorbable or non- resorbable membranes . 10-12 To date, the  literature do es not present  
clear guid elines for the type of bone graft material, membrane, or surgical procedure for ridge 
preservation .13  
 
     The use of the membrane prevents  invagination of the epithelium,  and gives the osteoblasts 
time and space to  form new bone .4, 14 The ideal membrane should be biocompatible, m alleable, 
and able to exclude  the soft tissue .15, 16 In clinical studies, d ifferent types of barrier membranes  
have been used, with different rates of bone form ation.4, 5 Usually, resorbable and  permeable  
synthetic membranes  require tension free primary closure, which increases surgical complexity, 
reduces t he amount of keratinized gingiva, disrupts the  architecture of soft tissues, and 
compromises the vascularity of the flap with  periosteal releasing incisions.  The micro -porosity of 
high-density polytetrafluoroethylene (dPTFE)  can exclude the bacteria and protect the graft even 
when exposed to the oral cavity .17 The successful use of (dPTFE) membrane  has been  
demonstrated in a nimal and clinical trials.18-20 Also, dPTFE membrane  can be used predictably 
without a bone graft material to preserve the extraction sites .21  
 
       In a recent animal study,  using autogen ous bone particles does not have a significant effect in 
preventing ridge resorption22 while, x enografts maintain the dimensions of the ridge  better 
compared to allografts  alloplastic materials and natural healing . Sockets grafted with alloplastic 
materials (after >12 weeks)  provide the highest amount of vital bone  ( 45.5%), and the least 
amount of remnant graft material (13.7%), and connective tissue  (38.4%),  while, allograft 
3 
 provided (30%, 21.7%, 51%) , and xenograft  provided (35.7%, 19.3%, 44.4%)  respectively .23 
Some literature suggest that implant primary stability could  be affected by the bone graft material 
remnants.24  
 
    There is limited evidence  to support the use of growth factors, human platelet -derived materials, 
platelet-rich fibrin, and stem cells  as adjuncts to ridge preservation.23 Leucocyte and platelet -rich 
fibrin (L-PRF) alone or in combination with a graft material can improve soft tissue healing, bone 
regeneration, ridge preservation, and reduces infection rate,25-30 L-PRF was introduced by 
Choukroun in 2001. L- PRF is composed of a dense high cross -linked fibrin mesh  with the 
entrapped  leucocytes and  platelets, w hich in turn releases growth facto rs and cytokines for 7 
days.31, 32 Some investigators have reported a positive effect on bone regeneration33, 34 while others 
failed to find any  effect.35 L-PRF outcomes for ridge preservation are comparable to those obtained 
with xenografts or allografts  bone graft particulates , however,  it is superior to alloplasts materials 
and natural healing . Use of L -PRF also provides additional advantages such as stimulating n atural 
healing with patients own growth factors  without any remnants and at a low cost.36 
The purpose of this clinical randomized study is to investigate the effect of L -PRF plug on the 
quality of newly formed bone in the preserved socket using non- resorbable membrane (d -PTFE). 
 Null hypothesis: 
The use of L-PRF plug, in combination with non-resorbable, open barrier membrane technique to fill the extraction sockets will have no effect on the quality of the newly formed bone nor on the 
dimensional changes of the ridge, compared to non- resorbable, open barrier membrane technique 
with natural blood clot. 
 
Alternative hypothesis: 
The use of L-PRF plug, in combination with non-resorbable, open barrier membrane technique to 
fill the extraction sockets will have a positive effect on the quality of the newly formed bone and 
on preserving the dimensions of the alveolar ridge, compared to non- resorbable, open barrier 
membrane technique with natural blood clot.  
 
 
4 
 Specific aims:  
The primary aim is to assess the  quality of the newly formed bone at the time of implant placement 
by comparing the percentage of new vital bone in the histomorphometric analysis. The second aim 
is to assess the  primary stability of the implant using the resonance frequency analysis (RFA) and 
insertional torque (IT) of the implant. The third aim is to  assess the horizontal and vertical changes 
of the residual bony ridge using Cone Bean Computerized Tomography (CB CT) analysis at 
baseline immediately after tooth extraction  and prior to implant placement at 12 weeks of healing.  
The fourth aim is to assess the soft tissue healing with a series of  intraoral occlusal photographs. 
 
Material and m ethods  
Study Population 
Forty-eight subjects will be recruited from the patient population of the University of Kentucky 
College of Dentistry clinics and will be randomly assigned into a control group and a test  group 
by computer- generated randomiz ation table. Following  informed research consent, all subjects  
will a complete health history questionnaire . Twenty e xtraction socket sites of  the test group will 
be filled with autogenous L -PRF Plug (Intralock ) and d-PTFE membrane (Cytoplast) will be 
laid on the top to seal the extraction socket. In the control group, d-PTFE membrane (Cytoplast ) 
will be laid on the top of twenty extraction socket s to allow natural blood clot formation in the 
extraction socket . To account for expected attrition, an additional four patient s will be tried to  be 
recruited in each group.  
 
Inclusion  and exclusion  criteria:  
The subject must have an unsalvageable tooth that is planned for extraction and delayed implant placement . The tooth should be free of acute odontogenic infections, and only the extraction 
sockets with  minimal to moderate bony defect will be included in the study.  
Any patient who is planned for full mouth extraction, who is a heavy smoker  (more than 10 
cigarettes a day) , who has  a history of malignancy , chemotherapy, radiation therapy,  
immunosuppressive disease, uncontrolled systemic disease, or any contraindications to surgical 
procedures will be excluded from the study . Females who are pregnant or breastfeeding  will be 
excluded as well. Also, for multi -rooted teeth, if the most coronal part of the interradicular septum 
is less than 5 mm below the crest of the bone, tooth will be excluded from the study. 
5 
  
Subject v isits:  
Screening Visit: All subjects will receive a comprehensive oral and periodontal examination. 
Patients who fulfill the inclusion criteria will continue in the study and will complete the baseline 
visit and all subsequent visits. After providing a thorough explanation about the study,  an informed 
research consent will be obt ained. The clinical examinations will be done on all patients by the 
same investigator  throughout the study. If the patient is eligible, a pre-operative assessment  and 
treatment planning will be done at this stage . 
Visit 1 (Baseline) : Tooth extraction , ridge preservation procedure, and CBCT will be performed. 
Autologous blood will be withdrawn and centrifuged to make the L-PRF plug  in the test group. 
Intraoral occlusal photograph will be taken  before and after tooth extraction. 
Visit 2 (1-week from the baseline visit):  Suture removal, and post- surgical follow-up evaluation  
will be performed and intraoral occlusal photograph  will be taken.  
Visit 3 (4-week from the baseline visit):  Non-resorbable membrane will be removed and intraoral 
occlusal photograph will be taken . 
Visit 4 (12-week from the baseline visit): A conventional or digital impression of the site will be 
taken and intraoral occlusal photograph will be taken. Then CBCT will be performed for implant 
planning. Visit 5 (14-week from the baseline v isit): A bone core biopsy  will be performed and will be  
followed by the implant placement along with the primary stability assessment.  Intraoral occlusal 
photographs will be taken before and after the surgery. 
6 
 

7DEOH'DWDFROOHFWLRQIRUHDFKYLVLWRIWKHVWXG\LVGHVFU LEHG$OOSURFHGXUHVGHVFULEHGDERYH
DUH6WDQGDUGRI&DUHH[FHSWERQH FRUHELRSV\LQYLVLWLVDUH VHDUFKFRPSRQHQWV


,QWUDRUDORFFOXVDOSKRWRJUDSK 
,QWUDRUDOSKRWRJUDSKZLOOEHWDNHQWRHYDOXDWHVRIWWLVVXHKHDO LQJ6WDQGDUGL]DWLRQRISKRWRJUDSKV
ZLOOEHWULHGE\XVLQJDQRFFOXVDOPLUURUZLWKD qDQJOHWRWKHRFFOXVDOSODQHRIDSDWLHQWLQD
VXSLQHSRVLWLRQ)L[HGFDPHUDV HWWLQJVZLOOEHXVHGLQDOOVHVV LRQV3KRWRVZLOOEHWDNHQDWWKHEDVH
OLQHZHHNZHHNZ HHNDQGZHHNYLVLWV





Screening 
visit 
Comprehensiv
e oral and 
periodontal 
examination
Pre-op 
assessment
Treatment 
plan
An informed 
research 
consent will 
be obtained
visit 1
baseline
Tooth 
extraction 
Only for the test 
group, blood will 
be withdrawn & 
centrifuged to 
make the L-PRF 
plug 
Ridge 
preservation 
procedure
Intraoral occlusal 
photograph
Post-op CBCT
visit 2
1- week
Post-surgical 
follow up
Suture removal
Intraoral 
occlusal 
photograph
visit 3
4-week
Non-resorbable 
membrane 
removal
Intraoral occlusal 
photograph
visit 4
12-week
Conventional or 
digital impression 
Intraoral occlusal 
photograph
CBCT for implant 
planning
visit 5
14-week
Bone core 
biopsy
Implant 
placement
Intraoral 
occlusal 
photographs 
before and after 
surgery
7 
 L-PRF plug preparation Protocol :37   
A venipuncture with a 21 Gauge butterfly needle will be used to collect up to six 9 ml tubes of 
blood. Tubes immediately are placed into the IntraSpin™ centrifuge. and counterbalanced with 
each other.  Centrifugation will be run at 2700 rpm for 12 minutes, however, in patient taking anti -
coagulant medication up to 18 minutes are recommended. The centrifugation would separate the 
red blood cells layer at the bottom, the platelet poor plasma layer on the top, and the L -PRF fibrin 
clot in the middle of the tubes. Fibrin clots will be taken out of the tubes and then will be placed in the small white cylinder of the Xpression™ box, and compressed until holder is level to cylinder. 
The plugs stay viable up to 3 hours, if they are re- hydrated with the PRF exudate.  
 
Ridge preservation surgical Procedure:  
After administration of the local anesthetic ( LA), full thickness buccal and  lingual flaps will be 
elevated about 3 -4 mm pass  the socket bone crest. Atraumatic tooth extraction will be performed 
using peizosurgery, periotomes and/or elevators with root sectioning on multi -rooted teeth. The 
socket will be curreted , then copious saline irrigation will be applied. The extraction sockets of the 
test group will be filled up to the crest of the ridge with  3-5 L-PRF Plug s, depending on the size 
of the socket , and condensed with the amalgam condensor . A d-PTFE membrane (Cytoplast ) 
will be laid on the  top of the extraction socket  of test and control group and will be inserted 3-4 
mm beyond the bone crest . Flap will be re-positioned to its original position with no attempt to get 
primary closure for either group.   
 
Implant digital surgical guide  
A digital or conventional impression of the site will be taken to obtain an STL file, and a DICOM 
file from the CBCT  at 12-week visit. Then surgical guide will be fabricated (Dreve ) utilizing the 
coDiagnostiX™ software in order to plan for the future implant size and location in a prosthetic 
driven manner . The same guide will be used for the bone core sample, with a trephine bur of a 
suitable size.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 Implant placement surgical Procedure:   
Using the implant surgical gu ide a core bone biopsy will be taken from the he aled extraction site. 
Then the i mplant will be placed as recommended by the manufacturer  (BLT, Strauman n), and 
additional bone grafting will be done if needed. The implant stability quotient (ISQ), and 
insertional torque (IT) will be recorded at the implant placement time to assess the primary 
stability. 
 
Pre- and Post - operative instructions:  
Prophylaxis Antibiotics: Standard of care Amoxicillin 2 g will be given one hour prior to surgery 
or Clindamycin 600 mg one hour prior to surgery if the subject is  reported to be allergic to 
Penicillin.   
Analgesic: NSAID will be prescribed as needed. Patient will be instructed to use Chlorhexidine 
0.12% mouth rinse twice a day for five weeks. The patient will be instructed to be refrained from 
brushing or flossing to the surgical site for 10 days. 
 
Histomorphometric assessment:  
The core bone biopsy will be harvested using the surgical implant guide at the time of implant placement. It will be placed in a container with 10% neutral buffered formalin. The sample will be 
sent for light microscopy histologic slides preparation in the lab. The  bone specimens will be de -
mineraliz ed in EDTA for a month and embedded in paraffin wax . Bone sections (~5µm) will be 
obtained using the Leica (RM  2255, Leica, IL) microtome. F or each biopsy specimen, longitudinal 
section will be used for light microscopic examination. Histomorphometric analysis will be 
performed on three fields for each section using specialized software (Bioquant, Nashville, TN).  
Percentages of newly formed bone, residual connective tissue , and any material remnants  will be 
measured based on the averages of the percentages at a magnification of 100X.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 CBCT acquisition : 
CBCT images38, 39 will be acquired by i -CAT FLX Cone Beam 3D system (Imaging Scien ces, 
Hatfield, PA, USA) at baseline immediately after tooth extraction, and prior to i mplant placement 
at 12 weeks post extraction . Scans will be obtained at the Standard protocol (360° rotation, 300 
frames, 120 kVp, 5 mA, 3.7 sec, 16 x 8 cm FOV, 400 µm voxel size). 
 
CBCT analysis26 
The analysis of the CBCTs will be performed according to the analysis described by Jung et al. 
(2013). To perform the CBCT measurements, scans taken immediately after extraction  (CBCT 0), 
will be superimposed on scans taken at 12 weeks post extraction  (CBCT 12 ) using InVivo 5.2 
imaging software (Anatomage, San Jose, CA, USA). For the superimposition of the cross -sectional 
slices, the fixed anatomical landmarks include the palatal  vault in the maxilla, the lower border 
and angle in the mandible, where no changes would occur after extraction. Both data sets would 
be spatially aligned in order to obtain a match. To set a reference, in single -rooted teeth, the most 
apical point (A) of  the extraction socket is defined in the baseline image (CBCT 0), while in the 
multi-rooted teeth point (A) to be the most coronal point on the  interradicular septum, right at the 
center of the extraction socket (Fig 1). Two reference lines are subsequentl y drawn. The vertical 
reference line is drawn in the center of the extraction socket crossing (A)  reference point. The 
horizontal reference line is drawn perpendicular to the vertical line crossing the apical reference point (Fig 2). 
 
The following measure ments are then  performed  (Fig. 3): 
1. The thickness of the buccal plate (BP) on CBCT0 will be measured at 1, 3 & 5 mm below the lingual bone crest. 
2. Horizontal ridge width (RW) will be measured at 3 levels : 1,3,5 mm below the buccal bone 
crest. 
3. Vertical resorption of both the buccal and lingual plates will be measured in millimeter . 
4. Socket fill percentage will be assessed based on the highest point of viewable mineralized bone 
on CBCT12. 
10 
 Primary outcome variable is  socket fill with new bone . Secondary outcome variables are changes 
in horizontal width at crest  -1mm, 3 mm, and 5 mm  levels; and vertical resorption at the lingual 
and buccal side. 
  (Fig 1) 
 Figure 1. In single -rooted teeth the most apical point (A) of the extraction socket is def ined in the 
baseline image (CBCT 0), while in the multi- rooted teeth  point (A) to be the most coronal  point 
on the septum, right at the center of the extraction socket. 
 (Fig 2) 
Figure 2.  Two reference lines are subsequently drawn. The vertical reference line (the blue 
interrupted line) is drawn in the center of the extraction socket crossing the apical reference point. 
The horizontal reference line (the red interrupted line) is drawn perpendicular to the vertical line 
crossing the apical referen ce point. 

11 
    (Fig 3) 
Figure 3.  Following measurements are then performed: 
1. The thickness of the buccal bone plate is to be measured at 1, 3 & 5 mm below the lingual 
bone crest (PB Width), on baseline image only. 
2. Horizontal ridge width at 3 levels (crest -1 mm (RW -1 mm), crest -3 mm (RW -3 mm) & 
crest -5 mm (RW -5 mm)) below the most coronal point of the buccal crest, in millimeter.  
3. Vertical resorption on bo th the buccal and palatal side,  in millimeter.  
4. Socket fill as being the highest point of viewable mine ralized bone. Percentages of socket 
fill will be measured by comparing the initial depth of the socket and the depth after 12  
weeks of healing.  
Adverse Effects : 
If patients experience pain that cannot be managed by the prescribed analgesic, they will be to ld 
to contact the principal investigator for follow -up.  
The membrane will be  left on the extraction socket for 4 weeks, if there is no sign of infection, 
otherwise any infection will be treated which may necessitate the removal of membrane. 
Subjects will be monitored for other adverse reactions throughout the study. All adverse events 
will be managed and documented by the pr incipal investigator . 
 
Statistical Analysis :  
For the expected result, A sample size of 20 in each group will have at least 80% power to detect 
an effect size (ES) of 0.9 using a two groups t-test with a 0.050 two- sided significance level.  The 
t-test will be used for  the histomorphometr ic analysis, ISQ and, insertional torque. While, 
Manova will be used  for the CBCT multiple measurements .  

12 
  
 
Subject incentives will consist of 50$ Gift card, and a free follow up CBCT after completion of 
visit 5. 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
13 
 References:  
1. Tan WL, Wong TL, Wong MC, Lang NP. A systematic review of post -extractional alveolar hard and 
soft tissue dimensional changes in humans. Clin Oral Implants Res  2012;23 Suppl 5:1- 21. 
2. Van der Weijden F, Dell'Acqua F, Slot DE. Alveolar bone dimensional changes of post -extraction 
sockets in humans: a systematic review. J Clin Periodontol 2009;36:1048 -1058.  
3. Schropp L, Wenzel A, Kostopoulos L, Karring T. Bone healing and soft tissue contour changes 
following single -tooth extraction: a clinical and radiographic 12 -month prospective study. Int J 
Periodontics Restorative Dent  2003;23:313 -323.  
4. Smukler H, Landi L, Setayesh R. Histomorphometric evaluation of extract ion sockets and deficient 
alveolar ridges treated with allograft and barrier membrane: a pilot study. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants  1999;14:407 -416.  
5. Fotek PD, Neiva RF, Wang HL. Comparison of dermal matrix and polytetrafluoroethylene membrane for socket bone augmentation: a clinical and histologic study. J Periodontol  
2009;80:776 -785.  
6. Friedmann A, Strietzel FP, Maretzki B, Pitaru S, Bernimoulin JP. Histological assessment of augmented jaw bone utilizing a new collagen barrier membrane compared to a standard barrier membrane to protect a granular bone substitute material. Clin Oral Implants Res  2002;13:587 -
594.  
7. Wang HL, Tsao YP. Histologic evaluation of socket augmentation with mineralized human allograft. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent  2008;28:231- 237.  
8. Avila- Ortiz G, Elangovan S, Kramer KW, Blanchette D, Dawson DV. Effect of alveolar ridge 
preservation after tooth extraction: a systematic review and meta -analysis. J Dent Res  
2014;93:950 -958.  
9. Ten Heggeler JM, Slot DE, Van der Weijden GA. E ffect of socket preservation therapies following 
tooth extraction in non -molar regions in humans: a systematic review. Clin Oral Implants Res  
2011;22:779 -788.  
10. Bartee BK. Extraction site reconstruction for alveolar ridge preservation. Part 2: membrane -
assisted surgical technique. J Oral Implantol  2001;27:194 -197.  
11. Iasella JM, Greenwell H, Miller RL, et al. Ridge preservation with freeze -dried bone allograft and a 
collagen membrane compared to extraction alone for implant site development: a clinical and histologic study in humans. J Periodontol  2003;74:990 -999.  
12. Laney WR. Glossary of Oral and Maxillofacial Implants. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants  2017;32:Gi -
G200.  
13. Vignoletti F, Matesanz P, Rodrigo D, Figuero E, Martin C, Sanz M. Surgical protocol s for ridge 
preservation after tooth extraction. A systematic review. Clin Oral Implants Res  2012;23 Suppl 
5:22- 38. 
14. Schenk RK, Buser D, Hardwick WR, Dahlin C. Healing pattern of bone regeneration in membrane -
protected defects: a histologic study in the canine mandible. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants  
1994;9:13 -29. 
15. Scantlebury TV. 1982 -1992: a decade of technology development for guided tissue regeneration. 
J Periodontol  1993;64:1129- 1137.  
16. Rakhmatia YD, Ayukawa Y, Furuhashi A, Koyano K. Current barrier membranes: titanium mesh and other membranes for guided bone regeneration in dental applications. J Prosthodont Res  
2013;57:3 -14. 
17. Bartee BK. The use of high -density polytetrafluoroethylene membrane to treat osseous defects: 
clinical reports. Impl ant Dent  1995;4:21 -26. 
14 
 18. Bartee BK, Carr JA. Evaluation of a high -density polytetrafluoroethylene (n- PTFE) membrane as a 
barrier material to facilitate guided bone regeneration in the rat mandible. J Oral Implantol  
1995;21:88- 95. 
19. Crump TB, Rivera- Hidalgo F, Harrison JW, Williams FE, Guo IY. Influence of three membrane types 
on healing of bone defects. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 1996;82:365 -374.  
20. Walters SP, Greenwell H, Hill M, Drisko C, Pickman K, Scheetz JP. Comparison of porous and non -
porous teflon membranes plus a xenograft in the treatment of vertical osseous defects: a clinical 
reentry study. J Periodontol  2003;74:1161 -1168.  
21. Hoffmann O, Bartee BK, Beaumont C, Kasaj A, Deli G, Zafiropoulos GG. Alveolar bone preservation in extraction sockets using non -resorbable dPTFE membranes: a retrospective non -randomized 
study. J Periodontol  2008;79:1355- 1369.  
22. Araujo MG, Lindhe J. Socket grafting with the use of autologous bone: an experimental study in the dog. Clin Oral Implants Res  2011;22:9 -13. 
23. Jambhekar S, Kernen F, Bidra AS. Clinical and histologic outcomes of socket grafting after flapless 
tooth extraction: a systematic review of randomized controlled clinical trials. J Prosthet Dent  
2015;113:371- 382.  
24. Marquezan M, Osorio A, Sant'Anna E, Souza MM, Maia L. Does bone mineral density influence 
the primary stability of dental implants? A systematic review. Clin Oral Implants Res  2012;23:767 -
774.  
25. Miron RJ, Zucchelli G, Pikos MA, et al. Use of platelet -rich fibrin in regenerative dentistry: a 
systematic review. Clin Oral Investig 2017;21:1913- 1927.  
26. Temmerman A, Vandessel J, Castro A, et al. The use of leucocyte and platelet -rich fibrin in socket 
management and ridge preservation: a split -mouth,  randomized, controlled clinical trial. J Clin 
Periodontol  2016;43:990 -999.  
27. Castro AB, Meschi N, Temmerman A, et al. Regenerative potential of leucocyte- and platelet -rich 
fibrin. Part B: sinus floor elevation, alveolar ridge preservation and implant therapy. A systematic review. J Clin Periodontol 2017;44:225 -234.  
28. Singh A, Kohli M, Gupta N. Platelet rich fibrin: a novel approach for osseous regeneration. J Maxillofac Oral Surg 2012;11:430 -434.  
29. Hauser F, Gaydarov N, Badoud I, Vazquez L, Bernard JP, Ammann P. Clinical and histological evaluation of postextraction platelet -rich fibrin socket filling: a prospective randomized controlled 
study. Implant Dent  2013;22:295 -303.  
30. Kumar N, Prasad K, Ramanujam L, K R, Dexith J, Chauhan A. Evaluation of treatment outcome after impacted mandibular third molar surgery with the use of autologous platelet -rich fibrin: a 
randomized controlled clinical study. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2015;73:1042- 1049.  
31. Dohan D M, Choukroun J, Diss A, et al. Platelet -rich fibrin (PRF): a second -generation platelet 
concentrate. Part III: leucocyte activation: a new feature for platelet concentrates? Oral Surg Oral 
Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2006;101:e51- 55. 
32. Roy S, Driggs J, Elgharably H, et al. Platelet -rich fibrin matrix improves wound angiogenesis via 
inducing endothelial cell proliferation. Wound Repair Regen 2011;19:753 -766.  
33. Ozdemir H, Ezirganli S, Isa Kara M, Mihmanli A, Baris E. Effects of platelet rich fibrin alone used with rigid titanium barrier. Arch Oral Biol  2013;58:537- 544.  
34. Pradeep AR, Rao NS, Agarwal E, Bajaj P, Kumari M, Naik SB. Comparative evaluation of autologous platelet -rich fibrin and platelet -rich plasma in the treatment of 3 -wall intrabony d efects in chronic 
periodontitis: a randomized controlled clinical trial. J Periodontol  2012;83:1499 -1507.  
35. Zhang Y, Tangl S, Huber CD, Lin Y, Qiu L, Rausch- Fan X. Effects of Choukroun's platelet -rich fibrin 
on bone regeneration in combination with depro teinized bovine bone mineral in maxillary sinus 
15 
 augmentation: a histological and histomorphometric study. J Craniomaxillofac Surg 2012;40:321 -
328.  
36. Anwandter A, Bohmann S, Nally M, Castro AB, Quirynen M, Pinto N. Dimensional changes of the 
post extracti on alveolar ridge, preserved with Leukocyte - and Platelet Rich Fibrin: A clinical pilot 
study. J Dent  2016;52:23- 29. 
37. Pinto N TA, Teughels W, Castro A, Cortellini S, Quirynen M Consensus Guidelines on the Use of L -
PRF from the 1st European Meeting on En hanced Natural Healing in Dentistry. 2016.  
38. Tyndall DA, Price JB, Tetradis S, et al. Position statement of the American Academy of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology on selection criteria for the use of radiology in dental implantology with emphasis on co ne beam computed tomography. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol  
2012;113:817- 826.  
39. Benic GI, Elmasry M, Hammerle CH. Novel digital imaging techniques to assess the outcome in oral rehabilitation with dental implants: a narrative review. Clin Ora l Implants Res  2015;26 Suppl 
11:86 -96. 
 
1 University  of Kentucky  
Revised  9/28/17  F1.0160  
Med IRB ICF  Template  Combined  with HIPAA Authorization   Combined  Consent  and Authorization  to Participate in a Research Study  
 
Ridge Preservation  with Leukocyte Platelet Rich Fibrin: A Clinical,  Radiographic, and  
Histomorphometric  Study  
 
 
WHY ARE YOU BEING INVITED  TO TAKE PART IN THIS RESEARCH?  
 
You are being  invited  to take part in a research study about  post tooth  extraction  ridge preservation with 
platelet  rich fibrin.  You are being  invited  to take part in this research  study  because  you need  to have  a 
non-restorable tooth that is  planned  for extraction  and delayed implant placement.   If you volunteer to 
take part in this study,  you will be one of about  forty people at the University  of Kentucky  College  of 
Dentistry  to do so. 
 
WHO IS DOING THE STUDY?  
 
The person  in charge  of this study  is Mhdfiras  Al Yafi DDS,  resident  at the University  of Kentucky,  
Department of Periodontics.  He is being  guided  in this research  by Mohanad Al-Sabbagh DDS MS, 
Periodontics  Division  Chief.  There may be other  people on the research team  assisting  at different  
times  during  the study.  
 
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THIS STUDY?  
 
The focus  of this research  is to see how much  the use of Leukocyte- Platelet  Rich Fibrin  Plug in the 
ridge preservation procedure following  a tooth extraction  will improve  the quality  of the newly  formed  
bone in the extraction  socket.  By doing this, we hope  to find the best way to prevent the bone  loss after 
tooth extraction.  
 
 
ARE THERE REASONS  WHY YOU SHOULD  NOT TAKE PART IN THIS STUDY?  
 
If you are a heavy smoker  (more  than 10 cigarettes  a day), have a history  of malignancy,  
chemotherapy, radiation  therapy,  immunosuppressive disease,  uncontrolled  systemic  disease, or any 
contraindications  to surgical  procedures, you should  not participate in the study.  Also,  females  who are 
pregnant or breastfeeding  should not take part in  this study.  Also, for multi -rooted teeth, if the most 
coronal part of the interradicular septum is less than 5 mm below the crest of the bone, tooth will be 
excluded from the study.  
WHERE IS THE STUDY GOING TO TAKE PLACE AND HOW LONG WILL IT LAST?  
 
The research procedures will be conducted at UK College of Dentistry Periodontics Clinic. You will need to come to Graduate Periodontics’ clinic at the fourth floor, for 5 visits for a total of 300 minutes 
during the next 14 weeks.  The expected time of each visits will be as following:  
• Visit 1: 60 -90 minutes.  
• Visit 2: 15 -30 minutes.  
• Visit 3: 15 -30 minutes.  
• Visit 4: 30 -60 minutes.  
• Visit 5: 60 -90 minutes.  
IRB #17-0815-F2L 
Valid:  2/19/18-2/18/19
2 University  of Kentucky  
Revised  9/28/17  F1.0160  
Med IRB ICF  Template  Combined  with HIPAA Authorization   WHAT WILL YOU BE ASKED TO DO?  
 
At visit 1 (Baseline):   by chance  you will be randomized  to one  of two groups:  for the first group  after 
applying local anesthetic tooth  will be extracted then a non- resorbabe  membrane  will be used  to 
preserve  the ridge,  While,  for the second  group after applying  local anesthetic  tooth  extraction will be 
followed  by the collection  of about 50  ml. of the patient’s  venous  blood, the blood will be spun  to make  
a plug which  will be packed  in the extraction  socket  then a non-resorbabe membrane will be used  to 
preserve  the ridge.  
 
CBCT  will be performed  and Intraoral  photographs  will be taken  before  and after tooth extraction  for the  
both groups.  
 
At visit 2 (1-week from the  baseline  visit): Suture  removal,  and post-surgical follow -up evaluation  will 
be performed  and an intraoral  photograph will be taken.  
 
At visit 3 (4-week from the  baseline  visit): the membrane will be removed and an intraoral  
photograph  will be taken.  
 
At visit 4 (12-week from the baseline  visit): An impression  of the teeth,  A CBCT  will be performed,  
and an intraoral  photograph will be taken.  
 
At visit 5 (14-week from the baseline  visit): A bone  core biopsy  will be performed  and will be 
followed  by the implant placement.  Also, intraoral  photographs  will be taken  before  and after the  
procedure.  
 
All procedures  described above are standard of care except  bone core biopsy  in visit 5 is for research.  
The average CBCT  radiation dose for the used  setting is 45 µSv, which  is equivalent  to 6 days  of US Per capita  
background radiation.  
IRB #17-0815-F2L 
Valid:  2/19/18-2/18/19
3 University  of Kentucky  
Revised  9/28/17  F1.0160  
Med IRB ICF  Template  Combined  with HIPAA Authorization   WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS?  
 
Although this study  has a minimal  risk, in  rare instance, you might experience pain that cannot be  
managed  by the prescribed  analgesic.  Also,  the membrane on the extraction socket will  be left exposed 
to your mouth for 4 weeks.  occasionally  if you are not cleaning  the membrane well, this might  
necessitate the removal  of membrane.  If you were  assigned to the second group where the 
venipuncture is being  performed,  complications  that can arise  include soreness, bruising, pain, 
infection, possible fainting, bleeding.  
There is always  a chance that any surgical  procedure can have some  complications, such  as post- 
surgical bleeding,  soreness,  pain,  bruising  or infection.  and the treatment  in this study  is no different. In 
addition  to the risks listed  above,  you may experience  a previously unknown  risk or side effect.  
The radiation dose from a typical dental x -ray is about 1/40th of the typical natural background 
radiation dose that we all receive every year. It is also about 1/7th of the annual safe dose limit dose 
(not including medical exposures) for members of the public and well below the levels that are 
considered to be a significant risk of any harmful effects.   
However,  you should  contact the principal  investigator  for follow -up and complications  management.  
 
Possible  Risk/Side  
Effect  How often 
has it 
occurred?  How serious is it? Can it be 
corrected?  
After  surgery  discomfort  Common  Usually  of short  
duration.  Not serious  Yes 
Prolonged  or heavy  
bleeding Uncommon  In otherwise  healthy  
patients,  it causes  
discomfort.  Not serious  Yes 
Bruising  (greenish - 
yellow  to black  and blue 
color)   
Uncommon  It will not impact  overall  
health.  Not serious  Yes 
Injury  to the crown,  
roots,  or fillings  of 
adjacent  teeth  Very 
uncommon  Depends  on the extent  
of injury.  Not serious  Correction  depends  
on the severity  of the 
injury  
After  treatment  
infection,  cracking  
and/or  bruising of lips 
due to stretching of 
corners  of the mouth)  Common  
for the 
posterior  
regions  Patients  discomfort.  
Not serious  Yes 
Limited  mouth  opening  
during healing  
(sometimes  related to 
swelling  and muscle  
soreness,  and 
sometimes  related to 
stress on jaw joints  
(TMJ),  especially  with 
pre-existing TMJ 
problems)  Uncommon  Patient  discomfort.  Not 
serious  Yes 
Allergic  reactions  to any 
medications  used in 
treatment  Very 
uncommon  Serious  in some  allergy  
reactions  Yes 
Injury  to nerves  in 
tissues  surrounding  
teeth  Very 
uncommon  Serious  pain,  
numbness,  tingling  or 
other  sensory  
disturbances  in the 
chin,  lip, cheek,  gums,  
or tongue.  Serious  May persist  for 
several  months  or in 
rare instances  
permanently  
Complications  for 
venipuncture  Common  Usually  of short  
duration.  Not serious  Yes 
IRB #17-0815-F2L 
Valid:  2/19/18-2/18/19
4 University  of Kentucky  
Revised  9/28/17  F1.0160  
Med IRB ICF  Template  Combined  with HIPAA Authorization   WILL YOU BENEFIT  FROM TAKING  PART IN THIS STUDY?  
 
There is no guarantee  that you will get any benefit from taking  part in  this study.   Your willingness  to 
take part,  however,  may,  in the future,  help doctors  better understand and treat others  who have your 
condition.  
 
DO YOU HAVE TO TAKE PART IN THE STUDY?  
 
If you decide  to take part in  the study,  it should  be because  you really  want to volunteer.   You will not 
lose any benefits  or rights  you would  normally  have if you choose not to volunteer.   You can stop at any 
time during  the study  and still keep  the benefits  and rights  you had before  volunteering. If  you decide  
not to take part in  this study,  your decision will have no effect on  the quality  of medical  care you  
receive.  
 
IF YOU DON’T WANT TO TAKE PART IN THE STUDY, ARE THERE OTHER CHOICES?  
 
If you do not want  to take part in the study, there are other choices  such as tooth extraction  with 
immediate implant placement,  and fixed  or removable prosthesis.  And any treatment option that is not 
included in the research  will be at your own cost. 
 
WHAT WILL IT COST YOU TO PARTICIPATE?  
 
The University of Kentucky may not be allowed to bill your insurance company, Medicare or Medicaid 
for the medical procedures done strictly for research. However, you will not be charged for the bone 
core biopsy procedure in visit 5 or any additional medical procedures done strictly for research.  
You and/or your  insurance  company,  Medicare  or Medicaid will be responsible for the costs  of all care 
and treatment you receive  during this study  that you would  normally  receive  for your condition. These 
are costs  that are considered  medically  reasonable  and necessary  and will be part of the care you 
receive if you do not take part in this study.  
A co-payment/deductible from you may be required by your insurer or Medicare/Medicaid even if your 
insurer or Medicare/Medicaid has agreed to pay the costs. The amount of this co -payment/deductible 
may be substantial.  if you have any questions regarding Medicare/Medicaid coverage you should 
contact Medicare by calling 1- 800-Medicare (1- 800-633-4227) or Medicaid at 1- 800-635-2570).   
 
 
WHO WILL SEE THE INFORMATION THAT YOU GIVE?  
 
We will make every  effort to keep confidential  all research  records  that identify  you to the extent  
allowed  by law. 
Your  information  will be combined  with information from other  people taking part in the study.  When  we 
write  about the study  to share it with  other researchers, we will write  about the combined  information we 
have gathered. You  will not be personally  identified  in these  written  materials.  We may publish  the 
results  of this study;  however,  we will keep your name  and other  identifying information  private.  
However, Officials of the Food and Drug Administration and the University of Kentucky may look at or 
copy pertinent portions of records that identify you.  
We will make every  effort to prevent  anyone who is not on the research  team from knowing  that you 
gave us information, or  what that information  is. Only the study Principal investigator, Mhdfiras Al Yafi 
will have access to your identifying information.   
You should know, ho wever, that there  are some circumstances  in which  we may have to show  your 
information  to other people.  For example,  the law may require  us to show  your information  to a court or  
to tell authorities  if you report information  about a child being abused  or if you pose a danger to yourself  
or someone  else. 
IRB #17-0815-F2L 
Valid:  2/19/18-2/18/19
5 University  of Kentucky  
Revised  9/28/17  F1.0160  
Med IRB ICF  Template  Combined  with HIPAA Authorization   CAN YOUR TAKING  PART IN THE STUDY END EARLY?  
 
If you decide  to take part in  the study  you still have the right to decide at any time that you no longer  
want to continue.  You will not be treated  differently  if you decide  to stop taking  part in  the study.  
However, If  you choose to withdraw from the study early, the data collected until that point will remain in 
the study database and may not be removed.   
 
 
ARE YOU PARTICIPATING  OR CAN YOU PARTICIPATE  IN ANOTHER RESEARCH STUDY AT THE SAME 
TIME AS PARTICIPATING  IN THIS ONE?  
 
You may take part in  this study  if you are currently  involved  in another research study.  It is important to 
let the investigator/your doctor  know  if you are in another research study.  You should also discuss  with 
the investigator before  you agree to participate  in another research study  while  you are enrolled  in this 
study.  
 
 
WHAT HAPPENS  IF YOU GET HURT OR SICK DURING  THE STUDY?  
 
If you believe  you are hurt or if you get  sick because of something  that is  due to the study, you should  
call Mhdfiras  Al Yafi DDS,  PI at 859 -323-6193  or Mohanad Al-Sabbagh  DDS MS, Periodontics  Division  
Chief  at 859 -323-5831 immediately.  
It is important for you to understand  that the University  of Kentucky  does  not have funds  set aside  to 
pay for the cost of any care or treatment that  might  be necessary  because  you get hurt or sick  while  
taking  part in this study.  Also,  the University  of Kentucky  will not pay for any wages  you may lose if you 
are harmed  by this study.  
The medical  costs related  to your care and treatment because  of research  related  harm  will be your 
responsibility.  
You do not give up your le gal rights by  signing  this form.  
 
 
WILL YOU RECEIVE ANY REWARDS  FOR TAKING  PART IN THIS STUDY?  
 
You will receive  a $50 Gift card  upon  the completion of all visits for taking  part in  this study . 
 
 
WHAT IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS,  SUGGESTIONS,  CONCERNS,  OR COMPLAINTS?  
 
Before you decide  whether to accept this  invitation  to take part in the study,  please  ask any questions  
that might come  to mind  now.  Later, if you have questions, suggestions, concerns,  or complaints  about  
the study,  you can contact the investigator, Mhdfiras  Al Yafi DDS  at 859- 323-6193.  If you have any 
questions  about  your rights  as a volunteer in this research, contact the staff in the Office  of Research  
Integrity  at the University  of Kentucky  between the business  hours  of 8am and  5pm EST,  Mon-Fri at 
859-257-9428 or toll  free at 1-866-400-9428.  We will give you a signed  copy of this consent form to  
take with you. 
IRB #17-0815-F2L 
Valid:  2/19/18-2/18/19
6 University  of Kentucky  
Revised  9/28/17  F1.0160  
Med IRB ICF  Template  Combined  with HIPAA Authorization   WHAT IF NEW INFORMATION  IS LEARNED DURING  THE STUDY THAT MIGHT AFFECT  YOUR DECISION  
TO PARTICIPATE?  
 
If the researcher learns  of new information  in regard  to this study,  and it might  change  your willingness  
to stay in this study, the information  will be provided to you. You may be asked  to sign a new informed 
consent form if the information is provided  to you after you have joined  the study.  
 
 
WHAT ELSE DO YOU NEED TO KNOW?  
 
There is a possibility  that the data/tissue/specimens  collected from you may be shared  with other  
investigators  in the future. If  that is the case  the data/tissue/specimen  will not contain  information  that 
can identify  you unless  you give your consent/authorization  or the UK Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB)  
approves  the research.  The IRB is a committee  that reviews  ethical  issues, according  to federal, state  
and local regulations  on research  with human subjects, to make sure the study  complies  with these  
before  approval  of a research  study  is issued.  
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov  as required by U.S. 
Law. This website will not include information that can identify you. At most, the website will include a 
summary of the results. You can search this website at any time.   
 
 
AUTHORIZATION  TO USE OR DISCLOSE  YOUR IDENTIFIABLE  HEALTH  INFORMATION  
 
The privacy  law, HIPAA (Health  Insurance  Portability  and Accountability  Act), requires  researchers  to 
protect  your health information.  The following  sections  of the form describe how researchers  may use 
your health  information.  
 
Your health information  that may be accessed,  used and/or released  includes:  
 
Your  demographic  information,  results  of physical  exams,  X-rays, medical history and other diagnostic 
and medical procedures including:  
• CBCT’s report and findings.  
• Histomorphometric analysis results.  
• Intraoral photographs.  
Also include Medicare Health Insurance Claim  Numbers  (HICN),  Social  Security  Numbers  (SSN).  
 
The Researchers may use and share your health information with: 
 
• The University  of Kentucky’s  Institutional  Review  Board/Office  of Research  Integrity.  
• Law enforcement  agencies  when required by law. 
• University  of Kentucky  representatives.  
• Primary  physician will be contacted if researcher  in the course of the project  learns  of a medical  
condition that needs  immediate attention.  
• The Food and Drug Administration ( FDA). 
 
The researchers  agree to only share your  health information with the people listed  in this document.  
Should your health information be released to anyone that is not regulated by the privacy  law, your health  
information may be shared with others  without  your permission;  however,  the use of your health information would  
still be regulated  by applicable federal  and state laws.  
IRB #17-0815-F2L 
Valid:  2/19/18-2/18/19
7 University  of Kentucky  
Revised  9/28/17  F1.0160  
Med IRB ICF  Template  Combined  with HIPAA Authorization   You may not be allowed  to participate in the research study  if you do not sign this form.  If you decide not to sign 
the form,  it will not affect  your:  
 
• Current or future healthcare at the University of Kentucky 
• Current or future payments  to the University  of Kentucky  
• Ability to enroll in any health plans (if applicable)  
• Eligibility  for benefits  (if applicable)  
 
After signing the form, you can change your mind and NOT let the researcher(s)  collect or release your 
health information (revoke the Authorization).  If you revoke the authorization: 
 
• You will send a written letter to: the investigator, Mhdfiras Al Yafi DDS at University of Kentucky 
College of Dentistry / Oral Health Practice Department, 4th Floor Dental Sience Bldg.  800 Rose 
St. 40536- 0297. Or call at 859 -323-6193  to inform him of your decision.  
• Researchers  may use and release your health  information already collected for this research study.  
• Your  protected health  information may still be used and released should you have  a bad reaction  
(adverse event).  
 
The use and sharing  of your information  has no time limit. 
 
If you have not already received  a copy of the Privacy Notice, you may request one. If you have any 
questions  about your privacy rights, you should contact the University  of Kentucky’s Privacy Officer 
between  the business hours of 8am and 5pm EST, Mon-Fri at: (859) 323-1184.  
 
You ar
e the subject or are authorized  to act on behalf of the subject.  You have read this information,  and 
you will receive a copy of this form after it is signed.  
 
 
 
 
  _ _ 
 
Signature of research  subject  Date  
 
 
  _ _ 
Printed name of research  subject   
 
 
  _ _  _   
Name of [authorized]  person obtaining  informed consent/HIPAA  authorization  Date  
 
 
  _ _ 
Signature of Principal  Investigator  or Sub/Co- Investigator  
IRB #17-0815-F2L 
Valid:  2/19/18-2/18/19