 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Measurement -Based Transition Assistance (MBTA): Evaluating the Promise of a Web -Based Approach 
to Promote Veterans' Support Seeking  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
2/27/2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 PROTOCOL  
 
Overview. We conduct ed a pilot randomized controlled trial (RCT) that compare d a prototype of MBTA to a a 
active control condition . We collected  data at baseline and at follow -up (three -months later ). Participants in the 
active control condition did not receive the MBTA prototyp e until the follow -up assessment . Aims of the study 
were  to evaluate the feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary effectiveness of the MBTA  prototype  in 
promoting Veterans’ support -seeking  in a sample of recently separated Veterans.  Findings will be used to guide  
further modifications to MBTA, as this pilot study used a prototype of MBTA.  
 
Sampling and Data Collection Method. We drew participants from a sampling frame of recently separated 
Veterans identified from the VA/DoD Identity Repository (VADIR). VADIR maintains automated files on all 
former military personnel with the necessary demographic and military background information to support the 
study. Inclusion criteria was: (1) having se parated from active duty military service within the past year but not 
the past three months (for whom  not enough time may have gone by to adequately assess readjustment 
challenge s); (2) having a postal address in the U.S; (3) having access to the internet ; and (4) having an 
honorable discharge from the military. We sent  500 initial invitations to potential participants , with the goal of 
obtaining a sample of 106 Veterans  at baseline . Twenty -five invitations were undeliverable.  We appl ied a 
modification of the Dillman mail survey . Specifically, a VA -approved vendor mailed  an invitation letter to 
potential participants, along with information about how to complete the study at a secure website.  Veterans 
were randomly  assigned to the intervention or active control condition  prior to mailing . Consistent with 
Dillman’s recommendation for repeated contacts, a reminder letter was mailed, followed by a second reminder 
letter , and then a final reminder letter  at the first (T1 ; baseline ) and second (T2 ; three -month follow -up) wave of 
data collection . We sent a final mailing with a monetary incentive in the form of a $25 Amazon  gift card to 
Veterans who complete d T1 (baseline)  and increased the incentive to $50 at T2  (three -month follow -up). The 
informed c onsent process was administered electronically. Informed consent elements w ere displayed on the 
screen  along with a button that potential participants c ould select to consent to participate. Participants had the 
option to print th e page and /or request a co py from the research team. A total of 43 Veterans elected to 
participate in this study  and provided data at baseline . 
 
Intervention Approach. This MBTA prototype require d Veterans to complete a 6-8 minute online assessment 
that measured areas of unmet well-being and mental health need s, after which they receive d individualized 
feedback on areas of unmet need, along with tailored recommendations for relevant programs, services, and 
supports. Veterans assigned to the intervention condition complete d MBTA at T1  (baseline) ; Veterans in the  
active  control condition had the opportunity to complete MBTA at T2  (three -month follow -up). Drawing on 
recommendations from the feedback -informed treatment ( FIT) literature,  MBTA f eedback was provided vi a a 
brief, easy -to-read infographic that includ ed recommendations for relevant resources. The research team  
generated a list of vetted resources that were free to use and nationally available prior to study. Relevant context 
was provided to normalize readjust ment challenges and feedback w as framed in terms of response formats 
rather than peer comparisons. For example, within the domain of financial satisfaction Veterans receive d the 
feedback that they indicated not being satisfied with their finances on averag e, rather than that they are less 
satisfied than their peers. Because the report was provided online it was possible to present information in an 
easily digestible manner, for example, by limiting the amount of information presented on each page and 
provid ing feedback in tabs rather than a list -based format . We also offer ed Veterans the opportunity to 
download a printable version of the report for future use . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
  
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
For primary outcome #1, we generated frequency statistics. Primary analyses  #2 and #3  involve d 
evaluating the feasibility  and acceptability  of the tool (i.e., primary outcomes labeled as satisfaction of the 
tool) through qualitative data analysis  of open -ended questions , specifically rapid content analysis.  
Unfortunately, the clincialtrials.gov platform does not allow reporting on these types of analyses . Thus, 
the primary analyses that are presented here reflect only a subset of the analyses that were the focus of 
this study.  We provided counts of themes generated from our qualitative data analysis.  
 
For our secondary outcomes, specifically #1, #3, and #4, ANCOVA models were run.  Baseline scores of the 
construct of interest and group status (intervention o r active control) were entered as the independent variables 
and follow -up scores of the construct of interest was entered as the dependent variable. We also found 
significant age differences between the intervention and active control group, and differences among constructs 
of interest  at baseline  by age, so age was also entered in the models as a covariate.  Due to the small sample 
size of th is pilot study, we encourage readers to focus on the magnitude of the effect that are  provide d in 
the resul ts, specifically partial eta -squared values: η2 = 0.01 indicate a small effect; η2 = 0.06 indicate a 
medium effect; η2 = 0.14 indicate a large effect.  This study was not powered to detect statistically 
significant differences, although this information is presented due to clinicaltrial.gov requirements.  
 
For our secondary outcome #2, frequency statistics are reported . Participants who did not report 
challenges within a domain could not be categorized into a stage of change; therefore, our sample size for 
these analyses are smaller than the other secondary outcomes. Due to the smaller than expected sample 
size and because chi -square tests are sensitive to sample size, we elected to report descriptive  information 
only for this outcome. We examine d the subset o f participants that reported challeng es within a domain at 
baseline and then examine d if they moved forward in their stages of change /were taking action to address these 
challenges  by the three month -follow -up.  
 
For our secondary outcome #5, we generated frequency statistics.  Specifically, the number of participants 
that reported the MBTA  prototype  increased their awareness, encourage d them to improve their well -being, and  
if the Veteran  reported using a resource/service. For the specific types of services  used, frequency statistics 
were limited to the subset of Veterans that reported using a resource/service  between baseline and follow -up. 
 