1 
  
  
 
  
Trial:      Caring Light for Family Caregivers 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]    
 
 
     
 
    
 
  
Date:   05/08/2022 (updated) 
  Investigator: Bruno Kajiyama   Research Site:     Photozig, Inc.    NASA Research Park    PO Box 128    Moffett Field, CA 94035-0128 
 
2 
 Project Summary 
 
Every 66 seconds, someone in US develops Alzhei mer’s Disease, a progressive irreversible 
neurodegenerative disease, causing di stress not only to dementia patient s, but also to caregivers 
(15+ million), who are the hidden  patients with high incidence of stress (60%) and depression (30%+). 
 Due to this significant problem, effective, low- cost, and accessible interventions are needed to help 
dementia caregivers to deal with the caring dem ands, heavy emotional toll, life changes, and 
overwhelming experiences. 
 A promising delivery mechanism is the smartphone, because: a) smartphone adoption is very high; 
and b) a large number of Americans nati onwide have access to mobile broadband. 
 Therefore, we propose a unique inte rvention based on the Coping wit h Caregiving (CWC) curriculum, 
mindfulness, self-paced approach, and mobile app delivery, which has not  been created before, 
called Caring Light App (CLA) to enhance caregiver coping skills , reduce stress, and alleviate 
depression.  Our project will have a high impact because: 1) the blending of CWC and mindfulness is expected to 
be very effective, based on our pr eliminary studies and other resear ch results; 2) the proposed 
program is low-cost; and 3) CLA intervention will be accessible to a large group of caregivers as a 
mobile app, allowing its broad dissemination to i nnumerous families struggling with Alzheimer’s and 
related dementia.  By integrating mindfulness practi ce with the CWC curriculum in a new mobile app, we will create a 
novel program for caregivers, blending training  (coping skills, techniques to deal with dementia, 
practical tips on difficult behaviors, etc.) with stress reducing strategies (e.g. guided meditation, gentle 
stretches, and other mindfulness exercises), which is  expected to be well accepted and easy to use 
by caregivers.  
3 
 Protocol 
 
Overview: 
1. Recruit subjects: caregivers of individuals with Alzheimer’s Dis ease or other dementia will be 
recruited. 
2. Randomize subjects: participants will be assigned to the study group or the control group. 
3. Collect pre-data: Before interv ention, we will collect pre-data to establish the baseline status of 
participants. 
4. Deploy treatments: For both study and control groups, we will send instructions and materials. 
5. Collect post-data: We  will collect post-treatm ent data after 3 months. 
 Research Participants: 150 dementia family ca regivers (planned enrollment) will be recruited: 
 
Inclusion Criteria: 
 Care for an individual with Alzh eimer's Disease or other dementia. 
 Own a smartphone or tablet and have Internet access. 
 Minimum age of 18 years old. 
 Spend at least 8 hours/week ca ring for a person with dementia. 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
 Severe psychological or physical illness. 
 Inability to read and follow English instructions. 
 High level of depressive symptoms. 
 Unwillingness to participate in all aspects of the study. 
 Informed consent will be obtained,  and participants will receive a st ipend for their participation. 
 Methods: The effectiveness investigation of the Ca ring Light App (CLA) will be implemented with a 
pre-post randomized trial of 3 months . As it takes 3 months to comp lete the entire program, post 
testing will happen about 3 months afte r pre-testing. The trial will have two levels: the CLA treatment 
package; and a control condition co mprised of existing educational programs, information for 
caregivers, and other resources. Outcome measures of both groups will be recorded at baseline and 
after 3 months.  
 
 CLA Condition (75 subjects): Participants will re ceive the Caring Light mobile app containing 
the coping skills training. 
 
 Control Condition (75 subjects): Participants  will receive a traditional educational/resources 
program, containing a work book and online resources. 
 Procedures: Participants will receive and complete  informed consent. After initial assessment, 
subjects will be randomized to either CLA or the cont rol condition, instructions  will be distributed. After 
3 months, all subjects will be interview ed for the post-intervention assessment. 
 
4 
 Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Main study hypothesis: “CLA will alleviate depression (measured by CES-D), decrease stress 
(measured by PSS), and contribute to  lower burden of care (RMBPC). 
 
Main Outcome Measures: 
 Depression: level of Depressive Symptoms: t heir presence and strength will be assessed using the 
Center for Epidemiologica l Studies Depression scale (CES-D); This  is a 20-item measure that asks 
about the frequency of depressive symptoms (affecti ve, psychological, and somatic) within the past 
week. 
 Overall Perceived Psychological Stress: the 10-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) measures 
overall appraisals of st ress in the past month. 
 Burden of care: level of bother or stress due to  disruptive behaviors: we will apply the Revised 
Memory and Behavior Problems Checklist (RMBPC),  with 24 items describing possible troublesome 
behaviors of care receiver and effect (bother and stress) on caregiver. 
 Analysis: Our hypotheses will be tested by analyzi ng the change scores (subtracting the baseline 
scores from the value obtained at  3 months) for the outcome me asures (CES-D, PSS, and RMBPC), 
and comparing the results of CLA wit h the control condition in order to determine the efficacy of the 
intervention. We will dete rmine if subjects in CLA had a signific ant decrease in level of depression, 
reduced stress, and decreased burden,  when compared to the contro l group. We’ll use univariate 
ANOVA (analysis of variance) to determine the level of significance for these measures.  
 