 
Project Title: Iterative Beta Testing of Videos for the DIPPer Academy  
Study ID: [REMOVED] 
Date: 9/27/2021  
  
The incidence of type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D ) is increasing in young children ( <6 years old) .1-4 Yet, the 
development of age -targeted  behavioral interventions for this vulnerable patient group has been limited . Young 
children will face a lifetime with T1D , substantially increasing their overall risk for micro - and macrovascular 
complications .5, 6 In addition, y oung children have a higher risk of cognitive deficits than children diagnosed at 
an older age ,7-10 suggesting the potential for greater impairment in education and job opportunities.  Establishing 
good glycemic control early in the cours e of T1D  can reduce the risk for complications (viz., metabolic 
memory) ,11-13 thereby underscoring the importance of intervening with young children who are likely to benefit 
from the risk reduction into adolescence .5, 6, 11, 14 
Unfortunately, research  shows  that many young children with T1D exhibit blood glucose levels that 
exceed the current U.S. and international targets .15 They also can experience problems with high “ glycemic 
variability ,”16, 17 and hypoglycemia.5, 16-18 Within families, t he research shows challenges parents face in 
managing their child’s T1D including moderate to high rates of parenting stress and hypoglycemia fear,19-21 
disrupted sleep schedules ,18 difficulty in managing their child’s disruptive behaviors ,22, 23 depressiv e and anxiety 
symptoms ,19, 24 and decreased quality of life.24 Caring for a young child with T1D  is uniquely challenging often 
because of the  typical and developmentally appropriate behaviors exhibited by young children, who can be  
unpredictable, idiosyncr atic, and contrary .5, 25-27 The young child’s natural tendency to seek more independence 
may complicate daily T1D  self-care; he or she may refuse to cooperate with insulin injections or pump site 
changes, glucose checks, or treatment for a low blood glucose level .5 Likewise, t he tendency  among young 
children to be unpredictable in their eating and activity patterns26 can make it hard for parents to plan meals, 
administer insulin before meals, and effectivel y manage glucose levels between meals.5, 6  
Traditionally, young children have not been a focus of T1D education. Indeed, according to the American 
Diabetes Association (ADA) Recommendations for Daily Self -Care ,5, 6 parents are encouraged to assume full 
responsibility of T1D self-care for their young child, making them the natural target s of existing  T1D interventions . 
On its face  this makes sense, but this exclusive focus on parents misses important opportunities to  engage ever 
developing kids in their own T1D care. Y oung children are active learners, gaining new skills each year in 
personal self -care (e.g., toileting, dressing), language (e.g., following simple instructions, repeats information), 
social/emotional de velopment (e.g., imitation, cooperative play, can recognize real versus make -believe, agrees 
with rules), and cognitive development (e.g., recognize familiar objects, starting to understand time, can 
remember parts of stories, can begin to predict what might come next in a story).27 As parents, w e inspire, teach,  
and encourage these new skills  in our young children. Extending this to T1D understanding and self -care skills  
could establish a strong foundation for kids’ ever evolving abilities  that will likely  increase understanding and 
cooperation during the early years and may even reduce well established struggles with self -care in later years28 
as they will have grown up with shared responsibility for and a greater sense of control  over their T1D . Family -
centered behavioral interventions exist for T1D pre-teens and teens and have been effective in im proving  
glycemic control in kids and quality of life within families .29, 30 Thus, i ncluding young children as additional targets 
of self -management intervention is a logical next step in the development of innovative and developmentally -
targeted interventions for families  of young children with T1D   
To date, four  pilot studies have evaluated interventions exclusively designed for parents of young children 
with T1D, but only two have shown any impact on improving children’s glycemic control .31-34 Specifically, in one 
study, a multifamily  in clinic  group education program was trialed and t he results demonstrated lower HbA1c 
levels among children for the 41% of parents  who attended >3 groups versus the 59% of parents who attended 
fewer groups.31 However, the study was not randomized, the intervention was delivered during children’s T1D 
clinic appointments,  and the non-attenders also had a significantly lower attendance rate at their child’s routine 
T1D clinic appointments making it difficult to solely ascribe changes in children’s HbA1c levels to the intervention . 
The second study is par t of our own preliminary work . In this study , we also piloted a multifamily group treatment  
program  for parents . Nine families participated (M child age 5.0±1.2 years ; see Preliminary Studies ).33 Our BEST 
MEALS intervention showed a 26 mg/dl decrease in children’s average daily glucose levels (185±46 v 159±40 
mg/dl, pre-  to post -treatment, respectively , p<0.001) with virtually no change in children’s  rate of hypoglycemia, 
suggesting the intervention helped parents to safely improve their child’s daily glycemic levels. We also found 
an improvement in mealtimes  and parents reported a high level of treatment satisfaction.  However , our pilot 
study was also not randomized, the treatment was parent -based and delivered face- to-face (limiting its 
scalability ) and the content  was highly focused on mealtimes.  The treatment outcome literature for young children 
with T1D is limited , but preliminary studies and our own pilot work  suggest s: (1) families  are interested in 
participating in behavioral interventions, (2) interventions focused on age-appropriate T1D education and 
reducing disruptive child behavior can lead to improved child glycemic levels. Additional work is needed to build 
on these preliminary studies to increase the generalizability and impact of these behavioral interventions .  
 One way to consider increasing the impact  of existing interventions for families of young children is to 
modify their mode of treatment deliv ery from face -to-face encounters and in clinic visits to a more modern 
technology -based method using the internet or a cellular phone. Behavioral interventi ons are typically labor 
and time -intensive, which can limit their impact and feasibility.35, 36 But u sing technology to deliver a behavioral 
intervention, while not a short -cut to intervention, could enhance both its generalizability and scalability by 
minimizing traditional barriers to participation, including travel to the medical center, child care, and time off 
from work.35 Also, for families of children with T1D, a technology -based intervention may be more feasible than 
an in clinic intervention becaus e at most, youths are seen only quarterly and data suggest that the majority of 
families attend fewer than four diabetes clinic appointments per year.37 There is growing evidence showing 
acceptability of i nternet interventions in adolescents  with T1D38-41 and their parents .42 In three of these 
studies ,39-41 the interventions resulted in improved T1D  self-care. Two studies showed improvements in self -
efficacy and quality of life,38, 42 while one study showed an effect for youths’ HbA1c .41 Specific to m obile 
technology (“mHealth”), several studies have investigated the impact of using text messaging in  adolescents 
and adults  with T1D43-46 and one study compared text messages versus email.43 In this study, both email and 
text message recipients experienced a short -term improvement in adherence, but the researchers noted a drop 
off in the use of these technologies after 3 months . It is possible t hat this drop off oc curred because of the type 
of messages youths received which were only generic reminders to complete self -monitoring glucose checks  
versus more personalized feedback and reinforcement .43 However, the emergence of more advanced 
communication technology now makes it very feasible to of fer patients’ personalized feedback to enhance 
intervention.44 In short, using technology is a  smart way to address the barriers to traditional face -to-face 
intervention that families articulate. Internet and mHealth interventions are feasible and acceptable in families 
of adolescents  with T1D. Also, as packaged interventions for delivery via the internet or by cellular phone, 
these interventions would be easy to disseminate across centers . 
 
Human Subjects Involvement, Char acteristics, and Design  
Aim 3 will involve a randomized pilot tes t (RPT) of DIPPer Academy. We propose to enroll up to 50 parents of 
young children with T1D into the RPT. Parents  who participate will be randomized to either an immediate 
treatment or a control group. Parent  will be recruited via letter, telephone call, or in clinic. Parents will be asked 
to give written informed consent for their participation and permission  to obtain a measure of HbA1c level in their 
child. Parents will be asked to complete study assessments (online surveys) at Time 1 (baseline), Time 2 ( post-
treatment), and Time 3 ( follow up).  We will collect child HbA1c at Time s 1, 2, and 3 . We anticipate that parents 
may spend about 3 hours completing the DIPPer Academy curricula spread out across 14 weeks of treatment. 
We expect the surveys at Times 1, 2, and 3 will each time take about 20 minutes to complete.  
 All parents  regardless of gender, race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic class will be considered potentially 
eligible to participate. Specific inclusion criteria for parents are: 
1. Parents of a young child who is between 3 -5 years old and at least 3 months post T1D diagnosis.  
2. Parents who are English- speaking.  
Parent  exclusion criteria for  are: 
1. Young children with evidence of type 2 diabetes or monogenic diabetes . 
2. Parents  with evidence of severe psychiatric disorder . 
3. Young children with a comorbid chronic i llness (e.g., renal disease) that r equires ongoing care beyond 
T1D. 
4. Young children with a history of anemia or medication use that may interact with glycemic control (e.g., 
systemic steroids) . 
5. Young children with an HbA1c < 7.5% (which is the current ADA target) .6 
 
Sources of Materials  
For all participating parents, we will collect demographic data and medic al history data specific to T1D . We will 
also collect data via parent surveys  and usage data collected during the intervention (i.e.,  website use statistics ). 
Survey  and parent usage data will be entered and stored in an electronic database (REDCap). This database 
will be located on a secured server maintained by the Department of Biostatistics at KUMC. No one outside of 
the research team will have access to data identifying the families who participated.  We will obtain a measure of 
child HbA1c.  
 
Potential Risks  
The overall risks of participation in this project are no more than minimal.  
1. Because the research requires the collection of personally identifying data, there is always a risk of 
breach o f confidentiality . 
2. Parents will be requested to disclose information about t heir child’s diabetes adherence and about their 
values, sources of mot ivation, regimen knowledge, their psychosocial and behavioral functioning, their 
priorities for diabetes management, and their concerns about their child. Disclosing this information may 
potentially lead to emotional discomfort. Parents may also feel inconvenienced by the amount of time 
required to complete the study . 
3. We will obtain a measure of chil dren’ s HbA1c levels . 
4. There is the potential risk that parents participating in the projects  will find their participation time-
consuming and inconvenient.  
ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS  
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Potential subjects will be identified by a review of the clinic database and in consul tation with the clinic director 
at CMH . Eligible parents  will be notified of the project  by a letter sent by the study team , by a telephone call 
placed by a member of the study team, or by in person solicit ation.  All parents  will be explicitly told that they  can 
continue to receive the same high quality of care from their child’s diabetes team  regardless of their decision to 
participate in the research project s. During the initial study contact, a member of the research team will describe 
the stud y and parents will have a chance to ask questions. During the informed consent process, parents  will be 
explicitly told that their participation i s voluntary and that they maintain the right to discontinue participation at 
any time. The research protocol and consent documents will be approved by  the Institutional Review Board at 
CMH.  (Note, KUMC and CMH already have an agreement in place which will allow the PI to seek a Request to 
Rely so that CMH will be the IRB of record for both CMH and KUMC should the project proceed). Consent forms 
will be filed in a confidential research file and copies will be given to parents/guardians. The consent forms will 
include contac t information for the Principal Investigator  and Co- Investigator s should families  have any questions  
or concerns regarding the research project . No study procedures will occur before written consent is obtained 
from parents.   
Protection Against Risk 
Before the project begins, Institutional Review Board approval will be obtained from the Institutional Review 
Board at CMH. In addition, all research team members will complete certification in topics related to the 
responsible conduct of research. Certifi cation will involve passing an online competency in each of the following 
areas: Foundations of Responsible Research Conduct, Safe Handling of Blood Products,  Research 
Administration, and Conflict of Interest.  
Minimization of Risks:  
1. We will use several procedures to ensure confidentiality of information collected throughout the project . 
Each participant will be assigned a unique subject ID number which will be used to identify/store all data 
collected from that participating family. When possible, all ident ifying information will be physically 
separate from the remainder of the data. Identifying information will be recorded only for the purpose of 
matching and merging databases and will be stored in a locked file cabinet or on a secured server 
separate from any corresponding data. All research data will be stored in a secure, password protected 
database and archived in a password- protected back up file. We will minimize risks to privacy during data 
collection by giving parents  the option of home visits and using on- line survey completion.   
2. During recruitment and the informed consent process, parents  will be informed as to the time commitment 
necessary for participation, as well as the potential risk for emotional /social discomfort. Parents  will be 
informed that they have the right to discontinue participation in the project s at any time. They also have 
the right to refuse to answer specific questions related to the projects. While the surveys proposed for 
this st udy are generally benign in nature and have been used in other pediatric diabetes research 
projects,  should participation in this study unmask or exacerbate parents’ feelings about diabetes, 
members of the research team will be clinically trained  to provid e a list of resources . Parents may be 
asked to complete a screener for depressive symptoms . These screeners will be reviewed by the post -
doctoral fellow within 24 hours of completion and the results shared with the PI. If a screener suggests a 
parent may be experiencing symptoms of depression, the PI or fellow (under direct clinical supervision 
of the PI) will contact the parent to review the results and to provide a list of resources to the parent.  
3. We propose to collect children’s HbA1c levels at Times 1, 2, and 3 during the randomized pilot trial. The 
purpose of measuring children’s HbA1c levels will be to explore the impact of DIPPer Academy on 
children’s glycemic control  even though children will not participate in the intervention.  
4. Participating may inconvenience parents . We will minimize the potential risk of inconvenience by offering 
parents the opportunity to participate in a project from their home. If parents do not own a mobile device 
or would prefer not to use their personal m obile device to access DIPPer Academy , we will loan parents 
an iPad Mini with data plan for use during the study . Prior to informed consent, parents will be informed 
of their ability to discontinue participation in a research project at any time without penalty. Discontinuation 
from a research project will not impact a child’s care by their Diabetes Team. The PI will ensure that 
research staff is trained to explicitly inform parents of the purpose, procedures, and risk related to 
participating in one of these research projects . 
5. We hypothesize that DIPPer Academy  will be deemed feasible and acceptable by parents  and will have 
a beneficial effect on children’s HbA1c . We have attempted to minimize the potential risk of inconvenience 
to parents  participating in DIPPer Academy by designing the intervention as a  mHealth intervention. 
Parents  will be able to access the DIPPer Academy website from their computer or any mobile devi ce. 
From the website, they will be able to view the video microlectures at any time and as often as they wish.   
6. Dr. Clements will be available to provide medical supervision.  
POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH TO THE SUBJEC TS AND OTHERS  
There is a chance parents s will perceive no direct benefit to study participation. In this case, parents who elect 
to participate have the opportunity to contribute to our evolving knowledge r elated to glycem ic control in childr en 
with T1D  and the development of preventative interventions to promote optimal glycemic control in young 
children with T1D .  
IMPORTANCE  OF THE KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED  
The proposed research project is part of a larger initiative to develop the infrastructure and research base to 
support the development of targeted behavioral interventions aimed at improving glycemic control in children 
with T1D. The knowledge gained from these projects will directly inform the development of a real -time and 
tailored technology -based intervention for parent s of young children with T1D that will utilize educational, 
behavioral, and motivational strategies to improve glycemic control . Development of an effective intervention 
could significantly enhance care provided to these children and improve t heir health outcomes. Information 
obtained from these projects  could lead to more efficacious health behavior interven tions for children with T1D  
as well as other pediatric populations.  
DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
Before the proposed projects begin, we will obtain approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB ) at 
Children’s Mercy Hospital  (CMH) . The P I will also secure approval from her home institution, the University of 
Kansas Medical Center, to Rely on the IRB at CMH as the IRB of record for the projects.  In compliance with 
regulatory practices, the PI and Co-Investigators  will secure “continuing ap proval” for the research projects each 
year from the CMH IRB and will notify the CMH and KUMC IRB’s  if any Adverse Events (AEs), Other Reportable 
Information and Occurrences (ORIOs), and Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others 
(UaPs) occur in the conduct of the projects . The PI  (with the assistance of Co-Investigators, as needed)  will 
assume primary responsibility for reporting AEs, ORIOs, UaPs, or  unforeseen outcomes to the IRB s in a timely 
fashion and will promptly inform the s tudy sponsor of any action taken by the IRB at CMH  because of  continuing 
review. The proposed research designs have been developed keeping in mind how to maximize specific data 
collection and minimize risk to parents  (i.e., psychometrically sound and benign questionnaires , Dr. Clements ’ 
availability to provide medical supervision of patients ). However, at the discretion of the CMH IRB , the PI will 
recruit  a Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) to ove rsee and monitor the data collection and intervention 
delivery . We propose members of the DSMB will include an endocrinologist, a psychologist, and a certified 
diabetes educator . If a DSMB is requested by the CMH IRB, we propose that the DSMB will meet at least annually 
by teleconference . For each of these meetings,  the PI and the biostatistician will jointly prepare a summary of 
the following topics:  
Performance monitoring:  A report of subject recruitment/ retention, protocol adherence, and quality of data 
collection procedures.  
Safety monitoring: A review of safety of the participants, including confidentiality and any adverse events 
or side effects related to the study procedures.  
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
Hypotheses:  
Hypothesis 1:  DIPPer Academy will result in better Time 2 HbA1c  than standard of care controlling for Time 1  
measurements . 
Hypothesis 2:  DIPPer Academy will result in improvements in HbA 1c across time ( a decreasing time trend for 
HbA1c ). 
Hypothesis 3:. 
Hypothesis 4: DIPPer Academy will result in  greater reported Time 2  parent self-efficacy and lower reported  
post-treatment parenting stress, mealtime behavior problems and hypoglycemia fear  than standard of care , 
controlling for Time 1  measurements on these variables . 
Data Analy ses. For the primary outcomes, we will conduct a sensitivity analysis to test for any effects due to 
attrition. We will also use an intent -to-treat strategy and imputation model to examine p arent  data even if they 
are lost to attrition. For  all analyses, we will include parental depression as a covariate if determined to be 
correlated with our outcome variables . To test for between group differences  in glycemic levels (Hypothesis 1), 
we will conduct an ANCO VA with Time 2 (post -treatment ) score as the outcome, group (treatment vs. control ) 
as focal predictor, and Time 1 (baseline) score as covariate. In addition, we will calculate within group 
standardized effect sizes (i n SD units) and within- group changes for HbA1c based on Time 1 and Time 2 values. 
To estimate and test time trends in gly cemic levels for DIPPer participants (Hypothesis 2) we will use appropriate 
generalized mixed models with a random p arent  intercept to account for clustering of repeated measures within 
parent s. Finally, to test for post -treatment differences between groups in reported paren t self-efficacy, parenting 
stress, mealtime behavior problems, and hypoglycemia fear (Hypothesis 3 ) we will calculate within group 
standardized effect sizes (in SD units) and within group changes for parents’  PSESDM, PIP, BPFAS, and HFS-
PYC scores using parents’ Time 1 and Time 2 data. To test for statistical significance, we will conduct an ANOVA 
for each variable as  described above for Hypothesis 1.  
 
REFERENCES  
1. Liese, A.D., et al., The burden of diabetes mellitus among US youth: prevalence estimates from the 
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study.  Pediatrics, 2006. 118(4): p. 1510- 8. 
2. Vehik, K., et al., Increasing incidence of type 1 diabetes in 0 - to 17 -year-old Colorado youth.  Diabetes 
Care, 2007. 30 (3): p. 503- 9. 
3. Dabelea, D., The accelerating epidemic of childhood diabetes.  Lancet, 2009. 373 (9680): p. 1999 -2000.  
4. Patterson, C.C., et al., Incidence trends for childhood type 1 diabetes in Europe during 1989- 2003 and 
predicted new cases 2005- 20: a multicentre prospective registration study.  Lancet, 2009. 373(9680): p. 
2027- 33. 
5. Silverstein, J., et al., Care of children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes: a statement of the 
American Diabetes A ssociation.  Diabetes Care, 2005. 28 (1): p. 186 -212. 
6. Chiang, J.L., et al., Type 1 diabetes through the life span: a position statement of the American 
Diabetes Association.  Diabetes Care, 2014. 37(7): p. 2034 -54. 
7. Holmes, C., et al., Disease and demogr aphic risk factors for disrupted cognitive functioning in children 
with insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM).  School Psych Rev, 1999. 28 : p. 215 -227. 
8. Ryan, C., N. Gurtunca, and D. Becker, Hypoglycemia: a complication of diabetes therapy in childre n. 
Pediatr Clin North Am, 2005. 52 (6): p. 1705 -33. 
9. Perantie, D.C., et al., Effects of prior hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia on cognition in children with type 
1 diabetes mellitus.  Pediatr Diabetes, 2008. 9 (2): p. 87 -95. 
10. Hershey, T., et al., Frequency  and timing of severe hypoglycemia affects spatial memory in children 
with type 1 diabetes.  Diabetes Care, 2005. 28(10): p. 2372 -7. 
11. Chemtob, C.M., et al., Does poor early metabolic control predict subsequent poor control in young 
children with type 1 diabetes: an exploratory study.  J Diabetes, 2011. 3 (2): p. 153 -7. 
12. Highlights of Research Accomplishments: Special Statutory Funding Program for Type 1 Diabetes 
Research.  
13. Ceriello, A., The emerging challenge in diabetes: the "metabolic memory".  Vascu l Pharmacol, 2012. 
57(5-6): p. 133- 8. 
14. Nathan, D.M., et al., Intensive diabetes treatment and cardiovascular disease in patients with type 1 
diabetes.  N Engl J Med, 2005. 353 (25): p. 2643 -53. 
15. Maahs, D.M., et al., Contrasting the clinical care and outcomes of 2,622 children with type 1 diabetes 
less than 6 years of age in the United States T1D Exchange and German/Austrian DPV registries.  
Diabetologia, 2014. 57(8): p. 1578- 85. 
16. Patton, S.R., et al., A comparison of average daily risk range scores for young children with type 1 
diabetes mellitus using continuous glucose monitoring and self -monitoring data.  Diabetes Technol 
Ther, 2012. 14(3): p. 239 -43. 
17. Patton, S.R., et al., Use of continuous glucose monitoring in young children with type 1 diabetes: 
implications for behavioral research.  Pediatr Diabetes, 2011. 12(1): p. 18- 24. 
18. Monaghan, M.C., et al., Nighttime caregiving behaviors among parents of young children with Type 1 
diabetes: associations with illness characteristics and parent functioning.  Fam Syst Health, 2009. 27 (1): 
p. 28 -38. 
19. Patton, S.R., et al., Pediatric parenting stress and its relation to depressive symptoms and fear of 
hypoglycemia in parents of young children with type 1 diabetes mellitus.  J Clin Psychol Med Settings, 
2011. 18(4): p. 345 -52. 
20. Patton, S.R., et al., Fear of hypoglycemia in parents of young children with type 1 diabetes mellitus.  J 
Clin Psychol Med Settings, 2008. 15 (3): p. 252 -9. 
21. Mitchell, S.J., et al., Stress among fathers of young children with type 1 diabetes.  Fam Syst Health, 
2009. 27(4): p. 314 -24. 
22. Patton, S.R., et al., Feeding problems reported by parents of young children with type 1 diabetes on 
insulin pump therapy and their associations with children's glyc emic control.  Pediatr Diabetes, 2009. 
10(7): p. 455 -60. 
23. Hilliard, M.E., et al., Parent stress and child behaviour among young children with type 1 diabetes.  
Child Care Health Dev, 2011. 37 (2): p. 224 -32. 
24. Jaser, S., et al., Coping and psychological adjustment in mothers of young children with type 1 
diabetes.  Child Health Care, 2009. 38: p. 91 -106. 
25. Wysocki, T., et al., Adjustment to diabetes mellitus in preschoolers and their mothers.  Diabetes Care, 
1989. 12(8): p. 524 -529. 
26. Linscheid, T., K. Budd, and L. Rasnake, Pediatric feeding disorders , in Handbook of pediatric 
psychology , M. Roberts, Editor. 2003, The Guilford Press: New York. p. 481- 498. 
27. Berk, L.E., Development through the lifespan. 5th ed. 2005, Boston: Pearson Education.  
28. Hood, K.K., et al., Association between adherence and glycemic control in pediatric type 1 diabetes: a 
meta -analysis.  Pediatrics, 2009. 124 (6): p. e1171 -9. 
29. Wysocki, T., et al., Effects of behavioral family systems therapy for diabetes on adolescents' family 
relationships, treatment adherence, and metabolic control.  J Pediatr Psychol, 2006. 31(9): p. 928- 38. 
30. Nansel, T.R., R.J. Iannotti, and A. Liu, Clinic -integrated behavioral intervention for families of youth with 
type 1 diabetes: randomized clinical trial.  Pediatrics, 2012. 129(4): p. e866 -73. 
31. Anderson, B.J., et al., Comprehensive, family -focused outpatient care for very young children living with 
chronic disease: lessons from a program in pediatric diabetes.  Child Serv: Soc Policy  Res Pract, 2001. 
4: p. 235 -250. 
32. Monaghan, M., et al., Supporting parents of very young children with type 1 diabetes: results from a 
pilot study.  Patient Educ Couns, 2011. 82 (2): p. 271 -4. 
33. Patton, S.R., et al., Pilot study results for a novel behavior plus nutrition intervention for caregivers of 
young children with type 1 diabetes.  J Nutr Educ Behav, 2014. 46 (5): p. 429 -33. 
34. Sullivan -Bolyai, S., et al., Social Support to Empower Parents (STEP): an intervention for parents of 
young children newl y diagnosed with type 1 diabetes.  Diabetes Educ, 2010. 36 (1): p. 88 -97. 
35. Rapoff, M.A., Adherence to Pediatric Medical Regimens . 2nd ed. 2010, New York: Springer.  
36. Kahana, S., D. Drotar, and T. Frazier, Meta -analysis of psychological interventions to promote 
adherence to treatment in pediatric chronic health conditions.  J Pediatr Psychol, 2008. 33 (6): p. 590 -
611. 
37. Markowitz, J.T., L.K. Volkening, and L.M. Laffel, Care utilization in a pediatric diabetes clinic: 
cancellations, parental attendance, and mental health appointments.  J Pediatr, 2014. 164(6): p. 1384- 9. 
38. Whittemore, R., et al., An internet coping skills training program for youth with type 1 diabetes: six -
month outcomes.  Nurs Res, 2012. 61 (6): p. 395- 404. 
39. Cafazzo, J.A., et al., Desig n of an mHealth app for the self -management of adolescent type 1 diabetes: 
a pilot study.  J Med Internet Res, 2012. 14(3): p. e70.  
40. Raiff, B.R. and J. Dallery, Internet -based contingency management to improve adherence with blood 
glucose testing recomme ndations for teens with type 1 diabetes.  J Appl Behav Anal, 2010. 43 (3): p. 
487-91. 
41. Mulvaney, S.A., et al., An internet -based program to improve self -management in adolescents with type 
1 diabetes.  Diabetes Care, 2010. 33 (3): p. 602 -4. 
42. Merkel, R.M. and T. Wright, Parental self -efficacy and online support among parents of children 
diagnosed with type 1 diabetes mellitus.  Pediatr Nurs, 2012. 38(6): p. 303 -8; quiz 309.  
43. Hanauer, D.A., et al., Computerized Automated Reminder Diabetes Syst em (CARDS): e -mail and SMS 
cell phone text messaging reminders to support diabetes management.  Diabetes Technol Ther, 2009. 
11(2): p. 99 -106. 
44. Mulvaney, S.A., et al., A pilot test of a tailored mobile and web- based diabetes messaging system for 
adolescents.  J Telemed Telecare, 2012. 18(2): p. 115- 8. 
45. Kirwan, M., et al., Diabetes self -management smartphone application for adults with type 1 diabetes: 
randomized controlled trial.  J Med Internet Res, 2013. 15(11): p. e235.  
46. Franklin, V.L., et al., A r andomized controlled trial of Sweet Talk, a text -messaging system to support 
young people with diabetes.  Diabet Med, 2006. 23(12): p. 1332 -8. 
 