 
 CITY OF HOPE NATIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
1500 E. DUARTE ROAD 
DUARTE, CA 91010 
Division of Radiation Oncology 
 
TITLE: A PHASE I/II TRIAL OF RADIOIMMUNOTH ERAPY (Y-90 cT84.66), GE MCITABINE AND HEPATIC 
ARTERIAL INFUSION OF FUDR FOR METASTATIC COLORECTAL CARCINOMA TO THE LIVER 
 
COH PROTOCOL NUMBER/VERSION: IRB PROTOCOL #04122 VERSION: 10 
 
DATE(S)/OF AMENDMENT(S)/REVISION(S):   Initial Review – Protocol dated 11/29/04   Version: 00 
Initial Approval – Protocol dated 01/11/05  Version: 00 
Amendment 01 – Protocol dated 07/20/05  Version: 01 
Amendment 02 – Protocol dated 10/07/05 Version 02 Amendment 03 – Protocol dated 11/22/05 Version 03 
Amendment 03 – Protocol dated 01/23/06 Version 03 
Amendment 03 – Protocol dated 03/06/06 Version 03 Amendment 04 – Protocol dated 07/11/06 Version 04 
Amendment 05 – Protocol dated 11/28/06 Version 05 
Amendment 06 – Protocol dated 06/01/07 Version 06 Amendment 07 – Protocol dated 05/19/08 Version 07 
Amendment 08 – Protocol dated 09/30/09 Version 08 
Amendment 09 – Title Page dated 10/22/13 Version 09 Amendment 10 -  Title Page dated 07/01/14 Version 10 
 
Site:  Colorectal/Hepatic Metastases  
Stage:  IV 
Modality:  RIT, gemcitabine, fluorodeoxyuridine  
Type:  Phase I/II  
 
Principal Investigators:   
   Jeffrey Wong, M.D.   Division of Radiation Oncology 
 
Collaborating Investigators:     Lucille Leong, M.D.   Division of Medical Oncology and Experimental Therapeutics  
 
Participating Clinicians: 
   Joseph Kim, M.D.   Division of General and Oncologic Surgery 
   John E. Shively, Ph.D.   Division of Immunology    Lawrence E. Williams, Ph.D.  Division of Radiology 
   Sharon Wilzcynski, M.D., Ph.D.  Division of Pathology 
   David Colcher, Ph. D.   Department of Radioimmunotherapy 
 
Investigational Drug Monitors:  
   Oscar Martin, Pharm.D.   Clinical Pharmacy 
   Sharon Denison, Phar m.D.  Clinical Pharmacy 
 
Protocol Nurse:  
   Tammy Kloythanomsup, R.N.  Department of Radioimmunotherapy 
 
Biostatistics    Paul Frankel, Ph.D.   Division of Information Sciences 
 
Clinical Research Associate:  
   Jennifer Simpson, B.A.   Department of Biostatistics 
 
 
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
                                                                             P a g e  
 S C H E M A           2 - 3    1.0 OBJECTIVES         3   2.0 BACKGROUND        4-10   3.0 DRUG INFORMATION       10-12   4.0 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA       12-14   5.0 STAGING CRITERIA       14   6.0 DESCRIPTIVE FACT ORS/STRATIFICATION/ 
 RANDOMIZATION SCHEME      15   7.0 TREATMENT PLAN        15-21   8.0 TOXICITIES TO BE MONITORED AND   DOSAGE MODIFICATIONS      21-22   9.0 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION AND  
 ENDPOINT DEFINITIONS       22-25   10.0 DATA AND SAFETY  MONITORING PLAN  
 & DATA SUBMISSION SCHEDULE     25-26   11.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS       26-28   12.0 PATHOLOGY REVIEW       28   13.0 REGISTRATION GUIDELINES      28   14.0 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS       28   15.0 ETHICAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS   28   16.0 REFERENCES        29-37     
Appendices  
 
I. ANTIBODY ADMINISTRATION      38 II. BONE MARROW PERCENTAGE      39 III. CRITERIA FOR ESTIMATION OF  PERFORMANCE STATUS  40 
I V .  T O X I C I T Y  G R A D I N G        4 1  V. PHASE I TRACKING LOG       42    
 
 SCHEMA: 
 
THERAPY CONSISTS OF TWO PARTS: 
 
Part I – Protocol Therapy (RIT/Gemcitabine/FUdR) 
90Y-cT84.66  (16.6 mCi/m2) :         D a y  9  
Gemcitabine (105 mg/m2) infused over 30 mins. i.v.     Days 9 and 11 
Continuous hepatic arterial infusion FUdR x 14 days:    Days 1 – 14 
 (starting dose level 0.10 mg/kg/da y to contain Decadron 1 mg/day) 
Ca-DTPA (250 mg/m2/day): infused over 60 minutes i.v.    Day 9 – 11  A maximum of 3 cycles every 6 weeks is planned.   This will be followed by:  
Part II – Best Systemic Therapy  (see section 7.8 for details): 
 
Additional hepatic arterial infusion of FUdR permitted for a maximum of 4 cycles (including cycles delivered during Part I of  protocol therapy with RIT/gemc itabine).  Systemic therapy may 
be given in combination with hepatic arterial infusion FUdR at the discretion of the treating 
physician.  Systemic therapy may be continued afte r completion of hepatic ar terial infusion at the 
discretion of the treating physician.
Amended 07/20/05 
  
 
 FUdR/RIT/Gemcitabine  Study Calendar 
 
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday 
  Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 Day 6 
             
  FUdR/Decadron 
(starting dose level 
0.10 mg/kg) FUdR/Decadron FUdR/Decadron  FUdR/Decadron FUdR/Decadron  FUdR/Decadron 
             
              
Day 7 Day 8 Day 9 Day 10 Day 11 Day 12 Day 13 
             
FUdR/Decadron FUdR/Decadron FUdR/Decadron FUdR/Decadron FUdR/Decadron FudR/Decadron FudR/Decadron 
   Gemcitabine 
(105 mg/m2)  Gemcitabine 
(105 mg/m2)   
    RIT (16.6 mCi/m2)        
    Ca-DTPA Ca-CTPA Ca-DTPA    
Day 14 Day 15 Day 16 Day 17 Day 18 Day 19 Day 20 
              
FUdR/Decadron             
       
              
Day 21 Day 22 Day 23 Day 24 Day 25 Day 26 Day 27 
              
       
              
Day 28 Day 29           
             
           
 
1.0 OBJECTIVES  
 
1.1 To determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and associated toxicities of concurrent 
hepatic arterial infusion (HAI) fluorodeoxypyr imidine (FUdR)/Decadron and intravenous  
gemcitabine combined with  intravenous yttrium-90 (90Y) chimeric T84.66 (cT84.66) in 
colorectal cancer patients afte r hepatic resection or maximu m surgical debulking (to < 3 
cm) of liver metastases. This is the primary objective. 
 1.2 To study the feasibility and t oxicities of such adjuvant th erapy following resection and/or 
ablation of liver metastases 
 1.3 To evaluate the biodistribu tion, clearance and metabolism of 
90Y and 111In (indium-111) 
chimeric T84.66 administered intravenously. 
 1.4 To estimate radiation doses to whole body, normal organs, and tumor through serial 
nuclear imaging. 
 
1.5 To correlate proteomic profile s pre and post-therapy with toxi cities and anti-tumor effects. Amended 
7/20/05 
 
  
2.0 BACKGROUND  
 
Hepatic Arterial Infusion Chemotherapy : Surgical resection of liver metastases from colorectal 
carcinoma can produce a 20% 5 year survival.  Howe ver, subsequent recurrences in the liver as 
well as in extrahepatic sites are the rule.  A prosp ective randomized trial at the City of Hope using 
resection and intr a-arterial FUdR 1 demonstrated the value of adj uvant therapy following complete 
resection of hepatic metastases in preventing disease recurrence.  Further randomized studies of 
intra-arterial FUdR have dem onstrated evidence of benefit 2,3.  In one study 156 colorectal patients 
with resected liver metastasis were randomized to  6 cycles of HAI with FUdR plus systemic 5-
fluorouracil, or to systemic 5-fluor ouracil alone.  After 2 year the actuarial rate of survival was 
better in the HAI group (86 vs 72%, P = 0.03).   Hepatic recurrences were also reduced in the HAI 
group (90 vs 60%, P < 0.001).  There were more he patic side effects in the HAI group with 18% 
of patients developing serum bilirubi n levels greater than 3.0 mg/dl.  Biliary stents were required 
in 4 patients with subsequent normalization in 2 of these.  He patic toxicity was managed by dose 
reductions and the use of intrahepatic dexame thasone.   Nevertheless, only 26%of patients 
received more than 50 % of the planned dose. 
 In another study, 109 colorectal patients with 1 –3  resected hepatic metastatses were randomized 
to no further therapy or to HAI with FUdR combin ed with systemic infusional 5-fluorouracil.  The 
HAI group had a 4-year recurrence free rate of 46%  vs 25% for the controls (p = 0.04).  The 4-
year liver recurrence free rate was also improved ( 67 vs 43%, P = 0.03).  The HAI group 
consisting of protocol eligible patients had a longer median survival (63.7 vs 49, P = 0.60).  
Increases in liver tranaminases were seen in 8/30 patients, and 2 required biliary stenting with all 
patients eventually recovering.   Two thirds of patients received all 4 planned chemotherapy 
cycles.  
A German study 
4 randomized 226 colorectal patients with resected liver metastases to HAI with 
5-flourouracil for 5 days plus syst emic 5-fluorouracil vs observation alone.   No benefit in terms of 
survival or time to progression was noted.  Grad e 4/4 toxicities including stomatitis, and nausea 
occurred in 62.9% of treated patients.  Based on this , the study was stopped at an interim analysis.  
The length of hepatic arterial  infusion of 5 days vs 14 days in other studies, as well as the use of 
5-fluorouracil as opposed to FUdR may have aff ected the result.  Various grade 1 – 4 liver 
function abnormalities were seen in between 12.2 and 17.6% of the treatment courses given.   
 Attempts have been made to incorporate poten tially more effective systemic therapies in 
conjuction with HAI to potentially reduce the rate on non-hepatic recurrences.  A recent study 
demonstrated the feasibility of combining irinotecan with HAI 
5.  In this study colorectal patients 
with resectable hepatic metastases  were treated with 6 cycles of HAI FUdR.  Inrinotecan at a dose 
of 200mg/m2 was found to be feasible in combina tion with a 14-day infusion of FUdR 
0.12mg/kg/day.    In another study, colorectal patie nts with resected, or ablated liver metastases were treated 
adjuvantly with HAI FUdR at a dose of 0.2mg/m
2/day combined with dexamethasone 1 mg/day 
for 14 days 6.  Oxaliplatin on day 1 at a dose of 130mg/m2 with capecitabine 1000mg/m2 twice 
daily for 14 days were given duri ng weeks 4-5.  Cycles were repeat ed every 6 weeks for a total of 
4 treatments.  An increase in grade 3 dia rrhea but not hepatic t oxicity was noted.   
 A study combining oxaliplatin based treatm ents with HAI has also been reported 
7.  In this study, 
colorectal patients with unresected liver metast ases were treated with HAI 0.12mg/kg/day for 14 
 
 days.  Systemic therapy was given every other w eek and consisted of oxaliplatin combined with 
either 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin or with  irinotecan.  The MTD of oxaliplatin/5FU was 
100mg/m2 and 1400mg/m2 by continuous infusion over 48 hours respectively with diarrhea and 
hepatotoxity limiting therapy.  With oxa liplatin and CPT-11, the MTD was 100mg/m2 and 
150mg/m2 respectively.  Hepatotoxicity, hematologic toxi city, and diarrhea were seen at the DLT 
level.  Gemcitabine:    Many clinical trials demonstrate a m easurable advantage to a combination of 
chemotherapy and radiation over treatment with radi ation alone.   Trials  with esophageal cancer 
using combined chemoradiation demonstrate re sponse rates of 15-30% with 5FU/CDDP or 
5FU/mitomycin C regimens with complete res ponses at radiation doses as low as 3000 cGy. 8.  
Clinical evidence of improvement with chemoradiation have been documented in other cancers including rectal cancer
9, pancreatic cancer  10, anal cancer 11 and head and neck cancer 12 .   Cell 
cultures studies have demonstrat ed experimental radiosensitizat ion with a variety of drugs 
including 5-fluororuracil, othe r antimetabolites, cisplatin 13 , topoisomerase I inhibitors  14 , as well 
as taxanes15 .  The exact mechanism of radiosensiti zation remains under study, but likely involves 
multiple bilateral interactions between radiation and various chemotherapy drugs  involving  functions such as DNA repair and apoptosis 
16. 
 A drug with good preclinical radios ensitization properties is gemcita bine.  This has been approved 
by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatm ent of advanced pancreatic cancer based on 
results of superior clinical benef it and activity in a phase III trial 
17.  It is given as a 30-minute 
infusion on a weekly basis.  It has been shown to  improve the quality of life as well as improve 
survival in pancreatic cancer patients in co mparison to 5-fluorouracil treatment.  The primary 
toxicity is hematologic, although other toxicities such as fluid retention, pulmonary toxicity, and 
cardiac toxicity may be significant 18,19. 
 
Laboratory studies have demonstr ated strong radiosensitization pr operties when gemcitabine is 
tested in cell culture 20.  The exact method of radiosensitiza tion is under inves tigation but likely 
relates to inhibition of ribonucle otide reductase with subsequent effects on deoxyribonucleotided 
pools, and to gemcitabine incorporation into  DNA with subsequent chain termination.  
Radiosensitization was greatest in one study when cells were exposed to gemcitabine for 2- hours 
24 - 48 hours before radiation exposure.  Radios ensitization was observed for approximately 2 
days after exposure 21.  The maximal sensitization has co rrelated with a drop in adenosine 
diphosphospate in response to gemcitabine (which is an inhibitor of ribon ucleotide reductase).  
Interestingly, radiosensitization appears to o ccur at relatively low, minimally cytotoxic 
gemcitabine levels.   In another study, radiosensi tization is again seen when gemcitabine is given 
before radiation 22.  S-phase Chinese hamster fibroblasts (V79) and a human co lon cancer cell line 
(Widr) were again exposed to gemcitabine fo r 2 hours followed by radiation.  The maximum 
interaction in this study appeared  2 hours after the 2-hour  treatment.  In summary, it appears that 
radiosensitization occurs after gemcitabine exposure although the time course of this sensitization 
may vary depending on the conditions.  Clinical studies combining gemcitabine with radia tion have confirmed that gemcitabine is a potent 
radiation sensitizer.  In studies with head and neck patients 
23, doses of gemcitabine  required 
progressive reduction from a starting dose of 300mg/m2 due to severe toxicity.  Doses below 
100mg/m2 were planned in an attempt to determine a to lerable dose.  Interes tingly, at a dose of 150 
mg/m2, levels of gemcitabine triphosphate (dFdCTP) re mained in the same range as those seen at 
the 300 mg/m2 dose level.  The levels of dFdCTP  were similar to those seen in in vitro  
 
 radiosensitization experiments sugge sting that even at low doses, significant inte ractions were 
occurring.    Other studies have reported to lerance of gemcitabine and exte rnal beam radiation in upper 
gastrointestinal tumors 
24,25.  Studies with lung cancer have al so been reported, noting increased 
esophagitis with the combination 26.   
 Radioimmunotherapy with Y-90 cT84.66 :  The rapidly growing fiel d of molecular medicine 
offers exciting new strategies for targeted de livery of cancer therapy.  Through molecular and 
genetic engineering, agents can now be custom designed against specific tumor targets with 
properties optimized for therapy. Monoclonal antibodi es (Mab) against tumor antigens were some 
of the first of these agents to be evaluated.  Conjugated to radionuclid es, Mab guided radiation 
therapy or radioimmunotherapy (RIT), demonstrat ed significant promise in laboratory models. 
This promise has been realized in the clinic for the more radiosensitive hematologic malignancies, 
particularly B-cell lymphomas and myeloid leukemias, which have reported response rates ranging 
from 30-85% 27-35, with complete responses rates as high as 80% with myeloablative, bone 
marrow transplant supported doses in patients with relapsed disease 27. 
 For the more radioresistant solid tumors, re sults have been less successful, but remain 
encouraging. At non-myeloablativ e doses in patients with chemotherapy refractory, metastatic 
disease, current RIT regimens have reported primarily stable diseas e and mixed, and minor 
responses in patients with colorectal, breast, medullary thyroid, and ovarian cancer 
36-45. More 
encouraging are trials evaluating RIT at higher,  myeloablative doses. For example, 50% partial 
responses of short duration have been reported in  an ongoing trial with myeloablative, stem cell 
supported doses of 90Y-DTPA-BrE3 in patients with a dvanced, metastatic breast cancer 46.   
 
Current non-stem cell supported RIT regimens only achieve the biologic equivalent of 2000 cGy 
to tumor and therefore do not achieve high enough  tumor doses to be used as single modality 
therapy, particularly for gross disease. This is not surprising given the ex perience with external 
beam radiotherapy, where 2000 cGy (at 200 cGy pe r day) rarely result s in shrinkage of 
carcinomas, particularly for chemo- and radiati on refractory recurrences. Comparable radiation 
doses to tumor are delivered by RIT and comparable results are seen in Phase I trials entering heavily pre-treated patients. Therefore, futu re therapy trial development should focus on 
increasing the tumoricidal efficacy of RIT th rough concomitant delivery with chemotherapy 
agents known to enhance radiation effects. The same RIT radiation dose of 2000 rads combined 
with other systemic chemotherapy agents, especia lly those with demonstrated radiation enhancing 
properties (e.g., 5-FU and hal ogenated pyrimidines), has a likelihood of increasing tumor 
responses compared to each modality alone, resu lting in major responses. Successful examples of 
using partial doses of external beam radiothera py with appropriate chem otherapy agents are found 
throughout the literature. For example, the earl y trials with esophageal cancer demonstrated 
pathologic complete response rates of 15-30% with 5-FU/cis -platinum or 5-FU/mitomycin-C 
regimens combined with conventionally fractionate d external beam radiation doses as low as 3000 
rads. The results were improved over that of chem otherapy alone or with what would be expected 
after 3000 rads alone 
47. Similar examples exist for other disease sites 48-50.  
 Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a well-studied tumor surface antigen that has proven to be a 
useful target for RIT.  CEA is expressed in many common tumor types such as colon, breast, non-
small cell lung, gastric, pa ncreatic, biliary, cervix, uterine an d ovarian cancer 
51-54.   Radiolabeled 
anti-CEA antibodies have been successfully used  in the clinic to treat  and image CEA-producing 
 
 malignancies 55,56. Radiolabeled anti-CEA antibodies have been the most extensively studied in 
colorectal cancer, since 90-95%  of tumors produce CEA. Animal  studies demonstrate significant 
tumor growth delay after therapy with 131I or 90Y labeled anti-CEA Mabs 57. Tumor responses 
further improved (resulting in long term tumor cont rol in some studies) in animal models which 
explored myeloablative RIT doses with BMT 58, RIT with small micrometastases 59, and RIT 
combined with 5-FU chemotherapy 60. 
   Murine T84.66 is an IgG 1 monoclonal antibody developed at the City of Hope with high 
specificity and affinity (approximately 1.16 x 10 11 M-1) for CEA 
61,62.  It recognizes the A3 
domain of the CEA molecule and has little cr oss reactivity with normal tissues.   Using 111In 
murine T84.66 Beatty et al. 56 demonstrated successful targeting and imaging of colon cancer with 
this antibody.  Further refinements of T84.66 have b een made by investigators at the City of Hope 
in preparation for using this antibody in RIT trials.  A human-mouse chimeric T84.66 has been 
developed (IgG 1 isotype) by Dr. Michael Neumaeir in  the Department of Immunology.  By 
humanizing the non-antigen binding portions of the molecule, the chances for development of 
anti-antibodies against T84.66 is potentially decreased, allowing fo r multiple administrations of 
the radiolabeled antibody for therapy.    Chimeric T84.66 (cT84.66) was radiolabeled with 
111In and evaluated in imaging/biodistribution 
trials in patients with CEA-producing ma lignancies (IRB protoc ols 91064 and 91169/BB-IND 
4040). These two trials demonstrated the following: 1) 111In intact cT84.66 targeted CEA-
producing tumors with imaging result comparable to other 111In labeled intact anti-CEA 
antibodies.; 2) immunogenicity was less after si ngle administration of up to 105 mg of antibody 
protein compared to intact muri ne monoclonal antibodies.; 3) the antibody was well tolerated,; and 
4) dosimetry estimates showed that high and potentially therapeutic ra diation doses can be 
delivered to some tumors, regional metastatic  lymph nodes, and small hepatic metastases.  
 
Based on these encouraging findings a Phase I th erapy trial (IRB 94001) was initiated to define 
the maximum tolerated dose of intravenously administered 90Y-cT84.66 63. On this trial, twenty-
two patients received at least one cycle of therapy, with one indi vidual receiving 2 cycles and two 
receiving 3 cycles of therapy. A ll were heavily pre-tr eated and had progressi ve disease prior to 
entry on this trial. Reversible leukopenia and thrombocytopenia were the primary dose-limiting 
toxicities observed. Maximum tolerate d dose (MTD) was reached at 22 mCi/m2. Thirteen patients 
developed an immune response to the antibody. HAC A was more frequent on this trial possibly 
due to the fact that each patient received an imaging dose of the antibody followed by the therapy 
dose a week later. Dose estim ates to tumor ranged from 66 to 1670 cGy (8.7 to 52.2 cGy/mCi 90Y) 
for each cycle of therapy delivered. Although no major responses were observed, 3 patients demonstrated stable disease of 12 to 28 weeks dur ation and 2 demonstrated a mixed response. In 
addition, a 41 to 100% reduction in tumor si ze was observed with 5 tumor lesions.    
 As a result a successor Phase I trial (IRB 96063) was developed evaluating the combination of Y-
90-cT84.66 given in combination with continuous in fusion 5-FU. Considerable interest has been 
generated recently for continuous infusion 5-FU  as an alternative dose schedule to bolus 
administration for several reasons.  At least si x phase III randomized trials have compared 
continuous infusion 5-FU for > 5 days versus bolu s administration and have reported comparable 
or improved response rates to varying degrees 64-68.  Furthermore, phase II trials of continuous 
infusion 5-FU have reported response rates in the 30-40% range in advanced metastatic colorectal 
cancer.  Second, myelotoxicity in all studies is significantly reduced making it a more attractive 
alternative in combination with other myelotoxic agents, such as RIT.  Continuous infusion 5-FU 
 
 may provide an improved approach toward 5-FU sensitization of radiation tumoricidal activity 69 
70.  Finally, Remmenga et al. demonstrated a significant decrease in  tumor growth when 
combining continuous infusion 5-FU with 90Y-CC49 in an LS174T nude mouse model 60. 
 IRB 96063 has been completed and results recently published 
71. Dose escalation to the highest 
planned dose level of 5-FU has been achieved (1000 mg/m2/day x 5 days).  Twenty-one heavily 
pretreated patients (almost all having failed pr evious 5-FU) have been treated. Dose-limiting 
toxicity was defined as grade 4 hematologic and/or  grade 3 non-hematologic toxicity on this trial. 
As in previous RIT studies, dose-limiting to xicities were hematologic, primarily 
thrombocytopenia and leukopenia. All 21 patients demonstrated hematologic toxicity. Other 
toxicities observed were similar to those observed with 5-FU. These include: grade 1 GI 
(nausea/vomiting or loose stool) toxi city in 16 patients and grade 2 GI  toxicity in 2 patients; grade 
1 fatigue in 14 patients; grade 1 erythema or skin rash in 8 patients; grade 1 mucositis in 9 patients, grade 3 mucosits in 1 patient and grade 4 mucositis in 1 patient. In addition 2 patients had 
transient grade 1 flu-like symptoms.  No hepatoto xicty was observed. Three patients had grade 1 
elevations in transaminases felt secondary to di sease progression. 5-FU did not appear to alter 
antibody pharmacokinetics, but did appear to de crease the HACA response possibly due to its 
effects on the immune system, with only 3 of 17 demonstrating HACA. Of 18 evaluable patients, 
9 demonstrated stable disease of 3-8 months dur ation. One patient demonstrated a mixed response. 
A decrease in size of 53-100% was seen in 3 lesions . This trial demonstrat ed the feasibility of 
combining chemotherapy with radioimmunotherapy.    This first concomitant RIT/chemotherapy trial at COH was followed by IRB 00148, a Phase I trial 
evaluating 
90Y-cT84.66 RIT at 16.6 mCi/m2 given on day 1 with concomitant IV gemcitabine 
given on Days 1 and 3. The gemcitabine dose leve l cohorts studied thus far have been 30, 45, 60, 
75,90 and 105 mg/m2. This trial was initiated based on pre-cl inical studies document an additive to 
supra-additive increase in anti-tum or effect with the combination 72-74. To date 17 patients have 
been treated on this study, with 1 partial response and 10 patients with stab le disease observed. In 
addition, one patient had stable disease of multiple  lung metastases after one cycle but developed a 
new brain metastasis. Toxicity has been primarily  hematologic, and dose-limiting toxicity has not 
yet been reached.  The proposed Phase I trial is a successor tria l to IRB 00148 and IRB 96063 and integrates the 
experience of HAI FUdR. Patients post attempted he patic resection or ablati on for liver metastases 
with all hepatic and extra-hepatic disease debu lked to <3.0 cm will receive FUdR by HAI in 
combination with systemic gemcitabine and Y-90- cT84.66. This trial therefor e incorporates three 
important concepts felt to be critical for successf ul application of RIT. First, it evaluates RIT in 
combination with radiation-enhancing chemothe rapy. The feasibility of combining RIT with 
systemic gemcitabine was established in the ea rlier trial. The proposed trial builds on this 
experience and evaluates the feas ibility of adding HAI FUdR to systemic gemcitabine and Y-90 
cT84.66 RIT as adjuvant therapy.  Second, this trial will evaluate hepatic regional combined modality therapy. Patients post hepatic 
metastases resection, who are ther efore at high risk of liver progr ession or recurrences present the 
ideal patient population for study. Potential subclini cal tumor deposits are i rradiated by specific 
tumor targeting of antibody to tumor as well as  non-specific Y-90-cT84.66 ac tivity that localizes 
in surrounding liver. Radiation is deposited c oncomitantly with regional delivery of FUdR. 
  
 
 
 Finally, patients on this study will have smaller volume or subclinical  disease. Studies predict that 
RIT will have its greatest impact on subclinical di sease. In small tumors, factors such as tumor 
vascularity and tumor interstitial pressu re are more favorable for antibody delivery 75, allowing for 
greater antibody penetration, highe r antibody uptake, more uniform distribution and, hence, more 
effective radiation doses to tumor 8,76. For example, Behr et al. 77 in a colon cancer liver metastases 
mouse model, improved survival and prevention of liver metastases in mice receiving I-131 
radiolabeled anti-CEA. Results were superior to  that observed with 5-FU  or irinotecan. These 
encouraging results led to a clinical trial by the same group evaluating I-131-hMN14 anti-CEA in 
patients with hepatic metastases from  colon cancer after hepatic resection 78. Of 9 patients 
receiving adjuvant RIT, 8 remain  disease free at 24+ months whic h compares favorably to other 
therapies delivered post-hepatic resection. Of 19 evaluable patient s with measurable disease, 3 
demonstrated a PR of 3-15 months duration and 8 demonstrated a minor response of 3-14 months 
duration. Promising results have been reported by Hird et al. 79 who reported on 15 patients with 
FIGO stage IIb-IV ovarian cancer who had negative  second look laparotomi es after surgery and 
chemotherapy. Median survival after si ngle dose intraperiton eal therapy with 90Y-DOTA-HMFG1 
or 90Y-DTPA-HMFG1 was 11 months (range 2-31 mont hs), which was superior to historical 
controls from the same institution. Based on thes e encouraging results, a randomized Phase III 
trial was initiated to compare standard chem otherapy versus standard  chemotherapy and Y-90-
HMFG1. The proposed study will enter patients who have potentially resectable liver metastases 
and potentially resectable limited extra-hepatic di sease.  Those with resection/maximum debulking 
(to less than or equal to 3.0 cm) will receive protocol therapy consis ting of RIT/Gemzar and 
intrahepatic pump infusion of FUdR. 
 Proteomic Studies:  Proteomics involves the analysis of  biological samples for their protein 
content usually in a differential analysis to dete rmine which proteins chan ge during the course of 
treatment or other changes to the biological system 80-83.  Although the ultimate goal is to develop 
protein chips analogous to other mi croarray technologies, the field is  still at the discovery stage 
and often uses mass spectrometry as a high throu ghput sensitive method that can rapidly identify 
proteins in complex biological samples.  Although many mass sp ectrometric approaches have 
been applied to proteomics, MALDI-TOF-MS (matrix assisted laser desorption time of flight mass 
spectrometry) remains a method of choice because it can rapidly analyze peptides and proteins 
ranging from low to high mass without interfer ence from salts and low molecular compounds 
usually present in biological samples.  This a pproach requires only microliter amounts of sample 
and can be spotted on 100 well format plates with an analysis time of seconds for each sample.  In 
the context of this study, we ar e interested in analyzing serum samples from patients undergoing a 
combination of RIT and chemotherapy to determin e if any protein signatures correlate to their 
course of treatment.  Since the number of patients is small, we do not expect to reach statistical 
significance.  Instead we propose to determine if the patients undergoing this therapy exhibit a 
common protein signature that can lead to the identification of markers to be more thoroughly 
screened in larger patient number studies.    
3.0   DRUG INFORMATION  
 
3.1 5-Fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine (FUdR)  
 
3.1.1 Mechanism of Action:  FUdR is an antimet abolite which is rapi dly converted into 5-
FU.  The actions and toxicity of FUdR ar e similar to 5-FU, the primary cytotoxic 
effect being a block of thym idylate synthesis with resu lting interference with DNA 
synthesis.  Also, the drug blocks the inco rporation of uracil and orotic acid into  
 
 RNA, thereby depressing RNA synthesis. Wh en given via the hepatic artery, 95% of 
FUdR is extracted by the liver with only 5%  having systemic circ ulation or effect. 
 3.1.2 Toxicity:  anorexia, nausea, vomiting, st omatitis, diarrhea, he patitis, gastritis, 
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia, alopecia, dermatitis, skin hyperpigmentation, 
and cerebellar ataxia.  In patients receiv ing continuous hepatic artery infusions 
biliary sclerosis can also occur. 
 3.1.3 Formulation and Storage:  FUdR is supplie d in vials containing 500 mg of crystalline 
drug which can be reconstituted in 30 cc of normal saline for parenteral (intra-
arterial) use. 
 3.2 Gemcitabine  
3.2.1 Chemistry/ Mechanism of action:  Gemc itabine is a nucleoside analogue in which 
2’ position of the carbohydrate moiety has been changed to form 2’-deoxy –2’,2’ 
difluorocytidine.  Gemcitabine is meta bolized by tumor cells to the di- and 
triphosphate nucleotide.  Ribonucleotide reduc tase activity is inhibited by the active 
metabolite dfdCDP.  DNA polymerase is also inhibited by dFdCTP and dFdCMP incorporated into DNA.   
   
3.2.2  Human toxicities:  Gemcitabine therapy is associated with nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, stomatitis, myelosuppression, and renal insufficiency.  Long-term animal 
studies to evaluate the carcinogenic pote ntial of gemcitabine have not been 
conducted.  Gemcitabine induced forward mutations in vitro  in a mouse lymphoma 
assay.  Gemicitabine is embryotoxic causing fetal malf ormation and should not be 
used in pregnant women. 
 3.2.3 Formulation:  Gemcitabine is available in 200 mg or 1 gram vials as a sterile 
powder with NaOH added to achieve pH adjustment upon the addition of sterile 
water. 
 3.2.4 Administration:  Gemcitabine will be dilu ted in 5% dextrose (or half-normal saline 
in patients with diabetes) IV solution. 
 
 
3.3       Y-90-DTPA-cT84.66 
 3.3.1.  Chemistry/Mechanism of Action:  cT84.66 is a chimeric human/murine IgG1 
monoclonal antibody developed at the City of Hope National Medical Center.  It 
recognizes the A3 domain of the CEA molecu le and has little cr oss reactivity with 
other molecules.  It binds CEA with  a high affinity (approximately 2 x 10
10 /M) and 
is able to bring a bound radioisotope into close proximity.   It is labeled with 
indium -111 or yttrium- 90 to form the imaging and therapeutic agent. 
 
3.3.2  Human toxicities:  In phas e I trials, the primary toxicity has been hematologic.   A 
possible complication of treatment is also  the development of human anti-chimeric 
antibodies (HACA).   
 
 
 3.3.3.  Formulation:  Yttrium-90 and indium -111 cT84.66 anti-CEA antibody is produced 
and labeled at the City of Hope  by the Divisions of Immunology and 
Radioimmunotherapy.  
 
3.3.4.  Supplier: cT84.66 anti-CEA antibody is an  investigational agent produced and 
labeled at the City of Hope by the Divisions of Immunology and 
Radioimmunotherapy. 
 
3.4  DTPA (Diethyltriaminepenatacetic acid)  
3.4.1.  Drug Formulation and Procurement 
DTPA will be purchased from Heyl Ph armaceuticals, Berlin, Germany. It is 
supplied as a 1 gram ampule in 5 mls.
 
 
3.4.2  Drug toxicity 
DTPA has been known to cause headaches, fever, chills, flu-like symptoms, nasal 
stuffiness, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cram ping, and diarrhea. Other side effects 
that are less common include pain at th e injection site, dehydration, decreased 
blood pressure, irregularitie s of heart rhythm, decreas ed blood counts, increased 
calcium, numbness and tingling, sneezing, ex cessive tearing, kidney damage, and 
zinc deficiency (which can  result in a facial  and perianal rash and tongue and 
mouth sores). In addition, there is always a risk of a very uncommon or previously 
unknown side effect occurring. Stopping th e infusion or reducing the dose of 
DTPA normally reverses the side effect s. Headaches and tingling have been 
observed at the City of Hope but were reversible.  
 
3.4.3.  Drug Storage, Reconstitution and Stability 
The DTPA solution will be diluted with 100 mls normal saline and administered IV 
over 1 hour. DTPA has a long aqueous stabil ity but should be used within 48 hours 
of being drawn up by the pharmacy. DTPA w ill be administered intravenously at a 
dose of 125 mg/m2 every 12 hours for a total of six administrations. 
 
3.5 Decadron 
 
3.5.1 Chemistry/Mechanism of Action 
  Decadron is a corticosteroid with  anti-inflammatory action.  Multiple 
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid effects occur.  The agent is metabolized in the 
liver and excreted out through the urinary system. 
 
3.5.2 Human Toxicities 
  Reported reactions, particularly with long-term use of Decadron, include peptic 
ulcer disease, osteoporosis, adrenal insu fficiency, weight gain, immunosuppression, 
nausea, dyspepsia, increased appetite, ed ema, headache, dizziness, mood swings, 
insomnia, anxiety, exacerbation of hy pertension, hyperglycemia, cushingoid 
features, Cushing’s syndrome, menstrual irregularities, ecchymoses, acne, skin 
atrophy, impaired wound healing with long-term use. 
 
3.5.3 Formulation and Administration Amended 
7/20/05 
 
 Decadron will be administered along with he patic arterial infusion of FUdR at a 
dose of 1 mg per day x 14 days  per cycle of treatment. 
 
4.0 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  
 
4.1 Pre-operative eligibility criteria: 
 
4.1.1 Patients must have a physiological age of > 18 years and < 70 years. 
  
4.1.2 Patients must have a Karnofsky performance status of > 60%. This must be met 
pre-surgery and pre-study therapy. 
 4.1.3 Patients must have histological confirma tion of colorectal carcinoma and present 
with potentially resectab le or ablatable metachronous or synchronous hepatic 
metastases. 
 4.1.4 Patients must have colorectal tumors that produce CEA as documented by either 
immunohistochemistry or by an elevated serum CEA. 
 4.1.5 Prior radiotherapy, immunotherapy, or chem otherapy must have been completed at 
least four weeks prio r to start of FUdR /RIT therapy on this study (6 weeks if 
mitomycin-C or nitrosoureas were part of  last therapy) and patients must have 
recovered from all expected side effects of the prior therapy. 
 4.1.6 Adequate bone marrow function as ev idenced by hemoglobin > 10 gm %, WBC 
>4000/ul, an absolute granulocyte count of > 1,500/mm3, and platelets > 
150,000/ul.  Patients may be transfused to reach a hemoglobin >10 gm %.  These 
must be met pre-surgery and pre-study therapy. 
4.1.7 Patients may have history of prior ma lignancy for which the patient has been 
disease-free for five years with the excepti on of basal or squam ous cell skin cancers 
or carcinoma in situ of the cervix. 
 4.1.8 Patients must have no prior history of radiation therapy to the liver. 
 4.1.9 Patients must have a total bilirubin < 1.5 (unless reversibly obstructed due to the 
metastatic tumor) and a serum creatinine of  < 2.0.  This must be met pre-surgery 
and pre-study therapy. 
 4.1.10 Patients must have evidence of intrahep atic metastases involving < 60% of the 
functioning liver. 
 4.1.11 Patients cannot have evidence of extr ahepatic disease with the following 
exceptions: 
 
4.1.11.1 Patients known to have a resectable "anastomotic" or local recurrence of 
their tumor.   
    
 
 4.1.11.2 Patients who undergoing their initial su rgery for resection of their primary 
colorectal carcinoma can have potential ly resectable porta hepatis and/or 
mesenteric lymph node involvement in addition to liver metastases. 
 4.1.11.3 Patients who have disease extension fr om the liver metastasis that can be 
resected en bloc (eg., diaphrag m, kidney, and abdominal wall). 
 
4.1.11.4 Patients who have minimal, potentia lly resectable to less than 3 cm 
extrahepatic disease. 
 
4.1.12 The pre-operative eligibility checklist must be completed.  4.1.13 If a patient has previously received mu rine or chimeric antibody, then serum anti-
antibody testing must be negative. This must be met pre-surgery if possible. 
 4.1.14 Serum HIV testing and hepatitis B surf ace antigen and C antibody testing must be 
negative. 
 4.1.15 Women of childbearing poten tial must have a negative serum pregnancy test prior 
to entry and while on study must be practic ing an effective form of contraception.  
This must be met pre-surgery and pre-study therapy. 
 
4.2 Intra-operative and pos t-operative eligibility 
 
4.2.1 Patients must have resectable or ablata ble liver metastases as determined by the 
attending surgeon. 
 
4.2.2 Colorectal carcinoma must be confined to the liver except as noted in 4.1.11 above. 
 4.2.3 Patients with limited extrahepatic dis ease as defined in 4.1.11 (primary, lymph 
node, or anastomotic recurrence) must have  disease resected or debulked to less 
than 3 cm in greatest dimension.  
 4.2.4 To receive study therapy, patients must be  at least 3 weeks post-surgery but no 
more than 16 weeks post surgery and without evidence of post-operative 
complications, such as infec tion or poor wound healing. 
 
4.2.5 Patients must have <40% liver resected at  the close of comple tion of the hepatic 
resection. 
 4.3 Ineligibility Criteria : 
 4.3.1 Patients that have received radiation th erapy to greater than 50% of their bone 
marrow (see Appendix II). 
 4.3.2 Patients with any nonmalignant interc urrent illness (example cardiovascular, 
pulmonary, or central nervous system dis ease) which is either  poorly controlled 
with currently available treatment or which is  of such severity that the investigators 
deem it unwise to enter the patient on protocol shall be ineligible.  
Amended 
10/07/05 Amended 
1/23/06 Amended 
11/28/06 
 
  
4.3.3 Biopsy-proven chronic active hepatitis.  
4.4 Note:  for patients who have had surgery prior to signing the c onsent form, the pre-
operative and intra-operativ e eligibility criteria may be veri fied retrospectively, prior to study 
therapy.   
5.0  STAGING CRITERIA 
 
 Staging will be by the TNM system of the AJCC.  
 
  6.0  DESCRIPTIVE FACTORS/STRATI FICATION/RANDOMIZATION SCHEME  
 
This is a Phase I study.  Patients shall be ente red according to the treatment plan in section 
7.0.  There shall be no randomization nor strati fication.  Descriptive factors shall include 
patient age, previous treatment, primary ma lignancy, location and ex tent of metastases. 
 
7.0 TREATMENT PLAN  
 
Patients fulfilling all pre-operativ e and intra-operative  requirements (as noted in section 4.0 
above) will have attempt at complete resec tion or ablation of hepatic metastases and 
implantation of infusion pump with the catheter in the hepatic artery. 
 
Post-hepatic resection therapy on this trial co nsists of two parts: 
 Part I  – Protocol Therapy: 
90Y-MxDTPA-cT84.66/Gemcitabine/hepatic arterial  
FUdR/Decadron for a maximum of 3 cycles ev ery 6-10 weeks between cycles.  There can 
be up to 10 weeks between cycles if more time is needed for recovery from toxicities.  If 
more than 10 weeks are required, then the patient will be off-study.  
 
Part II  – Additional courses of hepatic arte rial infusion FUdR/Decadron with best 
systemic therapy. 
 Additional hepatic arterial infusion of FUdR permitted for a maximum of 4 cycles 
(including cycles delivered during Part I of protocol therapy with RIT/gemcitabine).  
Systemic therapy may be given in combination with hepatic arterial infusion FUdR at the 
discretion of the treating physician.  Systemic  therapy may be continued after completion 
of hepatic arterial infusion at th e discretion of the treating physician. 
 
7.1 General Principles of Pr otocol Therapy (Part I) 
 
7.1.1 All patients will receive combined modality therapy consisting of 
chemotherapy and concomitant radioimmunotherapy (Y-90-DTPA-cT84.66).  A therapy cycle will consist of systemic gemcitabine, systemic 
Y-90-DTPA-cT84.66 and the HAI administration of FUdR/Decadron. Each  
Amended 
7/20/05 
Amended 7/20/05 
Amended 
7/20/05 
 
 treatment cycle will be 6 weeks for a maximum of 3 cycles in Part I 
(protocol therapy).  
7.1.2 Patients will begin treatment on day 1 with HAI FUdR/Decadron for 14 
days. On day 9, Y-90-cT84.66 will be give n as a single IV bolus infusion.  
On days 9 and 11, gemcitabine will be administered as a single IV bolus 
infusion. 
 
7.1.3 Any patient who has an actual body weight  or surface area that is > 10% in 
excess of ideal body weight or surfac e area will have chemotherapy doses 
calculated by averaging the ideal and actual values. 
 7.1.4 Protocol therapy can be initiated as  early as 3 weeks post-surgery but no 
later than 16 w eeks post-surgery. 
 
7.2 Administration of FUdR/Decadron (D ay 1-14 of each cycle) (Part I) 
 
7.2.1 Patients will receive a dose of FUdR/Decadron administered for 14 
consecutive days.  Solutions used to fill the intrahepatic  infusion pump 
should contain 1000 units of heparin/ml .  Decadron will be given at a dose 
of 1mg/day x14 days mixed with the FUdR in the infusion pump. 
 7.2.2 During times when the patient is no t receiving chemotherapy with the 
intrahepatic infusion pump a solution of  normal saline with 1000 units/ml of 
heparin or alternatively a glycerol wa ter solution will be used to maintain 
the patency of the pump catheter. 
 
7.2.3 The starting dose level (dose level 1)  on this Phase I trial will be 0.10 
mg/kg/day. Per phase I protocol desi gn using a modified Fibonacci scheme 
the dose will be escalated in cohorts  of 3-6 patients, until an MTD is 
defined and dose-limiting toxic ities are reached. (Table 1) 
 
7.2.4 A maximum of three dose levels are antic ipated to be required to reach the 
MTD.  Following a standard phase I dose escalation design (see Table 1), 
three to six patients will be entere d per dose level.  The maximum dose 
level will be 0.2 mg/kg/day. 
  
TABLE I 
DOSE ESCALATION SCHEME 
 
 Dose Level 1 Dose Level 2 Dose Level 3     FUdR dose 0.10 mg/kg/day 0.15 mg/kg/day 0.20 mg/kg/day 
  7.2.5 Each cycle of treatment for a given patie nt will be at the same dose, unless 
there is toxicity requiring a dose mo dification (see Section 8.2). A patient 
will be removed from protocol treatmen t if there is unacceptable toxicity, Amended  
7/20/05 7/11/06 
 Amended 
7/20/05 
Amended 03/06/06 
 
 progressive disease, or developmen t of an anti-antibody response (see 
Section 7.5) 
  
 
  
7.3         Administration of gemcitabi ne (Day 9 and 11 of each cycle) (Part I) 
 
7.3.1 Patients will receive gemcita bine at a dose of 105 mg/m2/day by bolus 
intravenous infusion over 30 minutes. 
 7.3.2 Each cycle of treatment for a given patie nt will be at the same dose, unless 
there is toxicity requiring a dose mo dification (see Section 8.2). A patient 
will be removed from protocol treatmen t if there is unacceptable toxicity, 
progressive disease, or developmen t of an anti-antibody response (see 
Section 6.6). 
 7.4 Intravenous infusion of radiolabeled an ti-CEA antibody (chimeric T84.66) (Part I) 
 
7.4.1 The infusion will contain 5 mCi of Indium-111 (111In) labeled cT84.66 and 
the therapeutic dose of Yttrium-90 (90Y) labeled cT84.66.  The 111In labeled 
cT84.66 will be used to track antibody activity and to estimate absorbed 
radiation dose to tumor and normal or gans.  The total amount of antibody 
protein infused will be kept constant at 5 mg.  Intravenous infusion will involve first a test infusion of 100 ug of antibody.  If there is no adverse 
reaction the rest of the antibody will  be infused over approximately 25 
minutes. The 
90Y cT84.66 infusion will be on Day 9 approximately 4 hours 
after gemcitabine infusion.   
 7.4.2.  The dose level on this trial will be 16.6 mCi/m
2 Y-90-cT84.66.  
 
7.4.3.  Each cycle of treatment for a given patie nt will be at the same dose, unless 
there is toxicity requiring a dose mo dification (see Section 8.2). A patient 
will be removed from protocol treatmen t if there is unacceptable toxicity, 
progressive disease, or developmen t of an anti-antibody response (see 
Section 7.5). 
  
7.4.4 DTPA infusion.   Although the Mx-DTP A chelate binds Y-90 tightly, it is 
not possible to have an off-rate of zero. Since any free Y-90 can target to 
bone, resulting in increased bone marro w toxicity, patients will receive a 
DTPA infusion for 3 days after Y-90 chimeric T84.66 infusion.  The dose 
of DTPA will be 250 mg/m 2/24 hours for 3 days (given in equally divided 
doses every 12 hours for a total of 6 doses).  Each infusion is only 60 mins. i.v.  DTPA will be administered as a calcium salt.  This dose and schedule 
has been used by other investigators administering Y-90 labeled antibodies 
and has resulted in increased urin ary excretion of free Y-90 and less 
hematologic toxicity. 
 7.4.5 Serial nuclear scans.  Radionuclide total body planar imaging will be done 
at approximately 1-3 hours post start of  infusion, and at 1 day, 2 days, 3-5 
days, and at a late time point betwee n 6-7 days post infusion.  A SPECT 
nuclear scan will also be performed at 2 days and a time point between 3-5 days post infusion.  These studies wi ll be used to estimate absorbed Amended 
7/11/06 
Amended  7/11/06 
 
 radiation doses to tumor, normal or gans (liver, lung, kidney, bone marrow), 
and whole body.  
 7.4.6 Serial blood and urine collections.  Serial blood (5 cc) samples will be 
collected at pre-main infusion (post test dose), approximately 1 hour and 3-
4 hours post start of infusion, and at s can times of 1 day, 2 days, 3-5 days 
and 6-7 days post antibody infusion.  Urine collections will be done daily 
for 5 consecutive days.  Blood and urin e samples will be analyzed for total 
activity and by radiometric HPLC.  These studies will acquire data on antibody metabolism and pharmacokinetics. 
 
7.5 (Part I)  Subsequent cycles (up to three to tal) will be given six weeks apart.  A 
subsequent cycle can be delayed up to a tota l of 10 weeks between cy cles if more time 
is needed for recovery from toxicity (expected  to be primarily hematologic).  If more 
than 10 weeks is required the patient is off protocol treatment.  The subsequent courses 
will consist of the same dose of In-1 11 chimeric T84.66 and Y-90 chimeric T84.66, 
gemcitabine and FUdR (i.e., no dose escalation w ithin a patient).  However, if toxicity 
occurs, a dose reduction with the next cy cle for a given patient is warranted (see 
Section 8.2).  A patient will receive no further protocol therapy (but still evaluable) if 
he/she  develops unacceptable toxicity, dis ease progression, or an anti-antibody 
response. 
 7.6 Proteomic analysis of blood samples.  (Par t I)  Before the first cycle of protocol 
therapy, and after each subsequent cycle,  a blood sample will be obtained for 
proteomic analysis to evaluate any correlations  to toxicities and anti-tumor effects.   
Protocol:  plasma or serum samples are diluted 3-5 fold with water or PBS usually 
containing 20% acetonitrile.  High molecu lar weight proteins components are 
precipitated using either acetone or trichlor oacetic acid and separa ted by centrifugation.  
The supernatant containing the low molecula r weight peptide and protein fraction is 
concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge and th en bound to a C18 reve rse phase support.  
After washing with water to remove salts, the bound components are eluted with an 
aqueous solvent containing 50-80% acetonitrile.  An aliquot of the sample solution is 
spotted onto a matrix assisted laser deso rption ionization (MALD I) sample plate along 
with a solution of the MALDI matrix, t ypically sinapinic acid or a-cyano-4-
hydroxycinnamic acid.  Protein profiles are acquired on a MALDI time-of-flight (TOF) 
mass spectrometer.  Components of interest  in the protein profile are identified by 
comparisons to samples taken from the same  patient at different time points, and/or 
comparisons to other patient or control samples.  Those components are further characterized by fractionation of the lo w molecular weight fraction by liquid 
chromatography, enzyme digestion, tandem MS  analysis and database matching to 
identify the proteins.  Since the number of  patients sampled is limited, the objective is 
not to perform a statistical analysis, but inst ead, to identify potential  markers of therapy 
or toxicity for future studies.  
 7.7 Once the MTD has been established, an addi tional 10 patient expanded cohort will be 
accrued for proteomic correlative studies. 
  
7.8  Part II – Conventional Therapy:  
 Amended  
7/11/06 
Amended 7/11/06 
 
  
 After treatment with 90Y-MxDTPA-cT84.66/gemcitabine/HAI FUdR, patients will 
proceed to further systemic therapy.  System ic therapy, at the discretion of the treating 
physician, will be combined with additional cycles of HAI FUdR.  Additional hepatic 
arterial infusion of FUdR permitted for a maximum of 4 cycles (including cycles 
delivered during Part I of protocol therapy with RIT/gemcitabine).  Systemic therapy 
may be given in combination with hepatic ar terial infusion FUdR at the discretion of 
the treating physician.  Systemic therapy may be continued after completion of hepatic 
arterial infusion at the discre tion of the treating physician. 
 7.9 The following tests and procedures will be performed prior to each cycle of therapy 
and for the study: 
  
 
 Study Parameters 
 
*or at the discretion of  the treating physician 
# If a complete or partial response is noted, this  must be confirmed by measurements at least 4 
weeks apart.  During part II of therapy, tumor measurements should be obtained after every 2 
cycles of therapy. If there is evidence of tumor response and patient goes off study, we will 
perform tumor measurements and CEA measurem ents at 3 mo and 6 mo off-study or as 
indicated by ongoing treatment. 
$ Anti-Ab assay and CEA should also be performed at 3 mo and 6 mo post last antibody infusion. 
% For pts who signed the ICF prior to  surgery, these tests must be re peated prior to study therapy. 
@ Tumor measurements are not requi red on the pre-surgery CT scan. 
  Baseline 
(pre-surgery)  Weekly  
between RIT cycles (starting 1 week post Y-90 dose) Before ea cy of 
RIT & Off Part I of study Every other 
week during FUdR therapy* Off Part II 
of study 
History & Physical X
% X X X X 
Vital Signs X% X X X X 
Weight X% X X X X 
KPS X% X X X X 
CT/MRI Tumor X%  X  X 
Tumor 
Measurement# X%,@  X  X 
CBC, ANC, 
PLT X% X X X X 
CMP + Mg X% X X X X 
HIV X     
Serum CEA X%  X$   
CXR X     
EKG X     
Anti-Antibody 
Assay X  X$   
Proteomic 
Analysis of blood sample X  X   
Creatinine 
clearance X%  X   
Hep B Surf Ag 
& Hep C Ab X     Amended 
7/20/05 
10/07/05 
01/23/06 
7/11/06 
 
 7.9 Criteria for Removal fr om Protocol Treatment 
 
7.9.1 Patients with progressive disease: 25 % increase in the sum of products of 
measurable lesions over smallest sum observed, OR reappearance of any lesion 
which had disappeared, OR clear worseni ng of any evaluable disease (see 9.1 and 
9.2), OR appearance of any new lesion/site.  For scan only bone disease, increased 
uptake does not constitute cl ear worsening.  Worsening of existing non-evaluable 
disease does not cons titute progression.   
 7.9.2 Patients developing unacceptable toxicity  after any cycle (see Section 8.0). 
 
 7.9.3 Patients developing anti-an tibody response after any course. 
 7.9.4 Patient refusal of further therapy.  7.9.5 Investigator's decision to remove th e patient.  The reason must be clearly 
documented on the case report forms. 
 
8.0 TOXICITIES TO BE MONITORE D AND DOSAGE MODIFICATIONS  
 
8.1 Both hematologic and non-hematologic toxi city will be monitored.  Hepatic, renal, 
pulmonary, cardiac, and hematologic toxicity  will be monitored through studies outlined 
in Section 7.6.  Dose-limiting toxicity is e xpected to be hematologic, GI, or hepatic . 
Lymphopenia is not a dose limiting toxicity. T oxicity will be scored by Common Toxicity 
Criteria outlined in Appendix IV. 
 
8.2 Dose modification of subsequent cy cles of  Part I PROTOCOL therapy 
(RIT/GEMCITABINE/FUdR)for a given patient.   
 
Patients with > grade 3 non-hematologic or grad e 4 hematologic toxicity will be taken off 
study.  In all other patients, the therapy is to be  repeated only after to xicity has reversed to 
at least grade 1 within 10 weeks from the la st RIT therapy infusion.  Dose modification for 
the next cycle should be made in a given pati ent experiencing adverse effects as follows: 
 
 
 If grade 3 or 4 non-hematologic, or grade 4 he matologic toxicity is observed at any dose 
level, that patient will be  taken off protocol therapy. Two occurrences of grade 3 non- Grade 3 or 4 non-
hematologic or  Grade 4 hematologic toxicity Grade 2 non-
hematologic or Grade 3 hematologic Grade 0, 1, or 
Grade 2 hematologic 
FUdR No further protocol 
treatment Decrease one level No Change 
Gemcitabine No further protocol 
treatment Decrease one level 
90 mg/m2 No Change 
90Y cT84.66 No further protocol 
treatment Decrease one level 
12 mCi/m2 No Change  Amended 
1/23/06 
 
 hematologic toxicity, two occurrences of grad e 4 hematologic or one occurrence of grade 4 
non-hematologic toxicity at the starting dosag e level one will necessitate revision of 
starting dosages.  The next cycle of treatment can be delayed fo r up to 4 weeks to allow for recovery from 
toxicity.  After more than 10 weeks between  treatments, the patient is off protocol 
treatment.  A patient will receive no further protocol therapy if: a) any grade  4 toxicity occurs,  
b) any grade 3 non-hematologic toxicity occurs 
c) a second grade 3 hematologic toxicity  occurs after dose modification, or 
d) toxicity not reversible to  grade 1 or less occurs. 
  
9.0 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION AND ENDPOINT DEFINITIONS 
 
9.1 The response endpoints will be:  a)  Progressi on-free survival, defined as first documented 
evidence of treatment failure.  Recurrence should be diagnosed  by biopsy if at all possible 
(see below); b) Overall Surviv al; c) Sites of recurrence. 
 9.2 Diagnosis of Treatment Failure 
 Every effort to biopsy recurrence of malignant di sease should be made whenever possible.   
 Suspicious findings do not constitute treatment failure and patients s hould not be taken off 
study on this basis. 
 Below are listed examples of acceptable and unacceptable evidence for treatment failure at various sites.  
9.2.1 Abdominal and/or Pelvic 
 (1) Anastomotic 
 
(a) Acceptable -- positive cytology or biopsy 
 
(b) Suspicious -- abnormal barium enema, cha nge in bowel habit, palpable mass, abnormal 
PET scan.  
(2) Abdominal, pelvic and retroperitoneal nodes 
 
(a) Acceptable -- positive cytology or biopsy, progressively enlarging node (> 2 cm) as 
evidenced by 2 CT scans separated by at least a 4 week interval, uret eral obstruction in the 
presence of a mass as documented on CT scan  
(b) Suspicious -- abnormal sonogram PET scan or CT scan or ureteral obstruction without 
mass   
 
 (3) Peritoneum (including visceral and parietal peritoneum, omentum) 
 
(a) Acceptable -- positive cytology or biopsy, pr ogressively enlarging intraperitoneal solid 
mass as evidenced by 2 CT scans separated by at least a 4 week interval 
 (b) Suspicious -- abnormal sonogram or CT scan without solid mass 
 
(4) Ascites 
 
(a) Acceptable - Positive cytology or biopsy 
 
(b) Suspicious -- ascites without  proof of tumor cells present 
 
(5) Liver 
 
(a) Acceptable - Positive cytology or biopsy 
 
(b) Suspicious: Any 3 of the following which are not associated with benign disease: 
 
 a. Recent or progressive hepatomegaly, abnormal liver contour 
 
 b. Positive radionuclide liver scan, PET scan, MRI scan, sonogram or CT scan 
 
 c. Abnormal liver function studies defined as > 3 times the upper limit of normal 
 
 d. Elevated CEA:  A persistent rise in CEA titer confirmed on 2 determinations 
separated by a 4 week interval.  The determination should be performed by the same 
laboratory using the same method.  NOTE:  An elevated CEA level wi ll, as of itself, not be cons idered acceptable evidence of 
treatment failure.  Non-protocol therapy will not be instituted on the basis of an abnormal 
CEA level.    
(6) Pelvic mass 
 
(a) Acceptable -- positive cytology or biopsy, pr ogressively enlarging intrapelvic solid mass 
(> 2 cm) as evidenced by 2 CT scans se parated by at least a 4 week interval 
 
(b) Suspicious -- abnormal sonogram PET scan or CT scan without solid mass 
 
(7) Abdominal wall, perineum and scar 
 
(a) Acceptable -- positive cytology or biopsy 
 
9.2.2  Non-abdominal and non-pelvic sites 
 
(1) Skeletal 
 
 
 (a) Acceptable --  (i) x-ray evidence of lytic, blas tic, or mixed lytic/blastic lesions on skeletal 
films with or without bone scan confirmati on, (ii) biopsy proof of bone metastasis, (iii) 
bone scan consistent with bone metastases in a patient with bone pai n, or (iv) progressive 
bone scan changes over at least a 4 week peri od are necessary in asymptomatic patients 
with only bone scan abnormalities (v) progressive changes on MRI scan.  NOTE:  In the absence of progressive diseas e by scan, a biopsy is strongly recommended.  
Any positive bone scan in the joints or in a r ecent area of trauma (surgical or otherwise) 
cannot be used as an indication of treatment failure.  
(2) Lung 
 
(a) Acceptable -- (i) positive cytology or biopsy or (ii) the presence of multiple pulmonary 
nodules which are felt to be consis tent with pulmonary metastases 
 NOTE: If a solitary lung lesi ons is found and no other lesi ons are present on CT scan, 
further investigations such as biopsy, needle aspiration or resection should be performed.  
Proof of neoplastic pleural effusion should be  established by cytology or pleural biopsy. 
  (3) Bone marrow 
 
(a) Acceptable -- positive cytology, aspiration or biopsy 
 
(b) Suspicious -- unexplained depression of peripheral count s and/or erythroblastic blood 
picture 
 
(4) Central nervous system 
 
(a) Acceptable -- (i) positive MRI or CT scan, us ually in a patient with neurological symptoms 
or (ii) biopsy or cytology (for a diagnosis of meningeal involvement) 
 
9.2.3  Post-mortem examination 
 Autopsies should be done whenever possibl e and reports sent to Biostatistics. 
 
  10.0 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PL AN & DATA SUBMISSION SCHEDULE  
 
A. Definition of Risk Level  
 
This is a Risk Level 4 study, as defined in the Guidance, Policy and Procedures for Data and Safety Monitoring for In-House Trials at City of Hope”, 
http//www.infosci.coh.org/gcrc/doc/dsmp.doc , involving hepatic arterial  infusion of chemotherapy 
(Fluorodeoxypyrimidine (FUdR)) and radiati on therapy (Yttrium-90-labeled chimeric 
T84.66 anti CEA antibody). 
 B. Monitoring and Personnel Responsible for Monitoring 
 Amended 
10/7/05 
11/22/05 
 
 The Protocol Management Team (PMT) consis ting of the PI, Collaborating Investigator, 
CRA/protocol nurse, and statistician are respons ible for monitoring the data and safety of 
this study, including implementation of the st opping rules for the safety and efficacy. 
 
 
Monitoring by the PMT will be done using the Phase I tracking log (see attached Appendix 
VI of protocol) to monitor data and safety for dose escalation. Data and safety will be 
reported to the COH DSMB after each dose leve l.  Reporting of data and safety to the 
DSMB will occur at each dose level using the PMT report. 
 
C. Adverse Events 
  
Reporting:   Adverse events must be reported to the COH DSMB, IRB , and GCRC  
according to definitions and guidelines at  http://www.infosci.coh.org/gcrc/doc/dsmp.doc  and 
http://resadmin.coh.org/doc/irb3810.doc,  which are defined below. AEs will be monitored by the 
PMT. Less than serious adverse events will be reported only at the time of protocol 
continuation reports.  Grade 4 lymph openia is not a reportable event. 
 All IND reports that are submitted to the FDA on this protocol will also be submitted to the 
DSMB for review.  A record of any interventional radiologic complications related to antibody infusion will be recorded on the Case Report Form. 
 
Adverse Event - An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical experience or change of an 
existing condition that occurs durin g or after treatment, whether or  not it is considered to be 
related to the protocol inte rvention. All AEs occurring during  this study, whether observed by 
the physician, nurse, or reported by the patient, w ill be recorded on the City of Hope National 
Medical Center Adverse Events (COH AER) form
 (http://resadmin.coh.org/doc/irb3820.doc) form .   
 
Serious Adverse Event -  A serious adverse even t (SAE) is defined as any expected or 
unexpected adverse event  (AE, generally equivalent to CTCAE grades 3, 4 or 5) that is related 
or unrelated  to the intervention that results  in any of the following outcomes : 
 
 Death 
 A life-threatening event 
 In-patient hospitalization (not required as part  of the treatment) or  prolongation of existing 
hospitalization 
 A persistent or signifi cant disability/incapacity 
 A congenital anomaly/birth defect 
 Causes cancer 
 Is an overdose  
 
Certain medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require 
hospitalization, may also be cons idered a serious adverse event when appropriate medical or 
surgical intervention is necessary to prevent one of the outcomes listed above. 
 
 
 Unexpected  Adverse Event  – Any event in which the severity or specificity is not 
consistent with the risk information described in  the protocol, and the ev ent is not anticipated 
from the subject's dise ase history or status. 
 Expected  Adverse Event  - Any event in which the severity or specificity is consistent with 
the risk information described in the protocol or is anticipated based on the subject's medical 
history. 
 
Attribution -  For reporting purposes, attri bution is the assessment of  the likelihood that an AE 
is caused by the research agent or protocol intervention.  The attri bution is assigned by the 
Principal Investigator after c onsidering the clinical informa tion, the medical history of the 
subject, and past experience with the research agent/intervention.  This is recorded using the 
Adverse Event Report (COH AER) form (
http://resadmin.c oh.org/doc/irb3820.doc )  in one of 5 categories 
scored as the following: 5=re lated, 4=probably related, 3=possi bly related, 2=unlikely related 
and 1=unrelated.  The attribution is subject to change as follow-up information becomes 
available, and it can be changed by the DSMB or by the IRB in the process of review. 
 
All primary data will be maintained by the as signed Data Manager fr om the Department of 
Biostatistics.  Data will be submitted to the Data  Manager at the time of each patient evaluation.  
These will include flow sheets, pathology reports, as well as off-study information.  Records will 
be stored in a secure location within the De partment of Biostatistics.                                                                 
 
11.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
This is a Phase I/II trial.  The primary objective of this  trial is to determin e the maximum tolerated 
dose and associated toxicities of intravenously administer ed gemcitabine and Y- 90 cT84.66 delivered 
in combination with hepatic arterial infusion FU dR.  Secondary objectives of the trial include the 
evaluation of the biodistribution, clearance and metabolism of Y-90 and In-111-cT84.66 and the 
estimation of radiation doses to  whole body, normal organs, an d tumor through serial nuclear 
imaging.     The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and level at which dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) is 
experienced will be determined as follows: 
 
Three patients will be enrolled at each dose leve l.  If none of the three patients has Grade 3 non-
hematologic toxicity or Gr ade 4 hematologic toxicity  after the first cycle, then three patients may 
be enrolled at the next dose level.  At each dose level, if in two of three patients, Grade 4 hematologic toxicity or  Grade 3 non-
hematologic toxicity related to therapy occurs af ter the first cycle, then the level at which DLT 
occurs is established.  If Grade 3 non-hematologic toxicity or Grade 4 hematologic toxicity occurs in one of three 
patients, then three additional pa tients are entered at the same dos e level.  Then if Grade 3 non-
hematologic toxicity or Grade 4 hematologic toxicity occurs after the first cycle in: 
 1.  1 of 6 patients, proceed to the next dose level 2.  2 of 6 patients, that dose is the dose level at which DLT occurs. 
 
 
 If Grade 4 non-hematologic toxicity  related to therapy occurs after the first cycle at a dose level, 
no further patients will be treated at that dose level and the DLT will be established.  Once the dose level at which DLT is established, th ree additional patients will be enrolled at the 
preceding dose level to a total of six patients.  Th e study will be closed after six patients have been 
accrued at a preceding level with the occurrence of no Grade 4 non- hematologic toxicity, and at 
most one Grade 3 non-hematologic toxicity or Gr ade 4 hematologic toxicity. The level at which 
DLT occurs will be defined as the minimum intolerable dose (MID). The preceding dose level at which no more than 1 of 6 patients experience Grade 3 non-hematologic toxicity and Grade 4  
hematologic  toxicity and no patients experience reversib le Grade 4 non-hematologic toxicity, will 
be defined as the maximum tolerated dose (MTD).  MTD and MID will based on toxicities observed with the first cycle of therapy. The two major endpoints will be 2 year progression-fr ee survival and sites of recurrence (liver or 
distant sites).  Since our City of Hope feasibi lity study (IRB 89188) suggested that only fewer than 
40% of the entered patients will actually undergo su rgical resection and adjuvant therapy, twice as 
many patients will be entered on study as will receive treatment.  The duration of progression-free an d overall survival will be estimated using the product-limit 
method of Kaplan-Meier, and 95% c onfidence limits calculated for th ese estimates.  The historical 
control data will then be compared to the Kaplan -Meier estimates of the 2-year progression-free 
survival rates.  Proteomic parameters will be compared with clin ical response and toxiciti es in an exploratory 
manner. However, the heterogeneity of the popula tion and the small number  of patients treated 
make formal statistical analysis of  these correlative studies unlikely. 
 
   12.0 PATHOLOGY REVIEW  
 
All patients will have advanced malignancy conf irmed by review of their biopsy specimens by the 
Division of Pathology of the City of Hope National Medical Center. 
 
13.0 REGISTRATION GUIDELINES  
 
Once a signed, written informed consent has been obtained and all pretreat ment evaluations have 
been performed, patients will be entered on study, af ter review of patient eligibility criteria by the 
assigned Data Manager from the City of Hope Department of Biostatistics. Patients may be 
screened for registration by calling the De partment of Biostatistics, ext. 2468. 
 
14.0 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS  
 
None.  
15.0 ETHICAL AND REGULA TORY CONSIDERATIONS  
  
 
 This study is to be approved by the Institutional Review Board according to City of Hope ethical 
and regulatory guidelines.  All patients will have signed an informed consent for participation in 
research activities, and will have been given a copy of the Experimental Subject's Bill of Rights.  When results of this study are reported in medical journals or at meetings , identification of those 
taking part will be withheld.  Medical records of patients will be maintained in strictest confidence, according to current legal requirements.  However, they will be made available for review, as required by the Food a nd Drug Administration (FDA) or ot her authorized users such as 
the National Cancer Institute (NCI), under the gu idelines established by the Federal Privacy Act.
 
 16.0 REFERENCES  
 
 1.  Wagman, L. D., Kemeny, M. M., Leong, L., Terz, J. J., Hill, L. R., Beatty, J. D., Kokal, W. 
A., and Riihimaki, D. U. A prospective, randomi zed evaluation of the treatment of colorectal 
cancer metastatic to th e liver. J Clin Oncol, 8: 1885-1893, 1990. 
 2.  Kemeny, M. M., Adak, S., Gray, B., MacDonald , J. S., Smith, T., Lipsitz, S., Sigurdson, E. 
R., and Benson, A. B. I. Combined modality treatment for resectable metastatic colorectal carcinoma to the liver:  surgical resection of hepatic metastases in combination with 
continuous infusion of chemotherapy -- an intergroup study. J Clin Oncol, 20: 1499-1505, 
2002. 
 3.  Kemeny, N., Huang, Y., Cohen, A. M., Shi, W., Conti, J. A., Brennan, M. F., Bertino, J. R., 
Turnbull, A. D. M., Sullivan, D., Stockman, J., Blumgart, L. H., and Fong, Y. Hepatic arterial infusion of chemothera py after resection of hepatic metastases from colorectal 
cancer. N.Engl.J.Med., 341: 2039-2048, 1999. 
 4.  Lorenz, M., Muller, H. H., Schramm, H., Gass el, H. J., Rau, H. G., Ridwelski, K., Hauss, J., 
Stieger, R., Jauch, K. W., Bech stein, W. O., and Encke, A.  Randomized trial of surgery 
versus surgery followed by adjuvant hepatic ar terial infusion with 5- fluorouracil and folinic 
acid for liver metastases of colorectal can cer. German Cooperative on Liver Metastases 
(Arbeitsgruppe Lebermetastasen). Ann.Surg, 228: 756-762, 1998. 
 5.  Kemeny, N., Jarnagin, W., Gonen, M. S. J., Blumgart, L., Sperber, D., Hummer, A., and 
Fong, Y. Phase I/II study of hepa tic arterial therapy with fl oxuridine and dexamethasone in 
combination with itravenous irinotecan as ad juvant treatment after resection of hepatic 
metastases from colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol, 21: 3303-3309, 2003. 
 6.  Alberts, S. R., Mahoney, M., Donahue, J, Roh, M., Wagman, L., and Bolton, J. Safety of 
systemic capecitabine and oxaliplatin administer ed with hepatic arteri al infusion (HAI) of 
floxuridine (FUDR) following resection of colore ctal metastases (M-CRC) confined to the 
liver:  A North Central Cancer Treatment Gr oup (NCCTG) phase II Intergroup trial. Proc 
ASCO Gastrointestinal Cancer Symposium 1 . 2004.  
 7.  Paty, P., Fong, Y, Harris, R., Koenigsberg, A, Schwartz, L., Jarnagin, W., and Kemeny, N. 
Update of phase I studies of hepatic arte rial infusion (HAI) of floxuridine (FUDR) and 
dexamethasone (DEX) plus:  Systemic axalip latin (Oxal) and irin otecan (CPT-11) or 
systemic oxal and fluorouracil (FU) and leucovo rin (LV) for unresectabl e hepatic metastasis 
from colorectal cancer.  Proc ASCO 22 . 2004.  
 8.  Williams, L. E., Duda, R. B., Proffitt, R. T., Beatty, B. G., Beatty, J. D., Wong, J. Y., 
Shively, J. E., and Paxton, R. J. Tumor uptak e as a function of tumor mass: a mathematic 
model. J.Nucl.Med., 29: 103-109, 1988. 
 9.  Liu, A., Williams, L. E., Demidecki, A. J., Raubitschek, A. A., and Wong, J. Y. Modeling of 
tumor uptake to determine the time-dose- fractio nation effect in radioimmunotherapy [letter; 
comment]. J.Nucl.Med., 35: 1561-1564, 1994. 
 10.  Duda, R. B., Wong, J. Y., Paxton, R. J., Bea tty, B. G., Williams, L. E., Shively, J. E., and 
Beatty, J. D. Localization of intraperitone al xenografts of human colon cancer by 
radiolabeled anti-CEA antibodies. J.Surg.Oncol., 44: 73-77, 1990. 
 
  11.  Buras, R., Williams, L. E., Beatty, B. G., Wong, J. Y., Beatty, J. D., and Wanek, P. M. A 
method including edge effects for the estimati on of radioimmunotherapy absorbed doses in 
the tumor xenograft model. Med.Phys., 21: 287-292, 1994. 
 12.  Wagener, C., Yang, Y. H., Crawford, F. G ., and Shively, J. E. Monoclonal antibodies for 
carcinoembryonic antigen and related antigens as a model system: a systematic approach for 
the determination of epitope specifici ties of monoclonal antibodies. J.Immunol., 130: 2308-
2315, 1983. 
 13.  Beatty, B. G., Paxton, R. J., Hawthorne, M. F., Williams, L. E., Rick ard-Dickson, K. J., Do, 
T., Shively, J. E., and Beatty, J. D. Pharm acokinetics of an anti- carcinoembryonic antigen 
monoclonal antibody conjugated to a bifunctiona l transition metal carborane complex (venus 
flytrap cluster) in tumor-bearing mice. J.Nucl.Med., 34: 1294-1302, 1993. 
 14.  Wagener, C., Clark, B. R., Rickard, K. J ., and Shively, J. E. Monoclonal antibodies for 
carcinoembryonic antigen and related antigens as a model system: determination of affinities 
and specificities of monoclonal antibodies by usi ng biotin-labeled antibodies and avidin as 
precipitating agent in a soluti on phase immunoassay. J.Immunol., 130: 2302-2307, 1983. 
 15.  Beatty, J. D., Beatty, B. G., and Vla hos, W. G. Measurement of monoclonal antibody 
affinity by non-competitive enzyme immunoassay. J.Immunol.Methods, 100: 173-179, 1987. 
 16.  Cabilly, S., Riggs, A. D., Pande, H., Shivel y, J. E., Holmes, W. E., Rey, M., Perry, L. J., 
Wetzel, R., and Heyneker, H. L. Generati on of antibody activity from immunoglobulin 
polypeptide chains produced in Escher ichia coli. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A., 81: 3273-3277, 
1984. 
 17.  Kuhn, J. A., Wong, J. Y., Beatty, B. G., B eatty, J. D., and Esteban, J. Gamma interferon 
enhancement in vivo of carcinoembryonic antigen expression in human colon cancer 
xenografts (Meeting Abstract). Pr oc.Annu.Meet.Am.Assoc.Cancer Res., 31: A1403 1990, 
1990. 
 18.  Beatty, J. D., Philben, V. J., Beatty, B. G., Williams, L. E., Paxton, R. J., Shively, J. E., 
Duda, R. B., Vlahos, W. G., Werner, J. L., Sheibani, K., and et al Imaging of colon 
carcinoma with 111-indium-labeled anti-CEA  monoclonal antibodies (Indacea) prior to 
surgery. J.Surg.Oncol., 36: 98-104, 1987. 
 19.  Wilson, L. A., Kuhn, J. A., Corbisiero, R. M., Smith, M., Beatty, J. D., Williams, L. E., 
Rusnak, M., Kondo, R. L., and Demidecki, A. J. A technical analysis of  an intraoperative 
radiation detection probe. Med.Phys., 19: 1219-1223, 1992. 
 20.  Kuhn, J. A., Corbisiero, R. M., Buras, R. R., Carroll, R. G., Wagman, L. D., Wilson, L. A., 
Yamauchi, D., Smith, M. M., Kondo, R., and Bea tty, J. D. Intraoperative gamma detection 
probe with presurgical antibody im aging in colon cancer. Arch.Surg., 126: 1398-1403, 1991. 
 21.  Hu, S., Shively, L., Raubitschek, A. A., Sherman, M., Williams, L. E., Wong, J. Y. C., 
Shively, J. E., and Wu, A. M. Minibody: A novel engineered anti- CEA antibody fragment 
(single-chain FV-CH3) which e xhibits rapid, high level targ eting of xenografts. Cancer 
Research, 56: 3061, 1996. 
 
  22.  Beatty, B. G., Paxton, R. J., Sheibani, K., Duda, R. B., Williams, L. E., Shively, J. E., and 
Beatty, J. D. Testis imagi ng with 111In-labeled anticarci noembryonic antigen monoclonal 
antibody: identification of carcinoembryonic antigen in nor mal germ cells. Cancer Res., 46: 
6503-6508, 1986. 
 23.  Hefta, S. A., Hefta, L. J., Lee, T. D., Paxton, R. J., and Shively, J. E. Carcinoembryonic 
antigen is anchored to membranes by covalent  attachment to a glyc osylphosphatidylinositol 
moiety: identification of the ethanolamine linkage site. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A., 85: 4648-
4652, 1988. 
 24.  Wu, A. M., Hu, S., Chen, W., Zieran, L., Sh ively, L., Sherman, M., Shively, J. E., Williams, 
L. E., Wong, J. Y. C., and Raubitschek, A.  A. Rapid tumor targeting and imaging by 
engineered fragments. In C. Thibeault (ed.), Antibody E ngineering: New Technologies, 
Applications and Commerci alization, pp. 126-144. Southborough:  IBC BioMedical Library, 
1996. 
 25.  Kuhn, J. A., Wong, J. Y., Beatty, J. D., Beatty, B. B., Estaban, J., and Wanek, P. M. 
Interferon enhancement of radioimmunotherapy for colon carcinoma (Meeting Abstract). 
Society.of.Surgical.Oncology Forty-third.Annua l.Cancer Symposium.and., 160-third Annual 
Cancer, 1990. 
 26.  Thompson, J. A., Pande, H., Paxton, R. J., Shively, L., Padma, A., Simmer, R. L., Todd, C. 
W., Riggs, A. D., and Shively, J. E. Mol ecular cloning of a gene belonging to the 
carcinoembryonic antigen gene family and discussion of a domain model. 
Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A., 84: 2965-2969, 1987. 
 27.  Press, O. W., Eary, J. F., Appelbaum, F. R ., Martin, P. J., Badger, C. C., Nelp, W. B., Glenn, 
S., Butchko, G., Fisher, D., Porter, B., and et  al Radiolabeled-an tibody therapy of B-cell 
lymphoma with autologous bone marro w support [see comments]. N.Engl.J.Med., 329: 
1219-1224, 1993. 
 28.  Kaminski, M. S., Zasadny, K. R., Francis, I. R., Milik, A. W., Ross, C. W., Moon, S. D., 
Crawford, S. M., Burgess, J. M., Petry, N. A ., Butchko, G. M., Glenn, S. D., and Wahl, R. L. 
Radioimmunotherapy of B-cell lymphoma with 131Ianti-B1 (anti- CD20) antibody. 
N.Engl.J.Med., 329: 459-465, 1993. 
 29.  Knox, S. J., Goris, M., Becker, M., Folwler,  S., Trisler, K., Ning, S. C., Grillo-Lopez, A., 
and Levy, R. 90Y anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy (I DEC-Y2B8) for recurrent B cell lymphoma. Clin Cancer Res, 
2: 457-470, 1996. 
 30.  DeNardo, G. L., Lewis, J. P., DeNardo, S. J., and O'Grady, L. F. Effect of Lym-1 
radioimmunoconjugate on refractory chr onic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer, 73: 1425-1432, 
1994. 
 31.  Appelbaum, F. R., Matthews, D. C., Eary, J. F., Badger, C. C., Kellogg, M., Press, O. W., 
Martin, P. J., Fisher, D. R., Nelp, W. B., Th omas, E. D., and Bernstein, I. D. The use of 
radiolabeled anti-CD33 antibody to augm ent marrow irradiati on prior to marrow 
transplantation for acute myeloge nous leukemia. Transplantation, 54: 829-833, 1992. 
 32.  Matthews, D. C., Appelbaum, F. R., Eary, J.  F., Fisher, D. R., Durack, L. D., Bush, S. A., 
Hui, T. E., Martin, P. J., Mitchell, D., Press, O. W., and et al Development of a marrow 
 
 transplant regimen for acute leukemia using ta rgeted hematopoietic irradiation delivered by 
131I- labeled anti- CD45 antibody, combined  with cyclophosphamide and total body 
irradiation. Blood, 85: 1122-1131, 1995. 
 33.  Jurcic, J. G., Caron, P. C., Nikula, T. K ., Papadopoulos, E. B., Finn, R. D., Gansow, O. A., 
Miller, W. H., Jr., Geerlings, M.  W., Warrell, R. P., Jr., Larson, S. M., and Scheinberg, D. A. 
Radiolabeled anti-CD33 monoclonal antibody M195 for myeloid leukemias. Cancer Res., 
55: 5908s-5910s, 1995. 
 34.  Juweid, M., Sharkey, R. M., Markowitz, A., Behr, T., Swayne, L. C., Dunn, R., Hansen, H. 
J., Shevitz, J., Leung, S. O., Rubin, A. D., a nd et al Treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma 
with radiolabeled murine, chimeric, or humanized LL2, an anti-CD22 monoclonal antibody. 
Cancer Res., 55: 5899s-5907s, 1995. 
 35.  Vriesendorp, H. M., Herpst, J. M., Germ ack, J. L., Klein, J. L., Leichner, P. K., 
Loudenslager, D. M., and Order, S. E. Phas e I-II studies of Yttrium-labeled Antiferritin 
treatment  for end-stage Hodgkin's disease, including radiation th erapy oncology group 87-
01. J.Clin.Oncol., 9: 918-928, 1991. 
 36.  Murray, J. L., Macey, D. J., Grant, E. J., Ro senblum, M. G., Kasi, L. P., Zhang, H. Z., Katz, 
R. L., Rieger, P. T., LeBherz, D., Bhadkamkar, V. P., South, M. S., Schlom, J., and Podoloff, 
D. A. Phase II trial of 131-I-CC49 Mab plus  alpha interferon (rIFNa) in breast cancer 
(Meeting abstract). J.Imm unother. 16(2), 162 1994. 1994.  
 37.  Welt, S., Divgi, C. R., Kemeny, N., Finn, R. D., Scott, A. M., Graham, M., Germain, J. S., 
Richards, E. C., Larson, S. M., Oettgen, H. F., and et al Phase I/II study of iodine 131I-labeled 
monoclonal antibody A33 in pa tients with advanced co lon cancer. J.Clin.Oncol., 12: 1561-
1571, 1994. 
 38.  Juweid, M., Sharkey, R. M., Behr, T., Swa yne, L. C., Rubin, A. D., Hanley, D., Herskovic, 
T., Markowitz, A., Siegel, J., and Goldenberg, D. M. Targeting and initial radioimmunotherapy of medulla ry thyroid carcinoma with 
131I-labeled monoclonal 
antibodies to carcinoembryoni c antigen. Cancer Res., 55: 5946s-5951s, 1995. 
 39.  Meredith, R. F., Khazaeli, M. B., Liu, T., Plo tt, G., Wheeler, R. H., Russell, C., Colcher, D., 
Schlom, J., Shochat, D., and LoBuglio, A. F. Do se fractionation of radi olabeled antibodies in 
patients with metastatic colon cancer. J.Nucl.Med., 33: 1648-1653, 1992. 
 40.  Divgi, C. R., Scott, A. M., Dantis, L., Capitelli, P., Siler, K., Hilton, S., Finn, R. D., Kemeny, 
N., Kelsen, D., Kostakoglu, L., and et al Phas e I radioimmunotherapy trial with iodine-131-
CC49 in metastatic colon carcinoma. J.Nucl.Med., 36: 586-592, 1995. 
 41.  Stewart, J. S., Hird, V., Snook, D., Su llivan, M., Hooker, G., Courtenay-Luck, N., 
Sivolapenko, G., Griffiths, M., Myers, M. J., Lambert, H. E., and et al Intraperitoneal 
radioimmunotherapy for ovarian cancer: pharmac okinetics, toxicity, a nd efficacy of I-131 
labeled monoclonal antibodies. In t.J.Radiat.Oncol.Biol.Phys., 16: 405-413, 1989. 
 42.  Jacobs, A. J., Fer, M., Su, F. M., Breitz, H., Thompson, J., Goodgold, H., Cain, J., Heaps, J., 
and Weiden, P. A phase I trial of a rheniu m 186-labeled monoclonal antibody administered 
intraperitoneally in ovarian carcinoma: Toxicity and clinic al response. Obstetrics & 
Gynecology,  82: 586-593, 1993. 
 
  43.  DeNardo, S. J., O'Grady, L. F., Richma n, C. M., and DeNardo, G. L. Overview of 
radioimmunotherapy in advanced breas t cancer using I- 131 chimeric L6. 
Adv.Exp.Med.Biol., 353: 203-211, 1994. 
 44.  DeNardo, S. J. Treatment of breast cancer  with biologically active chimeric monoclonal 
antibodies (Meeting abstract). Fourth.Annual.Symposium:.Current.Sta tus.and.Future.Directions.of., 35, 1992. 
 45.  DeNardo, S. J., Warhoe, K. A., O'Grady, L. F., Hellstrom, I., Hellstrom, K. E., Mills, S. L., 
Macey, D. J., Goodnight, J. E., and DeNardo, G. L. Radioimmunotherapy for breast cancer: 
treatment of a patient with I- 131 L6 chim eric monoclonal antibody. Int.J.Biol.Markers, 6: 
221-230, 1991. 
 46.  Schrier, D. M., Stemmer, S. M., Johnson, T ., Kasliwal, R., Lear, J., Matthes, S., Taffs, S., 
Dufton, C., Glenn, S. D., Butchko, G., Ceriani,  R. L., Rovira, D., Bunn, P., Shpall, E., 
Bearman, S. I., Purdy, M., Cagnoni, P., a nd Jones, R. B. High-dose 90Y Mx-
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA)-BrE-3  and autologous hematopoietic stem cell 
support (AHSCS) for the treatment of advanced breast cancer: a phase I trial. Cancer Res., 
55: 5921s-5924s, 1995. 
 47.  Roth, J. A., Putnam, J. B., Lichter, A. S., and Forstierre, A. A. Cancer of the Esophagus. In 
V. T. DeVita, S. Hellman, and S. A. Rosenberg  (eds.), Cancer: Princi ples and Practice of 
Oncology, 4th ed, pp. 776-817. Philadel phia: J.B. Lippincott, Co., 1993. 
 48.  Tannock, I. F. Combined modality treat ment with radiotherapy and chemotherapy. 
Radiother.Oncol., 16: 83-101, 1989. 
 49.  Philips, T. L. Biochemical Modi fiers: Drug-Radiation Interactions. In P. M. Mauch and J. S. 
Loeffler (eds.), Radiation Oncology: T echnology and Biology, pp. 113-151. Philadelphia: 
W.B. Saunders Co., 1994. 
 50.  McGinn, C. J. and Kinsella, T. J. Bioc hemical Modifiers: Non-hypoxic cell sensitizers. In J. 
S. Loeffler and P. M. Mauch (eds.), Ra diation Oncology: Technology and Biology, pp. 90-
112. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co., 1994. 
 51.  Hansen, H. J., Snyder, L. J., Miller, E., Va ndevoorde, J. P., Miller, O. N., Hines, L. R., and 
Burns, J. J. Carcinoembryoni c antigen (CEA) assay. A laborat ory adjunct in the diagnosis 
and management of cancer. J.Hum.Pathol., 5: 139-147, 1974. 
 52.  Neville, A. M. and Laurence, D. J. R. Report on the workshop on carcinoembryonic antigen 
(CEA): The present position and proposals for future investigation. Int.J.Cancer, 14: 1-18, 
1974. 
 53.  Steward, M., Nixon, D., Zamcheck, N., and Aisenberg, A. Carcinoembryonic antigen in 
breast cancer patients: serum levels  and disease progress. Cancer, 33: 1246-1252, 1974. 
 54.  Seppala, M., Pihko, H., and Ruoslahti, E. Ca rcinoembryonic antigen a nd alpha fetoprotein in 
malignant tumors of the female genital tract. Cancer, 33: 1377-1381, 1975. 
 55.  Stillwagon, G. B., Order, S. E., Klein, J. L., Leichner, P. K., Leibel, S. A., Siegelman, S. S., 
Fishman, E. K., Ettinger, D. S., Haulk, T., and Kopher, K. Multi-modality treatment of 
 
 primary non-resectable intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma with 131I-anti-CEA: a Radiation 
Therapy Oncology Group study. Int. J.Radiation Oncology Biol.Phys., 13: 687-695, 1987. 
 56.  Beatty, J. D., Duda, R. B., Williams, L. E., and et al. Pre-operative imaging of colorectal 
carcinoma with 111-In- labeled anti-carcinoemb ryonic antigen monoclonal antibody. Cancer 
Res, 46: 6494-6502, 1986. 
 57.  Wessels, B. W. Current status of animal radioimmunotherapy. Cancer Res., 50: 970s-973s, 
1990. 
 58.  Morton, B. A., Beatty, B. G., Mison, A., a nd et al. Role of bone marrow transplant in 
Yttrium-90 antibody therapy of co lon cancer xenografts in nude  mice. Cancer Res (Suppl), 
50: 1008s-1010s, 1990. 
 59.  Sharkey, R. M., Weadock, K. S., Natale, A ., Haywood, L., Aninipot, R., Blumenthal, R. D., 
and Goldenberg, D. M. Successful radioimm unotherapy for lung metastasis of human 
colonic cancer in nude mice. J.Natl.Cancer Inst., 83: 627-632, 1991. 
 60.  Remmenga, S. W., Colcher, D., Gansow, O ., Pippen, C. G., and Raubitschek, A. Continuous 
infusion chemotherapy as a radiation-enha ncing agent for yttrium-90-radiolabeled 
monoclonal antibody therapy of a human  tumor xenograft. Gynecol.Oncol., 55: 115-122, 
1994. 
 61.  Neumaier, M., Shively, L., Chen, F. S., Gaid a, F. J., Ilgen, C., Paxton, R. J., Shively, J. E., 
and Riggs, A. D. Cloning of the genes for T 84.66, an antibody that has a high specificity and 
affinity for carcinoembryonic antigen, a nd expression of chimeric human/mouse T84.66 
genes in myeloma and Chinese hamster ovary cells. Cancer Res., 50: 2128-2134, 1990. 
 62.  Neumaier, M., Zimmermann, W., Shively, L., Hinoda, Y., Riggs, A. D., and Shively, J. E. 
Characterization of a cDNA clone for the nonspe cific cross- reacting antigen (NCA) and a 
comparison of NCA and carcinoembryonic antigen. J.Biol.Chem., 263: 3202-3207, 1988. 
 63.  Wong, J. Y. C., Chu, D., Yamauchi, D ., Odom-Maryon, T., Williams, L. E., Liu, A., 
Wilczynski, S., Wu, A., Shively, J. E., and Raubitschek, A. A. Phase I radioimmunotherapy 
trials evaluating 90yttrium labe led anti-CEA chimeric T84.66 in patients with metastatic 
CEA-producing malignancies. Int.J. Radiat.Oncol.Biol.Phys. 39, 205. 1997.  
 64.  Seifert, P., Baker, L. H., Reed, M. L., a nd Vaitkevicius, V. K. Comparison of continuously 
infused 5-fluorouracil with bolus injection in  treatment of patients with colorectal 
adenocarcinoma. Cancer, 36: 123-128, 1975. 
 65.  Lokich, J. J., Ahlgren, J. D., Gullo, J. J., Philips, J. A., and Fryer, J. G. A prospective 
randomized comparison of continuous infusi on fluorouracil with a conventional bolus 
schedule in metastatic colore ctal cancer. J.Clin.Oncol., 7: 425-432, 1989. 
 66.  Weinerman, B., Shah, A., Fields, A., Cri pps, I. C., Wilson, K., McCormick, R., Temple, W., 
Maroun, J., Bogues, W., and Pater, J. Systemic  infusion versus bolus chemotherapy with 5 
fluorouracil in measurable metastatic co lorectal cancer. Am J.Clin Oncol., 15: 518-523, 
1992. 
 
  67.  O'Connell, M., Martenson, J., Rich, T., Wieand, H, Krook, J, Macdonald, J., Haller, D., 
Mayer, R., and Gunderson, L. L. Protracted ve nous infusion (PVI) 5-fl uorouracil (5-FU) as a 
component of effective combined  modality postoperative surgic al adjuvant therapy for high-
risk rectal cancer. Proc.Am.Soc.Clin.Oncol. 12(564), 193. 1993.  
 68.  Rougier, P. H., Paillot, B., Laplauche, A., Morvan, F., Benhamed, M., Seitz, J. F., Laplaige, 
P. H., Jacob, J., Grandjouan, S., Netter Pinon, G, Kamioner, D, Combes, M, Fabri, M. C., 
Luboinski, M., and Tigaud, J. M. End results of multicentric randomized trial comparing 5-
FU in continuous systemic infusion to bolus  administration in measurable metastatic 
colorectal cancer. Proc.Amer.Soc.Clin.Oncol. 11(465), 163. 1992.  
 69.  Byfield, J. E., Calabro-Jones, P., Klisak, I., and Kulhanian, F. Ph armacologic requirements 
for obtaining sensitization of human tumor cells  in vitro to combine 5-fluorouracil or ftofar 
and x-rays. Int.J.Radiation Oncology Biol.Phys., 8: 1923-1933, 1982. 
 70.  Smalley, S. R., Kimler, B. F., and Evans, R. G. 5-fluorouracil modulation of radiosensitivity 
in cultured huamn carcinoma cells . Int.J.Radiat.Oncol.Biol.Phys., 20: 207-211, 1991. 
 71.  Wong, J. Y. C., Shibata, S., Williams, L. E ., Kwok, C. S., Liu, A., C hu, D. Z., Yamauchi, D. 
M., Wilczynski, S., Ikle, D. N., Wu, A. M., Yazaki, P. J., Shively, J. E., and Raubitschek, A. 
A. A phase I trial of Y-90-anti-car cinoembryonic antigen chimeric T84.66 
radioimmunotherapy with 5-fluorouracil in pati ents with metastatic colorectal cancer. 
Clinical Cancer Research, 9: 5842-5852, 3 A.D. 
 72.  Gold, D. V., Schutsky, K., Modrak, D., and Cardillo, T. M. Low-dose radioimmunotherapy 
(90Y-PAM4) combined with gemcitabine for the tr eatment of experimental pancreatic cancer. 
Clinical Cancer Research, 9: 3929s-3937s, 2003. 
 73.  Wong, J. Y. C., Shibta, S., Williams, L. E ., Liu, A., Chu, D. Z., Yamauchi, D., Wilczynski, 
S., Wu, A. M., Yazaki, P., Shively, J. E., Doro show, J. D., and Raubitschek, A. A. A phase I 
trial combining 90Y-anti-CEA (cT84.66) with co ntinuous infusion 5-fluorouracil in patients 
with metastatic colorect al cancer. Cancer Biother.Radiopharm. 15(4), 405. 2000.  
 74.  Graves, S. S., Dearstyne, E, Hylarides, M ., Pantalias, A, Axworthy, D., Jones, M. H., and 
Auditore-Hargreaves, K. Gemcitabine improves the efficacy of 90Yttrium-based pretarget 
radioimmunotherapy against LS174T tumor xe nografts. Proceeding of the American 
Association for Cancer Research 43, 479. 2002.  
 75.  Jain, R. K. Physiological barriers to  delivery of monoclonal antibodies and other 
macromolecules in tumors. Cancer Res., 50: 814s-819s, 1990. 
 76.  Goldenberg, D. M. Carcinoembryonic antigen  as a target cancer antigen for radiolabeled 
antibodies: prospects for cancer im aging and therapy. Tumour.Biol., 16: 62-73, 1995. 
 77.  Behr, T. M., Salib, A. L., Liersch, T., Behe , M., Angerstein, C., Blumenthal, R. D., Fayyazi, 
A., Sharkey, R. M., Ringe, B., Becker, H., Wormann, B., Hiddemann, W., Goldenberg, D. 
M., and Becker, W. Radioimmunotherapy of sm all volume disease of colorectal cancer 
metastatic to the liver: preclinical evaluati on in comparison to standard chemotherapy and 
initial results of a phase I clinical study. Clin.Cancer Res, 5: 3232s-3242s, 1999. 
 
  78.  Behr, T. M., Liersch, T., Gr iesinger, F., Kaufmann, C. C., Be he, M., Gratz, S., Angerstein, 
C., Becker, H., Goldenberg, D. M., and Beck er, W. Radioimmunotherapy of small volume 
disease of metastatic colorectal cancer. Resu lts of an ongoing Phase II trial with the 131I-
labeled humanized anti-CEA antibody, hM N-14. Cancer, Biotherapy & Radiopharm., 15 : 
413, 2000. 
 79.  Hird, V., Maraveyas, A., Snook, D., Dhokia, B ., Soutter, W. P., Meares, C., Stewart, J. S., 
Mason, P., Lambert, H. E., and Epenetos, A. A.  Adjuvant therapy of ovarian cancer with 
radioactive monoclona l antibody. Br.J.Cancer, 68: 403-406, 1993. 
 80.  Hale, J. E., Gelfanova, V., Ludwig, J. R., and Knierman, M. D. Application of proteomics 
for discovery of protein biomarkers . Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic, 2: 185-193, 2003. 
 81.  Yates, J. E. Mass spectral analysis in proteomics. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct, 33: 
297-316, 2004. 
 82.  Bailey, W. and Ulrich, R. Molecular profili ng approaches for identyfying novel biomarkers. 
Expert Opin Drug Saf, 3: 137-151, 2004. 
 83.  Yu, L. R., Zhou, M., Conrads, T. P., and Veenstra, T. D. Diagnositc proteomics:  Serum 
proteomic patterns for the detection of  early stage cancers. Dis Markers, 19: 209-218, 2004. 
  
 
  
APPENDIX I 
 
ADMINISTRATION OF INTRAVEN OUS RADIOLABELED ANTIBODY:     
 
First, 100 ug of the antibody will administered intravenously over 2-3 minutes as a test dose. If there is no acute reaction after 15 minutes, the remainder of the dose will be administered 
intravenously over approximately 25 minutes.  Although uncommon, possible adverse reactions 
that may occur include: 1) chills and fever, 2) itchi ng, rash, or erythema, 3) pain in chest, flank or 
back (signs of anaphylaxis), 4) bronchospasm (m ay be sign of anaphylaxis ), 5) hypotension (rare, 
may be sign of anaphylaxis), and 6) anaphylaxis . Infusion will be terminated for any of the 
following reasons:  1) fall in blood pressure > 25 mm  Hg systolic, 2) respir atory distress, 3) pulse 
greater than 130/min, 4) temperature > 102 °F, 5) clinician's judgment, or 6) patient's request.  
Nursing and physician personnel will be present at all times during the administration and post 
administration period.  Vital signs will be monito red prior to administration, every 5-15 minutes 
during administration and in the immediate post administration period.  Af ter administration, the 
IV will be flushed with IV fluid and then disc ontinued.  IV tubing, and any bottles or syringes 
used for administration of radiolabeled antibody will be counted post administration to ensure no 
excessive remaining activity in the tubing.  A sp ecial 1" Plexiglass and lead holder for a 60 cc 
syringe has been constructed for shielding of the syringe which will contain the administered 
90Y 
antibody.  
 
 APPENDIX II 
 
Percent Red Marrow in Irradiated Bone  Anatomic Site Percent Total Red Marrow   Head    13.1  Cranium   12  Mandible          1.1   Upper Limbs  8.3  2 Humerus       2.0  2 Scapulae       4.8  2 Clavicles       1.5   Sternum   2.3   Ribs    7.9   Vertebrae   42.3  Cervical       3.4  Thoracic       14.1  Lumbar       10.9  Sacral        13.9   Lower Limb Girdle  26.1 
 2 Os Coxae       22 
 2 Femoral Head and neck        4   From Phys. Med. Biol. 5:255, 1961. 
 
 
  
 
 APPENDIX III 
 
 
KARNOFSKY PERFORMANCE SCALE 
  100 Normal; no complaints; no evidence of disease    90 Able to carry on normal activity; minor signs or symp toms of disease 
   80 Normal activity with effort; some sign or symptoms of disease    70 Cares for self, unable to carry on normal activity or do active work 
   60 Requires occasional assistance, but is  able to care for most personal needs 
   50 Requires considerable assi stance and frequent medical care 
   40 Disabled; requires speci al care and assistance 
   30 Severely disabled; hospitalization is  indicated, although deat h is not imminent 
   20 Very sick; hospitalization necessary; active support treatment is necessary    10 Moribund; fatal processes progressing rapidly  
    0 Dead 
                      
 
  
  
APPENDIX IV. 
 
COMMON TOXICITY GRADING 
  USE CTC VERSION 3.0 
 
http://ctep.cancer.gov/forms/CTCAEv3.pdf  
 
 
         
 
 PHASE I TRACKING LOG FOR IRB #: _______________ 
 
Pt# Med Rec #c Name Dose* 
Level 
(Arm) Eval-
uable for 
DLT? > = Grade 
3? If Yes: 
Highest Grade (3,4) Toxicities  
Per Organ System During Cycles 
 used for MTD Evaluation 
DLT                               Non-DLT Decision 
Re: Next Pt’s Dose 
Level Reason for Decision 
(Complete for each 
patient) 
        Grd    Organ Sys         Grd     Organ Sys   
___  ________-___ L _____________ ____ ___ Yes ___ Yes  ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ Same Dose  _______________ 
  F _____________  ___ No ___ No  ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ Escalate  _______________ 
 Date 
on-Study:        ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ De-escalate  _______________ 
 ____/____/_____     ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ MD Initials  _______________ 
          
 
        Grd    Organ Sys         Grd     Organ Sys   
___  ________-___ L _____________ ____ ___ Yes ___ Yes  ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ Same Dose  _______________ 
  F _____________  ___ No ___ No  ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ Escalate  _______________ 
 Date 
on-Study:       ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ De-escalate  _______________ 
 ____/____/_____     ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ MD Initials  _______________ 
          
 
        Grd    Organ Sys         Grd     Organ Sys   
___  ________-___ L _____________ ____ ___ Yes ___ Yes  ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ Same Dose  _______________ 
  F _____________  ___ No ___ No  ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ Escalate  _______________ 
 Date 
on-Study:       ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ De-escalate  _______________ 
 ____/____/_____     ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ MD Initials  _______________ 
          
 
        Grd    Organ Sys         Grd     Organ Sys   
___  ________-___ L _____________ ____ ___ Yes ___ Yes  ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ Same Dose  _______________ 
  F _____________  ___ No ___ No  ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ Escalate  _______________ 
 Date 
on-Study:       ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ De-escalate  _______________ 
 ____/____/_____     ____   __________ ____   __________ ___ MD Initials  _______________ 
          
 
1.1.1 What is the waiting period for evaluating toxicities  prior to entering the next patient?  _______________ 
  
* Dose Levels:  1.  2.                   3.    4.    5.    6.  
 
7.  
8.  9.  10.  11.  12.  