 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Official title of study: UCI 14 -92 / HS #2015 - 1889:  Phase IV Study of Daylight Photodynamic Therapy  
with Aminolev ulinic Acid for Actinic Keratoses  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Date of  Document: July 1,2015   
 
Protocol/Methods:  
The study was designed prospectively to have 90% power to detect a 50% change in number of  
AKs. The study was approved by the University of California Institutional Review Board. A total  
of 30 patients were recruited from July 2015 -Octobe r 2016 at the University of California, Irvine  
Department of Dermatology. Two patients were lost to follow up. Study inclusion criteria were  
age >18 years old with >10 actinic keratoses measuring >3mm each on the face or scalp.  
Exclusion criteria were hist ory of photosensitive skin disorder, current pregnancy, or use of  
topical or oral retinoids, imiquimod, ingenol mebutate, fluorouracil, or photosensitizing  
medications in the past 3 months prior to PDT or during the 6 month study period. Patients were  
also excluded if the weather was rainy on the intended day of treatment.  
Patients were instructed to wash their faces using a washcloth with warm, soapy water for 5  
minutes in order to remove excess oil and improve drug penetration and then gently curetted  
with a 4mm non -disposable curette.  
After curettage, the ALA (Kerastick®, DUSA) was applied first as spot treatment to the individual  
lesions and then as field treatment to the entire treatment area. Following ALA application, an  
avobenzone -containing chemical  sunscreen was applied. The chemical sunscreen was utilized  
to block ultraviolet light (and possible sunburn from daylight exposure) while allowing  
wavelengths above 400nm to pass through and activate the PpIX.  
After application patients were sent outdoors  or home with a handheld luxometer (Suncheck  
Instruments, Model HS1010) and detailed written instructions. All patients were instructed to  
begin their daylight exposure within 30 minutes of ALA application and to remain in the daylight  
for 2 hours. We spec ifically asked patients to be in a shaded area “where you can see the sky  
but not the sun.” During daylight exposure, patients recorded pain (scale of 0 -10), lux, the  
weather (raining, cloudy, partly cloudy, sunny) at times 0, 1 hour, and 2 hours, and pati ent 
satisfaction (not satisfied, slightly satisfied, moderately satisfied, or very satisfied). After daylight  
exposure all patients were instructed to apply physical sunscreen with titanium or zinc oxide and  
a wide brimmed hat in order to block visible lig ht and prevent further PPIX activation. The  
patients were not instructed to wash off the ALA afterward. They were instructed to go indoors  
for the following 48 hours. All patients were given prophylactic valacyclovir 500 mg BID for 7  
days to prevent herpes  simplex reactivation and possible eczema herpeticum.  
Patients were evaluated and photographed at time 0 days, 3 days, 3 months, and 6 months  
after treatment and AK counts were performed at 0 days, 3 months, and 6 months. Summary  
statistics were calculated  and a Pearson correlation coefficient test was performed (Stata/IC,  
Version 15) to assess the relationship between lux received and AK count at 6 months.  