Study Title:  Screen -and-treat Program for Chronic Kidney Disease - High Risk Persons  
NCT#:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date:  11/4/2019   
 
  
Additional Study Information  
 
Adapted from original IRB application, last approved  July 10, 2019  
 
Summary:    We propose  a pragmatic,  cluster -randomized  clinical  trial to evaluate  the effectiveness  and 
feasibility of a CKD screening program followed by education and incrementally intensified treatment 
strategies  to improve  BP management  among  non-diabetic,  hypertensive  adults  with screen -detected  CKD.  
 
Study Design:  Pilot, pragmatic, three -arm cluster -randomized trial  
 
Intervention Arm # 1: triple -marker screening for CKD followed by education for the patient and the primary 
care provider (Screen -Educate)  
 
Intervention arm #2:   addition of  an option for pharmacist co -management (Screen -Educate plus Pharmacist)  
 
Usual Care : No Intervention  
 
Setting:  Primary care practices at the San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center.  
 
Unit of Randomization:  provider team  
 
Additional Information  
 
Participants  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
The entire primary care medical practice at SFVAMC will be considered. Randomization will occur  at the 
team  level.  Within  each  team,  individual  patients  will be considered  eligible for  CKD  screening  by this 
protocol  and inclusion  in our trial if they have  hypertension  without  concomitant diabetes,  and no prior 
recorded  diagnosis  of CKD.  HTN  will be defined  as SBP >140  or DBP  >90 mmHg  at more  than two 
encounters  (any encounter)  within  the previous  3 years  or a documented  diagnosis  of HTN (listed in 
problem list or ICD -9 code). Diagnosed CKD will be defined as a documentation of CKD in the problem 
list or ICD -9 code or on -going nephrology follow up. We define diagnosed CKD without consideration of 
eGFRcreat or ACR in the laboratory section of the medical record, since work from our group  and others  
has shown  that awareness  and recognition  of CKD  is extremely  low, even  among  persons with  
documented  reduced  eGFR  or albuminuria.  Persons  will be required  to have  seen  their physician  at least 
one time within the past 18  months.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Kidney  transplant  recipients,  known pregnant  women,  and individuals  with an eGFR  < 15 ml/min/1. 73  m2 
will be excluded  from this study  as they likely  need  specialty  care for uncontrolled  hypertension . Persons  
aged  >80 will be excluded  because  data on aggressive  BP lowering  in this population  are less clear and 
adverse effects associated with aggressive BP control have been well documented. We will exclude 
persons with NYHA class III or IV heart failure, known ejection fraction < 25%, or documented allergy 
to ACE/ARB.  Other  exclusion  criteria  relate  to the required  ability  to communicate  with clinical  
providers:  impaired  cognition  or severe  mental  illness;  expected  life expectancy  < 6 months.  Patients  will 
be excluded  if the PCP  informs  the study  coordinator  that the patient  should  not be screened  for CKD . 
 
 
Additional Details:  
Study  Design:  We propose  a pragmatic,  cluster -randomized  clinical  trial to evaluate  the effectiveness  
and feasibility of a CKD screening program followed by education and incrementally intensified 
treatment strategies  to improve  BP management  among  non-diabetic,  hypertensive  adults  with screen -
detected  CKD.  
 
Primary care practices will be randomized into three groups: usual care , screen and educate and 
screen -educate and intensify strategies. The screen and educate strategy takes advantage of the 
electronic medical record and established  multi -disciplinary primary care teams in VA clinics to identify 
non-diabetic Veterans with hypertension  who do not have  a diagnosis  of CKD.  The study  coordinator  
will order  the screening  tests  on behalf of the primary care provider, after PCP consent has been 
obtained. In the information sheet , participants will be informed that tests are being ordered if they do 
not opt out. The nurse may alert the patient that they have orders to go to the laboratory prior to the 
PCP visit, as they already do  in routine care. The PCP will receive the results of the triple marker. In 
addition, the study coordinator will summarize the results and provide standard, guideline concordant 
education and recommendations  for CKD  management,  if applicable,  in the form of a standardized  
“research  note”.  This research note is entered into the medical record and it is co -signed by the PCP. 
This note serves as the provider education, and it will encourage the provider to counsel patients on 
their CKD related risks as outline d in this note.  Patients  will also receive  a letter  with the results,  along  
with patient  education materials. These materials have been designed and are used nationwide by the 
National Kidney Disease Evaluation Program  (NKDEP).  
 
The screen, educate and intensify treatment strategy will move a step further beyond screen -and- 
educate alone. Providers will be contacted notifying them of their patients with the highest risk for CKD 
via laboratory results, and reminding them of the opt ion to refer patients to a clinical pharmacist -led BP 
management program. The intensified blood pressure management strategy (i.e. the Screening + 
Education + Clinical pharmacist outlined above) currently exists as part of the available treatment  
options  for patients  with hypertension,  but will be refined  to include  CKD  related  considerations. A 
primary care clinical pharmacist, who is already an active member of the primary care team at the VA, 
will receive  a referral  for patients  with the highest  risk CKD, as defined  by the CKD  panel  ( eGFRcreat -
cys <6 0 ml/min/1.73m2 and ACR 30 mg/g) from the physician in the intervention group (screen + 
educate + pharmacy option). The pharmacist will schedule a series of appointments with Veterans 
identified as having  highest  risk CKD  to achieve  sustained  BP control  and ensure  use of ACE/ARB.  The 
pharmacist  would  follow  treatment  algorithms  recommended  by the 2012  KDIGO  international  CKD  
guidelines,  and designed by a team of internists and nephrologists.  
 
 
Outcomes:  
 
Primary Outcome Measure : Change in blood pressure [  Time  Frame:  12 months  ]: Change in blood pressure 
from enrollment to the end of the 12 -month follow up period as a continuous outcome  
 
Secondary Outcome Measures : ACE/ARB prescription by a clinician [  Time  Frame:  12 months  ] 
Percent of persons with controlled blood pressure, defined as less than 140/90 at 2 consecutive visits . 
Other Outcome Measures:  Testing time , Testing Cost , Feasibility and Implementation Measures  
 
Statistical Analys is Summary:  
 
For patient -level variables, we will assess co -morbid conditions (diabetes, hypertension,  cardiovascular  
disease,  heart  failure),  medication  use, blood  pressure  levels,  laboratory  data (eGFR, albuminuria) from 
the electronic medical record. National VA data will serve as our data source along  with Pharmacy  
Benefits  Management  data. We will use this as a baseline data.  
 
We will determine  the proportion  of persons  who have  CKD among those screened and calculate a 
number needed to screen (NNS) per CKD case detected. CKD is defined  as eGFRcreat/cys  < 60 
ml/min/1.73m2 or ACR  ≥ 30 mg/g,  as per guidelines.  We will estimate  NNS across  subgroups  (age ><65,  
gender,  presence  of CVD).  We will also estimate  the NNS  for eGFR  and ACR separately.  
 
We will begin  by performing  initial  comparisons  of patient  characteristics  among  eligible  patients  in the 
usual care vs. screen -and-educate provider arms. These include age distribution, BP levels, and 
other baseline  variables  detailed  above.  We will also compare  PCP  characteristics  such  as years  of 
training  and average panel size. Baseline balance between the arms will be assessed with logit link 
generalized esti mating equation (GEE) models for categorical variables and linear GEE models for 
continuous variables. We will control for characteristics that might influence outcomes but differ 
significantly at baseline  between  trial arms  in subsequent  analyses  of primary  and secondary  
outcomes.  
 
Our primary  clinical  outcome  is change  in BP from study  enrollment  to end of follow  up. We will  compare 
the usual care vs. screen -and-educate provider arms among all eligible hypertensives because CKD 
status will remain unknown within the usual care group. We will also compare the binary variable 
(proportion  of persons  with achieved  sustained  BP control) in the two arms  as defined  above.  Change  in 
BP from baseline to end of follow -up will be compared at the patient level. Multivariable regression 
analyses will  utilize  generalized  estimating  equations  (GEE)  to account  for the cluster  randomization.  In 
this study, hypertensive  patients  (the units  of analysis)  are nested  within  nurse -led teams  (the unit of 
randomization) and  are not independent.  We will compare  different  structures  for the within -cluster  
correlation  matrix  (e. g.,  autoregressive,  exchangeable,  or unstructured)  using  the quasi -likelihood  
information  criterion  (QIC)  to ensure  estimation  efficiency.  Continuous  outcomes  including  change  from 
baseline  in SBP and DBP  will be analyzed with an identity link and normal distribution. Binary outcomes 
including BP control will be analyzed with a logit link and a binomial distribution. The final multivariable -
adjusted models will be built separately  for each  outcome  using  a backward  stepwise  regression  with a 
p-value  of 0.05 or less for entry and retention of covariates. We will also report the unadjusted and 
adjusted intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) to assist in the planning of future cluster randomized 
controlled trials. Additionally,  among  patients  randomized  to the screen -and-educate provider arm, we 
will also compare utilization of ACE/ARB at baseline and at the end of the trial and among patients with 
ACR ≥ 30 mg/g, using paired t test or Wilcoxon signed rank test, depending on the distribution of the  
outcome . We will compare BP control among all persons with screen detected CKD in the  provider  
screen -educate -intensify  arm vs. screen -and-educate.  As we are interested  in understanding  the 
additional benefit of the pharmacy intervention in the highest risk group, we will perform analyses 
comparing  the clinical  outcomes  in the subset  of patients  with highest  risk CKD  in the screen -and-
educate provider vs. the screen -educate -intensify  arms.  