 
v. 3/30/2018   1 
  RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
Protocol Title:   Collaborative Care for alcohol use disorders in the patient -
centered medical home ( short title: Project ReDUCE)  
Principal Investigator:  Jon Morgenstern, Ph.D.  
Primary Contact Name:  Svetlana Levak, Ph.D.  
Primary Contact Phone:  (516) 837 -1675  
Primary Contact Email:  slevak@northwell.edu  
Date Revised:   3/30/2018  
IRB Number:   15-0743  
 
1) PREVIOUS STUDY HIST ORY  
Has this study ever been reviewed and rejected/disapproved by another IRB prior to submission 
to this IRB?  
NO YES—if yes, please explain: N/A  
 
2) BRIEF SUMMARY OF RESEARCH  
 
Excessive drinking (ED) and Alcohol Use D isorders (AUD s) remain one of the nation’s leading 
public health problems, yet this problem is l argely under -recognized and undertreated. Although 
many people with ED/AUD see a primary care physician annually, there has been limited 
research and implementation of models to treat ED/AUD in primary care. Important changes in 
the healthcare system and a dvances in alcohol research offer new and potentially 
transformative opportunities to integrate ED/AUD treatment into primary care practices. In 
particular, these changes have led to the development of new patient -centered, integrated care 
models that faci litate the treatment of behavioral health issues in primary care. Experts have 
repeatedly called for the development of a chronic care model to treat alcohol problems in 
primary care, similar to models now used to treat other chronic illnesses, including d epression. 
Yet, research to develop and test such models has been surprisingly limited. The primary aim of 
this proposal is to develop and test a chronic care model to treat ED/AUD in the patient -
centered model home (PCMH) using the National Institutes of Health ( NIH) stage model of 
intervention development. Specifically, using a mixed methods approach, this study proposes to 
adapt and test the collaborative care (CC) model for depression to treat ED/AUD in a high 
volume PCMH. Importantly, we will build the  CC model onto a Screening, Brief Intervention, and 
Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) program that is already in place in the PCMH. Notably, this 
SBIRT model currently refers those with ED/AUD out to specialty treatment providers.  
 
The purpose of the study is  to develop and test a collaborative care model to treat  ED and 
AUDs  in a primary care practice. We plan to conduct this study in two phases using the NIH 
stage model. A third stage that includes a randomized controlled trial will be conducted later  and 
will be submitted as a separate IRB protocol  after we adapt protocols based on what is learned 
in the first 2 phases  
 
The proposed study will be conducted in two phases. Phase I will involve initial adaptation of the 
CC model for depression. During this phas e, relevant depression CC protocols and measures 
will be adapted for ED/AUD and pilot tested on participants (n = 25) recruited in a PCMH. Phase 
 
v. 3/30/2018   2 
 II will involve model refinement based on iterative cycles of patient and PCMH staff feedback 
and examination o f drinking outcome data. During this phase, participants (n = 60) will be 
assessed and followed for three months. Iterative development will focus on: 1) utilizing a 
stepped -care model of treatment which will include outpatient detoxification, behavioral 
interventions, and medication intervention and management, 2) maximizing patient 
engagement, and 3) balancing the resource and expertise constraints of treating ED/AUD in a 
PCMH. Participants in Phases I and II  will be assessed  at weeks 1, 4, 8, and 12  and primary 
outcome data on drinking outcomes will be examined.  
 
3) INTRODUCTION/BACKGROUND MATERIAL/PRELIMINARY STUDIES AND 
SIGNIFICANCE  
 
Public  Health  and Excessive  Drinking . ED and Alcohol  Use Disorders  (AUD) remain  one of 
the nation’s  leading public  health problems.  One in six Americans  exceeds  recommended  
guidelines  for healthy  drinkin g (Center for Disease Control & Prevention, 2014) and about  one 
in twelve  (8.45%)  meet  criteria  for AUD (Grant , et al., 2004) . Annual  costs  to society related  to 
alcohol  problems  are estimated  to be $223.50  billion  (Bouchery, Harwood, Sacks, Simon & 
Brewer, 2006) , a figure  similar  to that of other  major  diseases  like diabetes  ($245 billion)  and 
cancer  ($216 billion).  Despite  the magnitude  of the probl em, ED/AUD  are under - recognized  
and undertreated.  For example,  studies  indica te that only 12% of those  with an AUD  ever 
received  treatment  (Cohen, Feinn, Arias , & Kranzler, 2007) . Barriers  to treatment  include  
stigma,  impaired  motivation  among  those  with alcohol  dependence  (AD),  inadequate  insur ance 
coverage,  and the delivery  of AUD  treatm ent in special ty care settings that exist outside  of 
mainstream  medicine.  The alcohol  research  community  has long recognized  this problem 
(Institute of Medicine, 1990) . Progress  has certainly  been made  in the last 25 years,  but the 
problem  of delivering  care to the vast majority  of those  with ED/AUD  remains  unresolved.   
 
New Opportunities  to Integrate  Treatment  of ED/AUD  into Mainstre am Healthcar e: 
Improv ed understanding  of alcoh ol problems  and changes  in the healt hcare system  offer new 
and potentially  transformative  opportunities  to expand  access  to alcohol  treatment.  AD is now 
widely  understood  as a chronic illness,  similar  to that of other  chronic  medical  conditions  
(McLellan , et al,, 2014) . Effective  treatments  have  been  developed  that can be feasibly  
delivered  in primary  care settings  including  brief advice (Center for Substance Abuse 
Treatment , 1999) , time-limited  behavioral  interventions  (Babor , et al., 2007) , and 
pharmacotherapies  (Park , et al., 201 5). Epidemiology  studies  provide new support  for the 
public  health argument  that alcohol  treatments  should  be made  accessible  to those  with mild to 
moderate  alcohol problems,  in part as a strategy  to avert  the development  of chronic  illness 
(Town, Naimi, Mokdad , & Brewer, 2006) . For example,  an analysis  of NESARC  data found  that 
over half of those  diagnosed  with AD reported  relatively  intact  psychos ocial functioning  and low 
rates  of mental  health  comorbiditi es. These  subgroups  appeared  to have  a less severe  course  
of AD and had the lowest  rates  of treatment  seeking  (<5% ). Study  findings  support  the 
argument  that primary  care might be a more  suitable  setting  to treat a large  segment  of those  
with AD who currently  remain  untreated,  if such treatment  was widely  available  (Lenaerts , et al., 
2014; Willenbring, 2007) . Similarly,  studies  indicate  about  16% of Americans  binge  drink four 
or more  times  a month,  most  binge  drink ers are not alcohol  depe ndent,  and binge  drinking  
accounts  for 75% of alcohol’s  estimated  costs  to societ y (Town, et al. , 2006; Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, 2012) . These  findings highlig ht the population  health  and 
economic  benefits  of screening  and intervention  in primary  care.  Overall,  recent  research 
findin gs substan tially strengthen  the argument  for expanding  ED/AUD  treatment  to primary  care 
settings.  Evidence  supports  the treatment  of AUD  as a chronic  illness  similar  to other  chronic  
conditions;  the effecti veness  of interven tions that can be feasibly  delivered  in primary  care 
settings;  and the public  health  bene fits of wides pread access  to alcohol  treatment,  especially  
early  intervention,  as an important  strategy  to reduce  healthcare  costs. 
 
v. 3/30/2018   3 
  
Changes  in Healthcare  Deliver y: The last decade  has witnessed  a dramatic  and accelerating  
transformation  of the healt hcare delivery  system  driven by the twin goals  of improving  quality  of 
care and reducing  costs (Mechanic, 2012) . Two developments  of special  impo rt for the 
integration  of alcohol  treatment  into mainstream  healthcare  are: 1) the paradi gm shift from a 
focus  on acute to chronic illness  and 2) the passage  of healthcare  reform legislati on that when  
fully impleme nted will greatly increase  insurance  coverage  for treating  alcohol problem s 
(McLellan , et al., 2014; Ghitza & Tai, 2014) .   (Lewis , et al., 2014)  
 
As noted  above, ED/AUD  substanti ally contribu tes to the burden of chronic illness.  Alcohol  
screening and early intervention  has been  shown to be one of the most  cost effective  
preven tative  medicine  strategi es for use in primary  care (Solberg, Maciosek , & Edwards, 
2008) , and effective  interventions  exist that can feasibly  be implemented  to treat a wide 
spectrum  of alcohol  problems  from at-risk drinking to uncomplicated  AD within  the primary  care 
setting.  There is reason  to anticipate  that identif ication and access to treatment  in primary  care 
will lead to great er engagement  and reduced  drinking for problem drinkers  and those  with 
unco mplicated  AD; groups  who rarely  receive  care in the current  system. These  developmen ts 
present  a new and exciting  window of opportunity  to address  a longstandi ng, seemingly  
intractable  public  health challenge:  integration  of alcohol  treatment  into mainstream  medicine  
as a way to reduce  the number  of untreated  or undertreated  Americans  who drink  excessively  
or are afflicted  with AUD.  
 
Gap in Model Development  and Testing : Wagner’s  Chronic  Care  Model  (CCM)  has been  an 
influential  template  for designing  and implem enting  most  of the above  mentioned  integrated  
care models.  Addiction  experts  have  repeatedly  called  for the development  of a CCM  to treat 
AUD  (McLellan , et al., 2014; Lenaerts , et al., 2014; Butler , et al., 2008; Saitz, Larson, Labelle, 
Richardson , & Samet, 2008; Saitz, 2013) . CCM  features  as implement ed in primary  care 
includ e: patient -centeredness,  multi -professional  teamwork,  conti nuity of care,  evidence -based  
practic e, and conti nuous  quality  improv ement (Lenaerts , et al., 2014; Ouwens, Wollersheim, 
Hermens, Hulscher , & Grol, 2005) . A review published  in 2014  by a NIDA  Consensus  panel  
concluded  that despite  the clear clinical  need for a CCM  model  and the extraordinary  
opportunity  for integrati on created  by ACA,  implementation  of such  a model  would  prove  
difficult  for two reasons  (McLellan , et al., 2014) . First,  few practical  models  exist to provide  
guidance.  Second,  there is a striking abse nce of empirical  evidence  comparing  CCM  to other  
SUD  treatm ent model s. Thus,  there  is a consens us among  experts  that a CCM  model  of 
ED/AUD  is needed  to capitalize  on the dramatic  changes  in healthcar e, but such  a model  and 
evidence  to support  its efficacy  does  not yet exist.  
 
Research  on Models  that Integrate  AUD  Trea tment  into Primary  Care  Settings : 
Screening,  Brief Intervention  and Referral  to Treatment  (SBIRT)  has been  extensively  studied  
as a model  for treating alcoh ol problems  in primary  care. Reviews  have  found  that SBI is 
effective  for at-risk drinkers,  that multi -component  brief interventions  (BI) are more  effective  
than single encou nters, but that SBIRT  appears ineffec tive among  harmful  drinkers  and those 
with mild to moderate  AD (Jonas , et al., 2012; McCambridge & Rollnick, 201 4; Saitz, 2010) . 
These  widely  accepted  results  (i.e., modest  effects  on consumption  for at-risk drinkers  and an 
abse nce of evidence  of efficacy for heavier  drinkers)  have led a number  of senior  alcoh ol 
scien tists to call for new research  to test the efficacy  of behavioral  interventions  and 
medication  in primary  care for those  with mild to moderate  AD as well as harmful  drinkers  as 
an important  next step in building  a strong er evidence -base for treating  AUD  in primary  care 
(McCambridge & Rollnick, 201 4; Heather, 2014; Saitz, 2014) . 
Two recent  studies  examined integrated  treatment  of AD in primary  care. First,  Oslin  et al. 
(2014) compared  treating  veterans  with AD using  naltrexone  plus medical  manageme nt in 
primary  care versus  referring  them to specialty  care.  The study found  superior  outcomes  for 
the group  treated  in primary  care.  Saitz  and collea gues (2013) tested  a CCM  for SUD  in a 
 
v. 3/30/2018   4 
 primary  care clinic.  The study  focused  on one important  subgroup  of patients : those with SUD  
depe ndence  who had signific ant social,  medical,  and mental  health  problems.  The majority  of 
participan ts (75%)  were  recruited  following  residential  drug detoxification.  The study  found  no 
significant  differences  between  CCM  and a referral  to primary  care but did find a small  positive  
effect  for a subgroup  with AD only.  In commenting  on the negative findings,  the authors  note 
that the efficacy  of treatments  for multi - problem  individuals  with chronic  SUD  may be limited.  
Thus,  delivering  such  treatments  in primary  care may not improve  outcomes.  
 
Overall,  with the exception  of the Saitz  and colleagues  (2013) , no study has rigorously  
examined  a CCM  for AUD  in primary  care. As noted  above,  research  suppor ts the use of 
screening  as a strategy  to identify  those  with alcohol  problems  in primary  care and the efficacy  
of brief interventions  to treat at-risk drinkers.  Findings  from Oslin  et al. (2014)  support  the use 
of naltrexone  to treat AD in primary  care,  but findings  may be limited  to the VA. For example,  
half of partici pants in the Oslin  et al. study (2014) already  had a prior episode  of alcohol  
treatment.  In addition,  a number  of experts  have  suggested  that future  research  in primary  care 
should  focus  on testing  treatments  for harmful  drinkers  and those  with mild to moderate  AD. 
 
Model  and Setting  Considerations : We propose  to develop  our model  in the context of a 
Patient  Centered  Medical  Home  (PCMH)  and to adapt  model  features  from the Collaborative  
Care  (CC)  model  for the treatment  of depressi on in primary  care (Unutzer, Harbin, & Druss, 
2013) . The PCMH  (also  referred  to as medical  homes)  is at the center  of efforts  to reinvent  
primary  care to address  the burden  of chronic  illness.  Among  the key features  of PMCH  are: a 
comprehensive  approach  to care,  a personal  relationship  with a physici an-led team  that has 
collective  responsibili ty for the patient  in a manner  that is coordinated  and continu ous, and a 
reimbursement  approach  that pays  for the cost of these  systems. Since  2008,  the National  
Comm ittee for Quality  Assurance  (NCQA)   has been  evaluating  and certifying  practices’  ability  
to functi on as a PCMH.  NCQA  PCMH  Recognition  is the most  widely -used  way to transform  
primary  care practic es into medical  homes.  More  than 10 percent  of U.S. primary  care practices  
(almost  7,000)  are recognized  as NCQA  PCMH s (National Committee for Quality Assurance , 
2014) . A recent  study found  that the transition  of primary  care practices  to PCMHs  is rapidly  
accelerating.  PCMH  projects  are now found  in 44 states  and are strongly  supported  by 
commercial,  state,  and federal  funders (Neilsen, Buelt, Patel, Nichols , & Fund , 201 4). In 2014, 
the American  Academy  of Family  Physicians  and other  leadi ng medical  societies  issued a 
statement  that integrated  behavioral  health  is a core principle  of PCMH (Baird , et al., 2014) . 
Subsequently,  NCQA  joined  this movement  by issuing a new set of PCMH  standards  that 
include  integration  of behavioral  healt h. Thus,  PCMHs  have  been  identified by leading  medical  
groups  as a setting  where the integr ation of medical  and behavioral  health  care should  occur.  
 
There  is a strong rationale  to develop  a CCM  for ED/AUD  in a PCMH  setting.  PCMHs  already  
have  many of the critical organization al, technolo gy, practice,  and staffing  features  needed to 
develop  CCM  for alcohol.  The newly  deve loped  model  can capit alize on those  features,  rather 
than seek to create  them.  PCMHs  do vary across  a wide range  of dimensions,  but NCQA  
requirements  provide  a core set of features that will facilita te adoption  of the model.  In 
addition,  because  PCMHs  are designed  to address  chron ic illness, there will be increasing  
pressure  on them to expand coverage  of beha vioral health  issues,  includi ng alcohol.  Thus, 
PCMHs  represent  an important  stakeholder  constitue ncy who over time will be motivated  to 
include  CCM  for alcohol  problems,  if such  an intervention  proves  effective.  
 
Collaborative  Care  (CC)  Model : CC is an evidence –based approach  for integrati ng 
depressi on treatment  as part of routine  medical  care.  CC was developed  using  the Wagner  
model  and contai ns the five CCM  core principl es (Ouwens, et al. , 2005) . CC has been  widely  
recommended  for adoption  by state  Medicaid  agencies as part of ACA in the context  of the 
expansion  of medical  and health  home program s (Unutzer, et al, 2013) . CC includes:  care 
 
v. 3/30/2018   5 
 coordinati on, regular  proactive  monitoring  and treatment - to-target  using  validated  clinical  
rating scales,  and regular  systematic  caseload  reviews  for patients  not showing  improve ment. 
A number  of reviews  have  found  that CC for depression  consist ently demonstrated  greater  
effectiveness  relative  to usual  care (Gilbody, Bower, Fletcher, Richards , & Sutton, 2006; 
Bower, Gilbody, Richards, Fletcher , & Sutton, 2006) . 
 
There  are several  reasons  for our decision  to adapt CC to ED/AUD.  First,  features  of the 
model  provide  a good  fit for adaptation  to existing  evidence -based  alcohol  interventions  (cf. 
section  below).  Second,  CC has a strong  evidence  base.  One attractive  feature  is that the CC 
attempts  to treat problems  in primary  care rather  than referri ng out. As stated above,  
provisional  evidence  supports  intervening  for alcohol  probl ems within  the PCMH,  rather than 
referral  out, as a first-line approach.  Second, CC appears  likely to become  the dominant  model  
for the treatment  of mental  health  problems  in the PCMH.  Developing a parallel  model  for 
alcohol  could greatly  facilitate dissem ination  to PCMHs.  
 
Core  Features of CC and their  Adaptation  for Excessive  Drinking/AUD:  Knowns and 
Unkno wns: CC has four core features:  1) standardized  assessment  to enable  identification,  
diagnosis,  and risk stratification.  In addition,  protocols  are required  for pro-active  ongoing  
monitoring,  trackin g, and suppo rt to assess  treatment  response  and adjust  treatment  as 
needed;  2) risk stratificati on of patients  and use of treatment  algorithms  for selection  of the 
initial evidence -based treatment;  3) Stepped  care and treatment -to-target  (TTT)  protocols  are 
needed  to respond  in a timely  manner to treatment  non-response  and modify  or step-up 
treatment;  4)Teamcare  (described below) consisting  primarily  of Primary Care  Practitioners  
(PCPs),  a non-physici an care manager/behavioral  health  clinician,  and easy  access  to a 
consulta tive specialist (s) to advise  the PCP on care issues. In the following  sections,  we 
describe  the issues  related to adapti ng CC for ED/AUD.  We identify  known  elements  in alcohol  
assessment/treatment  that can be easily  adapted  as well as unknown factors  that require  
exploration  and development : 
 
(1) Standard  Assessme nt and Ongoing  Monitoring  and Support  to Assess  Treatment  
Response : There  is a well-established  literatu re on screening  and assessment  for alcohol  
problems  in primary  care using  validated  self-report  measures  (Fiellin, Reid, & O’Connor, 
2000) . Unknown s: Self-report  measures  fail to detect  a portion  of those with alcohol  probl ems.  
It is not clear whether  other  methods  such  as biologic al assays  (e.g.,  liver enzyme  tests)  or 
medical  record  reviews  in combination  with standa rd screening  would  subs tantially  increase the 
number  of patie nts identi fied and whether  such  individuals  would  engage  in alcohol  treatment.  
Extended  care interventions  have  developed  protocols  for pro-active  monitoring  and 
intervention  but these  have  largely  been  limited  to afterc are (McKay et al., 2005) .  Unknown s: 
We have  limited  knowle dge about  how best to structure  pro-active monitoring,  education,  and 
support  for patients  and families  or the development  of a patient  registry  to track  care in the 
PCMH.  
 
(2) Risk Stratification  & Treatment  Algorithms  (cf. Approach  for a more  detailed  description  
of four mutually  exclusive  risk groups) : Evidence  supports  strati fication  and treatment  
assignment  based  on severity  of alcohol  problems  and the prese nce of co-occurring  problems  
(United States Department of Health and Human Services , 2005;  Cavacuiti, 2012; Harris, 
Kivlahan, Bowe, Finney , & Humphreys, 2009) . As noted above,  brief interventions  in primary  
care have  proven  effective  for at-risk drinkers,  but not for those  with more  severe problems  
(Saitz, 2010; Kaner , et al., 2009) . A number  of brief behavioral  interventions  including  
Motivational  Enhancement  Therapy  (MET)  (Morgenstern & McKay, 2007; Morgenstern , et al., 
2012; Walters, 2000) have  proven  effective  for problem  drinkers  (i.e., heavy drinkers  including  
those with mild to moderate  AD seeking  drink  reduction  rather  than abstin ence goals).  In 
addition,  several  medications  including naltrexone  and topiramate  have  also proven  effective  
(Morgenstern , et al., 2012 a; Kranzler , et al., 2009; Kranzler , et al., 2014)  to treat problem  
 
v. 3/30/2018   6 
 drinkers.  General  clinical research  guidelines  tend to exclude  participants  with severe  AD 
(often  defin ed as evidence  of physio logical  withd rawal)  from problem  drinker  studies  
(Morgenstern , et al., 2012 b; Kranzler , et al., 2014) . Numerous  clinical  trials of patients  with 
moder ate-to-severe  AD, but without  significant  co-occu rring problems,  support  the efficacy  of a 
similar  set of behavioral  and pharmacologic al treatments  as those  listed  above,  but in the 
context  of abstinence  goals  (Miller & Longabaugh, 1995; Anton , et al., 2006; Johnson , et al., 
2007) . Notably,  trials  such  as Project  MATCH  (Project MATCH Research Group, 1998) or 
COMBINE  (Anton et al., 2006) have  tended  to exclude  individuals  with current  other  Axis I or II 
disord ers or significant  social instability  and clinical practice guide lines tend to recommend  
more  intensive  treatments  such  as intensive outpatient  care for this group (Cavacuiti, 2012 ; 
Harris, et al. , 2009) . Unknowns : With very few exceptions  (Oslin , et al., 2014) , evidence  for the 
efficacy  of treatment  for problem  drinkers  and AD is based  on treatment  seeking  samp les. 
Thus,  we have  limited  knowle dge about  whether  such  patients  will engage  or benefit  from AUD  
treatment  delivered  in primary  care.  
 
(3) Stepped  Care  and TTT: Stepped  care in the CC model  refers  to pro-active  monitoring  of 
the patient  during the initial  care episode  to assess  adherence  and response  to the initial 
treatment.  Patients  who fail to respond are offered  a stepped -up care option. Typically,  
stepped  care involves  consultation  with a specialist  consultant 
(e.g., psychiatrist)  and provision  of an alternative  evidence -based  treatment  that may be more  
intensive  than  the initial  treatment.  Patients  who fail to respond  to this treatment  are offered  a 
third option,  typically  a referral  to speci alty care treatment  (e.g., mental  health  care setting).  In 
CC mode ls, evidence -based  treatments  are organized  in a hierarchy  with interventions  that 
involve  the least  burden  to the patie nt and staff being the first option.  In the case  of CC for 
depression,  use of treatment  algorithms  allows  the primary  care team to initiate treatment  
without  involving  specialty  mental  health  consultan ts. If the initial treatment  fails, then the 
specialist  consultant  gets involved  and a seco nd treatment  option  is implemented.  If the patient  
continues  to be sympt omatic,  a third option is offered and so on. At each  step-up, more  
specialized  treatments  and specialized  expertise  become  involved.  Unknowns : There  is an 
evolving  literature  on stepped  care in AUD  in the context  of AUD  clinical  trials (Kranzler &  
McKay, 2012) . However,  we are not aware  of peer-reviewed  literature  on treatment  of AUD  in 
primary  care using  stepped  care/TTT options.  
 
Teamcare : Teamcare  refers  to the realignment  of roles  of the PCPs,  specia lists, and allied  
health  professionals , so that they function  more  as a team and less as indepen dent and 
uncoordinated  sources  of patient  care (Katon , et al., 201 0). Teamcare  can be characterized  by 
the professionals  on the team,  their defined  roles,  and the workflow  of the progra m (Advanced 
Integrated Mental Health Solutions Center , 2015) . Typically,  the team  is comprised  of PCPs,  
care managers,  and speci alists (e.g.,  psychiatrists).  Care  managers  typically help screen and 
identify patients  and work  closely  with the PCP on engaging  the patient  in care.  Care  managers  
provide  education,  supp ort and monitoring  and are responsible  for developing  a registry  that 
tracks  patients.  In CC for depression,  a consulting  psychiatrist  is available  to provid e as-need ed 
advice to the PCP and conduct regular case supervisi on for complex patients.  Teams  have  
been used in prior studi es of CC for SUD in primary care (Saitz , et al., 2013; Alford , et al., 
2011) and the broad featu res are clearly applicable to AUD  treatment. Unknowns : The 
appropriate team composition, their respective  roles, and workflow have to be develo ped and 
tested  for feasibility. In addition, estimated resour ce allocation for staff time to operate  the 
model is unknown. 
 
Summ ary of Significance: ED/AUD  is a major public  health problem but remai ns under-
recognized and undertreate d in the healthcare  system. While progress  has been made,  the 
problem of integrating ED/AUD treatmen t into mainstream healthcare  remains large ly 
unresolved.  Legislative mandates for SUD  treatment  reimbursement  and ongoing initiatives to 
 
v. 3/30/2018   7 
 transf orm primary  care provide  a new climate  and unprecedented  opportunity  to address  this 
proble m (McLellan , et al., 2014) . Experts  have  repeatedly  called  for the development  of a CCM  
to treat ED/AUD  in primary  care, but (as reviewed  abov e) research  in this area has been  
limited. This study  builds on the new understanding  about  the strengths  and limitatio ns of 
SBIR T (Saitz, 2010) , the development  of effective  interventions  for PD and AD that could  be 
delivered  in primary  care (Oslin , et al., 2014; Morgenstern , et al., 2012 a, 2012b ), and the 
success  of the CC model  for integration  of depression  treatment  into primary  care. If study  aims  
are achieved,  important  and necessary  first steps  – development  of the model  and provisional  
support  for its efficacy  – towards  establis hing an evidence -based,  workable  model  to treat 
ED/AUD  in the PCMH  will be taken.  
 
4) OBJECTIVE(S)/SPECIFIC AIMS AND HYPOTHESES  
 
 
We conducted  an extensive  review of the published  literature  and currently  funded  NIH studies  
but found  surprisingly  limited  research  on development  of a CCM  model  to treat ED/AUD  in 
PCMHs.  Thus,  to the best of our knowledge , this would  be among  the first studi es in this area.  
In addition,  while  the general  assumption  is that early  interv ention  in primary  care can be 
effective,  there  is very limited  knowledge  about  whether  patients  will engage  in more  than a 
brief intervention  or how best to accommod ate important  aspects  of patient -center ed care such  
as patient  preferences.  Finally,  little is known  about non- response  to ED/AUD  treatment  in 
primary  care and what  stepped  care approaches  can feasibly  be implement ed in PCMHs  using  
a team-care approach.  
 
 
The primary  aim of this proposal  is to develop  and test a chronic care model  (CCM)  to treat 
excessive  drinki ng and Alcohol  Use Disorders  (ED/AUD)  in a patient  centered  medical  home  
(PCMH)  setting  using  the stage  model  of intervention  development.  The study  proposes  to 
adapt the collaborative  care model  (CC)  for treating  depression  in primary  care to use with  
ED/AUD  and then test the adapted  model  for feasibili ty, acceptability , and clinical  utility .  If 
evidence  suppo rts the model,  the long-term aim of the study  is to develop  the necessary  
protocols,  site preparation,  and design  specificatio ns to proceed  to submitting  an RO1 
application.   
 
The study  will be conducted  in two phases  using a mixed methods  approach.  Phase  I (5 
months)  will involve  initial  adaptation  of the CC model  for depression  to ED/AUD  (referred  to 
hereafter  as CC-AUD).  During  this phase,  relevant  CC for depression  protocols,  measures,  
and procedures  will be adap ted for ED/AUD  and piloted  test on 15-20 participants  recruited  in a 
PCMH.  Phase II (6 months)  will involve model  refinement  based  on iterative  cycles  of patient 
and PCMH  staff feedback.  During this phase,  participa nts (n=60)  will be recruit ed, assess ed, 
and followed  for three  months.  Iterative  development  will focus on two themes:  1) maximizing    
patient  engagement  while  balancing  this feature  with 2) the resource  and expertise  constraints  
of treating  ED/AUD  in a PCMH.  Study  results  will be analyzed  and lessons  learn ed will be used 
to develop  a refined  model.  a small  randomized  controlled  trial (RCT)  of the model .. 
Aim I. Adapt the CC model for depression  to treat ED/AUD  and implement  the model  (CC-AUD)  
in a PCMH.   
Aims  II. Use iterative,  recursive,  and bidirectio nal features  of the stage  model  to refine  CC-AUD  
using  a mixed  methods  approach.  
 
v. 3/30/2018   8 
  
Specific hypotheses are not provided for Phases I and II of the study as we are exploring and 
refining possible model options. For Phase III of the study, which is the randomized controlled 
trial and will be submitted as a separate IRB protocol, will provide specific hypotheses on what 
we expect to see from the models.  
 
5) RESOURC ES AVAILABLE TO CONDUCT THE HUMAN RESEARCH  
 
Subjects will be recruited as part of normal SBIRT procedures already being conducted at the 
865 Northern Boulevard  General Internal Medicine site in Great Neck, NY . Normal SBIRT 
procedures include the pre -screening of all scheduled patients by medical assistants to identify 
initial substance use risks, and then further assessment to identify risk classification of the 
patient based on their substance use patterns an d counseling by an SBIRT Health Coach for 
patients as needed based on this assessment. Patients identified as excessive drinkers during 
the standard SBIRT procedures will be asked by the SBIRT Health Coaches (HCs) about their 
interest in a study on treatme nt for problem atic alcohol use in the primary care setting. As all 
clinic patients are being routinely screened for  alcohol, we will have a large pool of patients 
screened from which to identify excessive drinkers. Based on SBIRT data collected, we 
estimat e that 75% of the patients or about 33 per month have a primary alcohol problem and 
would not be excluded for other reasons. We estimate that about 2/3 of eligible participants 
would be classified as at -risk drinkers with the remainder in the other ca tegor ies (i.e., Problem 
Drinkers, Alcohol Use Disorder with Physiological Withdrawal, and Alcohol Use Disorder with 
Chronic or Complex Presentation) . Thus, assuming that 50 % consent to participate, we 
estimate n=24  participants per month would be availab le to e nroll in the study and about eight  of 
these would meet problem drinking criteria. We note that of the 526 participants screening 
positive and offered a brief intervention at  the 865 Northern Boulevard site , only 3 refused. 
Thus, we anticipate a positive re sponse from participants and consider our recruitment 
projections as conservative estimates.  
 
6) RECRUITMENT METHODS  
Participants will be recruited via the SBIRT program at the 865  Northern Boulevard  General 
Internal Medicine Clinic. In addition, patients of  other Northwell Health Department of General 
Internal Medicine (DGIM) sites may be referred to the 865 Northern Boulevard practice to 
participate in this study. All patients receive SBIRT screening, conducted by the Health 
Coaches (HCs). During the screen ing, HCs will identify potential participants for this study 
based on study eligibility criteria. For individuals who screen positive and meet study criteria, 
the HC will offer the opportunity to participate in the study and conduct further assessment if 
the individual is interested. In cases where individuals are ambivalent about participation, they 
will be handed an informational card about the study with a way to contact  study staff . This 
card will be submitted to the IRB for approval prior to distributi on to patients.   
 
7) ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  
We expect to recruit a total of 85 participants for Phase I and II of this study based on the 
following inclusion/exclusion criteria:  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  Participants  must: 1) receive care at the 865 Northern Boulevard General 
Internal Medicine clinic  and/or other Northwell Health DGIM sites ; 2) ha ve an estimated 
weekly consumption of greater than 14 drinks for men and 7 drinks for women or experience 
 
v. 3/30/2018   9 
 at least one binge drinking day  (i.e., 5 or more dr inks for men and 4 or more drinks for 
women) per week; 3) demonstrate observable fluency in English language; 4) have no 
recognizable cognitive impairment.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  Participants will be excluded from the study if they: 1) report substance 
use other than cannabis, nicotine, or caffeine  in the last year ; 2) report using cannabis “daily 
or almost daily” and that this use is problematic and the primary concern compared to their 
alcohol use, as indicated in the SBIRT screening; 3) present with a seri ous psychiatric illness 
or substantial suicide or violence risk, as assessed via a chart review , reported by the primary 
care treatment team (e.g., the Primary Care Physician [PCP]) , and/or reported by the 
potential participant in the initial screen ; 4) are on probation or parole as reported in the initial 
screen; 4) have an organic mood/mental disorder ; 5) is pregnant , breastfeeding,  or trying to 
become pregnant as reported in the initial screen ; 6) report being enrolled in current 
substance use treatment in the initial screen . 
 
8) NUMBER OF SUBJECTS  
In the 865 Northern Boulevard primary care setting from where participants will be recruited  
and seen , approximately 526 patients are pre-screened  per week for alcohol use problems. 
Of these patients, approximately eight receive alcohol use brief interventions. It is estimated 
that all 526 patients will be pre -screened for our study and the eight who receive brief 
interventions will be offered to pa rticipate, if they meet initial eligibility  criteria. We expect that 
50% of these patients  or 4 individuals per week will be consented  into our study.  Other DGIM 
sites from where staff can refer patients to the study, the number of pre -screens for alcohol 
use problems are comparable.  As a result , we expect to enroll a  total of 85 participants , which 
includes 25 for Phase I  of the trial and 60 fo r Phase II . 
 
9) STUDY TIMELINES  
Enrollment for the proposed study is expected to last for approximately one year. Each 
participant will be in the study for 12 weeks. We expect to complete this study (Phases I and 
II) in Fall 2017.  
 
10) ENDPOINTS  
Over the 12 weeks of the study, there will be  five assessment points at weeks 0, 1, 4, 8, and 
12, which all participants will re ceive. Participant response and safety will be assessed at 
each assessment point. In addition, participants will be monitored daily via Ecological 
Momentary  Assessment d ata (EMA ) comprising  a brief questionnaire about their drinking. 
The HC  will monitor pa rticipants’ adherence to these surveys and their study visits and make 
outreach as needed. Notably, participant response to treatment will be assessed at week 4 
and a stepped -care approach will be applied in the case  that the participant ha s not 
responded to the initial treatment that he or she  chose . For instance, participants who chose 
to receive a behavioral intervention will be offered medication ( i.e., naltrexone) if they have 
not shown progress in their treatment as evident by a significant reduction in drinking.  
 
Some participants will also attend treatment appointments in the 12 weeks of this study, some 
of which will overlap with the assessment appointments. Participants will have biweekly 
medication management appointments and/or potentially 4 to 12 sessions of behavioral 
treatment.  
 
v. 3/30/2018   10 
  
11) RESEARCH PROCEDURES  
During  Phase I (Initial Model Implementat ion), we will prepare  all relevant  new materials,  adapt  
existi ng treatment  and assessment  protocols,  fine-tune all new procedures,  and train the primary 
care treatment team (including HCs, Medical Doctors [MDs], Nurse Practitioners [NPs], 
Registered Nurses [ RNs], and Behavioral Health Specialist s [BHSs])  on the new intervention  
protocols.  Because  all staff are currently either  working  as part of SBIRT  or in other  roles  in 
Psychiatry  and Medicine,  we anticipate  a rapid  start-up. In addition,  the BHSs  are already  
trained  in the delivery  of the proposed  interventions.   
 
 
During  Phase II (Iteration and Model Refinement) , we will iterate  and refine  the model  that was 
tested in Phase I . We will focus  on key issues  of patient  engagement,  balancing  treating  
patien ts within  the PCMH  versus need  to refer complex  cases  to specialty  care as well as 
issues  related  to staff burden, workflow  and resources.  We will focus on examining  the utility of 
medical  record  screening,  refini ng the conte nt and methods  to deliver  personalized  feedback  
on alcohol  consumption  and health  and assessing  their impact  of increasing  patient  motivation  
as well as PCP receptivity  to including  alcohol interventions  as part of PCMH  care.  We will pay 
speci al attention  to tracking  non-adherence,  and adjusting  interventions  for non-responders.  
We will also carefully  examine  workflow  and resources  required to manage  patients.  For 
examp le, how much  time is required  from specialist  consultants  and what  types  of consulta tion 
(e.g., caseload  supe rvision,  patient consults)  are most  informative.  We will use these  data to 
generate  an estimate  of staff resources  required  to treat eligible  participan ts. 
 
Below we describe the procedures to be conducted at each endpoint in both phases of the 
study, in addition to specific procedures related to our stepped -care approach and risk/safety 
monitoring.  
 
Week 0: Pre -enrollment: Participants will be recruited through the  Screening, Brief 
Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) program that is already a standard practice in 
the primary care site , where they are patients or to which they are referred to from other 
Northwell DGIM sites . As part of SBIRT st andard practice in this setting, all patients are 
systematically screened for risky alcohol use by a medical assistant and a health coach, using 
the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT), a self -report  validated screening tool.  In 
addition, for  patients who screen positive for risky alcohol use, the HC provides a brief 
intervention, which includes feedback about their drinking, a discussion about motivation to 
reduce use, and planning around re ducing or stopping alcohol use.  During this interact ion, HCs 
will assess if patients are eligible for the study based on the criteria. The  HC will provide a brief 
explanation of the study to patients who appear initially eligible to participate. Further eligibility 
screening will be provided either that day  or another day when the patient is available, if he or 
she expresses interest in participating.  
 
Week 0: Eligibility Screening: Participants will be recruited for this study based on our 
inclusion/exclusion criteria described above. Those participants who  are interested in the study 
will be initially consented ( General  Consent) by the HC and will complete further measures (i.e., 
the Timeline Fol low B ack [TLFB] for the past 60 days and the Composite International 
Diagnostic Interview -Alcohol Module [CIDI -Alcohol]), assessing for drinking criteria and 
establishing risk classification for treatment options. Other inclusion/exclusion criteria (i.e., drug 
use, mental/organic disorders, suicide/violence risk, legal involvement, and pregnancy) will be 
evaluated at  this point via self -report, chart review, and/or in consultation with the primary care 
clinical team (e.g., the primary care physician). Patients who endorse withdrawal criteria on the 
 
v. 3/30/2018   11 
 CIDI-Alcohol (i.e., endorse experiencing at least two withdrawal sympt oms in the last year after 
not drinking for a few hours or days, if any of those symptoms include hallucinations or seizures, 
or if they report drinking to reduce withdrawal symptoms in the last year) will also meet  with a 
Registered Nurse (RN; supervised by an MD) , Nurse Practitioner (NP), or  a Medical Doctor 
(MD) to as sess active withdrawal symptoms and appropriateness of outpatient detoxification 
treatment . In such cases, the RN/NP/MD  will complete the Clinical Institute Withdrawal of 
Alcohol Scale, Revised (CIWA -Ar) and assess for medical (e.g., brittle diabetes, unstable heart 
failure, advanced liver disease) and compliance (e.g., no family support at home to assist) 
issues with whic h outpatient detoxification would be contraindicated. Those participants who do 
not have medical or social contraindications and score below 15 on the CIWA -Ar will be offered  
outpatient detoxification  as part of standard care at the 865 Northern Boulevard Internal 
Medicine Clinic. These participants will be grouped in the AD -W group and offered treatment as 
per the description below. Participants’ insurance will cover the cost of the detoxification 
treatment. Participants who score above15 on the CIWA -Ar or  experience medical and/or social 
contraindications for outpatient detoxification will be referred for inpatient detoxification or other 
warranted treatment and classified into the AD -CMPLX group, as described below.  
 
Eligible participants will be classif ied (i.e., random assignment will not be used) into one of four 
groups  by the HC after the above assessment is completed :  
 
At-Risk Drinkers  (AR).  AR will include  individuals  who exceed  NIAAA  guidelines  for 
weekly  consumption  (>14 standard  drinks  [SD] for men or 7 drinks  for women),  those  who 
exceed  NIAAA  daily limits  (>5 SD for men or >4 SD for women) , or those whose  medical  
conditions  contraindicate  any alcohol  consumption.  AR will be followed up at week 4, 8, and 12 
assessments and will not be offered additional treatment  after the brief advice they receive as part of 
SBIRT.  
 
Problem  Drinkers  (PD).  PD will be defined  based  on weekly  consumption  (> or = 24 SD 
for men or > or = 14 SD for women)  or a pattern  of regular  binge  drinking  (>3 times  per month) . 
PD will be offered  a choice  of either  four sessions of Motivational Enhancement Therapy (MET) or 
12 weeks of daily naltrexone  with medication management.  
 
Alcohol Use Disorder  with Physiological  Withdrawal  Drinkers (AD-W): Participants  
meeting  criteria  for DSM -5 Alcohol Use Disorder  with physiological  withdrawal  will receive  
outpatient  detoxification  as part of standard care , unless  medically  or socially contraindicated  
(described above) . Upon  completion  of outpatient detoxification,  participants  will be offered  12 
weeks  of daily naltrexone  plus medication  management  or 12, weekly  sessions  of M o d i f i e d  
B e h a v i o r a l  S e l f -C o n t r o l  T h e r a p y  ( M BSCT ). 
 
Alcohol Use Disorder  with Chronic  or Complex  Presentation  Drinkers (AD-CMPLX):  
Participants in this group  will include  those  who meet  criteria  for DSM -5 Alcohol Use Disorder , 
report  inpatient treatment for alcohol use  and/or other mental health issues within the last five years , 
experience  social  problems  (i.e., unstable  housing)  that would  suggest  the need  for more  
intensive  psychosocial  treatment , or are deemed not appropriate for outpatient detoxification 
treatment and in need higher -level of care as assessed by the NP/MD  performing the CIWA -Ar 
assessment . Participants  classified  at AD-CMPLX  will be referred  to specialty  substance  use 
treatment based on the SBIRT protocol, where participants are referred to an outpatient 
treatment program that best fits their needs.  In the case that these participants refuse a referral 
to speciality care, a second attempt will  be made to do so at week 1. In the case that t he second 
attempt is not successful, they will be offered MBSCT, abstinence -based treatment, focused on 
connecting them with specialt y care, as part of the study.  
 
v. 3/30/2018   12 
  
Once participants are grouped and offered tr eatment options for their risk classification, they will 
choose a preferred treatment course and be scheduled for their next appointment with an 
RN/NP/MD  to administer naltrexone or a Behavioral Health Specialist ( BHS) to conduct the 
behavioral interventio ns. Each respe ctive clinician will complete either the Medication 
Intervention  Consent or the Behavioral Intervention  Consent with the participant at their next 
appointment. Notably, participants are free to change their treatment choice during the consent  
process (described below) with the clinician. If they do so, they will be scheduled for another 
appointment with the appropriate clinician.  All participants will be informed that they are being 
asked not to pursue any other formal substance use treatment until after the week 12 
assessment of the study , unless they are in the AD -CMPLX group and referred to treatment as 
part of this study . If they decide to pursue alternative  treatment, study staff will facilitate 
referrals. The participant will continue to be followed in the study  via follow up assessments  in 
order to learn about the progress of the participant which is valuable in our effort to test a 
feasible treatment model . 
 
Weeks 1 -12: During this period, participants in the PD and AD -W groups will rece ive treatment 
(see procedure as follows) and assessments, while the AR and AD -CMPLX groups will be 
followed in assessments only. All groups will be assessed for appr opriateness of stepped -care 
at week 4.  
 
Participants , who choose the medication interventi on, will  attend medication management in -
person at the primary care clinic.  Appointments would be conducted by a NP, an MD , or an RN, 
who is supervised by an MD ,. These appointments will occur weeks 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12. At 
their week 1 appointment after consent has been signed, the medical professional will assess 
the participant for appropriateness to take medications . They will conduct a medical exam, 
review the participant’s chart, and  may consult with his/her primary care clinical team.  
 
Partic ipants who choose b ehavioral intervention s will have  appointments conducted at the 
primary care clinic or via televideo , based on the preference of the participant. Behavioral 
Health Specialists (BHSs), who are licensed therapists or therapists supervised by licensed 
clinicians, will conduct the treatment. Participants receiving MET will have four sessions at 
weeks 1, 2, 4, and 8. Participants receiving MBSCT will receive wee kly sessions from week 1 to 
12. 
 
In addition to regular treatment appointments, follow up assessment  appointments will occur 
with the HC at weeks 4, 8, and 12. Each assessment appointment will occur after the treatment 
session scheduled for that day. These appointments can occur in -person or via televideo based 
on each participant’s p reference and will be conducted by the HC. At each appointment, the 
participant will complete the Timeline Follow Back (TLFB), a treatment addendum, and patient 
satisfaction measures. Participants  will be monitored for risk and safety at each of these 
appo intments as described below.  
 
Furthermore, a t week 1, participants will meet with a HC to complete a demographics 
questionnaire and receive training and instruction on the Ecological  Momentary Assessment 
(EMA; described below). Because participants will be  using smartphones, we will show them  
how to use their phones in a way that increases the security and confidentiality of the online 
surveys and the texts they receive. Based on our experience in previous studies, participants 
complete about 80% of the req uired surveys, which is significantly higher than expected. Note 
that EMA data is in electronic format and available in real -time to the HC. We will monitor EMA 
diary completion continuously to increase compliance and will have the required data available 
 
v. 3/30/2018   13 
 for safety monitoring. Participants will have the option to participate in the study even if they do 
not have a smartphone or refuse to use it to complete EMA. In such cases, participants will not 
complete EMA.  
 
At week 4, participants will be assessed for  response to the treatment intervention that they 
chose and offered an alternative treatment via the stepped care procedure below in the case 
that they do not respond. Response will be defined as drinking below study  drinking inclusion  
criteria  and demonst rating adequate progress in treatment without adverse response (based on 
clinician’s assessment of participants ’ drinking,  attendance, engagement, and effort and/or 
possible side effects if receiving naltrexone) . A participant will be deemed a non-responde r if his 
or her drinking exceeds  NIAAA  guidelines  for weekly  (>14 SD for men or 7 drinks  for women) or 
daily (>5 SD for men or >4 SD for women)  limits . 
 
Stepped Care:  Participants will be offered stepped care if they are deemed to be a treatment  
non-responder at their week 4 appointment. During their treatment visit at week 4, they will 
be assessed by the HC and their clinician for treatment re sponse based on the criteria 
described above. The HC will assess participants’ drinking based on NIAAA guidelines and 
the clinician will assess participants’ progress in treatment. If a participant is deemed a non -
responder, the clinician will discuss alter native treatment options with him or her. Stepped 
care options will be offered to the AR, PD, and AD -W risk classification groups  at their week 
4 assessments  in the following way:  
 
For the AR group, participants who are deemed non -responders will be offere d an additional 
session of Brief Advice similar to what they received as part of the SBIRT protocol. This 
additional session will occur at the same time as their assessment appointment at week 4.  
 
For the PD and AD -W groups, participants, who chose a behav ioral intervention, will be 
offered naltrexone and medication management. These participants will be scheduled for an 
appointment with the respective clinician, preferably in the same week, in order to undergo 
consent , to evaluate medication appropriatenes s, and, if appropriate, to  commence with the 
alternative treatment. Participants, who  chose naltrexone and medication management, will 
be offered either a behavioral intervention (i.e., MBSCT) in addition to nalt rexone or 
topirimate as an alternative medic ation for reducing drinking. This medication will be started 
on the same day , while the behavioral intervention would be scheduled for a different 
appointment with a BHS, where an additional consent would be completed. Participants will 
have the option to deny alternative treatment if they believe it is still the appropriate course of 
action during these phases of the study as long as it appears safe for them to continue (e.g., 
no adverse side effects to the medication are noted). The goal is to learn about  the 
effectiveness of these different treatment models  in these phases of the study through an 
ecological application of the models in a clinical setting, where patients would otherwise be 
free to deny an alternative treatment . 
 
Risk/Safety Monitoring:  Participants of this study will be patients who are receiving care at 
the 865  Northern Boulevard  Internal Medicine Clinic  or another Northwell Health DGIM site  
Therefore, their health is actively monitored by the Primary Care Physician (PCP) at the 
clinic , who will be notified of the participant’s participation throughout  the study . In addition to 
this monitoring, the clinicians meeting with the participants for treatment will assess their well -
being at each  assessment (at weeks 4, 8, and 12 ) along with the HC  drinking assessments 
and the daily EMA data monitoring. At the week 4, 8, and 12 assessments, the clinicians will 
 
v. 3/30/2018   14 
 perform a risk and safety assessment . Significant deterioration of note is defined as a 
significant increase in drinking since the baseline i nterview  (more than 25%) ; a significant 
increase in depression, anxiety, or other mental health symptom s; instability in life 
circumstances that would suggest a need for immediate treatment; or suicidal or homicidal 
ideation. If any of these indicators are  present , as a first -line of treatment, participants will be 
referred to the clinical team at the primary care clinic for additional treatment or evaluations. 
If a higher level of care is warranted , participants will be referred to appropriate care, such a s 
intensive outpatient treatment, inpatient detoxification, or outpatient psychiatric treatment, 
and continued to be monitored at their assessment visits. For participants who present an 
imminent risk of harm to self or others, or an inability to care for themselves, the  primary care 
clinical team  will evaluate the patient to determine the need to activate EMS, who will then 
take the patient to the emergency room to be evaluated for possible inpatient psychiatric 
admission.  
 
Visit Scheduling and Follow -up: In our experience with longitudinal psychotherapy 
intervention studies, participants often need to reschedule appointments for various reasons. 
In order to maintain integrity of the data, when a participant needs to reschedule, every 
attempt will be made t o schedule the visit within the same week (i.e. , if the participant cannot 
attend a visit on the first day of week 4, we will attempt to reschedule them at some other 
point within week 4).  In an effort to reduce retention, we will also offer televideo and/ or 
telephone options for all visits.  In addition, if a participant misses an appointment (e.g. , loss 
of contact, participant had an unexpected conflict, etc.), study staff will attempt to follow up 
with that participant and collect data for the missed appo intment as soon as we are able to 
reach the participant and/or reschedule; ideally , this would occur within a week of the missed 
appointment. However, since our primary outcome measure (Timeline Follow  Back) is 
continuous throughout the 12 weeks of the stu dy and our data analytic methods (e.g., 
Generalized Estimating Equations) can accommodate uneven intervals between visits, if we 
are unable to reschedule a participant within a week of their original appointment date, we 
will continue to attempt to resched ule their visit until the participant withdraws consent for 
participating in the study or until the Principal Investigator determines that it is no longer 
feasible to attempt to locate the participant (if out of contact). Our primary aim when a 
participant  misses a visit and/or falls out of contact is to determine whether the participant is 
at risk due to heavy drinking or other factors and to help the participant find the appropriate 
resources if necessary. Thus, we feel it is important to continue to foll ow up with participants 
who have missed visits for as long as is necessary to determine that they are safe. This plan 
is clearly communicated to participants during their enrollment and is verbally reinforced 
during the scheduling of visit appointments.  
 
Daily online questionnaires : Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) is a global term 
used to describe techniques to collect data in the real world. For example, filling out a daily 
data diary would be considered a kind of EMA. For this study, EMA involves br ief internet -
based surveys. Participants will be asked to complete a brief, online survey every morning for 
the 11 weeks of participation (i.e., weeks 1 to 12). Participants will use their personal 
smartphone. Smartphones will be utilized for receiving tex t messages to prompt participants 
to complete the online survey. Each morning survey requires approximately  one minute to 
complete and will ask about daily use of alcohol. We have used similar scripts previously (in 
our R01 study of MI), and they are attac hed to this protocol.  Participants, who do not have a 
smartphone or wish to not use their smartphone as part of this study, will be free to opt out of 
this part of the study.  
 
v. 3/30/2018   15 
  
Study Setting.  Whether participants are recruited from the  865 Northern Boulevar d Primary 
Care Clinic  or referred from another Northwell Health DGIM primary care site, this study will 
be conducted at the 865 Northern Boulevard site. It is  located  in Great  Neck,  NY, has been  
designated  a Level 3 Patient  Centered  Medical  Home  (PCMH)  since  2009.  It was one of the 
first medical  homes  in the lower  New York State  region  and includ es both a faculty  and 
resident  practice  with approximately  32,000 visits  per year.  Patients  from a variety  of 
socioeconomic  band  ethnic  backgroun ds are cared  for by 16 faculty  providers  and 72 internal  
medicine  residents.  In addition  to medical  staff, the practice  includes  a clinical  psychologist,  2 
nurse practitioners,  2 social workers,  a certified diabet es educator,  a clinical  pharmacist  and a 
nutritionist.  Medical  assista nts, nurses,  and administrative  staff support clinical  staff member s. 
These practitioners are part of the clinical team at this practice, and they provide regular 
monitoring/care for participants of this study. The practice  uses  the Allscripts electronic  health  
record  (EHR)  and has since  pioneered  many  of the innovations  and enhancements  including 
the use of e-calculato rs for SBIRT  screens  and generation  of clinical  alerts. 
 
The National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse (CASA) will contribute to the 
theoretical development of the study as well as data management and analyses. This will 
include participation in project meetings, performance of data analyses, and preparation of 
manuscripts. There will be no consenting or data collectio n that will occur at CASA. All 
recruitment, consenting, and subject data collection will be conducted at Northwell Health. 
Notably, the SBIRT project is being conducted in collaboration with CASA.  
 
12) SCHEDULE OF EVENTS  
The table below indicates the measures that will be administered in this study and the time 
points at which each will occur.  
 
Admin 
method  Measure  Wk 
0 w
k 1 w
k 4 w
k 8 w
k 
12 
HC Screening  for inclusion/exclusion criteria  X         
HC General Consent  X         
NP/MD/BH
S Medication OR Behavioral  Intervention Consent    X       
HC Enrollment note    X       
HC Locator information  X         
HC Demographic Questionnaire    X       
HC CIDI-SAM (Composite International Diagnostic Instrument, 
Alcohol Module)  X         
RN/NP/MD  CIWA -Ar (Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment of Alcohol 
Scale, Revised), if report withdrawal on CIDI -SAM  X         
HC TLFB (Time -Line Follow -Back Interview)  X   X X X 
HC Treatment Addendum      X X X 
HC Patient Feedback Questionnaire        X 
RN/NP/MD  Blood draw to assess liver function, if pt. chooses to receive 
medication    X X X X 
 
v. 3/30/2018   16 
 NP/MD/BH
S Study progress note      X X X 
EMA  Daily text messaging surveys on drinking    X X X X 
HC Study Termination note --time of completion depends on 
participant trajectory          X 
 
13) INTERVENTIONS  
Brief Advice (BA).  BA will consist of a 20 -minute session delivered by a health coach, 
closely adhering to the NIAAA's Clinician Guide to PD (National Institute on Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism, 2005). This includes normative feedback base d on NIAAA drinking norms 
(using data from AUDIT), goal selection, instructions on self -monitoring, discussion of drink 
reduction strategies, and distribution of NIAAA biblio -therapy guide. The rationale for using 
the NIAAA guide is that it contains elemen ts that have been empirically linked to brief 
intervention success (Morgenstern, Kuerbis, Chen, et al., 2012; Morgenstern, Kuerbis, 
Amrhein, et al., 2012), and its use will foster generalization of study results to mainstream 
healthcare settings. Participa nts will h ave one session of brief advice provided by the HC 
during the pre -screening for the study. An additional session may be offered to the AR group 
as part of stepped care, if warranted.  
 
Motivational Enhancement Therapy (MET):  MET (Miller  & Tonigan , 1992) is a motivational 
intervention shown to be effective in treating a broad spectrum of drinking problems in both 
abstinent (Project Match Research Group, 1997), and non -abstinent g oal conditions (Miller, 
1995). As adopted from Project MATCH, MET in th is study focuses on resolving ambivalence 
about and increasing commitment to positive behavior change. MET in this study will be 
delivered as in a previous study ( Morgenstern, et al., 2012 a) over the 12 -week treatment 
period with sessions scheduled for weeks 1, 2, 4 and 8. This treatment will be provided by a 
Behavioral Health Specialist (BHS) , who is a licensed mental health clinician or is being 
supervised by a licensed clinician.  
 
Modified  Behavioral Self -Control Therapy (MBSCT):  MBSCT was developed and 
implemented for a previous study,  (Morgenstern & McKay, 2007 ) in which we provided twelve 
weeks of psychotherapy for problem drinking  men who have sex with men  focused on 
reduction both of a lcohol consumption and HIV risk behaviors. It is a combination of 
Motivational Interviewing and Behavioral Self -Control Training (Miller, Leckman, Delaney, & 
Tinkcom, 1992; Walters, 2001). In that study, treatment was focused on the dual problems of 
proble m drinking and HIV risk behavior. For the present study, treatment will address only 
problem drinking. MBSCT is based on cognitive behavioral principles and is designed to 
modify critical behavior patterns that maintain excessive drinking. MBSCT aims to pr ovide a 
more complete application of CBT theory by addressing motivational issues and by including 
a functional analysis of drinking behavior. The first stage of MBSCT is motivation 
enhancement therapy and is closely modeled on the MET intervention as desc ribed above. 
The second stage of treatment focuses on teaching the client the cognitive behavioral model 
of substance mis use, completing a functional analysis of drinking, and addressing specific 
coping skills for moderation of or abstinence from drinking behavior. This treatment will be 
provided by a Behavioral Health Specialist (BHS) , who is a licensed mental health clinician or 
is being supervised by a licensed clinician.  
 
 
v. 3/30/2018   17 
 Naltrexone+Medication Management (NTX): Those selecting medication will receive 12  
weeks of daily naltrexone (50 mg ) with medication management. Naltrexone is FDA-approved 
for the treatment of alcohol dependence at 50 mg/day. It has been effectively applied in 
previous studies  (Kranzler et al., 2009; Morgenstern, et al., 2012b). To mini mize any potential 
side effects, initiate treatment using a 25 -mg dosage for the first week and as long as the 
medication is well tolerated will then increase to 50 mg daily. Participants will be instructed to 
call their study RN/NP/MD with any side effect s or medication related concerns. A follow -up 
PCP visit at week 12 wi ll be scheduled. Visit scheduled  will be adjusted upward if there are 
reports of side effects or problems with non -adherence. Blood tests will be administered at 
baseline and  week 4  to gu ard against liver toxicity ( i.e., one 5 cc tube, the equivalent of one 
teaspoon, will be drawn monthly). Additional blood tests (i.e., one 5 cc tube, the equivalent of 
one teaspoon, will be drawn monthly)  may be drawn if it is clinically indicated  any time  during 
the study . Unless a return to social drinking is contraindicated, participants will be offered a 
choice of moderation or abstinence goal treatment. Naltrexone treatm ent will be prescr ibed by 
an NP/MD or an RN , under the supervision of an MD. A medical exam and review of the 
patient’s medical history will be conducted and, if deemed appropriate, the participant will 
receive a prescription. Then, t hey will then be seen by the RN/NP/MD  weekly for the first two 
weeks of treatment, or until the participant’s medication dose has been stabilized with minimal 
side effects. After stabilization, visits  will take place biweekly. Participants will have 
medication management appointments at w eeks 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12. At these medication 
management visits, the RN/NP/MD  will assess participants’ medication compliance, potential 
side effec ts, and their current drinking.  
 
14) STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  The specific aims of Phases I and II  of this study are: Aim 
1: Adapt the coll aborative care model for depression to treat excessive drinking and alcohol 
use disorders and implement the model, to be called CC -AUD, in a primary care practice. 
Aim 2: Use iterative, recursive, and bidirectional features of the National Institutes of He alth 
stage model to refine the CC -AUD model. In both phases iterative analysis and 
experimenting with new approaches will be ongoing. However , at the end of Phase II we will 
conduct a formal study of model implementation and results using a mixed methods 
approach.  We des cribe the quantitative portion here and the qualitative portion below.  We 
will calculate descriptive statistics such as means, medians, SD, range and frequencies to 
create a baseline description of the sample, examine various measures of t reatment 
compliance (e.g., sessions attended, medication adherence), and drinking outcomes reported 
on the TLFB to include: number of heavy drink days, number of abstinent days, and w eekly 
sum of standard drinking.  Alcohol use data are  often not normally distributed;  therefore , we 
will examine outcome distributions using graphs (e.g., histograms) in order to inform model 
selection. Depending on the nature of the outcome variable distribution and the data, we will 
use multiple regression or Generalized Esti mating Equations (GEE) models with the best 
outcome distribution (e.g., normal, Poisson, negative binomial) to examine predictors of 
treatment compliance and drinking outcomes. We will examine characteristics of the sample 
who participated relative to thos e who refused using screening and brief intervention study 
data using statistics to estimate differences between groups (e.g ., t-test and chi -square). We 
will analyze qualitative data collected from patients and staff notes.  Qualitative data will be 
input  into NVivo 9 software.  Qualitative themes around patient engagement and staff burden 
will guide the analysis.  First, Dr. Morgenstern (PI) will develop meta -themes and sub -themes 
based on the literature and the data.  These themes will be reviewed by Dr.  O’Grady (co -PI). 
Next, a research assistant will code the transcripts for themes. These will be reviewed by Dr. 
O’Grady and discrepancies will be resolved.  We will triangulate data across qualitative and 
quantitative sources to examine whether patients r espond to alcohol treatment in a PCMH 
 
v. 3/30/2018   18 
 and whether the alcohol collaborative care model features implemented are compatible with 
PCMH staff resources, workflow, and expertise.  
 
15) DATA MANAGEMENT AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
To avoid breach of confidentiality, part icipants' data will be primarily maintained in HIPAA -compliant 
applications, such as our platform and REDCap. Any other electronic data will be stored only on 
computers with a BIOS password to prevent access by unauthorized users and users must login following 
10 minutes of inactivity.  Each file will be password protected and will only be stored on network -encrypted 
drives. If any data has to be printed for monitoring or trac king, it w ill be kept double locked (i.e., in a 
locked cabinet, in a locked room) to maintain their security. All study data forms will contain only the 
participant's unique study identification number, using a reference system maintained by the PI. 
Comple ted study charts  will be kept in a locked cabinet. T he key to such data and access to any of the 
above -mentioned data  will be available only to the PI and study research staff. Lastly, p articipant visits 
will be scheduled, and no information about the part icipant will be provided to anyone (except in 
emergencies as defined above) in person or by telephone.  
 
There is no personal health information that could identify an individual by seeing their web -
based assessment data and the codes that match participan t information to their unique 
codes are kept secure.  
To avoid breach of confidentiality, participants' names will appear only on a consent form, a 
telephone screening form and a "key" form that is password protected maintained on 
Northwell Health’s REDCap servers. All forms that contain identifying information will be kept 
double locked (i.e., in a locked cabinet, in a locked room) to maintain their security. All study 
data forms will contain only the participant's unique study identification number, using a 
reference system maintained by the PI s. Completed study charts will be kept in a locked 
cabinet, the key to which will be available only to the PI s and study research staff. Participant 
visits will be scheduled, and no information about the participant w ill be provided to anyone  
(except in emergencies as defined above) in person or by telephone. The study will be 
conducted in an outpatient clinical trials clinic at a site in which treatment is provided to 
participants who have a variety of psychiatric pro blems, not limited to substance abuse.  
 
Identifiable information will be retained for seven years post study completion. All de -
identified data will be retained for use under the PIs’ discretion. Only individuals who are 
listed as study personnel will have  access to the data collected. The  PIs will monitor 
appropriate handling of data to secure confidentiality and integrity.  
 
16) DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
• The PIs of the study will monitor study data and safety of participants every six 
months or more often  via regular study team meetings . They will be responsible 
for:Reviewing the research protocol and planning for data and safety monitoring.  
• Monitoring that will take place on a regular basis (every 6 months or more often).  
• Evaluating the progress of the trial, including periodic assessments of data quality 
and timeliness, participant recruitment, accrual and retention, participant risk 
versus benefit, and other factors that may affect study outcome. Monitoring may 
also consider factors external to the  study when interpreting the data, such as 
scientific or therapeutic developments that may have an impact on the safety of the 
participants or ethical issues related to the study.  
 
v. 3/30/2018   19 
 • Inquiring for further information as necessary to accomplish their mission.  
• Maintaining confidentiality during all phases of the trial including the monitoring, 
preparation of interim results, review and response to monitoring 
recommendations.  
• Generating a report that will be provided to the PI, the IRB, and NIAAA  
 
Specifically i n regard to safety monitoring, p articipants of this study will be patients who are 
receiving care at the 865 Northern Boulevard Internal Medicine Clinic  or another Northwell 
Health DGIM site. Therefore, their health is actively monitored by the Primary Car e Physician 
(PCP) at the clinic, who will be notified of the participant’s participation throughout the study. 
In addition, the clinicians meeting with the participants for treatment will assess their well -
being at each assessment (at weeks 4, 8, and 12) a long with the HC drinking assessments 
and the daily EMA data monitoring. In the case of significant deterioration in drinking and/or 
mental health (as outlined in study procedures), participants will be referred to the clinical 
team for additional treatmen t or evaluations. If a higher level of care is warranted, participants 
will be referred to appropriate care, such as intensive outpatient treatment, inpatient 
detoxification, or outpatient psychiatric treatment, and continued to be monitored at their 
asses sment visits. For participants who present an imminent risk of harm to self or others, or 
an inability to care for themselves, the primary care clinical team will evaluate the patient to 
determine the need to activate EMS, who will then take the patient to  the emergency room to 
be evaluated for possible inpatient psychiatric admission.   
 
17) WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS  
The goal  of Phases I and II  is to provide a treatment -team based approach to care for 
individuals with Alcohol Use Disorders that would be inclus ive all those in the primary care 
setting in order to truly craft a feasible model. Therefore, during these phases of the study, 
rather than withdraw ing participants who may have experience deterioration, we would  
provide them with alternative treatment vi a the in -house clinical team (as would be the 
standard for any primary care patient ; e.g., referral to social work) or refer them to  outside  
intensive treatment, while still offering them in -house monitoring  as part of the study . The 
RN/NP/MD/BHSs will pro vide regular monitoring of participants to assess for possible 
deterioration and need for alternative treatment. Likewise, participants will be seen and 
regularly monitored in the primary care clinic as part of standard care.  
 
18) RISKS TO SUBJECTS  
General  Procedures: There is some risk that participants will be identified as participants in 
a study of the treatment for heavy drinking or that clinical assessments will adversely affect 
participants’ well -being. Inadvertent breach of confidentiality concernin g drinking behavior is 
also a risk. To protect against any breach of confidentiality, study procedures will be 
conducted in a private and confidential clinical setting. All data will be collected and stored on 
secured computers in secure databases or in lo cked file cabinets with patient identity being 
kept separate from their research materials. Participants will only be identified with a number, 
and the key for matching these numbers to the participant  name/contact information will be 
kept in a separate lo cked location.   
 
Behavioral Interventions.  The proposed behavioral interventions are evidence -based and 
patient -centered. They have been used with those who drink excessively in a variety of 
settings. Psychological risks are minimal and not different from those of equivalent non -study 
treatments. All counseling will be conducted in a private and confidential setting. Subjects will 
 
v. 3/30/2018   20 
 be able to end behavioral counseling at any time , if they experience any discomfort.  
 
Rating Scales and Q uestionnaires:  While the proposed assessments are all non -invasive 
and add no special risks, they do cover sensitive areas.  Participants may feel uncomfortable 
answering questions about and discussing their drinking. Study personnel will be training to 
create a non -judgmental and comfortable environment to allow participants to share freely; 
participants will also be allowed to decline to answer and/or discuss topics in the situation 
that they are not at ease.  The major disadvantage is the time taken to complete them, an d 
the potential for breach of confidentiality. We will also provide participants will time 
expectations to complete their appointments, as well as allowing them to be completed via 
REDCap while at home whenever possible. Additionally, c areful efforts to ma intain 
confidentiality  that have been effective in our previous research will be continued.  
 
Daily Questionnaires:  The primary concern to confidentiality is that there may be an 
inadvertent breach of confidentiality concerning problem drinking behavior. It  is possible that 
since participants will be receiving messages on their personal mobile phones, another 
person may view a message specific asking about alcohol use from an unguarded phone. 
While unlikely, it is possible that there may be a breach of confi dentiality if a participant’s cell 
number is obtained through the REDCap computer database. We have a similar protocol that 
is currently approved by the IRB (14 -299) and we have had no adverse events with this 
protocol which sent 100s of messages about dri nking to participants. Already approved 
protocol 14 -299 uses an outside vendor and therefore this study will be even more secure 
because we are using REDCap. There have been multiple studies using text message as a 
means to communicate patient information of much more sensitive information. To reduce 
any possible breaches of confidentiality, participants will be offered instructions on how to: 1). 
Change message settings to alert individuals that an SMS message has been received but 
do NOT display or previe w any of the message. This ensures that a third party cannot 
passively see the message on a participants phone because no information is provided. 2). 
Inform individuals to add a security code to their phone in which one must enter the security 
code to vie w a message. 3). Inform individuals to create a contact to which they would feel 
comfortable receiving a message. For example, they can program their phone to display the 
name, Bob Jones every time we send them a message. 4). Inform the participants that t hey 
should keep their phone on their person or in a secure location at all times. 5). Inform 
participants on how to delete all messages from a particular sender.  
 
Medication: Participants identified as problem drinkers may choose to receive a medication 
intervention that includes na ltrexone (50 mg per day). According to the package insert for 
naltrexone ,the medication has been associated with liver toxicity at very high doses (up to 
300 mg/day); however , a number of clinical trials and published studies s uggest there are few 
serious adverse effects, including minimal hepatotoxicity, associated with 50 mg of NTX 
daily. Notably, naltrexone is an FDA -approved for alcohol use disorder and is not an 
experimental drug. The most common side effects patients r eport experiencing from taking 
naltrexone are nausea, vomiting, anxiety, headache, abdominal discomfort, difficulty 
sleeping, fatigue, irritability, and decreased appetite.  
 
In the present study protocol , we propose to monitor self -reported side effects weekl y for the 
first two weeks or until the participant’s medication dose has been stabilized, and then 
biweekly. Monitoring and medication manage ment will be conducted by an RN/NP/MD , and 
the PCP will also see the patient at baseline and at 12 weeks post -presc ription for 
monitoring. We will monitor liver function monthly, and we will conduct more frequent med ical 
monitoring as appropriate.  These measures should ensure that any potential risk to 
 
v. 3/30/2018   21 
 participants is minimized.  
 
For participants  who need stepped up c are as previously described, one option is a trial of 
Topiramate for those who fail to respond to N altrexone. Topiramate is an FDA -approved 
medication for the prevention of seizures and migraine headaches. It is also recommended 
and often used clinically a s a second line medication for treatment of alcohol use disorder, 
however, it is not FDA -approved for alcohol use disorder at this time. The most common side 
effects are fatigue, difficulty concentrating, paresthesia’s, memory impairment, dizziness, and 
weight loss.  
 
To avoid breach of confidentiality, participants' names will appear only on locator  form and a 
"key" for these forms will be  kept by the PI in a locked cabinet. All forms that contain 
identifying information will be kept double locked (i.e., i n a locked cabinet, in a locked room) 
to maintain their security. All study data forms will contain only the participant's unique study 
identification number, using a reference system maintained by the PI. Completed study forms 
will be kept in a locked cab inet, the key to which will be available only to the PI and study 
research staff. All electronic files (e.g., database, spreadsheet, etc.) containing identifiable 
participant information are password protected. All computers hosting such files have a BIOS 
password to prevent access by unauthorized users. Research staff will have a secure login to 
access study data. All research staff that will be involved in the proposed study are 
knowledgeable and experienced in dealing with confidentiality issues and any new staff will 
be trained rigorously. Ongoing training will be provided on human subjects issues.  
 
Benefits. Participants  will benefit from the study by being able to receive treatment for their 
problematic alcohol use within their regular primary care pra ctice, rather than needing to 
procure services from an external treatment facility or opt not to pursue treatment at all. They 
will receive additional monitoring and connection with healthcare staff rather than potentially 
disconnected treatment between he althcare and substance abuse care.  
 
19) RESEARCH RELATED HARM/INJURY  
As part of their participation in the study, participants who choose medication treatment may 
experience side effects from the medications (i.e., naltrexone and/or topirimate). Participan ts’ 
response to these medications will be closely monitored by an RN/NP/MD  in this study. In 
addition, all participants in this study are patients of the 865 Northern Boulevard P rimary 
Care C linic (or another Northwell DGIM site) , where their overall health is regularly monitored 
by their PCP.  For participants who receive outpatient detoxification before starting treatment 
in this study, they wi ll have access to an on -call physician in the clinic at all times and will be 
closely monitored by the RN/NP/ MD performing the detoxification . These on -call physicians 
will assess participants’ status and recommend scheduling a visit or instructing participant to 
call 911 or g o to the nearest emergency room  in cases of deterioration or non -compliance 
with detoxif ication protocol and urgent care is warranted.  
 
In the case that participants ’ drinking increases and they appear to need a higher level of 
care, they will be referred to inpatient or outpatient treatment outside of the clinic , which will 
also be the case for participants who appear to require inpatient detoxification . Participants 
will continue to be followed in the study but will be responsible for the cost of such care.  
 
20) POTENTIAL BENEFIT TO SUBJECTS  
Direct benefits to participants include careful ev aluation of their alcohol use and potential 
reduction in alcohol consumption, which may improve their health and well -being. In addition, 
there are benefits that this research will contribute to public health. Alcohol Use Disorder 
 
v. 3/30/2018   22 
 (AUD) is a highly prevale nt and costly health condition that disproportionately affects young 
people and is among the leading causes of disability worldwide for individuals ages 18 -45. A 
number of effective psychosocial and pharmacological interventions exist to treat AUD. 
However , these interventions are modestly effective, and there is a surprising absence of 
empirical research to guide treatment selection  based on individual need. In addition, 
although there is a significant need to provide treatment for individuals with AUDs, i t appears 
little is known about providing this treatment in primary care. Participation in this study could 
contribute to the development of a model of monitoring and treatment of AUDs in a primary 
care setting.  
 
21) PROVISIONS TO PROTECT PRIVACY INTEREST S OF SUBJECTS  
Participants will be recruited as part of normal SBIRT procedures at the 865 Internal 
Medicine practice site  or referred from another Northwell Health DGIM primary care practice . 
SBIRT Health Coach (HC) will provide Brief Advice  with patients  identified as excessive 
drinkers or having AUD as noted above, the HC will then describe the study and determine 
the patient’s interest, and if the patient is interested, the HC will conduct further assessment 
and complete the initial plan for treatment. The HC will also consent the participant to the 
general study procedures by explaining  the study protocol, study  risks, potential benefits, and  
alternative treatment options. This recruitment will be conducted in a private setting (i.e., in a 
private offic e at the 865 Northern Boulevard Internal Medicine Clinic  or another Northwell 
Health DGIM primary care site ). Information obtained from the patient is kept confidential as 
all clinic staff is trained to maintain HIPAA compliance. If a participant will expr ess interest in 
the study, his or her information will be input into REDCap to maintain confidentiality of 
identifiable data. Once in the study, all assessments, treatment visits, and study 
communications will be conducted in a confidential and private set ting (e.g., at the primary 
care setting or via Webex, which is a HIPAA -compliant software) . Identifiable information will 
not be shared and will only be stored in REDCap. Participants will be trained on protecting 
their smartphones when using them for the study.  
 
22) COSTS TO SUBJECTS  
Study -related visits will be given at no additional cost. For p articipants  who choose to receive 
medication as part of the study, their insurances will be billed to cover the costs of this 
treatment and the lab work . The study will pay for their co -pays. If a participant does not have 
insurance or does not want their insurance to be used, the study will pay for the medication 
and lab work in full.  
 
23) PAYMENT TO SUBJECTS  
Incentives will be provided to patients to complete assessments at baseline, one -month 
follow -up and three -month follow -up at $20 per time point. Thus, participants could potentially 
earn up to $80. They  will receive compensation on the ClinCard that will be provided at their 
week 1 appointment.  Individuals who are screened but not eligible for the study will receive a 
$20 Amazon gift card for their screening assessment.  
 
24) CONSENT PROCESS  
Consenting for this study will be conducted as a two -step process —the first of which is 
General Consent to be conducted by the HC at week 0 and the second is a Medication and/or 
Behavioral Intervention Consent to be conducted by the clinician performing the relevant 
treatment intervention (i.e., RN/ NP/MD conducting naltr exone and medication management 
or a BHS conducting the behavioral interventions) at week 1 prior to starting treatment. All 
participants who are eligible will sign the General Consent with the HC at their Week 0 
appointment. During that time when the part icipant is classified into a treatment group, he or 
 
v. 3/30/2018   23 
 she will choose a medication or behavioral intervention treatment option that is offered for his 
or her risk classification in the study. Once a participant chooses a treatment option, he or 
she will be s cheduled for an appointment with the clinician (RN /NP/MD  for medication or a 
BHS for a behavioral intervention). At this following appointment, the participant will undergo 
consent for treatment with the relevant clinician. Notably, participants will be gi ven the 
opportunity to change their treatment option to the other treatment offered for their risk group 
in the case that they do not wish to consent to the treatment they chose. For example, a 
participant in the Problem Drinkers group may choose to receiv e naltrexone and medication 
management in their initial appointment with the HC and will be scheduled to meet with the 
RN/NP/MD  at the next appointment to consent and start treatment. At that appointment, they 
may still decide to not consent to the medicat ion treatment and alternatively choose to receive 
the Motivational Enhancement Therapy (MET). They will be allowed to do so and a new 
appointment with a BHS, providing this treatment, will be scheduled in order to consent for 
and undergo MET instead.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
v. 3/30/2018   24 
  
 
 
 
25) REFERENCES/BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
Advancing Integrated Mental Health Solutions Center, University of Washington, Psychiatry & 
Behavioral Sciences Division of Population Health, 2015.  Retrieved from aims.uw.edu  
Alford, D. P., LaBelle, C. T., Kretsch, N., Bergeron, A., Winter, M., Botticelli, M., & Samet, J. H. 
(2011). Collaborative care of opioid -addicted patients in primary care using 
buprenorphine: five -year experie nce. Archives of internal medicine, 171 (5), 425 -431.  
Anton, R. F., O’Malley, S. S., Ciraulo, D. A., Cisler, R. A., Couper, D., Donovan, D. M., . . . 
LoCastro, J. S. (2006). Combined pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for 
alcohol dependence: th e COMBINE study: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 295 (17), 
2003 -2017.  
Babor, T. F., McRee, B. G., Kassebaum, P. A., Grimaldi, P. L., Ahmed, K., & Bray, J. (2007). 
Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) toward a public health 
approach to the management of substance abuse. Substance abuse, 28 (3), 7 -30.  
Baird, M., Blount, A., Brungardt, S., Dickinson, P., Dietrich, A., Epperly, T., . . . Korsen, N. 
(2014). Joint principles: integrating behavioral health care into the patient -centered 
medical home. The Annals of Family Medicine, 12 (2), 183 -185.  
Bouchery, E. E., Harwood, H. J., Sacks, J. J., Simon, C. J., & Brewer, R. D. (2011). Economic 
costs of excessive alcohol consumption in the US, 2006. American journal of preventive 
medicine, 41 (5), 516 -524.  
Bower, P., Gilbody, S., Richards, D., Fletcher, J., & Sutton, A. (2006). Collaborative care for 
depression in primary care. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 189 (6), 484 -493.  
Butler, M., Kane, R. L., McAlpine, D., Kathol, R. G. , Fu, S. S., Hagedorn, H., & Wilt, T. J. (2008). 
Integration of mental health/substance abuse and primary care.  
Cavacuiti, C. A. (2012). The essentials : Principles of addiction medicine: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins.  
Center for Health Care Strategies, In c. (2014). Medicaid Health Homes: Implementation Update. 
Retrieved from http://nyshealthfoundation.org/uploads/resources/medicaid -health -
homes -factsheet -march -2014.pdf  
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. (1999). Brief interventions and brief therapies fo r 
substance abuse.  Treatment Improvement Protocol (TIP) Series, No. 34  .  
Centers for Disease Control and  Prevention. (2012). Binge drinking: Nationwide problem, local 
solutions. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration (2009, December 29). Illicit drug use among 
older adults. The NSDUH Report, Figures, 1 .  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). Excessive drinking costs US $223.5 billion. 
CDC features. Atlanta: National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion, Division of Adult and Community Health .  
Cohen, E., Feinn, R., Arias, A., & Kranzler, H. R. (2007). Alcohol treatment utilization: findings 
from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Re lated Conditions. Drug and 
alcohol dependence, 86 (2), 214 -221.  
Fiellin, D. A., Reid, M. C., & O'Connor, P. G. (2000). Screening for alcohol problems in primary 
care: a systematic review. Archives of internal medicine, 160 (13), 1977 -1989.  
Ghitza, U.E. & T ai, B. (2014). Challenges and opportunities for integrating preventive 
substance -use-care services in primary care through the Affordable Care Act. Journal of 
Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 25 (1 Suppl), 36 -45. doi: 
10.1353/hpu.2014.0067  
 
v. 3/30/2018   25 
 Gilbody , S., Bower, P., Fletcher, J., Richards, D., & Sutton, A. J. (2006). Collaborative care for 
depression: a cumulative meta -analysis and review of longer -term outcomes. Archives of 
internal medicine, 166 (21), 2314 -2321.  
Grant, B. F., Dawson, D. A., Stinson,  F. S., Chou, S. P., Dufour, M. C., & Pickering, R. P. 
(2004). The 12 -month prevalence and trends in DSM -IV alcohol abuse and dependence: 
United States, 1991 –1992 and 2001 –2002. Drug and alcohol dependence, 74 (3), 223 -
234.  
Harris, A. H., Kivlahan, D. R., Bowe, T., Finney, J. W., & Humphreys, K. (2009). Developing and 
validating process measures of health care quality: an application to alcohol use disorder 
treatment. Medical Care, 47 (12), 1244 -1250.  
Heather, N. (2014). The two forms of alcohol brief intervention: an uneasy coalition. Addiction, 
109(7), 1059 -1060.  
Institute of Medicine . (1990). Broadening the base of treatment for alcohol problems : National 
Academy Press.  
Johnson, B. A., Rosenthal, N., Capece, J. A., Wiegand, F., Mao, L., Beyers, K., . . . Ciraulo, D. 
A. (2007). Topiramate for treating alcohol dependence: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA, 298 (14), 1641 -1651.  
Jonas, D. E., Garbutt, J. C., Amick, H. R., B rown, J. M., Brownley, K. A., Council, C. L., . . . 
Richmond, E. M. (2012). Behavioral counseling after screening for alcohol misuse in 
primary care: a systematic review and meta -analysis for the US Preventive Services 
Task Force. Annals of internal medici ne, 157 (9), 645 -654.  
Kaner, E. F., Dickinson, H. O., Beyer, F., Pienaar, E., Schlesinger, C., Campbell, F., . . . 
Heather, N. (2009). The effectiveness of brief alcohol interventions in primary care 
settings: a systematic review. Drug and alcohol review, 28(3), 301 -323.  
Katon, W., Lin, E.H., Von Korff, M., et al. (2010). Integrating depression and chronic disease 
care among patients with diabetes and/or coronary heart disease: the design of the 
TEAMcare study. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 31(4), 312 -322. 
Kranzler, H. R., Covault, J., Feinn, R., Armeli, S., Tennen, H., Arias, A. J., . . . Kampman, K. M. 
(2014). Topiramate treatment for heavy drinkers: moderation by a GRIK1 polymorphism. 
American Journal of Psychiatry .  
Kranzler, H.R., & McKay, J.R. (2012).  Personalized treatment of alcohol dependence. Current 
Psychiatry Reports , 14(5), 486 -493. 
Kranzler, H. R., Tennen, H., Armeli, S., Chan, G., Covault, J., Arias, A., & Oncken, C. (2009). 
Targeted naltrexone for problem drinkers. Journal of clinical psychopharmacology, 29 (4), 
350.  
Lenaerts, E., Matheï, C., Matthys, F., Zeeuws, D., Pas, L., Anderson, P., & Aertgeerts, B. 
(2014). Continuing care for patients with alcohol use disorders: A systematic review. 
Drug and alcohol dependence, 135 , 9-21.  
Lewis , V. A., Colla, C. H., Tierney, K., Van Citters, A. D., Fisher, E. S., & Meara, E. (2014). Few 
ACOs pursue innovative models that integrate care for mental illness and substance 
abuse with primary care. Health Affairs, 33 (10), 1808 -1816.  
McCambridge, J., & Rollnick, S. (2014). Should brief interventions in primary care address 
alcohol problems more strongly? Addiction, 109 (7), 1054 -1058.  
McKay, J. R., Lynch, K. G., Shepard, D. S., Morgenstern, J., Forman, R. F., & Pettinati, H. M. 
(2005). Do patient chara cteristics and initial progress in treatment moderate the 
effectiveness of telephone ‐based continuing care for substance use disorders? 
Addiction, 100 (2), 216 -226.  
McLellan, A. T., Starrels, J. L., Tai, B., Gordon, A. J., Brown, R., Ghitza, U., . . . Hort on, T. 
(2014). Can substance use disorders be managed using the chronic care model? 
Review and recommendations from a NIDA Consensus Group. Public health reviews, 
35(2).  
 
v. 3/30/2018   26 
 Mechanic, D. (2012). Seizing opportunities under the Affordable Care Act for transfor ming the 
mental and behavioral health system. Health Affairs, 31 (2), 376 -382.  
Miller, W.R. & Longabaugh ,R. (1995). The Drinker Inventory of Consequences (DrInC): An 
instrument for assessing adverse consequences of alcohol abuse. Test manual. 
Bethesda, MD : National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism  
Miller, W. R., Leckman, A. L., Delaney, H. D., & Tinkcom, M. (1992). Long -term follow -up of 
behavioral self -control training. Journal of studies on alcohol, 53 (3), 249 -261.  
Miller, W. R., & Tonigan, J. S. (1996). Assessing drinkers' motivation for change: the Stages of 
Change Readiness and Treatment Eagerness Scale (SOCRATES). Psychology of 
Addictive Behaviors, 10 (2), 81.  
Morgenstern, J., Kuerbis, A., Amrhein, P., Hail, L., Lynch, K., & McKay, J. R. (20 12a). 
Motivational interviewing: A pilot test of active ingredients and mechanisms of change. 
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 26 (4), 859.  
Morgenstern, J., Kuerbis, A. N., Chen, A. C., Kahler, C. W., Bux Jr, D. A., & Kranzler, H. R. 
(2012 b). A randomize d clinical trial of naltrexone and behavioral therapy for problem 
drinking men who have sex with men. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology, 
80(5), 863.  
Morgenstern, J., &  McKay, J. R. (2007). Rethinking the paradigms that inform behavioral 
treatment research for substance use disorders. Addiction, 102 (9), 1377 -1389.  
National Committee for Quality Assurance. (2014). The Future of Patient -Centered Medical 
Homes . Retrieved f rom 
https://www.ncqa.org/Portals/0/Public%20Policy/2014%20Comment%20Letters/The_Fut
ure_of_PCMH.pdf  
Nielsen, M., Buelt, L., Patel, K., Nichols, L.  M., & Fund, M. M. (2014). The patient -centered 
Medical Home’s impact on cost and quality. Milbank Memorial Fund .  
Oslin, D. W., Lynch, K. G., Maisto, S. A., Lantinga, L. J., McKay, J. R., Possemato, K., . . . 
Wierzbicki, M. (2014). A randomized clinical t rial of alcohol care management delivered 
in Department of Veterans Affairs primary care clinics versus specialty addiction 
treatment. Journal of general internal medicine, 29 (1), 162 -168.  
Ouwens, M., Wollersheim, H., Hermens, R., Hulscher, M., & Grol, R.  (2005). Integrated care 
programmes for chronically ill patients: a review of systematic reviews. International 
journal for quality in health care, 17 (2), 141 -146.  
Park, T. W., Samet, J. H., Cheng, D. M., Winter, M. R., Kim, T. W., Fitzgerald, A., & Saitz , R. 
(2015). The prescription of addiction medications after implementation of chronic care 
management for substance dependence in primary care. Journal of substance abuse 
treatment, 52 , 17-23.  
Project MATCH Research Group. (1998). Matching patients with alcohol disorders to 
treatments: Clinical implications from  Project MATCH. Journal of Mental Health, 7 (6), 
589-602.  
Saitz, R. (2010). Alcohol screening and brief intervention in primary care: a bsence of evidence 
for efficacy in people with dependence or very heavy drinking. Drug and alcohol review, 
29(6), 631 -640.  
Saitz, R. (2013). Screening and brief intervention for opioid addiction in primary care is not 
evidence based. The American journal of medicine, 126 (11), e15.  
Saitz, R. (2014). Lost in translation: the perils of implementing alcohol brief intervention when 
there are gaps in evidence and its interpretation. Addiction, 109 (7), 1060 -1062.  
Saitz, R., Cheng, D. M., Winter, M., Kim, T. W.,  Meli, S. M., Allensworth -Davies, D., . . . Samet, 
J. H. (2013). Chronic care management for dependence on alcohol and other drugs: the 
AHEAD randomized trial. JAMA, 310 (11), 1156 -1167.  
Saitz, R., Larson, M. J., LaBelle, C., Richardson, J., & Samet, J. H.  (2008). The case for chronic 
disease management for addiction. Journal of addiction medicine, 2 (2), 55.  
 
v. 3/30/2018   27 
 Solberg, L. I., Maciosek, M. V., & Edwards, N. M. (2008). Primary care intervention to reduce 
alcohol misuse: ranking its health impact and cost effec tiveness. American journal of 
preventive medicine, 34 (2), 143 -152. e143.  
Town, M., Naimi, T. S., Mokdad, A. H., & Brewer, R. D. (2006). Health care access among US 
adults who drink alcohol excessively: missed opportunities for prevention. Prev Chronic 
Dis, 3(2), A53.  
United States Department of Health and Human Services. (2005). Helping patients who drink 
too much: A clinician’s guide. National Institutes of Health. National Institute on Alcohol 
Abuse and Alcoholism. NIH Publication (07-3769).  
Unützer, J. , Harbin, H., & Druss, M. (2013). The collaborative care model: An approach for 
integrating physical and mental health care in Medicaid health homes. Center for Health 
Care Strategies and Mathematica Policy Research, May .  
Walters, G. D. (2001). Behavioral self -control training for problem drinkers: A meta -analysis of 
randomized control studies. Behavior Therapy, 31 (1), 135 -149.  
Willenbring, M. L. (2007). Medications to treat alcohol dependence: adding to the continuum of 
care. JAMA, 298 (14), 1691 -1692.  
 