Official title
 
IMPROVE: Improving Cancer Care by Incorporating the Patient’s Voice into 
On
-
treatment Symptom Management
 
 
NCT number
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
 
 
Document date
 
February 23, 2021
 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 1 of 11 
 Date: February 23, 2021    
Principal Investig ator: Khinh Ranh Voong, MD, MPH  
Application Number: IRB00218263  
 
  
JHM IRB - eForm A – Protocol  
 
  
 Use the section headings to write the JHM IRB eForm A, insertin g the appropriate material 
in each. If a section is not app licable, leave heading in and i nsert N/A. 
 When submitting JHM IRB eForm A (new or revised), enter the dat e submitted to the field at 
the top of JHM IRB eForm A. 
 
*************************************************************** *********************** 
 
IMPROVE: Improving Cancer Care by Incorporating the Patient’s V oice into On-treatment 
Symptom Management 
 
1. Abstract 
a. Provide no more than a one page r esearch abstract briefly stati ng the problem, the research 
hypothesis, and the importa nce of the research. 
 Physician-reported measures a re known to under report important  symptoms and toxicities from 
therapy and their associat ed level of burden on patients
1, leading to missed opportunities for 
clinicians to intervene and imp rove treatment-related outcomes.  With the advances in systemic 
therapy and in radiotherapy, definitive-intent radiation is inc reasingly being offered in concert with 
systemic therapy for patients w ith locally-advanced and for lim ited metastatic disease.3-9 however, 
these therapies are not without  risk. In a systematic review of  19 randomized trials of patients with 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC ) receiving chemoradiation (ch emoRT) compared to radiation 
alone, chemoRT improved survival but at a cost of greater toxic ity (esophagitis: RR 1.8, 95% CI: 
1.3-2.3; neutropenia: RR 3.53, 95%  CI: 1.8-6.7; grade 3 to 4 an emia: RR 3.5, 95% CI: 1.8-6.8).10 
Given the competing medical com orbidities and frailty of cancer  patients at presentation, the 
potential risks with aggressi ve radiation, the ability to optim ally understand, monitor, and manage 
cancer treatment toxicity is critical.  Patient-reported outcome measures  (PROMs) is an umbrella term t hat refers to any report on a 
health status measure that is reported directly by the patient,  without the influence of clinicians or 
anyone else.
11 PROMs have been shown to more c losely reflect a patient’s dail y health status when 
compared to physician-reported measures.1 Given the disconnect be tween patient and provider-
assessed toxicity, PROMs can be used to more accurately and con sistently characterize the 
detrimental impact of treatment on a patient’s symptom-specific  outcomes, functional well-being, 
and overall quality of life. For e xample, a French randomized t rial in stage IV NSCLC patients 
showed a survival benefit ( 22.5 vs 14.9 months) when using web- based PROMs to guide follow-up 
vs. standard follow-up with imaging every 3 to 6 months.12 However, research is needed to 
evaluate if patient symptom r eporting during treatment allows e arlier and improved detection of 
treatment toxicity, and leads to  individualized i nterventions w hich may improve the toxicity 
outcomes for locally-advanced and ol igometastatic patients rece iving definitive chemoRT. 
   
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 2 of 11 
 2. Objectives (include all primary and secondary objectives)  
 
a. Primary objective:  Describe the propor tion of patients with changes in physician- perception of 
treatment-related toxicity tha t result from routine physician r eview of PROMs reported during 
definitive radiotherapy.  
 
b. Secondary Objectives: Describe (1) the proportion of patie nts with changes in the man agement 
of treatment-related symptoms a nd (2) the type of management ch anges that result from routine 
physician review of PROMs reporte d during definitive radiothera py. 
 
3. Background (briefly describe pre -clinical and clinica l data, current exper ience with procedures, 
drug or device, and any other rele vant information to justify t he research) 
 
Interest is growing in using PRO Ms as a tool for improving asse ssment of patients and to guide 
physician decision making. Historically, PROMs were used for co llecting data on patients in 
clinical trials but such data was not shared with the physician s involved in earlier trials to guide 
decision making in the care of pa tients.  Patient-physician dis cordance in the rating and perception 
of symptom burden in patients has  been demonstrated in studies of cancer patients undergoing 
treatment.13 Use of PROMs by physicians may re duce this discordance and hel p improve overall 
assessment of the symptomatic burden for patients on-treatment.  Recent studies have shown the 
feasibility and usability of PROMs in routine clinical care for  cancer patients.14-19  
 Snyder et al. randomized patient s receiving oncological care to  three different questionnaires 
assessing quality of life. Patient s reported that utilization o f PROMs improved the quality of care, 
improved communication with their  physicians, and patients felt  more in control of their care. 
Although not powered for this purpos e, the trial also showed th at participants from minority racial 
groups, with lower education level s, and less computer usage we re more likely to rate the PROM 
intervention more favorably tha n their peers, suggesting a bene fit for this interve ntion in addressing 
the needs of vulnerable populations.
18 PROMs can also help physicians i dentify the symptoms that 
patients report as most bothersome,19 which can help clinicians ta ilor decision making approaches 
to create more beneficial outcome s for patients. There is less evidence to suggest that these 
assessments can lead to changes in management of symptoms and i mproved symptom burden as a 
result of treatment, though there have been some recent example s.12, 17, 20-21 
 
Lung cancer patients treated at J ohns Hopkins currently report individual adverse on-treatment 
symptoms using the National Cancer Institute’s Pa tient-Reported Outcomes version o f the Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO-CTCAE, version 1). 22 Our group has demonstrated 
the feasibility of r outine real-time co llection of PROMs in our  clinic for lung cancer patients 
receiving radiation. Over time, we  have been able to increase p atient PROM completion rates to 
above 80 % (Figure 1).23 
 This study builds on that clinical  collection and review of PRO Ms by nurses.  We propose a 
prospective pilot study to desc ribe the proportion of patients with a change in their physician’s 
assessment of their overall toxic ity burden that result from ro utine physician review of PROMs 
during radiotherapy. We hypothesize  that routine physician revi ew of PROMs during on-treatment 
visits will (1) increase propor tion of patients with an increas ed in their physician’ s assessment of 
their overall toxicity burden dur ing definitive radiotherapy, a nd (2) correspondingly increase the 
proportion of patients receiving phy sician-directed interventio ns for treatment-related symptoms.  
 
Figure 1: Patient PROM completion rates i n the thoracic radiation oncolog y clinic 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 3 of 11 
  
 
4. Study Procedures  
a. Study design, including the sequence and timing of study proced ures (distinguish research 
procedures from those that  are part of routine care).   
 
Patient Recruitment: 
We will recruit eligible cancer p atients who are about to begin  conventional-fractionated 
(chemo-) radiotherapy. Patients will be informed of the study b y their physician, clinic staff or 
research staff prior to the day of their first on-treatment vis it.  For patients who decide to 
participate, research staff or treating physicians will obtain an informed and written consent 
before or on the first on-treatment visit.  Clinician Recruitment:   
The treating radiation oncologist s have expressed a willingness  to participate in the study and 
will help with patient recruitment. The radiation oncologists w ill be recruited at Johns Hopkins 
and at WellSpan Health through em ails and will have differing l evels of experience.  Once we 
have received IRB approval, we will go through a formal consent ing process. Physicians will 
have the option to decide not t o participate.  If a physician i s willing to participate, she/he will 
be asked to provide written informed consent.    A participating physician may be  included a co-investigator in this study. No physician co-
investigator may analyze their own patient’s PROM data included  as a part of the study.  There 
is no requirement that to be a c o-investigator physician must a lso be a research participant. 
 
Study Procedures:  
In order to minimize the need for research-only in-person visit s, telemedicine visits may be 
substituted for in person clinical trial visits or portions of clinical trial visits where determined to 
be appropriate and where determined by the investigator not to increase the participants risks. 
Prior to initiating telemedicine  for study visits the study tea m will explain to the participant, 
what a telemedicine visit entail s and confirm that the study pa rticipant is in agreement and able 
to proceed with this method. Telemedicine acknowledgement will be obtained in accordance 
with the Guidance for Use of Telemedicine in Research. In the e vent telemedicine is not deemed 
feasible, the study visit will proceed as an in-person visit. T elemedicine visits will be conducted 
using HIPAA compliant method approved by the Health System and within licensing 
restrictions. 
 
As part of patients’ routine on-treatment evaluation, patients will report: (1) their symptoms 
using PRO-CTCAE measures for can cer-specific symptoms during on -treatment visits, (2) the 
most bothersome symptom, and (3) effect of their symptoms on th eir perception of bother and 
role function in terms of interference with daily activities ( Appendix A .)  These measures 
should take only 5-10 minutes to complete.  

 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 4 of 11 
  
** After signing informed consents  - Patients will be asked to complete the measures prior to 
seeing their physician, during eac h on-treatment visit. Patient  Care Technicians (PCT), Clinical 
Ancillary Staff, or Research Sta ff will provide the PROM forms to the patients and assess the 
forms for completion of questions . If the first three options a re not available, a nurse may 
provide the patients the form a nd confirm with the patients tha t the PROMs have been 
completed without reviewing the c ontent of the forms.  PROM for ms will be completed on an 
electronic tablet. A hard-copy will  be used as a back-up measur e for patients if electronic 
devices or wireless functioning capabilities are not available at the time. 
 
As a part of the study, treati ng physicians over-seeing the car e of their patients will be asked to 
provide a global burden score.  Lee et al. demonstrated the f easibility of using a global burd en 
score to capture the provider’s  overall percepti on of the combi ned burden of all assessed 
symptoms, using a visual analogue  scale demarcating an aggregat e score from 0 to 10.  This 
scale uses anchors at 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 for no, mild, moder ate, severe, life- threatening adverse 
events, and death, respectively.24  
 ** During weekly on-treatment vis its and prior to reviewing the ir patient’s PROMs, physicians 
will rate the symptom burden for  each of their patients from 0 to 10 using available clinical data. 
Routine available clinical data  include: vital signs, laborator y work, physical exam, nursing 
assessment, physician’s clinical j udgement. Then after reviewin g the patient’s PROMs, 
physicians will re-rate the patient’s symptom burden and report  any change in recommended 
interventions due to review of t he PROMs.  Management changes i nclude (1) additional 
counseling, (2) medications/inte rventions changed, (3) referral s to other services, and (4) further 
testing/evaluation ( Appendix B ). At the end of each patient’s course of radiotherapy, provide rs 
will complete a Clinician Feedback Form to answer questions reg arding the impact of PROM 
review on overall symptom perception and management during trea tment ( Appendix C ). These 
forms were designed to be easy to complete and will take an est imated 5 minutes per patient.   
 **At the time of enrollment, research staff will collect pertin ent patient baseline and 
characteristics through clinical  chart review. During each on-t reatment visit, research staff 
collect pertinent clinical and t reatment variables through char t review ( Appendix D ).  The 
research staff, if available on s ite, will also be available to  assist patients in completing the 
questionnaires during scheduled vi sits and to address any issue s or concerns patients have in 
completing the questionnaires.  ** Marks demarcates interventions  that will/may require researc h staff availability and 
assistance.   
b. If your study involves data/biospec imens from participants enro lled under other research studies 
with a written consent or under a waiver of consent, please lis t the IRB application numbers for 
those studies.  Please note:  C ertificate of Confidentiality (C oC) protections applied to the data 
in source studies funded by NIH or  CDC will extend to this new study if the funding was active 
in 2016.  If this situation applies, Section 36, question 4 in the application will need to be 
answered “Yes” and “Hopkins Facu lty” should be selected in ques tion 7. No other documents 
are required. 
 
Not applicable.  
c. Study duration and number of study vi sits required of research participants. 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 5 of 11 
 Patients will be enrolled in the  study prior t o or on their fir st radiotherapy on-treatment visit and 
will continue through the course of their radiotherapy.  Data w ill be collected at routine weekly 
on-treatment visits; no study-sp ecific visits are required 
 
d. Blinding, including justifica tion for blinding or not blinding the trial, if applicable. 
 Blinding will not be possible as t he treating physician will ne ed to provide routine care to the 
patients enrolled on this study. In addition, the treating phys ician will need to appropriately 
assign burden scores, and to report on whether there was a chan ge in management for each of 
their patients who enroll on this study.   
e. Justification of why pa rticipants will not r eceive routine care  or will have current therapy 
stopped.  Patients will continue to receiv e their routine care.  This stu dy will not alter nor stop the planned 
radiotherapy treatments. All pa tients enrolled will undergo rou tine weekly on-treatment 
evaluation and toxicity managem ent by the treating physician.  
 
f. Justification for inclusio n of a placebo or non-treatment group . 
 There is NO placebo group. This is a pilot study to evaluate wh ether physician review of 
PROMs during radiotherapy change s the physician’s assessment of  a cancer patient’s overall 
toxicity burden and management of treatment-related symptoms. T here is insufficient sample 
size to include a pl acebo group. In future studies building on this, where we have a greater 
sample size, we can randomize  patients to 2 arms: with and with out routine PROM review.  
 
g. Definition of treatment failure or  participant re moval criteria . 
 Patients will be removed if they de sire to refrain from answeri ng the PROM questionnaire.  
 
h. Description of what happens to pa rticipants receiving therapy w hen study ends or if a 
participant’s participation i n the study ends prematurely. 
 There will be no change in the pa tient’s routine care or treatm ent.   
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
 
Our study population will be trea ting radiation oncologists and  their primary cancer patients 
requiring definitive treatment with radiation with or without c oncurrent chemotherapy as per the 
inclusion criteria below. Cancer  patients receiving stereotacti c body radiation therapy or hypo-
fractionated definitive radiation will not be recruited as thes e patients represent a different treatment 
population with a much lower ove rall treatment toxicity burden.   
 
Patients: 
Inclusion Criteria: 
 Men and women over 18 years of age 
 Able to read and write in Eng lish or able to understand/answer questions with the aid of 
an interpreter 
 Histologically confirmed loco-re gional to advanced primary canc er, including but not 
limited to lung cancer, esophageal, o r gastro-intestinal cancer s at risk of developing 
radiotherapy-related toxicity.    
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 6 of 11 
  Receiving definitive conventionally -fractionated radiation trea tment with or without 
chemotherapy 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
 Patients receiving radiati on for palliative intent  
 Patients who do not provide informed consent  
 Patients who chose to withdraw from the study  
Radiation Oncologists 
Inclusion criteria: 
 Must be the physician overseeing t he care of the patient who an swers the PROMS 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
 Have not provided informed consent 
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices 
a. The rationale for choosing the  drug and dose or for choosing th e device to be used. 
Not applicable.   
b. Justification and safety infor mation if FDA approved drugs will  be administered for non-FDA 
approved indications or if doses  or routes of administration or  participant populations are 
changed. 
Not applicable.  
 c. Justification and safety infor mation if non-FDA approved drugs without an IND will be 
administered.  Not applicable.  
 
7. Study Statistics 
 
 This is s prospective pilot study.   
a. Primary outcome variable(s). 
 
The primary outcome is the propor tion of patients with any change in their physicians-assessed burden 
scores for at least one on-treatment visit, along with their exact binomial 95% confidence interval.    
 
b. Secondary outcome variables 
 
The secondary outcome is the proportion of patients w ith a change in their on-treatment management for at 
least one on-treatment visit, along with th e exact binomial 95% confidence interval.    
 
c. Exploratory outcome variables: 
 We will also summarize the mean change in the physician-assesse d burden score across on-treatment-visits, 
and across patients, using mea n, standard deviation, median and  ranges. We will report the distribution of 
changes (an increase, decrease  or no change) in physician burde n score after PROM review across all 
visits.  
 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 7 of 11 
 We will also summarize the mean change in the physician interve ntions across on-treatment-visits, and 
across patients, using mean, sta ndard deviation, median and ran ge of cumulative changes in interventions 
made.  We will explore the average cumulative number of managem ent interventions based on each 
specified numerical change in burden score.  
Additionally, we will describe differences in mean  physician burden score between first half and second 
half of treatment.  To describe changes in the physi cian perception of treatment-r elated toxicity resulting 
from routine physician review of  PROMs, we also will compare th e mean change in burden scores for on-
treatment visits 4 to 7 to the mean change in burden scores for  visits 1 to 3.  Treatment-re lated toxicities are 
expected to worsen over time.   If PROM review does not change physician perception of treatment-related 
symptoms, there would no differen ce between the mean change in burden score across patients in the first 
half of treatment compared to th e second half of treatments. Us ing paired t-tests, we will examine the 
differences between mean physicia n burden score across patients  in the second compared t o the first half of 
the treatments. We would expect t he changes in burden scores to  be greater in later visits since treatment-
related toxicities and correspondi ng PROMS are expected to wors en over time.  
 
Depending on the proportion of patients with a change  in physician burden assessment, we will also 
explore potential variables asso ciated with a change in burde n assessment by the physician.  
We will evaluate associations between variables of interest and  development of any point as well ≥2 
absolute point change in their  physician’s asse ssed burden scor es
 for at least one on-treatment visit using 
Fisher’s exact test.  Variables  may include but are not limited  to: PROM question type from the 
corresponding on-treatment visit (symptom type, symptom severit y, most bothersome symptom, 
interference on activit y of daily living), ba seline clinical or  demographic information, and/or treatment 
information including treating- physician or disease-site.  We w ill not adjust for multiple comparison due to 
the exploratory nature of this study.  
 
 
d. Statistical plan including sampl e size justification and interi m data analysis. 
 
The analyses will be descriptive . The statistical plan is writt en by study objective above. 
Exploratory plots will be mad e (line graph, bar plots) and used  to visualize the distribution of data 
of interest. These plots may i nclude but are not limited to cum ulative number of additional 
interventions recommended with t ime and the dis tribution of typ e of additional interventions 
(counseling, medications/interven tions, referrals, testing/eval uation). Exploratory tables will 
compare the average burden score  change with the a verage cumula tive number of management 
interventions per week.  Seconda ry analysis will explore rating s on the Clinician Feedback Form.   
 Annually, 60-80 lung and esophageal  cancer patients and 20 gast rointestinal tumors are treated with 
definitive RT over the course of 5-7 weeks at Johns Hopkins. On  average >80% of on-treatment 
visits have PROMs completed for l ung cancer patients. A sample size of at least 50 patients yields a 
two-sided 95% confidence interval  with a width of less than 30%  for descriptive an alyses. Thus, we 
would be able to estimate the  proportion of patients with a cha nge in their physician assessed 
burden score and change in management with a margin of error of  15 % (+/- 15 %).   
 There will be no interim data analysis.   e. Early stopping rules. 
 Not applicable.   
8. Risks 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 8 of 11 
 a. Medical risks, listi ng all procedures, thei r major and minor ri sks and expected frequency. 
 
There are minimal risks to patie nts associated with participati on in this study.  PROs will be 
collected as a part of  routine clinical care. Patients may beco me fatigued by completing the PRO 
questionnaire or the study f orms and they may be upset by some of the questions (although the 
nature of the items is not gener ally upsetting).  Patients will  be instructed that completion of the 
PRO questionnaire is voluntary and they may decide to stop comp leting the PRO questionnaire at 
any time.  They will be informed of the approximate length of t ime it takes to complete the 
questionnaire.  The data collecti on from clinicians is brief an d should not be fatiguing or upsetting. 
 b. Steps taken to minimize the risks. 
 
Because of the nature of this study, we do not anticipate any a dverse events.  However, if a patient 
is upset by completing the study f orms or becomes fatigued by c ompleting them, the patient is free 
to stop completing the que stionnaire at any time. 
 c. Plan for reporting unanticipate d problems or study deviations. 
 
The principal investigator and C o-investigators at all sites wi ll notify the appropriate regulatory 
agencies of any serious adverse event due to any cause during t he course of this investigation. These 
include the Johns Hopkins Cancer C enter Data and Safety Monitor ing Committee, and the Johns 
Hopkins Medical Institutional Re view Board (JHM-IRB) of The Joh ns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions. We do not expect any f atal events as a result of this study but will notify within 14 days 
regarding unanticipated p roblems or deviations.  
 
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with bre ach of confidentiality:  
 While data will be stored data in securely locked files (comput er files will be  password protected 
and any paper records will be stored in the research office at Johns Hopkins and all respective sites 
under lock and key) in which only the research team has access,  there is always the risk that 
confidentiality will be lost. Fo llowing data analysis, all clin ical information will be de-identified. 
Data management strategies will take full consideration of regu lations on the security and 
confidentiality of el ectronic data. Summary data reports will n ot contain any identifying 
information. Upon completion of the study and data retention pe riod, patient identifiers will be 
deleted in compliance with the H ealth Insurance Portability and  Accountability Act.  
 
e. Financial risks to t he participants:  
 
There will be no costs accrued t o the patient as a result of co mpleting the PROM questionnaire. We 
will attempt to eliminate additional logistical burdens by sche duling the assessments on days 
patients already have other schedu led clinical appointments.  
 
 
9. Benefits 
a. Description of the probable bene fits for the participant and fo r society. 
 Participants will answer PROMs which may improve patient-provid er communication, management 
of patient symptoms, and the pati ent’s experience and satisfact ion with treatment.   
 
 
10. Payment and Remuneration 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 9 of 11 
 a. Detail compensation for particip ants including possible total c ompensation, proposed bonus, 
and any proposed reductions or pe nalties for not completing the  protocol. 
 A $10 dollar gift card will be o ffered to patients enrolled on the protocol.  
 
11. Costs 
a. Detail costs of study procedure(s)  or drug (s) or substance(s) to participants and identify 
who will pay for them. 
 None. 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 10 of 11 
 References 
 
1. Atkinson TM, Li Y, Coffey CW, Sit L, Shaw M, Lavene D, et al. R eliability of adverse symptom event 
reporting by clinicians. Qual  Life Res. 2012;21(7):1159-64. 
2. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A . Cancer statistics, 2019. CA Canc er J Clin. 2019;69(1):7-34. 
3. Antonia SJ, Villegas A, Daniel D , Vicente D, Murakami S, Hui R,  et al. Overall Survival with 
Durvalumab after Chemoradiothera py in Stage III NSCLC. N Engl J  Med. 2018;379(24):2342-50. 
4. Chun SG, Hu C, Choy H, Komaki RU, Tim merman RD, Schild SE, et a l. Impact of Intensity-
Modulated Radiation Therapy Techni que for Locally Advanced Non- Small-Cell Lung Cancer: A 
Secondary Analysis of the NRG  Oncology RTOG 0617 Randomized Cli nical Trial. J Clin Oncol. 
2017;35(1):56-62. 
5. Gomez DR, Tang C, Zhang J, Blumens chein GR, Hernandez M, Lee JJ , et al. Local Consolidative 
Therapy Vs. Maintenance Therapy or  Observation for Patients Wit h Oligometastatic Non-Small-Cell 
Lung Cancer: Long-Term Results of a  Multi-Institutional, Phase II, Randomized Study. J Clin Oncol. 
2019;37(18):1558-65. 
6. Iyengar P, Wardak Z, Gerber DE , Tumati V, Ahn C, Hughes RS, et al. Consolidative Radiotherapy for 
Limited Metastatic Non-Small-Ce ll Lung Cancer: A Phase 2 Random ized Clinical Trial. JAMA Oncol. 
2018;4(1):e173501. 
7. Bauml JM, Mick R, Ciunci C, Agga rwal C, Davis C, Evans T, et al . Pembrolizumab After Completion 
of Locally Ablative Therapy for  Oligometastatic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: A Phase 2 Trial. JAMA 
Oncol. 2019. 
8. Xu Q, Zhou F, Liu H, Jiang T, Li X, Xu Y, et al. Consolidative Local Ablative Therapy Improves the 
Survival of Patients With Sync hronous Oligometastatic NSCLC Har boring EGFR Activating Mutation 
Treated With First-Line EGFR-TKIs. J Thorac Oncol. 2018;13(9):1 383-92. 
9. Network NCCN. NCCN Guidelines Available from: 
https://www.nccn.org/professiona ls/physician_gls/default.aspx#n scl. 
10. O'Rourke N, Roqué I Figuls M, F arré Bernadó N, Macbeth F. Concu rrent chemoradiotherapy in non-
small cell lung cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010(6):CD0 02140. 
11. Food and Drug Administration. Patie nt-reported outcome measures : use in medical product 
development to support labelling claims 2009. Guidance for Indu stry. [Available from: 
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs /GuidanceComplianceRegulator yInformation/Guidances/UCM1
93282.pdf. 
12. Denis F, Basch E, Septans AL, B ennouna J, Urban T, Dueck AC, Le tellier C. Two-Year Survival 
Comparing Web-Based Symptom Monitoring vs Routine Surveillance Following Treatment for Lung 
Cancer. JAMA. 2019 Jan 22;321(3):306-307. doi: 10.1001/jama.201 8.18085. 
13. Flores LT, Bennett AV, Law EB, H ajj C, Griffith MP, Goodman KA.  Patient-Reported Outcomes vs. 
Clinician Symptom Rep orting During Chemoradi ation for Rectal Ca ncer. Gastrointest Cancer Res. 
2012;5(4):119–124. 
14. Detmar SB, Aaronson NK.  Quality of life assessment in daily cl inical oncology practi ce:  a feasibility 
study.  European Journal of Cancer. 1998;34:1181-1186. 
15. Detmar SB, Muller MJ, Schornage l JH, Wever LDV, Aaronson NK.  H ealth-related quality-of-life 
assessments and patient-physicia n communications.  A randomized  clinical trial.  JAMA. 
2002;288:3027-3034. 
16. Velikova G, Brown JM, Smith AB , Selby PJ.  Computer-based quali ty of life questionnaires may 
contribute to doctor-patient interactions in oncology.  British  Journal of Cancer. 2002;86:51-59. 
17. Velikova G, Booth L, Smith AB, Bro wn PM, Lynch P, Brown JM, Sel by PJ.  Measuring quality of life 
in routine oncology practice im proves communication and patient  well-being:  a randomized controlled 
trial.  Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2004;22:714-724. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 11 of 11 
 18. Snyder CF, Herman JM, White SM, Luber BS, Blackford AL, Carducc i MA, Wu AW. When using 
patient-reported outcomes in clin ical practice, the measure mat ters: a randomized controlled trial. J 
Oncol Pract. 2014 Sep;10(5) :e299-306. doi: 10.1200/JOP.2014.001 413. Epub 2014 Jul 1. PubMed 
PMID: 24986113; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4161731. 
19. Snyder CF, Blackford AL, Aarons on NK, Detmar SB, Carducci MA, B rundage MD, Wu AW. Can 
patient-reported outcome measures  identify cancer patients' mos t bothersome issues? J Clin Oncol. 
2011 Mar 20;29(9):1216- 20. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.33.2080. Epub 2011 Feb 22. PubMed PMID: 
21343558.  
20. E Basch, D Artz, D Dulko, et al: Patient online self-reporting of toxicity symptoms during 
chemotherapy J Clin Oncol 23: 3552– 3561,2005 
21. Cleeland CS, Wang XS, Shi Q, Mendo za TR, Wright SL, Berry MD, M alveaux D, Shah PK, Gning I, 
Hofstetter WL, Putnam JB Jr, Va porciyan AA. Automated symptom a lerts reduce postoperative 
symptom severity after cancer s urgery: a randomized controlled clinical trial. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Mar 
10;29(8):994-1000. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.29.8315. Epub 2011 Jan  31. PubMed PMID: 21282546; 
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3068055. 
22. Basch E, Reeve BB, Mitchell SA, e t al. Development of the Natio nal Cancer Institute's patient-reported 
outcomes version of the common t erminology criteria for adverse  events (PRO-CTCAE). J Natl Cancer 
Inst. 2014;106(9) 
23. C.R. Elledge, P. Han, R.K. Hales, T .R. McNutt, M.R. Bowers, C. Snyder, PhD, C. Hu, and K.R. 
Voong. Real-time Collection of Patie nt-Reported Outcomes (PROs)  in Lung Cancer Patients 
Undergoing Thoracic Radiati on. IJROBP 2018;102 (3): e729–e73.  
24. Pearman TP, Beaumont JL, Mroczek  D, et al. Validity and Usefuln ess of a Single-Item Measure of 
Patient-Reported Bother From Sid e Effects of Cancer Therapy. Ca ncer. 2018 Mar 1;124(5):991-997 
25. Askew RL, Cook KF, Revicki DA, C ella D, Amtmann D. Evidence fro m diverse clinical populations 
supported clinical validity of PRO MIS pain interference and pai n behavior. J Clin Epidemiol. 
2016;73:103–111.  
26. Shing M. Lee, Jieling Miao, Ruby W u, Joseph M. Unger, Ken Cheun g, and Dawn L. Hershman. A 
comparison of nurses’ and physicians ’ perception of cancer trea tment burden based on reported adverse 
events. Health and Quality of L ife Outcomes (2019) 17:146 https ://doi.org/10.1186/s12955-019-1210-1 
27. Carlson LE, Speca M, Hagen N, Taenzer P.  Computerized quality- of-life screening in a cancer pain 
clinic.  Journal of Palli ative Care 2001;17:46-52. 
28. Basch E, Artz D, Iasonos A, S peakman J, Shannon K, Lin K, Pun C , Yong H, Fearn P, Barz A, Scher 
HI, McCabe M, Schrag D.  Evalu ation of an online platform for c ancer patient self-reporting of 
chemotherapy toxicities.  Journal  of the American Medical Infor matics Association 2007;14:264-268.  
 
            
 