AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     1   
 
 
 
AVERT :  
Acute Video -oculography for Vertigo in Emergency Rooms for Rapid Triage  
 
 
Principal Investigator : 
 
David E. Newman -Toker , MD, PhD  
Professor, Department of Neurology  
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine  
 
Supported by:  
The National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD)  
(Grant # 1U01DC013778 -01A1)  
 
Equipment Support:  
GN Otometrics  
 
Protocol Number:  
DIZZY.01  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version/ 4.2 
Version  Date:   7 May 2019 AGREEMENT ON THE PROTOCOL  
Version 4.2 
  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     2   
 
AGREEMENT ON THE PROTOCOL  
VERSION 4.2 
 
 
Trial ID:  AVERT  
Acute Video -oculography for Vertigo in Emergency Rooms for Rapid Triage   
NIDCD  
 
 
The Principal Investigator (hereafter referred to as Investigator) agree s to conduct the trial as outlined in this 
protocol with reference to national/local/international regulations and in accordance with current Good Clinical 
Practice  (GCP) and International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registrati on of 
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use  (ICH).  
 
Any modification to the protocol must be agreed upon by both the Investigator and JHMI and documented in 
writing. By written agreement to this protocol, the Investigator agrees to allow direct access to all 
docum entation, including source data, to authorized individuals representing JHMI (including monitoring staff 
and auditors), to Institutional Review Boards (IRB) and/or to regulatory authorities.  
 
 
 
 
Signature:  ______________________________  Date:  __________ ____________  
 
 
 
Name Printed:  ___________________________   
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     3  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1. INTRODUCTION ………..……………………………………………………………………………….  5 
1.1 ABSTRACT  …………………………………………………………………….. 5  
2.2. OBJECTIVES …………………………………………………………………...  5 
 
2.         BACKGROUND ……………………………………………………………………...… ………….. 5  
 
3. STUDY PROCEDURES …………………………………...………… ……………………………. 6  
 
4.         ENROLLMENT CRITERIA  & PROCESS ……………………...………… ………………………. . 7 
 
 4.1 Inclusion Criteri a ……………………………………………………………. 7  
 4.2 Exclusion Criter ia …………………………………………………………… 8 
 4.3 Study Enrollment Procedures ……………………… ……………………….. 8  
 
5.         STUDY INTERVENTIONS ………………………………………………….………… …………. 10 
 
 5.1 Interventions, Administration, an d Duration ...……………………………… 10 
 
6.         CLINICAL AND DEVICE BASED  TESTING……………..……….………………… …………. 1 4 
 
 6.1 Schedule of Evaluations ……………………………………………………. 1 4 
 6.2 Timing of Evaluations  ……………………………………………………… 1 4 
 6.3 Special Instructions and Definitions  of Evaluations ………………………... 1 5 
   
7.          RISKS  ……...……………………...…… ………………………………………………………….. 20 
 
8.          CRITERIA FOR INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION ………………...……… ………… 32 
 
9.          STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS & STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN ..…… …………. 32 
 
 9.1 General Design and Analysis Issues … .………………………… ……… .….. 32 
 9.2 Outcomes … ………………………………………………………………….. 34 
  
10. BENEFITS  ……………………………………………………………………………………….. 39 
 
 10.1 Direct and Indirect Medical Benefits  ………………………………………… 3 9 
 10.2 Payment and Remuneration  ………………………………………………….. 3 9 
 
11.          RECORD RETENTION, DATA, SAFETY, AND QUALITY ASSURANCE MONITORING,  
  EARLY STOPPING RULES …..…… …....………………………………………... ............... 40 
 
 11.1 Records to be K ept ………………………………………………………… .… 40 
 11.2 Data Management ………………………………………………………..……  41 
 11.3 Data and Safety Monitoring Board ……………………………...… ………….. 41 
  
12.          HUMAN SUBJECTS …………………………………………………………… ……… ……. 45 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     4   
 12.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review a nd Informed Consent ………….. 45 
  12.2 Study Modification/Discontinu ation …………………………….. 45 
 
13.  PUBLICATIONS………………………………………………………………….………….45  
 
14.          REFERENCES ………………………………………………………………...………………. 4 7 
  
 
APPENDI X 
 
1. Sample trial consent form  
 
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     5  1. INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 ABSTRACT  
This study seeks to improve clinical care for peripheral and central vestibular disorders by translating recent 
advances in vestibular physiology to clinical practice. Vertigo and dizziness lead to ~4.4 million US emergency 
department (ED)  visits annually at a cost of roughly $10 billion. Most of the estimated 1 million patients with 
peripheral (inner ear) vestibular causes for their symptoms are over -tested, misdiagnosed, and undertreated. 
Each year in the United States (US), h undreds of millions of dollar s are spent on neuroimaging (~$500M CT, 
~$100M MRI) trying to detect the 3-5% of patients who have life -threatening posterior fossa strokes causing 
their vertigo―yet one -third of these vestibular strokes are missed. Accurate , early,  and efficient diagnosis  will 
save lives and reduce costs through prompt and appropriate treatments  applied in the ED in real time . 
Our team has studied dizziness in the ED for more than a decade. We have developed a new approach to 
differentiate benign peripheral causes from dangerous central ones by careful assessment of three vestibular eye 
movements ( HINTS : Head Impulse, Nystagmus, Test of Skew) and hearing. Our approach enables rapid 
physiologic diagnosis at the bedside with greater accuracy than MRI brain scans in the fir st two days after the 
onset of acute, continuous vertigo or dizziness. This approach has been validated in over 200 patients. Similar, 
well-established bedside techniques (e.g., Dix -Hallpike test) work to diagnose intermittent, position -provoked 
vertigo. U nfortunately, these eye movement tests are unfamiliar to most ED providers  and even to many 
specialists. A video -oculography (VOG) device that measures these eye movements quantitatively has the 
potential to transform diagnosis of acute  dizziness and verti go. The device is easy to use, measures eye 
movements accurately, and requires no more patient cooperation than a routine bedside exam of the cranial 
nerves  by a specialist . We have shown initial proof that the device correctly diagnoses acute vestibular s trokes.  
The AVERT  Trial ( Acute Video-oculography for Vertigo in Emergency Rooms for Rapid Triage ) is a 
multicenter, randomized, Phase II clinical trial of VOG -guided vs. standard care to improve diagnosis and initial 
management for patients with a chief sy mptom of vertigo or dizziness suspected to be of vestibular cause. We 
will recruit 226 adults from four EDs. We will perform bedside VOG and hearing testing  on all subjects, who 
will then be randomized to VOG -guided vs. standard care.  In the VOG arm, patie nts will be diagnosed and 
treated according to a standard, predefined protocol guided by VOG results using automated, evidence -based 
decision rules. We will compare the impact of this VOG -guided care pathway relative to standard care on ED 
diagnoses, diagn ostic resource utilization, costs of diagnosis, treatments applied, and short -term outcomes. A 
logistical pilot study  will be conducted to refine study test procedures and data collection tools prior to initiation 
of the main trial.  
We hypothesize that VOG -guided rapid triage (VRT) will accurately, safely, and efficiently differentiate 
peripheral from central vestibular disorders in ED patients presenting acute vertigo or dizziness, and 
that doing so has the potential to improve post -treatment clinical outcomes for these patients.  
 
1.2 OBJECTIVES  
1.2.1  To m easure the impact of V RT on diagnosis and initial management in ED  vertigo/dizziness . 
1.2.2  To measure the impact of V RT on initial diagnostic work -up costs in ED vertigo/dizziness .  
1.2.3  To compare short -term clinical outcomes in those correctly diagnosed vs. those misdiagnosed . 
1.2.4  To develop a training library of e ducational materials related to eye -movement interpretation.  
1.2.5  To measure the diagnostic accuracy of expert interpretation of VOG in ED vertigo/dizziness.  
 
2. BACKGROUND  
Rapidly differentiating acute central from peripheral vestibular disorders is a ma jor public health problem 
relevant to NIDCD1 and NIH.2 There are ~4.4 million US emergency department (ED) visits  for vertigo or 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     6  dizziness at a cost of ~$10 billion/yr.3 The ~1 million with peripheral vestibular causes are over -tested,4 
misdiagnosed,5 and undertreated.6 Hundreds of millions of dollars are spent on brain imaging trying to rule out 
dangerous central vestibular causes such as stroke,3 yet one third of vestibular st rokes are missed initially.7  
ED physicians rank vertigo as a top priority for developing better diagnostic tools.8 Misconceptions9,10 drive ED 
clinical practice, resulting in both overuse and underuse of diagnostic tests.4 Patients with inner ear conditions 
such as vestibular neuritis (or labyrinthitis) and benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) are often imaged 
and admitted unnecessarily4 instead of being treated and discharged. Patients with dangerous brainstem or 
cerebellar strokes may be sent home without critical stroke treatments, somet imes resulting in serious harm.11  
Over the past decade our team has documented the problem and built solutions to  help close this quality of car e 
gap.2-7,9,10,12-43 Multiple research studies, systematic reviews, and guidelines confirm that c orrect diagnosis for 
vestibular neuritis,44-46 BPPV,47-51 and vestibular stroke,4,21,29,38 should be based on vestibular eye exams. We 
have developed a clinical decision rule based on such eye exams that distinguishes central from peripheral 
causes in acute vertigo more accurately than early MRI.4,21,38 Unfortunately, eye findings (e.g., head impulse, 
nystagmus type) require visual interpret ation and can be subtle. Many clinicians are unfamiliar with their use .5 
A device measuring these eye movements could transform diagnosis of vertigo in the ED. A portable video -
oculography (VOG) device is approved by the FDA for vestibular testing. Its technical performance has been 
validated in the lab,52,53 and it is already routinely used in the assessment of peripheral vestibular patients in 
otolaryngology clinics.54-56 We recently showed that it can accurately diagnose strokes in the ED.33 Integration 
of this device into daily ED practice could allow rapid and accurate diagnosis of vestibular neuritis, BPPV, and 
stroke―in tota l accounting for  roughly  one third of ED dizziness  patients .57,58  
 
3. STUDY PROCEDURES  
Randomized controlled trial (individual patient randomization), parallel design (1:1)  (Figure 1 ). Patients 
screened but not eligible for randomization will be enrolled in an observational arm that undergoes limited 
follow -up to ascertain for cli nical outcomes, particularly stroke events . 
 
 
 
Figure 1. AVERT Trial  patient flow. R = randomization. The VOG -guided  rapid triage  (VRT)  algorithm selects a predetermined care 
pathway using decision rules. If the V RT algorithm diagnosis is peripheral, the patient will be slated for treat and discharge  from the ED , 
followed by same -day safety MRI . ED providers may go ‘off protocol’ and insist on admission for safety, and may choose to consult 
another provider (e.g.,  ENT physician , vestibular physical therapist)  for treatment of BPPV or vestibular neuritis  if study treatment 
procedures appear ineffective . If the VOG diagnosis is equivocal, a neurology consultation is required, with subsequent management 
determin ed by ED provider and consultant (s) working together. The requirement for neurology consultation may be waived in cases where 
doing so could not feasibly be accomplished within a reasonable time frame; in such a case, the ED provider would determine subseq uent 
management without the assistance of a neurologist. If the VOG diagnosis is central, the research tea m will request that the ED provider 
order a neurology consultation, neuroimaging (MRI), and admit the patient for further evaluation and testing , even if the ED provider 
believes the patient has a peripheral cause ; a note to this effect will be placed in the patient’s medical chart as part of the research record.  
The ED provider will make the final decision whether to admit the patient. If the ED provider elects to discharge the patien t, this would be 
documented as a protocol deviation . Funds permitting, we will also obtain 6 -month phone follow -up. 
 

AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     7  The l ogistical pilot study  is being conducted to refine study test procedures , data collection tools  and examine 
VOG-guided rapid triage (VRT) reports prior to initiation of the main AVERT Trial .  Study coordinators will 
verify that VOG quantitative outputs are complete and accurate before results are submitted to the clinical trials 
data warehouse. A designated centralized eye movement expert  will revie w all VOG tests (videos, tracings, 
summary values and the automated algorithm classification) after VOG data collection and provide a n 
eligibility determination and diagnostic classi fication , independent of the automated VRT algorithm result.   The 
expert h uman interpretation will eith er agree or disagree with the eligibility and classification determined by the 
automated algorithm.  If disagreement occurs, the human expert classification will d etermine eligibility  (for all) 
and VRT pathway of care (for those  randomized to the VRT arm of the study) . These findings will be compared 
to the automated results  output from the VOG device for quality assurance and to evaluate t esting accuracy and 
sensitivity of the VOG -guided results.  This process will continue in t he main trial, if necessary, until 
confirmation of VOG testing result accuracy  is established and verified.  Subjects enrolled in the logistical pilot 
study may undergo some, but not all, study procedures scheduled for the main trial.  
 
4. ENROLLMENT  CRITERIA  & PROCESS  
Performance sites are Johns Hopkins University  (Bayview Medical Center  [ED] , Johns Hopkins Hospital  [ED, 
clinic] ), University of Michigan  Hospital [ED, clinic], University of Illino is (OSF St. Francis Medical Center  
[ED, clinic] ), The Mount Sinai  Hospital [ED, Clinic], The Massachusetts  General Hospital [ED], Massachusetts  
Eye and Ear [ Clinic].   
 
4.A. MRI standardization subjects  
 
Healthy volunteers, up to 4, were recruited for the purposes of standardizing MRI machine settings and image 
acquisition protocols across sites. Some of the volunteers were staff traveling from the Coordinating Center 
(CC) to the performance sites in order  to have the same person(s) undergo MRI scanning at each site to enhance 
MRI standardization a cross sites. Adults 18 years or older who were able to undergo MRI were recruited and 
granted their consent either under this protocol or in association with othe r locally IRB -approved protocols, 
depending on the study center. Prospective volunteers with a health condition that made it unsafe for the 
participant to have an MRI, including people with certain metal or foreign objects in their bodies, and pregnant 
wom en were excluded. Non -study staff volunteers were recruited in accordance with local IRB policies.  
 
4.B. Dizziness subjects (ED patients at one of 5 academic -affiliated hospitals; consecutive sample  during shifts ) 
 
For the main clinical trial, we expect t o enroll (randomize) approximately 226 participants recruited from the 
ED across  the five sites, approximately 75 per site  (the Johns Hopkins and University of Michigan will each 
recruit a total of 75 subjects from all of their institutional ED sites  combi ned). Recruitment will be consecutive 
during shifts ( generally scheduled during the time window 8AM to 7PM  weekdays ). For the logistical p ilot 
study , participants from the ED were screened and granted consent for participation across the three  sites in a 
convenience sample to maximize effectiveness of trial procedure development . 
 
4.1 Inclusion criteria  
Adult (18 years and older)  ED patients with  all of the following  (all determined pre -randomization) :  
1. VESTIBULAR SYMPTOMS: presenting symptom of “vertigo” OR “dizziness” OR “unsteadiness” ( as 
defined by consensus expert definitions in the International Classification of Vestibular Disorders25)  
2. RELEVANT EXAM SIGNS *: pathologic nystagmus (spontaneous, gaze -evoked, or positional) by bedside 
VOG testing  OR pathologic ataxia (gait, trunk, stance, limbs) by bedside ataxia examination  
3. RECENT ONSET: symptoms AND signs * appear to be new or markedly worse in the past month  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     8  * Exam signs are required for randomization, but not for the observational arm 
4.2 Exclusion criteria  
(Frequency and reasons for exclusion will be compiled and examined to plan for a follow -on Phase III trial)    
 
Excluded from Pre-Randomization Screening  
• Level 1 trauma or critical illness  
• Altered mental status (e.g., delirium, dementia) that would preclude active study participation (this inc ludes 
patients with abnormal mental state due to alcohol intoxication or illicit substance, which are known, easily -
recognized causes of dizziness or vertigo presentations to the ED)  
• Non-English speaking (enrollment of non -English speakers is not feasible given the logistics of identifying a 
translator and the need for rapid recruitment and randomization in the AVERT study; furthermore, the terms 
vertigo, dizziness, and unsteadiness may have different meanings in other languages15) 
• Known pregnancy  (all women of childbearing age who are enrolled will undergo a urine or serum beta -HCG 
pregnancy test prior to MRI to confirm no pregnancy , per local institutional guidelines)  
• Unable or u nsafe to participate in screening, including VOG tests (as deemed by specific pre -enrollment risk 
assessment questions  or ED provider  and/or Study Coordinator  judgment ) including, but not limited to:  
o visual impairment sufficient to prevent visual fixation during the VOG testing  
o clinically -perceived risk to patient of participating in study (ED provider  or staff concerns)  
o clinically -perceived risk to research staff (e.g., violence, blood/body fluid/respiratory precautions)  
o unstable cardiac status (given a single reported case of bradycardia with impulse testing61) 
o acute cranio -cervical trauma or other condition (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis) that might lead to 
instabi lity of the cervical spine that would be a contraindication to neck rotation during VOG testing  
• Obvious general medical cause (as judged by treating ED provider) including, but not limited to , acute 
myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolus, pneumonia, urinary tract infection , drug intoxication, etc.  
 
Excluded from Randomization (Eligible for Observational Arm Follow -up) 
• Patient previously randomized in the AVERT Trial  (previously screened but not randomized are eligible )  
• Unable to participate fully with study follow -up (particularly MRI)  including, but not limited to:  
o unable to return for follow -up testing within 30 days  
o unable to undergo  MRI because of contraindications (e.g., pacemaker, metallic foreign body, 
pregnancy) or other reasons ( severe claustrophobia, too large or too heavy for MRI scanner)  
 
4.3 Study enrollment procedures   
4.3.1 Sampling:  Consecutive during shifts. Recruitment shifts will be Monday to Friday during peak hours 
(window between 8 AM–7PM). Total ~35 hours per week.  
4.3.2 Identification & Recruitment:  A full-time study coordinator  (SC) at each site will screen, recruit, and 
colle ct clinical data. The SC will be stationed in the hospit al to systematically identify  potential subjects and 
maximize early recruitment , using both active and passive (notified by ED staff) surveillance . We will actively 
pre-screen chief complaints under a HIPAA waiver, and approach potentially eligible patients for pre -screening 
and consent. After granting consent, p atients will undergo VOG testing to determine trial eligibility.   
4.3.3 Documentation for Ineligibility:  Patien ts with a chief presenting symptom of vertigo , dizziness , or 
unsteadiness , whether eligible or not, who have been screened by study personnel at participating hospitals will 
be documented in the VISION E lectronic Data Capture (EDC)  system. All reasons for exclusion for each 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     9  patient not entered into the trial will be recorded. Each participating hospital will enter screening data into the 
VISION EDC system using a standardized electronic data capture procedure (see ‘Digivey’ below) . Subjects 
completing the s creening procedure will be identified as ineligible ( a pre-screen or screen failure ) or will be  
randomized. Monthly reports of subject accrual (pre -screened, screened, randomized) and other protocol 
compliance data will be maintained by the CC and monitore d for site performance.  
4.3.4 Logistical Pilot  Subject Recruitment for Training : During the trial start-up period , each site was approved 
to obtain consent from up to approxim ately  250 subjects to collect preliminary data in order to test the data 
collection procedures  and logistics . For the logistical pilot trial, enrollment occur s at the time of consent. These 
subjects who consented also serve d to test the VRT  algorithm, and as traini ng for site personnel in the 
admini stration of the VOG test and additional clinical exam s. Consent was obtained from pilot subjects for 
participat ion, including 1 -week and 30 -day clinical follow -up. A sample pilot study consent document is found 
in v3.2 of the AVERT protocol document, but has been removed from the main trial protocol (v4.0) . The 
consent procedure for these pilot study subjects differ s from the full study participants, and the consent form 
and procedure identif ied the specific aspects  of the study in which the patients were  participating (which var ies 
during the pilot period). The rationale for having a flexible pilot protocol was twofold: (1) staged beta testing  of 
data collection instruments and procedures  – for the initial patients we did a very limited data collection to test 
the consent procedures, electronic data capture forms and data transfers; subsequent patients went  through the 
full 1 -month data collection protocol, including follow -up; the final group of patients will comple te the entire 
protocol, including randomization to VOG care; (2) availability of funds for follow -up testing  – we sought  to 
test the procedures for scheduling and conducting these exam s at each site, but did not have sufficient funds for 
all pilot particip ants to complete  the full protocol with follow -up advanced testing  (MRI, vestibular lab tests) . 
4.3.5 Consent/Ethics:  Patients  will be offered enrollment using a standard written consent procedure. A sample 
AVERT (main) trial consent is provided in the Appendix. For the main trial, consent will be obtained during 
screening with enrollment into the trial occurring at the time of ra ndomization. The testing involves minimal 
risk, ide ntical to that in routine specialty care (neuro -otologic exam). Randomization is ethical because we are 
in research equipoise: (1) eye movement approaches to diagnosis are established63; (2) the VOG device has 
proven measurement accuracy52,53,64,65; but (3) the impact of VOG on clinical management and outcomes is 
uncertain. We will obtain VOG in all patients, then randomize to disclosure ( VRT ) or non -disclosure (standard 
care). The ethical nature of non -disclosure in diagnostic trials has been discussed in detail by Fost and Farrell.66 
The key reasons why such trials are considered ethical are t hat (1) patients are not being denied anything of 
known value, (2) disclosure may cause harm, and (3) subjects consented to the conditions of non -disclosure.66 
Trial risks and safety of head impulses (routine in specialty care) are summarized in Section 7 Risks . 
Study personnel will obtain consent at two different time points  for patients who are enrolled at St. Joseph 
Mercy Health System . The first consent will be obtained at the St. Joseph Mercy Health System for activities 
that take place at St. Joseph Mercy Hea lth System. The second consent will be obtained at the time of the 
approximately 1 -week follow -up visit at the University of Michigan for the University of Michigan activities.  
This is because the two sites operate under different IRB structures, despite t heir institutional affiliation.  
4.3.6 Randomization:  Patients who meet all of the inclusion and exclusion criteria using the above screening 
procedures and who provide consent will be randomized. AVERT randomization will initially assign each 
patient to a block size of 2 or 4, with a 50 -50 probability; all site personnel will be masked to this block 
assignment. Then, when the patient is determined to be eligible for the study, the patient will be randomized 
using VISION’s randomization framework, stratified  by site and block size, so that all patients assigned to size 
“2” are randomized in blocks of 2 and all patients assigned to “4” are randomized in blocks of 4 at each site. In 
this way, it would be difficult for the site personnel to predict the next assi gnment, as they will not know which 
patients are in which block.  
VISION’s just -in-time randomization framework generates each random treatment at the moment a patient is 
randomized, instead of reading from a pre -computed table of treatments. This automatic ally compensates for 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     10  imbalances caused if a previously -randomized patient drops out of the study or accidentally receives the wrong 
treatment.  When a random choice is made, VISION uses a cryptographically -strong SecureRandom random 
number generator. The Se cureRandom algorithm computes the SHA -1 hash over a true -random seed value 
concatenated with a 64 -bit counter, which is incremented by 1 for each operation. From the 160 -bit SHA -1 
output, only 64 bits are used. As a result, there is no known computer analy sis which is able to predict the next 
“toss” better than 50% of the time.  
4.3.7 Masking (blinding):  Allocation will be known to SC, ED provider(s) , and patients (VOG result added to 
the medi cal record in the intervention arm) , in order to guide management in the ED . This allocation will also 
be known to a small number of personnel at the CC, including members of the biostatistics team. The 
Investigator will become unmasked to allocation status for patients  who have completed their final diagnosis 
adjudicati on as part of the iterative VRT algorithm refinement process (see Section 5.1.1 ). Since this is a 
diagnostic (not therapeutic) trial, masking is most crucial for outcome assessors, who will adjudicate final 
diagnoses ‘offline ,’ masked to allocation status . Procedures will be  used to ensure maximal masking of the Final 
Diagnosis Adjudication Committee (FDAC) members  to trial allocation . In particular, all testing protocols are 
the same between the two arms of the study other than the requir ed “safety MRI” in the VRT arm (Figure 1). 
The risk of unmasking of allocation therefore relates to patients in the standard care arm who do not undergo 
clinical MRI. The FDAC process will proceed in two discrete stages separated in time: (1) based solely on ED 
index visit dat a without  the safety MRI; (2) based on all clinical data through the 30 -day follow -up. Study 
radiologists will be masked to the index visit scan purpose /type  (“safety MRI” vs. “pathway MRI” vs. “clinical 
MRI”), so the presence or absen ce of an imaging study will not cue them to the allocation during the first stage 
of FDAC review. During the second stage of review, study radiologists will reference any prior imaging studies 
using standard language that prevents disclosure to the other FDAC members whether a prior imaging study 
was or was not available (e.g., “The present study was compared to any prior studies, if available, and revealed 
no evidence of interval change.” ). The actual FDAC review will occur approximately 1 month after thes e 
images are interpreted, so the neuro -radiologist, when reviewing this summary, will generally not recall which 
subjects did or did not have MRI imaging prior to the definitive, 1 -week research MRI.  If they do recall this 
information for a particular subj ect, they are instructed not to indicate this to the remaining FDAC members.  
 
5.         STUDY INTERVENTIONS  
 
5.1 Interventions, Administration, and Duration  
5.1.1 Study Structure & Flow:  Detailed study flow is illustrated in Figure 2  and Table 1 below , highlighting 
safety aspects where care in either arm differs from usual care, and the role s of ED providers and consultants in 
patient care in the intervention arm. The 30 -day follow -up period after ED Index Visit  will be the time window  
for analysis of primary endpoints. Although the VRT diagnosis and pathway decision will occur in real time, 
final adjudicated (correct) diagnoses will be determined by a masked, multidisciplinary panel of physicians 
using clinical data from the ED Index V isit, 1-week, and 30 -day follow -up. Data from the 6 -month follow -up 
(funds permitting ) will not be used for primary trial outcome measures.  
It is pre -specified that the VRT algorithm will be adjusted during the study period. Because this algorithm has 
not been used before in this specific study population, optimal cut points for various algorithmic parameters can 
only be approximated  prior to the trial . The plan for adapting the algorithm will be refined during the logistical 
pilot study phase, in close con cert with the study’s biostatistical team. The general plan is to adapt the algorithm 
frequently near the beginning of the trial, and progressively less frequently during the course of the trial.  The 
algorithm will be adapted during the logistical pilot ph ase as frequently as necessary to identify cut points that 
maximize total diagnostic accuracy. The algorithm will be adapted during the main trial at pre -specified 
intervals  that will be identified in the statistical analysis plan following the logistical pilot phase.  In the event of 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     11  coding issues or algorithm malfunction, the system will default all patients to the Equivocal arm and the expert 
human VT double -check will ensure an appr opriate VRT pathway is selected for the patient (see section 5.1.3) . 
5.1.2 Study Flow (timing):  Patients will be directly engaged at three  or four  time points : (1) ED Index Visit , (2) 
1-week clinic follow -up, (3) 1-month  phone follow -up, and (4) 6 -month phone follow -up. After consent, 
screening d ata collection burden early in the ED Index Visit  is anticipated to be ~ 30-45 min. Additional 
research data will be gathered after patients are randomized (another ~30 min).  In our prior observational 
studies,15 we have  gathered research data from patients up to 60 min continuously. Total patient data collection 
burden in follow -up is anticipated to be approximately  6 hours, the bulk of which will occur during an on -site 1 -
week ‘gold standard’ follow -up visit: <1.5 hours for MRI; <3 hours for VOG, vestibular expert exam, repeating 
survey instruments; 1 hour for round trip travel; and 0.5 hours for 30 -day telephone surveys.   For scheduling 
purposes, the 1 -week follow -up testing may be performed over two half days. Additional data will be gathered 
from the ED chart and electronic health record for the index visit  and subsequent 30 day s of follow -up. An 
additional phone follow -up will be made at 6 months to ascertain stroke diagnoses  (funds permitting ). 
 
Figure 2. AVERT Trial  flow (expanded) . ED = emergency department; ENT = ear, nose, and throat physician; R = randomization; 
VOG = video -oculography; WK = week . VOG -guided  rapid triage (VRT) selects one of three predetermined care pathways using 
decision rules implemente d as a computer -based algorithm  (detailed rules to be used and modified as neede d):  
a) If the VOG algorithm diagnosis is peripheral , the research team will request that the ED provider  treat and discharge  the patient , followed 
by same -day safety MRI . Treatment will be applied for VOG -based BPPV diagnoses by study personnel, while recommendations for medical 
therapies will be made for those with VOG -based other peripheral diagnoses (e.g., vestibular sedative treatments with or without steroid 
therapy  for vestibular neuritis ). ED providers may choo se to go ‘off protocol’ and insist on admission for safety, and may choose to consult 
an ENT physician , vestibular physical therapist , or other provider  (optional) for treatment of BPPV, vestibular neuritis, or other peripheral 
vestibular disorder. Safety MRIs will occur after an ED disposition decision is made (discharge, observation, admission). To optimize 
integration of VOG care pathways into local care delivery mechanisms, decisions regarding precise timing and location of immediate, same -
day MRIs (<24 hours) were  adapted to each site’s specific needs during the pre -trial logistical pilot phase.  
b) If the VOG diagnosi s is equivocal , the research team will request that the ED pro vider order a neurology consultation , with subsequent 
management determined by ED provider and consultant together.  The requirement for neurology consultation may be waived in cases where 
doing so could not feasibly be accomplished within a reasonable time frame  (e.g., at a site where on -site neurology consultation is not 
routinely available) ; in such a case, the ED provider would determine subsequent management without the assistance of a neurologist.  ED 
providers  may choose to go “off protocol” and consult an ENT physician, vestibular physical therapist, or other provider (optional) for  
treatment of BPPV, vestibular n euritis, or other peripheral vestibular disorder if they believe the patient has an inner ear disease.  
c) If the VOG diagnosis is central , the research team will request that the ED provider order a neurology consultation , neuroimaging (MRI), 
and admit the patient for further evaluation and testing , even if the ED provider believes the patient has a peripheral cause ; a note to this 
effect will be placed in the patient’s medical chart as part of the research record . The ED provider will make the final decision whether to 
admit the patient. If the ED provider elects to discharge the patient, this would be documented as  a protocol deviation.  The neurology 
consultation may be obtained after inpatient admission, if logistical circumstances in the ED or hospital so dictate. ED providers may choose 
to go “off protocol” and consult an ENT physician , vestibular physical therapist, or other provider  (optional) for treatment of BPPV, 
vestibular neuritis, or other peripheral vestibular disorder  if they believe the patient has an inner ear disease . 

AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     12  Table 1. Assigned care pathway group and associated VRT pathway  and routine clinical  care events  
 
Assigned 
Clinical Pathway 
Group  Neurology 
consult at ED 
Index Visit  ENT or PT 
consult at 
index visit  Hospital 
admission at 
ED Index Visit  Same -day MRI 
(for safety)  Vestibular 
exam (1 wk)  Research
MRI (1 wk)  
VOG (peripheral)  Routine  Routine  Routine  Pathway  
(required)  Yes Yes 
VOG (equivocal)  Pathway 
(required*)  Routine  Routine  Pathway 
(required)  Yes Yes 
VOG (central)  Pathway 
(required *) Routine  Pathway  
(required)  Pathway 
(required)  Yes Yes 
Standard care  Routine  Routine  Routine  Routine  Yes Yes 
ED = emergency department; ENT = ear, nose, and throat physician; PT = physical therapist; wk = week  
* The requirement for neurology consultation in equivocal cases may be waived in cases where doing so could not feasibly be 
accomplished within a reasonable time frame; in such a case, the ED provider would determine subsequent management without th e 
assistance of a neurologist. . 
 
Both Trial Arms (pre -randomization & follow -up): VOG exam determines eligibility  
• patient approached for consent as early as possible during ED visit; randomization occurs after VOG testing  
• algorithm exam protocol (HINTS -Hallpike -Hearing) is a ~20 -minute data collection in the ED by the SC 
• uses commercially -available recording equipment (portable VOG device, audiometer, tablet computer)  
• examination protocol is standard in neuro -otologic specialty pract ice 
• systematic 1 -week (visit), 30-day (phone, records), follow -up post randomization  
 
Trial Arm 1 VRT  (intervention arm): VOG -based  logic rules determine rapid triage pathway  
• report includes direct device output (physiologic traces, quantitative measures) plus most likely diagnosis, 
category, and clinical trial care pathway (peripheral, equivocal, central) instructions  
• the VOG results  become  part of the patient’s clinical record  
 
The roles of the ED provider  in the care of patients in the VOG arm will be as follows:  
• assess illness severity and appropriateness of the patient for VOG testing and the study protocol  
• exclude obvious general me dical conditions  
• take over diagnostic decision -making for patients in whom VOG is equivocal  (with consultant input , if available ) 
• intervene to deviate from VRT pathway  if they are concerned about safety for patients in the VOG arm  
Note: these are the same roles anticipated for ED providers  if the VOG device were used for clinical practice  
 
Trial Arm 2 Standard Care (control arm): usual ED care plus VOG exam, no VOG repo rt genera ted 
• no VOG automated interpretation or summary report will be generated; the computer -based randomization 
algorithm does not generate a VOG report or pathway using logic rules in the control (standard care) arm  
 
The roles of the ED provider  in the care of patients in the standard care arm will be as follows:  
• assess illness severity and appropriateness of the patient for VOG testing and the study protocol  
• exclude obvious general medical conditions  
• all diagnosis, consultation, treatment, and d isposition decisions will be made by the treating ED provider(s)  
 
  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     13  5.1.3 Expert  Human VRT Double -Check : The VRT algorithm outputs in the intervention arm will be double -
checked by expert neuro -otology fellows or faculty in real time  to ensure accuracy; human judgment will 
“trump” VRT if there is disagreement  (or if, for technical reasons, the real -time algorithm is not able to be 
generated – for example, as with internet connectivity problems  or during development ). The expert human 
double -check procedure will be in place at the start of the main trial, and we anticipate it will remain in place 
until the VRT algorithm is refined (as per pre -specified  adaptations during the trial period) such that it appears 
accurate and safe.  
 
Proced urally, t he patient will be randomized electronically, with their VRT algorithm diagnosis determined 
electronically . If the patient is randomized to the VRT (intervention) arm , the on -call expert reviewer at the 
Coordinating Center will be notified (regard less of site) and the entire VOG recording will be available for 
immediate review and playback, in real time , along with key historical data . The review process is expected to 
take ~10 -15 minutes . The review includes viewing a room camera of the test procedures, eye camera of the eye 
movements, and quantitative traces of eye and head.  If necessary, the reviewer may contact the study 
coordinator to seek  additional information . The double -check expert review procedure  will NOT apply to those 
in the standard care arm (only those in the VRT arm).  
 
In the VRT arm, the  selected diagnosis is linked to the prespecified management recommendation per 
diagnosis.  If the ED provider has any concerns with VRT -diagnostic category or specified management , they 
will be given the opportunity to  talk with  the reviewing vestibular specialist, if applicable , and if so desired.  For 
as long  as this human double -check procedure remains in place, any VRT -arm care recommended by the expert 
reviewer and endorsed by the ED physician will be considered  clinically -indicated for billing purposes.  For 
example, if the VRT algorithm suggests the patien t has a vestibular neuritis, but the human reviewer changes 
the category to stroke,  then the prespecified management pathways (including the stroke -related care ) is 
considered clinically -indicated (e.g., ED index visit MRI, hospital admission). Alternatively, i f the VRT 
algorithm returns an “equivocal” result and the expert reviewer changes the category to a specific  vestibular 
condition , then the pres pecified pathway for the vestibular condition (e.g ., requires vestibular function testing 
for Menière’s disease) will also be considered clinically -indicated .  
 
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     14  6. CLINICAL AND DEVICE -BASED TESTING  
 
 
6.1 Schedule of Evaluations  
 
Test/Procedure  Screening & 
Recruitment  ED Index Visit & 
Hospit alization  1-Week * Visit 
Follow -up 
(+/- 3 days)  Phone Follow -up 
30 days (+/- 7) & 
6 months (+/ - 1) 
Consent  X    
Symptom History      
Structured Symptom History  X  X§ X§ 
Vertigo Symptom Scale (VSS -SF)  X§  X§ 
ABCD2 X    
Neurological Examinations      
NIH Stroke Scale (NIHSS)  X  X§  
Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Ataxia 
(SARA)  X  X§  
Calibrated Finger Rub Auditory Screening Test 
(CALFRAST)  X  X§  
Subjective visual vertical (SVV)   X§ X§  
Portable VOG (HINTS -Hallpike)  X  X  
Portable audiometry (air, bone hearing)   X§ X§  
Health Status Measures      
General Self -Rated Health  X  X  
Dizziness Handicap Inventory -Screening (DHI -S)  X X X 
Modified Rankin Scale (smRSq)   X X§ X 
Neuro -QoL ( multiple short form items )   X§  
RAND  36    X§ 
Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI)   X§  X 
MRI pre -screen  X  X (per local 
policies)   
MRI   X† (VRT arm)  X*  
Hospital admission   X‡ (VRT -C subarm)    
Neuro -otology examination    X  
Laboratory -based vestibular testing    X§  
Laboratory -based audiometry    X§  
EDPEC (satisfaction with overall experience)   X§ X§  
Resource utilization  review   X X§ X 
Medical record review  X X X X 
Canalith repositioning treatment for  active BPPV   X (VRT -P subarm)  X  
National Death Index review     X# 
* Optimal timing for the follow -up Research MRI is days 3 -7 after onset of symptoms, so timing of “1 -week” follow -up will be scheduled accordingly.  
§ Time permitting . Time constraints may make some of the testing, especially during the ED index visit, unrea listic under certain circumstances.  
† MRI required for all participants in the VRT  care arm (pathway MRI in VRT -C; safety MRI in VRT -P or VRT -E) unless ordered clinically ; slinical MRI 
may or may not be ordered by the clinical care team for participants in  the Standard ED -care (control ) arm. 
‡ Hospitalization may or may not be ordered by the clinical care team for any patient in either arm, but is pre-specified  in the VRT -C subarm.   
# For patients lost to follow -up at 6 months, we will search the National Death Index to ascertain their vital status and cause of death, if available.  
 
 
6.2 Timing of Evaluations  
6.2.1 Screening & Recruitment:  Screening & recruitment is the start of the screening process and begins when 
the study team identi fies or is notified of a potentially eligible subject. Consent will be obtained prior to 
performing VOG to determine trial eligibility. The potential  research subject will be informed as part of the 
consent discussion that the screening procedures will det ermine eligibility for the trial and that signing the 
consent form does not constitute enrollment into the trial.  
6.2.2 ED Index Visit & Hospitalization:  The acute phase of the protocol is defined as day one (day of 
randomization) through ED discharge or hospital admission. All subjects randomized to the V RT arm will 
undergo study -specific procedures as outlined in Table 1 above. Randomization , which is determined by the 
Vision EDC,  will occur immediately after eligibility screening if  all eligibility crite ria are met.  
6.2.3 1 -Week Clinic  Follow -up: The follow -up phase of the protocol begins during the week following the ED 
Index Visit . All enrollees will undergo a ‘gold standard’ battery of tests during week 1 that will be used  in 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     15  determining final diagnoses. The tests will include a vestibular exam by a neuro -otologist, repeat VOG, caloric 
testing, formal audiometry, and  MRI as applicable. The timing of the Week-1 visit will be determined based on 
optimal MRI sensitivity for dete cting stroke and logistical constraints. The optimal MRI timing window for 
diffusion -weighted images to detect stroke is roughly 3 -7 days after the onset of continuous dizziness or vertigo 
symptoms, although MRI -DWI detects acute stroke with high sensitivi ty out to 14 days or longer. We will 
define “T0” (time zero) as the time when dizziness symptoms began or most recently worsened, leading to the 
ED index visit. We will define “T1” as the ED registration time at the ED index visit. Follow -up MRI should 
not occur prior to 72 hours after ‘T0’ to reduce the odds of a false negative follow -up MRI scan for those with 
stroke . The target window for MRI is 3 -7 days after T0, but up to 14 days will be considered acceptable  for the 
purposes of inclusion in the primar y outcome analysis (see Statistical Analysis Plan below) . If T0 is unknown or 
uncertain, we will use time from T1 to determine the appropriate follow -up window . For scheduling purposes, 
the 1 -week follow -up testing may be performed over two half days , sepa rated in time . Regardless of exact 
timing, this visit will be known as the “1 -Week” or “Week -1” follow -up visit.  
6.2.4 30 -Day Phone Follow -up: All subjects will complete a phone interview 30 days (+/- 7 days) after the ED 
Index Visit. In the event that no 6 -month follow -up is possible ( e.g., due to funds limitations), the subject will 
be instructed that this is the final visit.  30-day phone follow -up (~20 -30 min) will repeat symptom  and quality -
of-life measures  (see Schedule of Evaluations ) and determine hospitalizations or doctor visits for stroke -related 
diagnoses (e.g., stroke, aneurysm, heart attack) . We will review relevant medical records for vascular events, 
outpatient visits  (particularly neurology or ot olaryngology) , ED visits, hospitalizations, and neuroimaging.  
Regardless of exact timing, this visit will be known as the “30 -Day” or “1 -Month” follow -up visit . 
6.2.5  6-Month  Phone Follow -up: Funds permitting, all subjects will complete a phone interview 6 months (+/ - 1 
month) after the ED Index Visit.  The subject will be instructed that this is the final visit. The 6 -month phone 
follow -up and record review will be similar to the 30 -day phone follow -up and record review in structure , but 
may be abbreviated. This visit is intended to provide data for a future Phase III trial with more longitudinal 
patient outcomes, and data at this time point will not be part of the AVERT Trial primary outcomes.  For any 
patients lost to follow -up at this time point , we will search the National Death Index 
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ndi/index.htm ) using  the patient’s social security number  or other identifiers  to 
determine the patient’s vital status  and cause of death , if available . 
 
6.3 Special Instructions and Definitions of Evaluations  
6.3.1 Consent : The informed consent process will occur  during pre-screening , and must be completed  prior to 
screening VOG testi ng. A signature on the consent form does not translate into enrollment in the study. Only 
after informed consent has been signed and all relevant inclusion/exclusion criteria have been met can a patient 
be randomized or enrolled  in the observational  arm of the  study.  
Informed consent must be obtained from the patient. Patients will not be enrolled  if consent cannot be obtained.   
The study center wil l document the informed consent process and the signing of the consent form in a written 
progress note, place a signed copy of the consent form in the hospital medical record , and keep the signed 
original consent form in the study subject file. A signed co py must be given to the subject as well. The study 
monitor will review and confirm the signed consent form while reviewing subject data collection forms and/or 
during monitoring visits  (which may be conducted remotely or on site) . 
6.3.2 Structured Symptom History : SCs will gather standard identifying, demographic, and meta -data (e.g., 
triage severity); key clinical parameters related to dizziness  (e.g., symptom onset, timing, triggers, type42), 
associated symptoms  (e.g., tinnitus, hearing loss, other neurological symptoms), and key past medical history .  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     16  6.3.3 Vertigo Symptom Scale – short form  (VSS-SF166): The VSS -SF incorporates two sub -scales with 8 items 
relating to  vertigo -balance and 7 items relating to autonomic anxiety symptoms. Severe dizziness is defined as 
≥12 points on the total scale. Subjects will complete the VSS -SF at baseline and 1-month  visit.  
6.3.4 ABCD2 Vascular R isk Score167: The ABCD2 score will be calculated  to determine the risk for stroke in the 
days following the  ED index visit.  This measure will likely be incorporated into the initial diagnostic algorithm.  
6.3.5 NIH Stroke Scale (NIHSS) : The NIHSS will be done by a certified examiner during screening or shortly 
after randomization  and then repeated at the 1 -week visit.  
6.3.6 Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Ataxia (SARA) : SARA is an 8 -item clinical scale that will be used 
to assess cerebellar signs . The scale assesses gait, stance, sitting, speech, finger -chase test, nose -finger test, fast 
alternating movements, and heel -shin test. The SARA evaluation will be done during screening or shortly after 
randomization and then repeated at the 1 -week follow -up visit.  
6.3.7 Calibrated Finger Rub Auditory Screening Test (CALFRAST) : CAL FRAST is a rapid bedside assessment 
for hearing loss using finger rubbing. Results of this test at the ED Index Visit will be used as part of the 
diagnostic algorithm. The test will be followed post -randomization by portable audiometry in the ED to confirm  
the accuracy of the clinical assessment. We will obtain formal, lab -based audiometry at 1 -week follow -up, in 
addition to repeating the CALFRAST test during the follow -up bedside exam, for comparison to audiometry . 
6.3.8  Subjective Visual Vertical (SVV ): Measurement of the patient’s SVV is a routine part of bedside and 
laboratory vestibular testing. This psychophysical test assesses the patient’s perception of verticality. At the ED 
Index Visit, testing will be accomplished using a standard ‘bucket test.’174 In the bucket test, the examiner holds 
a large bucket in front of the patient’s face so that they are peering at the floor of the bucket. A straight line is 
displayed in the floor of the bucket. As the examiner rotates the bucket slowly, the patient is as ked to notify the 
examiner when they believe the line to be completely vertical (i.e. parallel to gravity). The bucket is pre -
calibrated, and the examiner records how far from true vertical the bucket line is when the patient believes the 
line is vertical.  The test will be repeated at the 1-week follow -up. Depending on site -specific procedures, tests 
may be performed using the bucket, a mechanical light bar (see Laboratory -based vestibular testing), or both . 
6.3.9 Portable VOG – HINTS -Hallpike : Using the IC S Impulse 3-dimensional VOG (horizontal -vertical -
torsional  channels), trained SCs will record eye movements, including VOR gain ( horizontal head impulses); 
nystagmus―spontaneous (with, without fixation), gaze -evoked, positional (Dix -Hallpike [Nylen -Bárány]  plus 
supine roll positional tests50), head shaking104; and eye alignment (alternate cover for skew deviation60).  
As per standard practice, testing will occur under conditions of visual fixation and with vision denied. Vision 
will be denied using the manufacturer’s FDA -approved disposable occluder and eyepatch or a study -designed 
drape affixed to a simple plastic headband. The manufacturer’s  disposable vision denied solution is comprised 
of one sticky  patch that is fully opaque for the non -test (left) eye and a cup inserted into the goggles frame that 
allows the infrared camera to record eye movement  in the recording (right) eye . Both pieces have a mild 
adhesive backing and are applied to the orbital rim of each eye. The materials have  passed biocompatibility 
testing. After testing, the patches are gently removed by slowly releasing the adhesive from the skin.  The study -
designed external drape is intended to speed testing during recruitment by eliminating the need to remove the 
goggles, affix the adhesive patches, replace the goggles, recalibrate, and the n remove the adhesive patches.  
During testing, we will record video images of the eye movement examination for the following purposes: (1) 
final diagnosis adjudication  for the main trial outcome of diagnosis accuracy ; (2) monitoring adherence to trial 
examination protocols; (3 ) additional research questions (e.g., concordance between expert eye movement 
interpretation and results of quantitative recordings and algorithmic interpretation ; assessing head tilt and ocular 
counter -roll as signs of central vs. peripheral disease ); and (3) generating an educational library of teaching 
videos, as articulated in the AVERT grant proposal.  Images will includ e the following: eye -only videos (non -
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     17  identifiable), room camera videos of most  test procedures (potentially identifiable), partial -face close -up eye 
movement exams (potentially identifiable), and full -head/face images for head tilt (identifiable).  
Identif iable images will only be used outside the research study team (e.g., for education or academic 
publication) if the subject elects this option when signing the  consent .  
6.3.10 Portable Audiometry : SCs will use  portable audiometry headphones to record hear ing in each ear  (air and 
bone conduction thresholds) . SCs will be properly trained in hearing testing and assessment (e.g., conductive vs. 
sensorineural loss). Tympanograms/acoustic reflexes will be obtained at 1 -week formal audiometry follow -up. 
Repeat po rtable audiometry may be performed for test -retest reliability and validity relative to lab audiometry.   
6.3.11 General  Self-Rated Health Status : We will use two single -item general self -rated health measures to 
assess current health status and recent changes in health status  at baseline, 1 -week, and 1 -month . 
6.3.12 Dizziness Handicap Inventory – Screening  (DHI -S169): The DHI -S is a 10-item, self -reported, screening 
version of the full DHI an d will be used to identify difficulties that the subject may be experiencing because of 
dizziness or unsteadiness.  Subjects will complete the DHI -S at baseline, the 1 -week visit and the 1-month  visit.  
6.3.13 Simplified modified Rankin Scale questionnaire (smRSq) : The smRSq is a shorter, telephone -enabled 
version of the standard modified Rankin stroke -related disability score. The smRSq will be assessed at baseline 
and at the 1 -week and 1 -month follow -up visit s to determine a mRS score.  
6.3.1 4 Neuro -QoL: The Neuro -QoL is a set of self -report measures that assess health -related quality of life by 
evaluating symptoms, concerns, and issues that are relevant across different neurological disorders. Subjects 
will co mplete multiple short form items from the Neuro -QoL at the 1 -week visit.  
6.3.1 5 RAND 36 -Item Health Survey ( RAND -36168 v1.0): The RAND -36 uses 36 questions to measure 
functional health and well -being. Subjects will complete the RAND -36 at the 1-month follow -up. This 
instrument is made up of the same 36 questions as the Medical Outcomes Study Short Form (MOS SF -36) but 
uses a different scoring algorithm ( http:// www.rand.org/health/surveys_tools/mos/36 -item-short -form.html ). 
6.3.16 Charlson Comorbidity Index  (CCI): The CCI is a composing scoring measure of medical comorbidity 
based on the presence or absence of 19 specific conditions and the patient’s age. The CCI  will be assessed at the 
ED Index Visit and updated at 1-month based on medical chart review.  
6.3.17 MRI pre -screen : All patients will complete a n abbreviated  set of questions related to magnetic resonance 
(MR) pre-procedure screening during the Screening & Recruitment period to determine eligibility. Patients with 
known contraindications to MR imaging will be excluded from the trial. For those randomized, s tandard MRI 
pre-screening will occur per local institutional policies prior to safety (ED Index) or r esearch (1 -week) MRI.  
6.3.18 MRI : ED Index Visit  MRIs differ from Week-1 research follow -up visit MRIs (Table 2).  To maximize 
trial safety, all patients in the VOG arm of the study will undergo stroke protocol (safety ; 1.5 T esla) MRI  with 
non-contrast MRA  to minimize risk that a patient is erroneously discharged with a stroke . VRT -arm subjects 
with suspected central l esions will be admitted for stroke care and undergo clinical stroke protocol MRI  with 
MRA  as part of the required trial care pathway. VOG care patients slated for discharge will undergo same -day 
safety MRI  if they have not had a clinical MRI . Stroke -protocol images (for safety or based on pathway VRT -
C) will not be specifically adjusted or harmonized for the research study; they will use standard clinical 
protocols, so as to minimize clinical disruption in the ED and radiology  department . Althou gh the protocol 
requests a non -contrast MRI/A (to minimize total contrast dose, in light of Week-1 contrast -enhanced MRI), the 
patient’s clinical providers may request contrast -enhanced imaging be added if clinically indicated  for patients 
without contrain dications to contrast . All enrollees will undergo a  Week-1 gold-standard (3 T esla with or 
without contrast)  MRI (stroke, internal auditory canal sequences pre -/post -contrast , if applicable ). A 1.5 Tesla 
basic s troke protocol MRI will be obtained i f scheduling conflicts or institutional policies prevent the use of a 
3T scanner . The Week-1 MRI protocol has been  optimized to include images to detect posterior fossa stroke as 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     18  well as other posterior fossa and vestibular lesions (e.g., demyelinating lesio ns, cerebellar tumor, acoustic 
neuroma ). The Week-1 research MRI acquisition protocol was adapted at the start of the study for each site’s 
MRI technology (GE vs. Siemens, 3 Tesla) by the principal study neuroradiolog ist. The optimal MRI window is 
describe d in 6.2.3 . 
The rationale for obtaining the delayed gold-standard MRI is that the sensitivity of MRI for detecting stroke is 
much greater at days 3 -7 than in the first 72 hours after onset of symptoms. MRI sensitivity (using diffusion -
weighted imaging [DWI ] optimized for stroke detection) rises sharply in the first few hours after the onset of 
stroke symptoms. False negative scans are more frequent in the first 24 hours after onset of posterior fossa 
stroke symptoms than in the subsequent period from 24 -72 hours after onset. MRI sensitivity is about 80%29 
<24 hours and about 86%73 <72 hours. Maximal MRI sensitivity (~99%73) is achieved after about 72 hours, and 
is maintained at a high level until ~14 days after onset of symptoms, then declines to a nadir around 1 month.107 
Accordingly, only those whose gold -standard MRI scans were obtained within the 14 -day period will be 
included as part of the primary analysis for the main trial outcome  (see Statistical Analysis Plan below) . 
Oral anxiolytic therapy may be offered to subjects per local institutional policy who have MRI anxiety.  This 
will be documented in the subject’s record and same -day follow -up assessments that may be affected by 
anxiolysis (e.g., vestibular testing)  must be completed prior to anxiolytic administration.  
MRIs will be read by two independent, masked study neuro -radiologists. For safety, all 1-week study MRIs will 
also be read clinically as an urgent ED scan by on -site clinical radiologists .  
Standardization MRIs  (normal volunteers, occurred only during protocol refinement phase) : The MRI 
acquisition protocol was adapted for each of the study center’s MRI technology (GE vs. Siemens, 1.5 Tesla vs. 
3 Tesla) by the principal study neuroradiologist in collaboration wit h an MRI physicist . To ensure that MRIs for 
the 1 -week gold standard study were harmonized across sites, the MRI personnel from the CC visited each 
study center and collaborated with the local MRI personnel. This process involved scans obtained from both a  
“phantom” (non -human or animal impregnated gel) and 1 -4 human volunteer subjects (inclusive of study staff 
from the CC to allow for the same person(s) to undergo MRI scanning at each site to enhance MRI 
standardization across sites). Each volunteer underw ent MRI (see Table 2 for sequences) for 60 -180 minutes 
depending on the progress of the harmonization process. Scanner settings were adjusted during this time until 
optimal settings were obtained. This protocol differe d from the final protocol for the pati ents enrolled in the 
AVERT Trial ; no gadolinium was used , negating the need for IV access and assessment of kidney function.  
Table 2. Major MRI sequences obtained as part of the standard MRI protocols in the AVERT Trial  
Time Point  Stroke Images  Posterior Fossa, Internal Auditory 
Canal (IAC) Images  Approximate 
Length  Image 
Strength  
Immediate safety MRI 
obtained in all VOG 
patients before being 
released from the hospital  Stroke protocol MRI  (using 
non-contrast clinical protocol 
for each site , whether or not it 
includes an MRA ) none   30 min image 
acquisition time 
(total time ~45  
min)  3.0 Tesla 
or 1.5 
Tesla  
Gold standard MRI  (1 wk)  Stroke protocol MRI  with 
diffusion -weighted, T2 
FLAIR, susceptibility -
weighted images for stroke  
Stroke protocol MRA  with 
contrast and special T1 
sequences for vertebral artery 
or basilar dissection  IAC protocol MRI  with pre - and 
post- contrast images,108  
including axial and coronal T1 as 
well as CISS s equences with thin 
cuts through the posterior fossa, 
including the vestibular (8th) 
nerve complex  for patients 
without contrainidcations to 
contrast  90 min image 
acquisition time 
(total time ~90 
min)  3.0 Tesla  
or 1.5 
Tesla  
Standardization MRI  
(normal volunteers only)   same as above  same as above but without 
contrast use or post -contrast 
sequences  60-180 minutes  3.0 Tesla  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     19   
 
6.3.1 9 Hospital admission : The ED provider  determine s if admission is necessary for the standard care pathway. 
The research team will request that the ED provider admit eligible subjects randomized to VRT  whose VOG 
diagnosis is ‘central’  at the ED Index Visit. Those whose  VOG diagnosis is ‘equivocal’ will have hospital 
admission determined by the ED provider  in consultation with a neurologist , when available . Those whose 
VOG diagnosis is ‘peripheral’ will be discharged after safety MRI, unless the ED provider  decides to ad mit ‘off 
protocol’ for safety.  
6.3.20 Neuro -otology examination : All subjects will undergo a focused neuro -otology examination at the 1 -
week visit to evaluate ongoing and new clinical symptoms since the ED Index Visit, to assess the likely 
diagnosis,  and to provide any necessary referrals or communication with other providers.  
6.3.21 Laboratory -based vestibular testing : All subjects will undergo formal vestibular testing at the 1 -week 
visit. This standard clinical vestibular testing battery (~3 hours) will include the following:  
1. Subjective visual vertical (SVV) testing  
This test requires the patient to re-position a mechanical light bar so it is oriented upright.  Depending 
on site -specific procedures, this may occur using the ‘bucket test’ (described above).  
2. Video -oculography (VOG) saccade accuracy testing  
This test requires the patient  to look from side  to side.   
3. Video -oculography (VOG) head impulse testing (vHIT), 6 semicircular canal planes . 
This test involves ~15 rapid head rotations in the plane of each semicircular canal.  
4. Video -nystagmography ( VNG ) with caloric testing . 
This test involves a series of maneuvers designed to elicit nystagmus. These include looking side to 
side, blocking visual fixation, passive head shaking, positional tests (Dix -Hallpike, supine roll), and 
bithermal caloric testing (warm and cold water inst illed into the ear canal)  while supine .  
5. Vestibular -evoked myogenic potentials (VEMPs), cervical (c -VEMPs) and ocular (o -VEMPs) . 
Both tests are performed supine and using non -invasive, surface electrodes to measure neck and eye 
motor responses to auditory,  vibratory, or forehead ‘tapping’ stimuli. The c -VEMPs  test requires 
patients to lift or turn their heads against resistance to activate the sternomastoid muscle; they may 
also be asked to clench their teeth to activate the jaw muscles and to look at a fix ed target. The 
o-VEMPs test does not require any sustained patient effort. Tone bursts will be presented 
unilaterally to the test ear through a calibrated audiometric speaker or bone conduction vibrator at a 
varied stimulation rate to obtain thresholds for  response. In order to test utricular function, VEMP 
responses to midline forehead taps will be measured. The stimulus consists of a brief acceleration of 
the head imparted to the forehead with a neurological reflex hammer or a mechanical device (a 
short -distance tapping instrument that can give a repeated tap at set time intervals).  
 
SVV, VNG with caloric testing and VEMPs will be performed at all sites where clinical appointments are 
readil y available, and at the same location as the rest of the follow up visit. Sites with logistical constraints for 
getting these tests will perform them on a time permitting basis at follow -up.  
 
6.3.22 Laboratory -based audiometry : All subjects will undergo f ormal audiometry testing at the 1 -week visit. 
Pure tone thresholds at 500 Hz through 8000 Hz will be measured in addition to speech reception threshold and 
speech discrimination score. Testing will be  performed in a sound -proof booth with a clinical audiom eter. 
Tympanometry (test of middle ear compliance during changes in external auditory canal pressure and during 
comfortable -level sounds applied by an audiometer speaker so as to assess stapedius/acoustic reflex function) 
will also be performed.  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     20  6.3.23 Emergency Department Patient Experiences with Care  (EDPEC) : An abridged version of t he EDPEC  
survey  (https://www.cms.gov/Research -Statistics -Data -and-Systems/Research/CAHPS/ed.html ) using questions 
focused on overall experience will be completed by subjects  at the ED Index Visit and 1-week follow -up visit to 
provide their perspectives on the care they received during the ED Index Visit.  
6.3.24 Resource utilization : SCs will record the number and type of brain imaging studies, consultations, and 
admissions, as wel l as ED length of stay. They will note key process measures such as whether patients are 
treated with anti -vertigo medications or undergo specific canalith repositioning therapy.  
We will track use of higher -cost services likely to be impacted by VOG care a t ED visit and in follow -up 
(radiology/lab tests, physician consultations, admissions). Costs will be based on national average Medicare 
reimbursement (commonly used in cost analyses170), or, as needed, average consortium costs.  
6.3.2 5 Medical record review : Medical records will be accessed at the ED Index Visit to identify relevant 
medical conditions related to inclusion/exclusion parameters or critical study covariates. SCs will review 
medical records for baseline medical comorbidities (and any acquired duri ng the 30 -day follow -up period), 
ED/hospital/outpatient healthcare visits, and major medical events ( falls, hip fractures, vascular events [stroke, 
myocardial infarction, venous thromboembolism] , and test or treatment complications  related to 
studies/inter ventions during the study period (ED Index through 1 -month) .  
6.3.2 6 Canalith repositioning treatment for  BPPV : For patients in the VRT arm with an algorithmic, VOG -
derived diagnosis of BPPV, SCs will provide standard, evidence -based guideline -recommended canalith 
repositioning treatments.49,50 These maneuvers are simple and routinely per formed by vestibular physical 
therapists and nurses in clinical practice. All SCs will be trained to provide canalith repositioning for posterior 
canal BPPV via the modified Epley canalith repositioning maneuver (a 270 degree rotation from the Dix -
Hallpike  test position). SCs with more experience will also perform horizontal canal canalith repositioning 
treatments (e.g., the Lempert roll maneuver, which is similar to the Epley but with the chin tucked forward 
rather than head hanging  back ). No treatments for anterior canal BPPV will be applied by SCs, as our current 
VOG algorithm dictates that patients with positional downbeat nystagmus are diagnosed as presumed to have 
central lesions until proven otherwise by neuroimaging ; if this aspect of  the VOG algorithm is modified during 
the course of the study, only SCs with adequate experience or training in treatment of anterior canal BPPV will 
apply the appropriate maneuvers . Our standard approach will be the one typically used in subspecialty prac tice: 
to apply the treatment maneuver up to three times or until the nystagmus has resolved on positional testing. The 
treatments will be provided under  VOG guidance ―the VOG tracks the three -dimensional position of the head 
in space, and notifies the user if the patient’s head angles are not in the appropriate planes/locations. This will 
increase the accuracy of treatments  by SCs with less experience. It will also provide an internal check on 
accuracy and effectiveness of treatment procedures, as the VOG tr aces and videos from the treatments will be 
reviewed by neuro -otologists for correct technique and correct results (based on nystagmus patterns). At any 
time, the ED provider  may go ‘off protocol’ for any safety or treatment effectiveness concerns and requ est an 
ENT or physical therapy consultant to perform the maneuvers instead of (or in addition to) the SC.  Similar 
treatments will be applied at the 1 -week follow -up visit if patients have BPPV symptoms and findings.  
7.    RISKS  
This is a low -risk study who se properties generally do not exceed that typically encountered in routine clinical 
care (bedside exam using the standard of care in neuro -otology/vestibular neurology; MRI brain imaging using 
standard clinical protocols). Other than the risks of contrast  MRI, there are no specific procedures, situations, or 
materials that pose serious hazards to patients or personnel. Additional small risks relate to misdiagnosis and 
risks from subsequent inappropriate testing or treatments. While we hypothesize that the intervention (VOG -
guided care) will substantially reduce the risks of misdiagnosis, we are in equipoise regarding the possibility 
that it may not, on average, prove beneficial (or that individual patients could be harmed).  
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     21  Risks to human subjects fall int o seven  broad categories that affect both arms of the trial:  
 
I. Risks of disclosure of protected health information (PHI)  [equal risk in both arms ] (very low ) 
II. Risks from delays in care due to VOG testing  [equal risk in both arms ] (rare)  
III. Risks of video -oculography (VOG) with head impulse testing (HIT)  [equal risk in both arms ] (rare)  
a. Discomfort (increased dizziness, nausea) (infrequent)  
b. Symptomatic bradycardia (rare, single case report62) 
c. Minor soft tissue neck injury (rare, with no known cases of any significant injury)  
d. Minor discomfort or loss of facial (eye brow or eyelash) hair upon adhesive eye patch removal  
IV. Risks of MRI testing with contrast (both arms)  [similar risk in both arms ] (rare)  
a. Inadvertent imaging of patient with contraindication (rare with standard screeni ng procedures68) 
b. Risks of flying metallic objects (rare with standard precautions69,70) 
c. Risks of auditory injury (rare with standard precautions69,70) 
d. Risks of difficulty with cardiac resuscitation (unstable cardiac patients will be excluded)  
V. Risks of missed diagnoses or undertesting  [hypothesis to be tested: potentially differential risk ] 
a. Missed stroke (estimated ~30% in standard care arm; hypothesized ~1% in VOG -guided arm)  
b. Missed treatable vestibular disorders (~50% standard care; hypothesized ~1% VOG)  
VI. Risks of incorrect diagnoses or overtesting  [hypothesis to be tested: potentially diffe rential risk ] 
a. Imaging or admission for stroke evaluation (~50% standard care; hypothesized ~15% VOG)  
b. Inappropriate medications (~30% standard care; hypothesized ~1% VOG)  
VII. Risks to ED provider s of medicolegal liability  [unknown differential risk across the two arms ] 
 
EACH OF THESE TRIAL RISKS IS DESCRIBED FURTHER BELOW  
 
7. I. Risks of disclosure of PHI  
 
These risks are minimal, since data security protections (described in Data and Safety Monitoring below) are in 
place and the data we are gathering will, in general, not be of a particularly sensitive nature.  
 
7. II. Risks from delays in care  
 
A theoretic al risk is that clinical care will be delayed because of interference by study data collection. As in all 
of our previous ED -based studies,4,15,21,33,71-74 clinical care needs will always take precedence over our research 
investigations. SCs will be trained to stop their testing immediately if clinical care is needed. There will be no 
delay in administration of any treatment or procedure, including administration of thrombolytic 
medications for stroke, should this be the ED provider ’s manageme nt decision . Since testing will all 
happen ‘in situ’ within the ED, there will be no delays associated with patient transport. Likewise, since we will 
only recruit during shifts when SCs are stationed in the ED, there will be no delays incurred related to SC 
notification or travel prior to assessing the patient as part of the study protocol.  
 
Another theoretical risk is that care will be delayed because the VOG test results are part of the diagnostic 
process for VOG care. The total testing time for pre-randomization screening  is expected to be about 30-45 
minutes, but this will occur ‘around’ the usual ED care by physicians , providers and nurses, as described in the 
prior paragraph.  The VOG component of the testing will take approximately 20 minutes continuo usly, but could 
be interrupted for clinical care.  In other words, VOG care will not lengthen the time of an ED provider ’s 
initial assessment or management, or delay its onset . The VOG diagnosis may identify a stroke missed by 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     22  the clinician. In such cases, VOG could  speed identification of stroke (i.e., relative to waiting for neurology 
consultation or neuroimaging), shortening (not lengthening ) the time to early stroke ther apies.  
 
7. III. Risks of VOG with HIT  
 
7. III. 1 Overview of Video -oculography (VOG) : VOG has been used for 20 years (since the early 1990s) to 
measure eye movements during vestibular testing both in a laboratory75 and clinical setting.76 The technology is 
relatively simple in that it involves sending a video picture of one or both eyes to a computer, which then 
processes the image to detect eye position (usually throug h algorithms that recognize and track the location of 
the pupil). The pupil location, representing eye position, is then tracked in horizontal and vertical directions 
(some systems , including ours,  track torsional eye movements, but real -time torsional mea sures are not as 
accurate77). This is generally accomplished using a set of goggles with a small, infrared camera pointed at the 
eye. Prior iterations of such goggles looked similar to a large dive mask. More rece nt iterations are more 
compact and look more like swim goggles. These have enabled new forms of testing, described further below.  
 
Eye movement exams for specific forms of nystagmus during positional testing represent the gold -standard 
diagnostic tool in B PPV.48,78 This process is easily accomplished with standard VOG technology. 56,164  
Bedside differentiation of vestibular neuritis from stroke, however, has required technical developments that 
matured over the past 25 years. Scientific advances have made device -based diagnosis of stroke attainable:  
1. HIT (1988) : Halmagyi and Curthoys developed the horizontal head impulse test (h -HIT) of vestibulo -ocular 
reflex (VOR) function to assess vestibular disorders.79 The test could be performed qualitatively (expert 
examiner, visual inspection of eye movements) or quantitatively (lab -based recording devices).79 The test has 
now been adapted to assess all semicircular canals.80  
2. HINTS (2008) : Newman -Toker and colleagues demonstrated the utility of the qualitative h -HIT by experts in 
differentiating vestibular neuritis from vestibular stroke or other central causes in patients with acute, 
continuous dizziness (the ‘acute vestibular syndrome’).16,21 Our team recognized that strokes involving both the 
brain and labyrinth could mimic inner ear disease when relying solely on the h -HIT,21 so we created a 3 -step 
eye exam battery to capture the remaining cases. We labeled the beside qualitative eye examination ‘H.I.N.T.S. 
to I.N.F.A.R.C.T.’42 and showed it outperforms acute MRI in the first 48 hours after onset.4,29,73   
3. VOG -HINTS (2009) : MacDougall et al. built a portable VOG device lightweight enough to measure the h -
HIT without goggles slippage.52,64,81 This invention allowed our team to be the first to demonstrate in a small, 
proof -of-concept study that device -based differentiation of vestibular neu ritis and stroke was indeed possible.33 
We have since confirmed this approach in another dozen patients with acute vestibular syndrome and have 
publishe d detailed quantitative results and technical analyses.  
4. HINTS ‘Plus’ (2013) : Newman -Toker et al. showed that a minor modification of the HINTS decision rule is 
more sensitive for detecting stroke while losing only a small amount of specificity.73 This ‘HINTS plus’ counts 
new unilateral hearing loss in those with acute, continuous vertigo or dizziness as a predictor of stroke involving 
the inner ear (i.e., combined cochleo -labyrinthine infarction). This occurs because vestib ular neuritis is 
generally without hearing loss, while the blood supply to the inner ear derives from the vertebrobasilar 
circulation, generally via the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) giving rise to the internal auditory artery.  
The ICS Impulse  device ( http://icsimpulse.com/ ) that will be used in the AVERT Trial is a lightweight, modern 
adaptation of standard VOG technology; it received FDA approval in February, 2013 via a 510(k) mechanism 
that demonstrated  it to be substantially similar to predicate VOG devices measuring vestibular function 
(http://www.fda.gov/medicaldevices /productsandmedicalprocedures/deviceapprovalsandclearances/510kclearances/default.htm ).  
 
Since VOG devices can now measure the h -HIT, nystagmus (BPPV or central -type), and vertical eye 
position (skew deviation), VOG testing can now diagnose BPPV, vestibul ar neuritis, and stroke.   
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     23   
Note on Commercial Relationships and Choice of Device : No one on the research team ha d any commercial 
or financial interest in the ICS Impulse device (or any other VOG system)  at study start; any new commercial 
relationships (e.g., licensing the AVERT algorithm) will be disclosed per institutional policy . Here we describe 
the rationale for our choice of the ICS Impulse device ( http://icsimpulse.com/ ) over competitor products such as 
the EyeSeeCam ( http://eyeseecam.com/ ; http://www.interacoustics.com/us/vhit )  or Video Head Impulse Test 
Ulmer ( http://www.synapsys.fr/en/p -video head -impulse -test-ulmer -vhit-ulmer -48.htm ). Our choice to focus on 
using the ICS Impulse device was made for scientific rea sons. To our knowledge, only the I CS Impulse and 
EyeSeeCam devices have been validated against magnetic scleral search coil recordings (the gold standard in 
eye movement recording techniques) and are currently FDA approved for clinical use in the US. Compa nies 
producing these two devices have loaned them to our research group for research purposes. The EyeSeeCam 
has greater eye movement measurement flexibility in its current hardware and software configuration, but the 
ICS Impulse has a simpler, unibody des ign without moving or detachable parts; it is also more comfortable  for 
patients to wear . We believe these features make the ICS Impulse device more likely to be widely disseminated 
in an ED environment, so we chose to focus our initial efforts on using th is particular device. We are currently 
using the EyeSeeCam preferentially for laboratory -based studies. As long as the particular device can give 
similar measurements as described in this trial, the results should be applicable to all similar VOG devices.  
 
7. III. 2 The Impulse Maneuver : The horizontal head impulse test (h -HIT) of vestibulo -ocular reflex (VOR) 
function, as originally described in 1988,79 is a 
rapid, passive head rotation from lateral (10 -20 
degrees) to center head position as a subject 
fixates at a central target (e.g., the examiner’s 
nose). For the test to work, the head rotation 
must be passive (i.e., conducted by the 
examiner), rather than active (i.e., deliberate 
head turn by the patient).82 Although it the h-HIT 
is often  performed from center to lateral in 
research studies, we will use the original 
maneuver and displace the head laterally first 
before rotating  the head back to the center 
position.21 This approach reduces any theoretical 
risk of vertebral artery injury with neck over -
rotation by an overzealous, inexperienced examiner, and is the technique we have used successfully in our prior 
studies. In the AVER T Trial, all examiners will be well trained. We have shown that high -quality 
technique is achieved in less than 1 hour of training (Fig. 3). 
 
The HIT technique is now considered a standard part of the routine clinical exam in patients presenting with 
dizziness or vertigo.63,83 The evidence supporting its use in experienced hands is substantial.4,21,29,73,84 Our 
systematic review concluded the re was strong evidence (GRADE system85) for adequately -trained providers to 
use these findings for stroke diagnosis in AVS.29 Not performing the technique in a patient with acute, 
continuous dizziness or vertigo would now be considered inappropriate care by most vestibular specialists.  
 
7. III. 3 Side Effects of HIT : It is reasonable to expect that  patients with dizziness or vertigo could have an 
exacerbation of their symptoms during the HIT, as they might with any head movement. As a consequence, 
patients may feel greater dizziness, nausea, or unsteadiness during testing or for a few seconds or min utes after 
testing is complete. The maneuver could provoke vomiting or other vagal responses. Since 1988 there has been 
one case report of bradycardia after HIT,62 but no other reported complications, to our knowledge.  
  
Figure 3. Novices learn correct HIT technique in <1hr with VOG  

AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     24  Our 75 AVS patients enrolled in our observational VOG studies have easily tolerated 20 -40 impulse 
maneuvers at a session, often many more . We have found that patients experience more symptoms from 
sitting up from a recumbent position in bed than from the HIT itself . This is likely because the amplitude of the 
HIT movement is so small and the stimulus duration so brie f, that it does not cause major symptoms.  
 
Those with neck arthritis (or baseline neck pain or headache) could experience mild, transient increase in pain 
during the head rotation. None of these symptoms are expected to last more than a few seconds and no ne of 
these symptoms will be greater than those expected to be brought out by the routine process of clinical care 
(e.g., during typical Dix -Hallpike positional testing for nystagmus, which, unlike the HIT, is more commonly 
applied by ED providers  in the c ourse of routine clinical care for patients with dizziness or vertigo).  
 
7. III. 4 Theoretical Complications of HIT : Millions of HITs have been performed by dozens of investigators 
worldwide over the past 25 years.4,21,44,45,52,64,79,81,82,86-90 To our knowledge, no complications of HIT testing 
have ever been reported other than the transient side effects described above.  
 
Some who have observed the HIT performed have likened  it to chiropractic neck manipulation and expressed 
concerns about the possibility of causing a vertebral artery dissection or exacerbating a pre -existing one. The 
HIT differs mechanically from cervical spine manipulations which combine far lateral rotatio ns (>45 degrees) 
with full neck extension in order to immobilize the joint at its end range of motion before applying a sudden, 
high-velocity head rotation as a therapeutic maneuver ( http://www.you tube.com/watch?v=CAVxOFftqxg , 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=endscreen&v=NVuY5vqoGyU&NR=1 ).  
 
The theoretical risk of vertebral artery injury is with far lateral  (>45 d egree) neck rotations (as may occur with 
cervical spine manipulation, but not HIT ), since studies suggest that physical traction on the vertebral artery 
only begins to occur when the head is rotated more than 30 degrees laterally, and is only substantial w hen the 
head is rotated beyond 45 degrees laterally.91,92 This mechanical risk may be further increased in chiropractic 
cervical spine manipulation by com bining far lateral rotation with full neck extension (also not done in HIT ), 
thereby placing the vertebral arteries at additional biomechanical risk.93  
 
The correct h -HIT procedure as applied in this study will be to displace the head 10 -20 degrees laterally ( less of 
an excursion than typically used as part of routine auscultation of the carotid artery ) and return the head 
rapidly to center (100 -200 degrees per second) ( http://content.lib.utah.edu/cdm/singleitem/collection/ehsl -
dent/id/6 , video time point 4:29 for close -up demonstration of the head impulse as performed properly).  
 
For vertical HIT (v -HIT) testing in the  RALP (right anterior, left posterior semicircular canal) and LARP (left 
anterior, right posterior semicircular canal) planes, we will displace the head 30 -40 degrees laterally53 (roughly 
the excursion typically done as part of routin e auscultation of the carotid artery ) and rotate the head 
rapidly in flexion and extension by 10 -20 degrees.53 
 
Despite the lack of biomechanical similarity between chiropractic neck manipulation and HIT testing, we are 
mindful of concerns about the possible relationship between sudden neck movements and dissection expressed 
by thoughtful physicians.94 It is important to note that a direct causal relationship between chiropractic neck 
manipulation and stroke linked t o cervical (carotid or vertebral) artery dissection has been postulated,95   
but remains controversial .96,97 Population -based case control studies have shown that vertebrobasilar artery 
dissection and stroke is associated with a three to five -fold increase in likelihood of having been exposed to 
recent chiropractic neck manipulation among patients age <45 years  but not those over that age.98,99 The risk of 
having visited a primary care physician in th e weeks before dissection/stroke diagnosis, however, is the same as 
the risk of having visited a chiropractor.99 These findings suggest the association could be spurious, reflecting 
“confounding by indication” or “reverse causality bias” (‘vertebral dissection’ causes  ‘neck pain’ which causes  
‘chiropractic or primary care visit’… rather than ‘ neck disease ’ causes  ‘neck pain’ causes  ‘chiropractic visit’ 
which causes  ‘vertebral dissection’).96,99 Even those asserting a real association accept the absolute risk of 
dissection is low.97 The maximum estimated risk is 1 dissection per 20,000 manipulations,100 though others 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     25  sugges t the risk is much lower, between 1 per 400,000 and 1 per 1.3 million manipulations.98 Also, the presence 
of a vertebral artery dissection often has a favorable outcome  when treated appropriately .36  
 
Assuming the theoretical risk of dissection with the HIT is the same as the risk for cervical manipulation (which 
is unlikely based on the biomechanics described above), with a maximum of 180 impulses per patient ( 20 per 
canal , 2 canals at ED index and 6 at 1  week ), the total risk of a dissection would be approximately 0.01 -0.9%. 
By contrast, the risk of not performing the HIT in an ED patient with acute, continuous dizziness or vertigo 
presenting in the first 24 hours confers a 20% risk of missed stroke, even if every such patient is sent for an 
MRI. The 20% risk is of a false -negative MRI,29 currently considered the best available test (other than HIT). 
Many ED patients get CT rather than MRI, so their risk of a missed stroke is probably 58 -93%.101-103 Those 
whose strokes are initially missed appear to be at much higher risk of death (40% in one case series11) so the 
absolute risk increase of d eath due to a misdiagnosis (as a consequence of not performing the HIT) could be as 
high as 35% relative to a correctly -diagnosed patient. Thus, the absolute risk of death due to missed stroke in 
typical ED care (by not performing the HIT) in a patient pop ulation like ours (~10 -20% strokes) may be ~1%.  
 
If we have 15% strokes in our subject pool, then even if the excess risk of death due to a delay in ED 
cerebellar stroke diagnosis is only half that reported in the literature,11 the risk of stroke -related death  
due to misdiagnosis from NOT  performing the HIT is likely greater than any hypothetical risk of 
vertebral artery dissection  from actually pe rforming the HIT to help diagnose stroke in these patients .  
 
7. III. 5 Risks of other vestibular testing (positional tests,49,50 side-to-side head shaking104): These standard 
vestibular tests used to provoke vertigo, dizziness, or nystagmus are used routinely in specialty clinical 
practice.42,105,106 Aside from an increase in symptoms (dizziness, nausea, or vomiting), there are no known risks 
of these tests. If a patient wishes not to continue with the test protocol, they may stop at any time.   
 
7. III. 6  Risks of vestibular treatments  (canalith repositioning maneuvers ): These standard vestibular treatments  
are used routinely in specialty clinical practice  and form the basis of at least two clinical practice guidelines .49,50 
Aside from an increase in symptoms (dizziness, nausea, or vomiting), there are no known significant risks of 
these procedures (Cochrane Review doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003162.pub3).  The modified Epley maneuver  
for posterior canal BPPV is effective i n approximately  80% of acute cases, with a number needed to treat ~1.4 -
2.4 from two Class I randomized trials .50 Similar results have been found for horizontal canal BPPV treatmen ts, 
albeit from lower -quality studies.50 If a patient wishes not to continue with the treatment  protocol, they may 
stop at any time.  If an ED provider  prefers treatment by another provider, they may go ‘off protocol.’  
 
7. IV. Risks of MRI testing  
 
Overall, the risks of MRI, even with contrast administration, are extremely low. None of the risks in this study 
exceed risks typically encountered in clinical care for patients with vertigo undergoing MRI. Contrast 
administration is a recommended element of MRI imaging for patients with  vertigo and hearing loss.108  
7. IV. 1 Inadvertent imaging of patients with contraindications : This complication is rare with standard pre -
MRI screening procedures,68 which will be followed in the AVERT Trial . People who have known metallic 
foreign bodies in the head or eyes, or who may have been exposed previously to metal fragments in their work , 
such as welders or metal workers , will be excluded from the study in the initial screening  review for eligibility. 
As describe d in the consent form, those with remote exposure who have previously been cleared by skull x -ray 
or CT scan of the head (i.e., confirmed NOT  to have metal fragments) will, however, be eligible . Eligibility will 
be confirmed at each site using the standard  clinical or research pre -screening MRI questionnaires /checklists, 
per local institutional policies  (including a negative pregnancy status for all women of childbearing potential  
prior to MRI ). Patients will be pre -screened for claustrophobia  and treated w ith anxiolysis in advance as 
appropriate ; if refractory anxiety develops during the MRI, we will stop the scan.  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     26  7. IV. 2 Risks of flying metallic objects : This complication is rare with standard precautions in the conduct of 
MRI testing,69,109,110 which will be followed in the AVERT Trial . 
7. IV. 3 Risks of auditory injury : This complication is rare with standard precautions,69,109,110 which will be 
followed in the AVERT Tr ial. All patients will receive hearing protection. While some clinicians consider 
immediate MRI in a patient with sudden hearing loss to be contraindicated (for risk of further noise -induced 
damage), our data suggest that patients with combined audio -vesti bular presentations to the ED are more likely 
to be the result of stroke than peripheral vestibulopathy (i.e., labyrinthitis or cochleo -vestibular neuritis).73 This 
means that the risks of further hearing loss from MRI are likely outweighed by th e risks of missed stroke.  
7. IV. 4 Inadvertent risks of difficulty with cardiac resuscitation : Risks of difficulty with cardiac resuscitation 
are minimal since critically ill and unstable cardiac patients will be excluded.  
7. IV. 5 R isks of gadolinium -based contrast agents : [Note  that this risk did not apply to the MRI standardization 
volunteers because gadolinium was not administered.] Gadolinium helps identify brain, blood vessel, and 
cranial nerve pathology by demonstrating pathologic tissue enhancement and by enhanc ing the contrast between 
diseased arteries  (e.g., due to cervical artery stenoses or dissections ), and the surrounding soft tissues.  Contrast 
administration is important in this study to identify correct etiologies for dizziness, including active multiple 
sclerosis, inflammatory balance nerve lesions, small neoplasms (e.g., cerebellar metasteses), and vascular 
stensoses responsible for stroke.  At 1-week, contrast therefore maximizes accuracy of the gold standard.  
Overall risks are minimal in patients with normal renal function70 (defined as GFR >30 mL/min/1.73 m2). For 
patients without contraindications , we will use a gadolinium -based contrast agent to be administered 
intravenously at a dose of 0.1 mM/kg body weight using a power injector at a rate of 2cc/sec. This agent has 
been approved by the FDA and is widely used for clinical MRI exams. The amount is considered a “single 
dose”, and is typically the lowest dose used for clinical applications. We will minimize excess dosing by 
conducting safety or ad mission MRIs without contrast.  
Insertion of an intravenous catheter for injection may cause minor pain, bruising and/or infection at the injection 
site. Transient side effects of gadolinium administration may include discomfort during the injection of cont rast, 
tingling or warmth in the lips, metallic taste in the mouth, tingling in the arms, nausea, or headache.  These 
symptoms occur in less than 1% and resolve quickly.  There is a small risk of an allergic reaction to gadolinium; 
however, a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) occurs in less than 1 in 300,000.  
People with moderate to advanced renal failure who receive gadolinium are at risk of developing Nephrogenic 
Systemic Fibrosis/Nephrogenic Fibrosing Dermopathy (NSF/NFD). NSF/NSD causes thickening of skin and 
connective tissues that can result in pain, reduced joint mobility, and in some cases leads to death.70 The risk of 
developing NSF/NFD is 3 -7% in subjects with moderate to advanced renal failure,70 but these patients will not 
receive gadolinium.   The disorder has not been reported in patients with normal renal function.70 
7. IV. 6 Risks of incidental findings : Research MRI images or other tests obtained for research purposes may 
disclose incidental abnormal findings. In some cases, these findings may benefit the patient, in others, pursuing 
them may prove harmful.111 These findings will be shared with the patient, as described in the written consent 
form  and in the incid ental findings plan  (http://braininjuryoutcomes.com/documents/viewdownload/82/592 ). 
7.IV.7 Risks of Anxiolysis : Optional  anxiolytic medications given prior to MRI typically produce temporary 
drowsiness, dizziness, and mild cognitive impairments, all revers ible. In patients who metabolize these 
medications slowly, these side effects may persist for several hours, and, in rare instances, longer. Operating a 
motor vehicle while suffering from such side effects may be dangerous. To mitigate this risk, patients will not 
be administered these agents if they must operate a motor vehicle later that day ; as appropriate, transportation 
assistance may be offered to participants if necessary . There are also rare risks of serious allergic reactions.  
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     27  7. V. Risks of Missed Diagnosis  
 
The risks of missed diagnoses are important for treatable peripheral disorders and vestibular strokes. These risks 
are hypothesized to be substantially higher in the standard care arm. Standard care diagnos is accuracy for 
peripheral vestibular disorders an d vestibular strokes is suboptimal.  
Vestibular disorders are not always accurately diagnosed and treated in the ED4,5,112-114 and other frontline 
settings.115-122 About 900,000 (~22%20 of 4.3 million123) patients leave the ED with a non -diagnosis of 
“dizziness/vertigo, no t otherwise specified.” The majority may have undiagnosed vestibular disorders.57,58 
Among those diagnosed as peripheral, 81% are misclassified.5 In those diagnosed with BPPV, appropriate 
bedside posit ional testing is documented in only 22% and treatments applied in just 4%.124  
Harm may also result from missed opportunities to treat peripheral vestibular disorders, even if ‘benign.’115,125 
BPPV patients not treated within 24 hours of the ED visit have more than double the recurrence risk (46% vs. 
20%, p=0.002)126 and 6.5 -fold greater odds of falling.115 Prompt BPPV treatment improves health -related  
quality of life.127 Dizziness is a risk factor for hip fracture,128 and increases the ris k of a repeat hip fracture 
nearly 3 -fold.129 It produces subjective functional impairment in 54% of patients and engenders fear of serious 
medical illness in 46%.130 Untreated, dizziness decreases health -related quality of life131,132 and functional 
capacity.133 Vertigo or dizz iness can lead to a secondary depression or anxiety disorder in 32% of patients.134 
Vestibular strokes are often missed because clinical findings mimic benign ear disorders.114,135-137 Misdiagnosis 
is the most common medical error type found in the ED138 and may be of special concern with neurologic 
problems.137 More obvious stroke symptoms such as hemiparesis are infrequently missed (~4%139), but ~ 30% of  
vestibular s trokes are missed initially.7,135,136 In the subset of vestibular strokes presenting isolated 
dizziness/vertigo (i.e., wit hout any other associated neurologic symptoms or signs) , representing the majority of 
patients enrolled in the AVERT Trial , it is possible that as many as 50% of strokes are missed initially.7 
The prognosis of posterior circulation strokes, if promptly diagnosed and  appropriately managed, is usually 
favorable.17 When  strokes are missed, preventable adverse outcomes result from missed opportunities for 
thrombolysis,136,140 early surgery for malignant posterior fossa edema,17,141 or prevention of subsequent 
vertebrobasilar infarction  (i.e., major stroke following minor stroke or transient ischemic attack) .142-144 Rapid, 
early treatment improves stroke outcomes145,146 and lowers repeat stroke risk by up to 80%.147,148  
Women and minorities are at greater risk of misdiagnosis, as are patients under age 50.149 We have found that 
there are racial, ethnic, and sex -related disparities in missed vestibular strokes, with minorities and women at 
~20-30% higher risk.149 Patients <60yo are at especially high risk of misdiagnosis,149 because stroke is often not 
considered in young patients.73 
When vestibular strokes are missed, the risks of death and disabili ty may rise substantially.29 A small study 
found a 40% 5 -day mortality amo ng those with missed cerebellar strokes.11 If this is representative, missing the 
stroke may  increase mortality 8 -fold ― 40% (missed cerebellar s troke) vs. 5% (correctly diagnosed cerebellar 
stroke).29 This risk difference (35%) could correspond to as many as ~20 -30,000 preventable stroke deaths 
annually  in US EDs . The true attributable risk is probably not quite that high, but even a 10% difference would 
mean ~5,000 -7,000 preventable deaths per year.  
 
7. VI. Risks of Wrong Diagnosis or Overtesting  
 
As in Section 7. V. (Missed Diagnoses), the risks of wrong diagnoses are important for treatable peripheral 
vestibular disorders and vestibular strokes. As with missed diagnoses, these risks are hypothesized to be 
substantially higher in the standard care arm than in the VOG -guided care arm.  
 
Benign peripheral vestibular disorders are often mistaken for vestibular strokes.150 Nearly 1 in 3 vestibular 
stroke diagnoses turns out to have a misdiagnosed benign ear disorder (n=22/70).114  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     28   
Vestibular strokes are often mistaken for benign peripheral vestibular disorders.66,77,78 In referral cases, more 
than half of ED ear diagnoses are revised.114,150,151 Nearly 1 in 4 given  a benign ear diagnosis turns out to have a 
missed stroke (n=36/160).114,151 
 
With wrong diagnosis (especially beni gn vestibular disorders erroneously pursued for stroke), over -testing 
(especially neuroimaging or admission), confers special risks, described further below.  
• The risks of undergoing unnecessary CT will be far higher in the standard care arm than in the VO G-
guided care arm (since CT will not be a recommended strategy in any of the VOG clinical pathways).  
• The risks of undergoing unnecessary MRI are probably slightly higher in the VOG arm, since the 
decision rules ( algorithm will be used and modified as need ed) are tuned to err on the side of not 
missing a stroke.  
• The risks of unnecessary admission are probably slightly higher in the standard care arm.  
 
Patients with benign inner ear disorders are at risk of being harmed by overtesting or overtreatment in pursuit of 
a stroke or other neurologic diagnosis.  
• CT neuroimaging is ineffective, but frequently ordered in routine care for dizziness: The fraction o f ED 
dizziness patients undergoing neuroimaging to rule out stroke or other central causes has risen steadily from 
10% in 1995 to nearly  50% in 201 5,123 and this includes overuse in patients diagnosed with both BPPV and 
vestibular neuritis.4 Across the US, ED neuroimaging for these patients is still primarily by CT (~4 7%) 
rather than MRI (~ 3%),123 despite the known pitfalls of relying on CT to ‘rule out’ ischemic stroke in the  
posterior cranial fossa.11,17,135 The general increase in neuroimaging over time has not led to a corresponding 
increase in diagnosis of strokes or other important central causes.27 The same is true for unwanted, wide 
(1.5-fold), local -area practice variations in ED neuroimaging.152 
• CT carries meaningful risks:  In addition to delays in care, CT risks cancer from radiation exposure153 and, if 
contrast is used,  systemic allergy ( including risk of death from anaphylaxis)154 or contrast nephropathy.155  
• MRI carries some risks:  described above in  7. IV. Risks of MRI testing  
• Unnecessary admission carries some risks:  Some patients may be admitted to the hospital and unnecessarily 
exposed to hospital -acquired infections or treated erroneously with medications that have potential side 
effects or toxicity.116,118  
 
7. VI I. Risks of Medicolegal Liability for ED provider s 
 
We are sensitive to this issue, but we believe medicolegal risks arising directly from the study are very low.  
 
ED provider s caring for patients in the control arm will be providing standard care to their patients (i.e., without  
a VOG results report). The y are presumably at no greater risk of making a diagnostic error than if they were 
providing usual care outside the study protocol. Should a diagnostic error occur, ED provider s may be at greater 
risk for medicolegal liability given the greater clarity of diagnostic documentation and confirmatory testing. The 
gold-standard testing at 1 week could be used in a malpractice proceeding if a diagnostic error occurred at the 
ED index visit and an adverse event resulted in the following week. Most such events, how ever, would have 
formed the basis of a malpractice case independent of the additional testing. For example, if a patient were 
discharged as BPPV and returned with a devastating basilar -territory stroke two days later, this case would have 
ample d ocumentati on for a malpractice proceeding without research -related testing. Furthermore, few such 
cases end in malpractice claims, in part because the ED standard of care is low. Cases resulting in claims are 
often egregious, involving many neurologic symptoms and s igns156 rather than isolated vertigo or dizziness. To 
mitigate these risks, we will make available on request aggregate  ongoing  study information  to ED quality 
assurance and quality improvement processes as well as hospital risk mana gers.  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     29   
ED provider s caring for patients in the intervention arm (i.e., VOG -guided care) could potentially be held liable 
for VOG misdiagnoses, since ultimately they are responsible for clinical care decisions. This risk is mitigated 
almost entirely by safe ty precautions in the study (opportunity for ED provider s to go ‘off protocol’ for safety at 
any point; MRIs on all VOG patients; and 1 -week gold standard testing). The protocol goes well beyond usual 
care in terms of safety, so a medicolegal action agains t an ED provider  in this arm is highly improbable. It is 
much more likely that patients in the VOG arm are less likely to suffer a diagnostic error, thereby lowering the 
overall risk of medicolegal action for misdiagnosis in this arm of the study relative to usual care. Furthermo re, 
oversight provided by the external Data and Safety Monitoring Board ( DSMB ) will mitigate any residual risk.  
 
Protection Against Risks  
 
Patient Selection : We will exclude from study participation any patients with prior trauma to the cervical spine 
or other condition (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis) that might lead to instability of the cervical spine that would 
constitute a contraindication to neck rotation for the HIT. We will exclude any patients from the study who  are 
pregnant  (so as not to expose a fetus to neuroimaging risks),  and patients with contraindications to MRI with 
contrast, including renal insufficiency (GFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2),70 will not receive MRI contrast.   
 
Pre-Screening : For individuals who may have cervical spinal column problems (e.g., fusion, stenosis), prior to 
performing manipulations as part of the head impulse testing, treating ED providers  will confirm that patients 
can tolerate these manipulations. Patients will  be advised to indicate any discomfort, and research personnel 
will be prepared to discontinue if significant discomfort is indicated, as described further below. Moreover, our 
routine testing procedures always include a pre -impulse neck range of motion as sessment. The head is rotated 
slowly from side -to-side to ensure that there are no neck problems prior to HIT testing.  
 
Asepsis prior to the Exam : A procedure for sanitizing the ICS Impulse device will be implemented at all 
enrolling sites before the first  subject is enrolled. The VOG device has a disposable foam insert (produced by 
the company that manufactures the device) that contacts the patient’s skin surface. This foam will be replaced 
after each patient use to avoid infection related to the device. O ther equipment surfaces, including over -the-ear 
audiometry headphones, will be wiped clean with alcohol swabs or other disinfectant as appropriate.  
 
During the VOG Exam : Patients will be notified prior to any maneuvers necessary to evaluate their conditio n 
during the physical examination that might exacerbate their symptoms, so as to alleviate any unwarranted fear 
of the examination or examiner. We will stop testing at any time at the patient’s request. We anticipate no 
adverse effects of these research ex aminations. Nevertheless, should patients deteriorate clinically during their 
assessments, appropriate nursing and/or medical staff will be contacted immediately by research personnel.  
 
HIT Exam Technique : During our HIT procedures, the excursion of the neck rotation  will be very small (~10 -
20°). This technique minimizes potential discomfort or pain during testing, and effectively eliminates any 
hypothetical risk of soft tissue injury (e.g., vertebral arte ry dissection, described above in section 7.III.4 ). 
 
Response to Side Effects of the VOG Exam : All research personnel will be trained and ED site clinical 
providers will be given a standard set of instructions for how to handle any side effects or complica tions of 
testing  (See Manual of Operations and Procedures ). Emesis basins will be kept at the ready in case the patient 
should vomit during testing. All EDs will be equipped and ready to handle a bradycardic event, should one 
occur. For minor pain (or mino r increase in nausea/dizziness), VOG testing will stop temporarily and the patient 
asked if they are able to continue. For significant pain, VOG testing will stop . We have never seen a patient 
experience pain after impulse testing that lasts more than a fe w seconds . Nevertheless, if pain persists for more 
than 5 minutes after cessation of testing, its trajectory will be assessed over the subsequent 30 minutes. For 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     30  waning pain, there will be no specific intervention. For persistent pain, treatments will be a pplied by treating 
providers  (e.g., ibuprofen). Pain that remains persistent at the end of the ED visit will be documented, and these 
patients will be contacted daily by research personnel to assess their pain and any evolution of interval 
neurologic sympt oms that might suggest vascular injury or cervical spinal cord compression. At the 1 -week 
follow -up neuro -otology visit, pain issues will be addressed, and any necessary referrals or communication with 
other providers (e.g., primary care) made.  
 
Diagnostic  Process : The VRT algorithm will be tuned to err on the side of caution. For example, those with  
prior inner ear or eye movement disorders risk confounding the results in a way that could potentially harm 
patients (e.g., patient with prior acoustic neuroma  surgery who comes with acute, continuous dizziness due to 
stroke; in this patient, the exam findings related to prior surgery could lead to an erroneous “benign peripheral” 
diagnosis).  In such cases, the algorithm will incorporate that past history and will be tuned to return an 
equivocal result, necessitating a neurological consultation, if available. In addition,  there will be an expert 
human double -check for the algorithm output in the VRT arm until it is sufficiently refined (Section 5.1.3)  
 
Identifi cation of Adverse Effects  
 
Safety Assessments : All safety -related assessments will be consistent with generally accepted medical practices 
and standard -of-care. The following specific assessments will be performed according to the schedule described 
in the protocol, when it is developed and approved by the DSMB. Adverse events (AEs) recorded in the source 
documents will be entered into the e -CRF post randomization through the index discharge. Hospitalizations and 
adverse events reported during the 30 -day t elephone interview will be recorded, including date and time of 
resolution, outcome, severity, relatedness and whether or not classified as a serious adverse event.  
An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence in a patient enrolled into the study wh ether or not 
it has a causal relationship to the study events. An adverse event can be any unfavorable and unintended sign 
(including an abnormal lab finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated to the study timeline. The 
investigators will follow s tudy-related vestibular and stroke adverse events to resolution whenever possible.  
 If a subject is discontinued from the study for any reason, site personnel must clearly report and 
document the circumstances and data leading to any discontinuation, using  the EDC and whether the early 
termination was due to an adverse event. For any untoward event(s) the subject will be followed until the event 
resolves or is explained, with the frequency of follow -up designated by the investigator. Any alarming or 
unexpec ted adverse event, including death due to any cause, which occurs, inclusive of the follow -up period (30 
days), and whether or not thought to be related to the study, must be reported immediately (within 24 hours of 
learning of the event) to the CC. Clinic al adverse events and study AEs are defined in accordance with the 
International Conference on Harmonization.   
 
Adverse Event Follow -Up: Follow -up assessments will be repeated to document return -to-normal of any 
abnormalities (or the establishment of a permanent sequelae with no further improvement expected during the 
established study period), or to document other outcomes of any adverse events.   
 
VISION™ EDC System : The EDC system will have a robust set of data quality checks that wi ll be executed at 
the time of data entry at the investigational site. This includes the standard validations available with most EDC 
systems such as range checks (e.g., to flag timing inconsistencies for symptom inclusion) and data format 
checks (e.g., to flag an invalid date). Additionally, the VISION™ platform performs sophisticated cross -form 
computed calculations that would not be available in lesser EDC systems. It will also detect protocol variances 
and present a list to the investigator and the CC fo r evaluation and follow -up. Consequently, the EDC system 
will provide consistency, completeness, and logic checks immediately at the time of data collection.  
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     31  FDA Guidance for Electronic Data Entry Compliance : The design and development of the VISION EDC 
system will reflect the FDA Guidance for Industry for Computerized Systems Used in Clinical Trials (April 
1999) as well as the Electronic Records/Electronic Signatures rule (21 CFR part 11). A secure, computer 
generated, time -stamped electronic record allows reconstruction of the course of events relating to the creation, 
modification, and deletion of an electronic record. A copy of original information is verified, as indicated by 
dated signature, as an exact co py having all of the same attributes and information as the original. A computer 
data compilation of a series of symbols, executed, adopted, or authorized by an individual is the legal binding 
equivalent of the individual's handwritten signature. Source do cuments are retained to enable a reconstruction 
and evaluation of the study. The system ensures that all applicable regulatory requirements for record keeping 
and record retention in clinical trials are met with the same degree of confidence as are provide d with paper 
systems. Clinical investigators retain the original copy of all source documents uploaded onto the electronic 
case report form (eCRF). Query resolution correspondence is maintained and eCRF edits are tracked by the 
system. Changes to a require d record do not obscure the original information. The record clearly indicates the 
time a change was made and clearly provides a means to locate and read the prior information through the audit 
trail. This audit trail is in compliance with the 21 CFR 11.10 (e). The record, along with supporting 
documentation, also indicates who made the changes, when, and why changes were made. Security measures 
are in place to prevent unauthorized access to the system and data. To ensure that individuals have the authority 
to proceed with data entry, the system is designed to verify the electronic signature (user ID and password) at 
the start of a user session. The data entry system ensures attributability. Each entry to an electronic record, 
including any change, is made un der the electronic signature of the individual making that entry. A separate 
electronic signature is not required for each entry or change; a single electronic signature covers multiple entries 
or changes. Individuals who maintain the electronic record sys tems as well as the audit trail carry the 
responsibilities to protect authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality of electronic records. Audit trails will be 
available for inspectors at the CC or other location where associated electronic study records ar e maintained. 
The system will be designed to contain the prompts, lookup values, cross -field validations, flags, and on -line 
help to encourage consistent use of clinical terminology and to alert the user in case that data entered are out of 
acceptable rang e. External safeguards are in place to ensure that access to the computerized system and to the 
data is restricted to authorized personnel. Servers are stored in a physically secured, guarded data center.  
 
Security Measures : Users at the participating centers are aware of system security measures and the importance 
of limiting access to authorized personnel. Access to the data at a clinical site is restricted and monitored by the 
system through required log -on, security verifi cation procedures, and audit trail. The data cannot be altered, 
browsed, queried, or reported via external software applications without entering through the protective 
software, although computers at each site may also be used for purposes other than the clinical trial. Because the 
system is largely through remote access, all data and applications used for the study are logically and physically 
isolated from the servers in order to preclude unintended interaction with non -study use software. These servers 
are strictly monitored and maintained by designated administrators; remote sites do not have the ability to 
change such logical security of the system.  
Wireless data transfers will be fully encrypted. In addition, a secure handoff procedure has been 
devel oped for the transfer of data from the wireless data ( Creoso/Digivey ) devices to the VISION™ system via 
a secure mechanism . This secure procedure will ensure that patient identifiers are disaggregated from  any PHI 
transferred. Research personnel will first conduct a secure patient matching procedure to secure the patient’s 
unique study identifier from the e -patient log, then gather data from patients transferred as an encrypted file, 
and using only the patient’s unique study identifier .  
 
Disaster Prevention for EDC System :  The VISION EDC server uses multiple hard drives configured in 
a RAID array to maintain a continuous backup. A daily backup to external media supplements the RAID system 
along with weekly backup to offsite secure storage. The ser ver also has redundant separate power supplies. The 
hosting data center has dual electricity generation systems that can maintain the facility for up to 24 hours 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     32  (along with redundant cooling systems) in the event of power grid failure. OnRamp also maintai ns a second 
data center at a geographically separated locations (in the event of an attack or disaster that takes down the 
Austin facility completely) and, further, Prelude has contracted with a second data center in Austin (which is in 
an underground nucl ear-fortified shelter that also serves as a backup for the State of Texas) that can be deployed 
quickly to ensure continuing operation with minimal downtime.  
 
Limited Access : Each user is assigned an individual account with a unique username and password. The 
users are required to log into that account to start a data entry session and log out at the completion of the 
session  (the system will time -out following a period of inactivity) . Users  are legally (per FDA regulation 
subjecting them to civil and possi bly even criminal liability) and contractually prohibited from giving another 
person access to the system directly or by sharing login account information. Any hacking attempt to guess the 
password is locked out after ten (10) consecutive failed attempts, and any unauthorized access log -in attempt is 
recorded in a log file  that includes the originating TCP/IP  address . Once a hacking attempt is recognized, blocks 
of IP addresses (say, from a geographic region or top -level domain where there are no participat ing sites) can be 
locked -out at the network level.   
 
Users are required to log off the system upon leaving a workstation. Login sessions are protected by an 
https certificate and session ID, creating a secure tunnel between the authorized user and the serv er. The 
computer automatically logs off the current session after 30 minutes of inactivity, deactivating the session ID. 
On the computers accessing the EDC, as well as the site laptops/tablets temporarily compiling patient data, 
users are also required (per training and contractual user agreement) to use screensave rs with password s that 
prevent access to their computer screens after a short period should they step away from the computer . 
 
 Audit Trails : All changes made to data in the electronic record are tracked and recorded in the audit trail 
which is located wit hin the primary database. This audit trail captures the date/time, and the contents of the 
changes made, and the user’s name  used to make the change. The audit trail is created incrementally in 
chronological order, and in a manner such that overwriting of data cannot occur, in accordance with 21 CFR 
11.10(e).  
 
 Date and Time Stamps : All data are saved in the VISION EDC system on a central server carrying a 
time stamp, which is documented in the audit trail. The data server uses the participating site's time zone when 
available and US Central Time otherwise as the server is located in that time zone. The computers in 
participati ng sites use the local time where the study site is located. Individual users are unable to change the 
time on the server.  
 
8. CRITERIA FOR INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION  
 
At any point of the study, the patient may choose to withdraw.  
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     33   
9. STATISTICAL CONSI DERATIONS & STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
9.1 General Design and Analysis Issues  
 
Main trial d esign : Randomized controlled trial (individual patient randomization), parallel design (1:1) . 
Results will be used for primary outcome analyses related to  diagnosis accuracy at the ED index visit.  
 
Secondary cohort  design : Two c ohort s in the standard care arm are defined based on correctness of ED index 
visit diagnosis. Cohort s will be  followed for adverse events and functional outcomes (1wk, 30d) . Estimate s will 
be used for Phase III trial planning for the impact of diagnosis accuracy on clinical events and outcomes.  The 6 -
month follow -up time point (if available) will not be part of the primary trial outcomes.  
 
Observational arm: Patients with vestibular symptoms but no signs or who are not randomized for other 
reasons (see Inclusion and  Exclusion Criteria) will be eligible for a parallel track observational sub -study with 
limited phone follow -up. Results will support Phase III trial planni ng and diagnostic algorithm refinement . 
 
Diagnosis adjudication : Prior to adjudication, index VOG results  will be interpreted by two independent 
vestibular experts masked to allocation . They will be given only patient demographic information, a structured 
summary of dizziness -related history of the present illness, and bedside hearing test  result s. Using this 
information, and masked to all other index visit clinical findings, ED physician diagnoses, any neuroimaging, 
and all follow -up data, they will render an ED index visit diagnosis (“Index  VOG  Diagnosis ”). Prior to 
adjudication, MRIs will be interpreted by two independent neuro -radiologists masked to allocation and all 
clinical findings  other than demographic information . They will render an in dex visit diagnosis (“ Index 
Radiology Diagnosis ”). A 5-member multidisciplinary panel with ED physician, otolaryngologist, vestibular 
neurologist, stroke neurologist, and neuro -radiologist will adjudicate diagnoses. The panel will be masked at all 
times to  trial allocation ( VRT  vs. standard care). Diagnoses will be classified into 1 of 6 diagnostic categories 
likely to affect ideal ED management and rated as probable or definite based on neuroimaging results  and 
standard clinical criteria. Diagnoses will be  rendered in two stages – first based on VOG and all clinical data 
(including eye videos) from the ED index v isit alone, without follow -up data (“ Adjudicated Index Diagnosis ”); 
then again after all 1 -week testing and 30 -day follow -up data are revealed electronically (“ Adjudicated Final 
Diagnosis ”). All differences will be resolved by discussion or  majority vote.  
 
Algorithm Refinement : It is pre -specified that the VRT algorithm will be adapted iteratively during the trial. 
The algorithm performa nce in the VRT arm of the live trial will be monitored from the outset through the use of 
a human double -check procedure (described above in Section 5.1.3). The human double -check will remain in 
place until the algorithm performance is sufficient to be con sidered safe for unattended use, in consultation with 
the DSMB. The algorithm will be refined as frequently as necessary as long as the human double -check remains 
in place, and afterwards (if the human double check is removed before trial end) based on a s chedule 
determined by the lead study biostatisticians. In the interest of being able to conduct an end -of-trial analysis 
using the ‘optimized’ algorithm, modifications to the algorithm during the trial will be restricted to results from 
the VRT or observat ional arms of the trial; in this way, the optimized algorithm can be run on the SOC arm 
results without concerns for overfitting the algorithm to the data (i.e., a ‘split -half’ analysis).  
 
Outcome assessment : The ED diagnosis will have been elicited from ED provider s by study personnel as a 
forced choice diagnosis. For the primary outcome, a correct “ED Provider Diagnosis” requires that the 
“Adjudicated Final Diagnosis” is the same diagnostic category . The VRT diagnosis will be assigned 
automatically by the online algorithm in real -time. However, as long as the algorithm is being iteratively refined 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     34  during this Phase II trial, the human expert double -check procedure will remain in place. In this context , the 
primary trial outcome will be based on the actual VRT -based  care delivered to the patient ( regardless of 
whether that result was generated by the algorithm or modified by the expert human review). This approach is 
necessary to maintain alignment with  the structure of the study as a randomized trial. Additional  analyses will 
test the diagnostic accuracy of both the algorithm as rendered  and the end -of-trial ‘optimized’ algorithm . 
 
Analytic approach : For all primary and linked secondary analyses, we wil l include only randomized subjects 
completing the essential elements of the  diagnostic study protocol through the end of 1 -week follow -up (i.e., 
with ED index visit VOG test results, follow -up MRI within 14 days, and an in -person neuro -otology visit  
within 30 days of the index visit ). The quality of VOG and MRI testing will be determined by masked, expert 
raters from the FDAC during an FDAC meeting pre -review process; if either essential test is deemed to be of 
insufficient quality for analysis (e.g. , key VOG tests performed improperly or missing; motion artifact on MRI), 
such patients will be excluded from the primary and linked secondary analyses of the main trial outcomes. This 
per-protocol analysis is appropriate for this Phase II study designed t o determine the potential efficacy of the 
VRT intervention on diagnostic accuracy. Without adequate quality VOG and 1-week follow -up data, diagnoses 
will remain speculative. Subjects lost to follow -up at the 30 -day time point (phone follow -up) will be incl uded 
in these analyses, as 1 -month medical record review will generally be sufficient to determine correct diagnoses.  
 
Definitions : For the purposes of all analyses, the term “stroke” refers to any acute cerebrovascular event 
(ischemic stroke, transient is chemic attack, intracranial hemorrhage), unless expressly specified otherwise.  
 
9.2 Outcomes  
 
9.2.1 Aim 1 (Trial Outcome): Measure the impact of V RT on diagnosis and initial management  
 
Hypothesis  1: The VRT  pathway will yield more correct diagnoses by the end of the ED index v isit than the 
standard care ( ED provider -determined) pathway.  
 
Primary outcome  1: Six-Category Diagnosis Accuracy (all, VRT vs. SOC).  Total proportion of correct 
diagnoses made by VRT v s. SOC among subjects with 30 -day adjudicated final diagnoses (the gold standard) 
categorized in one of six possible diagnosis categories (3 peripheral, 1 central, 1 medical/other, 1 non -
diagnosis).  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan 1 :  
Primary analysis 1 : A generalized linear model with a log link will be used for comparing the true positive 
rates (TPRs) of VRT and SOC. Without additional covariates, the model based score test is equivalent to a 
Pearson Chi -square test for unpaired data. The regression mode l will assess the influence of demographic and 
key clinical variables as exploratory subgroups. Generalized estimating equation (GEE) 161 method will be used 
to account for clustering effects by hospital si te or provider. VOG non -completers are excluded pre -
randomization (randomization occurs post -VOG for all patients).  
 
Specifically, define Di= 1 if the 30-day adjudicated final diagnosis for the  ith subject is categorized in one of six 
possible diagnosis c ategories (3 peripheral, 1 central, 1 medical/other, 1 non -diagnosis). Define a test variable 
as  
 
𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡={1   for VRT
0   for SOC 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     35   
Define Yi(VRT)= 1 if the index VRT diagnosis for the ith subject is the same as his/her 30-day adjudicated final 
diagnosi s and Yi(VRT)= 0 otherwise . Similarly, define Yi(SOC )= 1 if the ED P rovider  Diagnosis for the ith 
subject is the same as his/her 30-day adjudicated final diagnosis and Yi(SOC )= 0 otherwise . 
 
The TPR, over the total proportion of correct diagnoses, is defined as follows  
𝑇𝑃𝑅(𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡)=𝑃[𝑌𝑖(𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡)=1 | 𝐷𝑖=1],    𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡=0,1. 
 
Define the regression model as  
log𝑇𝑃𝑅(𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡)=𝛼0+𝛼1𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡+𝑎𝑖⃐   ∙𝑋𝑖⃐       
 
where  𝑋𝑖⃐    is a vector of additional subgroup variables or other covaria tes to be explored for assessing the 
influence of demographic and key clinical variables described in the secondary analysis.  
 
Secondary analysis 1 : For each of the six possible diagnosis categories (3 peripheral, 1 central, 1 medical/other, 
1 non -diagnosis), define the gold standard =1 if the 30-day adjudicated final diagnosis is the corresponding 
category and 0 otherwise. Define test positive respe ctively for “Index VRT Diagnosis” and “ ED Provider  
Diagnosis” if the diagnosis is the corresponding category and 0 otherwise. Estimate sensitivity, specificity, 
predictive values and likelihood ratios accordingly for “Index VRT Diagnosis” and “ ED P rovider  Diagnosis”. 
Between -arm comparisons will be performed by the generalized linear model with a log link as described in 
primary analysis 1a.  
 
Tertiary analysis 1:  Subgroups and covariates:  
 
The regression model is  
log𝑇𝑃𝑅(𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡)=𝛼0+𝛼1𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡+𝑎𝑖⃐   ∙𝑋𝑖⃐       
 
where 𝑋𝑖⃐    is a vector of additional subgroup variables or other covariates to be explored for assessing the 
influence of demographic and key clinical variables described below.  
 
1) Potential Subgroups:  
a. AVS -Only Group: using only patients with acute (continuous) vesti bular syndrome >24hr.  
b. Younger -Patient Group: using only patients 49 years of age or younger (i.e., 18 -49).  
c. Women -Minority Group: using only patients self -identifying as female, minority, or Hispanic.  
d. NIHSS 0 Group: using only patients with an NIH stroke  scale score of zero at ED index visit.  
e. Stands -Independently Group: using only patients who stand without assistance or support.  
f. Normal Hearing Group: excluding any patient with hearing loss (new or old) . 
g. Non-AICA Group: excluding any patient with an AICA -territory stroke diagnosis . 
h. Pre-Treatment Group: using only patients with results obtained prior to anti -vertigo meds . 
i. VRT Definite -Only Group: using only ‘definite’ VRT diagnoses (excluding V RT-E cases).  
j. Specific ED -Only Diagnosis Group: using only ‘defin ite’ ED diagnoses (excluding ED O2).  
k. Neuro -otologic Diagnosis Group: using only patients with peripheral or central diagnoses . 
 
2) Potential Covariates:  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     36  l. Site: JH vs. UI vs. UM.  
m. Age (ordinal): 18 -49, 50 -59; 60+ years.  
n. Age (continuous): for each year.  
o. Sex: female vs. male.  
p. Race/Ethnicity: minority vs. non -Hispanic white.  
q. Symptom Onset (ordinal): 0 -24, 25 -48, 49 -72, >72 hours.  
r. Symptom Onset (continuous): time from symptom -onset for each hour.  
s. Symptom Type: vertigo vs. dizziness vs. unsteadiness.  
t. Symptom Sever ity: VSS -SF score.  
u. Vestibular Syndrome: episodic positional vs. episodic spontaneous vs. acute continuous.  
v. Hearing Loss: new hearing loss vs. no new hearing loss . 
w. Vascular Risk Severity (continuous): ABCD2 (0 -7). 
x. Neurologic Severity (continuous):  NIHSS (0 -42). 
y. Ataxia Severity (continuous): SARA score  (0-40). 
z. Stroke size (continuous): greatest dimension in millimeters . 
aa. Stroke location: none, hemispheric -only, posterior fossa (with or without hemispheric) . 
bb. Confounded: unconfounded vs. potentially confounded (medications or illnesses) . 
cc. Comorbidities  (continuous): Charlson Comorbidity Index (0 -56). 
Secondary outcomes 1.1-1.7: Diagnosis accuracy for different category groupings and comparisons; the 
following accuracy comparisons  are considered : 
  
1. Central -Peripheral Diagnosis Accuracy  (all, VRT vs. SOC)  
Total diagnosis accuracy VRT vs. SOC using 30 -day adjudicated final diagnos es categorized as central (stroke, 
posterior fossa mass lesion, encephalitis, demyelinating disease, etc.) vs. non -central (includes peripheral 
vestibular, medical, psychiatric, non -diagnoses, etc.).  
2. Stroke -No Stroke Diagnosis Accuracy  (all, VRT vs. SOC)  
Total diagnosis accuracy VRT vs. SOC using 30 -day adjudicated final diagnoses categorized as stroke vs. no 
stroke (includes posterior fossa mass lesion, encephalitis, etc.).  
3. Preventable  Six-Category Diagnosis Error  (all, VRT vs. SOC)  
Total diag nosis inaccuracy  (error)  VRT vs. SOC using adjudicated index diagnoses categorized in one of six 
possible diagnosis categories (3 peripheral, 1 central, 1 medical/other, 1 non -diagnosis). Adjudicated index 
diagnoses will be determined using only E D index visit data that ‘would have been’ available clinically (i.e., 
excluding safety MRI, index hospital admission data, and all follow -up data).  
4. VRT vs. MRI Stroke -No Stroke Diagnosis Accuracy (VRT arm only, VRT vs. MRI)  
Total diagnosis accuracy VRT vs. index imaging using 30 -day adjudicated final diagnoses categorized as stroke 
vs. no stroke (posterior fossa mass lesion, encephalitis, etc.). The VRT arm is chosen here because all VRT arm 
patients will undergo MRI at the index visit (protocol, clinica l, or safety), eliminating diagnostic ascertainment 
bias that may be present in the SOC arm.  
5. Algorithm -Only VRT Six -Category Diagnosis Accuracy (all, initial VRT output  vs. SOC ) 
Total diagnos is accuracy “as computed in real time,” algorithm -only VRT diagno sis vs. SOC using 30 -day 
adjudicated final diagnoses categorized in one of six possible diagnosis categories (3 peripheral, 1 central, 1 
medical/other, 1 non -diagnosis). We will use “ Index VRT  Diagnosis” and “ED Physician Diagnosis” compared 
to the “Adjudi cated Final Diagnosis” based on ED index visit and 30 -day follow -up clinical assessments. This 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     37  outcome measure reflects the weighted average diagnostic accuracy of the various versions of the automated  
algorithm as it would have been absent  human double -check during the course of the trial.  
6. Optimized Six -Category Within -Subject Accuracy  (SOC arm only, optimized VRT vs. SOC)  
Total diagnosis accuracy optimized VRT vs. SOC using 30 -day adjudicated final diagnoses categorized in one 
of six possible diagnosis ca tegories (3 peripheral, 1 central, 1 medical/other, 1 non -diagnosis). We will use 
“Optimized VRT Diagnosis” and “ ED P rovider  Diagnosis” compared to the “Adjudicated Final Diagnosis” 
based on ED index visit and 30 -day follow -up clinical assessments. Optimiz ed VRT diagnoses will be  run using 
the final (end -of-trial) version of the VRT algorithm. Only SOC -arm subjects are used for this outcome , as VRT 
patient results will have been used to optimize the algorithm during the trial . VRT diagnoses in the SOC arm 
(algorithm not run during the trial), will be assigned based on the final, optimized algorithm; for this purpose, 
the ED SOC diagnosis will be assigned as the VRT diagnosis for algorithm results in the VRT -E group.  This 
outcome measure reflects the estimate d diagnostic accuracy of the end -of-trial automated algorithm.  
7. Expert VOG Six-Category Diagnosis Accuracy (all, expert VOG  vs. SOC ) 
Total diagnos is accuracy adjudicated  expert VOG  diagnosis  vs. SOC using 30 -day adjudicated final diagnoses 
categorized in one of six possible diagnosis categories (3 peripheral, 1 central, 1 medical/other, 1 non -
diagnosis). We will use “ Index  VOG  Diagnosis” and “ED Physician Diagnosis” compared to the “Adjudicat ed 
Final Diagnosis” based on ED index visit and 30 -day follow -up clinical assessments . This outcome measure 
reflects the theoretical maximum diagnostic accuracy performance (i.e., expert level) of any future algorithms.  
 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan Secondar y Outcomes 1.1-1.7: A generalized linear model with a log link will be used 
for comparing the true positive rates (TPRs) of VRT and SOC. Without additional covariates, the model based 
score test is equivalent to a Pearson Chi -square test for unpaired data. The regression mod el will assess the 
influence of demographic and key clinical variables as exploratory subgroups. Generalized estimating equation 
(GEE) 161 method will be used to account for clustering effects by hospital s ite or provider.  
 
Secondary outcomes 8-9: Discharge and admission proportions: the following proportions are considered:  
8. Central Discharge Proportion (central subgroup only, VRT vs. SOC)  
Total discharge proportion of central causes VRT vs. SOC. Central causes determined based on 30 -day 
adjudicated final diagnosis.  
9. Peripheral Admission Proportion (peripheral subgroup only, VRT vs. SOC)  
Total admission proportion of peripheral causes VRT vs. SOC. Peripheral causes determined based on 30 -
day adjudic ated final diagnosis.  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan 1.b.2 : A logistic regression will be used to estimate the odds of discharge in two arms 
among subjects with central causes  determined based on 30 -day adjudicated final diagnosis. Similarly, a logistic 
regres sion will be used to estimate the odds of admission in two arms among subjects with peripheral causes 
determined based on 30 -day adjudicated final diagnosis.  
 
 9.2.2 Aim 2 (Trial Outcome): Measure the impact of VRT  on initial diagnostic work -up costs  
 
Hypothesis  2: The VRT  pathway is cost saving relative to current ED practice in diagnostic assessments.  
 
Primary outcome  2: Total dollar costs of VRT as compared to SOC for diagnostic tests and consultations 
obtained d uring the ED index v isit and hospital admission (for those admitted at the index visit) . The cost for 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     38  VRT arm does not include the costs of protocol safety MRIs or any tests not specified by the pathway but 
ordered for clinical purposes  by ED provider s. It does include tests ordered as part of the VRT pathway  by 
consultants or ED provider s in the ‘equivocal’ pathway.  Total costs will be calculated by multiplying fixed cost 
estimates (most recent year available average Medicare reimbursement in US dollars) by utilization rates for 
each ED index visit service tracked.  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  2: Analyses will include two -sample comparisons of mean and median costs . Mean of 
total cost between two study -arms will be compared by modified t -test wit h unequal variances. Median total 
cost between two study -arms will be compared by Wilcoxon -Mann -Whitney tests.162  
 
9.2.3  Aim 3 (Observational Outcome): Compare clinical outcomes for correct vs. incorrect diagnoses  
  
Hypothesis  3: ED patients with vertigo or dizziness who receive standard care will have better outcomes if 
correctly diagnosed than if misdiagnosed ( this is an observational outcome in the standard -care arm ). 
 
Primary Outcome  3: Proportion with short -term serious medical  events (SMEs) occurring between the time of 
ED index visit disposition and 1 -week research follow -up visit among those with correct vs. incorrec t ED 
provider  Diagnosis. “Correct” vs. “incorrect” diagnoses are categorized in one of six possible diagnosis 
categories (3 peripheral, 1 central, 1 medical/other, 1 non -diagnosis). SMEs  will include ED revisits, falls, hip 
fractures, vascular events (incl uding stroke), and test or treatment complications.  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  3: A multivariable logistic regression will be used to estimate the odds of a n SME  
(correct diagnosis vs. misdiagnosed) adjusting for demographic and clinical variables . 
 
Specifically, define Si = 1 if the ith subject experience SMEs between the time of ED index visit disposition and 
1-week research follow -up visit. Following notation used in Aim 1, define the logistic model as,  
 
logit𝑃(𝑆𝑖=1|𝑋𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡=0)=𝛽0+𝛽1𝑌𝑖(0)+𝛽2⃐    ∙𝑍𝑖⃐    
 
where  𝑌𝑖(0) is the variable indicating correct or incorrect diagnoses in SOC arm as defined in aim 1,   𝑍𝑖⃐     are 
additional subgroups variable s or other covariates listed in Aim 1.  
 
In addition, standard time -to-event analyses (Kaplan -Meier,163 Cox regression164) will be used to estimate 
relative hazard ratios, adjusting for demographic and clinical variables listed in Aim 1.  
 
9.3 Sample Size and Accrual  
 
Powering Endpoint : AVERT will be powered to detect a clinically important difference in diagnos is accuracy 
of 90% vs. 75% (113 per arm). VRT  diagnosis is anticipated to be nearly 100% accurate. We have shown that 
expert eye movement exams have 98.4% (n=187/190) accuracy for differentiating peripheral (vestibular 
neuritis) from central (stroke) vestibular disorders in acute, continuous vertigo.73 We have now replicated these 
findings with the VOG device in 21 acute vertigo patients (100% accuracy). The gold standard  
Table 3. Comparison of proportions power 
estimate (alpha 0.05, power 80%)  
VOG Care 
Correct 
Diagnoses  Standard Care 
Correct 
Diagnoses  Per-arm sample 
(total study 
sample)  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     39  for BPPV diagnosis is eye movement analysis,48,78 often by VOG,51,165 
so we conservatively estimate that VOG accuracy across  all vestibular 
conditions will be >90%. Diagnos is accuracy of routine ED care varies, 
estimated at <20% for BPPV and neuritis5 and ~70% for stroke, and 
lower (~50%) if stroke presents with isolated vertigo.7,135,136 Best 
estimates suggest an overall correct ED diagnosis rate of about 56% for vestibular patients.114 In EDs with 
greater access to specialty consultations or frequent MRI neuroimaging, the proportion of correct diagnoses 
may range hi gher. We have powered the AVERT Trial for an anticipated worst case scenario of 90% V RT 
accuracy and 75% standard care accuracy (Table 3).  
 
Recruitment Capacity : Our 3 -site consortium has a total of ~180,000 ED visits per year. Chief symptoms of 
vertigo/dizziness account for ~3 -4% of ED visits.15,123 Thus, our 3 sites have ~5,400 -7,200 ED dizziness visits 
per year (~5 -7 patients per 24hrs pe r site). Of these, we estimate ~20 -30%20 will meet inclusion criteria (~1-2 
patients per 24hrs per site). We will screen during five designated 7 -hr shifts weekly, performing VOG on ~3 -5 
patients per week, enrolling ~2 -4 patients per month per site, taking ~3 years to reach 226.  
 
Number of Strokes : With our inclusion criteri a, we expect ~10 -20% strokes (n=11 -23 per arm). This will not 
yield firm conclusions about VOG stroke accuracy, but should be sufficient for  Phase III trial planning.  
 
Interim Analyses : We plan interim analyses to be conducted by the Johns Hopkins Biostati stics Center for 
review and evaluation by the DSMB (Human Subjects below ). The primary concern is risk of misdiagnosis 
causing harm in the standard ED care arm, since safety MRIs in the VOG arm make harm from misdiagnosis 
unlikely. Our preliminary plan is to conduct statistical analyses on 30 -day clinical events after 75 and 150 
patients, but the interim analysis plan will be finalized in concert with the DSMB and institutional IRBs . 
 
Decision Rule for Proceeding to Phase III : We will proceed to Phase III if Phase II suggests either the (1) total 
diagnos is accuracy point estimate for V RT (or expert VOG) is higher than that of ED standard care (Aim 1); or 
(2) total diagnos is accuracy is statistically equivalent (Aim 1), but cos ts are lower for V RT care (Aim 2). Based 
on scant available data, a Phase III trial using 30 -day clinical events would likely need ~1,000 -5,000 subjects. 
Such a trial could be accomplished at reasonable cost with 2 -4 years of recruitment at ~10 -25 ED sites . 
 
10.  BENEFITS  
 
10.1 Direct and Indirect Medical Benefits  
We hypothesize that VOG -guided rapid triage (VRT) will help accurately, safely, and efficiently differentiate 
peripheral from central vestibular disorders in ED patients presenting vestibular vert igo or dizziness, and that 
doing so has the potential to improve post -treatment clinical outcomes for these patients.  The information 
learned from this study may help others in the future.    
 
For p articipants  assigned (by chance) to receive care guided by the study goggles device, the results may help 
them  get better care in the E D, hospital, and afterwards . The study  goggles device has been shown in a small 
study to accurately diagnose inner ear versus brain causes of dizziness  and will be backed up by a human expert 
double -check during part (or all) of the trial . It is hoped that  the study goggles output (including any provided 
by expert VOG review) will assist doctors with  the correct diagnosis for the cause  of the participant ’s dizziness 
symptoms. If participants are found to have an inner ear balance problem, participants may receive treatments 
that help them get better faster, with fewer unnecessary tests. If participants  are found to have  a stroke causing  
their dizziness, they will  get the bes t possible treatments, and this  could reduce their chances of a second stroke 
or even be life -saving.  Participants may benefit from being examined b y the dizziness/vertigo/balance specialist 99% 50% 15 (30)  
95% 50% 19 (38)  
90% 50% 25 (50)  
99% 75% 38 (76)  
95% 75% 59 (118)  
90% 75% 113 (226)  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     40  one week after the E D visit and also from the  MRI scan and other tests obtained as part of the study. These tests 
may help them receive a correct diagnosis and correct treatments for dizziness.  
 
For participants assigned (by chance) to receive standard care , there is no direct bene fit from the study goggles 
testing during the E D visit. They may benefit  from being examined by the dizziness/vertigo/balance specialist 
one week after the E D visit and also the MRI scan or other tests obtained as part of the study. These tests may 
help them receive a correct diagnosis and correct treatments for dizziness, even if these problems were not 
diagnosed at the first ER visit.  
 
The information learned from this study may help others in the future.  
 
10.2 Payment and Remuneration  
Trial  participants who complete the Week-1, in-person  follow -up testing  will be paid $ 200. The payment 
structure is based on roughly $25 per hour for time spent at the one -week follow -up visit . It is anticipated that 
the follow -up visit will take up to 8 hours, for a total payment of $ 200. If participants complete partial testing , 
they will receive partial payment based on tests completed  ($50 neuro -otology clinical visit , $50 vestibular  and 
audiometric testing , $100 MRI ). Payments will not be prorated based on actual hours spent, and a single 
payment will be issued to the patient after follow -up testing has been completed  (within approximately 6 -8 
weeks of the follow -up visit) . In addition, p arking voucher s will be provided for free parking for the one week 
follow-up visit.  Transportation assistance may be offered to participants if necessary . For p articipants scheduled 
for their follow -up visit overlapping  a mealtime , meal vouchers may  be available. Neither trial (randomized) 
nor observational arm patients (not randomized) will receive payment for phone follow -up. 
 
 
11. RECORD RETENTION, DATA, SAFETY, AND QUALITY ASSURANCE MONITORING, EARLY     
STOPPING RULES  
 
11.1 Records to be kept :  
 
Participation in this study requires that original study documents be retaine d for a minimum of 2 years 
following notification by the study CC that investigations have been discontinued. This standard complies with 
U.S. FDA regulations (21 CFR  §312.62[c]) . Records must not be destroyed without first contacting the CC to 
ensure that the time limits defined in the regulations have been met.   
 
For the purposes of this section, “original study documents” are defined as:  
 
• Subject medical records created at or available to the enrolling center during the subject’s 
participation in the trial, or any other document that supports entries in the EDC system and 
represents the original source of that information, including but not limited to applicable sections 
of medical charts, and patient correspondence, as well as any  forms or documents used to 
compile or maintain original subject data or study procedural information. Intermediary 
documents and worksheets used to organize and compile original records into a form that 
facilitates easier transcription into the EDC do not  represent original study documents. Certain 
data may be entered directly into the EDC in which case the EDC system represents the original 
study document.  
 
• All Essential Regulatory Documents (as defined under Good Clinical Practice Regulations) 
including:  all material communications with the IRB; all communications with the Sponsor that 
are related to study subjects or which otherwise document material study -related procedures or 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     41  safety issues; and, all training records and documentation that all participa ting staff are suitably 
qualified and authorized (CVs, 1572, Delegation Log, etc.).  
 
• Archival copies of the data and electronic documents from the VISION -EDC system.  
 
All study documents should be uploaded to the Electronic Trial Master File (eTMF) section  of the 
VISION -EDC system. VISION will be used as the master repository for all site and Sponsor regulatory 
documents, and all patient source documents with the exception of DICOMs and any records not 
uploaded to the EDC (perhaps for confidentiality reason s or do to specific site discretion, such as might 
be suitable for financial contracts), sites generally do not need to maintain duplicate local files unless 
otherwise mandated by local institutional requirements.  
 
At the conclusion of the study, all enter ed patient data and uploaded documents (with the exception of 
DICOMs) in the VISION -EDC system will be archived and provided to the site on DVDs  or other 
digital media . DICOMs submitted to the EDC system will be maintained in the EDC system. Sites will 
retain DICOMs via their local PACS system (or local copies of CDs).  The CC will also maintain a copy.  
 
Regulations require that study documents (including the archive CDs and any study documents not uploaded to 
the EDC) must be retained in the files of the re sponsible investigator for potential review by regulatory 
agencies. The expected retention period is a minimum of 2 years after the final report is submitted to the 
NIDCD after the conclusion of the overall clinical trial, irrespective of any particular si te’s participation.  
 
11.2 Data Management:  
 
Data Collection (logistics) : SCs will gather data from enrolled subjects in the ED using tablet devices as we 
have done in the past (NIH/NCRR RR17324 -01, AHRQ HS017755 -01).15 We use Digivey™ (Creoso 
Corporation, Phoenix, AZ) digital survey software platform to create our structured interview, touch -screen 
clinical data entry forms for use on tablet devices. All data are temporarily stored to local devices, wirelessly 
synchronized to a central server via encrypted Wi -Fi, and de leted from the local device following confirmed 
data transfer for optimal security. For VOG data we will use GN Otometrics’ OTOsuite Vestibular™ software 
in the local  configuration , and Digivey ’s Task Manager  will securely transfer files to the VISION ™ system.  
 
Data Management : Research data will be synchronized to our internet -accessible clinical trials management 
software platform ( VISION ™ by Prelude  Dynamics, Austin, TX ). This system is used by our Clinical Trials  
 CC (BIOS) for rapid and efficient prot ocol management in large, multicenter, acute stroke trials (30 -70 sites).  
 
BIOS Reading Center : Once images and videos are received, the BIOS (Clinical Trials CC) Reading Center 
Technician opens all image and video packets to verify contents. Each is catalogued by the date/time of the 
scan, the scan modality (MRI, CT, video, etc.), the scan medium (i.e., digital films, hard films, or printouts, 
etc.), the date received at the Reading Center, and any comments relating to the image packet or specific 
individual studies. Once the contents have been verified and catalogued, the images are loaded on the study 
server for archive, and made available for access at the Reading Center workstations.  
 
Data Analysis and Interpretation : We will have a safety and data  monitoring committee in full compliance 
with relevant Federal Policies for Data and Safety Monitoring in addition to compliance with all applicable U.S. 
and international GCP regulations.  
 
• NIH (NOT -98-084) ( http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice -files/not98 -084.html ).  
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     42  This program is designed to safeguard the well -being of study participants and to ensure scientific integrity, and 
will include the following components:  
 
• an externally -appointed, independent DSMB;  
• CC and performance site IRBs;  
• direct, ongoing oversight by the CC and PI;  
• central image reading providing independent, masked radiographic assessments;  
• multidisciplinary panel of outcome adjudicators masked to allocation status;  
• automated data quality checks at the time of EDC form completion by the investigati onal site;  
• a training program prior to site activation and with  continuous communicating and training after trial 
start-up. 
 
11.3 Data and Safety Monitoring Board:  A DSMB will provide an independent review of the research, interim 
safety and efficacy data, and progress towards achieving the goals of the study. To enable the CC to properly 
manage the study, the project leadership and key personnel will jointly work on a DSMB plan early in the study 
start-up process. The externally -appointed DSMB will then approve the plan. The monitoring plan will describe 
the process for reporting adverse events to the IRB, FDA, and NIH/NIDCD, as appropriate.  
 
FDA Approval and IDE : FDA review of the AVERT proposal has determined that no IDE is required:  
 “FDA has determined that your proposed clinical investigation is a nonsignificant risk (NSR) device study 
because it does not meet the definition of a significant risk (SR) device unde r § 812.3(m) of the investigational 
device exemptions (IDE) regulation (21 CFR 812).” (FDA Letter ; available for download from 
www.braininjuryoutcomes.com ). 
 
Data Flow for the Data Safety and Monitoring Board and Final Analyses : Each step in the flow of da ta for this 
study is discussed below in regards to its importance in ensuring data integrity and patient safety. The steps are 
numbered for reference purposes, albeit some steps may occur simultaneously and data for a single patient may 
be in differing sta ges in this process.  
 
 1. Regulatory Specialist Verification of Study Documentation : Before the site can begin enrolling 
patients, the CC will verify that all mandatory startup tasks have been completed and appropriate documentation 
has been uploaded to the electronic data capture (EDC) system’s electronic trial master file (eTMF). A 
param eter in the EDC system will allow the site to enroll a patient and grant user access rights to the online case 
form. This step will ensure that no site may enroll patients until all regulatory documentation (i.e., IRB 
approval, investigator qualification),  staff training certificates, and contractual requirements are fulfilled. 
During the study, the CC will work with the site PIs and SCs to maintain the study documentation in the eTMF 
repository, as all study documentation will be online. At the end of the study, the eTMF content will be 
provided to the site on compact disks, consisting of all the collected patient data and study documentation, for 
long term regulatory retention.  
 
 2. Data Entry & Source Document Upload : Once a potential patient is identifie d, the SC will register 
this new patient via the Digivey backend connection to the VISION EDC system, triggering an automated alert 
to the CC, reading center, and investigators. Should the patient subsequently fail to qualify for the study, the 
basic demographic information and reason for screen failure will be used to assess potential selection bias at the 
site, and for performance tracking and epidemiologic purposes.  
 Next, the SC will upload copies of applicable de -identified  or identified  medical r ecords , according to 
institutional policy,  to the eTMF to include the EDC and ambulance records, ED records, progress notes, 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     43  medication records, radiology, and other procedure reports, admit and discharge summaries, and adverse event 
information.  
 Also, e ach site will collect CT/MRI data files (as zipped DICOMS) and video images and upload these 
to the EDC system as well. These will be reviewed by the reading center.   
 Sites will be expected to enter critical screening data within 24 hours of enrollment , if these are not 
automatically transferred to VISION from Digivey . The EDC system will be programmed to send automated 
reminders to the investigator and site managers if sites fail to enter any data in a timely manner.  
 
3. Correction of Automat ed Errors and Warnings : As data are entered, the EDC system will 
immediately generate automated warnings (yellow highlights) and errors (red highlights). Warnings will 
represent data that is outside expected (questionable, but not impossible) limits or where required data are 
missing. Errors will indicate conditions that are unrealistic (such as an impossibly high age  or blood pressure 
reading ) or that indicate data error (such as an invalid date format).  
 In keeping with FDA requirements for electronic  systems, the EDC system will not force an investigator  
or SC  to immediately change the entered data (as that could be misconstrued as encouraging data falsification) 
but instead the EDC will simply provide feedback via on -screen messages and red/yellow fi eld highlighting. 
Unresolved w arnings may remain , due to patient -specific issues, but will be documented nonetheless. 
Conversely, red errors must be resolved before the case form page can be advanced in the workflow (i.e., signed 
by the SC) so the data wil l be “clean” before it is exported for analysis. The EDC system will also produce 
various instantaneous reports that are useful for data quality and safety monitoring purposes both by the site 
staff and the central teams.  
 
4. Source Document Verification a nd Data Integrity Review : The CC ’s data quality monitoring team  
(monitors) will review the online case forms for completeness, logic, and consistency, then verify the entered 
data against the uploaded source medical records and data collection worksheets. Routine queries identified in 
this process will be entered into the EDC system (triggering an automated notice to the site). A monitor will 
then work with the SCs to obtain correction of all data errors and resolution of the corresponding queries. 
Random s ampling will be used to select primary data for 100% source verification. Should the data accuracy for 
a patient/site exceed certain minimum expectations in this step, or if any material data integrity or regulatory 
compliance issues are identified, additi onal data from a patient/site will undergo intensive monitoring and the 
site referred to the Study PI for corrective action.  
 
5. Data Analyst Verification & Preliminary Compilation : Once the data are entered, source -verified, and 
safety -reviewed, they will be exported to a statistical analysis package (Stata or SAS) and subject to additional 
offline edit checks. Expanding upon the patient -oriented monitoring and automated verifications, this step will 
focus on cross -study evaluation of the data and identify outliers and notable trends.  
 
6. Final Data Listing Review : After a patient is complete and all data are final, a report (tables and 
graphs) of the important data points will be generated. The data m anager will perform a final check on the data 
to assess data completeness, consistency, and logic in preparation for final data lock.  
 
7. Report -to-Database Verification Audit :  A random sample (approximately 10%) of the data in the 
final data listing will  be 100% visually verified against the EDC entries to ensure there are no systematic or 
sporadic errors generated in the export, analysis, and compilation tasks. This quality control audit will be 
documented for the study files.  
 
8. Investigator Signoff an d Final Data Lock : Finally, after completion of all data cleaning, safety 
reviews, and QA activities, the investigator will be asked to sign -off on the final patient data  and then the case 
record will be locked . Once locked, the case forms will no longer b e editable.  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     44   
9. Data Collection and Submission to Statistical Center : Data will be entered digitally at the bedside as 
described above and synchronized to a secure central server. The study database (EDC system) contains raw 
data entered by SCs and investigators at study sites; it has pre -programmed exports to extract speci fic data sets 
for analysis. New exports can be built as may be necessary. The export routine is fully tested and documented 
as part of the overall EDC validation  (in accordance with FDA Part -11 guidance) . For data analysis and 
reporting, the data forms wil l be finalized through a specific time point (e.g., all data entered, cleaned, signed -
off, and locked to prevent further changes). The database is then exported (maintaining appropriate security, 
change -tracking, and chain -of-custody controls and a record (snapshot) is kept of data to be used for specific 
reports and analyses, such as for DSMB reports  our routine data quality audits. These snapshots are considered 
interim, as the patient data are subject -to-change while the study is ongoing. StatTransfer ( Seattle, WA)  or a 
comparable package  is used to export data from tables and queries of the local copy of the database in a format 
that can work with the statistical software (Stata or SAS) or be used for cost or cost -effectiveness analysis using 
standard s oftware (TreeAge, http://www.treeage.com/). The outputs are then analyzed, and if graphical 
presentation is needed, Ploticus, Stata, or SAS are used to generate charts and graphs. The CC will prepare 
routine interim reports of data analyses and reports sum marizing patient screening and selection, protocol 
adherence, and data quality. After the final full database lock at the conclusion of the study (and for any formal 
interim analyses stipulated in the protocol), the Statistical Center will develop (using f inal data exports that are 
generated by the CC in this same fashion) data analyses that summarize the study’s findings. The CC will work 
with Statistical Center to prepare the final reports summarizing the overall performance of all sites with respect 
to the protocol and the quality of the data generated.  
 
10. Statistical Analysis and Study Reporting : Final, locked data will be used for the protocol -defined and 
exploratory statistical analyses and generation of the final study report and associated study pu blications.  
 
10.4 Interim Analyses for Harm (Early Stopping Rules):  We plan two interim analyses to statistically assess  for 
harm in either trial arm (VOG care [active intervention] or standard care). These will be finalized in concert 
with the externally -appointed DSMB and institutional IRBs, but our initial plans are described here.  
  
Analyses will be conducted by the pri ncipal study statistician with oversight by the Johns Hopkins Biostatistics 
Center for review and evaluation by the DSMB. The first interim analysis will occur at the one -third -way point 
in the trial after the first 75 patients have been randomized. The se cond interim analysis will occur at the two -
thirds -way point after the first 150 patients have been randomized. If it is determined at either interim analysis 
that patients are suffering significant harms differentially across the two arms, the DSMB will d etermine if the 
trial should be modified (e.g., by adding a safety MRI to the standard care arm) or discontinued.  
 
Potential risks of harm are described in detail in Human Subjects Section above , and adverse event detection 
and reporting in the Data and S afety Monitoring Plan (below). The primary concern is risk of misdiagnosis and 
resulting harm in the standard ED care arm, since safety MRIs in the VOG arm make harm from misdiagnosis 
unlikely. The rationale for allowing a ‘no safety MRI’ -standard care arm  is that immediate safety MRIs for the 
standard care arm would be non -standard, since only 1 -2% of all ED patients with dizziness nationally undergo 
MRI.123 Further, we could not measure clinical outcomes of usual care to estimate sample size for a Phase III 
study. Although the primary concern is risk of harm in the standard care arm, i t is also possible that there would 
be instead be harms from overtesting in the VOG care arm ( 7. VI. Risks of Wrong Diagnosis or Overtesting).  
 
The DSMB will consider all NIH/NIDCD -defined serious and non -serious adverse events occurring within 30 -
days 
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     45  NIH Adverse Event Definition ( http://grants.nih.gov/clinicaltrials_fdaaa/definitions.htm ):  
“Unfavorable changes in health, including abnormal laboratory findings, that occur in tri al participants 
during the clinical trial or within a specified period following the trial.   Two types of adverse event data are 
to be reported: "Serious" and "Other (Not Including Serious)" adverse events.  
• Serious Adverse Events  include adverse events th at result in death, require either inpatient hospitalization 
or the prolongation of hospitalization, are life -threatening, result in a persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity or result in a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Other important medical e vents, 
based upon appropriate medical judgment, may also be considered Serious Adverse Events if a trial 
participant's health is at risk and intervention is required to prevent an outcome mentioned.  
• Other (Not Including Serious) Adverse Events  are those that are not Serious Adverse Events that exceed 
a frequency threshold.”  
These two interim analyses will be based on group sequential methods that control for the effects of ‘multiple 
looks’ at the data, as described by Piantidosi.171 To create the stopping rule, we will use cutoff points (c k), as 
described in Jennison and Turnbull,172 for construction of repeated confidence intervals for a hazard ratio. These 
critical cutoff points allow for the calculation of relative hazard of adver se events between the two trial arms 
using Cox regression164 and assuming O’Brien -Fleming boundar ies.173 
 
12. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
All subject participation will be in accordance with applicable Federal and international Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP) requirements regarding protection of human subjects, to include 45 CFR Part 46, 21 CFR 50, and the 
Declaration of Helsinki. All research will be under the review of the IRBs at the respective sites, to include IRB 
approval at the JHU BIOS CC (JCCI), operating in accordance with 21 CFR Part 56.  
 
The HIPAA Privacy Rule, 45 CFR Parts 160 and 164, will govern the protection of individually identifiable 
Protected Health Information (PHI). No PHI will be collected without first obtaining a HIPAA waiver and 
subject informed consent. Access to PHI will be restrict ed to authorized staff, and only after signing 
confidentiality, patient privacy, and security agreements. All key personnel, BIOS staff, and all investigative 
team members at the enrolling sites will provide proof of training on the protection of human res earch 
participants and maintenance of patient confidentiality. All certification documents will be required on e -file 
before a site is activated and its first research participant enrolled.  The conduct of this study will be in 
accordance with NIH’s Policy for Data and Safety Monitoring (N OT-98-084).  
 
12.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review and Informed Consent : This protocol and the informed 
consent document  and any subsequent mod ifications will be reviewed and approved by the IRB responsible for 
overs ight of the study. The con sent form will describe the purpose of the study, the procedures to be followed, 
and the risks and be nefits of participation.  
 
The informed consent documents will meet the requirements of 21 CFR 50.20 and contain the information 
required by each of the eight basic elements of 21 CFR 50.25(a) and each of the six elements of 21 CFR 
50.25(b) that is appropriate to the study.  
 
The sample consent form s (Appendices 1 and 2) along with the protocol will be provided to study centers for 
adaptation to conform to local IRB requirements. Performance site cons ent forms will be submitted to the CC 
for approval before the initial IRB submission and each time the document is modified. The protocol and 
informed consent document must be submitted to the IRB for review and approval before the study is initiated 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     46  at each respective study center. The final IRB letter of approval and approved informed consent document will 
be provided to the CC along with other pertinent regulatory documentation.  
 
The sample consent form contains language that subjects’ demographic and medical data  may be disclosed to 
specific agencies or persons for their use as part of the AVERT Trial in accordance with HIPAA. All study 
centers will be required to comply with its indi vidual institution’s HIPAA requirements including but not 
limited to institution -specific HIPAA authorization documents separate from the informed consent document 
and/or HIPAA waivers for screening patients and the transfer of screening data of enrolled a nd non -enrolled 
patients to the CC.  
 
12.2 Study Modification/Discontinuation : The study may be modified or discontinued at any time by the 
DSMB, NIDCD, or IRB as part of their duties to ensure that research subjects are protected.  
 
 
13. PUBLICATION S 
 
The Steering Committee will develop a detailed publications policy. Copies will be distributed to all Clinical 
Site PIs and the NIDCD Project Scientist. The goals of this policy are to (1) assure and expedite orderly and 
timely presentation t o the scientific community of all pertinent data resulting from the AVERT study; (2) have 
accurate and scientifically sound presentations and papers; (3) assure that all investigators, including those of 
junior faculty rank and other professionals have the  opportunity to participate and be recognized in study -wide 
presentations and the preparation of AVERT  papers; (4) assure that press releases, interviews, presentations, 
and publications are accurate and objective, and do not compromise the collaborative t rial and the acceptance of 
its results; and (5) establish procedures for review and approval of ancillary study applications.  
 
 
 
  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     47  13. REFERENCES  
 
1. Mission. 2013; http://www.nidcd.nih.gov/about/learn/pages/mission.aspx . Accessed April 11, 2013, 
2013.  
2. D'Onofrio G, Jauch E, Jagoda A, et al. NIH Roundtable on Opportunities to Advance Research on 
Neurologic and Psychiatric Emergencies. Ann Emerg Med. Nov 2010;56(5):551 -564. 
3. Saber -Tehrani AS, Coughlan D, Hsieh YH, et al. Rising annual costs of dizziness presentations to US 
emergency departments. Acad Emerg Med. 2013 (in press).  
4. Kattah JC, Talka d AV, Wang DZ, Hsieh YH, Newman -Toker DE. HINTS to diagnose stroke in the 
acute vestibular syndrome: three -step bedside oculomotor examination more sensitive than early MRI 
diffusion -weighted imaging. Stroke. Nov 2009;40(11):3504 -3510.  
5. Kerber KA, Morgen stern LB, Meurer WJ, et al. Nystagmus assessments documented by emergency 
physicians in acute dizziness presentations: a target for decision support? Acad Emerg Med. Jun 
2011;18(6):619 -626. 
6. Kerber KA, Burke JF, Skolarus LE, et al. Use of BPPV Processes in Emergency Department Dizziness 
Presentations: A Population -Based Study. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . Dec 21 2012.  
7. Kerber KA, Brown DL, Lisabeth LD, Smith MA, Morgenstern LB. Stroke among patients with 
dizziness, vertigo, and imbalance in the emergency  department: a population -based study. Stroke. Oct 
2006;37(10):2484 -2487.  
8. Eagles D, Stiell IG, Clement CM, et al. International survey of emergency physicians' priorities for 
clinical decision rules. Acad Emerg Med. 2008;15(2):177 -182. 
9. Stanton VA, Hs ieh YH, Camargo CA, Jr., et al. Overreliance on symptom quality in diagnosing 
dizziness: results of a multicenter survey of emergency physicians. Mayo Clin Proc. Nov 
2007;82(11):1319 -1328.  
10. Hsieh YH, Rothman RE, Newman -Toker DE, Kelen GD. National estim ation of rates of HIV serology 
testing in US emergency departments 1993 -2005: baseline prior to the 2006 Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention recommendations. AIDS. Oct 18 2008;22(16):2127 -2134.  
11. Savitz SI, Caplan LR, Edlow JA. Pitfalls in the diagnosis of cerebellar infarction. Acad Emerg Med. 
2007;14(1):63 -68. 
12. Newman -Toker DE. Common misconceptions in the evaluation of ED dizzy patients parallel those 
found in Emergency Medicine texts [abstra ct]. Acad Emerg Med . 2003;10(5):491 -492. 
13. Newman -Toker DE, Camargo CA, Jr. 'Cardiogenic vertigo' --true vertigo as the presenting manifestation 
of primary cardiac disease. Nat Clin Pract Neurol. Mar 2006;2(3):167 -172; quiz 173.  
14. Newman -Toker DE. Charted records of dizzy patients suggest emergency physicians emphasize 
symptom quality in diagnostic assessment [research letter]. Ann Emerg Med. Aug 2007;50(2):204 -205. 
15. Newman -Toker DE, Cannon LM, Stofferahn ME, Rothman RE, Hsieh YH , Zee DS. Imprecision in 
patient reports of dizziness symptom quality: a cross -sectional study conducted in an acute care setting. 
Mayo Clin Proc. Nov 2007;82(11):1329 -1340.  
16. Cnyrim CD, Newman -Toker D, Karch C, Brandt T, Strupp M. Bedside differentiatio n of vestibular 
neuritis from central "vestibular pseudoneuritis". J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. Apr 2008;79(4):458 -
460. 
17. Edlow JA, Newman -Toker DE, Savitz SI. Diagnosis and initial management of cerebellar infarction. 
Lancet Neurol. Oct 2008;7(10):951 -964. 
18. Kruschinski C, Hummers -Pradier E, Newman -Toker D, Camargo CA, Jr., Edlow JA. Diagnosing 
dizziness in the emergency and primary care settings. Mayo Clin Proc. Nov 2008;83(11):1297 -1298; 
author reply 1298 -1299.  
19. Newman -Toker DE, Dy FJ, Stanton V A, Zee DS, Calkins H, Robinson KA. How often is dizziness from 
primary cardiovascular disease true vertigo? A systematic review. J Gen Intern Med. Dec 
2008;23(12):2087 -2094.  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     48  20. Newman -Toker DE, Hsieh YH, Camargo CA, Jr., Pelletier AJ, Butchy GT, Edlow JA.  Spectrum of 
dizziness visits to US emergency departments: cross -sectional analysis from a nationally representative 
sample. Mayo Clin Proc. Jul 2008;83(7):765 -775. 
21. Newman -Toker DE, Kattah JC, Alvernia JE, Wang DZ. Normal head impulse test differentiat es acute 
cerebellar strokes from vestibular neuritis. Neurology. Jun 10 2008;70(24 Pt 2):2378 -2385.  
22. Newman -Toker DE, Reich SG. "Wrong -Way" nystagmus in the AICA syndrome [letter to the editor]. 
Laryngoscope. Feb 2008;118(2):378 -379. 
23. Newman -Toker DE , Robinson KA, Edlow JA. Frontline misdiagnosis of cerebrovascular events in the 
era of modern neuroimaging: a systematic review [abstract]. Ann Neurol. 2008;64(Suppl 12):S17 -S18. 
24. Kerber KA, Meurer WJ, West BT, Fendrick AM. Dizziness presentations in U .S. emergency 
departments, 1995 -2004. Acad Emerg Med. 2008;15(8):744 -750. 
25. Bisdorff A, Von Brevern M, Lempert T, Newman -Toker DE. Classification of vestibular symptoms: 
towards an international classification of vestibular disorders. J Vestib Res. 2009; 19(1-2):1-13. 
26. Newman -Toker DE, Sharma P, Chowdhury M, Clemons TM, Zee DS, Della Santina CC. Penlight -cover 
test: a new bedside method to unmask nystagmus. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. Aug 2009;80(8):900 -
903. 
27. Kerber KA, Schweigler L, West BT, Fend rick AM, Morgenstern LB. Value of computed tomography 
scans in ED dizziness visits: analysis from a nationally representative sample. Am J Emerg Med. Nov 
2010;28(9):1030 -1036.  
28. Meurer WJ, Potti TA, Kerber KA, et al. Potentially inappropriate medication utilization in the 
emergency department visits by older adults: analysis from a nationally representative sample. Acad 
Emerg Med. Mar 2010;17(3):231 -237. 
29. Tarnutzer AA, Berkowitz AL, Robinson KA, Hsieh YH, Newman -Toker DE. Does my dizzy patient 
have a s troke? A systematic review of bedside diagnosis in acute vestibular syndrome. CMAJ. Jun 14 
2011;183(9):E571 -592. 
30. Kattah JC, Pula J, Newman -Toker DE. Ocular lateropulsion as a central oculomotor sign in acute 
vestibular syndrome is not posturally dependent. Ann N Y Acad Sci. Sep 2011;1233:249 -255. 
31. Kerber KA, Burke JF, Brown DL, et al. Does intracerebral haemorrhag e mimic benign dizziness 
presentations? A population based study. Emerg Med J. Jan 18 2011.  
32. Moy E, Newman -Toker DE, Valente E, Andrews R, Coffey R, Hines A. Missed and delayed diagnosis 
of stroke in emergency department patients with headache or dizzin ess [abstract]. ISPOR 17th Annual 
International Meeting . Washington, DC 2012.  
33. Newman -Toker DE, Saber Tehrani AS, Mantokoudis G, et al. Quantitative video -oculography to help 
diagnose stroke in acute vertigo and dizziness: toward an ECG for the eyes. Stroke. Apr 
2013;44(4):1158 -1161.  
34. Kerber KA, Burke JF, Skolarus LE, et al. A prescription for the Epley maneuver: www.youtube.com?  
Neurology. Jul 24 2012;79(4):376 -380. 
35. Omron R, Saber -Tehrani AS, Duval -Arnold J , et al. The participation in a vertigo day resulted in better 
resident comfort with discharging patients without receiving a CT scan in patients with vestibular 
neuritis [abstract]. Society for Academic Emergency Medicine Annual Meeting . Chicago, IL 2012.  
36. Gottesman RF, Sharma P, Robinson KA, et al. Clinical characteristics of symptomatic vertebral artery 
dissection: a systematic review. Neurologist. Sep 2012;18(5):245 -254. 
37. Gottesman RF, Sharma P, Robinson KA, et al. Imaging characteristics of sympt omatic vertebral artery 
dissection: a systematic review. Neurologist. Sep 2012;18(5):255 -260. 
38. Pula JH, Newman -Toker DE, Kattah JC. Multiple sclerosis as a cause of the acute vestibular syndrome. 
J Neurol . Feb 8 2013.  
39. Newman -Toker DE, Zee DS. Building a new model for diagnosis of dizzy patients in the Emergency 
Department [abstract]. J Vestib Res. 2002;11(3 -5):281.  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     49  40. Newman -Toker DE. Diagnosing Dizziness in the Emergency Department -- Why "What do you mean by 
'dizzy'? " Should Not Be the First Question You Ask  [Doctoral Dissertation, Clinical Investigation, 
Bloomberg School of Public Health]. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University; 2007. In: 
ProQuest Digital Dissertations [database on Internet, http://www.proquest. com/]; publication number: 
AAT 3267879. Available at:  http://gateway.proquest.com/openurl?url_ver=Z39.88 -
2004&res_dat=xri:pqdiss&rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:dissertation&rft_dat=xri:pqdiss:3267879.  
Accessibility verified August 10, 2014 . 
41. Newman -Toker DE, Staab JP, Bronstein A, et al. Proposed multi -layer structure for the International 
Classification of Vestibular Disorders [abstract]. Bárány Society XXVI International Congress . 
Reykjavik, Iceland 2010.  
42. Newman -Toker DE. Symptoms and Si gns of Neuro -otologic Disorders. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 
Oct 2012;18(5 Neuro -otology):1016 -1040.  
43. Newman -Toker DE. Vertigo and Dizziness. In: Daroff RB, ed. Encyclopedia of the Neurological 
Sciences . 2nd ed. Oxford: Elsevier; 2014 (in press).  
44. Aw S T, Fetter M, Cremer PD, Karlberg M, Halmagyi GM. Individual semicircular canal function in 
superior and inferior vestibular neuritis. Neurology. 2001;57(5):768 -774. 
45. Weber KP, Aw ST, Todd MJ, McGarvie LA, Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM. Head impulse test in 
unilateral vestibular loss: vestibulo -ocular reflex and catch -up saccades. Neurology. 2008;70(6):454 -
463. 
46. Halmagyi GM, Weber KP, Curthoys IS. Vestibular function after acute vestibular neuritis. Restor 
Neurol Neurosci . 2010;28(1):37 -46. 
47. Baloh RW, Ho nrubia V, Jacobson K. Benign positional vertigo: clinical and oculographic features in 
240 cases. Neurology. 1987;37(3):371 -378. 
48. Aw ST, Todd MJ, Aw GE, McGarvie LA, Halmagyi GM. Benign positional nystagmus: a study of its 
three -dimensional spatio -tempo ral characteristics. Neurology. Jun 14 2005;64(11):1897 -1905.  
49. Bhattacharyya N, Baugh RF, Orvidas L, et al. Clinical practice guideline: benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008;139(5 Suppl 4):S47 -S81. 
50. Fife TD, Iverson DJ, Lempert T, et al. Practice parameter: therapies for benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo (an evidence -based review): report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American 
Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2008;70(22):2067 -2074.  
51. Ichijo H. Posi tional nystagmus of horizontal canalolithiasis. Acta oto -laryngologica. Jan 
2011;131(1):46 -51. 
52. Weber KP, MacDougall HG, Halmagyi GM, Curthoys IS. Impulsive testing of semicircular -canal 
function using video -oculography. Ann N Y  Acad Sci. 2009;1164:486 -491. 
53. Macdougall HG, McGarvie LA, Halmagyi GM, Curthoys IS, Weber KP. The Video Head Impulse Test 
(vHIT) Detects Vertical Semicircular Canal Dysfunction. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e61488.  
54. Manzari L, Macdougall HG, Burgess AM, Curthoys IS. New, fast, clini cal vestibular tests identify 
whether a vertigo attack is due to early Meniere's disease or vestibular neuritis. Laryngoscope. Aug 2 
2012.  
55. Perez -Fernandez N, Gallegos -Constantino V, Barona -Lleo L, Manrique -Huarte R. Clinical and video -
assisted examinat ion of the vestibulo -ocular reflex: a comparative study. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 
Nov-Dec 2012;63(6):429 -435. 
56. Mahringer A, Rambold HA. Caloric test and video -head -impulse: a study of vertigo/dizziness patients in 
a community hospital. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol . Mar 15 2013.  
57. Herr RD, Alvord L, Johnson L, Valenti D, Mabey B. Immediate electronystagmography in th e diagnosis 
of the dizzy patient. Ann Emerg Med. 1993;22(7):1182 -1189.  
58. Lam JMY, Siu WS, Lam TS, Cheung NK, Graham CA, Rainer TH. The epidemiology of patients with 
dizziness in an emergency department. Hong Kong J Emerg Med. 2006;13:133 -139. 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     50  59. Glossar y of Common Site Terms. 2012; http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/about -studies/glossary#P . Accessed 
April 11, 2013, 2013.  
60. Brodsky MC, Donahue SP, Vaphiades M, Brandt T. Skew deviati on revisited. Surv Ophthalmol. 
2006;51(2):105 -128. 
61. Ullman E, Edlow JA. Complete heart block complicating the head impulse test. Arch Neurol. Oct 
2010;67(10):1272 -1274.  
62. Pullens B, van Benthem PP. Intratympanic gentamicin for Meniere's disease or syn drome. Cochrane 
database of systematic reviews. 2011(3):CD008234.  
63. Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM, Zee DS. The history and future of neuro -otology. Continuum (Minneap 
Minn). Oct 2012;18(5 Neuro -otology):1001 -1015.  
64. MacDougall HG, Weber KP, McGarvie LA, Halmag yi GM, Curthoys IS. The video head impulse test: 
diagnostic accuracy in peripheral vestibulopathy. Neurology. 2009;73(14):1134 -1141.  
65. MacDougall HG, McGarvie LA, Halmagyi GM, Curthoys IS, Weber KP. Application of the video head 
impulse test to detect ve rtical semicircular canal dysfunction. Otol Neurotol . Aug 2013;34(6):974 -979. 
66. Fost N, Farrell PM. A prospective randomized trial of early diagnosis and treatment of cystic fibrosis: a 
unique ethical dilemma. Clin Res. Sep 1989;37(3):495 -500. 
67. Lachin JM, Matts JP, Wei LJ. Randomization in clinical trials: conclusions and recommendations. 
Control Clin Trials. Dec 1988;9(4):365 -374. 
68. Shellock FG, Spinazzi A. MRI safety update 2008: part 2, screening patients for MRI. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol. Oct 20 08;191(4):1140 -1149.  
69. Kanal E, Barkovich AJ, Bell C, et al. ACR guidance document for safe MR practices: 2007. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol. Jun 2007;188(6):1447 -1474.  
70. Shellock FG, Spinazzi A. MRI safety update 2008: part 1, MRI contrast agents and nephrogen ic 
systemic fibrosis. AJR Am J Roentgenol. Oct 2008;191(4):1129 -1139.  
71. Herrick DB, Nakhasi A, Nelson B, et al. Usability characteristics of self -administered computer -assisted 
interviewing in the emergency department: factors affecting ease of use, efficiency, and entry error. 
Applied Clinical Informatics. 2013;4(2):276 -292. 
72. Kattah JC, Dhanani SD, Pula JH, Mantokoudis G, Saber Tehrani AS, Newman -Toker DE. Vestibular 
signs of thiamine deficiency during the early phase of suspected Wernicke’s encephalopathy. Neurol 
Clin Pract. 2013;3:460 -468. 
73. Newman -Toker DE, Kerber KA, Hsieh YH, et al. HINTS Outperforms ABCD2 to Screen for Stroke in 
Acute Continuous Vertigo and Dizziness. Acad Emerg Med . Oct 2013;20(10):986 -996. 
74. Nakhasi A, Herrick D, Nelson BK, et al. Factors that influence patient willingness to participate in self -
administered computer -assisted interviewing in the emergency department – the stakes matter. Applied 
Clinical Informatics. 2014 (in press).  
75. Teiwes W, Clarke AH, Scherer H. Dynamic analysis of ocular torsion in parabolic flight using video -
oculography. Acta Astronaut. Aug 1993;29(8):607 -611. 
76. Scelsa SN, Simpson DM, Reichler BD, Dai M. Extraocular muscle involvement in Becker muscular 
dystrophy. Neurology. Feb 1996;46(2):564 -566. 
77. Houben MM, Goumans J, van der Steen J. Recording three -dimensional ey e movements: scleral search 
coils versus video oculography. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. Jan 2006;47(1):179 -187. 
78. Parnes LS, Agrawal SK, Atlas J. Diagnosis and management of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
(BPPV). CMAJ. 2003;169(7):681 -693. 
79. Halma gyi GM, Curthoys IS. A clinical sign of canal paresis. Arch.Neurol. 1988;45(7):737 -739. 
80. Halmagyi GM, Weber KP, Aw ST, Todd MJ, Curthoys IS. Impulsive testing of semicircular canal 
function. Prog Brain Res. 2008;171:187 -194. 
81. Bartl K, Lehnen N, Kohlb echer S, Schneider E. Head impulse testing using video -oculography. Ann N Y 
Acad Sci. May 2009;1164:331 -333. 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     51  82. Black RA, Halmagyi GM, Thurtell MJ, Todd MJ, Curthoys IS. The active head -impulse test in unilateral 
peripheral vestibulopathy. Arch  Neurol. 2005;62(2):290 -293. 
83. Curthoys IS. The interpretation of clinical tests of peripheral vestibular function. Laryngoscope. Jun 
2012;122(6):1342 -1352.  
84. Dros J, Maarsingh OR, van der Horst HE, Bindels PJ, Ter Riet G, van Weert HC. Tests used to evaluate 
dizziness in primary care. CMAJ. Sep 21 2010;182(13):E621 -631. 
85. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. Going from evidence to recommendations. BMJ. May 10 
2008;336(7652):1049 -1051.  
86. Aw ST, Halmagyi GM, Black RA, Curthoys IS, Yavor RA, Todd MJ. Head impulse s reveal loss of 
individual semicircular canal function. J Vestib  Res. 1999;9(3):173 -180. 
87. Halmagyi GM, Aw ST, Cremer PD, Curthoys IS, Todd MJ. Impulsive testing of individual semicircular 
canal function. Ann NY Acad  Sci. 2001;942:192 -200. 
88. Halmagyi GM, Black RA, Thurtell MJ, Curthoys IS. The human horizontal vestibulo -ocular reflex in 
respon se to active and passive head impulses after unilateral vestibular deafferentation. Ann NY  Acad 
Sci. 2003;1004:325 -336. 
89. Weber KP, Aw ST, Todd MJ, McGarvie LA, Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM. Horizontal head impulse test 
detects gentamicin vestibulotoxicity. Neurology. Apr 21 2009;72(16):1417 -1424.  
90. Chen L, Lee W, Chambers BR, Dewey HM. Diagnostic accuracy of acute vestibular syndrome at the 
bedside in a stroke unit. J Neurol. Dec 12 2010.  
91. Selecki BR. The effects of rotation of the atlas on the axis: ex perimental work. Med J Aust . May 17 
1969;1(20):1012 -1015.  
92. Kuether TA, Nesbit GM, Clark WM, Barnwell SL. Rotational vertebral artery occlusion: a mechanism 
of vertebrobasilar insufficiency. Neurosurgery. Aug 1997;41(2):427 -432; discussion 432 -423. 
93. Okawara S, Nibbelink D. Vertebral artery occlusion following hyperextension and rotation of the head. 
Stroke. Sep-Oct 1974;5(5):640 -642. 
94. Norris JW, Beletsky V, Nadareishvili ZG. Sudden neck movement and cervical artery dissection. The 
Canadian Stroke Co nsortium. CMAJ. Jul 11 2000;163(1):38 -40. 
95. Haldeman S, Kohlbeck FJ, McGregor M. Stroke, cerebral artery dissection, and cervical spine 
manipulation therapy. J.Neurol. 2002;249(8):1098 -1104.  
96. Cassidy JD, Bronfort G, Hartvigsen J. Should we abandon cervical spine manipulation for mechanical 
neck p ain? No. BMJ. 2012;344:e3680.  
97. Wand BM, Heine PJ, O'Connell NE. Should we abandon cervical spine manipulation for mechanical 
neck pain? Yes. BMJ. 2012;344:e3679.  
98. Rothwell DM, Bondy SJ, Williams JI. Chiropractic manipulation and stroke: a population -based case -
control study. Stroke. 2001;32(5):1054 -1060.  
99. Cassidy JD, Boyle E, Cote P, et al. Risk of vertebrobasilar stroke and chiropractic care: results of a 
population -based case -control and case -crossover study. Spine (Phila Pa 1976.). 2008;33(4 
Suppl):S176 -S183.  
100. Schievink WI. Spontaneous dissection of the carotid and vertebral arteries. N Engl  J Med. 
2001;344(12):898 -906. 
101. Chalela JA, Kidwell CS, Nentwich LM, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography in 
emergency assessment of patients with suspected acute stroke: a prospective comparison. Lancet. 
2007;369(9558):293 -298. 
102. Hwang DY, Silva GS, Furie KL, Gre er DM. Comparative Sensitivity of Computed Tomography vs. 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging for Detecting Acute Posterior Fossa Infarct. J Emerg Med . May 
2012;42(5):559 -565. 
103. Ozono Y, Kitahara T, Fukushima M, et al. Differential diagnosis of vertigo and dizzi ness in the 
emergency department. Acta oto -laryngologica. Dec 6 2013.  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     52  104. Huh YE, Koo JW, Lee H, Kim JS. Head -Shaking Aids in the Diagnosis of Acute Audiovestibular Loss 
due to Anterior Inferior Cerebellar Artery Infarction. Audiol Neurootol . 2013;18(2):1 14-124. 
105. Walker MF, Zee DS. Bedside vestibular examination. Otolaryngol Clin North Am . Jun 2000;33(3):495 -
506. 
106. Eggers SD, Zee DS. Evaluating the dizzy patient: bedside examination and laboratory assessment of the 
vestibular system. Semin Neurol . Mar 2003;23(1):47 -58. 
107. Thurnher M. Brain ischemia - imaging in acute stroke. Radiology Assistant  2008; 
http://www.radiologyassistant.nl/en/483910a4b6f14 . Accessed June 2, 2013.  
108. Tursk i PA, Wippold FJ, 2nd;, Cornelius RS, et al. ACR appropriateness criteria - vertigo and hearing 
loss 2008.  
109. Safety Guidelines for Magnetic Resonance Imaging Equipment in Clinical Use.  London, UK: Medicines 
in Healthcare product Regulation Agency; Decem ber 2007 2007.  
110. Preventing accidents and injuries in the MRI suite : The Joint Commission; February 14, 2008 2008.  
111. Royal JM, Peterson BS. The risks and benefits of searching for incidental findings in MRI research 
scans. Journal of law, medicine & ethics. Summer 2008;36(2):305 -314, 212.  
112. Polensek SH, Sterk CE, Tusa RJ. Screening for vestibular disorders: a study of clinicians' compliance 
with recommended practices. Med Sci Monit. 2008;14(5):CR238 -CR242.  
113. Polensek SH, Tusa R. Unnecessary diagnostic tests often obtained for benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo. Med Sci Monit. Jul 2009;15(7):MT89 -94. 
114. Royl G, Ploner CJ, Leithner C. Dizziness in the emergency room: diagnoses and misdiagnoses. Eur 
Neurol . 2011;66(5):256 -263. 
115. Oghalai JS, Manolidis S, Barth JL, Stewart MG, Jenkins HA. Unrecognized benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigo in elderly patients. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2000;122(5):630 -634. 
116. Li JC, Li CJ, Epley J, Weinberg L. Cost -effectiv e management of benign positional vertigo using 
canalith repositioning. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2000;122(3):334 -339. 
117. von Brevern M, Lezius F, Tiel -Wilck K, Radtke A, Lempert T. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: 
current status of medical manage ment. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. Mar 2004;130(3):381 -382. 
118. Fife D, FitzGerald JE. Do patients with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo receive prompt treatment? 
Analysis of waiting times and human and financial costs associated with current practice.  Int J Audiol. 
2005;44(1):50 -57. 
119. Geser R, Straumann D. Referral and final diagnoses of patients assessed in an academic vertigo center. 
Front Neurol. 2012;3:169.  
120. Maarsingh OR, Schellevis FG, van der Horst HE. Looks vestibular: irrational prescrib ing of 
antivertiginous drugs for older dizzy patients in general practice. Br J Gen Pract . Oct 2012;62(603):518 -
520. 
121. Wang H, Yu D, Song N, Su K, Yin S. Delayed diagnosis and treatment of benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo associated with current pra ctice. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol . Mar 2 2013.  
122. Perez P, Manrique C, Alvarez MJ, et al. [Evaluation of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo in primary 
health -care and first level specialist care]. Acta Otorrinolaringol.Esp. 2008;59(6):277 -282. 
123. Saber Tehrani AS, Coughlan D, Hsieh YH, et al. Rising annual costs of dizziness presentations to U.S. 
Emergency departments. Acad Emerg Med . Jul 2013;20(7):689 -696. 
124. Kerber KA, Burke JF, Skolarus LE, et al. Use of BPPV processes in emergency department  dizziness 
presentations: a population -based study. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . Mar 2013;148(3):425 -430. 
125. Gananca FF, Gazzola JM, Gananca CF, Caovilla HH, Gananca MM, Cruz OL. Elderly falls associated 
with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Braz J Otorhinolaryngol . Jan-Feb 2010;76(1):113 -120. 
126. Do YK, Kim J, Park CY, Chung MH, Moon IS, Yang HS. The effect of early canalith repositioning on 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo on recurrence. Clin Exp Otorhinolaryngol. Sep 2011;4(3):113 -
117. 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     53  127. Lopez -Escamez JA, Gamiz MJ, Fernandez -Perez A, Gomez -Finana M, Sanchez -Canet I. Impact of 
treatment on health -related quality of life in patients with posterior canal benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo. Otol Neurotol. Jul 2003;24(4):637 -641. 
128. Wolinsk y FD, Fitzgerald JF. The risk of hip fracture among noninstitutionalized older adults. J 
Gerontol. 1994;49(4):165 -175. 
129. Wolinsky FD, Fitzgerald JF. Subsequent hip fracture among older adults. Am J Public Health. 
1994;84(8):1316 -1318.  
130. Kroenke K, Lu cas CA, Rosenberg ML, et al. Causes of persistent dizziness. A prospective study of 100 
patients in ambulatory care. Ann Intern Med. 1992;117(11):898 -904. 
131. Fielder H, Denholm SW, Lyons RA, Fielder CP. Measurement of health status in patients with verti go. 
Clin Otolaryngol. 1996;21(2):124 -126. 
132. Honrubia V, Bell TS, Harris MR, Baloh RW, Fisher LM. Quantitative evaluation of dizziness 
characteristics and impact on quality of life. Am J Otol. 1996;17(4):595 -602. 
133. Aggarwal NT, Bennett DA, Bienias JL,  Mendes de Leon CF, Morris MC, Evans DA. The prevalence of 
dizziness and its association with functional disability in a biracial community population. J Gerontol A 
Biol Sci Med Sci. 2000;55(5):288 -292. 
134. Sloane PD, Hartman M, Mitchell CM. Psychological  factors associated with chronic dizziness in 
patients aged 60 and older. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1994;42(8):847 -852. 
135. Masuda Y, Tei H, Shimizu S, Uchiyama S. Factors Associated with the Misdiagnosis of Cerebellar 
Infarction. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis . Nov 24  2012.  
136. Cano LM, Cardona P, Quesada H, Mora P, Rubio F. [Cerebellar infarction: prognosis and complications 
of vascular territories]. Neurologia. Jul-Aug 2012;27(6):330 -335. 
137. Pope JV, Edlow JA. Avoiding misdiagnosis in patients with neurological em ergencies. Emerg Med Int. 
2012;2012:949275.  
138. Thomas EJ, Studdert DM, Burstin HR, et al. Incidence and types of adverse events and negligent care in 
Utah and Colorado. Med Care. 2000;38(3):261 -271. 
139. Morgenstern LB, Lisabeth LD, Mecozzi AC, et al. A population -based study of acute stroke and TIA 
diagnosis. Neurology. 2004;62(6):895 -900. 
140. Kuruvilla A, Bhattacharya P, Rajamani K, Chaturvedi S. Factors associated with misdiagnosis of acute 
stroke in young adults. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis . Nov 2011;20 (6):523 -527. 
141. Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP, Jr., et al. Guidelines for the early management of patients with acute 
ischemic stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the american heart association/american 
stroke association. Stroke. Mar 20 13;44(3):870 -947. 
142. Flossmann E, Rothwell PM. Prognosis of vertebrobasilar transient ischaemic attack and minor stroke. 
Brain. 2003;126(Pt 9):1940 -1954.  
143. Rothwell PM, Buchan A, Johnston SC. Recent advances in management of transient ischaemic attack s 
and minor ischaemic strokes. Lancet Neurol. 2006;5(4):323 -331. 
144. Paul NL, Simoni M, Rothwell PM. Transient isolated brainstem symptoms preceding posterior 
circulation stroke: a population -based study. Lancet Neurol. Jan 2013;12(1):65 -71. 
145. Hacke W, Kaste M, Bluhmki E, et al. Thrombolysis with alteplase 3 to 4.5 hours  after acute ischemic 
stroke. N Engl J Med. Sep 25 2008;359(13):1317 -1329.  
146. Lyden P. Thrombolytic therapy for acute stroke --not a moment to lose. N Engl J Med. Sep 25 
2008;359(13):1393 -1395.  
147. Lavallee PC, Meseguer E, Abboud H, et al. A transient is chaemic attack clinic with round -the-clock 
access (SOS -TIA): feasibility and effects. Lancet Neurol. Nov 2007;6(11):953 -960. 
148. Rothwell PM, Giles MF, Chandratheva A, et al. Effect of urgent treatment of transient ischaemic attack 
and minor stroke on ear ly recurrent stroke (EXPRESS study): a prospective population -based sequential 
comparison. Lancet. Oct 20 2007;370(9596):1432 -1442.  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     54  149. Newman -Toker DE, Moy E, Valente E, Coffey R, Hines A. Missed diagnosis of stroke in ED patients 
with dizziness or heada che using a large, population -based sample [abstract]. Diagnostic Error in 
Medicine 5th Annual Meeting . Baltimore, MD 2012.  
150. Moeller JJ, Kurniawan J, Gubitz GJ, Ross JA, Bhan V. Diagnostic accuracy of neurological problems in 
the emergency department. Can J Neurol Sci . Jul 2008;35(3):335 -341. 
151. Moulin T, Sablot D, Vidry E, et al. Impact of emergency room neurologists on patient management and 
outcome. Eur Neurol. 2003;50(4):207 -214. 
152. Kim AS, Sidney S, Klingman JG, Johnston SC. Practice variation in neuroimaging to evaluate dizziness 
in the ED . Am J Emerg Med . Jun 2012;30(5):665 -672. 
153. Smith -Bindman R, Lipson J, Marcus R, et al. Radiation dose associated with common computed 
tomography examinations and the associated lifetime attributable risk of cancer. Arch Int Med . Dec 14 
2009;169(22):207 8-2086.  
154. Mortele KJ, Oliva MR, Ondategui S, Ros PR, Silverman SG. Universal use of nonionic iodinated 
contrast medium for CT: evaluation of safety in a large urban teaching hospital. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 
Jan 2005;184(1):31 -34. 
155. Josephson SA, Dillon  WP, Smith WS. Incidence of contrast nephropathy from cerebral CT angiography 
and CT perfusion imaging. Neurology. May 24 2005;64(10):1805 -1806.  
156. Associated Press. $217 million awarded in malpractice case: A misdiagnosed Tampa man was left brain -
damage d and disabled. Florida Times Union  2006.  
157. Kim AS, Fullerton HJ, Johnston SC. Risk of vascular events in emergency department patients 
discharged home with diagnosis of dizziness or vertigo. Ann Emerg Med. Jan 2011;57(1):34 -41. 
158. Walker MF. Treatmen t of vestibular neuritis. Curr  Treat  Options  Neurol. 2009;11(1):41 -45. 
159. HCAHPS - CAHPS Hospital Survey. 2013; http://www.hcahpsonline.org . Accessed May 28, 2013.  
160. Adams HP, Jr., Bendixen BH, Kappelle LJ, et al. Classification of subtype of acute ischemic stroke. 
Definitions for use in a multicenter clinical trial. TOAST. Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke 
Treatment. Stroke. Jan 1993;24(1):35 -41. 
161. Liang KY, Zeger  SL. Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models. Biometrika. 
1986;73(1):13 -22. 
162. Skovlund E, Fenstad GU. Should we always choose a nonparametric test when comparing two 
apparently nonnormal distributions? J Clin Epi . Jan 2001;54(1):86 -92. 
163. Bland JM, Altman DG. Survival probabilities (the Kaplan -Meier method). BMJ. Dec 5 
1998;317(7172):1572.  
164. Andersen PK. Survival analysis 1982 -1991: the second decade of the proportional hazards regression 
model. Stat Med . Dec 1991;10(12):1931 -1941 . 
165. Lopez -Escamez JA. Role of vestibular testing in diagnosis of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . Jul 2009;141(1):7 -9; author reply 10 -11. 
166. Wilhelmsen K, Strand LI, Nordahl SH, Eide GE, Ljunggren AE. Psychometric pro perties of the Vertigo 
symptom scale - Short form. BMC Ear Nose Throat Disord. 2008;8:2.  
167. Navi BB, Kamel H, Shah MP, et al. Application of the ABCD2 Score to Identify Cerebrovascular 
Causes of Dizziness in the Emergency Department. Stroke. Jun 2012;43( 6):1484 -1489.  
168. Hays RD, Morales LS. The RAND -36 measure of health -related quality of life.  Ann Med . 2001 
Jul;33(5):350 -7. 
169. Jacobson GP, Calder JH. A screening version of the Dizziness Handicap Inventory (DHI -S). Am J Otol. 
1998;19(6):804 -808. 
170. Wilson L, Brown JS, Shin GP, Luc KO, Subak LL. Annual direct cost of urinary incontinence. Obstet 
Gynecol . Sep 2001;98(3):398 -406. 
171. Piantadosi S. Clinical trials: a methodologic perspective . 2nd ed. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley -Interscience; 
2005.  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     55  172. Jennison C, Turnbull BW. Interim analyses: the repeated confidence interval approach. J R Stat Soc . 
Series B (Methodological). 1989:305 -361. 
173. O'Brien PC, Fleming TR. A multiple testing procedure for clinical trials. Biometrics. Sep 
1979;35(3):549 -556. 
174.  Zwergal A, Rettinger N, Frenzel C, Dieterich M, Brandt T, Strupp M. A bucket of static vestibular 
function. Neurology. 2009;72(19):1689 -92. 
 
  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     56  Appendix: Sample Main AVERT Trial Consent Form  
RESEARCH PARTICIPANT INFORMED CONSENT AND PRIVACY AUTHORIZATION FORM  
 
Protocol Title:  AVERT_Acute  Video -oculography for Vertigo in Emergency Rooms for Rapid Triage  
 
Application No.:  [insert local IRB number]  
 
Sponsor:  National Institutes of Health (NIH); National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders (NIDCD)  
 
Principal Investigator:  [insert local PI name and contact information]  
  
1. What you should know about this study:  
• You are being asked to join a research study. This consent form explains the research study and your part in the study.  
• Please read it carefully and take as much time as you need.  
• Ask your study doctor or the study team to explain any words or informatio n in this informed consent that you do not 
understand.  
• You are a volunteer. If you join the study, you can change your mind later. You can decide not to take part or you can 
quit at any time. There will be no penalty or loss of benefits if you decide to qu it the study.  
• During the study, we will tell you if we learn any new information that might affect whether you wish to continue to be in 
the study.  
• If we think your participation in this study may affect your clinical care, information about your study pa rticipation will 
be included in your medical record, which is used throughout [insert your institution name] . Doctors outside of [insert 
your institution name]  may not have access to this information. You can ask the research team to send this information 
to any of your doctors.  
• A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This Web 
site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a summary of the results. You 
can search this Web site at any time.  
• If you would like to review the information for this study, or a summary of the results, ask the study team doctor for the 
ClinicalTrials.gov study registration number.  
• During this study, you will not hav e access to certain medical information and test results collected for study purposes. If 
an emergency occurs while you are in the study, medical information needed for your treatment can be made available 
to your study physician and other physicians who t reat you. When the study is completed, all the information in your 
medical record will be available to you.  
 
2. Why is this research being done?  
This research is being done to learn more about the diagnosis of stroke in Emergency Room (ER) patients who are 
experiencing new dizziness or other balance problems.  
 
Sometimes doctors are not able to figure out whether the dizziness or balance problem is coming from a problem with the ear 
or a problem with the brain (like a stroke). We are trying to make sure doctors  in the ER don’t miss the chance to recognize 
and treat strokes early, since strokes that cause dizziness are easy to miss. Specialists can diagnose strokes by looking at tiny 
movements of the eyes in people with recent dizziness. We are using a non -invasi ve device that is similar to a pair of 
swimming goggles that fits over a person’s head and takes a video picture of their eyes to study these tiny eye movements.  
These goggles are already routinely being used to care for patients with vertigo, dizziness an d balance problems in specialty 
clinics  and in some ERs . 
 
We want to see if using the information from the goggles helps give better treatment to people with dizziness or balance 
symptoms. To do this, we need to compare people whose treatment was guided by  the information from the goggles to people 
who receive standard ER care. This study is a “randomized trial.” Everyone will be tested with the goggles, but not 
everyone’s doctor will be told the results. The choice of whose doctor gets the goggles test res ults will be random (by chance, 
like the flip of a coin). For some participants, the study goggles test results will guide the care they receive and become p art 
of their medical record. For other participants, the results will not be given to their ER doct or, and they will get the same care 
in the ER that they would have gotten if they did not join the study.  
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     57  The video goggles in this research study are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (the FDA) for 
measuring balance function. The  use of the video googles in this study is investigational. The word “investigational” means 
that they are not approved by the FDA for diagnosing stroke . The FDA has reviewed its use in this study and determined that 
it presents a non -significant risk to y ou and other participants.  
 
Adults , 18 years and older  who speak English and are not pregnant, coming to the ER with dizziness, vertigo, or other related 
balance problems may join this study.  
 
How many people will be in this study?  
Roughly  2,000 people are expected to take part in the screening part of this  study, but only about 226 will complete the 
randomized trial, including about 75 at [insert your institution name] . 
 
3. What will happen if you join this study?  
 
If you agree to be in this stu dy, we will ask you to do the following things:  
 
NOW, AT THE ER VISIT : After signing this consent form, you will answer some basic questions about your health, 
including how much your dizziness is affecting you now. Put on a pair of study goggles (like swimming goggles) that 
measure eye movements and a brief clinical exam will be performed. The goggles have a small camera built into the frame to 
record a video of your eye movements during this exam. This video technolo gy finds more abnormalities than visual 
observation alone.  It is important to do a portion of the exam in complete darkness and your eyes will be covered 
temporarily using sticky patches that block light  or a drape that covers your face . This should take about 20 minutes. We 
believe this will help doctors get the right diagnosis and treatment for your dizziness. During the exam, we will ask you to 
look from side to side, move your head around, and lie down on the bed.  We will test your hearing, you r balan ce when 
standing or walking and some other routine clinical tests of brain function. We will  record a video of these tests using a room 
camera. These video recordings are an essential part of the research study. Without agreeing to them, you cannot join th e 
study. You may request that the video recording be stopped at any time, but this will end your participation in the trial .  
 
By allowing doctors and researchers to view these video recordings of your examination , doctors can use the information to 
learn and perform the tests in a more consistent  manner.  We want to use the video recordings of the clinical examination 
performed today and at the follow -up visit to educate other doctors so they can provide the best possible care for other 
patients like you. This includes teaching during lectures and eye movement training courses, some of which may be posted to 
the internet so that physicians anywhere in the world can learn. Most of the videos and other images recorded in the study 
will not be identifiabl e (for example, a close -up video picture of your eye). Signing th is consent to participate in this trial 
means you agree to have these unidentifiable  images used for the purposes of training, teaching, and scientific publication.    
Some images for the rese arch study will include a picture of your face that might be recognized. In order for us to use these 
identifiable recordings  to help educate other doctors around the world , we are asking for your permission below . You do not 
have to allow us to use these recordings to take part in the study. You may still take part in this study no matter what your 
decision. These videos will be used for the purpose s of training, teaching and scientific publications. These materials will not 
be used for any other purposes,  such as marketing.   
 
□  Yes, I agree for my identifiable images in the video recordings to be used for training, teaching, and 
scientific publications.  
□ Yes, I understand that I can request that the video recording be stopped at any time and that by 
doing so, this will end my participation in the trial.  
□ Yes, I understand that I have the right to withdraw my consent before the video recordings or my 
images are shared with the public.  
 
□ No, my identifiable images in the video recordings may not be used for training, teaching, or scientific 
publications. I understand that my  identifiable images in the video recordings will still be seen and 
analyzed as part of the research study.  
 
At the end of the initial testing, t he results of the eye exam with the goggles and other tests will determine if you are eligible 
for the trial. Even if you are not eligible for the trial, you are still eligible for the part of the follow -up study . 
   
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     58  If you  are eligible for the trial, y ou will be randomly assigned to one of two groups. It is like tossing a coin. If you are 
assigned to the first group, your care in the ER will be guided by diagnostic information from the study goggles. If you are 
assigned to the second group, you will receive standard care in the ER . 
 
GROUP #1 (STUDY GOGGLES CARE)  
 
a) The study goggles will determine your care. In some cases, your goggle s results may be double -checked by a specialist 
doctor who is an expert in dizziness. If th e specialist doctor disagrees with the goggles  result , the specialist doctor’s 
opinion will be used to guide your care. The study coordinator doing the goggles testing will tell you whether the 
specialist  will be reviewing your goggles and other test results.  
 
b) If the study goggles (or specialist  doctor ’s review) suggest your dizziness or vertigo probably indicates a stroke, you 
will be admitted to the hospital to confirm the diagnosis and be treated. This will include a brain scan (magnetic resonance 
imaging [MRI]) and other standard tests. The length of your hospital stay (usually about 2 -3 days) will depend on test 
results and treatments you need. If tests confirm you have a stroke or other brain problem, you will be given st andard 
treatments for that problem. If tests confirm an inner ear problem, you will be given standard treatments and sent home . If 
your ER doctors believe  you do not need hospital care and the hospital stay confirms this, then  the research study will pay 
for the hospital care. If your ER doctors believe you should be admitted to the hospital or if you are found to have a 
problem that would typically require you to stay in the hospital, the study will not pay for your care.  
 
c) If the study goggles (or specialist  doctor ’s review) suggest your dizziness or vertigo is from an inner ear problem, you 
will be treated in the ER and sent home. You will be given standard treatments for your inner ear problem such as 
medications to  reduce dizziness or nausea. As an a dded precaution before you leave, we will obtain an MRI brain scan 
(details below ) to make sure you do not have a stroke.  
 
GROUP #2 (STANDARD CARE)   
 
You will have the study goggles test, but the results will not be given to you or your doctors. The care you receive in the 
ER will be the same as you would if you were not part of the study.  
 
AFTER TODAY’S ER VISIT : If you are eligible for the trial, t here will be  one more in-person study follow -up visit and 
two follow -up phone calls: (1) Week 1 (in person); (2) one month (phone); and , in most cases,  (3) six months (phone). If you 
are not eligible for the trial, there will only be two phone calls. E ach appointment  is described below . 
 
WEEK -1 IN-PERSON  VISIT ( TRIAL PARTICIPANTS ONLY ): We will ask you to return for a n in-person  follow -up visit to 
[insert your institution name] . You will be paid $ 200 for the completion of the Week -1 follow -up testing  that includes a visit 
with a dizziness specialist and an MRI brain scan . This visit will take about 6 -8 hours and may take place in two half days or 
one full day , depending on scheduling .  Free parking and t ransportation assistance may be offered to participants who need it . 
For those p articipants scheduled for their follow -up visit in one day, meal vouchers may be available.  
 
A dizziness specialist will examine you and perform standard clinical tests related to dizziness and balance function. The 
study goggles test will be performed again. As before, we will take a video recording of your eye movement s and use a room 
camera to record the clinical exam . Standard balance tests, including a caloric test (water in the ear test) and a complete 
hearing test will be performed. A repeat MRI brain scan ( see below ) will be performed to confirm your diagnosis, since early 
MRI can sometimes be wrong. Unless these tests were recommended as clinically necessary by doctors at the ER visit 
(including any specialists, if involved), the tests will be paid  for by the research study.  
 
ONE -MONTH & SIX-MONTH PHONE  FOLLOW -UP (ALL PARTICIPANTS) : You will be called by a member of the 
research team about one month (and, in most cases,  again about six months) after your ER visit to ask some questions and see 
how you are doing. Each  call will take about 20 minutes. We will also check to see if you were back in the ER or the hospital 
since your last in -person visit with a similar problem. To do this, we will look  at specific parts of your medical record that 
relate to dizziness or strokes, like whether you saw an ear doctor (otolaryngologist) or a brain doctor (neurologist).   
 
 DETAILS ABOUT MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI) BRAIN SCANS:  
As part of your participati on in this research study, you will have a MRI brain scan to look for stroke or other brain disease 
that might be the cause of your dizziness or vertigo. If you have known  reasons why you cannot have an MRI brain scan , you 
cannot take part in th e trial, bu t you may still take part in the phone follow -up study. If you agree to join the study , we will 
ask you questions to make sure you are able to have an MRI. If you are accepted into the trial, b efore your MRI exam, the 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     59  MRI staff  will ask you to complete a s tandard questionnaire  that asks similar, but more detailed questions . The purpose of 
this questionnaire is to be totally sure  that you are able to safely enter the MRI area.    
After you are cleared as safe and ready to begin, t he full MRI exam will take ab out 90 minutes to complete. To start your 
MRI test, you will lie on a padded table. A head/neck “coil” frame will be placed around your head, face, and neck (close to 
your face, but not touching you directly). The coil frame is necessary to help the MRI machine take pictures. The table on 
which you are lying will be moved to the center of an MRI magnet, which looks like a long narrow tube. Even though the 
tube is open, some people feel confined in small places. If this bothers you, please notify the MRI s taff. You may end your 
participation in this study at any time by telling the MRI staff. When MRI pictures are taken, radio -signals and magnetic 
fields are used. When this happens, it is normal for the MRI machine to make loud, banging, and clicking noises . You will be 
asked to wear earplugs or headphones for your comfort during the exam, and to protect your hearing.  
During the exam, the MRI staff can see and hear you. You will be able to hear the MRI staff. The MRI staff will be talking to 
you during your MRI exam and may give simple instructions to hold your breath, maintain your position, etc. You will 
generally be requested to lie perfectly still throughout the exam. Again, you may ask the MRI staff to stop at any time.  If your 
MRI is with contrast, a t some point during your MRI exam the MRI staff will interrupt the scanning procedure in order to 
give a “contrast agent” (sometimes called a “contrast dye”). Giving contrast allows us to take more accurate pictures of the 
balance organs and blood vessels. Th e agent is given through a needle placed (an IV) in your arm. The IV will be placed 
using standard hospital techniques.  The research study requires an MRI at the 1 -week follow -up visit; if you do not wish to 
receive a MRI,  you cannot participate in the tr ial, but you may still participate in the phone  follow -up study . 
Incidental Findings  
The MRI you are having as part of this research study will be reviewed by a qualified physician  just as when having the MRI 
as part of your routine medical care. There is a possibility that while reviewing your MRI we may see an abnormality that we 
did not expect to see in this study. This is what is called an “incidental finding.” We will let you know if we see such an 
incidental finding.  Depending on the type of incident al finding, we may contact you by mail or by phone. In the case of a 
potential serious emergency, someone may go to your home. A qualified person (usually a member of the research team) will 
talk to you if there is an incidental finding. You do not have an  option to decline information about an incidental finding.  If 
you want, we will give information about this incidental finding to your primary doctor or we will refer you to an appropriat e 
doctor for further evaluation.  
 
• An incidental finding may cause yo u to feel anxious.  
• Since an incidental finding will be part of your medical record, it may affect your current or future life or health 
insurance coverage. This risk will vary depending on the type of insurance plan involved.  
The costs for any care that will be needed to diagnose or treat an incidental finding would not be paid for by this research 
study. These costs would be your responsibility.  
 
How long will you   be in the study?  
The entire study will last for about 5 years. You will be in this study for about six months .  
 
4. What are the risks or discomforts of the study?  
 
• You may get tired or bored when we are asking you questions or you are completing questionnaires. You do not ha ve to 
answer any question you do not want to answer.  
 
• You might experience some increased dizziness or feel sick to your stomach during the examination, although most of 
our patients and research participants do not.  
 
• The sticky patches on your eyes , if us ed, may cause some brief discomfort when removing.  
 
• There is a rare risk of neck pain or slowed heart rate during the examination.  
 
• There is a rare risk of discomfort from the audiology tones during the examination.  
 
• The risks of the MRI are the same as in routine brain scans for dizziness/vertigo.  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     60  MRI Brain Scan  
The effects of magnetic fields in an MRI scanner have been extensively studied, and there are no known significant risks with  
an MRI exam. You may, however, be bothered by feelings of confinement (claustrophobia)  or by the noise made by the 
magnet during the procedure. You will be asked to wear earplugs or earphones while in the MRI scanner . You may not 
participate in this study if you have a pacemaker, an implanted defibrillator or cer tain other implanted electronic or metallic 
devices. It is important for you to advise the MRI staff if you have had brain surgery for a cerebral aneurysm, or if you hav e 
implanted medical or metallic devices, shrapnel, or other metal, including metal in y our eye.  
The contrast agent you will receive is FDA -approved and used routinely for MRI exams. It contains a material called 
gadolinium. The injection of contrast may cause discomfort, tingling or warmth in the lips, metallic taste in the mouth, 
tingling i n the arm, nausea, or headache. These symptoms occur in less than 1% (less than 1 in 100) of people and go away 
quickly.  Insertion of the needle  and intravenous catheter  (small plastic tube  often referred to as an “IV” ) to give you 
gadolinium may cause min or pain, bruising and/or infection at the injection site.  There is a small risk of an allergic reaction 
to gadolinium; however, a severe allergic reaction occurs in less than one in 300,000 people.  
People must have normal kidney function to receive gadolin ium during the research MRI in this study. People with severe 
kidney failure who receive gadolinium are at risk of developing Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis/Nephrogenic Fibrosing 
Dermopathy (NSF/NFD). This ( NSF/NFD ) is a serious progressive disease and can result in death. There are no confirmed 
cases of this complication ( NSF/NFD ) occurring in individuals with normal kidney function (GFR ≥ 30 mL/min).  
All subjects will undergo the standard, institutionally required clinical prescreening tests, including MR I questionnaire and 
blood or urine test for kidney disease or pregnancy, per policy.  Please notify a doctor, nurse , or technologist if you are 
allergic to gadolinium, if you have any kidney problems, or if you experience any of these or other side effects .  
A physician will be available during the procedure to administer any necessary care if side effects do occur, and to determin e 
when or if the injection of the gadolinium should be stopped.  
Unexpected Diagnosis or Future Diagnostic Tests : In this study y ou will get special diagnostic tests that you would not 
normally get. These tests could identify brain diseases that you have but did not know about , such as stroke or multiple 
sclerosis. Finding this out could make you upset. It could also lead to other t ests or treatments outside the study that might 
have side effects, risks, or costs to you. These tests could also be wrong, which might lead to unnecessary tests or treatmen ts. 
 
Confidentiality : There is always a risk that information about you may become known to people outside this study. We will 
do everything we can to make sure that everyone who needs to see your information uses it only for the study and keeps it 
confidential.  
 
Randomization (Coin Flip) : The study goggles results (or specialist doctor ’s opinion after reviewing them) might lead your 
ER visit doctor(s) to choose tests or treatments that they might not have chosen. We believe those choices will benefit you, 
but we cannot be sure. For example, a common situation is that the study goggles results might require a brain scan that your 
ER doctor wouldn’t have ordered. The tests could show an important medical condition, like stroke , but i t might also turn out 
that these other tests don’t reveal anything, making them unnecessary. We bel ieve the goggles lead to tests that are medically 
necessary and decrease unnecessary tests, but we cannot be sure this will happen for you.  
 
5. Are there risks related to pregnancy?  
Pregnant women may not take part in this study because of unknown MRI/gadolin ium risks for an embryo or fetus. Women 
of childbearing potential may have a urine or blood pregnancy test , per institutional policy,  to confirm they are not pregnant.  
 
6. Are there benefits to being in the study?  
You may or may not benefit from being in this study. The information learned from this study may help others in the future.   
 
If you are assigned (by chance) to receive care guided by the study goggles device  (that might include input from a 
dizziness/ver tigo specialist) , the results may help you get better care in the ER, hospital, and afterwards. The study goggles 
device has been shown in a small study to accurately diagnose inner ear versus brain causes of dizziness. We believe the 
study goggles will he lp your doctor get the correct diagnosis for the cause of your dizziness symptoms. If you are found to 
have an inner ear balance problem, we believe you may receive treatments that help you to get better faster, with fewer 
unnecessary tests. If you are fou nd to have a stroke causing your dizziness, you will get the best possible treatments, and 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     61  these could reduce your chances of a second stroke or even be life -saving. You may benefit from being examined by the 
dizziness/vertigo/balance specialist one week a fter the ER visit. You may benefit from the MRI scan or other tests obtained 
as part of the study. These tests may help you receive a correct diagnosis and correct treatments for dizziness.  
 
If you are assigned (by chance) to receive standard care, there i s no direct benefit to you from the study goggles testing 
during the ER visit. You may benefit from being examined by the dizziness/vertigo/balance specialist one week after the ER 
visit. You may benefit from the MRI scan or other tests obtained as part of  the study. These tests may help you receive a 
correct diagnosis and correct treatments for dizziness, even if these problems were not diagnosed at the first ER visit.  
 
7. What are your options if you do not want to be in the study?  
You do not have to join this study. If you do not join, your care at [insert your institution name]  will not be affected.    
 
8. Will it cost you anything to be in this study?   
You will receive a separate Insurance and Research Participant Financial Responsibi lity Information Sheet (Sheet). This 
Sheet will give you the following information:  
 
• The procedures, tests, drugs or devices that are part of this research will be paid for by the study (no cost to you).  
• The procedures, tests, drugs or devices that will b e billed to you and/or your health insurer. If you have health 
insurance, you will be responsible for any co -pays or deductibles not covered by your insurance.  
 
9. Will you be paid if you join this study?  
You will be paid $200  if you are eligible for the tri al and complete the Week -1 follow -up visit . It is expected that the follow -
up visit will take up to 8  hours . You will also receive free parking for the follow -up visit.  Transportation assistance may be 
offered. For participants scheduled for their follow -up visit overlapping a mealtime, meal vouchers may be available. If you 
complete part of the follow -up visit , you will receive partial payment based on the tests you completed. You will receive 
payment by check about 6 -8 weeks after completing the study fol low-up. There is no additional payment for the phone 
follow -up, regardless of whether you are eligible for the trial or only the phone follow -up study.  
 
You may be required to provide your social security number to be paid for taking part in this study. Fe deral tax law requires 
that you report your research payments when you file your taxes. If your total payments from [insert your institution name]  
exceed $600 per year, [insert your institution name]  will report these payments to the Internal Revenue Service and you will 
receive a 1099 -MISC form from us.  Your social security number may also be used at the 6 -month follow -up to make sure 
you’re still alive  if we cannot reach you . Although your name and birthdate can be used to check government records, your 
social security number is the only reliable way for us to make sure we know it’s you . 
 
10. Can you leave the study early?  
• You can agree to be in the study now and change your mind later.  
• If you wish to stop, please tell us right away.  
• Leaving this study early will not stop you from getting regular medical care .  
 
If you leave the study early, [insert your institution name]  may use or give out your health information  that it has already 
collected if the i nformation is needed for this study or any follow -up activities .  
 
11. Why might we take you out of the study early?  
You may be taken out of the study if:  
• You fail to follow instructions.  
• You become pregnant prior to your one -week follow -up visit.  
• There may be other reasons to take you out of the study that we do not know at this time.  
 
If you are taken out of the study early, [insert your institution name]  may use or give out your health  information  that it has 
already collected if the information is needed for this study or any follow -up activities . 
 
12. How will your privacy be protected?  
We have rules to protect information about you. Federal and state laws and the federal medical Privacy Rule also protect your 
privacy.  By signing this form you provide your permission, called your “authorization,” for the use and disclosure of 
information protected by the Privacy Rule.  
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     62  The research team working on the study will collect information about you. This includes things learned from the diagnostic 
tests described in this consent form. They may also collect other information including your name, address, date of birth, an d 
infor mation from your medical records. This could include information about sensitive health conditions (such as HIV status, 
drug, alcohol or STD treatment, genetic test results, or mental health treatment) if they might be linked to your dizziness.  
 
The resear ch team will know your identity and that you are in the research study. Other people at [insert your institution 
name]  may also see or give out your information , particularly your doctors,  who may need this information for your clinical 
care. We make this information available to your doctors for your safety.  
 
People outside of [insert your institution name]  may need to see or receive your information for this study. Examples include 
government agencies (such as the Food and Drug Administration or National  Institutes of Health), Johns Hopkins, safety 
monitors, and other sites involved in the study.  We will not give out your information unless it is necessary for the study or 
required by specific rules or regulations.  
 
We cannot do this study without your authorization to use and give out your information. You do not have to give us this 
authorizatio n. If you do not, then you may not join this study.  
 
We will use and disclose your information only as described in this form and in our Notice of Privacy Practices; however, 
people outside [insert your institution name]  who receive your information may no t be covered by this promise or by the 
federal Privacy Rule. We try to make sure that everyone who needs to see your information keeps it confidential – but we 
cannot guarantee that it will not be re -disclosed.  
 
The use and disclosure of your information h as no time limit. You may revoke (cancel) your permission to use and disclose 
your information at any time by notifying the Principal Investigator of this study by phone or in writing. If you contact the  
Principal Investigator by phone, you must follow -up with a written request that includes the study number and your contact 
information. The Principal Investigator’s name, address, phone and fax information are on page one of this consent form.  
 
If you do cancel your authorization to use and disclose your i nformation, your part in this study will end and no further 
information about you will be collected. Your revocation (cancellation) would not affect information already collected in the  
study, or information we disclosed before you wrote to the Principal I nvestigator to cancel your authorization.  
 
13. Will the study require any of your other health care providers to share your health information with the researchers 
of this study?  
As a part of this study, the researchers may ask to see your health care records from your other health care providers. You 
may be asked  to give us a list of other health care providers  that you see.    
 
14. What treatment costs will be paid if you are injured in this study?  
[insert your institution name]  and the federal government do not  have programs to pay you if you are hurt or have other bad 
results from being in the study. However, medical care at [insert your institution name]  is open to you as it is to all sick or 
injured people.  
 
• If you have health insurance : The costs for any tr eatment or hospital care you receive as the result of a study -related 
injury will be billed to your health insurer. Any costs that are not paid for by your health insurer will be billed to you.   
 
• If you do not have health insuranc e: You will be billed for the costs of any treatment or hospital care you receive as the 
result of a study -related injury.  
 
 By signing this form you will not give up any rights you have to seek compensation for injury.  
 
15. What other things should you know about this rese arch study?  
 
a.    What is the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and how does it protect you?  
 
The [insert your institution name]  IRB is made up of:  
• Doctors  
• Nurses  
• Ethicists  
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     63  • Non-scientists  
• and people from the local community.  
 
The IRB reviews human research studies. It protects the rights and welfare of the people taking part in those studies. You 
may contact the IRB if you have questions about your rights as a participant or if you think y ou have not been treated 
fairly. The IRB office number is (local IRB phone number ). You may also call this number for other questions, 
concerns or complaints about the research.  
 
b.    What do you do if you have questions about the study?  
Call the principal investigator, [local PI name]  at [local PI phone number] . If you wish, you may contact the principal 
investigator by letter or by fax. The address and fax number are on page one of this consent form.  If you cannot reach 
the principal in vestigator or wish to talk to someone else, call the IRB office at [local IRB phone number] .  
 
c.    What should you do if you are injured or ill as a result of being in this study?  
If you think you are injured or ill because of this study, call [local PI name]  at [local PI phone number]  during regular 
office hours.  
 
If you have an urgent medical proble m related to your taking part in this study, call 911. Once stable, notify [local PI 
name]  at [local PI phone number]  during regular office hours or at [24-hour phone number]  after hours and on weekends .  
 
d.    What  happens to Data  that are collected in the study?  
[insert your institution name]  and our research partners work to understand and cure diseases. The data you provide are 
important to this effort.  
 
If you join this study, you should understand that you will not own your data, and s hould researchers use them to create a 
new product or idea, you will not benefit financially.   
 
With appropriate protections for privacy ( insert your i nstitution name ) may share your information with our research 
sponsors and partners.  
 
 
16. What does your signature on this consent form mean?  
 Your signature on this form means that:  
• you understand the information given to you in this form  
• you accept the provisions in the form  
• you agree to join the study  
  
 You will not give up any legal rights by signing this consent form.  
 
 
WE WILL GIVE YOU A COPY OF THIS SIGNED AND DATED CONSENT FORM  
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________________  
Signature of Participant                                    (Print Name)                                                DateTime  
 
 
__________________________________________________________________________________________  
Signature of Person Obtaining Consent           (Print Name)                                              DateTime  
 
 
NOTE : A COPY OF THE SIGNED, DATED CONSENT FORM MUST BE KEPT BY THE PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR; 
A COPY MUST BE GIVEN TO THE PARTICIPANT; IF YOU ARE USING EPIC FOR THIS STUDY A COPY MUST BE 
FAXED TO [local EPIC f ax number] ; IF YOU ARE NOT USING EPIC A COPY MUST BE PLACED IN THE 
PARTICIPANT’S MEDICAL RECORD (UNLESS NO MEDICAL RECORD EXISTS OR WILL BE CREATED).  
 
AVERT  
  Version  4.2 
May 7th, 2019 
     64  ONLY CONSENT FORMS THAT INCLUDE THE [insert your institution name]  LOGO CAN BE USED TO OBTAIN THE 
CONSEN T OF RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS. IF THIS CONSENT FORM DOES NOT HAVE A [insert your institution 
name]  LOGO, DO NOT USE IT TO OBTAIN THE CONSENT OF RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS.  