TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  1  TRANS WOMEN CONNECTED (TWC)  
STUDY PROTOCOL WITH  IMPACT ANALYSIS PLAN  
  
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  2  1) Research  Question s That Address Program Effectiveness  on Behavioral Outcomes  
 
These are consistent with outcomes listed on the www.Clinical Trials.gov  website.  
a. Primary research question(s):  
i. What is the impact of the full TWC app relative to the TWC COVID only app 
on the nu mber of times  participants report having been tested for STI and 
HIV  in the past 3 months  at follow -up, approximately three - and six -months  
post baseline ?  
ii. What is the impact of the full TWC app relative to the TWC COVID only app 
on the number of times p articipants report receptive condomless anal  or 
vaginal  intercourse at follow -up, approximately three - and six -months post 
baseline ?  
b. Secondary research question(s):  Grouped by  timepoints at which they are to 
be assessed per Clinical Trials Registration  
Assessed at all three follow -up timepoints   
i. What is the impact of the full TWC app relative to the TWC COVID only app 
on the perceptions of social support (based on mean score) at follow -up, 
approximately one-month , three -months, and six -months post baseline ?  
ii. What is the impact of the full TWC app relative to the TWC COVID only app 
on self-reported uptake of PrEP since last measurement period, 
approximately one-month , three -months, and six -months post baseline ? 
iii. What is the impact of the full TWC app relative to the TWC COVID only app 
on self-efficacy in decisions around safer sex behavior (i.e., the HIV & 
Safer Sex: Self Efficacy Scale)  at follow -up, approximately one-month , 
three -months, and six -months post baseline ? 
iv. What is the impact of the full TWC app relative to the TWC COVID only app 
on patient communication self -efficacy within clinical encounters  (i.e., 
Ask ,Understand, and Remember, AURA, Scale) at follow -up, approximately 
one-month , three -months, and six -months post baseline ? 
v. What is the impact of the full TWC app relative to the TWC COVID only app 
on participants’ degree of comfort with external appearance as it relates 
to gender identity (i.e., the Transgender Congruence Scale, or TCS)  at 
follow -up, approximately one-month , three -months, and six -months post 
baseline ? 
Assessed at three - and six -months post intervention only  
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  3  vi. What is the impact of the full TWC app relative to the TWC COVID only app 
on whether participants reported using a condom at last receptive anal 
intercourse or vaginal intercourse  at follow -up, approximately three - and 
six-months post baseline ?  
vii. What is the impact of the full TWC app relative to the TWC COVID only app 
on the self-reported number of visits to a health care provider (of any 
type and by type)  at follow -up, approximately three - and six -months post 
baseline ? 
viii. What is the impact of the full TWC app relative to the TWC COVID only app 
on the self-reported number of contacts as /with  a mentor/mentee for 
guidance or support  at follow -up, approximately three -months and six -
months post baseline . 
   Reaction outcome —one-month follow -up full TWC app sub -group only  
ix. What are participants' reactions to the full TWC app at immediate follow -up 
(one-month post baseline )?  
 Dropped o utcome s  
 Several outcomes were dropped before the study launch and were not included on the 
survey or asked in a way on the survey that allowed calculation. These include:   
• The Gender Identity Reflection and Rumination Scale: Scale measures rumination 
in the context of gender identity among transgender persons. Average of 15 items 
on a 4 -point scale, with a range of 15 - 60, with a lower score indicating less 
rumination and b etter outcomes [Time Frame: Baseline, Immediate post, 3 - month 
post, 6 -month post]. Note:  Scale dropped after pilot test.  
• Ask ,Understand, and Remember (AURA): Scale measures patient communication 
self-efficacy within clinical encounters. Average of 4 items on a 4 -point scale, with 
a range of 4 - 16, with a greater higher score indicating better outcomes [Time 
Frame: Immediat e post, 3 - month post, 6 -month post].  Note : Scale dropped after 
pilot test.  
• Sexual partners, unprotected, in last 3 months: # partners with whom had anal or 
vaginal sex without using condoms or PrEP in past 3 months [Time Frame: 3 - and 
6-months post intervention] . Note : Study survey asked each separately ( # partners 
and times unprotected, but not the intersection per feedback during pilot test).  
 
2) Description of the Intended Intervention  and the Attention Control Condition s 
a. Intervention condition:  The intervention is a mobile app delivered sexual  health 
promotion program designed specifically for  transgender women. The mobile app 
include s 42 interactive activities  plus resource maps, opportunities for mentoring , and 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  4  communication forums  for connecting with other transgender women  (see Table 1 for 
content summary) . The  intervention/app is intended to be used regularly  (e.g., two 
times per week ) though participants control how  often  and when they use the app.  
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  5   Table 1. TWC Intervention App Content.  
Activity or Feature Name  Brief Description of Focus  App functionality  
1-800-SEX-TALK Sexual Feedback  Increase skills to talk about sex and give sexual 
feedback; Increase confidence in talking about sex  with 
partners  This activity describes approaches to providing 
feedback successfully, illustrates a variety of 
couples providing sexual feedback, then 
provides an opportunity for the user to add 
their own feedback in scenarios using the new 
techniques  
Affirmations  Short messages of affirmation are sent to users to 
reinforce gender identity, social support, and HIV 
prevention messages.  A database of affirming and motivational 
quotes are sent at random intervals to users as 
push notifications.  
A Trip to the Clinic - Getting Tested 
  Increase knowledge of STI/HIV facts and 
misconceptions; Differentiate STI/HIV test types   
 This activity  uses a persona,  Adriana,  to allow  
the user to explore  the HIV/STI  testing  process.  
Here the user learns  about  misconceptions  
about  STIs and STI/HIV  testing;  the before,  
during;  and after of testing;  and the different  
types  of testing  that may be done  
Assertiveness Super Hero Academy  
 Increase knowledge of assertive communication skills; 
increase comfort and skill in how to communicate 
assertively  
 Users are introduced to nine custom trans 
women superhero characters who each have an 
assertiveness superpower they demonstrate in 
a scenario. Users self -select the technique they 
would like to focus on improving through 
practice in a scenario.  
Boundaries - My Life, My Way  Increase awareness of why boundaries are important; 
increase skills and strategies to set boundaries   Users are introduced to the importance of 
boundaries and are introduced to a video 
vignette of three friends and the three steps to 
address boundaries in relationships.  
Can You Hear Me Now   Increase  awareness  and skills  for assertive  
communication  and navigating  difficult  conversations  Users see examples  of passive,  aggressive,  
passive -aggressive, and assertive 
communication styles in relationship scenarios 
and practice the steps to be able to respond 
assertively to challenging relationship 
scenarios.  
Cards Against COVID  Increase awareness of self care practices; increase ability 
to identify personal strengths in face of obstacles   Users play a card game to practice different 
supportive strategies to respond to potentially 
stressful situations.  
Cleaning House - Breaking Up  Increase confidence to end an unhealthy relationship; 
increase awareness of strategies to end a relationship in 
a healthy way   Users are encouraged feel empowered to end a 
relationship if it no longer feels right. Using the 
analogy of cleaning up a messy room, users 
learn nine tips to improve their skills to end a 
relationship safely and calmly.  
Coping With Clocking  Increase awareness and confidence to validate feelings 
about misrecognition; Increase understanding of Users view “social media story” style 
experiences of trans women who have faced 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  6  Activity or Feature Name  Brief Description of Focus  App functionality  
different responses to misrecognition;  Increase social 
support by s hare the experiences of other women  and addressed misrecognition. Users identify 
their own feelings about non -affirming 
encounters and hear from other trans women 
how they have overcome these feelings.  
COVID Connections   Increase knowledge of strategies to prevent COVID 
transmission while dating and sex.  
Increase skill to develop a personal intimacy plan to 
identify what feels safe and appropriate dating during 
COVID.  Users watch a simulated dating game show and 
select their preferred responses from the 
contestants to help construct their own 
intimacy plan that can be saved to My 
Creations.  
COVID Slam  Increase knowledge of COVID transmission and 
prevention strategies.  Users watch a simulated game show with a host 
and 3 trans women participants answer 
questions about COVID transmission and 
prevention.  
Cumming Soon...Orgasm!  Increase knowledge about how orgasms work; Increase 
awareness of other trans women’s experiences of 
orgasm; Increase knowledge of different ways orgasm 
may change during transition   User is introduced to features related to 
orgasm using a movie poster theme and are 
asked to create their own poster to identify 
what matters most to them for their own 
orgasm. The customized movie poster can be 
saved to My Creations.  
Forums  A bulletin board feature where users can have 
conversations and discussions on a variety of topics.  Users can post and comment on 
communication topics started y the forum 
moderator or other forum participants.  
Healthy Relationship Roots  Increase knowledge and comfort to distinguish a healthy 
relationship from an unhealthy relationship   Using a gardening theme, users learn qualities 
that are most important to healthy 
relationships and then reflect on different 
relationship scenarios and identify their own 
feelings in response to the situation. They also 
reflect on their own past relations hip 
experiences to identify their feelings of what is 
healthy and unhealthy.  
Hook Me Up - HIV Linkage  Increase knowledge of HIV care services; Increase 
confidence to get what you need from HIV care   User view a video of a clinic walkthrough to 
illustrate the process of HIV testing and 
linkage.  
I Care About Me   Increase awareness of why self -care is important; 
Increase knowledge of self -care activities; Increase 
confidence in identifying self -care activities they can 
participate in   Users learn about different self-care practices 
and are asked to create their own “Self -care 
Playlist” by identifying activities that can help 
them reduce stress and replenish their energy.  
It's My Health and I'm in Charge  Increase assertive communication skills when talking 
with healthcare provider; identify question to prepare for 
healthcare appointments.  User hears from the assertiveness superhero 
characters about specific strategies to use with 
health care providers. Users complete their own 
assertive communication “prescription pad” to 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  7  Activity or Feature Name  Brief Description of Focus  App functionality  
prepare for conversations that can be saved to 
My Creations.  
Keep My Fire Lit  Increase knowledge of the connection between 
compassion fatigue and risk factors like isolation, 
substance use, and sexual risk taking;  Increase 
knowledge of the causes and symptoms of compassion 
fatigue; Increase skill to assess self for symptoms of 
compassion fatigue; Increase skill to identify next steps 
to address compassion fatigue   Users complete a compassion fatigue quiz to 
identify their level of fatigue. They receive a 
score and suggestions on how to address their 
own level of compassion fatigue. The 
customized quiz results can be saved to My 
Creations.  
Let Me Tell You Something - STI 
Disclosure  Increase  confidence  in talking  to current,  former,  and 
future  partners  about  STI status  Users  follow  a character  through  a “maze”  to 
practice  the four steps  of disclosing  an STI 
diagnosis  to current  or future  partners.  
Let's Put it Together - My Boundaries 
Plan Increase skills to set boundaries in relationships.  Users follow a video vignette of three friends 
talking about the three steps to address 
boundaries in relationships.  
Let's Talk About Sex - Getting on the 
Same Page  Increase skills to talk about sex and consent; Increase 
confidence in talking about sex   Users help a character practice talking about 
sex with a new partner, identify the topics that 
should be discussed, the timing for 
discussions, and examples of ways to talk 
about the topics.  
Life's a Beach    Increase self -awareness about life trajectories and the 
opportunities and challenges that may occur at different 
time periods in one’s life   Users reflect on the current, past, and future 
selves and to identify what mattered most, their 
accomplishments, challenges, and transitions 
during different decades of their lives.  
Loud and Clear: Communicating 
Boundaries  Increase skills to communicate boundaries in 
relationships.  Users follow a video vignette of three friends 
talking about the three steps to address 
boundaries in relationships.  
Love Shouldn't Hurt  Increase awareness that IPV happens in relationships 
and that it is not OK and that everyone deserves love in 
a relationship; i ncrease ability to make a  plan to leave or 
cope with IPV.   In this activity,  the incidence  of IPV in trans  
women’s  relationships  is discussed  and their 
right to have a safe and loving  relationship  is 
emphasized.  User creates  a safety  plan for 
coping  with IPV. 
Map   Locator map of resources specifically relevant to the 
trans community across several categories.  When the user opens the map feature, their geo 
location data opens the resources available in 
their region. Users can click on the resource 
and obtain the google maps information about 
the resource.  
Mentoring  To encourage connection and support between users, 
mentors and mentees are matched based on survey 
results and encouraged to create their own informal 
mentoring relationship.  Users complete a mentoring survey to request 
to be a mentor or a mentee. To be a mentor, 
users need to have completed a set number of 
activities in the TWC app.  
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  8  Activity or Feature Name  Brief Description of Focus  App functionality  
Messaging  To encourage connection and support between users, 
individuals can connect with other users individually.  Users can send private messages to other users 
in the app.  
My Creations   Screenshots of all of the personalized activity summaries 
are stored in one location on the individual user’s 
profile.  If the user choses to save their personalized 
activity products (e.g. the orgasm movie poster, 
the assertive communication prescription, the 
list of sexual boundaries), they are privately 
stored. The user can choose to share, 
download, or review their own creations.  
My Gender Journey  Increase awareness that each trans woman’s transition is 
an individual process that looks different; increase 
comfort to identify success and barriers in transition  Users take a virtual journey through a map of 
fantasy style kingdom, identifying their own 
priorities and barriers along the journey. The 
customized map can be saved to My Creations.  
My Play Palette  Increase knowledge of safer sex options; Increase 
decision -making skills; increase confidence to choose 
safer sex steps   This activity describes 6 steps to support 
decision making for safer sex. Users then select 
a type of sex and practice using the six steps to 
make safe sex decisions in that situation.   
My Pleasure Box   Increase confidence to talk about safer sex and different 
types of sex; Increase knowledge of resources for 
exploring sexual pleasure and safer sex   This activity uses a chocolate shop setting to 
give users the opportunity to select and learn 
about different types of sex.  
My Umbrella - HIV Social Support  
 Increase knowledge of qualities needed in a 
person/group for social support; Increase comfort to 
identify people/groups in current social network or 
outside current social network to strengthen and/or 
grow social support system; Increase knowledge how to 
navigate a conversation to express social support 
need(s) to another person   The activity addressing the need for social 
support systems and types of social support. 
Alongside the character Alex, the user decides 
what they need in a person and what kind of 
social support that they need.  
PEP'd Up!  Increase knowledge of the difference between PEP and 
PrEP;  This activity presents essential facts about 
when and how to access and use PEP as well as 
ways to increase support and decrease stigma.  
Pick Your Protection - The Condom 
Lab   Increase knowledge of the various condom types; 
Increase awareness of how to modify condoms for a 
variety of sex practices; Increase comfort to utilize 
condom types    Three trans health care provider custom 
characters walk users through various types of 
condoms and lubricant and ways to increase 
the effectiveness of use.    
Pleasure Map  Increase comfort with identifying where you do and 
don’t like being touched; Increase comfort with your 
own body; Increase confidence to discuss sex and 
sexual pleasure with a partner   This activity guides users to explore and map 
their own preferences for their bodies and 
pleasure (with or  without partners). The 
customized map can be saved to My Creations.  
Prep'n for PrEP  Increase knowledge of the how PrEP can protect women 
from HIV; increase awareness that PrEP is safe and 
effective for trans women  This activity presents a video of a trans woman 
talking to the user directly about the benefits 
of PrEP.  
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  9  Activity or Feature Name  Brief Description of Focus  App functionality  
Relationship Bouquet   Increase confidence to identify what is important to you 
in a relationship; Increase knowledge of skills to nurture 
intimacy   
 This activity asks users to select the behaviors 
and actions that make them feel safe in a 
relationship.  Their personalized bouquet of 
characteristics is summarized at end of activity.  
Safely Securing Your Bag  
 Increase  knowledge  of ways to remain  safer  when  
exchanging  sex for money  or other  goods  Videos of trans women speaking to user 
providing practical and actionable tips to stay 
safe when engaging in sex work.  
Salad Greens and COVID Vaccines  Increase awareness of vaccines and trans specific 
concerns; increase understanding of what a vaccine is 
and how they have been developed/used historically   The user experiences a virtual interview -style 
chat with four characters introduced in other 
activities discussing the COVID -19 vaccine. 
They reference the C.R.A.P. test to evaluate 
vaccine information   
Sex Dice  Increase confidence to explore sexual pleasure; Increase 
comfort with your own body; Increase confidence to 
have conversations with partners about sex and sexual 
pleasure   This activity  simulates  rolling  dice of body  
parts  and types  of touch  to explore  ways to 
experience  pleasure.  The user can customize  
which  items  are included  on the dice and they 
are encouraged  to try out the combinations  on 
themselves  or with a partner.  
Sex My Way   Increase knowledge of sexual boundaries; Increase 
confidence to identify some of your own sexual 
boundaries   This activity lists different types of sexual 
boundaries and the user is asked to swipe left 
or right to indicate if that is an important 
sexual boundary for themselves. Their 
personalized list of boundaries is summarized 
at end of activity and can be saved to My 
Creations.  
STI University  Increase knowledge of different STIs; increase 
knowledge of safer sex options for specific STIs; 
Increase confidence and skills through practice telling a 
partner that you have an STI.  This activity  introduces  the categories  of STIs 
and common  symptoms.  The user hears  a 
summary  of someone  recently  diagnosed  with 
3 different  common  STIs responds  to questions  
about  symptoms  and treatments.  
Sticking With It: ART  Increase  motivation  and encouragement  for ART 
adherence;  increase  understanding  of U=U This activity  introduces  the user to the benefits  
of anti-retroviral  treatment  for those  living  with 
HIV through  vector  characters  speaking  to the 
user.  
Super U & Telehealth  Increase knowledge of the benefits of telehealth;  
increase awareness of  how telehealth helps to fulfill 
healthcare needs; Increase awareness of telehealth’s 
usefulness in the user’s health routine(s)   
 This activity introduces the user to telehealth 
through a virtual, first person experience where 
the character explores what telehealth is, its 
pluses and challenges, the user reflects upon 
how they will address these challenges, sees 
how other trans women  have identified their 
healthcare needs through telehealth, and 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  10  Activity or Feature Name  Brief Description of Focus  App functionality  
ultimately provides the user with a greater 
sense of self -efficacy about telehealth.   
The Adventures of Sleutherella  Increase confidence and skills to find and evaluate 
health/COVID -related information to support informed 
decisions related to COVID mitigation, sexual health and 
health -care seeking practices.   The users follow a detective character to 
identify and apply the “Current -Reliable -
Authority -Purpose Test” to assess the reliability 
of COVID messaging.  
Vision Board  Identify goals for the future; visualize the realization of 
the goals by creating an image to guide and inspire the 
process.  Users  create a vision of the future they want 
using pictures,  art, words, colors in a graphic 
interface to  make a collage of  what their goals 
look like.  
Where I Draw the Line - Deciding My 
Boundaries  Increase  knowledge  of how to set relationship  
boundaries;  increase  confidence  to set boundaries.  Users follow a video vignette of three friends 
talking about the three steps to address 
boundaries in relationships.  
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  11  b. Attention Control C ondition:  An alternate  mobile app (TWC COVID only) was 
designed specifically for transgender women. The mobile app include s 7 interactive 
activities focused on COVID and COVID resources  (see Table 2 for app content) . The 
intervention/app is intended to be used regularly  (e.g., two times per week ) though 
participants control how often and when they use the app.  
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  12   Table 21. TWC Control  App Content.  
Activity or Feature Name  Brief Description of Focus  App functionality  
Super U & Telehealth  Increase knowledge of the benefits of telehealth;  
increase awareness of  how telehealth helps to fulfill 
healthcare needs; Increase awareness of telehealth’s 
usefulness in the user’s health routine(s)   
 This activity introduces the user to telehealth 
through a virtual, first person experience where 
the character explores what telehealth is, its 
pluses and challenges, the user reflects upon 
how they will address these challenges, sees 
how other trans women  have identified their 
healthcare needs through telehealth, and 
ultimately provides the user with a greater 
sense of self -efficacy about telehealth.   
The Adventures of Sleutherella  Increase confidence and skills to find and evaluate 
health/COVID -related information to support informed 
decisions related to COVID mitigation, sexual health and 
health -care seeking practices.   The users follow a detective character to 
identify and apply the “Current -Reliable -
Authority -Purpose Test” to assess the reliability 
of COVID messaging.  
COVID Connections   Increase knowledge of strategies to prevent COVID 
transmission while dating and sex.  
Increase skill to develop a personal intimacy plan to 
identify what feels safe and appropriate dating during 
COVID.  Users watch a simulated dating game show and 
select their preferred responses from the 
contestants to help construct their own 
intimacy plan that can be saved to My 
Creations.  
COVID Slam  Increase knowledge of COVID transmission and 
prevention strategies.  Users watch a simulated game show with a host 
and 3 trans women participants answer 
questions about COVID transmission and 
prevention.  
Cards Against COVID  Increase awareness of self care practices; increase ability 
to identify personal strengths in face of obstacles   Users play a card game to practice different 
supportive strategies to respond to potentially 
stressful situations.  
My Creations   Screenshots of all of  the personalized activity summaries 
are stored in one location on the individual user’s 
profile.  If the user choses to save their personalized 
activity products (e.g. the orgasm movie poster, 
the assertive communication prescription, the 
list of sexual boundaries), they are privately 
stored. The user can choose to share, 
download, or review their own creations.  
Salad Greens and COVID Vaccines  Increase awareness of vaccines and trans specific 
concerns; increase understanding of what a vaccine is 
and how they have been developed/used historically   The user experiences a virtual interview -style 
chat with four characters introduced in other 
activities discussing the COVID -19 vaccine. 
They reference the C.R.A.P. test to evaluate 
vaccine information   
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  13  3) Study Design  
a. Sample   
The study is open to participants who self-identify as transgender  women; report having 
had 2 or more sexual partners in the past 90 days  with at least one of those partners 
having a penis; report being age 18 -49 at baseline;  own a smartphone; and reside in any 
state in the United States.  
b. Screening criteria and process  
Participants were invited to complete a screening survey (via Qualtrics) that assessed 
eligibility for the study. Those who  did not meet eligibility criteria received an immediate 
message thanking them for this interest in the study and informing them that they were 
not eligible for participation. Those who met eligibility criteria  were forwarded to the 
study consent form and asked to read and complete the form to indicate their interest 
in taking part.  
c. Consent process   
Participants who screened into the study were directed to an online consent form  that 
explained the study expectations along with risks and benefits. Participants were asked 
to provide their consent if interested in taking part  by clicking  “yes” on the consent 
form and providing (add) . Those who provided affirmative consent went through a 
further confirmation protocol to reduce the risk for bots, scams, or those out of the 
country to enroll. Once participants’ eligibility , consent , and geographic location ( US) 
were confirmed, participants received a link to the baseline survey.  
d. Random assignment process  
The 2-arm randomized controlled trial involves randomizing individual participants 
using an equal allocation ( allocation ratio 1:1) to receive the full TWC app or an 
attention control app. Participants were randomized after completing their baseline  
surveys  using the randomizer feature of Qualtrics.   
e. Baseline and follow -up data collection  
The primary source of data for the outcome analyses is the self -report survey.  The 
survey is administered  four times: Baseline and at three follow -up timepoints, including 
1-month, 3 -months, and 6 -months post -baseline.  
Data collection was ongoing due to rolling enrollment.  On a weekly basis, prospective 
participants who were screened in, consented to participate , and were determined to be 
a unique respondent in the United States were emailed invitations to participate in the 
study . These invitations  sent through the Qualtrics platform contained links to the 
baseline  survey. Weekly, study staff would review all baseline survey completions and 
set up invitations to take the survey 1 month later, 3 months later, and 6 months later. 
Qualtrics survey invitations for baseline, 1 -month, 3 -month and 6 -month surveys were 
set-up with 5 automated reminders going out to non -completers  (3 emails at 3, 5, and 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  14  10 days after the survey link was sent and text message reminders at 7 and 12 days after 
the survey link was sent).    
For those not responding to automated reminders, w e used multiple follow -up 
strategies to encourage survey completion, including more intense follow -up by 
engagement specialists  (trans women who did more intense follow -up via phone calls 
and texting) , and extra time-anchored incentives to promote survey completion by a set 
date. 
4) Analysis  
Table 1. Behavioral outcomes used for primary impact analyses research questions.  
Outcome name  Description of the outcome, and how it is 
operationalized .   Source of the 
measure  Timing of 
measure (e.g., 
6 months after 
program ends)  
i. Number of 
times tested for 
STI/HIV  in 
past 3 months  Binary indicator for whether or not  a participant 
has tested for an STI or HIV in the past 3 
months. Yes/No response to “Have you been 
tested for STI in the past 3 months?” . “Yes” 
coded as “1” and “No” coded as “0”.  “Have you 
been tested for HIV in the past 3 months?”. 
“Yes”  to either question  coded as “1” and “No” 
to both questions  coded as “0”.   3 and 6 
months  
following 
baseline  
ii. Number of 
times 
participants 
report 
receptive 
condomless 
anal or virginal 
intercourse at 
follow -upa,b  Count of number of times p articipants report 
receptive condomless anal or vaginal intercourse. 
“In the past 3 months, how many times have 
you had receptive vaginal or anal intercourse 
without you or your partner using a condom? ”.  3 and 6 
months 
following 
baseline  
a This outcome will be assigned a value of 0 if a respondent reported she has never had that type of sex or 
didn’t have that type of sex in the past 3 months. This will allow for the full sample to be included in 
analytic models.  
b If an outcome assessing the number of times  has a very skewed distribution, it may be collapsed into a 
dichotomous variable (0 times, 1 or more times), depending on the final distribution.  
 
 
Table 2. Behavioral outcomes used for secondary impact analyses research questions.  
Outcome name  Description of the outcome  and how it is 
operationalized.  Source of the 
measure (e.g. 
performance 
measure)  Timing of 
measure 
(e.g., 6 
months after 
program 
ends)  
i. Perceptions of 
social support Average of 6 indicator variables . Responses 
ranged from “1 None of the time” to “5 All of 
the time”. Average was calculated  if the  one-month , 
three -
months, 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  15  Outcome name  Description of the outcome  and how it is 
operationalized.  Source of the 
measure (e.g. 
performance 
measure)  Timing of 
measure 
(e.g., 6 
months after 
program 
ends)  
(based on mean 
score) at follow -up participant  answered  67% or more of the 
items . and six -
months 
post 
baseline  
ii. Self-reported 
uptake of PrEP 
since last 
measurement 
period  The outcome is  a response of “No, I have not 
used PrEP ” or that the person has taken 
continuous PrEP or PrEP 2 -1-1 or “don’t 
know/not sure.”   one-month , 
three -
months, 
and six -
months 
post 
baseline  
iii. Self-efficacy in 
decisions around 
safer sex behavior 
(i.e., the HIV & 
Safer Sex: Self 
Efficacy Scale)  Responses range from 1 “not certain at all” to 
8 “absolutely certain.” Self-efficacy scale was 
modified to ask about use of a “condom” 
rather than a barrier  on an 8 item scale . 
Calculated if the participant reported 75% or 
more of the items in the scale.   one-month , 
three -
months, 
and six -
months 
post 
baseline  
iv. Degree of comfort 
with external 
appearance as it 
relates to gender 
identity (i.e., the 
Transgender 
Congruence Scale, 
or TCS)  Average of 12-items on the TCS. Responses 
range from “ 1 strongly disagree” to “ 5 
strongly agree” on a 12 -item scale. Three 
questions are reverse coded: “ The way my 
body currently looks does not represent my 
gender identity ”; “I do not feel that my 
appearance reflects my gender identity ” and “ I 
am not proud of my gender identity .” Average 
scores were only calculated for participants 
who completed 75% or more of the scale 
items.    one-month , 
three -
months, 
and six -
months 
post 
baseline  
v. Using a condom at 
last receptive anal 
intercourse or 
vaginal intercourse  Participants were asked “In the past 3 months, 
how many times have you had receptive 
vaginal or anal intercourse without you or a 
partner using a condom?” . To include the f ull 
sample participants  who reported never having 
receptive sex were coded as “0”. Participants 
who reported using a condom the last time 
they had receptive sex were coded as “0”. 
Participants who reported not using a condom 
the last time they had receptive sex were coded 
as a “1”.  three - and 
six-months 
post 
baseline  
vi. Self-reported 
number of visits to Count of number of visits to  a health care 
provider . “In the past 3 months, how many  three - and 
six-months 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  16  Outcome name  Description of the outcome  and how it is 
operationalized.  Source of the 
measure (e.g. 
performance 
measure)  Timing of 
measure 
(e.g., 6 
months after 
program 
ends)  
a health care 
provider (of any 
type and by type)  times have you seen a health care provider for 
transition -related care? ”; “In the past 3 
months, how many times have you seen a 
psychiatrist/psychologist/social worker/MFT 
(marriage and family therapist) or other mental 
health care provider? ” “In the past 3 months, 
how many times have you seen a doctor or 
other health care provider for any other reason 
(excluding mental health or transition -related 
care)? ” post 
baseline  
vii. Self-reported 
number of contacts 
as/with a 
mentor/mentee for 
guidance or 
support  Combined count of total contacts as a mentor 
and/or as a mentee. “About how many times 
have you connected with those you mentored 
(your mentee or mentees) in the past month? ”. 
“About how many times have you connected 
with your mentor or mentors in the past 
month? ”  three - and 
six-months 
post 
baseline  
viii. What are 
participants' 
reactions to the full 
TWC app at 
immediate follow -
up TWC full app sub -group only per Clinical 
Trials.   One month 
post baseline  
ix.     
a If an outcome assessing the number of sexual partners h as a very skewed distribution, it may be collapsed 
into a dichotomous variable (0 partners, 1 or more partners) or trichotomous variable (0 partners, 1 partner, 
2 or more partners), depending on the final distribution.  
 
 
a. Analytic sample    
 
The analytic samples for both primary and secondary outcomes are dependent on the 
results of imputation of missing data. If we can successfully impute missing values  
(using multiple imputation ) for data missing due to attrition at follow -up and item non -
response, the samples will be comprised of all youth who completed a baseline survey. 
If this first approach is unsuccessful, we will only impute missing values due to item 
non-response, in which case  the sample will be comprised of youth who completed  
both the baseline and 3 -month post -program follow -up surveys.   
 
b. Data cleaning  
Missing data . We will use listwise  deletion  for all outcomes  and only included complete 
cases .  
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  17   
Inconsistencies . Because of forced skip patterns pre -programmed into the electronic data 
collection devices, we expect the sexual behavior outcome data to be relatively clean 
within time points. Within time  consistencies will be checked on questions asking about 
the type of sex had in the last 3 months and the number of times respondents had the 
type of sex across all partners. Across time  inconsistency will be checked on questions 
asking  whether respondents have ever had vaginal  or anal sex. The survey asks 
respondents to think about the different sexual partners they have had in the past 3 
months and to answer questions about the number of times they had each type of sex 
(vaginal, oral, and anal) with each partner and the number of times they used condoms 
or other barrier methods ; these data are person specific, which may help recall.    
 
Extreme values . For questions asking about the number of times a behavior occurred we 
will examine extreme values in the context of other responses and apply a consistent 
decision rule.  
 
c. Assessment of baseline equivalence  
In addition to the baseline measures of the outcomes, the following variables will be 
used to assess equivalence of the intervention and control groups at baseline: age ,  race, 
ethnicity, sexual orientation, and baseline measurements of the primary outcome 
variables. To assess equivalence between groups on each of these variables, we used 
regression analyses with the variable of interest as the dependent variable and the 
intervention indicator as the independent variable. The groups are considered not 
equivalent on a giv en variable if the p-value for the intervention indicator’s regression 
coefficient is <  0.05 using the Wald test.   
d. Condition crossover and contamination  
An intent to treat model will be used in the analysis so that participants  will be analyzed 
as randomized to treatment or control and followed up regardless of whether they 
interact with women in the other condition. The survey asks respondents if they shared 
the app with anyone else; we will report summary statistics on this indicator. We do not 
have names who they shared the app with so we cannot assess contamination.  
e. Analytic approach for primary research questions  
i. Model specification :  
SPSS will be used to conduct the descriptive and bivariate analyses; Stata will 
be used to conduct the multivariable analyses. Statistical significance levels will 
be set at p<.05 unless otherwise noted.  
Separate data analyses will be performed on each outcome variable named 
above and will progress through the following stages:  
First, descriptive analyses will be used to explore the data on all model variables 
at baseline and each follow up for distributional assumptions and 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  18  unanticipated patterns that might affect subsequent analyses.  For example, as 
noted in the outcomes table, some outcomes may need to be dichotomized if 
the distribution is too skewed towards 0.   
Second, bivariate analyses  will be used (1) to compare the baseline demographic  
and background  characteristics of the intervention and control groups  and (2) 
to test for relationships between the outcome variable and potential covariates 
(confounders) being measures . A potential covariate will be included in the 
model if : (1) the variable is associated with the condition indicator  at p<0.15; 
and (2) the variable is associated with the outcome at p<0.15 in individual 
bivariate analyses . Our plan for covariate screening is derived from those 
suggested in Altman (1991) and Hosmer and Lemeshow (1989). I n the latter, 
it is suggested that p<.25 as a screening criterion may be more appropriate than 
p<.05 because the latter often fails to identify variables that may be important 
to control. We have traditionally “split the difference” and selected a p<.15 to 
preserve degrees of freedom of the model. We routinely include  the baseline  
value of the  outcome regardless of screening criteria (Pocock et al, 2002). 
Below, we clarify which covariates will be included regardless of these 
screening criteria. (4) Bivaria te analyses will also be conducted to assess 
baseline equivalence for the final primary analytic samples.  
Third, multivariable analyses  will be conducted using  regression  analyses (linear 
or logistic ) to evaluate the research questions as definitively as possible.  
Each model will include  an indicator variable denoting  (1) intervention 
group, (2) the baseline outcome variable, (3) the number of days between the 
baseline and f ollow -up survey ( if there is a large range), ( 4) the standard 
demographics of age at baseline and race/ethnicity  at baseline , and ( 5) a set of 
a priori  demographic s and outcome -related covariates that screened positively 
as candidates for inclusion in the bivariate screening step.  
Covariates  
Covariates to be forced into all models on an a prior  basis:   
1. Baseline value of outcome  
2. Adjustments for imbalances across conditions in baseline equivalen ce 
on demographic variables  for those differences reach ing statistical 
significance .   
 
A priori  covariate s to be screened into the models:  
1. Sexual orientation  
2. Relationship status  
3. Race/ethnicity  
4. Age 
5. Work status  
6. Rural location  
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  
Version: 2.0  Last updated: 9.26.22 
 
TWC Study Protocol with Impact Analysis Plan  19  NOTE: if there is high correlation  (r>.5) between some of these indicators we 
will not include them all . 
 
 
ii. Sample attrition  
Attrition analyses will be conducted to examine the rate of attrition by 
condition, and what characteristics might be related to attrition. Results from 
the attrition analyses will help evaluate the need to temper interpretations of 
outcome results .  
iii. Adjustments for multiple comparisons  (if applicable )  
Adjustments for multiple comparisons will be conducted for primary 
outcomes  using the Benjamini -Hochberg correction  as outlined in the WWC 
Procedures Handbook v4.1 .  
f. Analytic approach for secondary research questions  
Analyses for secondary research questions will proceed using the same steps as 
described for the primary research question s.  
5) Additional planned analyses   
Additional exploratory  analyses of the impact evaluation data may include the following.  
a. Subg roup analyses based on participants in each condition who downloaded their 
respective apps  will be completed for the primary outcome variables .   
b. Subgroup analyses by various subsets of the sample, such as those defined by 
race/ethnicity variables , age group, or HIV and PrEP status (e.g., PrEP uptake on 
those who were HIV negative and not using PrEP at baseline)  may be performed 
similarly to those described for the main analyses.  
 