IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 1 of 35 
 
  
Digital Detection of Dementia (D3) Studies  
 
Malaz Boustani, MD, MPH  
410 West 10th Street, Suite 1140, Indianapolis, IN 46202  
 
Zina Ben- Miled, PhD  
723 W Michigan St, SL 160, Indianapolis, IN 46202  
 
James Galvin, MD  
777 Glades Rd, BC -71 Room 209, Boca Raton, FL 33431  
 
   
Nicole Fowler, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine  
General Internal Medicine and Geriatrics  
Indiana University  
 
Paul Dexter, MD, Associate Professor of Clinical Medicine  
General Internal Medicine and Geriatrics  
Indiana University  
 
Randall Grout, MD, Assistant Professor of Pediatrics  
Pediatrics  
Indiana University  
 
Patrick Monahan, PhD, Professor of Biostatistics  
Biostatistics  
Indiana University  
 
Michael Kleiman, PhD, Data Scientist  
School of Medicine  
University of Miami 
    
Support Provided by:  
National Institutes of Health  
R01AG069765- 04 
  
 
  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 2 of 35 
 
 Table of Contents  
 
Abbreviations ……………………………………………………………. 3  
Specific Aims …………………………… ………… ……………………. 4  
A. Significance ……………………… ……….………… ……………… 6  
B. Innovation ……………………………… ………….……… ………… 8  
C. Preliminary Work ……………… …………………………. …...…… 9  
D. Research Approach …………………………… ………... ............ . 14 
E. Protection of Human Subjects … ……….. …………… ……… … 22  
F. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan ………… ……….. ………… … 25  
References ………………………………………… ………… …….. ….. 31  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 3 of 35 
 
 Abbreviations  
 
ADRD  Alzheimer’s Disease and related dementias  
AE Adverse Event  
AUC  Area Under the Curve  
AWV  Annual Wellness Visit  
CDR  Clinical Dementia Rating  
CDS  Computerized decision support  
CV Coefficient of variation  
DHHS  Department of Health and Human Services  
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  
DRE  Disease -Related Event  
Dx Diagnosis  
EHR  Electronic health record  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GLP Good Laboratory Practices  
GMP  Good Manufacturing Practices  
GPI Generic Product Identifier  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
ICC Intraclass correlation coefficients  
IF Inflation factor  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
ISM Independent Safety Monitor  
ISO International Organization for Standardization  
IUPUI  Indiana University -Purdue University -Indianapolis  
MCI Mild Cognitive Impairment  
ML Machine learning  
NCI No Cognitive Impairment  
NCT National Clinical Trial  
NIA National Institute on Aging  
NIH  National Institutes of Health  
NPI Neuropsychiatric Inventory  
Nx Medical  notes  
OHRP  Office for Human Research Protections  
PDM  Passive Digital Marker  
PI Principal Investigator  
PRO  Patient -reported outcome  
QA Quality Assurance  
QC Quality Control  
QDRS  Quick Dementia Rating Scale  
Rx Prescriptions  
SAE Serious Adverse Event  
SCI Subjective Cognitive Impairment  
SOP  Standard Operating Procedure  
TSH Thyroid -stimulating hormone  
UDS  Uniform Data Set  
UHealth  University of Miami  
UP Unanticipated Problem  
US United States  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 4 of 35 
 
 SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD) negatively impact millions of 
Americans with an annual societal cost of more than $200 million.1 Currently, half of Americans 
living with ADRD never receive a diagnosis.2-7 For those who do, the diagnosis often occurs two 
to five years after the onset of symptoms.6-9 As stated by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) 
(RFA -AG-20-051) “ The inability to diagnose and treat cognitive impairment results in prolonged 
and expensive medical care” and “ early detection could help persons with dementia and their 
care partners plan for the future ”. Furthermore, if the development of disease modifying 
therapeutics for ADRD is successful, this may require the use of such therapeutics at a v ery 
early stage of ADRD.1 However, the current approaches of using cognitive tests or biomarkers 
for early detection of ADRD are not scalable due to their low acceptance, their invasive nature, their cost, or their lack of accessibility in rural or underserved areas. Thus, the NIA called out for 
the development of low cost, effective, and scalable approaches for early detection of ADRD 
(RFA -AG-20-051).    
 Over the past five years, two interdisciplinary scientific teams led by Drs. Boustani, Ben -
Miled, and Galvin (MPI on this proposal) have developed and tested scalable approaches for 
the early detection of ADRD. At Indiana University, Drs. Boustani and Ben -Miled leveraged the 
widely available electronic health record (EHR) data and advances in Machine Learning algorithms to develop a Passive Digital Marker (PDM)  for early detection of ADRD with 80% 
accuracy for one -year and three- year prediction horizons.
10 At the same time, Dr. Galvin’s team 
developed and tested the Quick Dementia Rating Scale ( QDRS) as a practical 2 -3 minute 
patient -reported outcome (PRO) tool, for both early detection and staging of ADRD with 85% 
accuracy for ADRD diagnosis.11 If implemented successfully within the current Medicare funded 
Annual -Wellness Visit (AWV),2 an integrated approach based on the above two ADRD detection 
approaches (the PDM and the QDRS) may overcome the current barriers to early ADRD detection in a cost - and time- efficient manner that can be generalized across any primary care 
practice.  
 
In response to  the RFA -AG-20-051 call for the “validation, and translation of screening 
and assessment tools for measuring cognitive decline,” our interdisciplinary scientific team is proposing to execute a clinical validation study, one pragmatic trial and one additional replicated pragmatic trial am ong patients from diverse rural, suburban and urban primary care practices in 
two independent sites located in central Indiana and south Florida. As required by the RFA, the first study will be a single -arm cli nical validation (NIH Stage III) study of our developed early 
ADRD detection approaches; Passive Digital Marker (PDM) and the Patient Reported Outcome (PRO) tool, the Quick Dementia Rating System (QDRS) for discriminating gold standard ADRD diagnoses for a  sample of 400 older primary care patients served in the two states. The other 
studies will be two pragmatic cluster -randomized controlled comparative effectiveness (NIH 
Stage IV) trials to incorporate the PDM and the QDRS within the Medicare paid Annual 
Wellness Visit (AWV) for a cohort of patients from practices across the two independent sites, 
with practices randomized in each pragmatic trial to one of the 3 arms (the AWV alone, the AWV with PDM, and the AWV with both the PDM and the QDRS).  
 
These studies will support the following aims:   
 Primary Aim 1 : Evaluate the predictive performance of the PDM, the QDRS, and the combined 
(PDM + QDRS) approach in the early detection of ADRD, compared to the gold standard diagnoses.  
 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 5 of 35 
 
 Primary Hypothesis 1: The Area Under the Curve (AUC) for the combined approach (PDM + 
QRDS) will be 0.85 or greater and the AUC for the PDM or the QDRS will be 0.75 or greater.  
 Secondary Hypothesis 2: The combined approach (PDM + QDRS) will have statistically better 
AUC than each individual approach alone.     
 
Primary Aim 2 : Evaluate the practical utility and effect of the PDM, the QDRS, and the 
combined approach (PDM + QDRS) in improving the annual rate of new documented ADRD 
diagnosis in primary care practices.  
 Primary Hypothesis 1: In comparison to the AWV alone, the combined approach (PDM + 
QDRS) within the AWV will increase the incidence rate of ADRD over the subsequent 12 
months from 6% to 13%.  
 
Secondary Hypothesis 2: In comparison to the AWV alone, the combined approach (PDM + 
QDRS) within the AWV will have higher acceptance rates for recommended ADRD diagnostic 
work -up following a positive screen from 44% to 66%.  
 
  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 6 of 35 
 
 A. SIGNIFICANCE:  Our proposal is designed to help clarify the following important 
questions.  
 A.1. What is the value of early detection of Alzheimer Disease and Related Dementias 
(ADRD)? Primary care clinicians provide the vast majority of care to older adults living with 
ADRD.
1-5 However, more than 50% of these older adults never receive a formal diagnosis.4-9, 12 
And for those patients who are diagnosed with ADRD, the diagnosis often occurs 2 -5 years after 
symptom onset when the syndromes reach mild to moderate stage.4-9 The inability to diagnose 
ADRD and manage its cognitive, functional, and psyc hological disabilities results in significant 
burden for patients, families, and the entire society.1, 14 Early detection of ADRD could reduce 
this burden.13,15- 17 Furthermore, early detection will become increasingly important for ensuring 
that people receive early ADRD disease modification treatment when available.1 Thus, the 
National Academy of Sciences, National Plan to Address Alzheimer’s Disease, and Affordable 
Care Act all describe earlier ADRD detection as a core aim for improving the quality of care for 
older adults.1,2,20  
 
A.2. Can the Annual Wellness visit (AWV) overcome barriers for early detection of 
ADRD?  Beginning in 2011, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) started 
paying providers (with no patient requirement for copayment) for the AWV.2,18 Although the AWV 
does not mandate formal ADRD screening, the beneficiary’s cognitive function is assessed through direct observation, potentially supplemented with information provided by family 
members. In 2018, we published the results of a study that ev aluated the ability of the current 
format of the AWV to improve ADRD detection.
19 Using de- identified administrative claims data 
for a nationally representative sample of Medicare beneficiaries, we found no impact for the 
AWV in its current format on the diagnostic rate, testing, or care management for ADRD.19 
Enhancing the AWV with integrated scalable formal screening will likely facilitate earlier 
identification of ADRD.1,2 
 
A.3. Can we leverage Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems and Machine Learning 
(ML) algorithms  for the development of a low -cost approach for early detection of ADRD 
and embed such an approach within the AWV?  Growth in data captured by various EHR 
systems, increased access to inexpensive computational power and advancements in ML 
algorithms offer opportunities to answer the NIA call and develop targeted and scalable 
approaches for the early detection of ADRD. These approaches may allow feasible and scalable 
segmentation of patient populations including a high- risk group that could be targeted for further 
invasive, expensive, and time consuming cognitive or biological screening tests. However, one 
of the most difficult aspects of working with EHR data is i ts heterogeneous nature, with many 
different data types (e.g., continuous versus categorical, structured versus unstructured) and the 
common state of missing values for any number of variables per patient, as not all tests are 
administered to each patient or recorded correctly if they are. While such heterogeneity makes it 
difficult to apply various ML algorithms,45 the ubiquity of EHR data makes it vital that we figure 
out how to leverage this resource for purposes of identifying early ADRD.  
Relatively few research studies have explored the use of both the EHR data and ML 
algorithms to detect ADRD.21-24 Two studies developed electronic search algorithms for 
identifying ADRD from EHR notes.22, 23 Another study examined the impact of combining natural 
language processing with the presence of ADRD -related diagnosis codes and ADRD 
medications.21 A fourth study used Bayesian network to develop an algorithm that reached 80% 
accuracy related to the diagnosis of ADRD based on five cognitive exams that are not available 
at scale in most EHR systems used in primary care practices.24 While the accuracy from using 
Bayesian networks is good, a significant amount of neuropsychological data, computation, 
feature engineering and expert -guided bootstrapping is required in order to use this type of ML 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 7 of 35 
 
 algorithm.  The use of ML algorithms that require capturing detailed neuropsychological or 
invasive biological data from large numbers of older adults in primary care practice is simply not 
scalable nor sustainable. While the few studies that used ML algor ithms and existing data in the 
EHR demonstrate utility in identifying patients diagnosed with more advanced ADRD, they do 
not support the early screening of patients at risk for developing ADRD. Thus, balancing the 
capability of the most accurate ML algori thms, the available data within the current EHR 
systems and the focus on ADRD screening is the essential core of developing and 
implementing a low -cost scalable early detection approach for ADRD in primary care practices. 
At Indiana University, Drs. Boustani and Ben- Miled leveraged the EHR data and the advantages 
of ML algorithms to develop a Passive Digital Marker (PDM)  for early detection of ADRD with 
80% accuracy for one -year and three- year prediction horizons.10 
 
A.4. Do patient reported outcomes (PRO) improve early detection of ADRD? Previous 
approaches to early ADRD detection have included the use of cognitive screening tests and the use of invasive or expensive biological markers.
2,3,5, 13, 25,26 However, up to 38% of patients 
refuse cognitive screening tests,17, 27- 32 these tests fail to detect ADRD in individuals with high 
cognitive capacity, and their cultural, language and educational biases lower their accuracy in 
underrepresented groups.26 Using biomarkers for early detection of ADRD are not scalable due 
to their invasive nature (lumbar puncture); their cost (MRI, PET); and their accessibility (rural or 
underserved areas). Furthermore, ADRD can be insidious in its onset with symptoms fluctuating 
over time.3 Thus, Patient Reported Outcome (PRO) approaches can overcome the above 
barriers for early detection of ADRD in primary care practices. PROs can monitor ongoing symptoms of ADRD as well as how these symptoms affect patient functioning. They can create 
efficient and cost -effective clinical encounters with providers  while also empowering patients 
and family caregivers to engage in early detection of ADRD.
26, 33, 34 Dr. Galvin’s (a Co -PI on this 
proposal) team developed and tested the Quick Dementia Rating Scale ( QDRS) as a PRO tool 
for both early detection and staging of ADRD with 85% accuracy for ADRD diagnosis.11 The 
QDRS is a 10 -item, multiple choice questionnaire that takes 2 -3 minutes to complete and is 
highly correlated with Gold Standard measurements including the Clinical Dementia Rating 
scale, neuropsychological testing, and ADRD biomarkers (MRI, CSF, PET).11,55 Completion of 
the QDRS can offer several advantages above and beyond what is captured through EHR review including (a) capture of non -memory symptoms (e.g., orientation, problem -solving, daily 
functioning) that are both disturbing to patients and families and are more likely to be accepted 
as a change that requires medical attention; (b) provide information about the patient’s real -
world functioning; (c) provide information at visits for new patients where prior EHR data may 
not be available; (d) capture of progression over time; and (e) allow for staging of ADRD in a 
brief, valid, and time-  and cost -effective manner.
 11,26, 55 
 
  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 8 of 35 
 
 B. INNOVATION:  
The proposal is innovative for the following reasons.  
 
B.1. The proposal combines the multifunctionality of a PDM relying strictly on near -universal 
routinely -collected EHR data with the QDRS, a tool that depends on very feasible, scalable and 
low-cost patient reported data. Such a combined approach benefits from directly identifying 
patterns of health from the EHR indicative of early ADRD, while also supplementing known 
limitations of EHR data through direct capture of PROs from patients (i.e., in the absence of 
efforts by licensed professionals). These complementary combined approaches replicate ‘real -
world’ approaches common to primary care (review of records plus patient interview). Thus, the proposal directly addresses the objective of the NIA call for “the development of low cost, 
effective, and scalable approaches for early detection of ADRD” (RFA -AG-20-051).  
 
B.2. The PDM leverages two types of EHR -data; the structured EHR data including 
demographic information, diagnoses, and prescriptions; and the unstructured data from free text 
documents such as patients’ visit notes, progress notes, and medication notes. The P DM 
applies a novel differential clustering technique to the unstructured notes in order to automatically derive a lexicon to translate the unstructured data into a feature vector following 
the bag -of-word approach. The PDM then used features from the s tructured and unstructured 
EHR routine care data to train a Random Forest ML algorithm.
10 The Random Forest is an 
ensemble learning technique that can handle high dimensional and noisy feature spaces.35 This 
characteristic is especially important when using EHR data. In fact, most previous predictive 
ADRD models have been derived by using structured data from targeted medical tests such as 
MRI and cognitive tests.36-44 These tests are costly (in term of money or time) to administer and 
as a result, most of the cohorts used to develop the associated ML algorithms were limited in number.
 36-44 By selecting the appropriate ML algorithm and developing novel and scalable 
differential clustering techniques, the PDM was able to leverage the vast amount of EHR data to develop an algorithm with a prediction horizon of 1 to 3 years.
10 The PDM compared favorably 
to the results of a recent study of the Health and Retirement Study where regression- based 
diagnostic algorithms combined with patient reported data produced ar eas under the curve 
(AUC) of 0.84 to 0.85 in validation samples.44 Thus, the performance of the proposed PDM is 
commendable, especially given that it represents a screening algorithm with a 1 to 3 years 
prediction horizon, as opposed to a diagnostic one.  
 
B.3. The application proposes to conduct three complementary studies in very diverse rural, 
suburban, and urban primary care practices with high percentages of African Americans (Indiana sites) and Hispanic individuals (South Florida) with low socioeconomic st atus. Thus, 
the PDM and the QDRS will be deployed in two sites in order to validate their generalizability for 
diverse and underserved patient populations.  
 
  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 9 of 35 
 
 C. PRELIMINARY WORK 
 
C.1. Our interdisciplinary scientific team (see key personnel): Under the leadership of Drs. 
Boustani, Galvin, and Ben- Miled, we have assembled an impressive cadre of senior and junior 
scientists with expertise in ADRD screening and diagnosis (Drs. Boustani, Galvin, and Fowler); Machine Learning (Dr. Ben- Miled and Kleiman); Psychometrics (Drs. Monahan, Boustani, and 
Galvin); Medical informatics (Drs. Dexter, Boustani, and Grout); and Implementation Science 
(Boustani, Fowler, and Grout). The members of this team have a track record of collaborating in 
conducting research activities similar to the proposed activities within this application including 
creation and validation of PROs and utilization of ML algorithms to improve ADRD detection 
through the EHR.
10, 17,19, 27- 29, 31, 33 In the following section, we summarize the results of 
preliminary and relevant studies conducted by members of this team which informed the design 
of our proposed studies. Such preliminary studies are selected from a large repository of 
research conducted by this team (see scientific contributions within the key personnel).    
 
C.2. The limited impact of the current AWV on early detection of ADRD : We conducted a 
retrospective matched cohort study to examine the impact of the AWV on the detection of ADRD.
19 The cohort included 5% sample of Medicare beneficiaries continuously enrolled for 12 
months before and after an index ambulatory visit with no evidence of ADRD before the index 
date. The matching process resulted in 66,399 matched pairs of beneficiaries with and without 
an AWV. Outcomes included 12 months post -index visit claims -based measurements of new 
ADRD diagnoses, medications for ADRD, and cognitive care -related diagnostic work up such as 
neuropsychological testing, brain imaging, blood tests for thyroid- stimulating hormone ( TSH), 
serum B12, folate, or syphilis. There were no clinically relevant differences between the AWV 
and control groups in the rates of incident ADRD diagnoses (6.16% versus 6.86%, p<0.001) 
and the initiation of ADRD medications (1.00% versus 1.08%, p=0.148).  While the AWV was 
correlated with an increase in some measures of cognitive care (e.g., TSH, B12, and folate testing), we did not find that the current AWV increased recognition of undetected ADRD. Enhancing the AWV with data from the PDM, the QDRS, or both may overcome current AWV 
shortcomings.  
 C.3. We can enroll a large number of older adults attending diverse rural, suburban, and 
urban primary care practices : We conducted a single- blinded, 2- arm, randomized controlled 
trial in urban, suburban, and rural primary care practices.
17 We approached approximately 7,000 
eligible older adults to enroll and randomize 4,005 subjects (enrollment rate of ~60%) to ADRD screening (n=2,008) or control (n=1,997). Patients were screened using the Memory Impairment 
Screen
46,47 or the Mini -Cog48 and referred for a voluntary follow -up diagnostic assessment if they 
screened positive on either or both screening tests. Primary outcomes were health- related 
quality of life measured with the Health Utilities Index49 at 12 months, depressive symptoms 
measured with the Patient Health Questionnaire-950, and anxiety symptoms measured with the 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7- item scale51 at 1 month. The mean age was 74.2 years 
(standard deviation 6.9); 2,257 (66%) were female and 2,301 (33%) were minority population. 
The trial did not detect any harm of dementia screening.  
The current proposal directly leverages lessons learned from this prior study. Our 
previous trial did not adequately leverage the trusted relationship between the patient and her primary care team. Screening results were not integrated within the primary care clinic flow. The 
disclosure of the results was conducted by the research team rather than the primary care team, 
and the research team was responsible to coordinate the referral for the diagnostic assessment 
not the primary care physician. Indeed, the current proposed PDM and QDRS will be fully 
integrated within the AWV and the clinical flow of the primary care practices.   
 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 10 of 35 
 
 C.4. Using ML algorithm and routine EHR data to develop a Passive Digital Marker (PDM) 
for early detection of ADRD: The current approaches of using cognitive tests and biomarkers 
for early detection of ADRD are not scalable due to the high patient refusal rates (cognitive and 
biomarker tests), their invasive nature (lumbar puncture); their cost (MRI, PET); and their lac k of 
accessibility in rural or underserved areas.13, 17, 25 -32  In order to address this gap, we developed 
a ML algorithm  that can predict  ADRD  one year and three y ears prior to its onset  by using 
routine care EHR data.10 The  algorithm was trained  using  structured and unstruct ured data from 
three EHR datasets: diagnosis (Dx),  prescriptions (Rx),  and medical  notes (Nx ). Individual 
algorithms derived from each of the three datasets were developed and compared to a 
combined one that included all three datasets.  
 
C.4.a. Data Preprocessing:  The ML algorithms were trained and tested by using EHR data of 
incident ADRD cases and non- ADRD controls. 
Cases of prevalent Mild Cognitive Impairment 
(MCI) or ADRD were excluded in order to avoid 
any potential for positive predictive bias. The 
diagnosis date (index date) for each case was established and 3 to 4 matching controls were 
identified. The matching criteria were based on birth year, gender, race and index date (within 6 
months). Only patients who had at least one encounter per year were retained for a total of 2,159 
cases and 11,558 controls from 15 and 25 different institutions in Indiana, respectively. With respect to race and gender, the distribution of the cases and controls (Table 1) was similar, thus limiting any gender or race bias among the two classes. However, within a class, there are more 
females and more patients of white race than the other gender and races.  
 
C.4.b. Feature Engineering: The features (variables) of the algorithm include demographic 
features (i.e., age, gender, race) and medical features extracted from the prescription (Rx), 
diagnosis (Dx) and medical notes (Nx) categories of the health record. Feature engineering 
followed a different approach for each dataset. Each Rx feature corresponds to a drug g roup 
according to the Generic Product Identifier (GPI) classifier for a total of 100 features, and the 
value of the feature is the number of times a medication from the given drug group was prescribed 
to the patient within the algorithm’s period. Medical disorders identified by experts (Table 2) 
defined the 19 features of the Dx model 
where the feature values are the count of the diseases in each disease group 
during the algorithm’s period. The Nx 
features are obtained from medical 
notes. These notes are unstructured 
and include different administrative and medical report types. After the 
exclusion of administrative reports, the 
remaining 340 medical report types 
were used to construct the Nx dataset. A new clustering algorithm that leverages the differential 
frequency between cases and controls was developed. This process resulted into 110 bag- of-
words clusters where each cluster corresponds to a feature. The processing of the raw data took 
into consideration missing values and erroneous data especially in the case of the NX, where 
errors are more common due to human- entry of data. As such, the algorithm does not rely on 
extensive pre- processing of the raw data.  
 Table  1: Demographics  of the dementia cases  and healthy controls.  
 African  American  White  Other  
 Male  Female  Male  Female  Male  Female  
Cases  10%  21% 23%  41% 2% 4% 
Controls  11% 19% 24%  42%  1% 3% 
 
Table  2: List of dementia  related  disorders  or disease  groups  in Dx.  
Angina  
Anxiety  
Abnormal  Weight Loss 
Bipolar  Disorder  
Depression  
Insomnia  
Hypercholesterolemia  
Hypertensive  Disorders  
Schizophrenia  
Sleep Apnea  Chronic  Ischem ic Heart Disease  
Transien t  Ischemic  Attack 
Transien t Ischemic  Attack  Related Syndromes  
Other   Acute  Ischemic   Heart    Disease  
Stroke/Cerebral  Infarction  
Acute/ Subsequen t MI 
Hemorrhagic  Cerebrovascular  accident  
other Cardiovascular  diseases  
Claudication/A therosclerosis  
 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 11 of 35 
 
 C.4.c. Development and Evaluation: Random Forest was used to develop two algorithms (or 
models) for each dataset: The 1Yr model is trained and tested by using the available health 
records during the period (index date - 10 years) to (index date - 1 year). Similarly, the 3Yr 
model is trained and tested by using the patient records during the period (index date - 10 
years) to (index date - 3 years).  The mean and standard deviation of the accuracy, sensitivity, 
and specificity across the 5 groups in a 5 -fold cross validation of the models is  shown in Table 
3. The last row of this table corresponds to a combined model that was developed by using all three data sets (i.e., Nx, Rx, Dx).  The 1Yr models have higher accuracy, sensitivity and 
specificity than the corresponding 3Yr models. 
This is expected since the former models have 
access to more recent records. Among the three individual models, the Nx model has the highest 
accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. Moreover, 
the accuracy of the  combined model (RDNx) is 
higher than any of the individual models. This is an indication that the Nx features have a higher 
ADRD prediction entropy compared to the Rx 
and Dx datasets; nonetheless, the Rx and Dx features make a significant contribution to the 
combined model.  
 The choice of Random Forest for the ML 
technique was highly dependent on the characteristics of the data source. Compared to other 
techniques, Random Forest can accommodate a large number of features and these features can be either categorical or numerical. The resulting model is interpretable  offering the ability to 
use the decision path within the model to support the specific outcome for each individual patient. This is essential for adoption by clinicians and patients.   
Other ML techniques were considered. Bayesian Network models are highly 
interpretable. However, they require significant engineering effort and are computationally demanding especially when the number of features is large, making these models impractical 
for use with EHR data.
24, 35, 45 Our own preliminary study compared Random Forest to Support 
Vector Machine and Artificial Neural Network. Support Vector Machine had a comparable accuracy, but it is not as interpretable as Random Forest.
35, 45 Artificial Ne ural Network had a 
lower accuracy primarily because the number of available patient records was not sufficient to 
adequately train a high dimensional deep neural network. Furthermore, the Artificial Neural 
Network model is not interpretable.24,35, 45 We also developed a model using linear regression for 
the prediction of ADRD.52 The linear regression model was limited by the number of predictors it 
can accommodate compared to the Random Forest (i.e. 232 predictors) and it had a lower 
sensitivity.10,52  
 
C.5. The development and validation of the Quick Dementia Rating Scale (QDRS) as a 
patient reported outcome (PRO) tool for ADRD screening and Staging.  Early ADRD 
detection in a healthcare delivery system including primary care is challenging because many rating scales take significant time and require specialized training.
3,5,13,25,26 To address this, we developed 
several culturally - and linguistically -sensitive patient reported outcome (PRO) tools as scalable 
and sustainable approaches for the early detection and staging of ADRD.11, 33, 53- 55 The first of 
these scales was the AD8 as a brief screen to detect ADRD in the community that now has global 
applications.53,53  Although sensitive to cognitive impairment, the AD8 lacked properties for staging 
and did not permit differential diagnosis.53,54 As the AD8 was designed as a cross -sectional 
screening instrument, for longitudinal study, we developed and validated the Quick Dementia Rating 
Scale (QDRS).11,55 The QDRS is a 10- item, multiple choice questionnaire that takes 2- 3 minutes 
to complete.  It offers a range of scores from 0 -30; scores 0- 1.5 signify normal cognition, scores Table  3: Accuracy,  sensitivity  and specificity  for the 1Yr and 
3Yr dementia  prediction  models  trained  by using  different  
data  sets.  For each  metric,  the entry  in the table  corresponds  
to the mean  value  of all groups  in a 5- fold cross  validation  
and the number  in parenthesis  is the standard  deviation  
across  the groups.  
 Model  Accuracy (%)  Sensitivit y (%) Specificity  (%) 
Rx 1Y r 70.39 (0.88)  68.94  (2.35)  70.46  (0.98)  
3Y r 65.63 (1.24)  65.00  (3.91)  65.65 (1.43)  
Dx 1Y r 65.21 (0.74)  66.06  (2.44)  65.18  (0.80)  
3Y r 62.91 (1.71)  63.80  (4.26)  62.87 (1.95)  
Nx 1Y r 74.07  (0.98)  72.01 (1.72)  74.16 (1.01)  
3Y r 70.13 (2.65)  67.31 (3.28)  70.25  (2.85)  
RDNx  1Y r 77.43 (1.89)  76.01 (1.88)  77.49 (2.02)  
3Y r 73.50  (2.03)  70.93 (2.18)  73.61 (2.17)  
 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 12 of 35 
 
 2-5.5 signify mild cognitive impairment, scores 6- 12.5 signify mild ADRD, scores 13- 20 signify 
moderate ADRD, and scores 20.5- 30 signify severe ADRD. It provides a brief, valid, and reliable 
assessment regarding the presence and severity of a cognitive problem and demonstrates 
differential scoring across different ADRD etiologies (Table 4).11,55  
The QDRS was tested and validated against Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), cognitive 
testing, and Gold Standard measures of cognition, function, and behavior. QDRS scores increased 
with higher CDR staging and poorer neuropsychological performance (p's <.001). The QDRS 
demonstrated excellent known- groups validity (p's<.001); construct validity against Gold Standard 
(p’s<0.004); and reliability (Cronbach α: 0.86- 0.93). The QDRS is now being used by other 
investigators in prevention studies55 and in clinical tr ials (i.e., Biogen) for subject screening with 
translations being validated in Spanish, Korean, Chinese, and Portuguese.  
 
Although initially tested as an informant rating, w e examined the utility of the QDRS as a 
PRO tool. We compared informant QDRS, patient QDRS, and Gold Standard CDR and CDR -
Sum of Box in 254 consecutive dyads presenting to neurology clinics. The QDRS ratings were 
not considered in the Gold Standard evaluat ion and were completed prior to the office visit by 
the informant and patients. Cronbach alpha was examined as a measure of internal consistency. The internal consistency of the two versions of the QDRS were: Infor mant QDRS: 
0.939; Patient QDRS: 0.922, supporting that both versions have excellent psychometric 
properties. Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) were used to assess interscale reliability 
comparing CDR domains, Sum of Box, and global scores with the QDRS correcting for chance 
agreement. The ICC examines the proportion of responses in agreement in relation to the agreement expected by chance. An ICC between 0.55 and 0.75 is considered good agreement, 
whereas an ICC greater than 0.76 is considered excel lent. 
 Table 4: Properties of QDRS by Cognitive Status and Dementia Etiology (adapted from 
Galvin JE, Alz Dem; DADM 2015) 
  Controls  MCI AD LBD VCID  FTD p-
value  
Age, y  70.1 
(7.6) 76.2 
(8.9) 79.8 
(7.5) 78.4 
(7.7) 77.2 
(6.2) 72.7 
(8.2) .001 
Education, y  16.7 
(2.4) 15.9 
(3.0) 15.2 
(2.9) 14.5 
(3.6) 14.8 
(3.4) 16.8 
(3.3) .28 
Charlson Comorbidity 
Index  1.7 (1.9)  1.9 (1.3)  2.3 
(1.3) 2.4 (1.5)  2.6 (1.1)  2.0 (1.3)  .13 
Clinical Dementia Rating 
(CDR)  0.2 (0.3)  1.9 (1.6)  1.0 
(0.6) 1.5 (0.9)  1.7 (0.9)  0.8 (0.8)  <.001  
CDR -Sum of Boxes  0.03 
(0.1) 0.4 (0.3)  5.7 
(3.3) 8.8 (5.2)  9.3 (6.3) 5.2 (4.7)  <.001  
Mini Mental State Exam  28.7 
(1.6) 26.1 
(3.3) 19.6 
(5.5) 18.2 
(7.7) 19.7 
(6.0) 23.6 
(1.4) .005 
Functional Activities 
Questionnaire  0.0 (0.0)  3.6 (4.2)  10.5 
(8.5) 17.1 
(10.1)  16.6 
(13.9)  8.1 (9.9)  .001 
QDRS Total  0.3 (0.5)  3.5 (2.7) 7.2 
(5.1) 11.7 
(6.9) 11.6 
(7.8) 7.4 (6.3)  <.001  
QDRS Cognitive 
Subscale  0.2 (0.3)  1.5 (0.9)  3.1 
(1.9) 4.5. 
(2.6) 2.8 (2.3)  2.7 (2.4)  .005 
QDRS Behavior 
Subscale  0.2 (0.3)  2.0 (2.0)  4.2 
(3.5) 7.5 (4.9)  8.8 (5.9)  5.4 (4.8)  <.001  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 13 of 35 
 
      The informant and 
patient versions of the 
QDRS have high 
degrees of agreement, 
and both versions show 
good to excellent agreement with Gold 
Standard CDR (Table 
5).  
     We then looked at 
concurrent (criterion 
validity) comparing the 
mean performance on 
each Gold Standard 
measure of cognition 
(e.g., CDR, CDR- Sum 
of Box, neuropsychological 
testing), function (i.e., 
FAQ), behavior (e.g., 
NPI, Hospital Anxiety 
and Depression Scale), and caregiver characteristics (e.g., burden, depression) with the QDRS. 
Both informant and patient versions of the QDRS demonstrated strong relationships with clinical, cognitive and psychological variables. Strength of association w as comparable to that 
seen for CDR and CDR- Sum of Box. Further, we compared the QDRS to ADRD biomarkers 
(Galvin et al, manuscript under review 2020). Total QDRS scores as well as individual domain 
scores (e.g., memory, orientation, decision making, daily functioning) were significantly 
correlated with CSF Ab42, Ab42/tau ratios, PET PiB index, MRI total gray matter and 
hippocampal volumes (all p<.01 correcting for multiple comparisons). The addition of the QDRS 
as a PRO to the PDM is an enhanced complementary approach  to capturing real -world patient 
functioning, cognition, mood and behavior not routinely captured in the EHR, and provides 
important information regarding patients at the initial visit where EHR data may not be available.  
 
  Table 5: Construct reliability between QDRS versions and CDR  
 Inf QDRS – Pt 
QDRS  Inf QDRS – 
CDR  Pt QDRS - 
CDR  
Memory  .756 .754 .499 
Orientation  .783 .787 .699 
Decision making  .750 .728 .742 
Activities outside 
home  .803 .862 .780 
Activities inside 
home  .822 .861 .759 
Personal hygiene  .918 .887 .855 
Behavior  .716 ----- ---- 
Language  .839 ---- ---- 
Mood  .729 ---- ---- 
Attention  .749 ---- ---- 
Total QDRS  .887 ---- ---- 
QDRS -derived 
CDR -SB .889 .909 .831 
QDRS -derived 
CDR  .770 .826 .740 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 14 of 35 
 
 D. RESEARCH APPROACH 
 
D.1. General Overview and Design (see figure): Our research design is predicated on the 
notion that patient screening would appropriately identify a more targeted group for referral for 
appropriate diagnostic services. We will conduct three complementary studies to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the PDM , the QDRS or the combined (PDM + QDRS) approaches for early 
detection of ADRD. These approaches will be embedded within the EHR systems of diverse 
rural, suburban, and urban primary care practices in central Indiana and south Florida. The first 
study will be a clinical validation study (stage III) of the three approaches; the PDM, the QDRS, 
and the combination of both (the PDM + QDRS). The approaches will be clinically validated in 
real-world and diverse clini cal settings in comparison to the gold standard of ADRD diagnosis 
used in the NIA -funded ADRD Research Centers across the nation. The gold- standard 
evaluations will allow us to determine the accuracy of the screening approaches and compare their performanc es. The other studies will be two independent pragmatic cluster -randomized 
controlled comparative effectiveness trials (phase IV) of the approaches embedded within the 
AWV (PDM within AWV, PDM + QDRS within the AWV) in comparison to the current AWV only 
process (AWV without PDM or QDRS). The two trials will be conducted in two separate 
healthcare systems; the first trial will be conducted at Eskenazi Health and within 12 months a 
second replicated trial will be conducted at University of Miami Health. Both trials will have 
identical methodology and would compare the performance of the three approaches in 
increasing the incidence rate of new ADRD subsequently documented in the EHR by the 
primary care practices.  
 
D.2. Clinical Setting for both the Clinical Validation Study and the Pragmatic Cluster -
Randomized Controlled Comparative Effectiveness Trials : All studies  will be conducted in 
diverse rural, suburban, and urban primary care practices in central Indiana and south Florida. 
Such primary care practices include 10 federally qualified health centers affiliated with Eskenazi 
Health in Indianapolis 
and 10 primary care 
practices in South 
Florida affiliated with 
University of Miami 
(UHealth). Eskenazi 
Health is one of the 
largest safety net 
integrated healthcare 
systems in the nation 
serving underprivileged 
older residents of 
Marion County 
including African Americans (50%) and 
dual eligibl e Medicaid 
and Medicare 
beneficiaries with a low 
socioeconomic status (50%). The UHealth has primary care practices serving older adults 
residing in Miami -Dade, Broward, and Palm Beach Counties and serving underrepresented 
groups of African Americans (19%) and Hispanic (45%) populations throughout South Florida. Our interdisciplinary research team has long- standing relationships with many sites in the two 
states. In late 2019, we published the results of a randomized controlled trial evaluating the 

IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 15 of 35 
 
 benefits and harms of ADRD screening among 4,000 older adults attending rural, suburban, and 
urban primary care practices.17  
 D.3. Subjects Recruitment into the Clinical Validation (Stage III) Study : To recruit patients 
from the above clinical setting into our clinical validation study and using similar processes to 
our previous studies,
12,15,17, 27 -33 trained research assistants will work with the practice manager 
from each primary care practice to identify potential subjects who meet the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria outlined in the table below. The research assistants will make initial contact via 
a phone or face- to-face at the primary care practices to garner interest in participating in the 
study and verify if the patient meets the inclusion criteria (see Table 6). Based on the literature, our own pilot data, and our power analyses (described below), we anticipate approachi ng 1,000 
eligible subjects to enroll and complete data on 400 subjects. Rolling enrollment will take place 
over 18 months with an average monthly enrollment of 23 subjects per month.  
 
Table 6. Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
Inclusion criteria  Exclusion criteria  
65 years or older  Prior ADRD or mild cognitive impairment 
diagnosis as determined by ICD -10 code  
At least one visit to primary care practice within 
the past year  Evidence of any history of prescription for a 
cholinesterase inhibitors or memantine.  
Ability to provide informed consent  Has serious mental illness such as bipolar 
or schizophrenia as determined by ICD -10 
code  
Ability to communicate in English or Spanish  Permanent resident of a nursing facility  
Available EHR data from at least the past two 
or three  years   
 
D.4. Primary Care Practices Recruitment into the Pragmatic (Phase IV) Trials : We will 
approach the practice manager and the physician leader of each primary care practice to 
randomize their site into one of three early detection approaches; AWV  and any other visit to  
the primary care physician or geriatrician without PDM or QDRS; AWV  and any other visit to the 
primary care physician or geriatrician with PDM; and AWV  and any other visit with the primary 
care physician or geriatrician with both PDM and QDRS. We have received approval from the 
leadership of both Eskenazi Health and UHealth. The PDM and the QDRS will be embedded 
within the AWV process for each practice. The current rate of using the AWV across the country 
is increasing from 14% in 2012 to more than 60% in our own practices. We will obtain a waiver 
of informed consent from the local Instituti onal Review Board to review retrospectively (after at 
least one year of screening) the EHR systems of each practice to calculate the annual rate of 
new ADRD diagnosis and other EHR data to measure processes of diagnostic assessment 
following the AWV including screening rate, referral rate for diagnostic assessments for early 
ADRD and patient acceptance rate of undergoing such assessments.  In addition,  we will 
interview the practice managers by implementing  a one -time completion of Practice Transformation 
Assessment (PTA) for each clinic enrolled in the pragmatic trial at Eskenazi Health and University of 
Miami Health. T his will be administered by the RA or Project Manager and completed by the Practice 
Manager.  It will be variable, we will integrate it into our research method to describe the context of our 
healthcare system participating in our research. We want to know if there  is any difference in the results 
between University of Miami  Health (UMiami)  and E skenazi Health, and if that is related to different 
practice variable specifically the payment and healthcare transformation.  
      
 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 16 of 35 
 
 D.5. Interventions and Control for the Pragmatic (Phase IV) Trials : Our interdisciplinary 
scientific teams developed and tested both the PDM and the QDRS. Drs. Boustani and Ben -
Miled leveraged the widely available EHR data and the advantage of ML to develop the PDM 
with an approximate 80% accuracy for one -year and three- year prediction horizons.10 Dr. 
Galvin’s team developed and tested the QDRS as a practical 2 -3 minute patient reported 
outcome (PRO) tool for both early detection and staging of ADRD.11  
Each pragmatic trial will randomize primary care practices into one of three approaches for early 
detection of ADRD at (1:1:1) ratio. These approaches include the current state of using AWV in 
primary care (the control group), the incorporation of the PDM into the AWV, and the 
combination of PDM and QDRS (Passive + QDRS). All of the three approaches will be implemented within the current Medicare funded AWV and will be integrated within the provider 
clinical encounter to accommodate the clinical flow and data capture and results display needs 
of the primary care practices. To randomly assign each practice to one of the three screening 
approaches, we will use a computer -generated randomization scheme.  
 D.6. Integrating the PDM and QDRS within the Epic EHR : We will leverage the processes 
and technologies currently and successfully in use every day in our clinical partner’s primary 
care practices. These practices at both sites use Epic as their EHR and its related computerized 
decision support (CDS) engine and its patient -completed survey platforms. As indicated in the 
preliminary studies, EHRs contain detailed clinical data that can be accessed to run the PDM algorithm. EHRs also have a platform for patient reported outcome (PRO) survey in which we 
will integrate the QDRS for the selected primary care practices. The EHR -based CDS system 
will display the results of the screening to clinicians to promote the interpretation of the results 
by healthcare providers and patients. The Regenstrief Institute (see Resources section) has 
decades of experience in successful CDS research and implementation. Over the past three 
years, we have partnered with our Epic EHR clinical informatics colleagues to deploy various 
CDS  tools such as patient reported surveys, predictive algorithms for social frailty, and 
deprescribing recommendations.
56-67 These CDS tools provide clinicians with a graphical 
summary of the results with a focus on the factors driving these results. A similar approach will be adopted in this study, tailored through the extensive configuration options available in the 
Epic CDS engine. Patient registration at the primary care clinic would trigger the CDS process 
including patient completion of the QDRS. The CD S engine will also query the data sources for 
the required input features specific to the patient and invoke the PDM ML algorithm. Results will 
be displayed within the EHR user interface with an emphasis on the key features of the model 
that explain the fi nal outcome for each individual patient, including actionable clinician- directed 
recommendations related to appropriate diagnostic work -up. The proposed workflow will be 
deployed in the two healthcare systems (Eskenazi Health and UHealth) and integrated wi thin 
the flow of the primary care practices. We have received the approval from leadership at both 
sites for the deployment of both the PDM and the QDRS, as described in their letters of support. 
The technical infrastructure (including servers, EHR and CDS  configuration options, and data 
connections) as well as the security and governance agreements already exist and therefore pose no threats to project objectives or risk of delayed timelines.   
 D.7. Data Sources and Collection: We will collect EHR data from all patients enrolled in the 
clinical validation study (identified data after obtaining informed consent from subjects) and from 
patients receiving care in all of the practices enrolled in the two pragmatic trials (de- identified 
data after obtaining consent from the practice leadership and receiving waiver from the IRB). For the clinical validation study, the research team will conduct a gold -standard ADRD 
assessment on all patients screened by  the PDM and the QDRS.  
 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 17 of 35 
 
 D.7.a. ADRD Diagnostic Assessment : The ADRD assessment is modeled on the Uniform Data 
Set (UDS) 3.0 from the NIA Alzheimer’s Disease Center program.68,69 The assessment will be 
performed face -to-face or via Zoom at research centers in Indianapolis and Miami. To 
accommodate subject preference, the assessment may be conducted at the subject’s home for 
convenience. We have used such assessments for more than a decade with excellent quality 
assurance and completion.11,12, 33,53- 55, 61 The ADRD assessment will include the following data 
that will be entered into a REDCap database, a browser -based, metadata- driven software and 
workflow methodology for designing clinical and translational research databases.  
 
Subject interview and Medical Record Review  will be used to collect information on demographics, 
primary language, alcohol/tobacco/substance use history, and family history. W e will review the 
patient’s medical records for the presence of comorbid conditions, medications, vitamin B 12 
level, thyroid test, syphilis tests, Complete Metabolic Panel (CPM) and brain imaging. When 
relevant to making a diagnosis and unavailable in the patient’s record, laboratory tests or brain 
imaging – MRI,  will be requested in collaboration with the primary care clinicians.  Skilled nursing 
services will be utilized to perform blood draws with approximately 30ml of blood to be drawn 
from each patient, only one time.  
Medical Evaluation:  A  detailed  neurological examination will be completed by certified research 
staff. The Modified Hachinski Scale will assess vascular risks.68,69 
Cognitive Status:   T he Montreal Cognitive Assessment will be used for a global screen.70  The rest of 
the cognitive battery includes the Uniform Data Set (UDS) battery used in the NIA Alzheimer Disease Centers: 15- item Multilingual Naming Test (naming);
69 Animal naming and Letter fluency (verbal 
fluency);69 Craft Story for paragraph recall testing of episodic memory69 (craft story  immediate and 
delayed recall). ;71 Number forward and backward  69 and Trail making A and B (processing and 
visuospatial abilities).72 The Geriatric Depression Scale is performed for  assessment  of mood.   
Informant -B ased Rating Scales:  The CDR73 will be used for global staging, the Neuropsychiatric 
Inventory (NPI) to assess behavior,74 and FAQ75 to assess activities of daily living.   
Determination of Cognitive Status:  G lobal rating scales will be combined with cognitive performance, 
Clinician Assessed Medical Conditions, Clinician diagnosis and medical record review to assign 
individuals to the following diagnostic categories after a consensus conference: No Cognitive Impairment (NCI), Subjective Cognitive Impairment (SCI), Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) or ADRD. 
MCI categories will be attributed based on the number of cognitive domains affected (single vs multiple; amnestic vs non -amnestic). ADRD cases will be assigned etiologies (AD, LBD, VaD, FTD, 
or mixed).  
Professional research assistants will undergo a detailed training by Drs. Galvin and 
Boustani and will be certified in conducting the UDS assessment. Similar to our previous process from various research studies, 
12,17, 76 we will use several incentives to encourage 
patients who screened positive to undergo the diagnostic assessment. First, we will work with 
the patient’s physician to recommend the assessment. Second, the study personnel will provide 
information on the importance of the assessment. Third, the assessment will be offered free of 
charge. If transportation is a barrier, the patient will be offered free transportation or home -
based assessment. Fourth, patients and their care partners will be reimbursed for their time with 
a $50 gift for each.  
 D.7.b. Incidence of ADRD for the pragmatic cluster -randomized comparative 
effectiveness clinical trials :  For the two pragmatic trials and using similar approach from 
previous studies,
12, 19 we will use data captured by the EHR to assess for two outcomes. The 
primary outcome measure will be any new ADRD case identified (documented in the EHR) 
within 12 months of the Annual Wellness Visit (index visit). The secondary outcome measures 
will be a ny services related to cognitive diagnostic assessment in the post  Annual Wellness Visit 
(index) period that providers may order to diagnose or exclude ADRD. Specifically, the metrics 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 18 of 35 
 
 of diagnostic assessment will be evaluated as proportions of patients with a record of 1 or more 
of:  
• Laboratory tests for TSH, serum B12, folate, or syphilis; individually or combined at any point during the 90 days after index  
• Neuropsychological testing, including testing by psychologist or physician, technician administrator, computer, or other providers during the 12 months after index date  
• Brain imaging testing (computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, magnetic resonance angiogram) of the head and neck, brain, or skull 
during the 12 months after index date  
• Medications approved for management of ADRD (cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine) 
during the 12 months after index date  
D.8. Analysis Plan  
D.8.a. Primary Aim 1 : Evaluate the predictive performance of the PDM, the QDRS, and the 
combined approach in the early detection of ADRD, compared to the gold standard diagnoses .  
 
For Primary Hypothesis 1, the screening approaches will be validated by evaluating the Area 
Under the Curve (AUC) for the PDM, the QDRS, and the combined approach. For the purpose 
of Aim 1, the PDM and the QDRS will be administered in the same sample of patients to 
increase power while retaining internal validity of conclusions.77 The AUC will be calculated from 
the plot of the sensitivity (y -axis) by 1 – specificity (x -axis) across all possible discrete screening 
score values.  For the combined approach, screening will be considered positive if either PDM or QDRS are positive. The gold standard diagnosis will be determined as described in D.7.a. 
We hypothesize that the AUC, as well as the overall % accuracy of classifications, will be 0.85 
or greater for the combined method, and 0.75 or greater for PDM and the QDRS.  
 
For Secondary Hypothesis 2, dependent AUCs will be compared using the method78 that 
extends DeLong et al.'s nonparametric method79 to be valid for clustered data by using the Rao 
and Scott concepts for clustered binary data.80 The AUCs of different methods are dependent in 
the Aim 1 study because they are calculated on the same sample of patients. We hypothesize 
that the combined approach of PDM and QDRS will have statistically better AUC than PDM or 
the QDRS alone.  In addition, the screening approaches wi ll be compared on the overall % 
accuracy of classification (i.e., a simple proportion based on 0/1 data for each person) using 
nonlinear mixed models to account for correlated outcomes due to dependent methods and 
practice- clustered data.   
 
Potential problems & alternative strategies: The distributional assumptions for the binary 
outcomes are minimal, which will decrease the need to consider alternative analytic methods 
and models. However, to ensure the analytic methods appropriately account for the clustering 
effect when estimating standard errors and p- values, we will perform bootstrap estimation (i.e., 
using 1,000 datasets resampled with replacement at the person level) of the standard errors and confidence intervals surrounding the estimated values for AUC and % accuracy, and the estimated values for the difference in these values between screening approaches. In addition, 
if missing data occur, we will impute data using the simulation- based “Multiple Imputation” 
method,
81 in which multiple complete datasets with plausible values for missing data are 
generated using model -based prediction, and analytic results from imputed datasets are 
aggregated to calculate appropriate standard errors and p- values in the presence of imput ed 
data. We will use 100 imputed datasets, even though 10 to 50 are considered sufficient.81 
Inclusion of potential auxiliary variables in the imputation model will be considered. A sensitivity 
analysis will be performed using participants with complete data.  
 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 19 of 35 
 
 D.8.b. Primary Aim 2 : Evaluate the practical utility and effect of the PDM, and the combined 
methods in improving the annual rate of new documented ADRD diagnosis in primary care 
practices.  
 
For Primary Hypothesis 1,  three pragmatic screening approaches (AWV alone, AWV + PDM, 
and AWV + PDM + QDRS) will be compared on the annual incidence rate of EHR documented 
ADRD using nonlinear mixed models to account for clinic -clustered data. In the two pragmatic 
trials, differen t patients are randomized (via their clinics) to each of the 3 arms, making the 
outcomes independent between the three screening approaches; however, data will still be 
correlated for Aim 2 due to clustering of patients within clinics, which will be handled by random 
effects in the mixed models. We hypothesize the incidence rate will be 6% using AWV alone19 
and 13% with the screening approach that combines AWV + PDM + QDRS. Incidence rates for 
all arms, including for AWV + PDM, will be calculated along with their 95% confidence interval.  
 
For Secondary Hypothesis 2,  the analyses will be the same as described for Hypothesis 1 of 
Aim 2, except that the outcome will be acceptance rates for recommended ADRD diagnostic work -up following positive screen.  We hypothesize the acceptance rate will be 44% using AWV 
alone
17 and 66% with the screening approach that combines AWV + PDM + QDRS. 
 
Potential problems & alternative strategies: Same as those described for Aim 1 above.  
 D.8.c. Sample Size & Power:  Calculations were performed with PASS, a comprehensive 
power and sample size software
.82 All calculations assume two- sided tests and alpha = 0.05. 
For study 1 (i.e., Aim 1), a sample size of 15 cluster pairs consisting of 400 persons (26.667 
persons per cluster) will provide 81% power to compare population values of 75% versus 85% 
in the outcome of % accuracy of classification. This is based on using nonlinear mixed models 
to compare two paired (i.e., dependent) proportions. The  proportions are considered dependent 
instead of independent because all three screening approaches for study 1 will be performed in 
the same sample of 400. This approach was selected because it will increase power by allowing 
participants to serve as their own controls.77 Moreover, it is appropriate for a diagnostic validity 
study to compare methods in the same sample (i.e., method contamination is not an issue).77 
This calculation assumes that participants are recruited from 15 clinics (i.e., clusters) and that 
the within -pair coefficient of variation (CV) between clusters is .058. The CV was calculated as 
CV = SQRT (ICC x (1 - phi) / phi), where the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) was 
assumed to be 0.01, and phi is 0.75 (i.e. the proportion of accuracy for one of the standard screening methods). The power will be slightly greater than 81% to detect values of 75% versus 
85% in the AUC, based on power for comparing two dependent AUC’s, assuming discrete cutoff 
values, and accounting for a sample inf lation factor (IF), where IF = [1 + (M – 1) * ICC], M = 
average number of persons per cluster, and the ICC is 0.01. 
Because the other studies are two separate pragmatic clinical trials, participants will be 
cluster -randomized to three different arms. This approach ensures that rigorous testing of the 
outcomes (incident ADRD detection and acceptance of subsequent diagnos tic assessments) is 
not contaminated by the other screening approaches in other arms of interest. In addition, the 
400 patients in study 1 will be excluded from the two pragmatic trials to avoid contamination. 
The total sample for each pragmatic trial will  be slightly over 2,600, if each of enrolled practice 
screen conservatively 175 patients per year for a total of two years of screening. Alternatively, 
the total sample size for each trial will be 3,600, if we recruit, as we have in past trials, 200 
patients per clinic.  The table below shows the power for comparing ADRD incidence and 
acceptance rates between two different arms under the conservative and historical recruitment 
scenarios. Calculations were based on using nonlinear mixed models to compare two  
independent proportions, assuming cluster randomization (i.e., level -2 randomization) and the 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 20 of 35 
 
 ICC is 0.01. The “AWV alone” arm is expected to have ADRD incidence of 6% and acceptance 
rate of 44%.  The table shows that power will exceed 80% to detect ADRD incidence of 6% vs 
13%, even under conservative recruitment projections, and power for comparing acceptance 
rates will be 99%.  
 
  
 
 
Outcome  Conservative recruitment* (N = 
2,600)  
 Projected (feasible 
historically) recruitment* (N = 
3,600)  
ADRD incidence 6% vs 
13% 86% 89% 
Acceptance 44% vs 66%  99% 99% 
*Conservative recruitment = Total of 2,600 patients with 866 patients and 5 clusters per each of 3 arms; 
power for pairwise comparisons based on 1,732 patients with 866 patients and 5 clusters per each of 2 
arms, and M = 173.2 patients per cluster.  Histor ical recruitment = Total of 3,600 patients with 1,200 
patients and 5 clusters per each of 3 arms; power for pairwise comparisons based on 2,400 patients with 1,200 patients and 5 clusters per each of 2 arms, and M = 240 patients per cluster.   
 
D. 9. Potential problems & alternative strategies  
First, while we expect that adding EHR -based data (the PMD) elements to the QDRS based 
process of ADRD detection will boost validity from 75% to 85% for AUC or for the overall % 
accuracy of classification, these gains may be marginal (<10%). Smaller gains would signal a 
precautionary lesson on the limits of EHRs to detect ADRD as currently designed. Second, 
given the heterogeneity of EHR data, adding EHR data might actually cause the ADRD 
detection process to gain validity at the cost of reliability. Given Medicare’s growing reliance on 
EHRs for quality measurement, illuminating such a trade- off would be highly policy -relevant. 
Third, this work involves two states (Florida and Indiana), which may limit generalizability. However, the diversity of the study population may overcome these limitations. Fourth, the 
intervention faces barriers, such as stakeholder buy -in, unintended consequences, alert fatigue, 
and clinical uncertainty. We will overcome these barriers by (1) working closely with the 
leadership of the primary care practices to ensure stakeholder buy in, (2) leverage the trusted 
relationship between the patient and her primary care team, (3) the proposed PDM and QDRS 
will be fully integrated within the AWV and the clinical flow of the primary care prac tices, and (4) 
working with Drs. Grout and Dexter (their Epic Team) to trouble shoot EHR integration barriers 
and minimize alert fatigue.  Based on our extensive preliminary studies, the combined approach 
of using the PDM and the QDRS would outperform the current state of using the AWV alone or 
the integration of the PDM within the AWV clinical flow. Fifth, seamlessly integrating the PDM 
and QRDS within the AWV clinical workflow with limited disruption can be challenging. The 
Regenstrief Institute has more than a decade of experience with, and has the technical 
infrastructure in place for, developing and integrating various CDS within Epic, Cerner, and 
other EHR vendors across the world (see Facilities & Other Resources). We have also allocated 
sufficient ti me between the analysis of Aim 1 and go- live of Aim 2 (see Timetable) to make any 
necessary adjustments. Lastly, we will be monitoring uptake and usage of the CDS intervention 
using the system logs. If uptake during the go -live period appears problematic, we will be able to 
revisit training / socializing the new workflow with clinical staff or alter the user interfac e based 
on feedback.  
 
D.10. Timetable & Project Administration.  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 21 of 35 
 
 We are proposing a 5- year grant period to accommodate recruitment, management of multiple 
data sources, primary data collection, training data collection staff, and multiple distinct analytic 
techniques. During the first six months, we will hire and train our research team, set up the 
organizational structure of the research projects, and finalize IRB approval. In the following 18 
months, we will deploy the PDM and the QDRS into the Epic EHR environments in the two 
health care systems in Indiana (Eskenazi H ealth) and Florida (UHealth). Also by the end of Year 
2, we will recruit 400 subjects into our first clinical validation (Stage III) study and complete the 
data collection for Aim 1. In Year 3, we will complete the data analysis and the dissemination 
activities related to Primary and Secondary Aim 1. In the beginning of Year 3, we will recruit the 
15 primary care practices from the two sites into our pragmatic cluster -randomized controlled 
comparative effectiveness (phase IV) trials.  In Year 4 we will retrieve the data related to Primary 
Aim 2 from the Datawarehouse of the Epic EHR systems at both participating healthcare 
systems (Eskenazi Health and UHealth) and complete data analysis for Primary and Secondary 
Aim 2. In Year 5, we will share our de -identifi ed data with the scientific community and 
disseminate the result of our trial to the scientific community via peer reviewed publication and 
presentation at national and international scientific conferences. In the same year, we will share 
our codes for bot h the PDM and the QDRS with Epic headquarters to make sure that these 
codes are available for any healthcare system with Epic across the country. We will also share 
technical details in a platform -agnostic manner to aid implementation in other EHR platform s. 
    
   
 
 
 
  Timetable       
Project Year  1 2 3 4 5 
Project Quarter  1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Study start up  X X                   
Deploy PDM* + QDRS** tools  X X X X X X X X             
Clinical Validation (stage III) Study  
Recruit subjects    X X X X X X             
Data Collection (Aim 1)    X X X X X X             
Data Analyses (Aim 1)          X X           
Dissemination (Aim 1)            X X         
Pragmatic cluster -randomized controlled comparative effectiveness trials  (phase IV)  
Recruit Clinics          X X X X X X X X     
Data Retrieval from Epic (Aim 2)                  X X   
Data Analysis ( Aim 2)                  X X   
Sharing Codes                  X X X X 
Sharing De -identified Data (Aim 2)                  X X X X 
Dissemination (Aim 2)                  X X X X 
*PDM: Passive Digital Marker; QDRS: Quick Dementia Rating Scale.  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 22 of 35 
 
 E.  PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
Risk to Subjects  
Human subjects’ involvement and characteristics: Our Digital Detection of Dementia ( D3) project 
include the execution of three complimentary studies; the Clinical Validation (stage III) Study 
and the two Pragmatic cluster -randomized controlled comparative effectiveness (phase IV) 
trials. These studies will include community -dwelling men and women aged 65 years and older, 
who receive primary care services within Eskenazi Health located in central Indiana and UHealth in south Florida. They will be English or Spanish speaking, have had at least one visit 
to primary care practice within past year with available electronic health record (EHR) data from 
at least three years. The aims of the first Clinical Validation (Stage III) study require a face -to-
face or telephone interview and EHR review, to evaluate the accuracy of two scalable 
approaches for early detection of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD); the 
Passive Digital Marker (PDM) and the Quick Dementia Rating Scale (QDRS). These 
approaches will be embedded within the EHR systems of diverse rural, suburban, and urban 
primary care practices in central Indiana and south Florida. Older adult patients represent a 
somewhat vulnerable group. Our research specifically targets this group in an attempt to 
enhance the current standard of early detection of ADRD and improve Health for these individuals.  
Participants in the first Clinical Validation Study will be informed of the purpose of the overall all goal of Digital Detection of Dementia ( D
3) project of using scalable screening approached to 
improve the early detection of ADRD in primary care practices) and the procedures related to the clinical Validation study. Signed informed consent will be obtained from these participants. For the clinic al validation study, and once informed consent is given, the research team will 
conduct a gold- standard ADRD ass essments (within 30 days of screening) on all patients 
screened by the PDM and the QDRS.  
Sources of material : We will collect EHR data from all patients enrolled in the Clinical Validation 
study (identified data after obtaining informed consent from subjects) and from patients receiving care in all of the practices enrolled in the Pragmatic cluster -randomized controlled 
comparative effectiveness (phase IV) trials (de- identified data after obtaining consent from the 
practice leadership and receiving waiver from the IRB as the two pragmatic trials are Quality 
improvement trials). For the clinical  validation study, the research team will conduct a gold-
standard ADRD assessments on all patients screened by the Passive Digital Marker and the 
Quick Dementia Rating Scale. Such ADRD assessment will be performed face -to-face at 
research centers in Indianapolis and Miami. To accommodate subject preference and current COVID -19 related safety, the ADRD assessment may be conducted via Zoom or at the subject’s 
home. We have used such assessments for more than a decade with excellent quality assurance and completion. The ADRD assessment will be entered into a Redcap database.  
Potential risks:
  No experimental pharmacological or nonpharmacological intervention will be 
used in this study. All patients enrolled in the clinical validation study will receive screening for ADRD to validate the accuracy of the PDM and the QDRS. Although data from this study will not 
be gathered from the patient without his or her consent, it is possible that some of the questions 
related to ADRD screening and management asked of the respondents could cause anxiety. 
However, in our recent published ADRD screening trial that evaluated the potential benefits and 
harms of ADRD screening, there were no differences between the screened and the control group in quality of life, depressive symptoms or anxiety.
17 Furthermore, we anticipate early 
detection of ADRD in some patients enrolled in the clinical validation study, and up to 13% of patients receiving care in all of the practices enrolled in the pragmatic trials who undergo the 
screening process and/or the subsequent diagnostic assessment. The impact of this early 
diagnosis on their quality of life and care was assessed in our recent published trial and found no negative impact on quality of life, depression, anxiety, healthcare utilization or independence 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 23 of 35 
 
 at home.17 However, it is not known about other potential harms such as stigma. On the other 
hand, early detection of ADRD is considered part of the standard of care and screening for 
ADRD is part of the Annual Wellness Visit covered by Medicare. Such early detection would 
lead to receive appropriate and valuable care both pharmacologically and non-
pharmacologically. Such treatment would decrease the patient’s disability resulting from 
unrecognized or unmanaged ADRD and enhance the patients’ adherence of medical management of other health conditions. The research personnel will be trained to recognize and 
minimize any potential discomfort and patients may discontinue participation at any time.  If a respondent becomes anxious or upset, the local principal investigator will be notified to 
intervene. Loss of confidentiality is also a risk in this type of data collection. Our data 
management and quality assurance technique has proven effective in past trials in maintaining confidentiality, and all study personnel have completed training in Human Subjects Research 
and HIPAA standards.  
In addition, there may be There following are possible risks due to blood draw:  
• Pain while blood is being drawn  
• Bruising of skin on the area after blood draw  
• Bleeding after blood draw may occur  
• There may be other risks associated with blood draw which may not be known 
Risks of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)  
Because radiation is not used, there is no risk of exposure to radiation during an MRI procedure. 
However, due to the use of the strong magnet, MRI cannot be performed on patients with 
internal metallic objects such as implanted pacemakers, intracranial aneurysm clips certain 
prosthetic devices. Patients will be asked if they have any type implants. Patients with implants may undergo a CT scan without contrast. Also, subjects may feel nervous about tight spaces.  
 Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
Recruitment and informed consent: The Digital Detection of Dementia ( D3) studies will be 
approved by the Indiana University -Purdue University at Indianapolis Institutional Review Board. 
Indiana University -Purdue University (IUPUI) at Indianapolis Institutional Review Board will be 
the single IRB for this trial. University of Miami will submit a request for a reliance agreement. Trained research assistants will work with the practice managers from each primary care 
practice to identify potential subjects who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the 
Clinical Validation study. Recruitment will be performed over the telephone, Zoom, or in- person 
at primary care practices for those eligible to participate in the clinical validation study, following 
HIPAA compliant standard recruitment procedures. The research assistants wil l make initial 
contact via telephone, Zoom or face to face at the primary care practices to garner interest in participating in the study and verifying the patients’ eligibility. Our studies will require two written 
informed consent forms. The first one, for the clinical validation study will be completed per eligible participant and countersigned by the researcher and the second one, is consent from 
the practice leadership, after receiving an informed consent waiver from the IRB for patients 
receiving care  in all of practices enrolled in the pragmatic trials.  The informed consent process 
will be completed prior to conducting any baseline assessments.  
 
Blood Draws and MRI Protections:  Blood draw risks will be minimized by blood being drawn by 
experienced staff members.  For MRI,  If subjects feel uncomfortable due to the tightness of the 
space, we can pause and try the MRI again. 
 
Protection against risk : Patients who refuse to participate in the Clinical Validation study will not 
be approached again. The patient’s medical record will only be reviewed after obtaining 
informed consent from the participants in the clinical validation study (Stage III) and from the practice leadership (after receiving an informed consent waiver from the IRB), for patients 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 24 of 35 
 
 receiving care in all of practices enrolled in the pragmatic trials (Phase IV). To avoid the risk of 
inadvertent disclosure of PHI, all study personnel will be educated about general principles of subject access, informed consent, confidentiality, data safeguarding, and privacy requirements, and will complete an on- line course required by the Indiana University Purdue University 
Institutional Review Board. The format and the procedure of data collection will be outlined in the consent form, the data will be extracted into a pre- designed database, and the research 
assistant will not collect any additional data without the consent of the patient and approval by university IRB . Each study participant will be assigned a study identification (ID) number, and 
this ID number will be used rather than names and medical record numbers on all PHI data collected.  
The principal investigators will disclose the finding of new information about the patient’s health status directly to the patient and if the participant agrees, to the primary care physician. The 
principal investigators will be available to clarify any questions and offer any needed 
consultation. Efforts will be made to keep patients’ personal information confidential. In addition, the investigators are planning to have continuous feedback from the patient and the practice staff to discuss any problems encountered during the data collection.  
Reporting unanticipated problems involving risk to participants : A data safety monitoring board 
(DSMB) will be established, and will include a primary care physician, Geriatrician, patient 
representative, and biostatistician. The DSMB will meet prior to the first patient enrollment, to 
review the protocol for any major concerns prior to implementation. Subsequently, the DSMB 
will meet periodically to review and evaluate the accumulated study data for participant safety, 
study conduct and progress and scientific validity and integrity of the trial.  
 
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others 
Although our studies are collecting data to test the accuracy and effectiveness of two scalable 
approaches for early detection of (ADRD) among older adults attending primary care practices, 
we anticipate some immediate benefit to participants. Detecting cognitive decline early and at low-cost is beneficial to patients and caregivers alike.  The screening results will assure of the 
negative screening results, and those with positive screening results will receive a referral for appropriate diagnostic and management services. Early detection of ADRD will lead to early 
management of its cognitive, functional, and psychological disabilities, which if goes 
unmanaged, results in significant burden for patients, families, healthcare delivery systems 
and the entire society. In turn, early detection of ADRD could reduce such a burden, in addition 
to becoming increasingly important for assuring that people receive early ADRD disease modification treatment when available.  
 Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD) negatively impact millions of Americans. Currently, half of Americans living with ADRD never receive a diagnosis. For those who do, the diagnosis often occurs two to five years after the onset of symptoms. The data may lead to 
national early detection and management program for ADRD as an efficient and beneficial 
method of reducing the current and future burden of ADRD.  We are unaware of any similar 
studies that has been or will be conducted in a diverse primary care setting. Our studies will 
inform the scientific community and the health care system about the performance, including accuracy and effectiveness of the two scalable approaches in early detection of ADRD and 
improving the annual rate of new documented ADRD in primary care practices. Our studies will 
provide some knowledge about the specific characteristics of the primary care patients, and 
their attitudes toward early detection of ADRD and subsequent referral for appropriate 
diagnostic and management services. The knowledge gained will increase the power of care 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 25 of 35 
 
 delivery at our study sites by leveraging machine learning.  This will make our health systems 
smarter and help to prevent avoidable hospitalizations and other negative ADRD outcomes.  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov Registration : The Digital Detection of Dementia ( D3) studies will be registered 
at clinicaltrials.gov.  
 
 
 
 
  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 26 of 35 
 
 F.  DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
The proposed pragmatic Clustered- comparative effectiveness trials are considered 
Quality Improvement project. However, we will construct a data safety monitoring plan 
(DSMP) for the trials and the clinical validation study. This DSMP will be monitored by t he 
co-PIs and a three- member Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB). The co- PIs will 
also conduct data and safety monitoring and will regularly monitor progress, goal 
achievement, and overall research direction in consultation with the co- investigators. In 
regard to the pragamtic trials, t he team will use the Epic EHR system log to monitor the 
uptake and usage of the Annual Wellness visit with and without the deployed screening 
approaches of the Passive Digital Marker (PDM) and the Quick Dementia Rating Scale (QDRS) within the Epic computerized decision support (CDS). If uptake during the go- live 
period appears problematic, we will be able to revisit training and socializing the enhanced AWV with clinical staff or alter the user interface based on feedback.  
 Data Monitoring and Reporting  
The frequency of data review for the se studies are summarized in the following tables:  
 
Data Type: Clinical Validation Study  Frequency of Review  
 Each 
Occurrence  At assessment 
(Baseline)  End of 
study  
Subject accrual (adherence to inclusion/exclusion); 
completion of the screening and the diagnostic 
assessment   X  
Protocol violations/noncompliance  X   
Out of range data   X  
Risk-benefit ratio assessment    X 
 
Data Type: Pragmatic Trials – All data capture will 
be from the EHR  
 Quarterly  Annual  
Adverse events, Unscheduled acute care utilization  X X 
Usage of the AWV with and without the PDM and the 
QDRS  X X 
Risk- Benefit ratio assessment   X 
 
The project manager and the biostas tician will generate reports for each pragmatic trial that will 
contain:  
A) summary of all -source adverse events and an explanation of how each event was 
handled;  
B) the usage of the AWV with and without the PDM or the QDRS, and  
C) completion of the diagnostic assessment for those who screened positive;  
All reports will be submitted to the Indiana University Purdue University of Indianapolis (IUPUI) IRB at time of continuing review.  
Note: University of Miami will submit a request for a reliance agreement; IUPUI IRB will be the reviewing IRB for this study.  
Protection of data  
Database security is maintained using a multi -layered approach to both limit access and 
the ability to alter data. There are strong protections restricting access to the researchers’ 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 27 of 35 
 
 network. Local installation of proprietary software is required to detect our server on the 
network. Each authorized user has a unique username and password that allows specific 
access and editing privileges. Browsing level access only is used except when data 
entry/editing is explicitly intended. While multiple authorized users can simultaneously 
view data, only a single specifically authorized user can edit a given record at any time. 
The database is stored on a secure server, which is also password protected and only accessible to authorized lab personnel, in our locked laboratory offices. Database 
backups are conducted on a regular basis. Raw data, regardless of capture method, are 
accessible only to key research personnel; and all electronic information is stored on 
password- protected computers. The PIs will additionally regularly monitor the data 
collection and analysis process for data appropriateness, comprehensiveness, accuracy, 
and timeliness.   
 
Safety Monitoring Definitions  
Adverse Event (AE)  - Any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a human subject, 
including any abnormal sign, symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the subject's 
participation in the research, whether or not considered related to the subject's participation in 
the research. We will use the EHR system to monitor the following AEs:  
• Emergency room visits, not requiring hospitalization 
• Breach of  confidentiality  
• Suicidal ideation not requiring intervention  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) is any adverse events that result in the following, which we will 
monitor:  
• Death 
• Persistent or significant  disability/incapacity  
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization 
• Suicidal attempt or ideation requiring intervention 
 
Study -Related – An AE or SAE is considered study related if the PI determines that the AE or 
SAE to be definitely, probably, or possibly related where possibly related means there is reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused by the 
procedures or interventions involved in the research. AEs or SAEs judged as remotely related or 
not related are not considered study related.  
 
Unanticipated Problem or Unexpected AE/SAE –  problems or events in which the research 
places participants or others at a greater risk of harm (including physical, psychological, 
economic, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized. The term “unanticipated 
problem” is used in this context because some situations may not have produced an adverse 
event but is still considered an unanticipated problem  (e.g. unsecured or stolen patient data 
which may not result in an AE). An event is unexpected if i t is not described in the package 
insert of cessation medication, in the study protocol, or in the informed consent  document.  
 
Measurement and Reporting of Adverse Events 
Adverse event rates associated with screening interventions are low and are expected to 
vary little between the intervention and control groups in the two pragmatic trials. We will 
present blinded adverse event data to the co- PIs throughout the trials. We plan to present 
unblinded adverse events data to the DSMB panel when requested and at  the annual 
meetings. If there is evidence of elevated adverse events, the PIs will consult with the 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 28 of 35 
 
 study team and use an adverse event form to report injuries or other adverse events 
caused by the intervention and detected through sources listed below.  
 Event Detection and Reporting  
No serious adverse events (SAEs) are expected for the two pragmatic trials. Our CHOICE trial
17 found no negative impact of screening on depression, anxiety, quality of 
life, or health care utilization; thus, the only expected Adverse Events (AE) is loss of 
confidentiality.  The Annual Wellness visit is the current standard of care.  
 All AEs reported by any of the primary care clinics or detected by the quarterly EHR  
review will be recorded and monitored. Each event will be documented on the basis of 
AE or SAE, severity, expectancy, and relatedness (definitely related, possibly related, or 
not related to study activities). The Principal Investigators (PIs) will be notified of  all 
reportable events, including SAEs, within 24 hours. SAEs will be reported by telephone to the IUPUI IRB within 48 hours. A summary of SAEs will be included in annual IRB 
reporting. Annual Reports submitted to the IRB will contain the number of AEs and SAEs in the prior year and an explanation of how each event was handled. The annual 
IRB report will also contain the following: number of complaints and how each complaint was handled and the number of patient who did not complete the diagnostic assessment 
following screen positive results within the AWV.   
SAEs that are unanticipated and definitely related to the intervention will be reported to 
the NIH Program Officer within 48 hours of the study’s knowledge of the SAE.  
SAE/AE Response and Reporting Procedure  
1) Research staff becomes aware of AE/SAE (via scheduled reviews of EHR  data)  
2) Research staff notifies Dr. Boustani and/or Dr. Galvin immediately if the event is an 
SAE or if immediate psychiatric  or medical intervention is required, and within 7 
days if the event is an  AE. 
3) Dr. Boustani and/or Dr. Galvin will conduct EHR review when necessary to gather additional information about the  event.  
4) Dr. Boustani and/or Dr. Galvin will report AE/SAE to DSMB to aid in  determining:  
a.  Severity : Mild, Moderate,  Severe  
b.  Expectedness : Expected,  Unexpected  
c. S  tudy Related: Definitely, Probably, Possibly, Remotely, Note  Study -Related 
5) Project staff documents AE/SAE and DSMB determination in study database. The report will  be provided to a NIA Program  Officer.  
6) Dr. Boustani and/or Dr. Galvin will prepare a report for the IRB as per 
local, state, and federal reporting requirements.  
7) If a death occurs, Dr. Boustani and/or Dr. Galvin will report it to the DSMB and NIA 
Program Officer within 48 hours  of knowing about the  event.  
8) DSMB will aid in planning measures to prevent future occurrences, if any  warranted.  
9) Dr. Boustani and/or Dr. Galvin will make changes to protocol and/or consent form if  
needed.  
 To enhance monitoring and study oversight, DSMB and study staff will meet once per 6 month.  
Possible Adverse Events 
Adverse events will be monitored on an ongoing basis by the study manager from three 
sources:  
1. Self-initiated phone, e -mail, or in -person report by the participant in the clinic al 
validation study or by the primary care clinical team for the pragmatic trials . 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 29 of 35 
 
 2. Quarterly review of acute care utilization in the pragmatic trials.  
 
The co- PIs will be notified within 24 hours of any adverse events. Serious adverse events 
will be reported within 5 business days to IUPUI IRB, DSMB, and NIH. Non- serious 
adverse events will be reported at  time of continuing review  to IUPUI  IRB. In cases  where  
there is any question regarding the level of adverse event or attributable cause, we will 
consult with the DSMB.  
 
Non-serious adverse events are defined as: 1) outpatient surgical procedure, 2) sought 
advice from a physician or medical professional regarding a problem related to prescription 
medications, 3) experienced pain, fatigue, dizziness, or acute illness requiring no 
hospitalization related to prescription medication use. Serious adverse events are defined 
as: death, life threatening event, inpatient hospitalization, permanent  disability.  
 
Stopping  Rules  
The two pragmatic trials are quality improvement studies of clinical process related to the 
operationalization of the Annual Wellness visit that is covered by Medicare for the sole 
purpose of improving the recognition of ADRD by the healthcare system. It is unlikely  that 
the trial would  be stopped early. The NIH will make the final decision on whether or not to 
accept the DSMB’s recommendation about discontinuation of any component of the  study.  
 
Limits of Assumptions  
It is possible that baseline differences between the groups or  missing  data will limit the 
value of data analysis of measurements. Baseline differences will be evaluated after the baseline measurement time point  at the halfway  point  of target  enrollment.  Effects  on the 
power  to detect  differences  in the primary  outcome will be evaluated and communicated to 
the PI, DSMB, and NIH. Given the monitoring plans outlined elsewhere in this document, it 
is exceedingly unlikely that there will be baseline differences between groups of any 
magnitude to threaten the validity  of the  studies.  
With early alerts to problems, action would be taken to avoid higher level alerts; if a higher 
level alert should arise, more drastic remedial action would be invoked.  
The actions taken at each level of alert are given below:  
• Mid-level alert = Conference call between study investigators to discuss 
approaches to minimize further losses to  follow- up/dropouts.  
• High-level alert = Conference call between investigators and DSMB to determine 
further alterations of study protocol to complete the study with no further  losses  
• Extreme -level alert = In the unlikely event of a 45% dropout rate occurs, study 
investigators, the DSMB members, and the NIH program official would convene on a conference call to discuss the usefulness  of continuing the  study.  
 
Qualifications and Responsibilities of the Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
The three- member DSMB panel will meet at 6 -month intervals and has the following 
responsibilities:  
• Review the research protocol  for the three studies , informed consent documents of the 
clinical validation study and plans for data safety and monitoring for the two pragmatic 
trials ; 
• Initiate s tudies after having deemed the protocol s are satisfactory;  
• Evaluate the progress of the three studies  including periodic assessments of data quality 
and timeliness, recruitment, participant risk versus benefit, performance of the study site, 
and other factors that can affect study outcomes;  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  04-05- 2023  
 Page 30 of 35 
 
 • Consider factors external to the study when relevant information becomes available, such 
as scientific or therapeutic developments that may have an impact on the safety of the 
participants or the ethics of the study;  
• Review study performance, resolve problems with study operations;  
• Protect the safety of the study participants;  
• Report to NIH on the safety and progress of the trial;  
• Confer with NIH Program Officer concerning continuation, termination or other 
modifications of the study based on adverse events;  
• Ensure the confidentiality of the study data and the results of monitoring; and,  
• Communicate with NIH regarding any problems with study conduct, enrollment, sample size, and/or data collection.  
 
DSMB Membership and Affiliation  
We will identify the members of the DSMB in collaboration with the National Institute on Aging. 
These persons will not be otherwise affiliated with the project. Should there be any questions 
regarding the independence of the DSMB, it will be addressed and corrected, if necessary, at 
that time.  
The following individuals would be recommended to the NIH.  
 
Jim Rudolph, MD  
Director, Center of Innovation in Geriatric Services, Providence VA Medical Center  
Professor of Medicine and Health Policy & Practice, The Warren Alpert Medical School of 
Brown University  
 Esther Oh, MD, PhD  
Associate Director, Johns Hopkins Memory and Alzheimer’s Treatment Center  
Associate Professor of Medicine, Johns Hopkins  
 Manish Shah, MD, MPH  
Professor and Vice Chair of Research, University of Wisconsin- Madison School of Medicine and 
Public Health  
The John & Tashia Morgridge Chair of Emergency Medicine Research  
Director/KL2 Program, Institute for Clinical and Translational Research  
Co-Lead, Care Research Core, Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center  
 
Conflict of Interest for  DSMB’s  
DSMB should have no direct involvement with the study investigators or intervention. Each DSMB member will sign a Conflict of Interest Statement which includes current affiliations, if 
any, with pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies (e.g., stockholder, consultant), and any 
other relationship that could be perceived as a conflict of interest related to the study and/or 
associated with commercial interest pertinent to study objectives.  
 
Protection of  Confidentiality  
Data with PHI will only be shared with members of the research team that are authorized to 
view such data as part of research procedures. De- identified data will be presented at open 
sessions of DSMB meetings. Participants’ identities will not be known to the DSMB members 
and all data will be treated as confidential.  
 
 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 31 of 35 
 
 References  
 
1. Alzheimer's Association. 2018 Alzheimer's Disease Facts and Figures. 2019;  
https://www.alz.org/media/Documents/alzheimers -facts -and-figures -2019 -r.pdf. Accessed 2020 
Jan 17.  
2. Cordell CB, Borson  S, Boustani M, et al. Alzheimer's Association recommendations for 
operationalizing the detection of cognitive impairment during the Medicare Annual Wellness 
Visit in a primary care setting. Alzheimers Dement. 2013; 9:141 -150. 
3. Holsinger T, Deveau J, Boustani M, Williams JW. Does this patient have dementia? 
JAMA 2007;  
297(21):2391- 404. 
4. Bradford A, Kunik ME, Schulz P, Williams SP, Singh H. Missed and delayed diagnosis of 
dementia in primary care: prevalence and contributing factors. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 
2009; 23: 306 -314. 
5. Lin JS, O'Connor E, Rossom RC, Perdue LA, Eckstrom E. Screening for cognitive 
impairment in older adults: A systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 
Ann Intern Med. 2013; 159:  
601- 612. 
6. Boise L, Camicioli R, Morgan DL, Rose JH, Congleton L. Diagnosing dementia: 
perspectives of primary care physicians. Gerontologist. 1999; 39:457 -464. 
7. Brayne C, Fox C, Boustani M. Dementia screening in primary care: is it time? JAMA. 
2007; 298:2409- 2411.  
8. Iliffe S, Haines A, Gallivan S, Booroff A, Goldenberg E, Morgan P. Assessment of elderly 
people in general practice. 1. Social circumstances and mental state. Br J Gen Pract. 1991; 
41:9- 12. 
9. McCormick WC, Kukull WA, van Belle G, Bowen JD, Teri L, Larson EB. Symptom 
patterns and comorbidity in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1994; 
42:517- 521. 
10. Ben Miled, Z., Haas, K., Black, C. M., Khandker, R. K., Chandrasekaran, V., Lipton, R., 
& Boustani, M.  
A. (2019). Predicting dementia with routine care EMR data. Artificial Intelligence in 
Medicine. 2020 January; 102:101771.  
11. Galvin JE.  The Quick Dementia Rating System (QDRS): A rapid dementia staging tool. 
Alzheimer Dem (DADM) 2015; 1:249- 259. 
12. Boustani M, Callahan CM, Unverzagt FW, et al. Implementing a screening and diagnosis 
program for dementia in primary care. JGIM. 2005; 20(7): 572 -7 doi: 10.1111/j.1525-
1497.2005.0126.x.  
13. Ashford JW, Borson S, O'Hara R, et al. Should older adults be screened for dementia? It 
is important to screen for evidence of dementia! Alzheimers Dement. 2007; 3:75 -80. 
14. Hurd MD, Martorell P, Delavande A, Mullen KJ, Langa KM. Monetary costs of dementia 
in the United States. N Engl J Med. Apr 04 2013; 368(14):1326- 1334.  
15. Callahan CM, Boustani MA, Unverzagt FW, et al. Effectiveness of collaborative care for 
older adults with Alzheimer disease in primary care: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2006; 
295: 2148 -2157.  
16. Boustani M, Alder C, Solid C, Reuben D. An alternative payment model to support 
widespread use of collaborative dementia care models. Health Affairs. 2019; 38(1):54- 59. 
17. Fowler NR, Perkins AJ, Gao S, Sachs GA, and Boustani MA. Risks and Benefits of 
Screening for Dementia in Primary Care: The Indiana University Cognitive Health Outcomes Investigation of the Comparative Effectiveness of Dementia Screening (IU CHOICE) Tri al. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2019; 00:1 -9 (published online Dec 2 2019; DOI:10.1111/jgs.16247).  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 32 of 35 
 
 18. The ABCs of Annual Wellness Visit (AWV). Available at: https://www.cms.gov/Outreach-
and-Education/Medicare -Learning- Network -
MLN/MLNProducts/downloads/AWV_chart_ICN905706.pdf. Accessed Jan 17, 2020.  
19. Fowler NR, Campbell NL, Pohl GM, Munsie LM, Kirson NY, Desai U, Trieschman EJ, 
Meiselbach MK, Andrews JS, Boustani MA. One- Year Effect of the Medicare Annual Wellness 
Visit on Detection of Cognitive Impairment: A Cohort Study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2018 Ma y; 
66(5):969- 975. doi:  
10.1111/jgs.15330. Epub 2018 Apr 2. PubMed PMID: 29608782.  
20. US Department of Health and Human Services. National Plan to Address Alzheimer's 
Disease: 2018 Update. 2018; https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/259581/NatPlan2018.pdf. 
Accessed 22 Mar 2019.  
21. Reuben DB, Hackbarth AS, Wenger NS, Tan ZS, Jennings LA. An Automated Approach 
to Identifying Patients with Dementia Using Electronic Medical Records. J Am Geriatr Soc. Mar 2017; 65(3):658- 659. 
22. Jammeh EA, Carroll CB, Pearson SW, et al. Machine- learning based identification of 
undiagnosed dementia in primary care: a feasibility study. BJGP Open. Jul 2018; 
2(2):bjgpopen18X101589.  
23. Amra S, O'Horo JC, Singh TD, et al. Derivation and validation of the automated search 
algorithms to identify cognitive impairment and dementia in electronic health records. J Crit 
Care. Feb 2017; 37:202- 205. 
24. Maity NG and Das S. Machine learning for improved diagnosis and prognosis in 
healthcare. IEEE Aerospace Confernece. 2017. DOI: 10.1109/AERO.2017.7943950.  
25. Philpis E, Walters A, Biju M, Kuruvilla T. Population -based screening for dementia: 
controversy and current status. Progress in Neurology and Psychiatry. 2016; Jan/Feb:6 -10. 
26. Galvin JE. Using informant and performance screening methods to detect mild cognitive 
impairment and dementia. Curr Geriatr Rep. 2018 Mar; 7(1):19 -25. 
27. Fowler NR, Perkins AJ, Turchan HA, et al. Older primary care patients' attitudes and 
willingness to screen for dementia. J Aging Res. 2015; 2015:423265.  
28. Harrawood A, Fowler NR, Perkins AJ, LaMantia MA, Boustani MA. Acceptability and 
Results of Dementia Screening Among Older Adults in the United States. Curr Alzheimer Res. 
2018; 15(1): 51 -55. 
29. Fowler NR, Perkins AJ, Gao S, Sachs GA, Uebelhor AK, Boustani MA. Patient 
characteristics associated with screening positive for Alzheimer's disease and related dementia. 
Clin Interv Aging. 2018;13:1779- 1785.  
30. Boustani MA, Justiss MD, Frame A, et al. Caregiver and noncaregiver attitudes toward 
dementia screening. J Am Geriatr Soc. Apr 2011; 59(4):681 -686. 
31. Fowler NR, Boustani MA, Frame A, et al. Effect of patient perceptions on dementia 
screening in primary care. J Am Geriatr Soc. Jun 2012; 60(6): 1037- 1043.  
32. Justiss MD, Boustani M, Fox C, et al. Patients' attitudes of dementia screening across 
the Atlantic. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. Jun 2009; 24(6):632- 637. 
33. Monahan PO, Alder CA, Khan BA, Stump T, Boustani MA. The Healthy Aging Brain 
Care (HABC) monitor: validation of the patient self -report version of the clinical tool designed to 
measure and monitor cognitive, functional, and psychological health. Clin I nterv Aging. 2014; 
9:2123- 32 doi:  
10.2147/cia.S64140.  
34. Holmes MM, Stanescu S, Bishop FL. The use of measurement systems to support 
patient self -management of long term conditions: an overview opportunities and challenges.  
Patient Relat Outcome Meas. 2019 Dec 16; 10:385- 394. 
35. Boulesteix AL, Janitza S, Kruppa J, Konig IR. Overview of random forest methodology 
and practical guidance with emphasis on computational biology and bioinformatics. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. Vol 2 2012:493- 507. 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 33 of 35 
 
 36. Seixas FL, Zadrozny B, Laks J, Conci A, Muchaluat Saade DC. A Bayesian network 
decision model for supporting the diagnosis of dementia, Alzheimers disease and mild cognitive 
impairment. Comput Biol Med. Aug 2014; 51140- 158. 
37. Zhang D, Shen D. Multi -modal multi -task learning for joint prediction of multiple 
regression and classification variables in Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage. Jan 16 2012; 
59(2):895- 907. 
38. Moradi E, Pepe A, Gaser C, Huttunen H, Tohka J. Machine learning framework for early 
MRI-based Alzheimer's conversion prediction in MCI subjects. Neuroimage. Jan 1 2015; 
104:398- 412. 
39. Zhang Y, Dong Z, Phillips P, et al. Detection of subjects and brain regions related to 
Alzheimer's disease using 3D MRI scans based on eigenbrain and machine learning. Front Comput Neurosci. 2015; 9:66.  
40. Chen R, Herskovits EH. Machine- learning techniques for building a diagnostic model for 
very mild dementia. Neuroimage. Aug 1 2010; 52(1):234 -244. 
41. Shankle WR, Mani S, Pazzani MJ, Smyth P. Detecting very early stages of dementia 
from normal aging with machine learning methods. Paper presented at: Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence in Medicine1997.  
42. Maroco J, Silva D, Rodrigues A, Guerreiro M, Santana I, de Mendonca A. Data mining 
methods in the prediction of Dementia: A real -data comparison of the accuracy, sensitivity and 
specificity of linear discriminant analysis, logistic regression, neural networks, support vector 
machines, classification trees and random forests. BMC Res Notes. Aug 17 2011; 4:299.  
43. Woods SP, Troster AI. Prodromal frontal/executive dysfunction predicts incident 
dementia in Parkinson's disease. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. Jan 2003; 9(1):17- 24. 
44. Gianattasio KZ, Wu Q, Glymour MM, and Power MC. Comparison of Methods for 
Algorithmic Classification of Dementia Status in the Health and Retirement Study. 
Epidemiology. 2019; 30:291– 302. 
45. Miotto R, Li L, Kidd BA, Dudley JT, Deep patient: an unsupervised representation to 
predict the future of patients from the electronic health records. Sci Rep. 2016 May 17; 6:2609.  
46. Buschke H, Kuslansky G, Katz M, et al. Screening for dementia with the memory 
impairment screen. Neurology. Jan 15 1999;52(2):231- 238. 
47. Lipton RB, Katz MJ, Kuslansky  G, et al. Screening for dementia by telephone using the 
memory impairment screen. J Am Geriatr Soc. Oct 2003;51(10):1382 -1390.  
48. Borson S, Scanlan J, Brush M, Vitaliano P, Domak A. The mini -cog: a cognitive 'vital 
signs' measure for dementia screening in multi -lingual elderly. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2000; 
15(11):1021- 7. 
49. Horsman J, Furlong W, Feeny D, Torrance G. The Health Utilities Index (HUI): concepts, 
measurement properties and applications. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2003; 1:54.  
50. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL. The PHQ -9: A new depression and diagnostic severity measure. 
Psychiatric Annals. 2002; 32:509- 521. 
51. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, Lowe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized 
anxiety disorder: the GAD -7. Arch Intern Med. 2006; 166:1092- 1097.  
52. Boustani M, Perkins AJ, Khandker RK, Duong S, Dexter PR, Lipton R, Black CM, 
Chandrasekaran V, Solid CA, and Monahan P. Passive Digital Signature for Early Identification 
of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2019; XX: 1- 8 (published 
online on Nov 29 2019);  
DOI:10.1111/jgs.16218.)  
53. Galvin JE, Roe CM, Powlishta KK et al. The AD8: a brief informant interview to detect 
dementia. Neurology. 2005; 65:559– 594. 
54. Galvin JE, Roe CM, Xiong C, Morris JC. The validity and reliability of the AD8 informant 
interview for dementia. Neurology. 2006; 67:1942 -1948.  
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 34 of 35 
 
 55. Berman SE, Koscik RL, Clark LR, Mueller KD, Bluder L, Galvin JE, Johnson SC. Use of 
the Quick Dementia Rating System (QDRS) in the Wisconsin Registry for Alzheimer’s 
Prevention. J Alz Dis Report. 2017; 1:9- 13. 
56. Boustani M, Yourman L, Holden RJ, Pang PS, Solid, CA. A profile in population 
management: The Sandra Eskenazi Center for Brain Care Innovation. Generations Supplement. 
2019; 3:68- 72. 
57. Holden RJ, Campbell NL, Abebe E, Clark DO, Ferguson D, Bodke K, Boustani MA, 
Callahan CM, Brain Health Patient Safety Laboratory. Usability and feasibility of consumer -
facing technology to reduce unsafe medication use by older adults. RSAP 2019. doi: 
10.1016/j.sapharm.2019.02.011. Epub 2019 Feb 26. (In Press)  
58. Khan BA, Perkins AJ, Campbell NL, Gao S, Farber MO, Wang S, Khan SH, Zarzaur BL, 
Boustani MA. Pharmacological management of delirium in the intensive care unit: a randomized 
pragmatic clinical trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2019 May; 67(5):1057- 1065.  
59. Campbell NL, Perkins AJ, Khan BA, Gao S, Farber MO, Khan S, Wang S, Boustani MA. 
Deprescribing in the pharmacologic management of delirium: a randomized trial in the intensive 
care unit. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2019; 67(4):695- 702. doi: 10.1111/jgs.15751.  
60. LaMantia MA, Perkins AJ, Gao S, Austrom MG, Alder CA, French DD, Litzelman DK, 
Cottingham AH, Boustani MA. Response to depression treatment in the Aging Brain Care 
Medical Home model. Clin Interv Aging. 2016; 11:1551- 58 doi: 10.2147/cia.S109114.  
61. LaMantia MA, Alder CA, Callahan CM, Gao S, French DD, Austrom MG, Boustany K, 
Livin L, Bynagari B, Boustani MA. The Aging Brain Care Medical Home: Preliminary Data. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2015;  
63(6):1209- 13 doi: 10.1111/jgs.13447.  
62. Khan BA, Calvo- Ayala E, Campbell N, Perkins A, Ionescu R, Tricker J, Campbell T, 
Zawahiri M, Buckley JD, Farber MO, Boustani MA. Clinical decision support system and 
incidence of delirium in cognitively impaired older adults transferred to intensive care. Am J Crit Care. 2013; 22(3):257 -62 doi: 10.4037/ajcc2013447.  
63. Frame A, LaMantia M, Reddy Bynagari BB, Dexter P, Boustani M. Development and 
implementation of an electronic decision support to manage the health of a high- risk population: 
the enhanced Electronic Medical Record Aging Brain Care software (eMR -ABC). E GEMS 
(Washington, DC). 2013; 1(1):1009 doi: 10.13063/2327- 9214.1009.  
64. Boustani MA, Campbell NL, Khan BA, et al. Enhancing care for hospitalized older adults 
with cognitive impairment: a randomized controlled trial. JGIM. 2012; 27(5):561- 7 doi: 
10.1007/s11606 -012-1994- 8. 
65. Kasthurirathne SN, Vest J, Menachemi N, Halverson PK, Grannis SJ. Assessing the 
capacity of social determinants of health data to augment predictive models identifying patients 
in need of wraparound social services. J Am Med Informatics Assoc. 2018;25( 1). 
doi:10.1093/jamia/ocx130 
66. Haas LR, Takahashi PY, Shah ND, Stroebel RJ, Bernard ME, Finnie DM, Naessens JM. 
Risk-stratification methods for identifying patients for care coordination. Am J Manag Care. 
2013; 19(9):725–  
32. PMID: 24304255.  
67. Vest JR, Menachemi N, Grannis SJ, Ferrell JL, Kasthurirathne SN, Zhang Y, Tong Y, 
Halverson PK. Impact of Risk Stratification on Referrals and Uptake of Wraparound Services That Address Social Determinants: A Stepped Wedged Trial. Am J Prev Med. 2019 Feb 14; 
56(4):e125– e133.  
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2018.11.009 PMID: 30772150.  
68. Beekly DL, Ramos EM, Lee WW, Deitrich WD, Jacka ME, Wu J, Hubbard JL, Koepsell 
TD, Morris JC, Kukull WA; NIA Alzheimer's Disease Centers. The National Alzheimer's 
Coordinating Center (NACC) database: the Uniform Data Set. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 
2007 Jul -Sep; 21(3):249 -58. 
IRB#: 20008372812  
 
Version Date:  0 4-05-2023  
 Page 35 of 35 
 
 69. Weintraub S, Besser L, Dodge HH, Teylan M, Ferris S, Goldstein FC, Giordani B, 
Kramer J, Loewenstein D, Marson D, Mungas D, Salmon D, Welsh- Bohmer K, Zhou XH, Shirk 
SD, Atri A, Kukull WA, Phelps C, Morris JC. Version 3 of the Alzheimer Disease Centers'  
Neuropsychological Test Battery in the Uniform Data Set (UDS). Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 
2018 Jan- Mar; 32(1):10- 17. 
70. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bédirian V, Charbonneau S, Whitehead V, Collin I, 
Cummings JL, Chertkow  H. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool 
for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005 Apr; 53(4):695- 9. 
71. Shapiro AM, Benedict RH, Schretlen D, Brandt J. Construct and concurrent validity of  
the HopkinsVerbal Learning Test -revised. Clin Neuropsychol. 1999 Aug; 13(3):348- 58. 
72. Reitan, R.M., Validity of the trail making test as an indication of organic brain damage. 
Perceptual and Motor Skills. 1958; 8:271- 276. 
73. Morris JC.  The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): Current version and scoring rules. 
Neurol. 1993;  
43:2412- 2414.  
74. Kaufer DI, Cummings JL, Ketchel P, Smith V, MacMillan A, Shelley T, Lopez OL, 
DeKosky ST. Validation of theNPI -Q, a brief clinical form of the Neuropsychiatric Inventory. J 
Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2000 Spring; 12(2):233 -9. 
75. Tappen RM, Rosselli M, Engstrom G. Evaluation of the Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ) in cognitive screening across four American ethnic groups. Clin 
Neuropsychol. 2010 May; 24(4):646- 61. 
76. Callahan CM, Boustani MA, Schmid AA, et al. Targeting functional decline in Alzheimer 
disease: a randomized trial. Annals of internal medicine. 2017; 166(3):164 -71 doi: 10.7326/m16 -
0830.  
77. Kim e, Zhang Z, Wang Y, Zeng D. Power calculation for comparing diagnostic 
accuracies in a multi -reader, multi -test design. Biometrics. 2014; 70(4):1033- 41. doi: 
10.1111/biom.12240. Epub 2014 Oct 29.  
78. Obuchowski NA. Nonparametric analysis of clustered ROC curve data. Biometrics. 
1997; 53(2):567- 78. 
79. DeLong, E. R., DeLong, D. M., and Clarke- Pearson, D. L.Comparing the areas under 
two or more correlated receiver operating characteristic curves: A nonparametric approach. 
Biometrics. 1988;  
44:837- 844. 
80. Rao, J. N. K. and Scott, A. J. A simple method for the analysis of clustered binary data. 
Biometrics. 1992; 48:577 -585. 
81. Little RJ, D'Agostino R, Cohen ML, Dickersin K, Emerson SS, Farrar JT, Frangakis C, 
Hogan JW, Molenberghs G, Murphy SA, Neaton JD, Rotnitzky A, Scharfstein D, Shih WJ, 
Siegel JP, Stern H. The prevention and treatment of missing data in clinical trials.  N Engl J Med. 
2012 Oct 4; 367(14):1355- 60. 
82. PASS 2019 Power Analysis and Sample Size Software (2019). NCSS, LLC. Kaysville, 
Utah, USA, ncss.com/software/pass.  
 
 