Official Title:  Microelectrodes in Epilepsy  
NCT number : 
Document  Type:  Study Plan (including statistical analysis plan)
Date of the 
Document:  03/20/2020 Version Date  
06/22/2020 IRB updates finalized  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 1 of 25   
 
 
Instructions:  
The following  information  in the format  provided  below  is an application  for Dartmouth -Hitchcock  Health  review.  Read  
through  each section  and respond  to each  item (even  if to indicate  NA - not applicable) . Please  also review  the 
CHECKLIST  for Full Committee  Submission.  We have  provided  some  guidance  information  under  each question.  
 
Please  define  all acronyms  at first use and attach  a glossary  if more than 3 acronyms  are used in  this application.  
 
When  revising  a D-HH reviewed  Study  Plan for further review, please  track  the changes.  To turn on tracking  in this 
document  in Microsoft  Word:  
1) Display  the forms  and reviewing  toolbars.  
2) Unlock  the form  by clicking  on the lock icon on the forms toolbar.  
3) Turn  on change  tracking  by clicking  the icon on the reviewing  toolbar.  
4) Lock  the form  by clicking  again  on the lock icon on the forms  toolbar.  
 
Attachments:  
Complete  and submit  Attachment(s) if applicable  to the research  study.  
Attachments  may be downloaded  from  this webpage:  http://www.dartmouth.edu/~cphs/tosubmit/forms/StudyPlanAttach  
Attachment  A: Nonsignificant  Risk Devices  
Attachment  B: Placebo  
Attachment  C: Genetic  Research  
Attachment  D: Employees  and Students  
Attachment  E: Illiterate  Participants  
Attachment  F: Research  Involving  Children  
Attachment  G: Research  Involving  Individuals  With  Impaired  Decision -Making  Capacity  
(formerly  referred  to as incompetent)  
Attachment  H: Request  for Waiver  of Participant  Consent  
Attachment  I: Request  for Waiver  of Participant  Signed  Consent  Form  
Attachment  J: Drugs  or Biologics  
Attachment  L: International  Research  
Attachment  M: Pregnant  Women,  Fetuses  and Neonates  
==================================================================  
 
Local  Principal  Investigator:  
Department:    Neurology  
 
Study  Title:  Microelectrodes  in Epilepsy  
Funding  Source  (Sponsor):    Department  of Neurology  Funds  
 
D-HH Study  Plan  Version  Date:  
 
 
1.Abstract.  
Provide  an abstract  of the proposed  research  in language  that can be understood  by a non-scientist . 
The abstract  should  summarize  the objectives  of this project  and the procedures  to be used,  with an 
emphasis  on what  will happen  to the subjects.  (Maximum  250 words)  Dartmouth  College  and Dartmouth -Hitchcock  Medical  Center  
Committee  for the Protection  of Human  Subjects  
 
CPHS  Study  Plan  for Full Committee  Review  
Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Barbara  Jobst,  MD 
30Mar2020  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 2 of 25   
 
 
 
 
2.Objectives  & Hypotheses:  
List your research  objectives  and hypotheses.  
 
 
 
 
 
3.Introduction:  
a) Explain  the background  of this project  so that we will understand  why it is important  to perform  this 
research  project.  b) Summarize  previously  published  data and pilot studies.  Be sure to include  a 
discussion  of any data that do not support  the study  hypothesis.  If a study  similar  to the one being  
proposed  has already  been  completed,  explain  why the proposed  study  is necessary.  c) For studies  
designed  to compare  or evaluate  therapies,  there  should  be a statement  of the relative  advantages  or 
disadvantages  of alternative  modes  of therapy.  d) If not obvious,  explain  why human  subjects  are 
necessary.  Include  references  for all published  data cited.  If a formal  protocol  for the study  exists,  page  
references  to the protocol  are acceptable.  
 
 The standard -of-care for medically  refractory  epilepsy  is resective  brain  surgery.  In certain  patients,  
precise  localization  of the epileptic  focus  is done  using  intracranial  EEG  (iEEG)  recording.  In this type 
of EEG  recording,  electrodes  are placed  on the brain  surface  or inserted  into the brain  through  an 
opening  in the skull.  In addition  to standard  electrode  recording,  several  epilepsy  centers  have  
independently  developed  ultra thin microelectrode  technology.  Microelectrodes  are only several  
micrometers  thick  and are uniquely  useful  because  they are able to record  the activity  of single  neurons  
in isolation.  Such  recording  has tremendous  clinical  potential  in epilepsy  surgery  and tremendous  
research  potential  in cognitive  neuroscience.  This IRB study  plan outlines  our clinical  and research  
interests  in the use of FDA  approved,  commercially  available,  dual macro -micro  electrode  system  in 
patients  who require  intracranial  EEG  recording  prior  to epilepsy  surgery.  
We have  two fundamental  objectives  and hypotheses.  Our first objective  is to investigate  the usefulness  
of microelectrode  technology  in epilepsy  surgery.  We hypothesize  that microelectrode  recording  will 
provide  unique  and novel  information  on the specific  epileptic  potential  of the implanted  brain  tissue.  
Our long-term aim is to improve  our paradigms  for epilepsy  surgery.   Our second  objective  is to 
investigate  the activity  of single  neurons  during  specific  cognitive  tasks.  We hypothesize  that such 
analysis  will help to predict  possible  cognitive  deficits  of epilepsy  surgery  and provide  unique  insight  
into the fundamental  mechanisms  of cognition  and behavior.  
Patients  who have  recurrent  unprovoked  seizures  despite  adequate  treatment  with antiepileptic
medications  have  medically  refractory  epilepsy  (1). This condition  affects  approximately  30% of all
patients  diagnosed  with focal  epilepsy  in the United  States.  The standard  of care for this group  of 
patients  is referral  for epilepsy  surgery.  Epilepsy  surgery  has been  well demonstrated  to be an effective
treatment  option  for these  patients  with high seizure  freedom  rates and low morbidity  in properly  
selected  patients  (2). Each  patient  referred  for epilepsy  surgery  undergoes  a pre-surgical  evaluation  with 
a goal of precise  localization  of the epileptogenic  region  and determining  the probable  cognitive  and 
functional  morbidity  for the surgery.  The pre-surgical  evaluation  frequently  requires  the recording  of 
seizures  using  intracranial  EEG  (iEEG).  In this technique,  specially  designed  electrodes  are surgically  
implanted  into target  regions  of the patient's  brain  by a trained  neurosurgeon  and epileptiform  activity  is 
recorded.  IEEG  recording  has a long track  record  of being  an effective  method  of seizure  localization  
(3) with a complication  rate of 2-4% (4,5).  This method  has been used successfully  at the DHMC  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 3 of 25  Epilepsy  Center  on hundreds  of patients  since  1992.  The recording  of iEEG  for conventional  clinical  
applications  is done  using  a standard  macroelectrode  system.  A macroelectrode  is either  a soft plastic  
strip with multiple  5 mm disc electrodes  or a rigid 10 cm needle  electrode  with multiple  contacts  along  
its length.  Macroelectrodes  are designed  to record  the summated  activity  of relatively  large  groups  of 
neurons  located  in the vicinity  of the electrode  contact.  Although  macroelectrode  iEEG  recording  is the 
mainstay  of surgical  epilepsy  with established  clinical  indications,  significant  limitations  are known.  
 
Currently,  several  well-established  epilepsy  centers  in the United  States  (for instance,  UCLA  and Mayo  
Clinic)  are investigating  the use of microelectrode  systems  in epilepsy  surgery  to supplement  the  
standard  macroelectrode  recording.   Microelectrodes  are ultra thin filament  electrodes  with tip diameters  
of 3 to 10 micrometers  which  are able to record  the activity  of small  groups  or even  single  neurons,  i.e. 
single  unit potential  recording.  Supplementary  microelectrode  recordings  are obtained  using  
commercially  available,  FDA -approved,  dual macro -micro  electrode  systems.  These  dual systems  do   
not require  the insertion  of separate  and additional  microelectrode  catheters  but use the standard  iEEG  
electrode  to deliver  the microelectrodes  to the target  brain  regions.  The major  benefit  of this novel  design  
is that the rate of complications  from  such dual electrode  systems  is the same  and for the standard      
iEEG  electrodes.  
 
The primary  aim of supplementing  standard  iEEG  recording  with single  unit recording  is to obtain  
additional  information  about  the epileptogenic  potential  of the brain  region  that is implanted.  Initial  
research  in this area was done  in the 1980’s  at UCLA  Medical  Center  where  microelectrode  recordings  of 
epileptogenic  brain  tissue  showed  anomalous  bursting  patterns,  coupled  neuronal  firing,  and increased  
local  inhibition  (6, 7). At the same  center  in the 1990’s  high frequency  oscillations  called  fast ripples  
were  recorded  in patients  undergoing  pre-surgical  evaluation  (8, 9) and Braquin  et al Annals  of 
Neurology  2002).  Fast ripples  are ultra-fast neuronal  oscillations  in the 80 to 1000  Hz range  which  have  
been  proposed  to be the exclusive  signatures  of epileptogenic  cortex  (10).  Most  recently,  dual macro - 
micro  system  to record  fast ripples  and determined  that they frequently  appeared  in the microelectrode  
recording  and were  not apparent  in the standard  macroelectrode  recording  (11).  These  findings  suggest  
that fast ripples  are generated  by microscopic  neuronal  structures  which  are frequently  too small  to be 
recorded  using  the standard  macroelectrode  system.  Therefore,  single  unit recording  may offer  clinically  
relevant  information  for epilepsy  surgery.  
 
A second  yet no less important  aim of recording  single  unit potentials  is to gain better  understanding  of 
the role of the epileptogenic  cortex  in cognitive  function.  Once  localization  of epileptogenic  cortex  is 
established,  the functional  role of this cortex  and possible  cognitive  deficits  following  resection  must  be 
established.   Present  paradigms  require  assessment  of cognitive  function  during  the electrical  
stimulation  of macroelectrode  contacts  which  can establish  the eloquence  of the underlying  cortex.  
Recording  of single  unit potentials  with microelectrodes  during  specifically  designed  neuropsychological  
tasks  may offer  unique  insight  into the function  of epileptogenic  cortex.  For example,  studies  done  at 
UCLA  Medical  Center  have shown  that the recording  of single  unit potentials  during  specific  memory  
tasks  has provided  relevant  information  regarding  the functional  state of the hippocampus  (12).  
Therefore,  recording  of single  unit potential  during  specific  cognitive  tasks  may provide  important  
information  on the functional  integrity  of the region  of the brain  where  resection  is planned.  
 
A third  aim of recording  single  unit potentials  is to investigate  the activity  of single  neurons  during  
specific  cognitive  tasks.  For instance,  single  unit recording  from  the hippocampus  using  the dual macro - 
micro  electrode  system  during  specific  cognitive  tasks  has generated  a novel  insight  into the organization  
of the human  semantic  memory  system  (13).  Currently,  patients  at DHMC  undergoing  iEEG  recording  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 4 of 25  may have  depth  electrodes  in the orbitofrontal  region,  the insula,  the amygdala,  and the hippocampus.  
Investigation  of single  unit activity  in these  patients  during  performance  of specific  tasks  may generate  
unique  and novel  insight  into the function  of these  brain  regions  in behavior.  For instance,  investigation  
of the role of mirror  neurons  in social  behavior  may be done  by recording  the activity  of insular  neurons  
during  observation  of facial  expression.  Furthermore,  single  unit activity  in the orbitofrontal  region  
during  Go-No Go tasks  may offer  novel  insight  into the role of this brain  region  in impulse  control.  
 
In summary,  we have  two concurrent  goals  for the use of microelectrode  recording  in patients  
undergoing  iEEG  for surgical  treatment  of medically  refractory  epilepsy.  Our most  salient  goal is to 
augment  the standard  iEEG  recording  with additional  microelectrode  recording  which  may help to 
identify  regions  of epileptogenic  cortex.  Our second  goal is to augment  our ability  to predict  the 
cognitive  risk of epilepsy  surgery  and investigate  the role of the specific  brain  region  in cognition  and 
behavior.  For these  goals,  we will utilize  a safe, commercially  available,  FDA  approved  dual micro - 
macro  electrode  system.  Our hypothesis  is that such recording  will elucidate  specific  characteristics  of 
brain  regions  with epileptogenic  potential,  will offer  novel  insights  into cognitive  neuroscience,  and help 
to predict  neuropsychological  outcomes  of surgery.  
 
References:  
1. Kwan  P, Brodie  MJ. Early  Identification  of Refractory  Epilepsy,  NEJM  342 314-319, Feb 3 2000  
2. Wiebe  S, Blume  WT, Girvin  JP, Eliasziw  M. A Randomized,  Controlled  Trial  of Surgery  for 
Temporal -Lobe  Epilepsy.  NEJM  345:311 -318, August  2, 2001  
3. Steven  P, Ebersole  J. Intracranial  EEG  in Temporal  Lobe  Epilepsy.  Journal  of Clinical  
Neurophysiology, September  1999  - Volume  16 - Issue  5 - p 399 
4. Hamer  HM, Morris  HH, Wyllie  E, Lüders  HO. Complications  of invasive  video -EEG  monitoring  
with subdural  grid electrodes.  Neurology  2002;58:97 -103 
5. Van Gompel  JJ, Worrell  G. Phase  I trial:  safety  and feasibility  of intracranial  
electroencephalography  using  hybrid  subdural  electrodes  containing  macro -and microelectrode  arrays.  
Neurosurg  Focus 25 (3):E23, 2008.  
6. Babb  TL, Brown  WJ. Neuronal,  dendritic,  and vascular  profiles  of human  temporal  lobe epilepsy  
correlated  with cellular  physiology  in vivo.  Adv Neurol.  1986;44:949 -66. 
7. Colder  BW, Wilson  CL, Frysinger  RC, Chao  LC, Harper  RM, Engel  J Jr. Neuronal  synchrony  in 
relation  to burst  discharge  in epileptic  human  temporal  lobes.  J Neurophysiol.  1996  Jun;75(6):2496 -508. 
8. Bragin  A, Engel  J Jr, Wilson  CL, Fried  I, Buzsáki  G. High -frequency  oscillations  in human  brain.  
Hippocampus.  1999;9(2):137 -42 
9. Bragin  A, Wilson  CL, Staba  RJ, Reddick  M, Fried  I, Engel  J Jr. Interictal  high-frequency  oscillations  
(80-500 Hz) in the human  epileptic  brain:  entorhinal  cortex.  Ann Neurol.  2002  Oct;52(4):407 -15. 
10. Staba  RJ, Frighetto  L, Behnke  EJ, Mathern  GW,  Fields  T, Bragin A, Ogren J, Fried  I, Wilson  CL, 
Engel  J Jr. Increased  fast ripple  to ripple  ratios  correlate  with reduced  hippocampal  volumes  and neuron  
loss in temporal  lobe epilepsy  patients.  Epilepsia.  2007  Nov;48(11):2130 -8. Epub  2007  Jul 28. 
11. Greg  A.Worrell,1  Andrew  B.Gardner,3  S. Matt Stead,1,2  Sanqing  Hu,1  Steve  Goerss,4  Gregory  J. 
Cascino,1  Fredric  B. Meyer,4  Richard  Marsh4  and Brian  Litt3High -frequency  oscillations  in human  
temporal  lobe:  simultaneous  microwire  and clinical  macroelectrode  recordings.  Brain  February  7, 2008  
12. Cameron  KA, Yashar  S, Wilson  CL, Fried  I.. Human  hippocampal  neurons  predict  how well word  
pairs  will be remembered.  Neuron.  2001  Apr;30(1):289 -98 
13. Gelbard -Sagiv  H, Mukamel  R, Harel  M, Malach  R, Fried  I. Internally  generated  reactivation  of 
single  neurons  in human  hippocampus  during  free recall.  Science.  2008  Oct 3;322(5898):96 -101. Epub  
2008  Sep 4. 
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 5 of 25  4.Design,  procedures,  materials  and methods:  
Use a level  of detail  similar  to what  would  be used when  submitting  an article  for publication  in a peer 
reviewed  journal.  Explain  the study  procedures,  data collection,  and analysis  process.  Please  define  
terms  and explain  concepts  which  might  be confusing  to reviewers  who are not expert  in the area of the 
study.  If a formal  protocol  for the study  exists,  page references  to the protocol  are acceptable.  
 
 
Patient  selection.  Patients  with medically  refractory  epilepsy  are referred  to DHMC  for surgical  
evaluation.  The first stage  of the evaluation  includes  inpatient  video  EEG  monitoring,  epilepsy  protocol  
MRI,  and a neuropsychological  evaluation.  Following  the initial  evaluation,  each patient’s  case is 
discussed  in the epilepsy  surgery  conference.  The conference  is attended  by all Dartmouth  epilepsy  
neurologists  and neurosurgeons.  A consensus  among  all physicians  is reached  regarding  further  
evaluation.  Approximately  50% of patients  require  intracranial  EEG  (iEEG)  recording  prior  to epilepsy  
surgery.  If a patient  requires  iEEG,  the strategy  for the exact  type of electrode  implantation  is  
determined  at the same  surgical  conference.  Subsequently,  the need  for iEEG  monitoring  is discussed  
with the patient  in the outpatient  clinic.  Patients  who meet  clinical  indication  for iEEG  recording  will be 
asked  to participate  in the research  study.  If the patient  agrees,  certain  standard  electrodes  will be 
substituted  with the dual micro -macro  electrodes  during  the iEEG  recording.  
 
Electrodes.   Ad-tech is the largest  manufacturer  and supplier  of intracranial  electrodes  for use in 
epilepsy  surgery.  Ad-tech standard  macroelectrodes  have  been used at Dartmouth -Hitchcock  Medical  
Center  since  1992  in hundreds  of iEEG  cases.  In addition  to macroelectrodes,  Ad-tech currently  
manufactures  two types  of dual macro -micro  electrode  systems  that will be used in the study.  The 
appropriate  type of electrode  system  will be determined  by the study  team.  
 
One system  is designed  to mimic  the original  macroelectrode  design  with the addition  of ultra-thin 
microelectrodes.  The original  macroelectrode  dimensions  and properties  are retained  and additional  
microelectrodes  are positioned  at the tip. Leads  for the macro  and micro  electrode  recording  are separate  
and are connected  to two distinct  recording  systems.  Safety  information  for the use of the dual  
electrodes  is provided  from  a single  retrospective  study  of 24 patients  who underwent  the dual electrode  
implantation  at Mayo  Clinic.  The complication  rate for microelectrodes  was 4% compared  to 6% for 
standard  electrode  systems.  Attachment  #1 and Attachment  #2 address  the safety  of the electrodes.  
 
The second  system  (Behnke  Fried/Micro  Inner  Wire  Bundle)  consists  of an outer  macro  contact  depth  
electrode  that accepts  delivery  of an inner  micro  wire bundle.  The micro  contacts  extend  past the tip of 
the macro  depth  electrode.  
 
Data  Recording.  Recording  of iEEG  using  macroelectrodes  has been  routinely  performed  at Dartmouth  
using  the Natus  system.  Recording  of microelectrode  potentials  will be done  using  a separate  Digital  
Lynx system or the clinical  Natus  system.  The two systems  are distinct  and will not share  information.  
The Digital  Lynx system  is a state-of-the-art microelectrode  recording  system  manufactured  by 
Neuralynx.  Neuralynx  provides  the highest  quality  microelectrode  recording  equipment.  The Digital  
Lynx system  is not FDA  approved  for clinical  use. However,  it has been  fully tested  and meets  the 
60601  medical  safety  standards,  has the 60601 -1 safety  certification  for medical  devices,  and has meets  
the 60601 -2-26 safety  standards  for EEG  equipment.  This system  is available  for clinical  use through  
the lab of Barbara  Jobst.  Attachment  #3 addresses  the safety  of the Digital  Lynx System.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 6 of 25   
 
 
 
5.Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria:  
Please  provide  detailed  description  of inclusion  and exclusion  criteria.  If a formal  protocol  for the study  
exists,  page references  to the protocol  are acceptable.  
 
 
 
 
 
6.Financial  Considerations:  
Disclosure  of financial  impact  on the participant  is critical  to informed  consent.  Insurance  cannot  be 
billed  for research -related  services  outside  the standard  of care or paid for by the funding  agency  for the 
study.  The department,  the study  or the participant  may be responsible  for payment  for research -related  
services.  Participants  should  know  which  tests,  visits,  or procedures  will be billed  to them  or their 
insurance  and which  ones will be paid by the funding  agency  for the study  or the department.  
 
a) List tests,  visits,  and procedures  performed  for only research  purposes.  These  services  are outside  the 
standard  of care.  They  would  not be performed  if the individual  were  not a research  participant,  and may 
not be billed  to a health  insurance  plan.  
Note:  6a information  must  also be in "How  is this different . . ." section  of the consent  form.  
Cognitive  Tasks.  Patients  who agree  to participate  in microelectrode  studies  may be asked  to participate
in a study  which  involves  a cognitive  task. Each  task will be specifically  designed  to elicit  a specific
cognitive  function  important  to testing  of the regions  where  electrodes  are implanted.  The task could  be
a memory  task, such as remembering  of word  pairs  if electrodes  reside  in the hippocampus.  The task 
may involve  perception  of facial  emotion,  mimicry  of facial  movements,  mimicry  of planned  
movements,  smell  appreciation,  taste appreciation,  appreciation  of disgust,  or visual  spatial  analysis.  
The type of task that a patient  gets will depend  on the region  of the brain  that is implanted  by the
microelectrode.  
Data  Analysis.   Data  on neuronal  discharge  characteristics  will be recorded  using  the 64 Chanel  Digital
Lynx system  running  Cheetah  software.  The characteristics  of fast ripples,  and the data on neuronal
firing  characteristics  during  specific  cognitive  tasks  will by exported  to Matlab  software  for statistical
analysis.  Data  analysis  will be done  by either  the study  team  at DHMC/Dartmouth  College,  or by 
collaborators  at Columbia  University.  
Inclusion  criteria:  
1. 18-65 year old 
2. male  or female  
3. right  or left handed  
4. IQ>70  
5. medically  refractory  focal  epilepsy  requiring  intracranial  EEG  for pre-surgical  evaluation  deemed  
medically  necessary  
6. no contraindications  to intracranial  electrode  study  
7. able and willing  to participate  in research  
 
Exclusion  criteria:  
1. does not meet  the inclusion  criteria  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 7 of 25   
 
 
 
b) List the tests,  visits,  and procedures  that may be standard  care,  but for which  the funding  agency  for 
the study  is paying.  
 
 
 
 
 
c) Will the funding  agency  for the study  be responsible  for the above  costs?  
Yes No 
If No, describe  who will be responsible  (i.e., department  or participant).  
The Department  of Neurology  will be responsible  for all research  costs  outside  of standard  of care.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.Statistical  Methods  and Review  Statement : 
a) Specify  the primary  endpoint,  as well as other  endpoint(s).  
 
 
 
b) State  the statistical  analysis  plan,  including  all hypothesis  tests (e.g.,  t-test, chi-square),  and estimation  
methods  related  to the primary  endpoint.  If a formal  protocol  for the study  exists,  page references  to the 
protocol  are acceptable.  
 
 
 
 
c) Justify  the sample  size, using  the concepts  of power,  type I error,  and effect  size if applicable.  If a 
formal  protocol  for the study  exists,  page references  to the protocol  are acceptable.  There  is no predicted  extra  cost to the patient  if they choose  to participate  in the study.  We will purchase  
the research  portion  of the dual micro -macro  electrode  system  using  research  funds.  Use of Digital  Lynx 
system,  collection  of data,  data analysis,  creating  and administration  of neurocogntive  tasks  will be done  
during  research  time of individuals  in the study.  Nothing  that is done  outside  the standard  of care will be 
billed  to the patients.  
None  
PLEASE  ENCLOSE  THE  DHMC  BILLING  GRID/PLAN.  Also  enclose  the schedule  of events  or 
table  listing  all procedures  from  the sponsor  protocol.  A Billing  Grid  will not be applicable  to this 
study  as there  is not a sponsor  and all procedures are  standard  of care.  There  are only 2 points of 
contact  with  the patient  regarding  the study:  1. Consenting  the patient  after  a routine  office  visit 
and 2. Standard  of care surgical  evaluation.  
The primary  hypothesis  is that high oscillations  (fast ripples)  occur  in epileptogenic  cortex  and are 
absent  in non-epileptogenic  cortex.  Our secondary  hypothesis  is that single  unit activity  recorded  from  
various  electrode  positions  in the brain  will correlate  with specific  cognitive  tasks.  
The recording  of high frequency  oscillations  will require  only basic  statistical  analysis  using  chi-square  
testing.  The analysis  of neuronal  discharge  characteristics  and temporal  association  with specific  
cognitive  tasks  will be done  using  Matlab.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 8 of 25   
 
 
 
8.Data  and Safety  Monitoring:  
Describe  plans  for data and safety  monitoring  to ensure  the safety  of subjects  and the quality  of the data.  
As described  in federal  guidance  “… a variety  of types  of monitoring  may be anticipated  depending  on 
the nature,  size, and complexity  of the trial. In many  cases,  the principal  investigator  would  be expected  
to perform  the monitoring  function.”  This plan should  include  monitoring  to determine:  
 
The progress  of the trial, including  periodic  assessments  of data quality  and timeliness,  participant  
recruitment,  accrual  and retention,  participant  risk versus  benefit,  and other  factors  that can affect  study  
outcome.  Monitoring  should  also consider  factors  external  to the study  when  interpreting  the data,  such 
as scientific  or therapeutic  developments  that may have  an impact  on the safety  of the participants  or the 
ethics  of the study.  
 
Note:  This section  does not request  information  related  to sponsor  study  monitor  visits.  This section  
requires  a description  of an adequate  data and safety  monitoring  plan.  
 
 
 
 
9.Genetics:  
Does  any part of the study  involve  genetic  analysis  of biological  specimens?  
Yes No 
If yes,  respond  to Genetics  Attachment  C 
 
 
10.Instruments:  
Describe  each instrument,  if any, used to collect  data in this study.  
 
Attach  copies  of any questionnaires,  surveys,  or interview  questions.  If the research  involves  interviews  
that could  evolve  as the research  progresses,  include  a list of discussion  topics  and any “starter”  
questions  for each topic  that can reasonably  be expected  to be covered.  If a draft of a written  
questionnaire  or survey  is attached,  it should  be clearly  labeled  as such and a final version  should  be sent 
to Dartmouth -Hitchcock  Health  (D-HH) IRB for review  before  data collection  begins.  
 
 
 
11.Deception.  
Will deception  of participants,  including  withheld  information,  be used in this research?  
Yes No 
If yes, complete  a-d. 
 
a) Describe  the deception  being  used in this study:  We are planning  to enroll  up to 50 patients  over an extended  period  of time.  The power  calculations  and 
effect  size, will depend  on the cognitive  task applied  in the individual  patient  for the specific  electrode  
array.  
The safety  of dual macro -micro  electrodes  will be assessed  with every  patient.  Complete  data analysis  
will be done  with every  patient.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 9 of 25   
 
 
b) Explain  why deception  is necessary  in this research:  
 
 
 
c) Describe  the information  provided  to subjects  when  they decide  to participate:  
 
 
 
d) Describe  how the subjects  will be provided  with additional  pertinent  information  after 
participation  (debriefing):  
 
 
 
 
 
12.Timetables:  
a) Indicate  length  of participant  involvement  in the study:  
 
 
b) Estimate  how long it will take to enroll  enough  participants  to complete  this study:  
 
 
13.Risks:  
The purpose  of this section  is to determine  if subjects  will be placed  "at risk,"  which  in general  means  
exposed  to the possibility  of physical,  psychological,  social,  economic,  legal,  dignitary  or other  harm  as a 
consequence  of any activity  proposed  in the research  project.  
 
a) What  is the overall  risk classification  of the research?  
 
Minimal  
Greater  than minimal  
Significant   
Unknown  
 
Note:  In the federal  regulations  on human  subjects  protection  minimal  risk means  "The  probability  and magnitude  of harm  or 
discomfort  anticipated  in the research  are not greater  in and of themselves  than those  ordinarily  encountered in  daily  life or 
during  the performance  of routine  physical  or psychological  examinations  or tests."  
 
b) Describe  any potential  risks  (physical,  psychological,  social,  legal,  economic,  or other)  and assess  
their likelihood  and seriousness.  Describe  the procedures  for protecting  against  or minimizing  these  
risks,  including  risks to confidentiality,  and assess  their likely  effectiveness.  Please  list risks from  most  
severe/likely  to least severe/unlikely.  ongoing  study.  We think  we can enroll  2-3 patients  per year.  This  will be an  Each  participant  will be enrolled  into the 
study  for the duration of their  iEEG  monitoring, this  is an inpatient  admission  of less than two  
weeks.   
 
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 10 of 25  The risk of participation  in the study  overall  is only minimally  greater  that standard  iEEG  recording,  
although  conclusive  risk assessment  is not available.  The safety  of dual micro -macro  electrode  systems  
has been  annalyzed  in a retrospective  study  done  at the Mayo Clinic  by Van Gompell  et al. In this study,  
24 consecutive  patients  underwent  long-term iEEG  monitoring  with implanted  dual depth  and subdural  
grid and strip electrodes;  both clinical  macroelectrodes  and research  microelectrodes  were  used.  The 
patients  included  18 women  and 6 men with an average  age of 35 (range  21–65). The mean  hospital  stay 
was 11 days (range  5–20), with mean  duration  of implantation  7.0 days (range  3–15). Data from  the 198 
consecutive  craniotomies  for standard  clinical  subdural  grid insertion  (prior  to surgery  in the 24 patients  
described  here)  were  used for comparison  to investigate  the relative  risk of complications.  The overall  
complication  rate was 4.2%  (only  1 patient  had a complication),  which  did not significantly  differ  from  
the complication  rate previously  reported  by the authors  of 6.6%  when  standard  subdural  and depth  
intracranial  electrodes  were  used.  There  were  no deaths  or permanent  neurological  deficits  related  to 
electrode  implantation.  In conclusion,  he authors  demonstrated  the use of hybrid  subdural  strip and grid 
electrodes  containing  and standard  clinical  macroelectrodes.  In this initial  study  in 24 patients,  the 
complication  rate is acceptable,  and there  does not appear  to be increased  risk associated  with the use of 
hybrid  electrodes  compared  with standard  subdural  and depth  iEEG  electrodes.  Please  refet to 
Attachments  #1 and #2 for further  details.  
 
Digital  Lynx system is not FDA  approved.  However,  it has been certified  to be UL/EN  60601 -1 and 
60601 -22 compliant.  Details  are enclosed  in attachment  #3. 
 
A theoretical  risk of potential  physical  neuronal  injury  by direct  contact  of a microelectrode  with a 
neuron  exists.  This type of injury  has not been reported  in humans  with use of microelectrodes.  
Potential  injury  by direct  microelectrode  contact  would  most  likely  be limited  to single  neurons  or very 
small  populations  of neurons.  No neurocognitive  effect  would  be expected  by injury  to such small  
populations  of neurons.  
 
 
14.Risk/Benefit  analysis:  
Describe  why the risks  to subjects  are reasonable  in relation  to the anticipated  benefits  to participants  
and in relation  to the importance  of the knowledge  that may reasonably  be expected  to result  from  the 
study.  
 
 
 
 
15. Research  Setting  
a) Is this a multi -center  study?  
Yes No 
If yes: Are you the lead investigator?  Yes No 
If you are NOT  the lead investigator:  
Name  of lead investigator:  
Institution  where  the lead investigator  is located:  The potential  risk of this study  is reasonable  give the wealth  of potential  information  which  may be 
gained  from  this study.  Potential  benefits  include  improvement  in prediction  of neuropsychological  
outcomes,  improvement  in detection  of epileptogenic  brain  regions,  and novel  understanding  of 
neurocognitive  mechanisms.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 11 of 25  b) List all sites where  research  will take place  and D-HH is the reviewing  IRB (e.g. DHMC  Alliance  
Hospitals,  DHMC  Clinics,  WRJ  VAMC):  
 
 
 
 
c) If you are the lead investigator  of a multi -center  study,  list all sites where  research  will take place  
and D-HH is NOT  the reviewing  IRB:  or check  N/A 
 
Note:  Each  site taking  part in the research  should  have  appropriate  institutional  or IRB oversight.  A 
Site Agreement  or Federalwide  Assurance  may be required.  The D-HH office  can assist  you with these  
arrangements.  
 
 
 
d) Does  the study  involve  sites outside  of the United  States  and Canada?  
Yes No 
If yes, are arrangements  for the international  site(s)  being  made  by a multinational  pharmaceutical  or 
device  sponsor  or a cooperative  oncology  working  group?  
Yes No 
If no, please  complete  Attachment  L. 
 
 
 
 
16.Adequacy  of Resources  to Protect  Subjects:  
a) Investigator  (including  co-investigators)  has sufficient  time to conduct  and complete  the research.  
Yes No 
 
b) Adequately  qualified  (including  experience,  training,  supervision,  and familiarity  with the protocol)  
staff are available  for this research.  
Yes No. 
 
c) Describe  availability  of psychological,  social,  or medical  services,  which  include  counseling  or social  
support  services,  that may be required  as a consequence  of research  participation.  
 
 
 
d) Describe  psychological,  social,  or medical  monitoring,  ancillary  care,  equipment  needed  to protect  
participants  (e.g. close  proximity  to resuscitation  equipment  or a plan for monitoring  of emotional  state 
during  study  procedures).  
 
 DHMC  - Lebanon  
Patients  are routinely  evaluated  by neuropsychologists  as part of routine  work -up. As subjects  will be 
inpatients  during  their participation  in the study,  epilepsy  , neuropsychiatry,  and psychology  services  
will be available.  
The study  will be conducted  inside  the Epilepsy  Monitoring  Unit (EMU)  at DHMC.  This unit is 
specifically  equipped  to deal with complications  of epilepsy  and epilepsy  surgery.  The unit has 
continuous  video  EEG  monitoring,  meets  safety  standards  for operating  an EMU,  has specially  trained  
and qualified  nurses  who are able to treat seizures.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 12 of 25  e) Describe  other  resources  needed  for the protection  of subjects  in the conduct  of this research  (e.g. 
language  translation  services).  
 
 
 
f) Explain  how the investigator  has access  to a population  that would  allow  recruitment  of the required  
number  of subjects.  
 
 
 
 
17.Participant  Population : 
Certain  populations  are considered  vulnerable  to coercion  and undue  influence.  These  populations  are 
provided  with additional  protections  when  participating  in a research  study.  The populations  include:  
 prisoners  
 human  embryos  
 fetuses  
 elderly  people  
 people  with an cognitive  disability  (also  see #23 below)  
 people  with a disabling  psychiatric  illness  
 people  who are economically  disadvantaged  persons  
 people  who are illiterate  
 
Refer  to: Students,  Employees  Attachment  D 
Illiterate  Subjects  Attachment  E 
 
a) List vulnerable  groups:  or check  None  
 
 
 
b) Describe  additional  protections:  or check  N/A 
 
 
 
 
18.Gender  and Racial/Ethnic  distribution : 
NIH guidelines  state that research  involving  human  participation  should  include  minorities  and both 
genders.  
Note:  If one gender  or minorities  are excluded or are inadequately  represented in  this research,  particularly  in proposed  
population -based  studies,  a clear  and compelling  rationale  for exclusion  or inadequate  representation  should be provided.  None  
Patients  who have medically  refractory  epilepsy  are referred  to the DHMC  Epilepsy  Center  for surgical  
evalaution.  Each  year,  between  10-15 intracranial  EEG  studies  are performed.  Patients  will be recruited  
from  among  all patient  who meet  the inclusion  criteria.  We anticipate  that 5-8 patients  per year will be 
recruited  to participate  in the study.  
People  with a cognitive  disability  who meet  the inclusion  criteria,  and are capable  of performing  the 
cognitive  tasks,  but are not capable  of giving  informed  consent.  
The informed  consent  process  for potential  participants  with a cognitive  disability  who have  a legal  
guardian  will include  the participant  and their legal  guardian.  As the risks associated  with this study  are 
minimal,  no other  additional  protections  would  be needed.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 13 of 25  Will eligibility  for the study  be based  on gender,  race,  or ethnicity?  Yes No 
If yes, explain:  
 
 
 
 
19.Pregnant  Women:  
Are pregnant  women  eligible  for enrollment  into this study?  Yes No 
If yes, respond  to Research  Involving  Pregnant  Women,  Fetuses  and Neonates:  Attachment  M 
If no, explain  and include  a process  to determine  pregnancy  status.  If a pregnancy  test is required,  note 
who will pay: 
 
 
 
 
20.Fetuses  and Neonates:  
Are fetuses  and neonates  participants  in the research?  
Yes No 
If yes, respond  to Research  Involving  Pregnant  Women,  Fetuses  and Neonates : Attachment  M 
 
 
21.Children:  
Are children  eligible  for enrollment  into this study?  Under  state law, a child  is a person  less than 18 
years  old. 
Yes No 
If yes,  respond to Children:  Attachment  F 
If no, present  an acceptable  justification  for the exclusion:  
 
Note:  NIH guidelines  state that research  involving  human  participation  should  include  children  unless  there  is appropriate  
justification  for their  exclusion.  The investigator should address  the rationale  for selecting  or excluding  a specific  age range  
of children,  or an explanation  of the reasons  for excluding  children  as participants  in the research.  When  children  are 
included,  the plan should also include  a description  of the expertise  of the investigative team  for dealing  with children  at the 
ages included,  of the available  facilities  to accommodate  the children,  and a sufficient  number of children  to contribute  
meaningfully  to the study  analysis.  
 
 
 
 
22.Women  of Child -Bearing  Capability  
Are women  of child -bearing  capability  eligible  for enrollment  into this study?  
Yes No 
If yes, describe  potential  harm  to an unborn  fetus  from  study  activities  and the process  for determining  
pregnancy  status  if necessary.  If a pregnancy  test is required,  note who will pay. If there  is potential  
harm  to an unborn  fetus,  the investigator  should  review  with each individual  a plan to avoid  pregnancy.  
If the investigator  regards  these  contraceptive  plans  as inadequate,  the individual  should  be advised  on 
how to achieve  adequate  contraception  or should  be excluded  from  the study.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 14 of 25   
 
 
If no, explain  why this population  is not eligible  and how you will determine  eligibility  for each woman.  
 
 
 
 
23.Individuals  With  Impaired  Decision -Making  Capacity:  
Will participants  potentially  lacking  capacity  to provide  informed  consent  be eligible  to enroll  in this 
study?  Yes No 
If yes, respond  to Research  Involving  Individuals  With  Impaired  Decision -Making  Capacity:  
Attachment  G 
 
 
24.Recruitment:  
Describe  how subjects  will be recruited  for participation  in this study:  
Eligible  participants  may be identified  from  medical  record  information  as a “preparatory  to research”  
activity  under  the HIPAA  Privacy  Rule.  Protected  health  information  obtained  as a preparatory  to 
research  activity  may not be removed  by a researcher  from  DHMC,  including  on mobile  electronic  
storage  devices.  Contact  with the identified  participants,  however,  may not occur  without  prior  D-HH 
approval  of the recruitment  plan for the study.  This plan should  describe  how initial  contact  with 
participants  will be made  and by whom.  Please  note in general,  individuals  should  not be contacted  for 
recruitment  into a research  study  by someone  unknown  to the individual.  
 
a) Will subjects  be recruited  by searching  records  (e.g.,  school  records,  medical  records)?  
Yes No 
If yes, will this search  include  paper  files?  
Yes No 
If yes, where  will these  paper  files be located?  
 
If yes, will this search  include  electronic  files?  
Yes No 
If yes, who maintains  these  electronic  files?  
 
b) Will databases  be utilized?  
Yes No 
If yes, please  specify  types  and locations  of databases:  
 
 
 
c) Will fliers  or brochures  be posted,  mailed  or otherwise  distributed?  
Yes No 
 
d) Will letters  be sent to potential  participants?  
Yes No 
If yes, please  provide  the letter(s)  for D-HH review.  All patients  undergoing  surgical  work  up for epilspsy  have  a pregnancy  test done.  Patients  who are 
pregnant  are excluded  from  epilepsy  surgery  and will not be included  in this study.  
 Patients  will be recruited  from  the clinical   
patient  pool of patients  of the Dartmouth  Epilepsy  Program. No specific  or pre-exisisting  database  
will be searched.   
 
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 15 of 25  e) Will referral  be utilized  for recruitment?  
Yes No 
If yes, please  be aware  patients  should  first be informed  about  the study  and agree  to the contact  before  
any referral.  
f) Will any other  method  be employed?  
Yes No 
If yes, please  specify,  in detail,  what  those  methods  will be: 
 
 
 
g) Does  the research  plan include  “finder  fees”  or incentives  (bonus  payment,  gift certificates)  offered  to 
study  personnel  for enrollment  of participants?  
Yes No 
Note:  As a rule, finder fees  or incentives  are not acceptable.  Please  justify  any offered  incentives.  If incentives  become  
available  during  the course  of the study, please  notify  D-HH. 
 
 
 
Attach  copies  of any proposed  flyers,  posters,  pamphlets,  print  advertisements,  and scripts  for on-air 
advertisements  or telephone  calls.  All recruitment  materials  should  be approved  by D-HH prior  to use. 
 
Note:  Advertising  should not use terms  such as “new  treatment,”  “new  medication,”  or “new  drug”  without explaining  that  
the test article  is investigational.  A phrase  such as “receive  new treatments”  implies  that research  participants  will be  
receiving  newly  marketed  products  of proven  worth.  Advertisements  should not promise  “free  medical  treatment,”  when  the 
intent  is only to say  participants  will not be charged for taking  part in the investigation.  D-HH will determine  if the promise    
of treatment  without  charge  is an inappropriate  inducement  for study  participation.  Advertisements  may state that participants  
will be paid,  but should  not emphasize the payment or the amount to be paid.  The advertisement  should  include:  the name and 
address  of clinical  investigator and research  facility; the condition  under study  or the purpose  of the research;  in         
summary  form, the criteria  that will be used to  determine  eligibility  for the study;  a brief  list of participation  benefits,  if any 
(e.g.,  a no-cost health  examination);  the time or other  commitment  required  of the participants;  and the location  of the   
research  activities;  and the person  or office  from  whom  to obtain  further information.  
 
25.Consent  Process:  
The Principal  Investigator  (PI) is responsible  for ensuring  all participants  have provided  informed  
consent  to participate  in this study  unless  the consent  process  is waived  or altered  by D-HH. The PI may 
authorize  other  appropriately  trained  individuals  to obtain  consent  from  participants.  
 
Please  file the consent  form  in the medical  record  of each research  participant  if study  participation  may 
affect  other  medical  treatment.  
 
Explain  how informed  consent  to research  participation  will be obtained.  Please  describe  the consent  
process,  including  information  about:  
 Who  has been authorized  by the PI to obtain  consent  
 The time interval  between  providing  information  potential  participants  about  a study  and having  
the consent  form  signed  
 Any precautions  taken  to minimize  the possibility  of coercion  or undue  influence  Patients  who are candidates  for intracranial  EEG  monitoring  for presurgical  evaluaion  of medically  
refractory  epilepsy  will be asked  in the outpatient  clinic  or over the telephone  by their clinician  if they 
would  like to participate  in a clinical  study.  If they do, they (and their legal  guardian,  if applicable)  will 
be provided  with all pertinent  study  information.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 16 of 25   Plans  for responding  to a potential  participant  or a legally  authorized  representative  who does not 
speak  English,  such as the use of a translator  or a translated  consent  form  
 Any aids used to simplify  scientific  or technical  information,  like a diagram  
 Plans  to accommodate  the probable  literacy  level  of potential  participants  
Dr. Barbara  Jobst  or a qualified,  appropriately  trained  person  designated  by Dr. Jobst  will be responsible  
for the consent  process.  All persons  designated  by Dr. Jobst  to obtain  consent  will have completed  the 
Protection  of Human  Subjects  training,  or the equivalent  accepted  by D-HH.  The patients  will be seen  
in the outpatient  epilepsy  clinic  to discuss  intracranial  EEG  monitoring  prior  to epilepsy  surgery.  The 
consent  will take place  at the same  clinic  visit.  Patients  who do not have  a clinic  visit scheduled  prior  to 
admission  (usually  due to travel  distance)  will be contacted  by their clinicial  via telephone.  If they are 
interested,  a consent  form  will be sent to them  for review,  and their signature  obtained  on the day of their 
admission.  Undue  coersion  will be minimized  by the team  approach  to determining  who is a candidate  
for intracranial  EEG  study.  That is, the decision  for iEEG  and implant  plan is made  during  epilepsy  
surgery  conference  and requires  the unanimous  approval  of all involved  physicians.  Only  patients  who 
require  iEEG  will be approach  to participate  in the study.  We will not obtain  research  testing  on patient  
who cannot  understand  or speak  English.  We may show  patients  actual  examples  of the electrodes  used 
for routine  clinical  care and the dual electrodes  to help them  make  the decision.  
 
Patients  who are not able to provide  informed  consent  will be considered  for participation  in the study  if: 
1) they meet  the inclusion  criteria;  2) they are interested  in participating  in the study  and; 3) in the 
judgement  of the research  team  they are capable  of performing  the cognitive  tasks.  In those  instances  the 
patient  and their legal  guardian  will both participate  in the informed  consent  process,  with the legal  
guardian  signing  the consent  form.  
 
I intend  to obtain  consent  for research  participation  but I am requesting  a waiver  for the use of a 
signed  and dated  consent  form.  Please  respond  to the criteria  listed  in Attachment  I and include  an 
information  sheet  based  on the D-HH template.  
 
I am requesting  an alteration  of the consent  process  to exclude  certain  information  that is ordinarily  
required.  A list of the essential  elements  of consent  to research  participation  is available  on the CPHS  
website:       http://www.dartmouth.edu/~cphs/tosubmit/ConsentElements.html.  
Please  respond  to Attachment  H. 
 
I am requesting  a waiver  of the entire  consent  process  and use of a consent  form.  Please  respond  to 
Attachment  H. 
 
Explain  why any alteration  or waiver  to the consent  process  or form  is necessary.  
 
 
 
b) Authorization:  Explain  how an authorization  for research  use of protected  health  information  (PHI)  
will be obtained.  PHI is individually  identifiable  health  information  obtained  from  a health  care  
provider  or insurance  plan.  In general,  the HIPAA  Privacy  Rule  permits  the use or disclosure  of PHI for 
research  purposes  only with an authorization  from  each participant  whose  PHI will be involved.  Only  
when  certain  criteria  are satisfied  can D-HH grant  a waiver  of authorization  or of the use of a signed  and 
dated  authorization  form.  A waiver  of authorization  is necessary  for recruitment  procedures  when  
patient  information  is used to identify  and contact  potentially  eligible  research  participants.  A single  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 17 of 25  form  may combine  the essential  information  for both consent  and an authorization.  The D-HH consent  
template  contains  this combination  and is available  on the D-HH website.  
 
Check  all that apply:  
This study  does not involve  PHI. 
A single  form  combining  an authorization  with the consent  form  and based  on the CPHS  template  is 
included  with this application.  
A separate  authorization  form  is included  with this application.  
I am requesting  a waiver  of authorization  for only the recruitment  procedure.  Please  respond  to 
Attachment  H. 
I am requesting  a waiver  of signed  and dated  authorization.  Please  respond  to Attachment  I. 
I am requesting  a waiver  of authorization  for the use or disclosure  of PHI in this entire  study.  Please  
respond  to Attachment  H. 
 
In your explanation  of the consent  process  above,  please  include  information  about  obtaining  
authorization  for the research  use of PHI. 
 
 
26.Privacy  and Confidentiality : 
Describe  the plans  to protect  the privacy  of subjects  and maintain  the confidentiality  of the data.  
 
Note:  Under certain  circumstances, an invasion  of privacy  or breach  of confidentiality  may present  a risk of serious  harm  to 
subjects  (e.g.,  as when  the research  obtains  information  about  subjects  that would,  if disclosed  by the researcher,  jeopardize  
jobs or lead to prosecution  for criminal behavior).  Under other circumstances,  an invasion  of privacy  or breach  of 
confidentiality  can be a moral  wrong  
 
a) Will any study  activities  involve  an interaction  or reveal  information  for which  protection  of 
participant  privacy  is necessary?  
Yes No 
If yes, please  identify  the activities  and describe  the plan to protect  the privacy  of participants.  For 
example,  a plan for protection  of privacy  might  consist  of conducting  the assent  process  for an 
adolescent  minor  in a private  setting,  rather  than in the presence  of the minor’s  parent.  
 
 
 
 
b) Will the data collected  in the course  of the study  be considered  sensitive,  e.g., include  information  
about  a mental  health  disorder,  HIV status,  or SS#?  
Yes No 
If yes, provide  the rationale  for why these  data are needed:  
 
 Data  recorded  during  the study  will include  the names  of patients,  their dates  of birth,  medical  record  
numbers,  and results  of testing.  This information  will be kept on DHMC  servers.  Data sent from  DHMC  
to collaborators  at Columbia  University  will be de-identified.  Access  to the data will only be available  
for investigators  involved  in the study.  
 
De-identified  EEG  data collected  for this study  will be shared  with other  academic  institutions,  and 
added  to public  databases  of EEG  data.  Data shared  in this way will not include  any identifying  
information.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 18 of 25  If yes, could  any of these  data,  if disclosed,  damage  financial  standing,  employability,  insurability,  or 
reputation?  
Yes No 
If yes, will a Certificate  of Confidentiality  be obtained?  
Yes No 
Any person  engaged  in research  collecting  information  about  illegal  conduct  from  human  research  subjects  may apply  for a 
Certificate  of Confidentiality.  NIH provides  detailed instructions  for investigators  wishing  to make  an application  at 
http:/ /grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/coc/index.htm . 
 
c) Describe  specific  physical,  administrative,  and technical  safeguards  employed  to protect  
confidentiality  of data,  e.g., coding  with the removal  of identifiers,  limitation  of access  to data,  use of 
locked  file cabinets,  protection  of computer -based  data systems.  
 
 
 
 
d) Will data that identify  individual  subjects  be published  or in any way be disclosed  to third parties  
other  than project  personnel?  
Yes No 
If yes, please  explain  here and incorporate  the information  in consent  form:  
 
 
 
 
27.Responsibility  for costs  of injury  or illness  related  to research:  
Will the sponsor  or other  funding  agency  be responsible  for costs  of injury  or illness  related  to the 
research?  
Yes No 
 
If applicable,  describe  whether  or not the sponsor  will be responsible  for investigational  device  removal  
if required:  
 
 
 
 
If the sponsor  or other  funding  agency  will not be responsible  for costs  of injury  or illness  related  
to research,  please  complete:  
a) The reasons  why the sponsor  or funding  agency  is not accepting  responsibility  for research -related  
injury.  Sensitive  patient  information  will be stored  on DHMC  servers.  
Use of microelectrodes  is generally  considered  safe. A single  retrospective  annalysis  of the use of the 
dual macro -micro  electrode  system  has shown  no significant  complications  above  that for the use of 
macroelectrodes.  Specific  macroelectrode  complications  do occur.  If any complications  such as 
infection  or hemorrhage  occur,  they will be attributable  to the macroelectrode  part, and not the 
microelectrode.  Therefore,  the cost of complications  should  be covered  by the health  insurance  plan as 
these  would  be expected  to occur  in standard  electrode  patients.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 19 of 25   
 
 
b) Summary  of risks  as related  to potential  costs  that could  be incurred  as a result  of research -related  
injury  or illness.  
 
 
 
c) Describe  reasons  for requesting  that DHMC  or Dartmouth  College  provide  coverage  for research - 
related  injury  or illness,  which  is not standard  policy.  
 
 
 
 
28.Participant  Remuneration:  
Will participants  be paid for their time,  reimbursed  for travel  or meal  expenses,  or receive  any sort of 
"gift"  for participating  in this study?  
Yes No 
If yes, please  describe  in detail:  
 
Note:  Participant  remuneration  is not considered a benefit  of being  in a research  study.  D-HH will consider the  amount of 
payment  in relation  to the time needed  and any inconvenience  to participants.  Payment,  reimbursement,  or gifts should not be 
in an amount  that would  be coercive  to the participant  population.  
 
If study  is to be done  at the VA, specific  questions  need to be answered  if a participant  is being  paid "in excess  of 
reimbursement  for travel."  Please  contact  the D-HH office  if you need  more  information.  
 
 
 
 
 
29.Investigational  Drug  or Biological  Agent:  
Respond  to items  below  or check  No investigational  drug or biological  agent  involved.  
 
Are all agents  approved  by the FDA  for the specific  indication  for which  they are used in this study?  
Yes No 
If no, respond to a and b: 
 
a) Briefly  discuss  the plan for the storage,  dispensing,  handling,  and disposal  of investigational  and 
FDA -approved  drugs,  devices,  and biologics.  When  these  activities  are being  done  by the investigator,  
include  a description  of the procedures  for inventory  control  and documentation.  
 
DHMC  Investigational  Pharmacy  is managing  all study  drugs.  
Yes No 
If No please  describe  management  plan below.  
 
 We anticipate  that any complications  will be related  to the implant  or admission  generally,  and not 
specific  to the research  portion  of the electrodes  or the study  tasks.  
All patients  involved  in the research  study  will be inpatients  undergoing  intracranial  EEG  monitoring.  
Participants  will not be paid for participation  in the study.  There  will be no additional  travel  expenses.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 20 of 25  b) Check  and respond  to one of the following  statements:  
If this study  is being  done  under  an Investigational  New  Drug  (IND)  application  to the FDA  please  
provide:  IND # (Investigational  New  Drug):  # and specify  who holds  the IND#:  
 
OR 
 
If the drug or biologic  agent  used in this study  is not FDA  approved  for the indication  in this study,  
but an IND # has not been obtained,  please  complete  Attachment  J. 
 
 
30.Placebo  vs. Standard  Care:  
Does  any part of the study  involve  use of a placebo  or procedures  that are inconsistent  with the standard  
of care at DHMC?  
Yes No 
If yes,  respond  to Placebo:  Attachment  B 
 
 
31.Medical  Device:  
Respond  to items  below  or check  No devices  involved.  
 
Is this device  approved  by the FDA  for this indication?  
Yes No 
 
If no or if FDA  approval is pending,  respond to a, b, and c 
 
a) Is the device  provided  free of charge  by the sponsor?  
Yes No 
 
b) Where  are the devices  used in the study  stored?  Who  controls  their use? 
 
 
c) Respond to (1), (2), (3),  or (4) 
(1) If this study  is being  done  under  an Investigational  Device  Exemption  (IDE)  from  the FDA  
please  provide:  IDE#:  # or check  here if the IDE is pending:  
Also  check  the FDA  Device  HCFA  Reimbursement  Category:  
A B2 B3 
Please  note:  D-HH will not approve  a study  before  an IDE # has been  received.  
OR 
(2) If 510(k)  notification  for the device  has been  sent to FDA  check here  and either:  
provide  a copy  of the documentation  verifying  510(k)  clearance,  or check  here if 510(k)  
clearance  is pending      . 
 
OR 
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 21 of 25  (3) If the device  is exempt  from  IDE requirements,  check  here and provide  a copy  of a letter  
from  the FDA  or sponsor  stating  that the device  is exempt  from  IDE requirements  under  
812.2(c).  
 
OR 
 
(4) If you are requesting  a nonsignificant  risk determination  for the device  from  D-HH, please  
check  here and complete  Attachment  A. 
 
Please  note:  D-HH may approve,  disapprove,  or require  modifications  in a protocol  that has been 
approved  or cleared  by the FDA.  
 
 
32.Conflict  of Interest  Review:  
Dartmouth  College,  Dartmouth -Hitchcock  Clinic,  and Mary  Hitchcock  Memorial  Hospital  have adopted  
a policy  on Conflict  of Interest  in Human  Subject  Research.  Copies  of the policy  are available  on the 
Dartmouth  College,  Office  of Sponsored  Projects  web site at 
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~osp/policies.html.  
Definitions:  
“Conflict  of interest”  occurs  when  an independent  observer  may reasonably  question  whether  an 
individual's  professional  actions  or decisions  are influenced  by considerations  of the individual’s  private  
interests,  financial  or otherwise.  
Conflicting  financial  interests  do not include:  
 salary  and benefits  from  Dartmouth  College,  Dartmouth -Hitchcock  Clinic,  and Mary  
Hitchcock  Memorial  Hospital;  
 income  from  seminars,  lectures,  teaching  engagements,  or publishing  sponsored  by federal,  
state,  or local  entities,  or from  non-profit  academic  institutions,  when  the funds  do not 
originate  from  corporate  sources;  
 income  from  service  on advisory  committees  or review  panels  for governmental  or non- 
profit  entities;  
 investments  in publicly -traded  mutual  funds;  
 gifts and promotional  items  of nominal  value;  and 
 meals  and lodging  for participation  in professional  meetings.  
 
“Principal  investigator  or other  key personnel”  means  the principal  investigator  and any other  person,  
including  students,  who is responsible  for the design,  conduct,  analysis,  or reporting  of research  
involving  human  subjects.  
Instructions:  
To assist  institutional  review  of the proposed  research  for conflicts  of interest,  please  respond  to the 
question  below.  
With  regard  to this proposed  research  study,  does  the principal  investigator  or other  key 
personnel,  or any of their  spouses,  domestic  partners,  or dependent  children,  hold  a financial  
interest  that would  reasonably appear  to affect  or be affected by the proposed  study, including  but 
not limited  to the following  interests?  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 22 of 25  a. compensation  for services  (e.g.,  consulting  fees or honoraria),  or in-kind payments,  other  than 
from  the researcher's  primary  employer,  in the prior  calendar  year or projected  over the next 
twelve  months;  
b. royalty  income  or the right  to receive  future  royalties  under  a patent  license  or copyright,  when  
the proposed  research  is directly  related  to the licensed  technology  or work;  
c. equity  interests  (e.g.,  stocks,  stock  options  or other  ownership  interests),  including  equity  
holdings  where  the value  cannot  readily  be determined  by reference  to public  prices;  
d. intellectual  property  rights  (e.g.,  patents  and copyrights),  and royalties  from  such rights;  
e. gifts or funds  available  to the researcher  from  the sponsor  of this study  beyond the current  
project;  
f. funding  expected  to significantly  exceed  the projected  costs  of conducting  this study;  or 
g. another  financial  or private  interest  that may present  a conflict  of interest.  
 
 
No: The Principal  Investigator  or other  key personnel  do not have  any financial  interests  listed  in a. 
- g. above.  
Yes: The Principal  Investigator  or other  key personnel  do have financial  interests  listed  in items  a. - 
g. above.  
Only  if you have  answered  yes to the question  above  about  study -specific  financial  interests  for a 
member  of the research  team,  please  provide  the following  additional  information.  
Name  of each individual  with a listed  financial  interest:  
 
 
 
 
Attachment  G 
Research  Involving  Individuals  With  Impaired  Decision -Making  Capacity  
 
Introductory  Information:  
When  a subject  lacks  capacity  to give informed  consent,  the investigator  should  obtain  written  
permission  from  a legally  authorized  representative  prior  to enrolling  the subject  in a research  study.  
Federal  Regulations  define  legally  authorized  representative  as an "individual  or judicial  or other  body  Each  individual  on the above  list should  complete  a Conflict  of Interest  Disclosure  Form  for Human  
Subject  Research.  The disclosure  should  include  only those  financial  interests  that are specifically  
relevant  to this research  study.  
The Conflict  of Interest  Disclosure  Form  for Human  Subject  Research  is available  on the CPHS  website  
at the following  url: 
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~cphs/tosubmit/forms/  
 
 
Please  complete  and sign the Conflict  of Interest  Disclosure  Form  for Human  Subject  Research  form.  In 
an envelope  marked  "Confidential",  send the form  to the Director  of the Office  of Sponsored  Projects,  
using  the following  address:  
CPHS/COI -HS, Hinman  Box 6254.  
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 23 of 25  authorized  under  applicable  law to consent  on behalf  of a prospective  subject  to the subject's  
participation  in the procedure(s)  involved  in the research"  (45CFR46.102(c)).  Neither  Federal  
Regulations  nor New Hampshire  State  Law provide  specific  information  about  who may or may not 
qualify  as a legally  authorized  representative  in a research  setting.  For the purposes  of this policy  
statement,  the options  of defining  a legally  authorized  representative  include:  
 
a) Durable  power  of attorney  for health  care (DPAHC),  
b) Court  appointed  legal  guardian  
c) Next-of-kin. 
 
A strict  interpretation  of NH state  law does not provide  for the use of next-of-kin as a surrogate  decision  
maker  for investigational  activity.  The argument  for allowing  next-of-kin to consent  to participation  in 
research  activity  for an individual  who lacks  capacity  to consent  is that, without  such an option,  it is 
often  impractical  or impossible  to conduct  important  medical  research  on conditions  where  results  with 
the best current  therapy  are suboptimal.  When  investigational  therapy  represents  the best treatment  
option  or when  risks to the subject  are small  in relation  to the potential  benefit  of research  to society,  a 
policy  which  creates  a major  obstacle  to the conduct  of important  research  activity  is ethically  unsound.  
 
With the above  issues  in mind,  the Dartmouth  CPHS  has established  the following  policy  for research  
studies  that may involve  adult  subjects  who lack capacity  to give informed  consent  to participation  in a 
research  study.  Please  carefully  review  all items.  
 
Submission  requirements:  
When  initially  submitting  a protocol  for review  by the CPHS,  the investigator  will inform  the CPHS  in 
the appropriate  section  of the CPHS  Study  Plan  (item  #18) if the study  may involve  subjects  who lack 
capacity  to give informed  consent  to participate  in the study  being  proposed.  
 
In addition,  when  a study  may involve  subjects  who lack capacity  to give informed  consent,  the 
investigator  will use the form  provided  below  to inform  the CPHS  of the requested  options  to provide  
permission  for an individual  who lacks  capacity  to participate  in the research  study  and respond  to 
specific  CPHS  questions.  
 
For all requests:  
Even  with the permission  of a DPAHC,  or court  appointed  legal  guardian,  the D-HH will not permit  a 
subject  who lacks  capacity  to give informed  consent  to participate  in a research  study  that offers  little 
chance  of DIRECT  BENEFIT  to the research  subject  over what  they could  receive  outside  the research  
setting  and involves  a meaningful  increase  in the risk of harm  or discomfort,  regardless  of the potential  
gain to future  subjects  or society  in general.  
Please  complete  a) and b): 
a) Does  participating  in this study  offer  the subject  a chance  of direct  benefit  over what  they could  
receive  outside  the research  setting?  
 
 
There is little  chance that data  gathered  using  the microelectrodes will inform  decisions  
being  made about  epilepsy  surgery  for the participant  or otherwise  directly  benefit  the 
patient.  
 
 
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 24 of 25  b) Is there  an increase  in the risk of harm  or discomfort  for the subject  over what  they would  
experience  outside  the research  setting?  
 
 
To the best of  our knowledge,  the risk associated  with implanting  electrodes that include  
microelectrode contacts  is no greater  than that associated  with implanting  standard  
electrodes.  
 
The risk associated  with the memory,  speech  and thinking  tasks that participants will 
perform  is very  minimal.  Participants can decline  to continue  the tasks  at any  time.  
 
 
 
When  there  is a meaningful  chance  of DIRECT  BENEFIT  to the research  subject  over what  they could  
receive  outside  the research  setting,  D-HH will make  a judgment  decision  about  who may consent  to 
participation  in the study.  The options  include:  DPAHC,  court  appointed  legal  guardian,  and a 
properly  motivated  next-of-kin. 
 
Please  indicate  the option(s)  requested  to allow  for consent  if a subject  is incompetent  to provide  
consent:  
 
Durable  power  of attorney  for health  care (DPAHC)  YES NO 
Court  appointed  legal  guardian  
Next-of-kin. YES 
YES NO 
NO 
 
If a study  requests  the use of Next -of-Kin as the legally  authorized  representative,  Please  complete  a)  
through  e) below:  
 
a) Could  the subject  receive  the same  management  that they will receive  in the research  study  outside  
the setting  of a research  protocol?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Will participation  in the study  increase  the risk of harm  or discomfort  compared  to what  is expected  
with the management  that the subject  will receive  if they do not participate  in the research  study?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Will participating  in the study  increase  the chance  that the subject  will experience  a favorable  
outcome  compared  to what  is expected  with the management  that the subject  will receive  if they do not 
participate  in the research  study?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
d) What  is the magnitude  of the benefit  that future  patients,  or society  in general,  may experience  as a 
result  of the subject  participating  in this study?  
 
 
 
 
 
CPHS  Template  v. 5.13.2009  
Study  Plan v30Mar2020;  D-HH#21933  page 25 of 25  e) The process  of appointing  a legal  guardian  may take several  months.  Would  this type of delay  
compromise  patient  care?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The CPHS  will use the responses  to the items  a) – e) when  discussing  the option  of allowing  Next-of-Kin 
to enroll  subjects  into a research  study.  
 
Signature  section  of the consent  form:  
Below  is the signature  line to use when  individuals  lacking  decision -making  capacity  may be enrolled  
into a research  study.  As described  above,  use of the next-of-kin option  requires  special  CPHS  
approval:  
 
 
 
Participant  Signature  and Date  Printed  Name  
If participant  lacks  capacity  to provide  informed  consent,  sign below  as appropriate:  
 
Power  of Attorney  for Health  Care  and Date  Printed  Name  
or Durable  
 
Court  Appointed  Legal  Guardian  and Date  Printed  Name  
or 
 
Next-of-kin and Date  Printed  Name  
 
 
Decision  by the CPHS:  
 
The CPHS  decision  will be relayed  to the investigator  via the CPHS  approval  letter.  