Testing Product Messages for Colombia  
Hypotheses and Analytic Plan  
NCT# NCT0456700 4 
Version Date: 9/25/20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hypotheses  
 
Primary Outcomes  
The overall purpose of this study is to identify the impact of nutrient warnings on product selection and 
other outcomes compared to GDA labels, Nutriscore labels, and a no -label control, in 
Colombia . The primary  objectives of this study are to  evaluate our hypotheses that , compared to GDA, 
Nutriscore, and control,  a nutrient warning  label  will lead to:   
1. Lower selec tion of the less healthy product in a set of two products as the product the consumer 
most wants to buy.     
2. Better ability to correctly identify which product of a set of two has higher levels of sugar.    
 
We will also explore  whether the impact of the nutrient warning (vs. other study conditions) on these two 
primary outcomes differ by respondent’s educational level.  
 
Secondary Outcomes  
We hypothesize that the nutrient warning label (compared to other label types ) will: 
1. Have higher perceived message effectiveness  
2. Be the most discouraging label  
We hypothesize that the nutrient warning label (compared to all other conditions) – and all conditions 
compared to the control – will: 
1. Increase the ability to correctly identify the most unhealthy product when compared with two 
options  
2. Increase the ability to correctly identify whether a single product contains excess sugar, saturated 
fat, or so dium  
3. Lower intentions of purchasing a product high in the nutrient of concern in the next week if it were 
available.  
 
 
Analytic Plan  
We will use a two -sided critical alpha of 0.05 to conduct all statistical tests. We will use complete case 
analysis to handle any missing data.  We will descriptively report unadjusted means  (and stand ard 
deviations)  and percentages for the primary and secondary outcomes.   For PME, we will take the average 
of the 3 items for each product type if alpha>.70. For all outcomes assessed between -subjects only, w e 
will then assess whether the outcomes vary by study arm with regression models (linear for continuous 
outcomes and logistic for dichotomous outcomes). For outcomes with multiple measurements per -person, 
we will fit  mixed effects linear regression model s for continuous outcomes (including PME) and a  mixed 
effects logistic regression model for binary outcomes (including product selection, label selection, 
identification of healthier products), treating the intercept as random to account for repeated measures.  
We will include indicator variables for w arning message (between -subjects) and product type (within -
subjects), as well as an interaction of warning message and product type. We will use postestimation 
commands to conduct pairwise comparisons of the predicted means  to examine differences by all la bel 
types . We will correct for multiple comparisons. To evaluate the most discouraging label, we examine 
the proportion of participants that selected each warning label as the most discouraging and will conduct 
z-tests to explore statistical significance o f these differences . To assess whether  the effect of the warning 
label on the primary outcomes  differs by education, we will test for an interaction of warning label with low 
versus high education level (specified as dummy variables),  and use a Wald chunk test to determine the 
joint interaction. We will use postestimation commands to predict means by warning label and education 
level and conduct pairwise comparisons of the predicted means.  
 
 
 