Title: Amigas Latinas Motivando el  Alma (ALMA): A Delayed Intervention Control Trial of a 
Program to Reduce Mental Health Disparities in Latina Immigrant Women  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date: June 8, 2022  
  
Study Title: Amigas Latinas Motivando el  Alma (ALMA): A Delayed Intervention Control Trial of  
a Program to Reduce Mental Health Disparities in Latina Immigrant Women 
Objectives: ALMA is an 8- week program offered in a group format to teach women new coping  
strategies, enhance their existing social  ties, and incr ease social support to prevent and reduce 
depression and anxiety symptoms. The aim of this research is to evaluate the efficacy of ALMA,  
a mental health promotion intervention, among Latina immigrant women.  
Study Design: The proposed study aims to test the efficacy of the Amigas Latinas Motivando el  
Alma (ALMA) intervention in a delayed intervention control trial.  Participants are recruited in four  
waves (N = 50) of approximately 25 participants at each site.  In each wave,  one community - 
based organization served as the intervention group, and the other organization served as the  
delayed intervention comparison group. Participants were not blinded to their study condition.  
During the first two waves of the study, participants received the intervention in-person (N=106), 
while those recruited during the last two waves received the intervention online via Zoom  (N 
=119).  
Participants: Our goal based on sample size calculations was to recruit 200 Latina immigrant  
women to partic ipate in the intervention trial at two site community -based organizations (Casa 
Latina and El Centro de la Raza). Participants were recruited through the community -based 
organizations by trained research staff (N = 226). This included current clients and other  
community contacts.  
Inclusion Criteria: Self -identify as female, Latina, immigrant, over age 18, and speak Spanish.  
Exclusion Criteria: We screened potential participants for  high levels of depressive symptoms  
(as indicated by a score of 20 or higher on the PHQ -9). The PHQ -9 is a clinical screener for  
depressive symptoms and scores of 20 or above indicate severe symptoms. Participants with 
scores above 20 were referred to the licensed mental health counselor on the study team. In  
these cases, the counselor discussed participation in the program with the potential participants  
and referred them to additional services if needed. If participants were currently receiving  
treatment and/or had symptoms under control, they were included in the study.  If women were 
not already receiving mental health treatment, they were referred to mental health providers  
offering low -cost services in Spanish.  
Recruitment and Intervention Sites: ALMA trial participants were recruited through two 
community -based organizations serving Latino immigrants (Casa Latina and El Centro de la 
Raza). The ALMA sessions were also held at these community organizations. For Waves 3 and  
4 of the study, we will offer the ALMA groups virtually using HIPPA compliant Zoom Pro. The  
Principal In vestigator is Latina and has a history of collaborating with community organizations  to 
conduct research in Latino communities. Staff from the community organizations  served as  
advisors to the project and review study procedures in advance.  Participants were recruited by  
Spanish speaking research team members (many of whom are also Latinas and immigrants  
themselves). ALMA sessions were delivered in Spanish by trained research team members.  
Recruitment and Screening: Participants will be recruited and screened by trained Spanish 
speaking UW research team members at Casa Latina and El Centro de la Raza through  
personal contact, either in person, or by email or phone. Participants were asked to provide verbal consent before being screened. In addition to the recruitment materials outlined below,  
the ALMA staff held pre- program information sessions on study aims and program content, as  
well as to recruit and screen potential participants. For Waves 3 and 4, recruitment  was 
completed virtually by email or phone.  Additional pre -program information sessions were held  on 
HIPPA compliant Zoom Pro. For the qualitative interviews, recruitment will be completed  virtually 
by phone.  
Recruitment materials: Community organization staff  made announcements about the study to  
their clients through personal contact, flyers, email lists and social media.  Potential participants  
were provided contact information for UW research staff so that  they could contact them directly  
if they are interested in the study.  In addition, we provi ded times and dates that UW research  
staff will be available on site at community organizations to recruit and screen potential  
participants. For Waves 3 and 4, recruitment was be done over the phone using a recruitment  
script.  
Payment to participants: Par ticipants completed four surveys in order to evaluate the efficacy  
of the intervention. Participants received $30 for completion of each survey, for a potential total  
of $120 per participant.  For Waves 3 and 4, participants received a $30 VISA gift card for 
completion of each survey, for a potential total of $120 per participant.  
Non-monetary Compensation: Participants were provided ORCA cards for transportation to the 
ALMA sessions, childcare during the ALMA sessions if needed, and refreshments at the ALMA 
sessions.  
Consent Process: Information was provided to women about the ALMA trial during the  
recruitment and screening process.  We obtained consent from all women that plan to attend  the 
ALMA group sessions and complete the surveys. Women will be verbally read the consent  form 
and given an opportunity to ask questions.  If any participant decides at that time that they  do not 
want to participate they will be free to leave.  Women that decide to participate will sign their 
consent forms.  
For Waves 3 and 4,  women will be verbally read the consent form and given an opportunity to  
ask questions. If any participant decides at that time that they do not want to participate they will  
be free to leave.  Women that decide to participate will provide verbal consent. We will also mail 
or email enrolled participants an information sheet based on our phone script highlighting details  
on the research study and their rights as a participant.  
Study Procedures: Once screened, participants in the intervention group were invit ed to 
participate in ALMA, an eight -week intervention to promote mental health, at either Casa Latina 
or El Centro de la Raza. Over the course of the eight ALMA sessions, participants were (1)  
engaged in activities to identify coping strategies they are cu rrently using and are encouraged to  
continue to use them; (2) introduced to new coping strategies (e.g. mindfulness techniques,  
increased social ties and social support); and, (3) provided resources for seeking additional help 
if needed. Sessions were faci litated by bilingual UW research staff, who have extensive 
experience working with the intervention components and the population. Women in the delayed 
intervention control group receive the intervention after their 6 month follow -up survey.  
Participants c ompleted four surveys in order to evaluate the efficacy of the intervention:  baseline, 
3-month follow -up, 6- month follow -up, and 9- month follow -up These surveys were administered 
in person by a bilingual data collector on a tablet in a private location onsite at one  of our two 
community partner organizations. Baseline surveys took 60 minutes to complete on average, 
and each additional follow -up survey took about 45 minutes. Interviewers contacted  participants 
by phone or text message to schedule a time t o complete each follow -up survey.  
 
Between program sessions, participants received newsletters and cards by mail highlighting  
ALMA staff members and general wellness information.  They also received reminder phone  
calls and texts of upcoming A LMA sessions.  
During ALMA program sessions, both attendance and fidelity were tracked. Session facilitators  
recorded attendance at each program session, to calculate an overall attendance count for each 
participant. They will also complete a fidelity check list to assess fidelity to curriculum  
implementation. The checklist will include a list of outlined activities and themes for each  
session, where they will report to what degree the content was addressed. The checklist will  also include space to report barriers and aids to participation and levels of engagement in 
session activities.  
For Waves 3 and 4,  once screened, participants were invited to participate in ALMA, a 6- week  
online intervention using HIPAA compliant Zoom Pro, in collaboration with either Casa Latina or  
El Centro de la Raza (two of our partner community -sites). We modified our 8 -week ALMA  
sessions to include activities that would be feasible to complete using HIPAA compliant Zoom  
Pro. Over the course of the six ALM A sessions, participants were (1) engaged in activities to  
identify coping strategies they are currently using and are encouraged to continue to use them;  
(2) introduced to new coping strategies (e.g. mindfulness techniques, increased social ties and socia l support); and, (3) provided resources for seeking additional help if needed.  Sessions  
were facilitated by bilingual UW research staff, who have extensive experience working with the  
intervention components and the population. We also offered an ALMA Orientation Session 
prior to the 6 -week online sessions to provide participants an overview of the ALMA sessions,  
provide guidance and technological support in how to use Zoom, and answer any questions  
participant might have before they participate in the ALMA  group.  
Measures : Participant surveys include the following constructs: depression (PHQ -9), anxiety  
(GAD), somatic symptoms of depression (PHQ -15), stress (PSS), discrimination, immigration-  
related stressors, mindful awareness (MAIA), coping strategies (self -compassion scale short  
form), social support, social ties, resilience, and trauma.  
Translations: All study procedures  were conducted in Spanish (participants’ native language).  
Our study team has a long history of working with this population and cre ating study materials  
that are linguistically and culturally appropriate.  All materials were translated by consensus  
involving at least two native Spanish speakers, and also reviewed by the PI who also speaks  
and reads Spanish.  We had community advisors that work with Casa Latina and El Centro de  
la Raza clients review the materials before we begin recruitment.  
Statistical Analysis Plan:  
Descriptive Analyses:  To assess possible bias, we conducted descriptive analyses on 
demographic and primary outcome variables at baseline by group assignment and delivery  
modality. We used t -tests for continuous variables, including depression and anxiety. We used  
chi-squared tests to detect associations between binary, ordinal, and nominal variables, as well  
as group assignment or intervention modality. We used a p- value of <.05 to determine 
significance. All data were analyzed using STATA SE version 16.1.  
Intervention analyses: To test the efficacy of the ALMA intervention to reduce anxiety and 
depressive symptoms among Latina immigrant women, we used a generalized estimating  
equation model with proposed estimation and an unstructured working correlation matrix. GEE  
is an population- averaged model which produces efficient estimates of the coefficients by  
accounting for  within -subject correlation due to repeated measures. Because the GEE model  
creates working pairs to estimate correlation for the entire sample, we used an intent -to-treat 
(ITT) analysis approach. We specified an unstructured correlation model that provides robust  
standard errors and imposes no pattern on the correlation matrix because we have few  
timepoints. Time- varying variables were specified as baseline, post -intervention, follow -up. We  
report adjusted models because outcomes were very similar to unadjusted models. We adjusted 
for modality, age, education level, and language spoken. To test the efficacy of ALMA within 
each modality (in -person versus online), we stratified the sample by modality and estimated  
adjusted GEE models for depression and anxiety using the same options as the general 
sample.  Adjusted models for stratified analyses include age, education level, and language 
spoken.  
 