KAISER FOUNDATION  HOSPITALS
THE PERMANENTE MEDICAL GROUP, INC.,  San Francisco, CA
And
UNIVERSITY OF  CALIFORNIA, SAN FRANCISCO, San Francisco, CA
CONSENT TO  PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH STUDY
FORMAL TITLE: Patient  Activation to Address Chronic Pain and Opioid Management 
in Primary Care 
ATERNATE TITLE: ACTIVATE:  Patients Managing Pain
Cynthia Campbell,  PhD, from Kaiser Permanente and Constance Weisner, DrPH, from 
the University of California, San Francisco, are conducting a research study on 
persistent pain, and you are being invited to participate. To decide whether or not you 
want to be part of this research, you should understand the risks and benefits in order to 
make an informed decision. You have the right to know what the purpose of the study 
is, how participants are selected, what procedures will be used, what the potential risks 
and benefits are and what is expected of you as a study participant. This process is 
called "informed consent." This consent form gives information about the research 
study, which one of the study staff will discuss with you.
Please feel  free to ask the Research Assistant if something is unclear during the 
informed consent process, or if the form contains words or phrases that you do not 
understand. You may take home an unsigned copy of this consent form to think about 
or discuss with family or friends before making your decision to participate or not in the 
study. Once you are satisfied that you understand the study, and have decided to 
participate, you will be asked to sign and date this consent form. You will then be given 
a copy of the signed form.
The research  costs of this study are being funded by the Patient Centered Outcomes 
Research Institute, a federally funded organization authorized by Congress to conduct 
research focused on questions important to patients.
BACKGROUND AND  STUDY PURPOSE
This is  a research study to learn whether a new behavioral treatment will improve 
treatment for patients with pain.Through this study, researchers hope to learn what 
might help patients understand the importance of their overall health care and engage in 
healthy practices and pain self-management. The study materials have been developed 
with input from patients with pain. 
You are  being asked to take part in this study because you take opioid medication for 
non-cancer pain. The purpose of this study is to examine the effect of a brief, group-
based treatment focused on pain management, when provided in addition to usual 
primary care services. 
KPNC Health Services IRB
IRB NUMBER: CN-14-1928-H
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/29/2016
Page 2  of 8
 SCOPE AND  LENGTH OF STUDY
There will  be about 480 people enrolled in this study.  Participation in this study involves 
up to 8 hours of your time over a period of 12 months.  
STUDY PROCEDURES
If you decide  to enroll in this study, the following will occur: 
The Research Assistant will ask you  to answer questions about pain and pain 
management, including medications, overall health status, alcohol and drug use, 
medical and psychiatric symptoms, daily activities, and demographic characteristics. It 
should take about 40 minutes to complete these questions. 
You will  be randomly assigned to one of two patient groups. Randomization is a process 
similar to flipping a coin, to decide which group you will be in. One half will be assigned 
to the behavioral intervention (Group 1), and the other half will be assigned to usual 
care (Group 2). The following study activities will take place for participants in the two 
groups:
Group  1, behavioral intervention: In addition to their usual care, participants in 
Group 1  will attend four group educational sessions at Kaiser Permanente Santa 
Clara or Kaiser San Jose. These sessions cover information about pain and pain 
management including prescription opioids, overall health, how pain interacts 
with physical and emotional health, communication with clinicians and how to use 
Kaiser Permanente’s resources. These sessions use supportive, patient-
centered counseling and education methods to help participants explore these 
topics. The four group sessions will last about 90 minutes each.  If you are not 
already enrolled in kp.org, we will help you register.
Group  2: Participants in Group 2 will receive usual care, with no additional 
treatment procedures  associated with the study. 
Participants in  both Group 1 and 2 will also complete two 40-minute telephone follow-up 
interviews, which will take place about 6 months, and one year from now. These 
interviews will include questions about pain, pain management, pain medication, 
psychiatric symptoms, health problems, alcohol and drug use, daily activities, and 
demographic characteristics.
All in-person  procedures will be done at Kaiser Permanente Santa Clara Medical Center 
or San Jose Medical Center, in a private room. Follow-up telephone calls will be made 
to you at your home or another private setting of your choosing. 
In addition  to these procedures, we need your permission to look at your Kaiser 
computerized health records for dates of visits, medical conditions, and medication 
prescriptions received at Kaiser. The researchers will examine your medical records at 
Kaiser Permanente to determine the quantity and type of services you receive as part of 
KPNC Health Services IRB
IRB NUMBER: CN-14-1928-H
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/29/2016
Page 3  of 8
 your usual care  services. We will remove your name and all personally identifying 
information from all study datasets in order to protect confidentiality. 
PAYMENT/COSTS
In return  for your time, effort and travel expenses, eligible participants will be paid up to 
$150 for taking part in this study, which will be paid in the form of Target gift cards. This 
includes $50 for the in-person baseline interview, $50 for the 6-month follow-up 
telephone interview, and $50 for the final 12-month follow-up telephone interview. If you 
do not complete the study, you will receive payment for each interview you have 
completed. A Target store card will be mailed to you within 3 weeks after you complete 
each telephone interview.
All study visits and  study-related tests and procedures will be provided free of charge 
while you are participating in this study.  Tests and services relating to the health care of 
KFHP members will continue to be provided as described under your KFHP Evidence of 
Coverage, which may include co-payments, co-insurance, and deductibles.
RISKS, SIDE  EFFECTS AND DISCOMFORTS OF THE STUDY
Answering some  of the interview questions (that is, about pain medication, alcohol or 
drugs) may make you feel uncomfortable or embarrassed.  However, you are free to not 
answer any questions you do not wish to answer or to terminate your participation in the 
study at any time.  Despite taking part in the study, some patients may find that their 
pain continues or worsens.  
POSSIBLE BENEFITS
It is  not known if you will receive a direct benefit from participating in this study. The 
information that you provide may help health professionals learn more about how best 
to provide services for patients with persistent pain. 
ALTERNATIVES
Your other choices  include receiving standard primary care treatment without being in a 
study.  If you decide not to take part in this study, there will be no penalty to you.  You 
may choose not to participate in this study, and the decision will not affect your medical 
care or your relationship with Kaiser Permanente or your care providers in any way.
INJURY
Any injury  or condition experienced by a member of Kaiser Permanente, as a result of 
being in this study, will be covered as described in your Health Plan Evidence of 
Coverage.  No free medical care or other form of compensation will be offered by Kaiser 
Foundation Health Plan, Inc., Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, The Permanente Medical 
Group, Inc., or the Kaiser Permanente staff conducting the study.  Your consent to 
participate in this research study does not take away any legal rights in the case of 
negligence or legal fault of anyone who is involved with this study.
KPNC Health Services IRB
IRB NUMBER: CN-14-1928-H
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/29/2016
Page 4  of 8
 VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION/WITHDRAWAL
Your participation  in this study is completely voluntary.  You are free to refuse to 
participate in parts of or all of this study.  Your decision will not affect your medical care.  
If you decide to participate, you can change your mind at any time without any effect on 
your medical care or eligibility for future care or membership in Kaiser Permanente.  
The researchers can  also discontinue your participation in this study at any time without 
your consent for any of these reasons:
If  you do not follow instructions given to you
If  they feel that it is in your best interest
If  there are administrative reasons to discontinue the study
CONFIDENTIALITY
The researchers will keep  information about you, obtained for this study, confidential 
and will not disclose it without your written permission.  However, some personal 
information may be disclosed.  For example, personal information may be disclosed to 
protect you or someone else from serious harm, or to take steps (including notifying 
authorities) in cases of child abuse or elder abuse. If any member of the research team 
is given such information, he or she will make a report to the appropriate authorities. In 
addition, the Kaiser Permanente Northern California Institutional Review Board (a 
formal committee that reviews research studies to protect the rights and welfare of 
participants), or other regulatory agencies may look at and/or copy your research 
records for quality assurance and data analysis. Because of the possible need to 
release information to these parties, absolute confidentiality cannot be guaranteed. Your 
other doctors may become aware of your participation. However, hospital regulations 
require that all health care providers treat information in medical records confidentially. 
Study information  about you will be identified only by a unique study code.  No 
personally identifiable information such as your name or medical record number will be 
attached to your study data. If information from this study is published or presented at 
scientific meetings, your name and other personal information will not be used. 
Furthermore, only aggregate data will be published or presented which combines 
information from all study participants. By signing this consent form, you will also be 
giving consent for the medical investigator or his/her assistants to review your medical 
records as may be necessary for this study.  Your identity will not be revealed in any 
publication or release of study results.
KPNC Health Services IRB
IRB NUMBER: CN-14-1928-H
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/29/2016
Page 5  of 8
 CERTIFICATE OF  CONFIDENTIALITY
In this  study, researchers will ask you about drug use. The researchers will keep your 
information confidential. To help keep information about you confidential, the research 
team  has obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality from the Department of Health and 
Human Services (DHHS).  The Certificate of Confidentiality adds special protection 
regarding your participation in a research study.  It will protect the investigators from 
being forced, even under a court order or subpoena, to release information that could 
identify you.  Participation in research may involve a loss of privacy, but information 
about you will be handled confidentially.  Even when a Certificate of Confidentiality is in 
place, you and your family members must still continue to actively protect your own 
privacy. If you voluntarily give your written consent for an insurer, employer, or lawyer to 
receive information about your participation in the research, then we may not use the 
Certificate of Confidentiality to withhold this information.
QUESTIONS
Any study-related questions,  problems or injuries should be directed to the investigators 
responsible for the study, Dr. Cynthia Campbell at (510) 891-3584, or the Project 
Manager, Monique Does, at (510) 891-3612.  Questions about your rights as a study 
participant, or comments or complaints about the study also may be presented to the 
Institutional Review Board for the Protection of Human Subjects, Kaiser Foundation 
Research Institute, 1800 Harrison St., 16th Floor, Oakland, CA, 94612, telephone toll 
free (866) 241-0690. If you continue to have questions, you may also contact the 
Committee on Human Research, University of California, San Francisco, telephone 
(415) 476-1814.  
I have  read the above and am satisfied with my understanding of the study, its possible 
benefits, risks, and alternatives.  My questions about the study have been answered.  I 
hereby voluntarily consent to participate in the research study as described.  I will be 
given a signed copy of this seven page consent form, which includes the Authorization 
to Use and Disclose Protected Health Information and of the attached Research 
Participants’ Bill of Rights.
Date Participant's  Signature for Consent
Date Person  Obtaining Consent
KPNC Health Services IRB
IRB NUMBER: CN-14-1928-H
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/29/2016
Page 6  of 8
 AUTHORIZATION TO  USE AND DISCLOSE PROTECTED HEALTH 
INFORMATION
STUDY TITLE : ACTIVATE: Patients Managing Pain
Why is  this authorization required?
The Privacy  Rule is a federal law designed to safeguard your Protected 
Health Information (PHI). Your PHI is individually identifiable information 
about you, including your physical or mental health, the receipt of health 
care, or payment for that care. The Privacy Rule requires that researchers 
obtain your written authorization to participate in this study.
By signing  this authorization, you will permit Kaiser Permanente researchers 
to use and disclose your PHI for the purpose of the research study named 
above. Your PHI will only be used and disclosed as described in this 
authorization, except as otherwise required by law.
Must I agree  to this authorization to participate in the research?
Yes, in  order to participate in this research study, you must agree to the 
uses and disclosures of your PHI as described in this authorization. 
Who will  use or disclose my PHI?
Kaiser Permanente researchers  and the research team will use your PHI 
for the purposes of this study. Your PHI may also be sent to others as 
required by law.
What is  the purpose of the use or disclosure of my PHI? 
Kaiser Permanente researchers  will use your PHI, including your research 
and/or medical record, to conduct the study and determine research 
results. In addition, others at Kaiser Permanente, for example, the 
Institutional Review Board that approved the study, may also review your 
research or medical record, or both, to monitor the study.
Information from  your research record and medical record used and 
disclosed for the study may include, for example, laboratory and other 
tests, and both clinical and research observations relating to your 
participation in the study, including utilization of chemical dependency and 
mental health services. 
When will  this authorization expire?
This authorization  will expire at the end of this research study. 
KPNC Health Services IRB
IRB NUMBER: CN-14-1928-H
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/29/2016
Page 7  of 8
 Can I  withdraw this authorization?
Yes, at any  time during this study you may decide that you no longer want 
to have your PHI used or disclosed as part of this study. If so, you must 
write a letter stating that you withdraw your authorization and send it to:
Cynthia Campbell,  PhD
Kaiser Permanente Division  of Research
2000 Broadway
Oakland, CA   94612
If you  withdraw your authorization, you may be required to end your 
participation in the study. 
Kaiser Permanente researchers  and the study sponsor may continue to 
use your PHI that was obtained before you withdrew your authorization. 
Kaiser Permanente researchers will not disclose your PHI after they 
receive your written request except as required by law. For example, even 
if you withdraw your authorization, Kaiser Permanente researchers may be 
required by law to record and report anything that relates to your safety or 
the safety of others.
What will happen  to my PHI after it is disclosed?
The Kaiser  Permanente research team will use and disclose your PHI only 
as described in this authorization. However, if someone receives your PHI 
from Kaiser Permanente and then discloses it again to someone else, it 
may no longer be protected by this authorization. 
Will I get  a copy of this authorization?
The researcher  who is obtaining this authorization from you must give you 
a copy of this form after you sign it.
Authorization signatures
This authorization  has been explained to me, and all of my questions have 
been answered. By signing below, I am giving my permission to allow the 
use and disclosure of my PHI for the research study as described above. 
_______________________________________ ________________
Signature of  Participant Date
(or Personal Representative,  
KPNC Health Services IRB
IRB NUMBER: CN-14-1928-H
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/29/2016
Page 8  of 8
 if Participant is  unable to give authorization)
_______________________________________ ________________
Personal Representative’s  authority Date
(e.g., Power  of Attorney, parent, spouse)
KPNC Health Services IRB
IRB NUMBER: CN-14-1928-H
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 07/29/2016