STU00215439  
 Version  Date:   11.22.2021  Page  1 of 10 
HRP -593 / v05202020  PROTOCOL  TITLE:   Self-Catheterization  Mirror  System  for Female  Patients   
 
 
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR:  
Megan  O’Brien  
Shirley  Ryan  AbilityLab  
312-238-2289  
mobrien02@sralab.org  
 
 
VERSION  DATE:  
11.22.2021  
 
  
STUDY  SUMMARY:  
 
Investigational  Agent(s)   
(Drugs  or Devices)  Self-Catheterization  Mirror  
IND / IDE / HDE  #   
Indicate  
Special  Population(s)  None  
Sample  Size 30 
Funding  Source  Shirley  Ryan  AbilityLab  
Indicate  the type of consent  
to be obtained  Written   
Site Shirley  Ryan  Ability  Lab 
Research  Related  Radiation  
Exposure  No  
DSMB  / DMC  / IDMC  No 
 
 
  
STU00215439  
 Version  Date:   11.22.2021  Page  2 of 10 
HRP -593 / v05202020  OBJECTIVES : 
The purpose  of this study  is to evaluate  the usability  of a modified  self-catheterization  mirror  
compared  to a standard  self-catheterization  mirror  as well as to obtain  user feedback  through  
patient  experience  with the use of a modified  self-catheterization  mirror.  
 
 
BACKGROUND : 
Intermittent  catheterization  is a procedure  to empty  the bladder  for individuals  with voiding  
difficulties,  such  as resulting  from neurologic  injury  (e.g.,  spinal  cord injury  or multiple  sclerosis)  
or obstruction.  IC can maintain  or improve  urological  function  and to reduce  the risk of bladder  
infections  [1,2]. Self-catheterization  is a standard  method  for managing  short -term or long-term 
bladder  dysfunction  for many  individuals . However,  many  female  patients  have  difficulties  with 
self-catheterization  [3]. Mirrors  currently  used  for this procedure  have  insufficient  stability  and 
visibility  to easily  view the urethral  opening  during  catheterization,  particularly  for individuals  with 
motor  impairments  and urinary  retention  related  to spinal  cord injury  or other  medical  conditions.  
This can be especially  frustrating  because  catheterization  is performed  frequently  (typically  
every  4-6 hours) and may need  to occur  at home  or in public  facilities.   
 
 
Figure 1. The standard  self-catheterization mirror for 
female patients. This setup poses significant challenges 
for female patients to catheterize themselves, with limited 
stability and visibility to view the urethral opening.  
 
 
This project  will develop  and test a portable,  cost-effective  product  to help female  patients  with a 
range  of motor  abilities  catheterize  themselves  in various  postures  and settings.  The long-term 
goal is to improve  the self-catheterization  experience  for patients  during  inpatient  education  and 
after hospital  discharge.  
 
 
STUDY  ENDPOINTS:  
Our primary  outcome  is the patient -reported  usability  and experience  when  using  the mirror . Our 
secondary  outcome  is the average  time needed  to set up the mirror  and self-catheterize.  These  
measures  will be obtained  for all patients  and compared  between  the modified  mirror  and the 
standard  mirror.   
 
We expect that participants  will be in this research study during two weeks of their inpatient 
rehabilitation stay at the Shirley Ryan AbilityLab , spanning two phases of testing that will each 
last up to 1 week . 
 
 

STU00215439  
 Version  Date:   11.22.2021  Page  3 of 10 
HRP -593 / v05202020  STUDY  INTERVENTION(S)  / INVESTIGATIONAL  AGENT(S):  
We have  developed  modifications  to a standard  catheter  mirror,  which  are intended  to improve  
stability  and visibility  during  the self-catheterization  procedure  for women  with motor  
impairments  and urinary  retention  related  to spinal  cord injury  or other  medical conditions.  The 
modified  mirror  (Figure  2) features  the standard  catheter  mirror,  held in a surrounding  case,  
with adjustable  straps  for suspension  between  the legs whether  the individual  is in a seated  
position,  reclined,  or in a standing  position.  This also provides  flexibility  for the mirror’s  angle  to 
be manipulated  for better  viewing.  The mirror  also features  LED lights  that can be turned  on to 
improve  visibility , so that individuals  may view the urethral  opening  easier  during  catheterization.  
 
 
Figure 2 . The m odified self-catheterization mirror system includes the 
standard mirror, held in a surrounding case , with adjustable straps  for 
suspension between the legs and LED lights that can be turned on/off.  
 
 
All modified  self-catheterization  mirrors  will be stored  in a locked  area at Shirley  Ryan  AbilityLab  
and will only be accessible  to immediate  study  team  members.  
 
 
PROCEDURES  INVOLVED:  
Screening:  This study  will involve  recruitment  of female  patients  participating  in self-
catheterization  at the Shirley  Ryan  AbilityLab  (SRAlab).  Clinicians  at this location  will be 
informed  of the inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  for this study  in order  to refer 
appropriate  patients  to the study.  Potential  research  subje cts will be referred  to authorized  
research  personnel  and will also be identified  based  on inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  using  the 
Cerner  application.  
 
Testing:  There  will be two phases  of the testing,  with each  phase  lasting  up to 1 week.  Phase  1 
will test their experience  with the standard  mirror,  and Phase  2 will test their experience  with the 
modified  mirror.  This order  is determined  so that all participants  attain  practice  with self-
catheterization  and study  procedures  with the standard  mirror  first, in alignment  with the 
standard  of care.  The modified  mirror  will not be given  to the participants  until Phase  2 testing  
begins.  
 
Phase  1 (Standard  mirror):  Subjects  will self-catheterize  every  4-6 hours,  depending  
on their physician’s  orders,  using  the standard  mirror.  This will allow  the subjects  to self-
catheterize  at different  times  of the day and in various  positions.  This mirror  will have  
already  been  provided  for self-catheteriz ing patients  by the hospital,  and patients  will 
have  been  trained  to self-catheterize  by their standard  care team.  

STU00215439  
 Version  Date:   11.22.2021  Page  4 of 10 
HRP -593 / v05202020   
Subjects  will be given  a log sheet  specifying  the catheterization  trial number  and the 
assigned  mirror.  For each  catheterization,  subjects  will record  the position  used,  the 
mirror  used,  and the time it took to complete  mirror  set up and successfully  insert  a 
catheter.  They  will record  this information  after each  catheterization  within  the phase.  
 
Phase  2 (Modified  mirror): Upon  completion  of Phase  1 testing,  subjects  will be trained  
to use the features  of the modified  mirror  in a single  training  session.  Study  staff will 
demonstrate  the attachment  of the mirror  and help the subject  practice  the attachment  
and use of the mirror  in any of the positions  (seated,  reclined  in the patient’s  hospital  
bed, and standing).  If a subject  is unable  to achieve  and maintain  a position  
independently  or with minimal  assistance,  the training  in that position  will be skipped.  
Study  staff will confirm  any positions  that the subject  uses  to self-catheterize  (confirmed  
against  the Phase  1 log sheet),  and train the subject  to utilize  the modified  mirror  in 
those  positions.  Training  will be considered  successful  if the subject  can set up the 
modified  mirror  3 times  independently  in all possible  self-catheterization  positions.  At the 
end of the training  session,  the subject  will be asked  if they would  be comfortable  using  
the mirror  independently.   
 
A subsequent  training  session  will be scheduled  if the subject  (1) cannot  set up the 
modified  mirror  3 times  independently  in their possible  self-catheterization  positions,  or 
(2) does  not feel comfortable  using  the mirror  independently.  If the subject  does  not 
meet  these  criteria  after a second  training  session,  they will be asked  to fill out a 
questionnaire  regarding  their experience  with the device  (see “Questionnaires”  below)  
and study  procedures  will end; patients  who do not complete  a successful  training  
session  will not be invited  to complete  Phase  2 testing.  
 
Immediately  following  the completion  of a successful  training  session,  subjects  will begin  
the Phase  2 testing,  following  identical  procedures  as in Phase  1 but asked  to use the 
modified  mirror.  Subjects  will record  the mirror  used,  position,  and time for self-
catheterization  in a new log sheet.  Subjects  will continue  to have  the standard  mirror  
during  this phase,  and will be encouraged  to use this standard  mirror  instead  for any trial 
if needed  for successful  self-catheterization.  
 
 
Questionnaires:  Subjects  will complete  a questionnaire  (System  Usability  Scale)  at the end of 
each  testing  phase  related  to self-operation  and user satisfaction  with the use of the assigned  
mirror.  They  may also complete  these  questionnaires  at the completion  of the study.  
 
 
DATA  AND  SPECIMEN  BANKING  
Data  will be collected  and kept confidential  and compliant  with HIPAA  requirements.  All 
personal  information  and study  documentation  that can identify  participants  will be kept secure  
to protect  their privacy  and will never  be shared  at any time with any person  or entity.  Data  
collected  during  the study  and shared  with others  will reference  participants  only by an 
alphanumeric  code  (i.e., de-identified).  The “master  list” linking  personal  information  to the 
alphanumeric  code  will not be shared.  Electronic  data will be stored  on a secure  and password -
protected  network  and devices  managed  by the Shirley  Ryan  AbilityLab.  Electronic  folders  will 
be private  with limited  access  as determined  by the PI. 
 
STU00215439  
 Version  Date:   11.22.2021  Page  5 of 10 
HRP -593 / v05202020  De-identified  data will be stored  indefinitely.  If participants  give written  consent  to be contacted  
for future  studies,  this information  will be kept separate  from de-identified  data files, in locked  
cabinets  accessible  only by authorized  research  personnel.  All other  information  will be 
destroyed  in accordance  with HIPAA  and IRB compliant  guidelines . 
 
 
SHAR ING RESULTS  WITH  PARTICIPANTS  
Participants  will be recording  their own results  in a time log, as well as providing  their own 
experiences  and satisfaction  with the use of a modified  mirror  during  self-catheterization.  There  
is no intent  to share  additional  information  about  results  with participants.  
 
 
STUDY  TIMELINES  
- Subjects  will each  participate  in the study  for two testing  phases,  each  lasting  a period  of 
up to 1 week  
- This study  will enroll  participants  for up to 9 months . 
- This study  is projected  to be completed  by June  2023 
 
 
INCLUSION  AND  EXCLUSION  CRITERIA  
Inclusion  Criteria:  
- Females  age 13 or older  
- Urinary  retention  related  to spinal  cord injury  or other  medical  conditions  resulting  in 
need  for catheterization   
- Individuals  with sufficient  upper  limb function  to catheterize  independently  or with 
minimal  assistance,  or as deemed  appropriate  for the study  by the Principle  Investigator.   
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  
- Individuals  younger  than 13 years  old 
- Individuals  with cognitive  deficits  or visual  impairments  that may impact  safe use of the 
devices  used  
- Severe  ROM  restrictions  of the upper  and/or  lower  extremities  
- Pregnant  
 
 
RECRUITMENT  METHODS  
This study  will involve  recruitment  of individuals  who require  self-catheterization  due to urinary  
retention  related  to spinal  cord injury  or other  medical  conditions.  Clinician s at Shirley  Ryan  
AbilityLab  (18th-25th floors)  will be informed  of the inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  for this study  
for the referral  of appropriate  subjects.  Potential  subjects  will be screened  and evaluated  by the 
research  team . Clinicians  on the 18th-25th floors  will be trained  on the use of the modified  
mirror  and will help introduce  the modified  mirror  to eligible  and willing  participants.  
 
 
COMPENSATION  FOR  PARTICIPATION  IN RESEARCH  ACTIVITIES  
Participan ts will be compensated  up to $20 for their participation  through  the ClinCard  system.  
When  a subject  completes  participation,  funds  will be approved  and loaded  onto the card.  
These  funds  are provided  for the subject’s  participation  in the study.   
 
STU00215439  
 Version  Date:   11.22.2021  Page  6 of 10 
HRP -593 / v05202020  For each  participant,  SRAlab  will issue  a ClinCard,  which  is a specially  designed  debit  card for 
clinical  research.  Funds  will be loaded  as appropriate.  The funds  will be available  within  1 day 
after being  loaded  and can be used  at the participant’s  discretion.  Participants  will be issued  
one card for the duration  of the study.  If the participant  withdraws  from the study  early,   she will 
be reimbursed  for these  expenses  for the portion  of the study  that was completed.  If the card is 
lost or stolen,  participants  may call (866)  952-3795  or ask a coordinator  for a replacement  
ClinCard.  
 
 
WITHDRAWAL  OF PARTICIPANTS  
If a participant  has an adverse  event,  requiring  therapeutic  intervention  and/or  the experience  
interrupts  usual  daily activities,  the subject  will be withdrawn  from the research  study  without  
their consent.  This may include  injury  or impaired  skin integrity  due to the use of the modified  
mirror.  
 
If a participant  chooses  to withdraw  from the study,  they will be thanked  for their time and asked  
if they wish to disclose  why they have  decided to withdraw  from the study.  From  that point,  all 
data that was already  collected  on the participant  will be retained  and missing  data from 
continued  data collection  will be treated  as a loss to follow  up. 
 
 
RISKS  TO PARTICIPANTS  
The modified  self-cathe terization  mirror  is a prototype  device  with no significant  risk to 
participants . The device  utilizes  a standard  catheter  mirror,  enables  it to be suspended  between  
the legs, and improves  visibility  using  commercially -available  resources  such  as adjustable  
straps  and miniaturized  LED lights . The system  can easily  be adjusted  to fit participants  and 
adhere  to different  positional  needs  during  self-catheterization . Use of the device  can be 
stopped  at any time when  completing  self-catheterization.   
 
Physical  risks from this study  may include  skin breakdown,  urinary  tract infection,  and muscle  
soreness.  
 
 Another  possible  risk is discomfort,  skin pressure/friction,  or bruising  caused  by the 
device  straps , which  has the potential  to lead to skin breakdown  or abrasions.  This risk 
will be minimized  by a thorough  skin check  performed  by clinicians  before  and after 
device  use, and application  of foam  dressings  or bandages  as needed . Use of the 
modified  mirror  will be discontinued  for any participant  with skin breakdown.  
 
 Risk of a urinary  tract infection  due to use of the device.  This risk will be minimized  by 
emphasis  of utilizing  a sterile  environment  during  self-catheterization  and following  
hospital  protocols  regar ding hygiene  and cleanliness  of devices  and equipment.   
 
 There  is a risk of muscle  soreness  from being  in a certain  position  for a prolonged  period  
of time during  the self-catheterization  process.  Clinicians  will monitor  subject  activity  and 
subjective  reports of pain or discomfort  throughout  the process.  Assisted  repositioning  
and/or  rest periods  will be provided  as needed.  
 
 Embarrassment  or discomfort  discussing  self-care may be associated  with this study.  All 
staff members  assisting  with this study  are trained  professionals  and familiar  with the 
intermittent  catheterization  process.   
STU00215439  
 Version  Date:   11.22.2021  Page  7 of 10 
HRP -593 / v05202020   
Clinicians  will monitor  device  function ality and participant  comfort  during  use and intervene  if an 
unforeseen  challenge  occurs.  During  study  procedures,  a standard  mirror  will always  be 
available  to the patient  if needed  in the event  that use of the modified  mirror  is obstructive  to the 
self-catheterization  process.  
 
Risk of confidentiality  will be minimized  by not including  personal  identifying  information  on 
forms  (Self-Catherization  Log, questionnaire,  etc.) and by conducting  data collection  in a private  
setting.  
 
Some  of the questions  included  in the questionnaire  may be upsetting  or uncomfortable  for the 
participant  to answer.  If they do not wish to answer  a question,  they may skip it. 
 
No psychological,  financial,  or legal  risks to participants  are anticipated.  
 
 
POTENTIAL  BENEFITS  TO PARTICIPANTS  
There  may be no direct  benefit  to the participants.  The main  benefit  of participation  in this study  
is understanding  the real-world  challenges  faced  by patients  performing  self-catheterization,  
which  may help other  people  through  future  development  of devices  and procedures . The 
modified  mirror  is intended  to increase  stability  and visibility  for individuals  needing  to self-
catheterize,  and ultimately,  make  the self-catheterization  process  easier  for them.  There  is 
potential  for participants  to experience  these  benefits  during  use. 
 
 
DATA  MANAGEMENT  AND  CONFIDENTIALITY  
Data  will be collected  and kept confidential  and compliant  with HIPAA  requirements.  All 
personal  information  and study  documentation  that can identify  participants  will be kept secure  
to protect  their privacy  and will never  be shared  at any time with any person  or entity.  Data  
collected  during  the study  and shared  with others  will reference  participants  only by 
alphanumeric  code.  The “master  list” linking  personal  information  to the alphanumeric  code  will 
not be shared.  Electronic  data will be stored  on a secure  and password  protected  network  and 
devices  managed  by the Shirley  Ryan  AbilityLab.  Electronic  folders  will be private  with limited  
access  as determined  by the PI. 
 
 
PROVISIONS  TO MONITOR  THE DATA  TO ENSURE  THE SAFETY  OF PARTICIPANTS  
Data  will be reviewed  by researchers  after each  intervention  session.  Any and all adverse  
events  will be documented  and reported  in compliance  with IRB regulations.  If they occur  in the 
presence  of researchers,  prompt  medical  attention  will be requested  via assessment  by the 
resident  on call. Health  status  will be assessed  at all visits  to ensure  participant  safety.  Events  
will be recorded  in case  report  forms.  Participants  will be encouraged  to contact  research  staff 
or the PI to report  any changes  in health status.  If participants  experience  major  changes  in 
health  status,  study  participation  will either  be suspended  or terminated  depending  on severity.   
 
If any new information  is identified  concerning  the safety  of the study  device,  participants  will be 
notified.  This available  information  may affect  the participant’s  decision  to remain  in the study.  
 
 
PROVISIONS  TO PROTECT  THE PRIVACY  INTERESTS  OF PARTICIPANTS  
STU00215439  
 Version  Date:   11.22.2021  Page  8 of 10 
HRP -593 / v05202020  Subject  records  will be kept confidential.  Precautions  will be taken  to protect  the privacy  
interests  of subjects.  Participation  in this study  is completely  voluntary.  The purpose  of the study  
and intended  use of a subject’s medical  information  as well as precautions  taken  to keep  the 
study  information  and data confidential  will all be explained  to each participant.  All collected  
data will be kept confidential  and compliant  with HIPAA  standards.  
 
 
COMPENSATION  FOR  RESEARCH -RELATED  INJURY  
The PI of the study  is required  to be notified  promptly  in the instance  of any injury  or illness  
inflicted  on the participant  as a result  of the study.  The hospital  [Researchers,  Shirley  Ryan  
AbilityLab,  Northwestern  University  and all affiliated  clinical  sites]  will not pay for medical  care 
required  because  of a bad outcome  resulting  from participation  in this study.  However,  the 
subject  may still seek  to get paid back  for care required  because  of a bad outcome  resulting  
from participation  in this study.  
 
 
ECONOMIC  BURDEN  TO PARTICIPANTS  
Subjects  will be compensated  for their participation  in the study . 
 
 
CONSENT  PROCESS  
Before  recruitment  and enrollment  onto this study,  the participant  will be given  a full explanation  
of the study  and will be given  the opportunity  to review  the consent  form.  Each  consent  form 
must  include  all the relevant  elements  as approved  by the North western  University  Institutional  
Review  Board.   
 
Trained  research  personnel  will guide  the participant  through  consenting  process.  Participant  
will be given  detailed  explanation  of the purpose,  time line, commitment,  procedures,  data 
handling,  and privacy  and confidentiality  of information  pertaining  to the study.  Once  this 
essential  information  has been  provided  to the participant  and the investigator  is assured  that 
the participant  understands  the implications  of participating  in the study,  the participan t will be 
asked  to give consent  to participate  in the study  by signing  an IRB approved  consent  form.  
Subjects  will be consented  with a new consent  form if changes  are made  to the protocol.  Prior  
to participation  in the trial, the written  informed  consent  form must  be signed  and personally  
dated  by the participant  or authorized  guardian  and by the person  who conducted  the informed  
consent  discussion.   
 
The consent  process  will take place  at the Shirle y Ryan  AbilityLab  in Room  11-1401  or on an 
AbilityLab  floor (patient  room  or private  meeting  space) . 
 
 
PARTICIPANTS  WHO  ARE  NOT  YET ADULTS  (infants,  children,  teenagers ) 
Participants  will be asked  their age upon  study  screen.  Any child under  the age of 18 years  will 
be considered  a minor.  If the participant  is determined  a mino r, every  effort  will be made  to 
ensure  the screening  process  proceeds  with a parent  or an authorized  legal  guardian  present.  
The consent  and protocol  will be explained  by a trained  researcher  to both the present  
parent/authorized  legal  guardian  and the minor.  The parent  or authorized  legal  guardian  will 
then be asked  to consent  on behalf  of the minor,  in accordance  with the DHHS  and the 
USFDA’s  subpart  D. The parent  or authorized  legal  guardian  will also be given  the opportunity  
present  at all training  and testing  sessions.  
STU00215439  
 Version  Date:   11.22.2021  Page  9 of 10 
HRP -593 / v05202020   
Consent  will be obtained  from one parent  even  if the other  parent is alive,  known,  competent,  
reasonably  available,  and shares  legal  responsibility  for the care and custody  of the child.  This 
will be done  to ensure  the protocol  is carried  through  in a timely  manner.  
 
Permission  will also be obtained  from an authorized  legal  guardia n if necessary.  Efforts  will be 
made  to determine  whether  the guardian  is in fact legal ly authori zed by ensuring  the child lives 
with the aforementioned  guardian.  Assent  will be obtained  from all children.  Verbal  assent  will 
be obtained  for children  unable  to give written  consent.  Assent  will be documented  in the IRB 
approved  consent  form.  
 
 
NON -ENGLISH  SPEAKING  PARTICIPANTS  
Non-English  speaking  subjects  will be permissible  for recruitment  and enrollment  in the study  
(Spanish,  Arabic,  and Polish) .  
 
An interpreter  who speaks  the participant’s  primary  language  will be scheduled  through  the 
Shirley Ryan  AbilityLab  Interpreter  Services  department  to attend  all research  appointments  
during  which  the participant  is scheduled  if necessary  as determined  by the participant.  
 
 
PROTECTED  HEALTH  INFORMATION  (PHI AND  HIPAA)  
Subjects  records  will be kept completely  confidential.  Every  possible  precaution  will be taken  to 
protect  the privacy  interests  of subjects.  Trained  research  personnel  will explain  the purpose  of 
the study  and intended  use of a subject’s  medical  informatio n and the precautions  taken  to keep  
the study  information  and data confidential.  Data  will be collected  and kept confidential  and 
compliant  with HIPAA  standards.   
 
Participants  will be assigned  an alphanumeric  study  ID. Identifying  data will be kept in locked 
cabinets  and password  protected  servers  completely  separate  from de-identified  data.  Research  
data will be de-identified  and stored  in locked  cabinets  in the lab accessible  only by authorized  
research  personnel.  Electronic  data will be de-identified  and kept on secure,  password  
protected  servers  at the Shirley  Ryan  Ability  Lab. Only authorized  research  staff will be able to 
access  any of the formerly  mentioned  data.  De-identified  data will be kept indefinitely.  
 
Study  documentation  will be collected  and stored  and kept confidential  and compliant  with 
HIPAA  requirements.  Identifying  data will be held for 7 years  after the study  is completed  and 
published.  
 
All personal  information  (names,  addresses,  email  or phone  numbers,  etc.) gathered  for this 
study  that can identify  participants  will be kept secure  to protect  their privacy  and will never  be 
shared  at any time with any person  or entity.  Data  collected  during  the study  and shared  with 
others  will reference  participants  only by an alphanumeric  code.  The “master  list” linking  
personal  information  to the alphanumeric  code  will not be shared,  and will be kept by the study  
PI in a secure  location.  All  personal  information  linking  participants  to their data will be 
destroyed  after 7 years following  the complet ion of the study  
 
 
QUALIFICATIONS  TO CONDUCT  RESEARCH  AND  RESOURCES  AVAILABLE  
All sessions  will occur  at Shirley  Ryan  AbilityLab  (355 East Erie St. Chicago,  IL 60611 ) 
STU00215439  
 Version  Date:   11.22.2021  Page  10 of 10 
HRP -593 / v05202020  An acute  inpatient  rehabilitation  and research  hospital.  Each  unit is staffed  with 21 full time 
employee  nurses;  with virtually  no cross -over.  Study procedures  will occu r on the inpatient  floor 
in private,  single -patient  care rooms.  
 
All study team members will be trained on the study protocol and procedures. Th e study team 
members are employees o f the Shirley Ryan AbilityLab. They are familiar with the study site and 
are experienced with the study population.  There will be medical resources including a resident 
on call and nursing staff available 24 hours a day  if needed in case of an emergency.  
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Wyndaele,  J. Intermittent  catheterization:  which  is the optimal  technique?  Spinal  
Cord  40, 432–437 (2002).  https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.sc.3101312  
2. Lapides  J, Diokno  AC, Silber  SJ, Lowe  BS. Clean  intermittent  self‐catheterization  in the 
treatment  of urinary  disease . J Urol. 1972 ; 107(3): 458‐ 461. 
3. Logan  K, Shaw  C, Webber  I, Samuel  S, Broome  L. Patients’  experiences  of learning  clean  
intermittent  self‐catheterization:  a qualitative  study . J Adv Nurs . 2008 ; 62(1): 32‐ 40. 