1 
  
Protocol ID:  IRB-HSR# 21926       Date: 11/01/2019  
 
Knee Biofeedback Re habilitation Interface for 
Game -based Home Therapy ("KneeBRIGHT") 
Phase II  
  
2 
 Protocol  
 
Osteoarthritis (OA) is the leading cause of disability in the United States. A s osteoarthritis is associated 
with the lower limb muscle weakness, rehabilitation focused on  quadriceps  and other lower extremity 
muscle  strengthening is a well -established treatment for patients with knee O A. However, patient 
adherence to exercise routines is low due to the lack of guidance regarding optimal protocols , and poor 
engagement during the repeti tive routines that patients find tedious and boring.  
 
Long -term goal of th is study  is to improve knee OA outcomes through effective and motivating 
rehabilitation exercises. The Knee Biofeedback Rehabilitation Interface for Game -based Home Therapy 
("KneeBRI GHT") system combines electromyography (EMG) biofeedback with video game therapy (VGT) 
to provide knee OA patients with an engaging, effective tool for conducting rehabilitation exercises at 
home. KneeBRIGHT aims to motivate patients with knee OA to conduc t regular muscle strengthening 
exercise through an engaging, EMG -driven video game therapy.  
 
Participants with age from 40 -75, with independent ambulation  and with the diagnosis of knee OA made 
by x-ray and a score of at least 2 (out of 4) on the Kellgren -Lawrence OA radiographic classification 
system will be included in the study. Participants with psychiatric or cognitive impairment (e.g., 
dementia), symptomatic spine, hip, ankle, or foot disease other than OA that would interfere with 
assessment of the k nee will be excluded. Participants with balance or vestibular disorders, peripheral 
neuropathy, skin conditions that prevent EMG electrode placement, prisoner, pregnant women (by 
report), non -English -speaking, individuals who are visually and/or hearing im paired will also be 
excluded.  
 
Eligible participants will be randomized to two groups: (1) KneeB RIGHT  group; (2) Standard 
rehabilitation group. Both groups will undergo baseline and follow up assessment to measure the 
patient -reported outcomes, thigh muscl e strength, and balance. Participants in both groups will undergo 
a 12-week program including 3 exercise sessions per week that include s a combination of in -person and 
at home sessions  (Table 1) .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Table 1 Study schedule for  participants visits over 12 weeks  
 
Both groups will undergo same rehabilitation protocol  which will begin with sessions supervised in the 
clinic by the study team physical therapist and gradually home sessions  will be added . Participants in 
KneeB RIGHT  group will perform the quadriceps strengthening exercises with the video -games based 
activities. The EMG biofeedback units and video game w/laptop will be provided to the subjects for 
home use. Subjects wi ll receive instruction on how to apply the EMG biofeedback unit and use of the 
video game. KneeBRIGHT Game Activities  consists of an introduction of the player to the virtual world 
and the missions, the player customizes the personal avatar and completes a  series of calibration 
contractions and practice exercises to gain familiarity with the game controls. Through the EMG system, 
a player’s muscle contractions translate into  physical movements of the avatar and control of vehicles 
within the virtual environ ment. Each quest -type challenge is designed to permit play in a seated, supine, 
supported standing, or freestanding position, based on an individual’s physical status. User interactions 
with the game incorporate knee extension exercises and functional move ments that provide optimal 
therapeutic benefits.  
 
 
Participants in both groups will undergo c ombination of home and in clinic sessions . Protocol  will start  
with six clinic visits in order to maximize familiarity with the exercise routines and equipment . Home 
sessions  will be added after 2 weeks in rehabilitation  (Table 2) . The sessions will consist of warm up, 
strengthening, balance, precision and gentle stretching exercises . Strengthening exercises will be 
focused on quadriceps, hamstring, calf and glutea l muscles. Stretching exercises will be focused on 
quadriceps, hamstring and calf muscles. Progression will be guided by the rehabilitation principles and 
participants response to the exercise.  The amount of these exercises will depend on how they make the  
subject feel. The rehabilitation program will allow the subject to increase the amount of exercise they 
can perform. Exercises will be limited if the subject feels discomfort. Overall, protocol will consist of 36 
sessions in total, 20 in clinic sessions and 16 home -based sessions.  
 
 
 
 
 
  Visit 1  
(Screening)  Visit 2  
(Baseline)  Visit 3 -38 Follow -up 
Study Week  
 0 0 1-12 13 
Informed Consent   
x    
Review study eligibility  x x   
Medical History  x    
Strength, Balance & Endurance testing   x   
Questionnaires   x  x 
Rehabilitation Exercises    x x 
4 
 Table 2 Weekly schedule for patients for in clinic and home -based therapy sessions  
 One Hour Exercise Sessions  
 In clinic session  Home -based session  
Week 1  3 0 
Week 2  3 0 
Week 3  2 1 
Week 4  2 1 
Week 5  2 1 
Week 6  2 1 
Week 7  1 2 
Week 8  1 2 
Week 9  1 2 
Week 10  1 2 
Week 11  1 2 
Week 12  1 2 
TOTAL  20 16 
 
Pre and post intervention outcome measures will be compared to explore the effectiveness. Technology 
acceptance will also be studied in patients randomized to KneeB RIGHT  group.  
 
Overall, KneeBRIGHT has the potential to significantly enhance OA rehabilitati on by improving functional 
recovery through  physical practice of specific, adaptive exercise and promoting adherence through fun 
games and performance  feedback. Use of the KneeBRIGHT system in teletherapy may increase access to 
remote/underserved areas and  extend the range of existing rehabilitation facilities.  
 
Statistical analysis  
Knee function assessed by composite KOOS score prior to the study will be compared to the KOOS score 
recorded post -intervention to test the primary hypothesis that patients conducting the KneeBRIGHT 
exercise will significantly improve knee function compare d to the control group. Pre -intervention KOOS 
scores measures will be subtracted from the post -intervention scores to produce a set of delta values. 
These delta values will be analyzed via Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA).  A p≤0.05 decision rule will be 
utilized as the rejection criterion.  
 
Questionnaire results will be used to test the hypothesis that patients using the KneeBRIGHT system 
demonstrate increased levels of engagement compared to those conducting a conventional exercise 
routine. The questionnai re scores will be tallied to produce composite scores. These composite scores 
will be analyzed via a linear mixed model. A p
0.05 decision rule will be used as the null hypothesis 
rejection criterion.  
 
Timing data from the home visits will be analyzed by c omparing the minutes of exercise with the 
KneeBRIGHT system to minutes of exercise with the standard exercise regimen in the control group to 
5 
 test the hypothesis that exercise duration is greater with the KneeBRIGHT system. Mean usage time on 
each system w ill be analyzed via Student’s paired t-test, with p
0.05 as the null hypothesis rejection 
criterion.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  