 
 
TRADIPITANT  
VP-VLY -686-3101  
 
 
A RANDOMIZED,  DOUBLE -BLIND,  PLACEBO -
CONTROLLED,  EFFICACY  STUDY  OF THE  NEUROKININ -1 
RECEPTOR  ANTAGONIST  VLY -686 IN PATIENTS  WITH  
ATOPIC  DERMATITIS  
 
Document  Type:       Clinical  Study  Protocol  
Sponsor:         Vanda  Pharmaceuticals  Inc. 
          2200  Pennsylvania  Ave. NW 
          Suite  300E 
          Washington,  DC 20037  
USA  
Study  Product:       tradipitant  (VLY-686) 
Protocol  Number:      VP-VLY-686-3101  
Study  Phase:        III 
IND Number:        122741 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
 
Date:  12 August  2019  
Status:  Final  
 
2 
 SYNOPSIS   
Name  of Sponsor/Company:  
Vanda  Pharmaceuticals  Inc. 
Name  of Investigational  Product:  
tradipitant  (VLY -686) 
Title  of Study:  A Randomized,  Double -Blind,  Placebo -Controlled,  Efficacy  Study  of the 
Neurokinin -1 Receptor  Antagonist  VLY-686 in Patients  with Atopic  Dermatitis   
Study  center(s):  Multicenter  in North  America  
Studied  period:   
Date  first patient  enrolled:  July 2018  
Estimated  study  duration:  6 months  Phase  of development:   
III 
Number  of patients  (planned):   
Approximately 350 patients  randomized  (175 per arm, 1:1 randomization  scheme),  
diagnosed  with atopic  dermatitis  with treatment -resistant  pruritus  (i.e. pruritus  duration  of 
> 6 weeks  despite  the use of antihistamines  or corticosteroids)   
Inclusion  Criteria:  
1. Ability  and acceptance to provide  written  informed  consent ; and sufficiently fluent 
in English  to participate in the trial ; 
2. Male  and non-pregnant,  non-lactating  female  patients  aged  18 – 70 years  
(inclusive);  
a. Note:  Princip al investigators  are advised  to enroll  a patient  population  that 
reflects  the demographics  of the overarching  United  States  population.  
Demographics  in this context  refer  to age, sex, race,  and ethnicity.    
3. Diagnosed  with atopic  dermatitis  
a. ≥ 1% body  surface  area (BSA)  of AD involvement  at the screening  and baseline  
visits ; 
b. Presence of excoriations at screening and baseline visit s (i.e. S COR ing Atopic 
Dermatitis index excoriation score > 0)  
c. Note:  Princip al investigators  are advised  to enroll  a patient  population  that 
reflects  the severity  distribution  of the overarching  atopic  dermatitis  population  
seen in the United  States  population.  Severity  in this context  refers  to mild,  
moderate,  and severe  atopic  dermatitis.  
4. Suffering  from  chronic  pruritus  with pruritus  being  actively  present  for at least 6 
weeks  prior  to screening  despite  the use of antihistamines  or corticosteroids;  
5. Worst Itch Numerical Rating S cale (WI-NRS)  score  ≥ 5 points at the screening and 
baseline visit;  
 
3 
 6. Daily diary reporting Worst Itch Numerical Rating Score ( WI-NRS) average score 
for maximum itch severity ≥ 7 points  between screening and baseline visits ;  
a. Note: WI-NRS average score for maximum itch severity  will be determined 
based on the average of the 50% worst daily NRS scores for maximum itch 
severity (the daily scores ranging from 0 to 10) during the screening period 
(between visits 1 and 2). A minimum diary compliance of 70% during the 
screening phase (between Visits 1 and 2) is required before randomization.  For 
patients who do not have at least 70% diary compliance preceding the planned 
randomization date, randomization should be postponed until thi s requirement 
is met, but without exceeding the 45 -day maximum duration for screening.  
7. Patients  with Body  Mass  Index  (BMI)  of ≥18 and ≤40 kg/m2 (BMI  = weight  (kg)/  
[height  (m)]2);  
8. Patients  must  agree  to the following  study  restrictions:    
a. Males  of procreative  capacity  (not surgically  sterile)  will use an acceptable  
method  of contraception  from  randomization  through  1 month  following  the 
last dose of study  medication.  Examples  of acceptable  contraception  for males  
include  abstinence,  use of a barrier  method,  or surgically -sterilized  or post-
menopausal  partner.   
b. Females  of child -bearing  potential  (not surgically  sterile  or post-menopausal,  
defined  as 12 months  with no menses  without a medical cause ) will use an 
acceptable  method  of contraception  from  the earlier  of screening  or 1 month  
prior  to randomization  through  1 month  after the last dose of study  medication.  
Examples  of acceptable  methods  of contraception  for females  include  
abstinence,  the use of 2 independent  barrier  methods,  hormonal  contraception  
plus 1 barrier  method,  or surgically  sterilized  partner.   
9. Willing  and able to comply  with all study  requirements  and restrictions;  
10. Willing  to not participate  in any other  interventional  trial for the duration  of their 
participation;  
11. Patients  must  be in good  health  as determined  by past medical  history,  physical  
examination,  electrocardiogram,  clinical  laboratory  tests, and vital signs.  
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  
1. Chronic  pruritus  due to condition  other  than atopic  dermatitis  (AD) ;  
2. Superinfection  of AD; 
3. Unwilling  or unable  to follow  medication  restrictions  described  in Section 7.2 , or 
unwilling  or unable  to sufficiently  washout  from  use of restricted  medication.   
4. Under  medical  treatment  for a skin disease  with a therapy  listed  in the prohibited  
medications  section  in Table 3 that may influence  the results  of the study;  
5. Have  been  treated  with the following  therapies:  
 
4 
 a. An investigational  drug, including placebo,  within  8 weeks  or within  5 half-
lives  (if-known),  whichever  is longer,  prior  to the baseline  visit or 
b. A biologic  for less than 5 half-lives  (if known)  or 16 weeks  prior  to the baseline  
visit 
6. Recent  history  (within  six months  of screening)  of drug or alcohol  abuse  as defined  
in DSM -5 Diagnostic  Criteria  for Drug  and Alcohol  Abuse  and/or  a positive  drug or 
alcohol  screen  at the Screening  visit and Baseline ; 
7. Patient  has ever made  a suicide  attempt  and/or had suicidal  ideation  of type 4 or 5 
on the Columbia -Suicide  Severity  Rating  Scale  (C-SSRS)  or patient  is at risk of 
suicide  at Screening  or Baseline,  in the opinion  of the Investigator;   
8. Any medical  procedure  requiring  general  anesthetic  within  three  months  of the 
Baseline  Visit  or any procedure  requiring  sedation  within  one month  of the baseline  
visit; 
9. Current  clinically  significant  cardiovascular,  respiratory,  neurologic,  hepatic,  
hematopoietic,  renal,  gastrointestinal  or metabolic  dysfunction  unless  currently  
controlled  and stable,  including  (but not limited  to) the following:  
a. Uncontrolled  diabetes  mellitus  defined  as HbA1c  >7%;  
b. Positive  hepatitis  C antibody  test (anti-HCF);  
c. Positive  hepatitis  B surface  antigen  (HBsAg);  
10. History  (including  family  history ) or current  evidence  of conge nital long QT 
syndrome  or known  acquired  QT interval  prolongation;  
11. History  of intolerance  and/or  hypersensitivity  to medications  similar  to tradipitant  
and its accompanying  excipients ; 
12. Indication  of impaired  liver function  (values  for AST,  ALT,  or bilirubin  > 2 times  
the Upper  Limit  of Normal  (ULN) ; 
13. Has a creatinine  level  > 1.25x  ULN   
14. Anyone  affiliated  with the site or sponsor  and/or  anyone  who may consent  under  
duress ; 
15. Any other  sound  medical  reason  as determined  by the Investigator  including  any 
condition  which  may lead to an unfavorable  risk-benefit  of study  participation,  may 
interfere  with study  compliance  or may confound  study  results.   
Investigational  product,  dosage  and mode  of administration:   
A single  oral capsule  of tradipitant  85 mg or matching  placebo  will be orally  administered  
twice  daily  for a total daily  dose of 170 mg.  
Duration  of treatment  (Randomization  Phase) : 8 weeks  
 
Reference  therapy,  dosage  and mode  of administration:   
Placebo  capsules  will be provided  in size and appearance  identical  to those  containing  VLY-
686 and will be administered  orally.  
 
5 
 Objectives:   
Primary  Objective:   
• To evaluate  the efficacy  of VLY-686 in reducing  worst  itch in patients  with 
chronic  pruritus  in atopic  dermatitis  as measured  by Worst Itch Numerical  
Rating  Scale  (WI-NRS)  at Week 8 . 
 
Secondary  Objectives : 
• To evaluate  the efficacy  of VLY-686 in improving  disease  severity  in patients  
with atopic  dermatitis  as measured  by the validated  Investigator  Global  
Assessment  scale  for Atopic  Dermatitis  (vIGA-AD). 
• To evaluate  the efficacy  of VLY-686 in improving  disease  severity  in patients  
with atopic  dermatitis  as measured  by the SCORing  Atopic  Dermatitis  
(SCORAD)  index  and Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI) . 
• To evaluate the  proportion of patients with improvement of WI -NRS ≥ 4 -point 
reduction.  
• To evaluate t he proportion  of patients  with improvement  on SCORAD  index  of 
at least 50%, 75% or 90% improvement.  
• To evaluate t he proportion  of patients  with improvement  on the EASI  of at least 
50%,  75% or 90% improvement.  
• To assess  the efficacy  of tradipitant  on global  measures  of improvement  as 
measured  by Clinical  Global  Impression  of Change  (CGI -C) and Patient  Global  
Impression  of Change  (PGI -C). 
• To assess  the efficacy  of tradipitant  on quality  of life as measured  by the Patient  
Oriented  Eczema  Measure  (POEM),  Dermatology  Life Quality  Index  (DLQI),  
Healthly Days Core Module (4 questions) (HRQOL -4), Insomnia  Symptom  
Questionnaire  (ISQ)  and Patient  Benefit  Index  - Pruritus  (PBI -P). 
• To explore  the safety  and tolerability  of multiple  oral doses  of VLY-686. 
 
Pharmacogenomic  Sub-Study:  
• Identify  genetic  markers  that correlate  with response  to tradipitant  treatment.  
• Identify  genetic  markers  that correlate  with adverse  events  that may occur  upon  
treatment  with tradipitant.  
• To identify  genetic  markers  that are associated  with atopic  dermatitis  and/or  
pruritus  and disorders/diseases  associated  with NK-1 receptors.  
• To identify  genetic  markers  that are associated  in the metabolism,  distribution,  
and/or  excretion  of tradipitant  and its metabolites.      
Overall  Design:  
This is multicenter,  randomized,  double -blind,  placebo -controlled  study  to be conducted  in 
the United  States.  Approximately Three  Hundred  and Fifty  (350) patients  diagnosed  with 
atopic  dermatitis,  who satisfy  the selection  criteria  for the study,  will be randomized  to 
receive  either  tradipitant  85 mg or matching  placebo  BID.  
 
6 
 The study  is divided  into two phases:  the pre-treatment  phase  and the evaluation  phase.  The 
pre-treatment  phase  includes  a screening  and a baseline  visit where  patients ’ eligibility  for 
the study  will be assessed.  Washout  of medications  will occur  during  the screening  phase.    
The evaluation  phase  includes  8 weeks  of randomized , double -blind , placebo -controlled  
treatment.  In-clinic  evaluations  will occur  at Screening,  Baseline,  and Weeks  2, 4, 6, and 8.  
Criteria  for evaluation:  
Efficacy:   
Efficacy  assessments  will include:   
• Worst  Itch Numerical  Rating  Scale  (WI-NRS)  
• SCORing  Atopic  Dermatitis  (SCORAD)  index   
• Validated  Investigator  Global  Assessment  scale  for Atopic  Dermatitis  (vIGA-
AD) 
• Eczema  Area  and Severity Index  (EASI)   
• Clinical  Global  Impression  of Change  (CGI -C) 
• Patient  Global  Impression  of Change  (PGI -C) 
• Patient  Oriented  Eczema  Measure  (POEM)  
• Dermatology  Life Quality  Index  (DLQI)  
• Patient  Benefit  Index  – Pruritus  (PBI -P) 
• Insomnia  Symptom  Questionnaire  (ISQ)  
• Healthly  Days Core Module (4 questions) (HRQOL -4)  
Safety:   
• Safety  and tolerability  assessments  will include  the recording  of adverse  events  
(AEs),  physical  examinations,  clinical  laboratory  evaluations,  vital signs,  and 
electrocardiograms.  
• The Columbia -Suicide  Severity  Scale  (C-SSRS)  will be used to assess  suicidal  
behavior  and ideation.   
 
  
 
7 
 Table  1: Schedule  of Evaluations  
Phase  Pre-Treatment   Evaluation  
Visit  V1 
Screening  V2 
Baseline  V3 
 V4 
 V5 
 V6  
 
Study  Day Up to 
Day -45 Day 0 Day 
141 Day 
281 Day 
421  Day 561 
or ET 
Informed  Consent  Form  (ICF)2 X      
Eligibility  assessment   X X     
Patient  demography  X      
Medical  history  X      
Prior/concomitant  medications  X X X X X X 
Adverse  Event  (AE)  Assessment3 X X X X X X 
Serum  β-HCG  (for WOCBP)  X     X 
Urine  pregnancy  test (for WOCBP)   X X X X  
HbA1c  X      
Hepatitis  B/C screen  X      
Drug  and alcohol  screen  X X X X X X 
Hematology,  chemistry,  and urinalysis  X X  X  X 
IgE collection  X X X X X X 
Cytokine  Panel4 X     X 
Filag grin Analysis  X     X5 
Pharmacoge netic  (PG)  sample  X     X5 
Pharmacokinetic  (PK)  sample   X X X X X 
Resting 12-lead ECG  X X X X X X 
Vital  signs  and body  measurements6 X X X X X X 
Physical  Examination  (PE)7 X X X X X X 
Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating 
Scale ( C-SSRS )8 X X X X X X 
Medical  History  of Pruritus  
Questionnaire   X     
Medical History of Atopy 
Questionnaire  X      
Pruritus  Assessment  (incl.  NRS,  VRS ) X X X X X X 
SCORing  Atopic  Dermatitis  
(SCORAD)  index  X X X X X X 
Eczema  Area  and Severity  Index  
(EASI)  X X X X X X 
 
8 
 Phase  Pre-Treatment   Evaluation  
Visit  V1 
Screening  V2 
Baseline  V3 
 V4 
 V5 
 V6  
 
Study  Day Up to 
Day -45 Day 0 Day 
141 Day 
281 Day 
421  Day 561 
or ET 
Validated  Investigator  Global  
Assessment  scale  for Atopic  
Dermatitis  (vIGA-AD) X X X X X X 
Patient  Benefit  Index  – Pruritus  (PBI -
P)9  X X X X X 
Patient  Global  Impression  of Change  
(PGI -C)   X X X X 
Clinical  Global  Impression  of Change  
(CGI -C)   X X X X 
Patient  Oriented  Eczema  Measure  
(POEM)  X X  X  X 
Dermatology  Life Quality  Index  
(DLQI)   
X X X X X X 
Insomnia  Symptom  Questionnaire  
(ISQ)  X X  X  X 
Healthy Days Core Module (4 
questions)  (HRQOL -4) X X  X  X 
Daily Diary   
Photography   X  X  X 
Randomization   X     
Study  medication  dispensation10  X X X X  
Study  medication  collection  & 
compliance    X X X X 
Daily diary  distribution  and 
instruction  X      
Patient  daily  diary  review    X X X X X 
1 within +/ - 3 days  
2 Informed Consent will be obtained prior to performance of any study procedure(s)  
3 Adverse Event collection will begin at the time the ICF is signed  
4 If V1 cytokine panel sample is missed, sample should be drawn at the next in -clinic visit.  
5 Sample collected at V1. Sample collected at V6/EOS only if randomized under Protocol Amendment 1  and sample was not 
already collected at V2 . 
6 Body height will only be collected at screening (V1), body weight will be collected at visits 1, 2, and 6.  
7 An abbreviated physcial axamination will be performed at V2 (Baseline) and post -baseline visits 3 -5 ONLY if clinically 
indicated.  
 
9 
 8 The Screening/Baseline C -SSRS will occur at V1 (Screening). The Since Last Visit C -SSRS will occur at all other visits.  
9 At V2 (Baseline), the Patient Needs Questionnaire (PBI -P(PNQ)) will be administered. The Patient Benefits Questionaire 
(PBI -P(PBQ)) will be administered at subsequent visits.  
10 Patients will be instructed to take their first dose of study medication on the evening of Day 0.  
 
ET = Early  Termination;  WOCBP  = Women  of Child -bearing  Potential;  ECG  = electrocardiogram;  C-SSRS  = 
Columbia  Suicide  Severity  Rating  Scale;  NRS  = Numeric  Rating  Scale ; VRS  = Verbal  Response  Scale ; HbA1c = 
Haemoglobin  A1c or glycated  haemoglobin ; IgE= Immunoglobulin  E 