v.11.24.2020 Evaluating the Effects of Kangaroo Care 
in the NICU  
Principal Investigator: Craig Garfield, MD 
 
Protocol Date: 11/24/2020  
 
Funded by the Stanley Manne Children’s Research Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
v.11.24.2020 Contents 
1.  Background and Significance  .................................................. ................................................... .......... 3 
2.  Study Hypothesis and Outcomes  .................................................. ................................................... .... 4 
3.  Study Design  .................................................. ................................................... .................................... 4 
4.  Study Safety  .................................................. ................................................... ..................................... 9 
5.  Statistical Analysis  .................................................. ................................................... ......................... 10 
6.     References  .................................................. ................................................... ..................................... 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
v.11.24.2020 1.  Background and Significance  
Among 4 million infants born annually in the US, ne arly 0.5 million are born prematurely 
(<37 weeks gestation) and cared for in Neonatal Int ensive Care Units (NICUs). These preterm infants ar e 
extremely vulnerable in the perinatal period, with increased risks of physiologic instability, apnea, 
chronic intermittent hypoxemia, impaired temperatur e and metabolic regulation, and infection (1-7). 
Such prematurity-related complications are the lead ing cause of neonatal mortality and morbidity and 
result in longer average lengths of hospital stay a nd higher rates of re-hospitalization in preterm in fants 
than in full term infants. Strategies to improve th e physiologic stability and maturation of preterm 
infants during the critical perinatal period are vi tal to improve preterm infant outcomes, reduce life -long 
morbidity, and mitigate associated healthcare costs . 
 
Skin-to-skin contact between a preterm infant and a  parent, also known as kangaroo care (KC), is an 
important, inexpensive modality deployed in the NIC U to support the infant’s development and the 
formation of the parent-infant bond. During KC, a p arent holds an infant against their bare chest, ski n-
to-skin. NICU implementation of KC typically involv es the mother (8), in a practice familiarly termed 
Kangaroo Mother Care (KMC). Over 1,000 articles sup porting the implementation and positive effects of 
KMC have been published, outlining the positive eff ects of KMC intervention on physiologic and 
psychosocial outcomes.  KMC is invaluable in promot ing strong mother-infant bonds, reducing morbidity 
and mortality, improving infant physiologic stabili ty, and benefiting overall development trajectories . 
Additionally, KMC has also been shown to greatly be nefit mothers, with improved initiation and 
duration of breastfeeding, reduced anxiety, and imp roved sense of confidence in parenting (10).  
 
In contrast to KMC, conspicuously little research h as been published about the implementation and 
benefits of Kangaroo Father Care (KFC).  The limite d preliminary data that are available support an 
association between KFC and improved preterm infant  physiologic stability (e.g. heart rate variability , 
respiratory status, blood glucose, oxygen saturatio n (13)), infant contentment (e.g. crying episodes ( 12), 
time to relaxed state (13) and father-infant bondin g (12). While both mothers and fathers have been 
noted to experience doubt, stress, anxiety, depress ion and loss of control (16) in the NICU, fathers a re 
faced with different challenges than mothers (17,18 ). Specifically, fathers have been shown to feel le ss 
important and less needed than mothers (19), un-emp owered in terms of active participation at the 
bedside, and relegated to return to work and handle  external affairs (20). Fathers also report a lack of 
confidence in how to interact with and care for the ir premature infant, including a fear of caring for  the 
infant based on the infant’s size and perceived fra gility (17). Research suggests that these feelings can 
interrupt the father-infant bond (21). Additionally , fathers have been shown to hide their feelings an d 
return to work while their infant is still in the N ICU (19, 22-24) and to experience “pervasive uncert ainty” 
when transitioning home (18). These feelings and ex periences may further translate into individual and  
interpersonal stress, anxiety, and diminished paren ting confidence.  KFC may be an effective mechanism  
to support fathers through these experiences, so th ey can, in turn, better support infants and mothers .  
 
Even though the short and long-term benefits, inclu ding cost-effectiveness, of KMC are clear and the 
World Health Organization recommends that KC be uti lized as continuously as possible during the 
neonatal period (9), the benefits of KFC are only e merging and KC remains thoroughly under-utilized 
(14) in the NICU (15). We propose to revolutionize KC in the NICU by objectively measuring the effects  of 
the KFC intervention on infants, fathers, and famil ies. Utilizing wireless biosensor technology design ed 
v.11.24.2020 by members of this team, our study will be the firs t of its kind to objectively evaluate KFC as an 
intervention for improving both acute and long-term  outcomes of infants, mothers, and fathers in the 
NICU. 
2.  Study Hypothesis and Outcomes   
2.1.   Study Hypothesis  
The main hypothesis of this study is that Kangaroo Father Care (KFC) will positively impact acute 
physiologic and long-term behavioral outcomes in in fants, fathers, and families.  
2.2.   Outcome Measures  
2.2.1.  Primary Outcome  
Primary outcome measures include heart rate (HR) an d oxygen saturation (SpO2) as indicators of 
cardiorespiratory stability in infants before, duri ng, and after KC and HR and HR variability (HRV) as  
indicators of physiologic stress in NICU parents du ring and after periods of KC. All of these outcomes  will 
be measured using wearable, wireless biosensors. 
2.2.2.  Secondary Outcomes  
Secondary outcome measures include 1) Accelerometry  data captured using the wearable biosensors 
and compared to observations of infant position mad e by a study team member during  KC sessions to 
validate the accuracy of these biosensors in detect ing body position and movement during KC; 2) Infant  
salivary cortisol reactivity, maternal salivary cor tisol reactivity, and paternal salivary cortisol, 
testosterone, and oxytocin reactivity, compared bef ore, during, and after KC; 3) Parenting confidence,  
relationship quality, and involvement scores as qua ntitated by the Parenting Sense of Competence Scale  
(PSOC), the Revised Dyadic Adjustment Scale (RDAS),  the Postpartum Bonding Questionnaire, and a 
Father Involvement Scale at baseline, before discha rge, two weeks after discharge, and four weeks afte r 
discharge. Two-sample t tests and mixed-effect line ar regression models will be used to assess the mea n 
between-group differences. Covariates such as age, education, socio-economic status (SES), stress and 
depression will be adjusted in the multivariable re gression model.    
3.  Study Design  
3.1.   Eligibility Criteria  
3.1.1.  Inclusion Criteria  
Infants: Infants who are born at Prentice Women’s H ospital between 30 0/7 and 36 6/7 weeks gestation, 
are ≤20 days old at the time of enrollment, and do not meet any of the study’s exclusion criteria will  be 
eligible for participation in this study. Additiona lly, infants will only be included in this study if  both of 
their biological parents are eligible and agree to participate.  
 
Parents: Parents who are ≥18 years of age, English speaking, expect mother and father to raise the 
infant together in the same household regardless of  their marital status, and do not meet any of the 
study’s exclusion criteria will be eligible for par ticipation in this study. Additionally, family unit s will only 
be included in this study if both biological parent s of the infant are eligible and agree to participa te.  
v.11.24.2020 Only English speaking parents will be included in t his trial because the study questionnaires are only  
available in English. 
3.1.2.  Exclusion Criteria  
Infants: Infants who are intubated or sedated, are receiving vasopressors or analgesics, have any 
congenital anomalies or skin abnormalities deemed l ikely to impact KC by clinical team, have received or 
are planned to receive surgical intervention that w ill impact the utilization of KC, wearable sensors,  
and/or oral swabs, or are experiencing other sympto ms or receiving other intervention that will impact  
the utilization of KC, wearable sensors, and/or ora l swabs will be excluded from this study. 
 
Parents: Parents who are showing any signs of illne ss or taking corticosteroids or testosterone 
supplementation will be excluded from this study. N on-English speaking parents will also be excluded 
from this study because the questionnaires associat ed with this study are only available in English. 
3.2.   Screening and Consent  
Families who qualify for participation in this stud y will be identified through review of electronic m edical 
records. Once a potential subject is identified, a study team member will consult the NICU care team i n 
order to assess the condition of the infant and det ermine the family’s approachability for discussion of 
the study. If the clinical care team feels a family  is approachable, a member of the study team will 
identify the best time to meet with the family. All  participation will be discussed at the infant’s be dside 
in a private room. 
 
During this discussion, the study team member will outline the following study details for the family:  the 
rationale of the study, the specifics of data and s pecimen collection, the study team’s legal and ethi cal 
obligations and practices to ensure confidentiality , the physiologic monitoring by wearable, wireless 
biosensor, the KC interventions, the salivary sampl e collection, the saliva questionnaires and the 
psychosocial questionnaires and follow-up. The stud y team member will also discuss the risks of 
participation, which include the risks of adverse r eaction to the adhesive used on the wearable, wirel ess 
biosensors. The family will be informed that their commitment or refusal to participate will not affec t 
the care their child receives in the NICU and will be completely optional and anonymous. A copy of the  
Informed Consent document will be provided to each family. The family will then be left with the 
consent form to review discuss privately. After thi s period of private review, the study team member 
will return and give parents the opportunity to ask  questions. Once all questions are answered, the 
parents will be asked to describe the study process  as they understand it in their own words. To 
minimize the amount of time the study team spends i n the infant's bed space an infant's parent(s) may 
provide consent over the phone or a secure telecomm unication platform such as Skype for Business. 
The consent process as described above will not cha nge. The family will be provided written materials 
describing the nature of the optional elements and given an opportunity for questions and private 
discussion. 
 
Consent obtained over the phone or secure telecommu nication platform will be obtained according to 
institutional policy. A member of the study team wi ll explain in detail and review the informed consen t 
document(s) with the parent(s). If the parent(s) ag ree to participation, they will sign a copy of the 
informed consent document(s) and the study team mem ber obtaining consent will sign a copy at the 
v.11.24.2020 same time. The parent(s) will be required to send t heir signed document(s) to the study team by mail, 
fax, or email, and the two signature pages will be combined. The parent(s) will be provided a copy of the 
fully executed, signed informed consent document(s)  by mail, fax, or email prior to any study 
procedures.  
3.3.   Study Procedures  
Screening : 
Participants will be recruited from the NICU at Pre ntice Women’s Hospital. A member of the study team 
will screen all NICU patients for inclusion and exc lusion criteria by reviewing electronic medical rec ords. 
A screening and enrollment log will be kept to trac k families who have been approached and agreed or 
declined to participate in the study. The screening  and enrollment log will be kept on a secure REDCap  
server housed by Northwestern University. Only the study team will have access to this log. 
 
Kangaroo Care (KC) Intervention : 
After enrollment, families will be scheduled to par ticipate in two sessions of KC. The goal will be to  
schedule the KC sessions over two sequential days a nd at approximately the same time of day (i.e. 
morning, afternoon, or evening). However, if this i s not possible given the parents' schedules, the 
sessions will be scheduled for the days and time of  day that participating parents are able to visit t heir 
infant in the NICU. Each session will include two h ours of continuous KC, with one day focused on 
Kangaroo Mother Care (KMC) and the other on Kangaro o Father Care (KFC), in a randomized order. 
These sessions will include continuous skin-to-skin  holding of the infant by the parent, per standard of 
care protocol. 
 
Physiologic Recording:  
Infant : Prior to the first scheduled KC session, two wear able, wireless biosensors will be placed on the 
infant to continuously capture physiology measures including electrocardiogram (ECG), heart rate (HR),  
oxygen saturation (SpO2), body temperature, respira tory rate, movement, systolic blood pressure (BP-
S), and others for the duration of the study. One d evice will be placed on the infant’s chest or back.  A 
second device will be placed peripherally, on the i nfant’s leg, foot, arm, or hand. The devices are 
encapsulated in a medical-grade silicone and will b e adhered to the infant’s skin using a medical-grad e 
adhesive, similar to the adhesives standardly used in the NICU. The biosensors will be left in place f or up 
to 48 hours, but will be checked by study staff at least once every 24 hours to ensure skin integrity and 
signal quality. The adhesives will be changed betwe en uses.   
 
Parent : The same type of wearable, wireless biosensor will  also be used to record 4 hours of continuous 
physiology including ECG, HR, temperature, movement , SpO2, and others in the infant’s parents. The 
biosensor will be placed on the parent’s chest 1 ho ur before the start of a scheduled KC session and 
worn for 1 hour preceding the scheduled KC session,  during the 2-hour KC session, and for 1 hour after  
the completion of the KC session. The biosensor wil l be worn by the parents for approximately 4 hours 
in total. 
 
Skin Monitoring:  
Before and after the wearable biosensors are placed  on the infant, the infant’s skin integrity will be  
evaluated using a neonatal skin scoring measure for  monitoring skin integrity. Study staff will take 
v.11.24.2020 photographs of the skin at the site of biosensor pl acement before the biosensors are placed and after 
the biosensors are removed. Skin changes occurring while the biosensor is adhered to the infant’s skin  
will be documented photographically. No faces will be photographed. The study team will consult the 
bedside care team within 1 hour for any changes in skin integrity (based on the neonatal skin integrit y 
score). 
 
Saliva Sample Collection : 
Saliva will be collected from enrolled infants and parents non-invasively to evaluate the effects of K FC on 
established biomarkers of stress (cortisol and test osterone) and father-infant bonding (oxytocin).  
Before, during, and after each KC session, saliva w ill be collected from the participating parent, and  their 
infant.  A trained member of the study team will co llect saliva from the infant using suction, a metho d 
that follows the standard of care for the infant, o r oral swabs (27) made from an inert polymer and 
appropriately sized for an infant mouth (approximat ely 5 mm). Saliva samples will be taken from the 
infant immediately prior to beginning a KC session (T1), 30 minutes into the KC session (T2), and 
30 minutes post-session (T3). Parents will self-col lect saliva samples at the time points outlined abo ve, 
using an adult-sized oral swab. At T2, the trained study team member will be able to help the parent 
collect the saliva sample, if necessary, while the parent continues to hold their infant. This approac h to 
salivary sample collection and biomarker analysis i s similar to that established by previous studies o f 
kangaroo care (26,27) and takes into consideration the 30-minute delay before cortisol reactivity in 
saliva. 
 
Saliva Questionnaires : 
When saliva is collected from parents at time point s T1, T2, and T3, parents will also be asked to 
complete a brief saliva questionnaire. These questi onnaires will take approximately five minutes each to 
complete and will be completed on paper or directly  in REDCap, depending upon the participant’s 
preferences. At T2, a study team member will be abl e to help the parent complete the survey, if 
necessary, while the parent continues to hold their  infant.  Data provided on surveys completed on 
paper will be transferred to secure REDCap forms by  study staff and destroyed within 24 hours. All 
questionnaire data will be stored long term on the secure REDCap server housed by Northwestern 
University. 
 
Psychosocial Questionnaires:  
This study will employ psychosocial measures to cap ture the short- and long-term impacts of 
KFC. Specifically, validated measures of parenting confidence, relationship quality, infant bonding, a nd 
father involvement will be assessed via a set of  p aper or REDCap surveys administered in the NICU 
(short term) at baseline and the day before dischar ge (T-1) , and at home (long term) at 2 weeks (T+14 ) 
and 4 weeks (T+30) after discharge. Each of these s ets of surveys will take approximately 30 minutes t o 
complete. At baseline, each parent will complete th e Revised Dyadic Adjustment Scale (RDAS) and the 
Postpartum Bonding Questionnaire (PBQ). At T-1, eac h parent will complete the RDAS , the PBQ, and the 
Parenting Sense of Competence Scale (PSOC). These q uestionnaires will be completed on paper or 
directly in REDCap, depending upon the participant’ s preferences. Data provided on surveys completed 
on paper will be transferred to secure REDCap forms  by study staff and destroyed within 24 hours. At 
T+14 and T+30, each parent will complete the RDAS, the PBQ, the PSOC, and a Father Involvement 
Questionnaire. These questionnaires will be complet ed directly in REDCap only. Each parent will 
v.11.24.2020 receive an email containing a link to their set of questionnaires at both post-discharge time points. All 
questionnaire data will be stored long term on the secure REDCap server housed by Northwestern 
University. 
 
Wearable Sensor Data Collection : 
The wearable sensor that will be used in this study  can stream data continuously using near field 
communication (NFC) or Bluetooth technology. An enc rypted laptop, iPad, or similar device will be left  in 
the patient room and used to capture the continuous  data stream from the wearable sensor. 
Additionally, wearable biosensors can include onboa rd memory, and physiologic streams may be 
recorded to this onboard memory until transfer to a n encrypted laptop for analysis. 
 
We have recently upgraded a new firmware version ac tivating the ability for the sensor to continuously  
measure bioimpedance for respiratory rate. This fun ction does not require any modification to the 
physical device itself or the adhesive. However, th e bioimpedance functionality does require delivery of 
low amplitude sinusoidal current through the electr odes of the chest unit. The frequency of the curren t 
is 4 kHz – a frequency range used typically for hum an bioimpedance measurements by FDA cleared 
systems. The maximum current delivered is 8 μA. The  sensors with these parameters are safe to be 
worn by the infants for the duration of the study, which is up to 48 hours. These parameters are below  
commonly used body fat percentage impedance analyze rs that are widely commercially available. 
Furthermore, bioimpedance is standard measurements in existing NICUs / PICUs leveraging the ECG 
electrodes that are then displayed on standard of c are monitors. Commercially bioimpedance devices 
that are FDA approved inject currents that are 10x greater than our system (e.g. the CoVa Monitoring 
System 2 for continuous wearable sensing of thoraci c impedance). Finally, the parameters in our sensor  
follow IEC 60601-1-2 guidelines for electromagnetic  safety. 
 
Standard of Care Data Collection : 
In all patients in rooms where data from standard o f care monitoring is recorded on the BedMaster 
system, this data will be used for comparison to da ta captured using the wearable sensors. In 
participants in rooms where this system is not avai lable, the MediCollector system will be used to 
capture background data during the approximately 48 -hour study. 
3.4.   Study Timeline  
Activity  Duration   
Study Set -up   12/2018 -3/2019   
Recruitmen t 2/2019 -5/202 1  
Data Collection  2/2019 -5/2021   
Final Data Analyses + Report   12/2019 -12/202 1 
 
 
 
 
v.11.24.2020 4.  Study Safety  
4.1.   Privacy Protections  
The study team will take measures to protect the pr ivacy and confidentiality of participants. The plan  to 
protect patient privacy includes approaching and co nsenting participants in a private room. Study 
procedures will be done in the privacy of the patie nt rooms in the ICU. Study participation discussion s 
will be limited to members of the study staff and t he involved participants. 
Participant data will be coded with study identifie r only. All data obtained from the bedside monitors  
will be stored on the Azure Cloud (maintained by Da ta Analytics Reporting (DAR) at Lurie Children’s). All 
data obtained using wearable sensors will be stored  on an encrypted laptop and secure network for 
later analysis. All questionnaire responses will be  collected via Research Electronic Data Capture 
(REDCap) hosted by Northwestern University. When pr eferred, parents can fill in questionnaires on 
paper, and these will be transferred to REDCap by s tudy staff after collection.  
To minimize the risks, only the minimum data necess ary to complete the study will be collected on each  
study participant. 
Photographs will be labeled only by study code, and  will not include subject’s face. Video may include  
the subject’s face, but all videos will be scored f or position and movement within 1 month of recordin g, 
and will be deleted after scoring.  All photos and videos will be stored on a password protected serve r 
accessed by a password protected computer. 
Only authorized personnel listed in the IRB applica tion will have access to study data. The screening and 
enrollment log used contain the code link, and this  file will be stored on the REDCap server and will have 
access limited to the study team. The link between the participants and their study identifier will be  
destroyed at the conclusion of this study, so all r emaining data will be fully de-identified.  
Data transferred to the study team by the NU electr onic data warehouse for patients meeting screening 
criteria in the Prentice NICU will be downloaded on to the Lurie Children's Hospital server. This data file 
will be used for up to one week to allow the screen ing process to take place, then will be deleted.  
Confidentiality will be maintained with all of the medical records of this study. Subject records will  be 
kept in a locked cabinet, under the control of the Principal Investigator. The subject will also be as signed 
a code in the data sheets so that the records on th e computer will be kept confidential.  
Potential Risks 
Sensor Risks : There is a risk of discomfort or irritation from the adhesives used with wearable, wireless 
biosensors. It is possible that the additional hand ling required to place the biosensors may be 
temporarily disruptive for the participants. Study staff will check on the participant at least once e very 
24 hours to monitor for signs of discomfort, irrita tion, or allergic reaction. Skin integrity will be scored 
according to the protocol, and the bedside team wil l be consulted within 1 hour for any concerns. Any 
adverse events or evidence of discomfort during mon itoring will be recorded and the bedside team will 
be immediately consulted. Photographs will be taken  at baseline and after study; skin changes during 
the period of wearable biosensor use or at subseque nt time points will be documented 
photographically. 
 
v.11.24.2020 Parent Questionnaire Risks : Some questions may make parents uncomfortable or upset. It will be made 
clear to the parents that they do not have to answe r any questions that make them feel uncomfortable 
or upset. The parents will be informed that they ca n end their participation in the study at any time  
4.2.   Discontinuation Criteria  
A participant may be discontinued if the participan t is unwilling or unable to tolerate the wearable 
sensors, saliva collection, or skin-to-skin session . Examples may include adverse reactions to the 
adhesive on the wearable sensors or a patient remov ing the wearable sensors. The bedside clinical team  
or family can also request discontinuation at any t ime.  Families participating in the video monitorin g 
can request discontinuation of the video monitoring  aspect of this study at any time during the study.   
4.3.   Patient Withdraw al 
Any participants withdrawn from the study will have  the wearable sensors removed immediately. Any 
data collected prior to the withdrawal will remain a part of the study, and this data will be coded. 
5.  Statistical Analysi s 
5.1.   Statistical Plan  
Measurements made through clinical standard of care  will be compared to the measurements recorded 
by the wearable sensors. Distribution checks for no rmality and data accuracy will be completed for eac h 
individual and for the entire study prior to all an alyses. For continuous measures of physiology, 30 
second epochs will be defined for each method for c omparison. 
 
Agreement and correlation of wearable biosensor mea sures to standard of care measures will be 
assessed in two ways. First, Bland–Altman plots wil l be created to assess agreement between each 
measurement system via bias and precision, which re flect the mean or average difference between two 
methods and the variation in these differences, res pectively. Our second method consists of individual  
correlations between methods assessed for each pers on. This correlational method will supplement 
additional methods, and can be directly transformed  to variance shared between wearable biosensor 
and standard of care measures, a common metric of r eliability of any measure. 
 
Formal tests of bias, precision, and correlations: While the above methods will yield useful statistic s, 
they need to be extended to deal with the structure d nature of our data. Specifically, our data are 
clustered, meaning that we have multiple observatio ns within each person and multiple people in our 
sample, which violates standard independence assump tions inherent to many models. We propose to 
estimate bias and correlation/reliability using mul ti-level models, which yield the same statistics 
discussed above but account for the fact that obser vations taken from the same patient are more 
related than comparisons involving different patien ts. 
 
Data will be cleaned and analyzed using IBM SPSS St atistics 20.0, unless a newer version of SPSS is 
available. Using repeated-measures analysis of vari ance (RM-ANOVA), with the study phase (pre-, 
during-, and post-kangaroo care) as the repeated fa ctor, we will test differences across study phase f or 
maternal cortisol, paternal cortisol, infant cortis ol, paternal oxytocin, and paternal testosterone. W e will 
use a two-tailed test with a 5% level of significan ce analysis. In addition to tracking changes over t he 
period of kangaroo care, we will also examine withi n-triad correlations in cortisol for mother-father-
v.11.24.2020 infants in the same family, as well as correlations  between infant cortisol and father 
testosterone/oxytocin, and maternal cortisol and fa ther testosterone-oxytocin. 
 
Statistical Power: The large amount of within-perso n data provides incredibly high statistical power f or 
all planned and many secondary data analyses, allow ing this data set to answer all proposed questions.  
Previous work on power in multilevel models found g reater than 99% power to detect associations with 
the planned observations suggested here within comp arable nested designs. 
6. References  
1.Escobar GJ, Clark RH, Greene JD. Short-term outco mes of infants born at 35 and 36 weeks gestation: 
we need to ask more questions. Semin 
Perinatol. 2006;30(1):28-33. 
 
2.Wang ML, Dorer DJ, Fleming MP, Catlin EA. Clinica l outcomes of near-term infants. Pediatrics. 
2004;114(2):372-376. 
 
3.Kramer MS, Demissie K, Yang H, Platt RW, Sauvé R,  Liston R. The contribution of mild and moderate 
preterm birth to infant mortality. Fetal and Infant  Health Study Group of the Canadian Perinatal 
Surveillance System. JAMA. 2000;284(7):843-849. 
 
4.Santos IS, Matijasevich A, Silveira MF, Sclowitz IK, Barros AJ, Victora CG, Barros FC. Associated fa ctors 
and consequences of late preterm births: results fr om the 2004 Pelotas birth cohort. Paediatr Perinat 
Epidemiol. 2008;22(4):350-359. 
 
5.Tomashek KM, Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Davidoff MJ, Pet rini JR. Differences in mortality between late-
preterm and term singleton infants in the United St ates, 1995-2002. J Pediatr. 2007;151(5):450-456. 
 
6.Pulver LS Guest-Warnick G, Stoddard GJ, Byington CL, Young PC. Weight for gestational age affects th e 
mortality of late preterm infants. Pediatrics. 2009 ;123(6):e1072-1077. 
 
7.Escobar GJ, McCormick MC, Zupancic JA, et al. Uns tudied infants: outcomes of moderately premature 
infants in the neonatal intensive care unit. Arch D is Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2006;91(4):F238-244. 
 
8.Xue WL, Shorey S, Wang W, He HG. Fathers' involve ment during pregnancy and childbirth: An 
integrative literature review. Midwifery. 2018;62:1 35-145. 
 
9.World Health Organization recommendations on inte rventions to improve preterm birth outcomes. In: 
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization Pres s; 2015. [Internet]. 
 
10.Moore ER, Anderson GC, Bergman N, Dowswell T. Ea rly skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their 
healthy newborn infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2012(5):CD003519. 
 
11.Fischer CB Sontheimer D, Scheffer F, Bauer J, Li nderkamp O. Cardiorespiratory stability of prematur e 
boys and girls during kangaroo care. Early Human De velopment. 1998;52(2). 
 
v.11.24.2020 12.Kamphorst K Brouwer AJ, Poslawsky IE, Ketelaar M , Ockhuisen H, van den Hoogen A. Parental 
Presence and Activities in a Dutch Neonatal Intensi ve Care Unit: An Observational Study. J Perinat 
Neonatal Nurs. 2018;32(3):E3-E10. 
 
13.Velandia M, Unväs-Moberg K, Nissen E. Sex differ ences in newborn interaction with mother or father 
during skin-to-skin contact after Caesarean section . Acta Paediatrica. 2012;101(4). 
 
14.Campbell-Yeo ML, Disher TC, Benoit BL, Johnston CC. Understanding kangaroo care and its benefits 
to preterm infants. Pediatric Health Med Ther. 2015 ;6:15-32. 
 
15.Pallas-Alonso CR, Losacco V, Maraschini A, et al . Parental involvement and kangaroo care in Europea n 
neonatal intensive care units: a policy survey in e ight countries. Pediatr 
Crit Care Med. 2012;13(5):568-577. 
 
16.Ionio C, Columbo C, Brazzoduro V, Mascheroni E, Confalonieri E, Castoldi F, Lista G. Mothers and 
Fathers in NICU: The Impact of Preterm Birth on Par ental Distress. Eur J Psychol. 2016;12(4):604-621. 
 
17.Logan RM, Dormire S. Finding My Way: A Phenomeno logy of Fathering in the NICU. Adv Neonatal 
Care. 2018;18(2):154-162. 
 
18.Garfield CF, Lee Y, Kim HN. Paternal and materna l concerns for their very low-birth-weight infants 
transitioning from the NICU to home. J Perinat Neon atal Nurs. 2014;28(4):305-312. 
 
19.Helth T, Jarden M. Fathers' experiences with the  skin-to-skin method in NICU: Competent 
parenthood and redefined gender roles. Journal of N eonatal Nursing. 2013;19(3):114-121. 
 
20.Mackley AB, Locke RG, Spear ML, Joseph R. Forgot ten parent: NICU paternal emotional response. Adv 
Neonatal Care. 2010;10(4):200-203. 
 
21.Zelkowitz P, Bardin C, Papageorgiou A. Anxiety a ffects the relationship between parents and their 
very low birth weight infants. Infant Ment Health J . 2007;28(3):296-313. 
 
22.Pohlman S. The primacy of work and fathering pre term infants: findings from an interpretive 
phenomenological study. Adv Neonatal Care. 2005;5(4 ):204-216. 
 
23.Hugill K, Letherby G, Reid T, Lavender T. Experi ences of fathers shortly after the birth of their p reterm 
infants. J Obstet 
Gynecol Neonatal Nurs. 2013;42(6):655-663. 
 
24.Arockiasamy V, Holsti L, Albersheim S. Fathers' experiences in the neonatal intensive care unit: a 
search for control. Pediatrics. 2008;121(2):e215-22 2. 
 
25. Clearfield MW, Carter-Rodriguez A, Merali AR, S hober R. The effects of SES on infant and maternal 
diurnal salivary cortisol output. Infant Behav Dev.  2014;37(3):298-304. 
v.11.24.2020  
26. Early Origins of Health Disparities: Material D eprivation Predicts Maternal Evening Cortisol in 
Pregnancy and Offspring Cortisol Reactivity in the First Few Weeks of Life. American Journal of Human 
Biology. 
2014; 26(6):723-730. 
 
27. Kahraman A, Başbakkal Z, Yalaz M, Sözmen 
EY.The effect of nesting positions on pain, stress and comfort during heel lance in premature 
infants.Pediatr 
Neonatol. 2018 Aug;59(4):352-359. 
 
28. Srinath BK, Shah J, Kumar P, Shah PS. Kangaroo care by fathers and mothers: comparison of 
physiological and stress responses in preterm infan ts. J Perinatol. 2016 May;36(5):401-404.  