 
 
 
  
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   1 
 COVER PAGE  
 
Official Study Title : Coalition to Alleviate PTSD: Randomized  Clinical  Trial  of 
Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
 
NCT number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
IRB Approval Date : 04.09.2020  
 
 
Unique Protocol ID : HSC2014339H  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   2 
  
1. PROTOCOL  TITLE : Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
 
2. ABSTRACT:  The purpose  of this randomized  clinical  trial of 192 military  Veterans  with posttraumatic  
headache  (PTHA)  and co-morbid  symptoms  of posttraumatic  stress  is to compare  an 8-session  manualized  
clinic -based  cognitive  behavioral  therapy  (CCBT)  headache  intervention  delivered  over 6 weeks,  to a 12-
session  manualized  Cognitive  Processing  Therapy  – Cognitive  only (CPT -C) for PTS delivered  over 6 weeks,  
to Treatment  As Usual  (TAU)  in the relief  of both PTHA  and PTS symptoms  following  therapy  and at 3- and 6-
months.  
 
3. OBJECTIVES/SPECIFIC  AIMS/RESEARCH  QUESTIONS:  The overall  purpose  of the study  is to compare  
two talk therapies  (CCBT  and CPT-C) for the treatment  of posttraumatic  headache  (PTHA)  and co-morbid  
posttraumatic  stress  (PTS).  The researchers  hope  to learn  if a non-medication,  cognitive  behavioral  treatment  
can result  in noticeable  reductions  in PTHA  intensity/severity  and frequency  as well as PTS symptom  severity.  
 
4. BACKGROUND  AND  SIGNIFICANCE  
Posttraumatic  headache  (PTHA)  is a singularly  unique  and vexing  by-product  of traumatic  brain  injury  (TBI)  
offering  numerous  challenges  both to the individuals  experiencing  them  as well as the medical  providers  tasked  
with treating  this growing  problem  (Monteith  et al., 2009).  Although  PTHA  is not a new phenomenon  (there  are 
reports  of posttraumatic  headache  dating  back  to the 1700s),  very little is known  about  headaches  with onset  
or exacerbation  after TBI. 
 
One of the greatest  problems  facing  posttraumatic  headache  research  is inconsistency  in how PTHAs  are 
defined.  The most  widely  recognized  definition  is listed  in the International  Classification  of Headache  
Disorders  (ICHD -II), assembled  by the International  Headache  Society.  The ICHD -III (beta)  criteria  classify  
PTHA  as a secondary  headache  attributed  to head  and/or  neck  trauma.  PTHA  symptoms  can present  similarly  
to primary  headache  conditions  like migraine  or tension - type headache,  but the onset  or exacerbation  of the 
headache  symptoms  must  be secondary  to trauma  exposure.  Acute  versus  chronic  PTHA  is identified  based  
on the duration  and persistence  of the posttraumatic  headache.  Posttraumatic  headaches  that resolve  within  
3 months,  or are present  in individuals  with trauma  exposure  less than 3 months  ago, are classified  as acute.  
If posttraumatic  headache  persists  beyond  3 months,  then it is considered  chronic.  There  is also widespread  
agreement  that PTHA  goes  beyond  de novo  headaches,  including  marked  worsening  of premorbid  headache  
symptoms  attributable  to a traumatic  event.  
 
Despite  the significant  incidence  of PTHA  among  individuals  who suffer  TBI, very little is known  about  its 
treatment.  To date,  there  are no controlled  studies  of PTHA  treatment,  and the nesting  of PTHA  symptoms  
within  postconcussion  syndrome  makes  this population  unresponsive  to typical  primary  headache  
medications.  Many  PTHA  sufferers  attempt  self-treatment  through  the use of acetaminophen,  ibuprofen,  and 
opiate/triptan  medication  (usually  prescribed  for other  reasons).  Unfortunately,  these  over-the-counter  or self-
prescribed  medications  do not effectively  address  PTHA    symptoms  and may result  in headache  worsening  
through  medication  overuse.  Over  one-third of PTHA  patients  are referred  to Neurology,  where  they are 
typically  prescribed  anticonvulsants,  tricyclics,  or gabapentin.  Patients  with PTHA  referred  to Neurology  
usually  present  with more  severe  and persistent  PTHA  symptoms,  and few benefit  from Neurology  intervention.  
Less  than one-third of those  referred  to Neurology  actually  present  for their first appointment,  and 40% of those  
who attend  a first appointment  fail to return  for subsequent  appointments.  As a result,  there  are few studies  of 
medication  treatment  in PTHA,  and many  patients  refuse  medication  interventions  due to concerns  about  
headache  worsening  with medication  overuse,  inability  to complete  follow -up due to mTBI  and PTHA  disability,  
dislike  of medications  and side effects,  and general  mistrust  of the medical  system.  Based  on significant  
concerns  about  medical  treatments  and poor response  to medical  interventions,  it is strongly  recommended  
that PTHA  be addressed  through  a comprehensive  multidisciplinary  treatment  program  offering  evidence -
based,  non-medical  interventions  for headache  management.   
 
 
 
  
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   3 
  
Psychiatric  comorbidities  are common  in headache  (Breslau  et al., 2003),  and comorbid  psychopathology  has 
been  linked  to alterations  in headache  evolution  and treatment  response  (Antonaci  et al., 2011).  Ruff et al. 
(2012)  estimate  that more  than 80% of Veterans  diagnosed  with mTBI  and PTHA  also have  PTSD.  Although  
comorbid  headache  and PTSD  may alter the effectiveness  of interventions,  there  is some  evidence  to suggest  
that addressing  PTSD  directly  can ameliorate  health  symptoms  like headache  (Shipherd  et al., 2013).  There  
are no studies,  however,  examining  the influence  of PTSD  comorbidity  in posttraumatic  headache  in a military  
population,  so the gaps  in PTHA  intervention  extend  beyond  targeted  non- medication  interventions  to PTSD  
treatments  that address  PTHA  through  alterations  in PTSD  symptom  severity.  In fact, an ongoing  PTSD  trial 
overseen  by Dr. Patricia  Resick,  has revealed  subjective  reports  of headache  improvement  among  military  
service  members  who are successfully  treated  for PTSD.  We have  chosen  to add a treatment  arm to  this study  
design  in which  participants  with PTHA  and comorbid  PTSD  or PTS symptoms  will be treated  with a gold-
standard,  manualized  PTSD  intervention  (Cognitive  Processing  Therapy;  CPT-C). Both CPT-C and the 
manualized  headache  intervention  rely upon  cognitive  behavioral  mechanisms  that overlap  and may produce  
relief  for both disorders.  
 
5. RESEARCH  DESIGN  
Due to the lack of studies  exploring  behavioral  interventions  for PTHA,  this research  is designed  as a 
randomized  clinical  trial comparing  an 8-session  manualized  CBT intervention  for headaches  (CCBT)  to the 
12 session  Cognitive  Processing  Therapy  – Cognitive  Only (CPT -C) to Treatment  as Usual  (TAU)  for patients  
with co-morbid  symptoms  of PTHA  and posttraumatic  stress  following  military  deployment  and combat  trauma.  
The resulting  data will significantly  add to the extant  research  by gathering  preliminary  evidence  supporting  
the efficacy  of a manualized  migraine  headache  intervention  in 192 post 9/11 military  Veteran  and active duty 
Service M embers with PTHA.  Assessments  will occur  prior to treatment  and 1-, 3-, and 6- months  (following  
treatment  completion).  Blood  will be collected  prior to treatment,  during  two of the sessions  of the 6- week  
treatment  phase  for all participants  and at 1- and 6-months  following  treatment  in collaboration  with the CAP 
Genomics  and Basic  Science  Core  (Douglas  E. Williamson,  Ph.D.  – PI) to examine  gene  expression  profiles  
links with PTHA  that may be predictive  of treatment  outcomes.  Veterans  randomized  to the TAU group  will 
have  an option  to be treated  clinically  with either  CCBT  or CPT-C after their 6-month  follow -up assessment  is 
complete.  
 
6. RESEARCH  PLAN  
 
6.1 Selection  of Subjects  
 
6.1.1.  Subject  Population.  Potential  participants  will be recruited  from the STVHCS  Polytrauma  
Rehabilitation  Center  (PRC) , military medical treatment facilities,  and from the local community.  
Recruitment  will target  veterans  and active duty personnel  having  returned  from a post-9/11 deployment  
with chronic  PTHA  and symptoms  of posttraumatic  stress.  
 
6.1.2.  Source of Research Material . Please find a description of these measures at the end of this 
protocol.  Assessments will be administered in person whenever possible.  However, in order to 
accommodate participant schedules and/or instances in which a participant may have left the local area at 
the time of a follow up assessment, we may collect full or partia l assessments in person or via phone or 
electronic data capture using a secure link to the encrypted STRONG STAR database.  Assessments 
completed via phone or remote electronic data capture will not include biospecimen collection.  
Reasonable efforts will be made to collect all data as described in this protocol, but we expect some 
participants may not be able to complete part or all of any given follow up assessment.  
 
 
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   4 
 Assessments  PC/RA  or IE BL TX Post 3MFU  6MFU   DC 
Demographics  and Military  Questionnaire  PC/RA  x      
History  of Head  Injuries  and History  of Head  Injuries  Addendum  PC/RA  x  x x x  
Deployment  Risk  and Resiliency  Inventory_2_Deployment  Environment  (DRRI_2_D)  PC/RA  x      
Deployment  Risk  and Resiliency  Inventory_2_Postbattle  Experiences  (DRRI_2_P)  PC/RA  x      
Deployment  Risk  and Resiliency  Inventory_2_Combat  Experiences  (DRRI_2_C)  PC/RA  x      
Life Events  Checklist -5 (LEC -5) PC/RA  x  x x x  
Patient  Health  Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9) PC/RA  x   x x x x  
Depressive  Symptom Index  –Suicide  Subscale  (DSI-SS) PC/RA  x  x x x  
Generalized  Anxiety  Disorder -7 (GAD -7) PC/RA  x  x x x  
Alcohol  Use Disorders  Identification  Test –Self Report  (AUDIT)  PC/RA  x      
Quick  Drinking  Screen  (QDS) PC/RA  x  x x x  
Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine  Dependence  (FTND)  Self-report  x  x x x  
Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine  Dependence -Smokeless  Tobacco  (FTND -ST) Self-report  x  x x x  
Headache  Management  Self-efficacy  Scale  (HMSE)  PC/RA  x  x x x  
Headache -Specific  Locus  of Control Scale  (HSLC)  PC/RA  x  x x x  
Headache  Impact  Test (HIT-6) PC/RA  x  x x x x 
Neurobehavioral Symptom Inventory  (NSI) PC/RA  x  x x x  
Credibility  and Expectancy  Questionnaire  (CEQ) PC/RA   x x    
Pre-Treatment  Health  Interview  (+ BL PTHA  addendum)  IE x      
Post -Treatment  Health  Interview  (+ FU PTHA  addendum)  IE   x x x  
Structured  Diagnostic  Interview  for Headache  –Revised  (SDIH -R) IE x  x x x  
Ohio  State  University  TBI Identification  Method -Interview  Form (OSU  TBI-ID- 
SF) IE x      
Selection  of Index  Event  for the CAPS -5 IE x      
Clinician  Administered PTSD  Scale -5 (CAPS -5) IE x  x x x  
Self-Injurious  Thoughts  and Behaviors  Interview  –Short  Form IE x  x x x  
Tinnitus  Functional Index  IE x  x x x  
PTSD  Checklist  List-5 (PCL -5) PC/RA  x x x x x x 
Cognitive  Emotions  Regulations  Questionnaire  –Short  (CERQ -Short)  PC/RA  x  x x x  
Posttraumatic  Cognitions  Inventory  (PTCI)  PC/RA  x  x x x  
Response  to Stressful Experiences  Scale  (RSES)  PC/RA  x      
Patient  Health  Questionnaire -15 (PHQ -15) PC/RA  x  x x x  
Veterans  Rand  12 Item Health Survey  (VR-12) PC/RA  x  x x x  
PROMIS Sexual  Function  PC/RA  x  x x x  
Brief -Inventory  of Psychosocial Functioning  (B-IPF) PC/RA  x  x x x  
Insomnia  Severity  Index  (ISI) PC/RA  x  x x x  
PROMIS Sleep -Related  Impairment  and Disturbance  PC/RA  x  x x x  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   5 
         
        
Assessments (cont.)  PC/RA  or IE BL TX Post 3MFU  6MFU  DC 
Snoring, Tired, Observed, Blood Pressure (STOP)  PC/R
A x      
Community  Reintegration  of Injured  Service  Members  (CRIS)  PC/R
A x  x x x  
NIH Cognition  Battery  (via computer)  PC/R
A x  x x x  
PTHA Study Missing Data Assessment  PC/R
A      x 
Online  Forms:  1.) Daily  Headache  Dairy  2.) Profile  
of Mood  States  3.) Sleep  
Quality/Quantity  4.) Daily  Stress  
Inventory  Participant  will complete  online  entries twice  
daily. Entries  will occur before,  during, and  
after treatment for  a total of 14 weeks.   
          * DC = participant discontinued participation (i.e., drop out of treatment or follow -up) 
 
6.1.3.  Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria.  
 
Inclusion  Criteria:  
▪ adult  (ages  18 and above)  
▪ U.S. military  Veterans  and active duty personnel  with military  service  during  a post-9/11 deployment  
▪ have  sustained  a traumatic  head  injury.  
▪ have  been  diagnosed  or report  symptoms  consistent  with chronic  (> 3 months)  posttraumatic  headache  
attributed  to a traumatic  injury.  We are focusing  on chronic  PTHA  due to the very low likelihood  of headache  
remission  after 3 months,  the disability  associated  with chronic  PTHA,  and the high prevalence  of chronic  
versus  acute  PTHA  in this population.  A positive  PTHA  diagnosis  will be indicated  for individuals  with de novo  
headache  onset  after a concussion  or exacerbation  of pre-existing  headache  symptoms  (increased  frequency,  
duration,  or intensity),  which  is consistent  with the existing  ICHD -IV diagnostic  criteria  for PTHA.  PTHA  
inclusion  will be based  on a consultation  with one of our PRC/Polytrauma  System of  Care  (PSC)  co-
PIs/overall  study  PI if symptoms  consistent  with chronic  PTHA  are reported , but the diagnosis  is not already  
documented  in the participant’s  medical  record.  
▪ If taking  headache  medication,  participant  must  agree  to work  with their prescriber  to remain  on stable  doses  
of any prescribed  headache  medications  for the duration  of the intervention  and through  the follow -upsas 
much  as possible  and as medically  indicated..  
▪ Participants  must  also report  on the Clinician  Administered  PTSD  Scale  (CAPS -5) an exposure  to a traumatic  
event  (Criterion  A) and at least  one intrusion  symptom  (Criterion  B). There  is some  evidence  suggesting  40% 
comorbidity  between  PTSD  and new onset  headache,  so it is reasonable  to assume  that at least  half of all 
PTHA  participants  recruited  for this study  will have  PTHA  and comorbid  PTS symptoms.  The inclusion  of 
PTS symptoms  in this sample  is vital based  on reports  indicating  that PTS symptoms  and PTSD  actually  
increase  vulnerability  to PTHA  and chronic  headache  in military  populations.  
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  
▪ Participant  has had a recent  and significant  change  in the nature  of headache  symptoms  over the last 6 weeks  
prior to screening  (as determined  by the investigators).  
▪ Participants  currently  in CPT or prolonged  exposure  for PTSD.  
▪ Participant  has medication  overuse  headache  as guided  by the Structured  Diagnostic  Headache  Interview - 
Revised  (Brief  Version;  SDIH -R) and clinical  judgment.  
▪ Participant  is unable  to read or speak  English  at a 6th grade  level.  
▪ Participant  has had a psychiatric  hospitalization  in the last 6 months.   
▪ Participant  is pregnant  or plans  to become  pregnant  during  the trial (due to concerns  about  pregnancy -induced  
headache  that may obscure  findings)  
▪ Participant  has a present  psychiatric  problem  that warrants  immediate  treatment  as indicated in CPRS, flagged 
by an IE during evaluation, or confirmed by a clinician through screening or review of CPRS notes.  
▪ Participant  demonstrates  significant  cognitive  impairment  that could  impact  treatment  adherence/benefit.  
 
6.1.4.  Description  of the Recruitment  and Prescreening  Process . 
Initial  contact  will be made  through  various  mechanisms.  Under an IRB approved  HIPAA  Waiver,  Drs. Jaramillo,  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   6 
 Eapen  or study  staff will check  the VA Computerized  Patient  Record  System  (CPRS)  appointment  schedules  and 
examine  CPRS  medical  records  of STVHCS  patients  with upcoming  appointments  to help identify  candidates  that 
may benefit  and qualify  for the study.  In this case,  a potentially  “qualified”  candidate  is a PRC  patient  presenting  with 
a primary  diagnosis  of headache  with a history  of diagnosis  for TBI and/or  persistent  post-concussive  symptoms  (e.g.,  
tinnitus,  dizziness)  as noted  in their CPRS  record.  Dr. Jaramillo,  Dr. Eapen,  or study  staff will contact  the veteran’s  
provider  for the pending  visit to inform  them  that their patient  may qualify  for the study.  Patients  will be given  
information  about  the study  from their medical  provider,  and interested  patients  will be consented  by study  staff who 
are housed  in the PRC  (the provider  will notify  the study  staff of the potential  participant).  Providers  will be informed  
about  the study  through  In-Service  presentations  twice  a month  and will be given  approved  fliers  describing  the study  
and inclusion  criteria.  If study  staff are unavailable  to meet  with potential  participants  at that time,  interested  patients  
will give permission  for study  staff to contact  them  by signing  a consent  to contact  form.  Providers  in all the clinics  
will be briefed  on study  goals  and the inclusion/exclusion  criteria  to help guide  their referrals.  
 
Study Investigators will consult with military treatment providers who may see patients that could benefit from the 
treatment provided by the study, and the study team may accept direct referrals from these providers.  Individuals 
may also be referred by other STRONG STAR studies.  Potential participants may also self -refer in response to 
recruitment information on the STRONG STAR website at www.strongstar.org . Interested persons can call or walk 
in to the STRONG STAR offices. STRONG STAR also recruits using various social  media sites (e.g. Facebook, 
Twitter, LinkedIn, etc.) and web search engines (e.g. Google Ads, Bing, etc.).   In addition, there may be events 
where information about STRONG STAR studies is provided and those interested may fill out a “consent to 
contact” form indicating that they would like a member of the research team to contact them at a later date to learn 
more about the study and schedule or complete pre -screening.  Research staff will field incoming phone calls and 
walk-ins.   
 
Interested individuals  may directly  contact  the study  coordinator  on their own accord  in response  to recruitment 
materials  distributed  at the PRC/PSC  clinics  and locations in the local community  frequented by veterans and service  
members , including military facilities.   Appearances  by the study  staff in public  media  may also generate self -referrals . 
Study  staff will also review  CPRS  medical  records  of community  referrals  (if available)  before  consent  to aid in pre-
screening  and determining  eligibility.  Recruitment letters will be mailed to veterans or SMs registered at the STVHCS 
with a history of OEF/OIF/OND tour(s) through collaboration with the local VA OIF/OEF/OND program office or 
through research registry databases (or other open research studies) of willing Veteran or SM research participants 
who have consented to be contacted about further study opportunities. Recruitment materials will provide information 
about the study and contact information for both the study PI and study coordinator.  
 
Individuals  interested  in participating  will be given  information  about  the study  including  inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  
and they will be screened  using  the telephone pre-screen  questionnaire  to determine  the possible  presence  of chronic  
PTHA,  the presence  of PTS symptoms,  and any indicators  that would  exclude  them  from participation.  Interested  and 
qualified  participants  will then get additional  information  about  the study  and will  meet  with the study  coordinator  to 
be formally  consented  into the study  and undergo  a baseline  assessment.  
 
6.1.5.  Consent  Process . 
The IRB Policy  on Informed  Consent  Process  and Informed  Consent  Documentation  will be followed.  Potential  
participants  will have  the study  explained  to them  by a trained  research  staff member  in a safe and private  location.  
The potential  participant  will be given  a copy  of the informed  consent  document  (ICD)  to read.  After  the individual  
has read the ICD they will be given  the opportunity  to take the consent  home  to discuss  the research  with family  and 
friends.  The Research  Team  will be available  to answer  any questions  about  the research.  Once  the potential  
participant  has reached  a decision,  the advising  staff member  will go over the risks and benefits  of the study  and 
ensure  the subject  understands  the research.  The advising  staff member  will have  the individual  sign the consent  
form.  A copy  of the signed  ICD will be given  to the participant.  The advising  staff member  will document  the informed  
consent  process  in the medical  record  of veteran  participant s per VA guidelines .  Participants who discontinue 
participation before completing study treatment and follow -up assessments will be contacted by phone to complete a 
brief assessment of their symptoms and their reason(s) for discontinuing participation.  Consent for this asse ssment 
will be done verbally over the phone to prevent the need for an in -person visit for the veteran.  
 
6.1.6.  Subject  Screening  Procedures . 
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   7 
 Baseline  assessment  will occur  following  consent.  Following  the baseline  assessment,  participants  found  to meet  the 
inclusion  criteria  for the study  will be randomized  into the study.  Participants  not meeting  study  inclusion  criteria   
  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   8 
 will be informed  and referred  to appropriate  care either  as part of another  study  or using  the local VA, military providers,  
and/or  civilian  resources  as appropriate.  
 
6.1.7.  Compensation  for participation . 
Participants  who are not active  duty at the time of an assessment will receive  $50 each  time they complete  
comprehensive  assessment  measures  at Baseline,  1, 3, or 6 -month  follow -up assessments for a possible total of 
$200 .  Participants will also be paid $25  each  time they get their blood drawn  (Baseline, twice during treatment, and 
1-month and 6 -months after treatment), for a possible total of $125.  Additionally, participants will be paid $20 at each 
appointment during treatment to offset  the cost of travel and potential lost income.  Historically, the cost of traveling up to 
12 times during treatment has been a barrier for some participants in the study.  The possible total of $40  (2 sessions)  to 
$240  (12 sessions)  will help individuals who have long commutes, or may be hindered from lost work hours. Similarly, a 
payment of  $0.50 will be given for each completed headache diary  ($5 payment received with the milestone of 10 completed 
entries)  for a possible total of $112.  By completing all the diaries, the 4 assessments, up to 2 -12 treatment sessions, and 
the 5 blood draws, participants could receive between $477 and $677 in total compensation. Participants  who choose  to 
withdraw  from this study  early  will receive  compensation  for all assessments , treatment, diaries, and  blood  draws  
that they completed.  Payment  will be provided  via a rechargeable  MasterCard®  ClinCard.  The MasterCard®  
ClinCard  is a debit  card issued  to the study  participant.  Funds  are loaded  onto card through  the ClinCard  website  at  
www.clincard.com . Only authorized users will be able to access the ClinCard website to add funds with a username 
and password. The ClinCard funds will be available to recipients within 1 business day and can be used as the 
participant chooses. The participant will be notifi ed that their name, address and date of birth will be shared with a 
third-party (ClinCard) solely for the purposes of payment processing. This information will only be used for the 
administration of the payment and will be kept strictly confidential.   There will be no compensation for participation in 
the brief assessment of symptoms and discontinuation reasons for participants who discontinued participation in this 
study before completing treatment and follow -up assessments.  
 
6.2. Study  Procedures/Research  Interventions .  
Consent & Baseline Assessment  
Individuals will visit the Audie L. Murphy VA Hospital (which is part of the South Texas Veterans Health Care System) 
or the UTHSCSA STRONG STAR clinic where they will learn more about the study, provide consent for participation. 
Baseline assessment will occur following consent. Most participants will be able to complete the baseline assessment 
at the same appointment, but  individuals will be allowed to complete the baseline assessment appointment over two  
to three appointments if they prefer.  
 
If participants are referred  from other STRONG STAR studies, t esting completed within the past one month as part 
of the assessment for other STRONG STAR studies will be used as baseline testing for participation in this study as 
appropriate with participant consent.   
 
Participants  found  to meet  inclusion/exclusion  criteria  will return  to the clinic  to have  blood  drawn  as part of the baseline  
assessment,  be oriented  to the on-line daily diaries,  and, if randomized  to CPT-C, undergo  a Trauma  Interview  
conducted by the therapist  who will be providing  therapy.  An appointment  will be made  for all participants  
approximately  2-weeks  later to start treatment.  The on-line headache  diaries  will be completed  daily for approximately 
2-weeks.  If participants  miss a headache  diary  entry,  they will receive  a phone  call from research  staff as needed  
to encourage  and remind  them to  complete  the diary.  
 
Treatment  
• Clinic -Based  Cognitive  Behavioral  Therapy  (CCBT) . The CCBT  headache  treatment  consists  of 8 one-hour 
sessions  that participants  will be asked  to complete  in approximately 6 weeks  (participants  will be seen  once  
or twice  each  week).  Each  treatment  will take place  at the South  Texas  Veterans  Healthcare  System  (Audie  
Murphy  Hospital)  or the UTHSCSA  STRONG  STAR  clinic.  The 8 CCBT treatment  sessions  will cover  many  
topics  including:  relaxation  training,  identifying  stress,  planning  for long-term stress  management,  solving  
problems  that impact  their headaches,  dealing  with thoughts  about  their headache,  specific  headache  coping  
skills  training,  and how to maintain  their gains  from treatment.  
• Cognitive  Processing  Therapy -Cognitive  Only (CPT -C). Cognitive  Processing  Therapy  (CPT)  is a trauma -
focused  treatment  that involves  learning  to recognize  and challenge  thoughts  related  to traumatic  brain  injury.  
Participants  assigned  to this treatment  arm will be asked to meet  with a study  therapist  twice  a week for 
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   9 
 approximately 6-weeks  for a total of 12 one-hour sessions.  Each  treatment  will take place  at the South  Texas  
Veterans  Healthcare  System  (Audie  Murphy  Hospital)  or the UTHSCSA  STRONG  STAR  clinic.  During  this 
treatment,  participants  will be asked  to think  about  how they received  their traumatic  brain  injury  and their 
beliefs  about  the meaning  of the event,  as well as their current  beliefs  about  themselves  and others.  Topics  
such  as safety,  trust,  control,  self-esteem,  and intimacy  will be discussed.  Participants  will be expected  to 
complete  assignments  outside  of session  to practice  skills  learned  in treatment.  
• Treatment  as Usual  (TAU) . Participants  assigned  into the Treatment  as Usual  (TAU)  condition  will receive  
treatment  by their primary  provider  as indicated.  The participants will meet with study staff twice during the 
treatment phase to complete assessments.  
 
Assessments  
• All participants  regardless  of treatment  group  will be asked  to complete  headache  diary  on-line twice a day . 
• Blood  will be drawn  prior to treatment,  during  two of the treatment  sessions,  and at the 1- and 6-month  
assessments.  
• Two weeks  before  the scheduled  1-, 3- and 6-month  assessments,  participants  will once  again  be asked  to 
complete  headache  diaries  for two weeks  prior to the evaluations.  
 
All evaluations  will be audio -recorded  and CCBT  and CPT-C therapy  sessions  will be audio -recorded  to make  sure 
that the study  staff is correctly  following  the study  procedures.  These  recordings  will be reviewed  by research  experts  
who are part of the research  team.  
 
Assessment of Discontinued (i.e., treatment/assessment dropout) participants.  
• All participants who discontinued participation in this study before completing study treatment and follow -up 
assessments will be contacted by phone by a project coordinator or research assistant and asked about their 
willingness to participate in a 10 -15 assessment of their symptoms and reason for discontinuing participation.  
Participants will have the option to opt in to the assessment by givi ng verbal consent over the phone.  
• Those who agree to participate will be asked questions about global change in headache and PTSD 
symptoms, their perceptions of study participation and study treatments, their reason(s) for discontinuing 
participation in the study, and verbal administration of the HIT -6 and PCL -5 to assess headache and PTSD 
symptom severity.  
 
6.2.1  Collection  of Human  Biological  Specimens . 
All participants  will have  blood  drawn  prior to treatment,  at two treatment  sessions,  and 1- and 6-months  (following  
treatment  completion)  coordinated  through  the CAP Biomarkers  and Genomics  Core.  A skilled  phlebotomist  will draw  
the samples.  All blood  samples  will be collected  at the Audie  L. Murphy  VA Hospital  or the UTHSCSA  STRONG  STAR  
clinic.  
 
6.2.1.1  Laboratory  evaluations  and special  precautions . 
All blood  samples  will be collected  at the Audie  L. Murphy  VA Hospital  or the UTHSCSA  STRONG  STAR  clinic  and 
then transported  to the CAP Biomarkers  and Genomics  Core  in the UTHSCSA Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Sciences at the UT Health -Long School of Medicine in room 727F  for processing  and storage.  This location  is monitored  
24-7 by a wireless  monitoring  system  on the Isensix  system  and has approval  by the STVHCS  and Central  VA office  
as a VA-Approved  Tissue  Bank.  The study  staff will be available  to offer assistance  if the participant  is distressed  at 
any point  during  any procedures.  
 
6.2.1.2  Specimen  storage . 
Biological  specimens  will be coded  with a digital  bar code  that can be linked  to the study  and subject  only by key-codes  
maintained  by the CAP Data  Management  and Biostatistics  Core.  
6.2.2  Data  Collection.  
Hardcopies  of data will be stored  in locked  file cabinets  within  a dedicated,  cipher/keyed  room at  the Audie  L. Murphy  
VA Hospital  in the Polytrauma  Rehabilitation  Center  or the UTHSCSA  STRONG  STAR  clinic  (iaw local Privacy  
policies).  
 
Electronic  data will be stored  on a FISMA  compliant,  secure,  research  database  at UTHSCSA,  
https://delta.uthscsa.edu/ssdashboard/login.aspx .  The STRONG STAR data server is physically located at the 
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   10  
 Advanced Data Center (ADC)  has 24x7 onsite security, card key , biometric  access controls and video surveillance. 
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio (UTHSCSA) ADC facility also maintains Gen 2 firewall 
devices to protect and prohibit any unauthorized access to UTHSCSA data. All UTHSCSA network devices are 
monitored by state of the art monitoring applications that include configuration audit, management, and availabi lity 
24x7.   
 
Statistical  Consideration  
 
6.3.1  Sample  Size Estimation.  
This study  will consent  approximately  438 study  participants  with the goal of having  192 participants  randomized for 
analysis . 
 
6.3.2  Primary  (i.e., primary  outcome  variables)  and secondary  endpoints.  
The primary  outcomes  are headache  symptoms  and PTSD  symptoms.  
 
6.3.3  Data  analysis.  
Treatment  groups  will be compared  on baseline  variables.  Dropout  during  treatment  resulting  in lack of outcome  data 
can bias analyses.  If attrition  can be successfully  modeled  with logistic  regression  on the basis  of baseline  
characteristics,  and particularly  if there  is evidence  of differential  attrition,  strategies  such  as inverse  probability  
weighting  can supplement  the outcome  analyses.  Assuming  that headache  disability  data (HIT-6; our primary  
outcome  for this research)  is reasonably  normally  distributed  across  the sample,  treatment  effects  of the clinical  
interventions  (CCBT  and CPT-C) over the Treatment  as Usual - Control  condition  will be analyzed  using  a general  
linear  mixed  (GLM)  model  with baseline  scores  used  as a covariate.  Unlike  ANOVA,  mixed  effects  models  permit  
heterogeneity  of variance  in the treatment  groups.  If HIT-6 data are non-normal,  a generalized  linear  model  will be 
used  (e.g.,  Poisson  regression).  
 
Two joint primary  comparisons  will be conducted  comparing  both active  treatments  to TAU.  To adjust  the alpha  level 
for these  joint hypotheses,  we will interpret  both at the alpha  = 0.025  significance  level.  Secondary  analyses  will 
examine  differences  between  the two active  interventions  as well as sensitivity  analyses  of the primary  outcomes  
considering  missing  data,  adherence  to the protocol,  or imbalances  between  the groups  at baseline.  Additional  
analyses  will consider  the secondary  outcomes  and differences  between  the groups  at other  time points.  
 
A recent  study  helped  to guide  our determination  of what  constitutes  a clinically  meaningful  change  in perceived  
headache  disability  and the proposed  study  was powered  in light of these  differences.  In the primary  care setting,  HIT-
6 changes  ranging  from 2.5 (95%  CI: -3.3 to -1.7) were  perceived  as “somewhat  better”  and changes  up to 5.9 (95%  
CI: - 7.6 to -4.1) were  perceived  as “much  better.”  We considered  a meaningful  change  as somewhere  between  these  
two global  impressions  and used  this marker  as an index  of clinically  significant  between -group  differences.  Our 
study  is powered  to detect  an effect  size of 2.8 points  between  groups  after controlling  for baseline  scores  (i.e., a 
residualized  change)  and constitutes  an effect  that would  be meaningful  to most  headache  sufferers.  Assuming  an 
alpha  level of 0.025,  group  sample  sizes of  n = 64 (N = 192), and a moderate  correlation  between  the baseline  scores  
and final endpoints  (r = 0.50),  we will have  power  = 0.80 to detect  an effect  size of d = 0.52 between  both of the joint 
primary  comparisons.  In realistic  terms,  this will allow  us to detect  a change  of 2.8 points  on the HIT-6 between  the 
active  treatment  and the controls.  Changes  smaller  than this magnitude  are unlikely  to be clinically  meaningful.  
 
6.4 Confidentiality.  
Confidentiality  will be safeguarded  through  a number  of Consortium controls  already  in place  for existing  studies.  First,  
all assessments  will occur  in a private  room.  Completed  hard-copy  assessments  will be stored  in a file in a locked  
drawer  that is located  in a locked  office  at the VA or the UTHSCSA  STRONG  STAR  clinic.  Patient  identifiers  are 
removed  from all charts  and associated  only with a number  identifier.  Data  will be transcribed  into the Consortium  
database  by the study  coordinator  or a trained  research  assistant  using  a double -entry  method.  All digital  research  
data files will be encrypted  and password - protected  on the UT Health  Science  Center’s  FISMA -compliant  network,  
with files accessible  only to the Consortium  Data  Core.  All UTHSCSA STRONG STAR network connectivity is 
segmented with Access Control Lists and is not accessible to any other UTHSCSA network segments. The STRONG 
STAR data server is physically located at the Advanced Data Center (ADC)  has 24x7 onsite  
  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   11  
 security, card key , biometric  access controls and video surveillance. University of Texas Health Science Center at San 
Antonio (UTHSCSA) ADC facility also maintains Gen 2 firewall devices to protect and prohibit any unauthorized access to 
UTHSCSA data. All UTHSCSA network devices are monitored by state of the art monitoring applications that include 
configuration audit, management, and availabi lity 24x7. VA intervention  and phone  contacts  will occur  in the South  Texas  
Veterans  Health  System  at Audie  Murphy  VA Hospital  in San Antonio,  TX or the UTHSCSA  STRONG  STAR  clinic.  
Dr. Carlos  Jaramillo  and Dr. Blessen  Eapen  have  confirmed  available  office  space  for PTHA  research.  
 
Biological  specimens  will be coded  with a digital  bar code  that can be traced  back  to the study  and subject  only by 
key-codes  maintained  by the Data  Management  and Biostatistics  Core.  
 
6.4.1  Certificate  of Confidentiality.  N/A 
 
7.1 RISKS/BENEFITS  ASSESSMENT  
 
7.2 Risks.  
Risks  and side effects  related  to the Clinic -based  Cognitive  Behavioral  Treatment  (CCBT),  Cognitive  Processing  
Therapy - Cognitive  Only (CPT -C) for post-traumatic  headache,  and blood  draws  include  those  which  are: 
 
Likely  Risks,  but Not Serious  (expected  to occur  in less than 20 subjects  out of 100),  
• Psychological  distress  during  assessments  and treatment  may produce  some  discomfort  or emotional  distress  
and can even  produce  a temporary  increase  in some  symptoms  in less than half of the people  receiving  the 
treatment.  Similarly,  treatment  may be associated  with a temporary  or occasional  increase  in symptoms  of 
depression,  anxiety,  or other  pre-existing  psychiatric  symptoms.  
• Discomfort,  bruising  or both,  at the site of the needle  puncture  during  blood  sample  collection.  
• Some  people  experience  fainting,  the formation  of a small  blood  clot or swelling  of the vein and surrounding  
tissue,  or bleeding  from the puncture  site. 
• This research  includes  genetic  research  with the participant’s  samples.  Using  new technology,  information  
about  DNA  structure  (genetic  information)  can be used  to indicate  risk for developing  certain  diseases.  This 
genetic  information  is unique  to the participant  and may indicate  changes  in their future  health  status  or life 
expectancy,  or that of their children  and other  relatives.  If released,  these  discoveries  could  be stressful  and 
cause  psychological  difficulties  or family  problems.  
 
7.3 Potential  Benefits.  
The possible  benefit  of participating  in this study  is improvements  in the severity  and frequency  of headaches  and 
PTSD  symptoms  as well as a better  understanding  of headaches  and posttraumatic  stress.  
 
8.0 ADVERSE  EVENTS,  UNANTICIPATED  PROBLEMS,  AND  DEVIATIONS  
The IRB policy  on reporting  adverse  events,  unanticipated  problems,  and protocol  deviations  will be followed.  
 
9.1 WITHDRAWAL  FROM  STUDY  PARTICIPATION.  
Participants  may be withdrawn  from the study  if: 
▪ The researcher  believes  that it is not in their best interest  to stay in the study.  
▪ The participant  becomes  ineligible  to participate.  
▪ The participant’s  condition  changes  and they need  treatment  that is not allowed  while  taking  part in the study.  
▪ The participant  does  not follow  instructions  from the researchers.  
▪ The study  is stopped.  
 
10.0 REFERENCES  
1. Akshoomoff,  N., Newman,  E., Thompson,  W. K., McCabe,  C., Bloss,  C. S., Chang,  L., & Jernigan,  T. L. (2014).  
The NIH Toolbox  Cognition  Battery:  Results  from a large  normative  developmental  sample  (PING).  
Neuropsychology , 28(1), 1. 
2. Antonaci,  F., Nappi,  G., Galli,  F., Manzoni,  G. C., Calabresi,  P., & Costa,  A. (2011).  Migraine  and psychiatric  
comorbidity:  a review  of clinical  findings.  The journal  of headache  and pain, 12(2), 115-125. 
3. Babor,  T. F., Higgins -Biddle,  J. C., Saunders,  J. B. & Monteiro,  M. G. (2001).  The Alcohol  Use Disorders  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   12  
 Identification  Test:  Guidelines  for Use in Primary  Care , 2nd Edition.  Geneva,  Switzerland:  World  Health  
Organization.  
4. Bastien,  C. H., Vallieres,  A., Morin,  C.M.,  (2001)  Validation  of the Insomnia  Severity  Index  as an outcome  measure  
for insomnia  research.  Sleep  Medicine,  2(4), 297-307. 
5. Beck,  A. T., Epstein,  N., Brown,  G. & Steer,  R. A. (1988).  An inventory  for measuring  clinical  anxiety:  Psychometric  
properties.  Journal  of Consulting  and Clinical  Psychology,  56, 893-897. 
6. Beck,  A. T. & Steer,  R. A. (1991).  Manual  for the Beck  Scale  for Suicide  Ideation.  San Antonio,  TX: The 
Psychological  Corporation.  
 
7. Beck,  A. T., Steer,  R. A., & Brown,  G. K. (1996).  Manual  for the BDI-II. San Antonio,  TX: The Psychological  
Corporation.  
8. Beck,  A. T., Ward,  C. H., Mendelson,  M., Mock,  J. & Erbaugh,  J. (1961).  An inventory  for measuring  depression.  
Archives  of General  Psychiatry,  4, 564-571. 
9. Brantley,  P. J., Waggoner,  C. D., Jones,  G. N., & Rappaport,  N. B. (1987).  A daily stress  inventory:  Development,  
reliability,  and validity.  Journal  of behavioral  medicine , 10(1), 61-73. 
10. Breslau,  N., Lipton,  R. B., Stewart,  W. F., Schultz,  L. R., & Welch,  K. M. A. (2003).  Comorbidity  of migraine  and 
depression  investigating  potential  etiology  and prognosis.  Neurology , 60(8), 1308 -1312.  
11. Borkovec,  T. D & Nau,  S. D. (1972).  Credibility  of analogue  therapy  rationales.  Journal  of Behaviour  Therapy  and 
Experimental  Psychiatry,  3, 257-260. 
12. Campbell,  J. K., Penzien,  D. B., Wall,  E. M. (2000).  Evidence -based  guidelines  for migraine  headaches:  Behavioral  
and physical  treatments.  American  Academy  of Neurology  Web  site 
(http://www.aan.com/professionals/practice/pdfs/g10089.pdf ). Accessed  Jan. 25, 2012.  
13. Caplan,  L. J., Ivins,  B., Poole,  J. H., Vanderploeg,  R. D., Jaffee,  M. S., & Schwab,  K. (2010).  The structure  of 
postconcussive  symptoms  in 3 US military  samples.  The Journal  of Head  Trauma  Rehabilitation , 25(6), 447-458. 
14. Cella,  D., Riley,  W., Stone,  A., Rothrock,  N., Reeve,  B., Yount,  S., ... & Hays,  R. (2010).  The Patient -Reported  
Outcomes  Measurement  Information  System  (PROMIS)  developed  and tested  its first wave  of adult  self-reported  
health  outcome  item banks:  2005 –2008.  Journal  of clinical  epidemiology , 63(11), 1179 -1194.  
15. Chervin,  R.D.,  Aldrich,  M.S.,  Pickett,  R., & Guilleminault,  C. (1997).  Comparison  of the results  of the Epworth  
Sleepiness  Scale  and the Multiple  Sleep  Latency  Test.  Journal  of Psychosomatic  Research,  42(2),145 -155. 
16. Chung,  F., Yegneswaran,  B., Liao,  P., Chung,  S. A., Vairavanathan,  S., Islam,  S., Khajehdehi,  A., & Shapiro,  C. 
M. (2008).  STOP  questionnaire:  A tool to screen  patients  for obstructive  sleep  apnea.  Anesthesiology,  108, 812-
921. 
17. Corrigan,  J.D., & Bogner,  J.A. (2007).  Initial  reliability  and validity  of the OSU  TBI Identification  Method.  J Head  
Trauma  Rehabil,  22(6):318 -329. 
18. Davis,  J. L., & Wright,  D. C. (2007).  Randomized  clinical  trial for treatment  of chronic  nightmares  in trauma‐
exposed  
adults.  Journal  of Traumatic  Stress , 20(2), 123-133. 
19. Davis,  J. L., Wright,  D. C., & Borntrager,  C. (2001).  The Trauma -Related  Nightmare  Scale . Tulsa,  OK: University  
of Tulsa,  Department  of Psychology.  
20. Devilly,  G. J., & Borkovec,  T. D. (2000).  Psychometric  properties  of the credibility/expectancy  questionnaire.  
Journal  of Behavior  Therapy  and Experimental  Psychiatry,  31, 73-86. 
21. Foa, E. B., Elhers,  A., Clark,  D. M., Tolin,  D. F. & Orsillo,  S. M. (1999).  The Posttraumatic  Cognitions  Inventory  
(PCTI).  Psychological  Assessments,  11, 303-314. 
22. French,  D. J., Holroyd,  K. A., Pinell,  C., Malinoski,  P. T., O'donnell,  F., & Hill, K. R. (2000).  Perceived  Self‐efficacy  
and Headache ‐Related  Disability.  Headache:  the journal  of head  and face pain, 40(8), 647-656. 
23. Garnefski,  N. & Kraaij,  V. (2006).  Cognitive  emotion  regulation  questionnaire  – development  of a short  18-item 
version  
(CERQ -short).  Personality  and Individual  Differences,  41, 1045 -1053.  
24. Garnefski,  N., Kraaij,  V. & Spinhoven,  P. (2001).  Negative  life events,  cognitive  emotion  regulation  and emotional  
problems.  Personality  and Individual  Differences,  30, 1311 -1327.  
25. Goslin  RE, Gray  RN, McCrory  DC, Penzien  D, Rains  J, Hasselblad  V. Behavioral  and Physical  Treatments  for 
Migraine  Headache  (Technical  Reviews,  No. 2.2). Rockville  (MD):  Agency  for Health  Care  Policy  and Research  
(US);  1999  Feb. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK45267/?part=).  Accessed  Oct. 6, 2011.  
26. Gray,  M., Litz, B., Hsu, J., & Lombardo,  T. (2004).  Psychometric  properties  of the Life Events  Checklist.  (PDF)  
Assessment,  11, 330-341. doi: 10.1177/1073191104269954  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   13  
   
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   14  
  
27. Harris,  P. A., Taylor,  R., Thielke,  R., Payne,  J., Gonzalez,  N., & Conde,  J. G. (2009).  Research  electronic  data 
capture  (REDCap) - A metadata -driven  methodology  and workflow  process  for providing  translational  research  
informatics  support.  J Biomed  Inform,  42(2),  377-381. 
28. Jeffery,  D. D., Tzeng,  J. P., Keefe,  F. J., Porter,  L. S., Hahn,  E. A., Flynn,  K. E., ... & Weinfurt,  K. P. (2009).  
Initialreport  of the cancer  Patient‐Reported  Outcomes  Measurement  Information  System  (PROMIS)  sexual  
function  committee.  Cancer , 115(6), 1142 -1153.  
29. Johns,  M.W.  (1994).  Sleepiness  in different  situations  measured  by the Epworth  Sleepiness  Scale.  
Sleep.17 (8),703 - 710. 
30. Johnson,  D. C., Polusny,  M. A., Erbes,  C. R., King,  D., King,  L., Litz, B. T., Schnurr,  P. P., Friedman,  M., Pietrzak,  
R. H. & Southwick,  S. M. (2008).  Resilience  and response  to stress:  Development  and initial  validation  of the 
Response  to Stressful  Experiences  Scale  (RSES).  Unpublished  manuscript,  Naval  Health  Research  Center,  San 
Diego,  CA. 
31. Jones,  D., Kazis,  L., Lee, A., Rogers,  W., Skinner,  K., Cassar,  L., et al. (2001).  Health  status  assessments  using  
the Veterans  SF-12 and SF-36: Methods  for evaluating  outcomes  in the Veterans  Health  Administration.  The 
Journal  of Ambulatory  Care  Management , 24, 68–86. 
32. Kazis  LE, Lee A, Spiro  III. A, Rogers  W, Ren XS, Miller  DR, Selim A,  Hamed  A, and Haffer  SC. (2004).  
Measurement  comparisons  of the Medical  Outcomes  Study  and the Veterans  SF-36® Health  Survey.  Health  Care  
Financing  Review,  25(4), 43-58. 
33. Kazis  LE, Selim A,  Rogers  W, Ren XS, Lee A and Miller  DR. (2006).  Dissemination  of methods  and results  from 
the Veterans  Health  Study:  Final  comments  and implications  for future  monitoring  strategies  within  and outside   
the Veterans  Health  Care  System.  Journal  of Ambulatory  Care  Management,  29(4), 310-319. 
34. Kosinski  MS, Bayliss  JB, Bjorner  JE, et al. A six-item short -form survey  for measuring  headache  impact:  The HIT-
6™. Quality  of Life Research.  2003;12:963 -974. 
35. Kroenke,  K., Spitzer,  R. L., & Williams,  J. B. (2002).  The PHQ -15: Validity  of a new measure  for evaluating  the 
severity  of somatic  symptoms.  Psychosomatic  medicine , 64, 258-266. 
36. Kubany,  E. S., Haynes,  S. N., Abueg,  F. R., Manke,  F. P., Brennan,  J.M.,  Stahura,  C. (1996).  Development  and 
validation  of the Trauma -Related  Guilt Inventory  (TRGI).  Psychological  Assessments,  8, 423-444. 
37. Lichstein,  K. L., Durrence,  H. H., Riedel,  B. W., Taylor,  D. J., & Bush,  A. J. (2004).  Epidemiology  of sleep:  Age, 
gender,  and ethnicity . Psychology  Press.  
38. Martin,  N. J., Holroyd,  K. A., & Penzien,  D. B. (1990).  The Headache ‐Specific  Locus  of Control  Scale:  Adaptation  
to Recurrent  Headaches.  Headache:  the journal  of head  and face pain, 30(11), 729-734. 
39. Monteith,  T., Boylan,  L., & Young,  W. B. (2009).Teaching  case  presentation:  heroic  headache.  In: Levin  M, ed. 
Resident  and fellow  section.  Headache,  49(2),  325-327. doi:10.1111/j.1526 -4610.2008.01331.x  
40. Morin,  C.M.  (1993).  Insomnia:  Psychological  Assessment  and Management.  New York,  NY: The Guilford  Press.  
41. Posner,  K., Oquendo,  M. A., Gould,  M., Stanley,  B., & Davies,  M. (2007).  Columbia  Classification  Algorithm  of 
Suicide  Assessment  (C-CASA):  Classification  of suicidal  events  in the FDA’s  pediatric  suicidal  risk analysis  of 
antidepressants.  American  Journal  of Psychiatry,  164, 1035 –1043.  
42. Resick,  P. A., Falsetti,  S. A., Resnick,  H. S., & Kilpatrick,  D. G. (1991).  The Modified  PTSD  Symptom  Scale —Self 
Report.  Charleston,  SC, Crime  Victims  Treatment  and Research  Center,  Medical  University  of South  Carolina . 
43. Ruff,  R. L., Riechers,  R. G., Wang,  X. F., Piero,  T., & Ruff,  S. S. (2012).  A case –control  study  examining whether  
neurological  deficits  and PTSD  in combat  veterans  are related  to episodes  of mild TBI. BMJ open , 2(2). 
44. Saunders,  J. B., Aasland, O. G., Babor,  T. F., De La Fuente,  J. R. & Grant,  M. (1993).  Development  of the Alcohol  
Use Disorders  Identification  Test (AUDIT):  WHO  collaborative  project  on early  detection  of persons  with harmful  
alcohol  consumption -II. Addiction,  88, 791-804. 
45. Shacham,  S. (1983).  A shortened  version  of the Profile  of Mood  States.  Journal  of personality  assessment , 47(3), 
305-306. 
46. Shipherd,  J. C., Clum,  G., Suvak,  M., & Resick,  P. A. (2013).  Treatment -related  reductions  in PTSD  and changes  
in physical  health  symptoms  in women.  Journal  of behavioral  medicine , 1-11. 
47. Schwedt  TJ, Dodick  W, Hentz  J, et al. Occipital  nerve  stimulation  for chronic  headache:  Long -term safety  and 
efficacy.  Cephalgia.  2007;27:153 -157. 
48. Silberstein,  S. D. (2000).  Practice  parameter:  evidence -based  guidelines  for migraine  headache  (an evidence -
based  review):  report  of the Quality  Standards  Subcommittee  to the American  Academy  of Neurology.  Neurology,  
55(6),  754-762. 
  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   15  
  
49. Steer,  R.A.,  Rissmiller,  D.J., Ranieri,  W.F.,  Beck,  A.T. (1993).  Dimensions  of suicidal  ideation  in psychiatric  
inpatients.  
Behaviour  Research  and Therapy,  31(2) , 229-236. 
50. Vogt,  D., Smith,  B. N., King,  D. W., & King,  L. A. (2012).  Deployment  Risk and Resilience  Inventory -2 (DRRI -2). 
Assessment  available  from the National  Center  for PTSD  at www.ptsd.va.gov.  
51. Watanabe,  T. K., Bell, K. R., Walker,  W. C., & Schomer,  K. (2012).  Systematic  review  of interventions  for post- 
traumatic  headache.  PM&R , 4(2), 129-140. 
52. Weathers,  F.W.,  Blake,  D.D.,  Schnurr,  P.P.,  Kaloupek,  D.G.,  Marx,  B.P.,  & Keane,  T.M. (2013a).  Life Events  
Checklist -5(LEC -5). Assessment  available  from the National  Center  for PTSD  at www.ptsd.va.gov . 
53. Weathers,  F.W.,  Blake,  D.D.,  Schnurr,  P.P.,  Kaloupek,  D.G.,  Marx,  B.P.,  & Keane,  T.M. (2013b).  The Clinician - 
Administered  PTSD  Scale  for DSM -5 (CAPS -5). Interview  available  from the National  Center  for PTSD  at  
www.ptsd.va.gov . 
54. Weathers,  F. W., Litz, B. T., Keane,  T. M., Palmieri,  P. A., Marx,  B. P., & Schnurr,  P. P. (2010).  The PTSD  Checklist  
for DSM –5 (PCL -5). 
 
Description  of Study  Measures  
1. Ohio  State  University  Traumatic  Brain  Injury  Identification  Short  Form  (OSU  TBI-ID-SF): The OSU  TBI-ID-SF is a 
6 item screener  used  to determine  the likelihood  an individual  suffered  a TBI. Those  showing  a history  of probably  
TBI will be included  in the study  (Corrigan  & Bogner,  2007).  
2. History  of Head  Injury:  We will use a modified  version  of the Defense  and Veterans  Brain  Injury  Center  (DVBIC)  
3 Item Screening  Tool (Schwab,  Baker,  Ivins,  Sluss -Tiller,  Lux & Warden,  2006;  Schwab,  Ivins,  Cramer,  Johnson,  
Sluss -Tiller,  Kiley,  Lux & Warden,  2006)  that was used  in STRONG  STAR.  This instrument,  initially  called  the 
Brief Traumatic  Brain  Injury  Screen  (BTBIS),  was used  as the gold standard  for the diagnosis  of TBI in a sample  
of soldiers  returning  from duty in Iraq and/or  Afghanistan  (Schwab,  Ivins,  et al., 2006).  As recommended  by the 
DVBIC,  the 3- Question  Screen  will be considered  positive  when  the participant  endorses  an injury  (question  1) 
and altered  consciousness  (question  2, items  A-E) for the worst  head  injury  sustained  while  deployed.  The form 
was modified  for STRONG  STAR  and now CAP to capture  the number  of injuries,  and to answer  question  2 
based  on the worst  injury;  the original  form does  not recognize  the possibility  of multiple  head  injuries  during  
deployment.  As the 3-Question  Screen  does  not query  head  injuries  prior to deployment,  an additional  four 
questions  have  been  added  to solicit  information  about  each  head  injury  sustained  outside  of deployment.  
3. Response  to Stressful  Experiences  Scale  (RSES)  (previously  known  as the National  Center  for PTSD  Trait 
Resilience  Scale) . The RSES  is a 22-item questionnaire  developed  by a team  of experts  at the National  Center  
for PTSD  to assess  trait-related  cognitive,  emotional,  and behavioral  resilience  (Johnson,  et al., 2008).  It asks 
participants  to assess  how well each  statement  describes  them,  both during  and after stressful  events  in their 
lives.  Responses  are given  on a 5-point  scale, with  anchors  0 (not at all like me) to 4 (exactly  like me). 
Psychometric  testing  in 1,014  active  duty,  reserve  and veteran  groups  showed  that the instrument  has sound  
internal  consistency  (coefficient  alpha  0.91 to 0.93)  as well as good  test-retest  reliability  over 7-days  (reliability  
correlation  = 0.87).  The instrument  correlated  positively  with another  measure  of resilience,  the Connor -Davidson  
Resilience  Scale  (coefficient  alpha  0.61 to 0.81)  as well as unit cohesion  (coefficient  = 0.38),  and post-deployment  
support  (coefficient  0.36 to 0.56).  The instrument  correlated  negatively  with psychological  symptom  distress  as 
assessed  with the Patient  Health  Questionnaire  - 9 (coefficient  = -0.51),  posttraumatic  stress  as assessed  with 
the PCL-M (coefficient  -0.23 to -0.39),  and overall  mental  health  as assessed  with the Minnesota  Multiphasic  
Personality  Inventory -2 Neuroticism  (coefficient  = -0.35)  demonstrating  concurrent  validity.  Factor  analysis  
revealed  a six-factor  model  of resilience  including  subscales  for active  coping,  meaning -making,  cognitive  
flexibility,  spirituality,  self-efficacy,  and restoration.  
4. Cognitive  Emotions  Regulation  Questionnaire  (CERQ) -Short . The CERQ  was designed  to assess  cognitive  coping  
strategies  people  tend to use, or what  someone  thinks,  after having  experienced   
threatening  or stressful  events  (Garnefski,  Kraaij,  & Spinhoven,  2001).  The CERQ  can be used  to assess  
cognitive  strategies  that characterize  the individual’s  style of responding  to stressful  events.  Thirty  six (36)-items  
are scored  to produce  nine subscales  including:  1) Self-Blame,  2) Blaming  Others,  3) Rumination,  4) 
Catastrophizing,  5) Positive  Refocusing,  6) Planning,  7) Positive  Reappraisal,  8) Putting  into Perspective,  and 9) 
Acceptance.  The answer  categories  for each  item range  from 1 (almost  never)  to 5 (almost  always).  Individual  
subscale  scores  are obtained  by summing  up the scores  belonging    to the particular  subscale.  The  
  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   16  
 higher  the subscale  score,  the more  a specific  cognitive  strategy  is used.    Psychometric  testing  of the 36-item 
CERQ  was conducted  using  a group  of 547 secondary  school  students  aged  12   to 16 attending  a state  school  
in the Netherlands.  Internal  consistency  of the subscales  ranged  from 0.71 to 0.92.  The CERQ  was positively  
correlated  with both depression  and anxiety  as assessed  with the subscales  of the  Symptom Check  List-90. 
Test-retest  
reliability  for each  of the subscales  at five months  ranged  from 0.41 to 0.59.  The CERQ -short  form (Garnefski  & 
Kraaij,  2006)  is an 18-item questionnaire  that produces  the same  9 subscales  as the 36-item questionnaire.   A 
study  of 611 adults  from a general  practitioner’s  office  practice  in the Netherlands  indicated  that the internal  
consistency  of the 2-item subscales  remained  acceptably  high (α = 0.67 to 0.81).  In support  of the validity  of the 
CERQ -short,  correlations  with outcome  measures  were  comparable  to reported  results  with the original  CERQ  in 
that the Rumination,  Self-Blame  and Catastrophizing  subscales  were  related  to more  depression  and anxiety  
symptoms,  while  the Positive  Reappraisal  subscale  was related  to fewer  symptoms  (Garnefski  & Kraajj,  2006).  
5. Demographics:  We will use a standard  CAP form to gather  relevant  demographics  including:  age, gender,  ethnicity,  
date of concussion/TBI,  mechanism  of concussion/TBI,  number  of past concussions/TBIs,  relevant  comorbid  
medical  conditions  (e.g.,  cognitive  decline,  musculoskeletal  or neuropathic  pain –especially  presenting  in the head  
or neck).  
6. Health  Interview  (Pre-Treatment)  and Health  Interview  (Follow -Up) also,  pre- and post- HI addendum : The Health  
Interview  includes  items  regarding  general  health,  hospitalizations,  current  and past psychiatric  medications,  
thoughts  about  wanting  to harm  others,  utilization  of mental  health  services,  utilization  of outpatient  medical  
services,  and caffeine  and tobacco  use. Additionally,  the health  interview  will include  a review  of the participant’s  
medical  record  to identify  provider -assigned  ICD-9 diagnostic  codes  for chronic  and neuropathic  pain.  
7. Generalized  Anxiety  Disorder  Screener  (GAD -7): The GAD -7 (Spitzer,  Kroenke,  Williams,  & Lowe,  2006)  will be 
used  to assess  generalized  anxiety  symptomology.  This is a 7-item measure  that asks participants  to rate the 
frequency  with which  they have  been  bothered  by anxiety  symptoms  within  the past two weeks  on a scale  ranging  
from 0 (“not at    all”) to 3 (“nearly  every  day”).  Scores  on all items  are summed  to obtain  a total severity  score.  
Scores  reflect  no significant  anxiety  symptoms  (0-4), mild anxiety  symptoms  (5-9), moderate  anxiety  symptoms  
(10-14), and severe  anxiety  symptoms  (>15).  Respondents  also indicate  the degree  to which  their anxious  
symptoms  have  made  it   difficult  for them  to do their work,  take care of things  at home,  or get along  with other  
people,  from “not difficult  at all”   to “extremely  difficult.”  The GAD -7 has been  shown  to have  high internal  
consistency  (e.g.,  α = .89; Lowe  et al., 2008)  and has been  shown  to reliably  discriminate  between  anxious  and 
non-anxious  diagnostic  groups  (Kroenke,  Spitzer,  Williams,  & Lowe,  2010).  
8. Self-Injurious  Thoughts  and Behaviors  Interview  (SITBI):  The Self-Injurious  Thoughts  and Behaviors  Interview  
(SITBI;  Nock,  Holmberg,  Photos,  & Michel,  2007)  is a structured  interview  assessing  the presence,  frequency,  
and characteristics  of self-injurious  and suicidal  thoughts  and behaviors.  The SITBI  will be administered  by an 
Independent  Evaluator,  who will instruct  the participants  to answer  the questions  based  on their entire  lifetime  of 
experience.  The SITBI  has shown  high interrater  reliability,  test-retest  reliability,  and concurrent  validity  (Nock  et 
al., 2007).  
9. Deployment  Risk and Resilience  Inventory  (DRRI  - II) Combat  Experience,  Postbattle  Experiences,  and 
Deployment  Environment  Sub-Scales : High- and low-intensity  deployment  stress  exposure  will be assessed  
using  scales  from the DRRI -2 (Vogt,  Smith,  King,  & King,  2012).  High intensity  stressor  exposures  will be 
assessed  using  the DRRI -2 Combat  Experiences  and Postbattle  Experiences  subscales.  Responses  to these  
scales  are on a 6-point  Likert  scale.  The total score  is the sum of the item scores,  where  higher  scores  signify  
greater  exposure  to combat  or exposure  to the consequences  of combat,  respectively.  In addition,  low-intensity  
deployment  stress  will be assessed  with the DRRI -2 Deployment  Environment  subscale.  Responses  to this scale  
are on a 5-point  Likert  scale  with anchors  1 (almost  none  of the time) to 5 (almost  all of the time). The total score  
equals  the sum of the item scores,  where  higher  scores  are indicative  of a more  difficult  living  and working  
environment  
10. Life Events  Checklist  (LEC -5): The LEC-5 (Weathers,  Blake,  Schnurr,  Kaloupek,  Marx,  & Keane,  2013)  includes  
the same  list of 16 different  potentially  traumatic  life events  from the original  LEC that are commonly  associated  
with PTSD  symptoms  and designed  to facilitate  PTSD  diagnosis  (Gray,  Litz, Hsu, & Lombardo,  2004).  There  is 
also a  blank  for specifying  an additional  stressful  event  not encompassed  in the 16 events.  For each  potentially  
traumatic  life event,  respondents  rate their experience  of that event  on a 6-point  nominal  scale  (1 = happened  to 
me, 2 = witnessed  it, 3 = learned  about  it, 4 = part of my job, 5 = not sure,  and 6 = doesn’t apply).  The primary  
addition  to the LEC-5 is a category  involving  occupational  exposure  (“for example,  paramedic,  police,  military,   
  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   17  
 or other  first responder”).  There  has not been  a publication  on the psychometric  properties  of the LEC-5, but the 
measure  is nearly  identical  to the original  LEC.  In a group  of 108 undergraduate  psychology  students  the LEC 
demonstrated  good  convergence  with   the Traumatic  Life Events  Questionnaire  (average  kappa  = 0.55)  and 
correlated  with  
the Posttraumatic  Stress   Disorder  Checklist  – Civilian  version  (reliability  coefficients  0.34 to 0.48).  The LEC 
demonstrated  good  test-retest  reliability  over 7 days.  In 131 combat  veterans  the LEC was related  in the predicted  
directions  with other  measures  of psychopathology  known  to be associated  with potentially  traumatic  life events  
as assessed  by the Posttraumatic  Stress  Disorder  Checklist  – Military  version,  Clinician -Administered  PTSD  
Scale,  and the Mississippi  Scale  for Combat -Related  PTSD.  
11. Posttraumatic  Cognitions  Inventory  (PTCI).  The PTCI  is a 36-item questionnaire  that was developed  to deter mine  
how an individual  views  the trauma  and its sequelae  in an attempt  to understand  both how PTSD  develops  and 
is maintained  (Foa,  Elhers,  Clark,  Tolin,  & Orsillo,  1999).  Using  an emotional  processing  theory,  Foa and her   
colleagues  (1999)  have  suggested  that PTSD  is a consequence  of disruptions  in the normal  processes  of recovery  
when  an individual  has excessively  rigid concepts  about  self and world  rendering  the person  vulnerable  if a 
traumatic  event  occurs.  Thus  the PTCI  was developed  as a measure  of trauma -related  thoughts  and beliefs.  It 
is comprised  of three  subscales  (Negative  Cognitions  about  the Self, Negative  Cognitions  about  the World,  and 
Self-Blame).  The measure  was tested  in almost  600 adult  volunteers  recruited  from two university  PTSD  
treatment  clinics  as well as a university  community.  Approximately  65% (n=392)  of individuals  reported  having  
experienced  a trauma  in which  their own life or that of another  person  was perceived   
to be in danger  and their response  at the time included  intense  terror,  horror,  or helplessness  (Criterion  A event).  
The remaining  35% (n=162)  denied  such  a traumatic  experience.  Of  those  who had experienced  a trauma,  170 
had PTSD  symptoms  of at least  moderate  severity  while  the remaining  185 reported  a low symptom  severity.  
The three  subscales  of the PTCI  demonstrated  internal  consistency  with alpha  coefficients  ranging  from 0.86 to 
0.97.  Convergent  validity  was demonstrated  comparing  the PTCI  to appropriate  subscales  of the World  
Assumptions  Scale  and Personal  Beliefs  and Reactions  Scale.  Significant  correlations  between  the appropriate  
subscales  ranged  from 0.20 to 0.85.  The PTCI  was able to differentiate  individuals  with and without  PTSD  
demonstrating  discriminate  validity  (sensitivity  = 0.78,  specificity  = 0.93).  Test–retest  reliability  for each  of the 
three  subscales  at a 1-week interval  ranged  from 0.75 to 0.89 and for a 3-week  interval  ranged  from 0.80 to  0.86.  
12. Structured  Diagnostic  Headache  Interview -Revised  (Brief  Version;  SDIH -R): The SDIH -R is a structured  clinical  
interview  assessing  headache  symptoms  that conform  to the ICHD -II criteria  for primary  and posttraumatic  
headache  (Silberstein,  2000;  Campbell,  Penzien,  & Wall,  2000).  This interview  will be administered  at the baseline  
assessment  session  to further  establish  the participant’s  headache  diagnosis  and again  at post-treatment  and 
six-month  follow -ups (to help establish  the perseverance  or dissolution  of the PTHA  diagnosis  in response  to 
treatment.  
13. Daily  Headache  Diary  (Online)  (Goslin  et al, 1999):  Headache  frequency  and severity  will be assessed  via daily 
headache  self-monitoring  diaries.  Patients  will complete  the assessment  twice  daily (during  AM and PM),  requiring  
5   to 10 minutes  per assessment.  Although  the descriptions  of when  the various  forms  are completed  are made  
in reference  to a typical  sleep -wake  cycle,  it is of note that the “morning”  (AM)  entry  simply  refers  to the entry  that 
is  made  when  a subject  awakens  and the “evening”  (PM)  entry  is made  at the end of their waking  day (thus,  the 
entries  can easily  be adapted  for individuals  doing  shift  
work).  They  will record  their headache  intensity  2 times  during  the day using  a 0 to 10 scale,  with 0 representing  
"no headache"  and 10 representing  a headache  that was "extremely  painful —I can't do anything  when  I have  this 
headache."  From  these  diaries,  4 dependent  measures  will be computed  for each  assessed  week:  (a) days  per 
week  with a headache  (days  with headache  greater  than 2); (b) weekly  headache  frequency  (total  number  of 
discrete  headaches  per week);  (c) headache  duration  (total  number  of hours  of headache  per week  with headache  
greater  than 2); and (d) average  peak  headache  intensity.  The Headache  Diary  also tracks  the occurrence  of 
known  headache  triggers  and medication  use for headache  management  (prophylactic  and abortive).  
14. Headache  Impact  Test-6 (HIT-6): The HIT-6 is a 6-item measure  of headache -disability  considered  a gold standard  
in headache  clinical  and research  work.  Developed  in 2003  (Kosinski  et al, 2003),  the HIT-6 has demonstrated  
excellent  reliability  (internal  consistency  = 0.89;  test-retest  reliability  = 0.80)  and validity  (relative  validity  
coefficients  ranging  from 0.82 to 1.00).  There  are almost  100 published  studies  of headache  using  the HIT-6, 
including  previous  studies  of PTHA  (Schwedt  et al, 2007).  
15. Headache  Management  Self-Efficacy  Scale  (HMSE) : This is a 25-item assessment  rated  on a 7 point  Likert -type 
scale  measuring  one’s  confidence  at preventing  headaches  (French,  Holyroyd,  & Peinell,  et al, 1999).  
  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   18  
  
16. Headache  Specific  Locus  of Control  Scale  (HSLC) : The HSCL  is a 33 item measures  scored  on a 5-point  Likert –
type scale  to measure  an individual’s  perceptions  that headache  problems  and relief  are determined  by: individual  
behaviors,  healthcare  professionals,  or chance  factors  (Martin,  Holyroyd,  & Penzien,  1990).  
17. Clinician -Administered  PTSD  Scale  for DSM -5 (CAPS -5) : The CAPS -5 is structured  interview  that assesses  the 
DSM -5 criteria  for PTSD  (Weathers  et al., 2013).  Each  item is rated  on a severity  scale  ranging  from 0  (Absent)  to 
4 (Extreme/incapacitating)  and combines  information  about  frequency  and intensity  for each  of the 20 symptoms.  
Additional  items  that are not included  in the total score  evaluate  overall  symptom  duration,  distress,  impairment,  
dissociative  symptoms,  and global  ratings  by the interviewer.  Validation  studies  are nearly  complete  to establish  
the psychometric  properties  of the CAPS -5 and findings  will be reported  in peer-reviewed  publications.  This 
interview  is very similar  to its predecessor,  the CAPS  for DSM -IV, which  has been  considered  the gold standard  
for evaluating  PTSD  and demonstrated  good  reliability  and validity  (Weathers,  Keane,  & Davidson,  2001).  In 
addition  to reflecting  diagnostic  changes  for PTSD  in DSM -5, the CAPS -5 differs  from the CAPS  in that frequency  
and intensity  ratings  for each  symptom are  no longer  scored  separately,  so the severity  rating  for each  item 
determines  whether  a symptom  is present  or not. Subscale  scores  are calculated  by summing  severity  scores  for 
items  in the following  PTSD  symptom  clusters:  re-experiencing,  avoidance,  negative  alterations  in cognitions  and 
mood,  and hyperarousal.  
18. PTSD  Checklist  –DSM -5 (PCL -5): The PCL-5 (Weathers,  et al., 2010)  is a 20-item self -report  measure  update  of 
the PCL designed  to assess  PSTSD  symptoms  as defined  by the DSM -5. The PCL-5 is currently  available  and 
has been  shown  to have  good  psychometric  properties.  
19. Neurobehavioral  Symptom  Inventory  (NSI):  The NSI is a 21-item assessment  of post-concussive  symptoms  with 
a 3- factor  structure  (somatic/sensory,  affective,  and cognitive)  (Caplan  et. al, 2010).  
20. Patient  Health  Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9): The PHQ -9 is a widely  used  and well-validated  instrument  for measuring  
the severity  of depressive  symptoms  (Kroenke,  Spitzer,  & Williams,  2001).  It consists  of 9 items  that assess  both 
affective  and somatic  symptoms  related  to depression  and depressive  disorders;  these  9 items  correspond  to the 
diagnostic  criteria  for DSM  MDD.  Respondents  rate the frequency  with which  they have  been  bothered  by 
depressive  symptoms  on a scale  ranging  from 0  (“not at all”) to 3 (“nearly  every  day”).  Scores  on all items  are 
summed  to obtain  a total severity  score.  Scores  reflect  no significant  depressive  symptoms  (0-4), mild depressive  
symptoms  (5-9), moderate  depressive  symptoms  (10-14), moderately  severe  depressive  symptoms  (15-19), and 
severe  depressive  symptoms  (>19).  Respondents  also indicate  the degree  to which  their depressive  symptoms  
have  made  it difficult  for them  to do their work,  take care of things  at home,  or get along  with other  people,  from 
“not difficult  at all” to “extremely  difficult.”  The PHQ -9 has high internal  consistency  (e.g.,  alpha  ranging  from .83 
to .92; Cameron,  Crawford,  Lawton,  & Reid,  2008),  and correlates  strongly  with other  measures  of depression   
(Kroenke  et al., 2001).  
21. Online  Profile  of Mood  States -Short  Form  (POMS -SF; Shacham,  1983)  online  Each  morning  and evening,  subjects  
will complete  the POMS -SF. The POMS -SF is a 37-item scale  which  assesses  distinct  mood  states.  Each  
emotional  adjective  (e.g.,  “sad”)  is rated  on a 0 (“Not  at all”) to 4 (“extremely”)  scale.  The measure  takes  
approximately  1.5 – 3.5 minutes  to complete.  
22. Online  Daily  Stress  Inventory  (DSI;  Brantley  et al., 1987)  online  Each  evening  subjects  will complete  the DSI. The   
DSI is a 58-item scale  that allows  a subject  to identify  stressful  events  that they have  experienced  in the last 24 
hours.  For each  item that is endorsed,  a stressfulness  impact  rating  is made  ranging  from 1 (“occurred  but was 
not stressful”)  to 7 (“caused  me to panic”).  
23. Depressive  Symptom  Index  – Suicidality  Subscale  (DSI-SS): The DSI-SS (Metalsky  & Joiner,  1997)  will be used  
to assess  current  suicidal  ideation.  The DSI-SS is a 4-item self-report  measure  of suicidal  ideation  that focuses  
on ideation,  plans,  perceived  control  over ideation,  and impulses  for suicide.  It is being  used  as a core measure  
in the Military  Suicide  Research  Consortium.  Scores  on each  item range  from 0 to 3, with higher  scores  reflecting  
greater  severity  of suicidal  ideation.  Instructions  will instruct  the participants  to respond  based  on the past week.  
A systematic  review  of measures  of suicidal  ideation  and behaviors  found  that the DSI-SS had evidence  of 
excellent  internal  consistency  and concurrent  validity  (Batterham  et al., 2014).  
24. NIH Toolbox  Cognition  Battery:  The NIH Toolbox  is a recently  developed  comprehensive  assessment  tool with an 
emphasis  on measuring  outcomes  in longitudinal  epidemiologic  studies  and prevention  or intervention  trials  across  
a lifespan  (Akshoomoff,  et al., 2014).  The cognition  battery  is a brief and efficient  computer -based  
neuropsychological  test of the seven  key cognitive  domains:  Executive  Functioning,  Episodic  Memory,  Working  
Memory,  Processing  Speed,  Language,  Attention  and Reading.  The oral reading  subtest  will not be administered  
to reduce  subject  burden.  The battery  requires  only 20-30 minutes  to administer.  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   19  
   
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   20  
  
25. Alcohol  Use Disorders  Identification  Test (AUDIT)  self-report  version : The AUDIT  (Babor  et al., 2001)  will be used  
to identify  people with  hazardous  or harmful  patterns  of alcohol  consumption  and to index  the severity  of these   
problems.  It will be administered  as a self-report  form.  The AUDIT  is a 10-item screening  measure,  developed  by 
the World  Health  Organization  (WHO),  with three  subscales  (alcohol  consumption,  drinking  behavior,  and alcohol -
related  problems)  that are scored  on a 4-point  scale  for a highest  possible  total score  of 40. The AUDIT  has good  
internal  consistency  (αs = .80-.93) as well as sensitivity  and specificity  (Saunders,  Aasland,  Babor,  De La Fuente  
& Grant,  1993;  see Reinert  & Allen,  2007,  for review).  
26. Quick  Drinking  Screen  (QDS)  self-report  version:  The QDS  (Sobell  et al., 2003)  will be used  to measure  alcohol  
consumption.  It consists  of 4 items  probing  frequency  and quantity  of alcohol  consumption.  It will be administered  
in a self-report  form.  The QDS  has been  validated  against  the Timeline  Followback  daily estimation  measure  of 
alcohol  use, and it shows  good  psychometric  properties  (Roy  et al., 2008;  Sobell  et al., 2003).  The QDS’s  time-
frame  will be modified  to match  the “last two weeks”  probed  by the mandated  depression  and anxiety  instruments  
for CAP studies  (PHQ -9 and GAD -7). Like these  other  measures,  the QDS  can be administered  frequently  
throughout  CAP trials to track  changes  in alcohol  use. 
27. Brief Inventory  of Psychosocial  Functioning  (B-IPF):  This is a 7-item self-report  instrument  measuring  respondents’  
level of functioning  in seven  life domains:  romantic  relationship,  relationship  with children,  family  relationships,  
friendships  and socializing,  work,  training  and education,  and activities  of daily living  (Marx,  2013).  Respondents  
indicate  the degree  to which  they had trouble  in the last 30 days  in each  area  
on a 7-point  scale  ranging  from “0 = Not at all” to “6 = Very much.”  The B-IPF has demonstrated  concurrent  
validity,  and the full 80-item IPF  from which  it was created  has strong  test-retest  reliability  and internal  consistency  
(Marx,  2013).  
28. Patient  Health  Questionnaire  – 15 (PHQ -15): The PHQ -15 (Kroenke,  Spitzer,  & Williams,  2002)  is an abbreviated  
version  of the original  PHQ  that asks about  somatic  symptoms  and symptom clusters  that account  for more  than 
90% of physical  complaints  reported  in an outpatient  setting.  The 15-item measure  asks patients  to report  
symptom  severity  on a scale  ranging from 0 (“not bothered  at all”) to 2 (“bothered  a lot”). The PHQ -15 has been  
found  to have  excellent  internal  reliability  (α = .80) and good  convergent  validity  with scales  such  as the SF-12 
and other  measures  of symptom  severity  and functionality  (Kroenke,  Spitzer,  & Williams,  2002).  
29. Veterans  Rand  12-Item Health  Survey  (VR-12): The Veterans  SF-12 was developed  from the Veterans  SF-36 (VR-
36) and adapted  from the MOS  SF-36, and spans  the range  of health  domains  from physical  to psychological  
health  status.  The VR-36 has been  widely  used,  distributed  and documented  in the Veterans  Health  
Administration  (VHA).  The VR-36 assesses  eight  domains  including  physical  functioning,  role limitations  due to 
physical  problems,  bodily  
pain,  general  health  perceptions,  vitality,  social  functioning,  role limitations  due to emotional  problems  and mental  
health.  The eight  scales  are summarized  into two summary  scores,  physical  (PCS)  and mental  (MCS).  Higher  
scores  indicate  better  health.  The VR-12 includes  12 items  representing  the eight  domains  from the VR-36 and 
two items  measuring  change  in physical  and mental  health.  The VR-12 explains  90% of the reliable  variance  of 
the VR-36 (Jones,  et al., 2001).  Using  independent  results  from the Veterans  Health  Study  and the 1996  National  
Survey  of Ambulatory  Care  Patients,  the results  for the Veterans  SF-12 corresponded  very closely  with the results  
for the Veterans  SF-36 (Kazis,  et al., 2004;  Kazis,  et al., 2006).  
30. Online  Daily  Diary  Sleep  Quantity/Quality  (Lichstein  et. al, 2004)  online  Each  morning  (once  per day on 
awakening),  subjects  will record  the following  in the electronic  diary:  A) What  time did you get out of bed this 
morning?  B) What  time did you go to bed last night?  C) How long did it take for you to fall asleep  after going  to 
bed last night?  D) How many  times  did you wake  up during  the night?  E) How long were  you awake  during  these  
awakenings  in the night  (in total)?  F) About  how long did you sleep  during  the night  (altogether)?  G) How would  
you rate the quality  of your sleep?  [0-4 scale;  0=poor;  2=fair;  4=excellent]  H) How well (rested  and refreshed)  do 
you feel this morning?  [0-4 scale;  0=not  at all; 2=moderately;  4=very]  I) Did you nap or doze  yesterday  before  
going  to bed?  (If so, what  time and how long did you sleep)?  
31. Patient  Reported  Outcomes  Measurement  Information  System  (PROMIS)  Sleep  Disturbance  and Sleep -Related  
Impairment  short  forms : The PROMIS  Sleep  Disturbance  and Sleep -Related  Impairment  short  forms  (Yu, Buysse,  
& Germain,  2012)  are self-report  measures  of past-week  sleep  disturbance  and past-week  sleep -related  
impairment,  respectively,  derived  from the larger  PROMIS  item banks  (Buysse  et al., 2010).  Each  short -form 
measure  includes  8 items,  with most  items  (symptoms)  scored  in intensity  from 1 (“not at all”) to 5 “(very  much”).  
Each  measure  has shown  strong  reliability  and construct  validity  (Yu et al., 2012).  
32. Snoring,  Tired,  Observed,  Blood  Pressure  (STOP)  Sleep  Apnea  Screen  (Chung  et al., 2008).  To better  understand  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   21  
 sleep  disturbance  associated  with PTSD  and PTSD  treatment,  the STOP  screen  will be  
  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   22  
  
administered  to screen  for sleep  apnea.  The STOP  is a four-item questionnaire  developed  and validated  in 211 
pre-operative  surgical  patients.  Using  the answering  of 2 or more  questions  “yes,”  the sensitivity  of the STOP  
ranged  from 66% to 80% as compared  with the apnea -hypopnea  index  (AHI)  of polysomnography  depending  
upon  the AHI cut-off used.  Individuals  answering  “yes”  to 2 or more  of the questions will  be advised  that they may 
be at risk for having  sleep  apnea  and advised  that they may want  to speak  with their primary  care provider  to 
consider  referral  for an overnight  sleep  evaluation  at the CRDAMC  Sleep  Clinic  
33. Insomnia  Severity  Index  (ISI; Morin,  1993).  The ISI is a 7-item self-report  measure  that assesses  perceived  
severity   of insomnia.  Each  item uses  a 4-point  Likert  type scale  from 0 (not at all satisfied)  to 4 (very  much  
satisfied).  The  items  sum to produce  a total score  (range  0 – 28). The ISI has an internal  consistency  alpha  
coefficient  of 0.74,  and has shown  convergent  validity  with other  measures  such  as the Pittsburgh  Sleep  Quality  
Index  (r = 0.67),  the Dysfunctional  Beliefs  and Attitudes  about  Sleep  (r = 0.55),  and sleep  diaries  (range  from 
0.32-0.91)  (Bastien,  Vallieres  
& Morin,  2001).  
34. Patient  Reported  Outcomes  Measurement  Information  System  (PROMIS)  Sexual  Functioning  Profile : The 
PROMIS  questionnaires  are a system  of reliable  measures  of patient –reported  health  status  for physical,  mental,  
and social  well–being  developed  with funding  under  the National  Institutes  of Health  (NIH)  Roadmap  for Medical  
Research  Initiative  to re-engineer  the clinical  research  enterprise  (http://www.nihroadmap.nih.gov ). PROMIS  
measures  can be across  a wide variety  of chronic  diseases  and conditions  and in the general  population  (Cella  
et al, 2010).  One of the PROMIS  instruments  is a Sexual  Functioning  Inventory  (Jeffery  et al, 2009).  The PROMIS  
Sexual  Function  Inventory  provides  scores  on seven  different  sub-domains  of sexual  function:  interest  in sexual  
activity,  vaginal  discomfort  (women  only),  lubrication  (women  only),  erectile  function  (men  only),  orgasm,  and 
global  satisfaction  with sex life.  Each  question  asks respondents  to report  on their experiences  over the past 30 
days.  With the exception  of the  orgasm  sub-domain,  all sub-domain  scores  are expressed  as T scores  (mean  = 
50,   
standard  deviation  = 10). While  the instrument  is intended  for broad  use, almost  all of the development  work  was 
with patients  with cancer.  Research   is ongoing  to expand  development  beyond  cancer.  In testing  with 819 
individuals  (388 males,  430 females,  1 person  did not specify  sex),  correlations  between  the PROMIS  Sexual  
Functioning  Profile  and corresponding  sub-domains  of two well-established  measures,  the Female  Sexual  
Function  Index  (FSFI)  and the International  Index  of Erectile  Function  (IIEF),  ranged  between  .48 and .92. The 
sub-domains  of the instrument  discriminate  between  people  who had and had not asked  a provider  about  sexual  
problems.  Test-retest  correlations  over one month  are >.65 for all sub- domains  (Sexual  Function  and Satisfaction  
Measures  User  Manual,  2012).  
35. Fagerstrom  Test for Nicotine  Dependence  (FTND)/Fagerstrom  Test for Nicotine  Dependence  – Smokeless  
Tobacco  (FTND -ST): The FTND  and FTND -ST are both 6-iem self-report  measures  that assesses  severity  of 
nicotine  dependence  and smokeless  tobacco  use, subsequently.  Questions  on both measures  probe  quantity  of 
nicotine  use and pattern.  
36. (PTHA -specific  ) Credibility  and Expectancy  Questionnaire  (CEQ) . The CEQ  is a 6-item measure  that was 
designed  to assess  treatment  expectancy  and rationale  credibility  for use in clinical  outcomes  studies  (Devilly  & 
Borkovec,  2000).  It has been  expanded  from a 5-item measure  designed  primarily  to assess  credibility  (Borkovec  
& Nau,  1972),  4-items  of which  have  been  used  by both Foa and Resick  (P.A.  Resick,  personal  communication,  
February  22, 2010;  E.A. Hembree,  personal  communication,  February  23, 2010;  E. B. Foa, personal  
communication,  February  25, 2010)  with the name  Expectancy  of Therapeutic  Outcomes  (ETO).  The 6-item CEQ  
assesses  both whether  the person  cognitively  understands  how the therapy  works  (credibility)  as well as whether  
the person  affectively  believes  that the therapy  will work  for them personally  (expectancy).  The 6-item CEQ  has 
been  tested  in 217 individuals  including  68 male  Vietnam  veterans  and 58 female  spouses,  69 individuals  
diagnosed  with general  anxiety  disorder  who had received  treatment,  and 22 individuals  who had received  either  
Cognitive  Based  Therapy  (CBT)  or Eye Movement  Desensitization  and Reprocessing  (EMDR)  for the treatment  
of PTSD.  The scale  demonstrated  high internal  consistency  (alpha  coefficients  ranged  from 0.84 to 0.85).  Test-
retest  reliability  over a one-week  period  was found  to be 0.82 for expectancy  and 0.75 for credibility.  The CEQ  
was able to differentiate  between  two treatment  rationales  in one study,  one with and one without  an 
encompassing  theory  while  maintaining  equivalence  between  three  rationales  in another  study.  Responses  to 
four questions  are scored  using  a 9-point  Likert  scale  (1= not at all, 9= extremely).  Responses  to two of the 
questions  are scored  using  an 11-point  Likert  Scale  (0% to 100%).  The combined  responses  are used  to generate  
a score  for credibility  and another  score  for expectancy.  
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   23  
   
Randomized  Clinical  Trial of Cognitive -Behavior  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Headache  
   
14-339H, Jaramillo, Form BB, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx   24  
  
37. The Community  Reintegration  of Injured  Service  Members  (CRIS):  The CRIS  is a validated  instrument  using  
OIF/OEF  cohorts  and consists  of three  scales  measuring  extent  of, perceived  limitations  in, and satisfaction  with 
community  reintegration.  This is a pen-and-paper,  9-item measure.  
38. Tinnitus Functional Index: The Tinnitus  Functional  Index  (TFI)  was reported  by Henry  et al (2014).  They  report  
five stages of TFI development  through which prototypes  were developed,  tested,  and revised over  a four-year 
period.  The TFI has eight  subscales that  address the intrusiveness of tinnitus,  the sense  of control  the patient  
has, cognitive interference,  sleep  disturbance,  auditory  issues,  relaxation issues,  quality  of life,  and emotional  
distress.  
39. PTHA Study Missing Data Assessment :  The PTHA Study Missing Data Assessment is a 5 -item measure of global 
symptom improvement for headache and PTSD, perception of satisfaction and burdensomeness of study 
treatments, and reason(s) for discontinuing study participation.  This assessment will  be used to assess missing 
data randomness and to categorize participants who discontinued study participation as a way to help impute 
missing data and improve future studies with these treatments in similar populations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 