Study Title: Planning for the Care You Want
Document: Verbal Consent Script
Date: 1/23/2017
NCT: 02320123
Title of Research:  Planning for the Care You Want  
(IRB Study #032013 -051)  
 
Funding Agency/Sponsor:    Agency  for Healthcare  Research and Quality  and the  Palliative Care Research 
Cooperative  
 
Study Leader :  Ramona Rhodes, MD  
 
Research Team:   Bryan Elwood , Kimberly Williams , and Tori Knox -Rice 
 
Why is this study being done?  Parkland and  UT Southwestern Medical Center are looking for better ways to help 
African American patients understand their options for care . 
 
Why am I being asked t o take part in this research study?  We are inviting adult patients who are hospitalized at 
Parkland and their caregivers to participate by answering survey questions.  We expect about 96 people to 
participate.  
 
What is involved in this study?   If you agree  to participate, we will ask you survey questions about your 
experience with your illness and your medical care and your thoughts and feelings about each.  This survey takes 
about 30 minutes.  If you have a caregiver, we will ask them to answer some survey  questions, too.  At the end of 
the survey, we will give you a $10 Target gift card as our thanks.  If your caregiver completes the survey, that 
person will also get a $10 Target gift card.  Some participants will be invited to watch an educational video a bout 
options for planning for the care you want and talk with one of our team members about it.  Not everyone will be 
asked to watch this video.  That’s part of the design of the study.  Then, everyone will get a call from someone on 
our team to ask you so me survey questions again in one month, then again in three months, and one last time in 
six months.  Each of these follow -up surveys will take about 20 minutes.  After each survey, we will mail you a $10 
Target gift card as our thanks.  There are no tests  or treatments related to participation .  We hope participating 
in this study will be a good experience for you.  However, there may be no direct benefit to you for participating.   
   
What if I do not want to participate?  That is okay. You do not have to  take part in this study.   If you begin the 
study and change your mind, you can stop at any time.  Whether or not you take part in this study will not effect  
the healthc are you receive at Parkland.  By answering these questions and completing the survey , you will give 
consent and agree to let our research team access information about your health in your medical record .  There 
are no  costs to you or your insurance company for participating.  
 
What are the risks of the study?  There are minimal risks related to participating in this study.  Some questions 
may make you feel uncomfortable.  You may refuse to answer any question, take a break, or stop participating. 
Like any research study, there is the small potential for loss of confidentiality.  The information you provide will 
only be shared with member s of the research team.  Some of your information may also be viewed by the UT 
Southwestern Institutional Review Board, the funding agencies, and government agencies responsible f or keeping 
research safe for participants.  No reports or publications will use your name or other information that could 
identify you.  
 
Whom do I call if I have questions or problems? Please call  Dr. Ramona Rhodes at  214-648-9012  if you have any 
questions or concerns .  If you get her voicemail, she will call you back during regular business hours.  You may also 
call the study coordinator, Bryan Elwood, at 214 -648-8487.  For questions about your rights as a research 
participant, contact the UT Sout hwestern Institutional Review Board (IRB) Office at 2 14-648-3060.  