IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MH-14-0734  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  02/02/2016    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Comparison of Femoral Nerve versus Adductor  Canal Block Following Anterior  
Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction: A Prospective, Randomized Clinical Study  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 0 2/02/2016  
  
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MH-14-0734  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  02/02/2016   Addendum: HSC-MH-14-0734 - Clinical O utcome Following Arthros copic Knee Surgery 
 
(COFA KS) 
 
“Clinical C omparison  of Femoral N erve versus Adductor Canal Block Following Anterior  
Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction: A Prosp ective, Randomized Clinical Study” 
 
Primary Investiga tor: Lane Bai ley, PT, PhD, DPT 
 
Co-Investiga tors: Walter Lowe, MD; Jennifer Wu, MD, MBA 
Research Coordinator: Valerie Simon, CCRP 
Research Assistant:  Joshua Griffin, MD; T hanos Papavasil iou, DPT 
 
 
 
 
I. Purpose: The purpose of this research addendum is to e xamine the potential  
differences between femoral nerve block ade (FNB) and adductor canal blockade (ACB) 
for pain control and  quadriceps muscle  activation for patients fol lowing anterior 
cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstru ction. Patients enrolled within the “Clinical 
Outcomes Following Arthroscopic Knee Surgery - HSC-MH-14-0734” study will be 
recruited to particip ate, as the indi cated p rocedures a re currently being performed as 
“stand ard of  care”.  The study will be conducted at the Univ ersity of Texas - Medi cal 
Center location in Houston, TX.  
 
We intend to pe rform a matched prospective comparison of  post-operative pain cont rol 
and qu adriceps mu scle activation between bloc kade groups. The  anesthes iology team, 
including  Co-I (JW), currently administers both FNB and ACB  in patients enrolled 
within the CO FAKS study. We intend to use  a matched control des ign to c ompare the 
effects of block ade on these outcome  measures using the m ethods d escribed below. 
 
II. Specific Aims: 
To compa re femoral nerve versus adductor canal blockade for: 
1. Pain cont rol 
2. Muscle  strength 
 
III. Hypothesis: 
Addu ctor canal block will have  no si gnificant difference in regards to p ain control  
compa red to femoral nerve block. Patients r eceiving ACB will demonstr ate fewer pos t- 
operative quadriceps strength deficits when compared to FNB. 
 
IV. Background and Significance 
Adequate pain cont rol following  anterior cruciate ligament reconstru ction (ACL) often 
requires a regional nerve block. The femoral nerve block (FNB) has been traditional ly 
employed. More recently, ultrasound application to r egional n erve blocks allows for the 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MH-14-0734  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  02/02/2016   use of alternatives such as the adductor canal block following  ACL reconstruction.  In 
2009, Mani ckam et al. were the first to describe the ultrasound  guided adductor canal 
technique  for the purposes of kn ee joint an algesia.  Unlike oth er traditional te chniques 
that seek to c ause a sensory as well as a motor block ade, the adductor canal block 
attempts to spare the motor block of  the n eighboring distributions in an attempt to offer 
selective analgesia  and strength preservation.  Chisholm  et al demonstr ated the 
adductor canal block provides si milar and adequate postop erative analgesia when 
compa red to the FNB, following  arthroscopic ACL reconstr uction with pat ellar tendon 
autograft.  Th eir study focused on analgesia and did not ev aluate  quadriceps function or 
impact on rehabilitation.  Sharma et al d rew the  first asso ciation betw een femor al nerve 
blocks and inc reased fall risk due  to muscle  weakness in total knee  arthroplasty 
population.  A random ized, blinded stu dy to com pare quadriceps strength following 
adductor canal versus FNB was performed by Kwofie et al.  Th ey showed that 
compa red with  FNB, adductor canal block results in significant qua driceps motor 
sparing and significantly preserved balance.  These studies focused on acute muscle 
weakness after regional anesthesia and its relation  to safety.  Qu adriceps function is  
very important in rehabilitation of  ACL reconstr uction.  Luo et al demonstr ated lo ng 
term de ficits r elated to FNB.  They demonstr ated that patients treated with FNB after 
ACL reconstr uction had significant isokin etic deficits in kn ee extension and flexion 
strength at 6 months wh en compa red with patients  who did not r eceive a nerve block. 
Patients without  a block were 4 t imes more  likely to meet criteria for clearance to return 
to sports at 6 months.  In addition, K rych et al found si gnificantly inferior quadriceps 
strength and function at 6 months in FNB group.  Based on the available li terature, we 
aim to comp are femoral nerve versus adductor canal block in r egards to  pain cont rol 
and mus cle strength in ACL reconstru ction patients until return to spor t. 
 
 
 
V. Methods 
a.   Study Design: Prospective Age-Matched Observational  Cohort  
 
b.  Sample Populatio n: Patients will be identifi ed by particip ation in the Cl inical 
Outcomes Following Arthroscopic Knee Surgery Study (COFAKS - HSC-MH-14- 
0734)  will be provided verbal and written consent to pa rticipate  if they meet the 
following  criteria 
i.   Inclusion Criteria: 
 Males & Females ages 16-30 yrs 
 Undergoing ACL reconstruction by Co-Investigator (Walter Lowe) 
 Receiving peri-operative FNB or ACB 
ii.   Exclusion Criteria: 
 Not enrolled with in the CO FAKS study 
 Receiving intrathecal nerve block ade or no blockade 
 
c.   Data Colle ction Timeline: 12/1/2015  to 12/31/2016  
 
d.  Surgical Blocka de Methods:  A majority of patients receiving anterior cruciate 
ligament su rgery currently undergo a nerve blockade from the C o-Investigator 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MH-14-0734  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  02/02/2016   (WL) as standard of care. The purpose of this stu dy was to comp are post-operative 
patient ou tcomes (V.e.) for those receiving FNB to those  receiving ACB. 
i.   Femoral Nerve Blocka de (FNB):  Ultrasound  guided FNB (30 ml  of 0.2% 
ropiv acaine with 100 mcg clonidine usi ng a 22-gauge 40 mm  ProBloc II 
insulated n eedle; Kimbe rly-Clark, Ros well, Georgia) below t he inguinal 
ligament usi ng a high-frequency linear ultrasound  transdu cer (4–12 H z; 
Mindray  M7; Mind ray North Ame rica, Mahwah, NJ) with stimulator 
confirmation.  
ii.   Adductor Canal  Block ade: ):  Ultrasound  guided  ACB  (15 ml  of 0.2% 
ropiv acaine with 100 mcg clonidine using a 22-gauge 40 mm  ProBloc II 
insulated n eedle; Kimbe rly-Clark, Ros well, Georgia) at the mid-thigh usi ng a 
high-frequency linear ultr asound tr ansdu cer (4–12 Hz; Mindray  M7; Mind ray 
North Ame rica, Mahwah, NJ). 
iii. 
 
e.   Outcome Measures: The outcome  measures used  in this study are considered 
stand ard of  care, and are currently being collected as part of the  daily practice 
patterns in pos t-operative rehabilitation. 
i.   Postop erative Pain control – 
 Num eric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS): Measured acutely in PACU s etting and 
with Pain cont rol nu meric scale at first  physical therapy and posto perative 
physicians visit. See Appendix A. 
 Narcotics Use: Total cos ts for pharmaceutical utilization will  also be tr acked 
from the All-scripts E MR system uti lizing the MRN l inking  variable for the 
parent protoc ol. 
ii.   Quadriceps Muscle Activation  
 Surface Electromyography (EMG): The  surface EMG will be us ed at pos t- 
operative day 1, 7 and 14  to det ermine  the mus cle activation 
 Straight Leg Raise Test: See section C.3. of  the p arent proto col - HSC -MH-14- 
0734.  
 
VI. Statistical Ana lysis: 
Primary Analysis:  Independent t-test and analysis of variance (ANOVA) models will  
be used to determine the differences between FNB and adductor canal block in r egards 
to pain control and  musc le strength. 
Secondary Analysis: Pearson correlation models will  be used to det ermine  the 
relationships b etween patient demo graphic in formation and the out come measures 
listed within the methods  section - V. 
 
VII. Power Analysis: 
a.   Based on work by Hsu et al (AJSM 2013) and Kim et al (Anesth 2014) we intend to 
recruit 130 p articip ants (65 FNB, 65 ACB) to suf ficiently power this  study.  Kim et 
al (Anesth 2014) observed a  mode rate effect size of d = .53 for NPRS in patient 
following  total knee  arthroplas ty. To achieve  an acceptable  power of (1-β) = .80 at 
an error rate of α =  0.5 we will need to co mplete  testing on 114 p atients (Figure 1). 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MH-14-0734  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  02/02/2016   
With a conservative drop-out estimate  of 10% our total sample  is est imated to be  
130 p articip ants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Power Analysis 
 
VIII.  Literature Cited / References 
 
Mani ckam B, Perlas A, Dugg an E, et al. Feasibility and efficacy of ult rasound-guided 
block of  the saphenous  nerve in the adductor canal. Reg Anesth Pa in Med. 
2009;34(6 ):578-580. 
 
Chisholm  MF, Bang H, Maalouf DB, Marcello D, Lotano M A, Marx RG, et al. 
Postop erative analgesia with s aphenous blo ck appears equivalent to f emoral nerve 
block in A CL reconstru ction. HSS J. 2014 ;10:24 5–51. 
 
Sharma S, Iorio R, Specht L, et al. Comp lications of femoral nerve block for total knee 
arthroplas ty. Clin Orthop R elat Res. 2010;468(1 ):135-140. 
 
Kwofie M, Sh astri U, G adsden  J, et al. The  effects of ultr asoun d-guided adductor canal 
block v ersus femoral nerve block on quadriceps strength and fall risk: a blinded, 
random ized trial of volunt eers. Reg Anesth Pa in Med. 2013;38(4 ):321-325. 
 
Luo TD, Ashraf A, Dahm DL, Stuart MJ, McIntosh AL.  Femoral nerve block is 
associ ated with  persistent strength deficits at 6 m onths after anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstru ction in pediatric and adolescent patients. Am J  Sports  Med. 2015  
Feb;43(2 ):331-6. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MH-14-0734  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  02/02/2016   Krych AJ, Woodcock JA, Morg an JA, Levy BA, Stuart MJ, Dahm D L. Factors 
associ ated with excellent 6-month functional and isokin etic test r esults follow ing ACL 
reconstru ction. K nee Surg Sports T raumatol Arthrosc [published February 15, 2014 ]. 
doi:10.1007/ s0016 7-014-2869 -9 
 
Lawrence P. Hsu L, MD, Oh S, Nuber G, Doty R, Mark C. Kendall, MD, Stephen  Gryzlo, MD, 
and Ant oun Nader, MD. Nerve Blo ck of the Infrapatellar Branch of the Saphenous Nerve in 
Knee Arthroscopy: A Prospective, Doubl e-Blinded, Randomized, P lacebo-Controlled Trial. J 
Bone Joint Surg Am. 2013 ;95:1465-72 
 
Appendix A. Nu meric Pain  Rating Scale (NPRS) 
 
 