 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Within Subjects Comparison of Two Antegrade Flushing Regimes in Children  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
08/23/2019   
This study was a part of a dissertation presented to the Graduate School of the University of Florida in 
partial fulfillment of the Doctor of Philoso phy degree requirements.  
Study design  
This study compared two flushing regimens utilizing a cross -over design embedded in a single subject A -
B-C-Bʹ-Cʹ-B1ʹ design  with  subject s acting as their own control ; thereby  ensuring the highest possible 
degree  of equivalence across treatment conditions  and allowing greater precision and efficien cy in 
estimates of treatment effects (Janosky , Leininger, Hoerger & Libkuman , 2009; Piantadosi, 2005; 
Portney & Watkins, 2009). In both methods subjects were randomized to treatment sequence  
decreasing the threat of order effects, increas ing group equivalency in the cross -over design, minimiz ing 
variability in measurement due to subject or period differences, and increas ing internal validity (Chow & 
Liu, 2014; Jones & Ken ward, 2003). This study was well suited to single -subject repeated measures 
design, because children requiring an ACE procedure co nstitute a very small population with widely 
variable anatomic and physiologic causative factors making sample homogeneity dif ficult. The design 
allowed for frequency  and volume adjustment of each flushing regimen as needed  facilitat ing dose 
response comparison and aid ing in identifying which flushing regimen required the minimal dose and 
administration  frequency  and had  fewer side effects while achieving stool continence  (Gast, 2010; 
Janosky et al., 2009; Kazdin, 2011). Subjects were limited to children who were scheduled for a 
cecostomy or appendicostomy ensuring a naïve gut to the effects of a flushing regimen and  allowing for 
a true no -treatment baseline. Flush effects were reversible, making this intervention amenable to a 
withdrawal design. Specimen  collection occurred after an active wash out period at the completion of 
each flushing regimen facilitat ing comparison of treatment effects on electrolytes and stool calprotectin , 
negating the possibility of carry -over effects.  
Regulatory Considerations  
The potential risks associated with this study conferred no greater than minimal risk as categorized by 
the National Inst itutes of Health (National Institutes of Health [NIH], 1998). However, it involved 
vulnerable subjects necessitating full Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval, legal guardian informed 
consent by at least one parent, and child assent for children age 7  and above (Knox & Burkhart, 2007; 
Pieper, 2008). In addition, although normal saline and USP glycerin have been used for over three 
decades in the clinical setting as ACE flushing solutions, administration of either solution through a n ACE 
stoma is consid ered off -label use and therefore the study required FDA approval.  Prior to submission to 
the IRB, the study design was reviewed by the Nemours Children’s Clinic (NCC) Research Committee  
which made suggestions for revision but deferred to the investigator’ s Dissertation Committee for 
approval of study design and analysis . The UF IRB deferred to the NCC IRB because the study was to be 
completed at NCC. An IRB authorization agreement was completed,  and the contract was signed by all 
parties . The proposal was submitted to the FDA and an IND was obtained .  A Nemours Children’s Clinic 
IRB application was completed . As a part of the NCC IRB application process, submission s for research 
involving investigational drugs and biologics and management of re search pharmaceutical products 
were completed and approved.  NCC IRB approval was obtained and renewed annually . Legal guardian 
informed consent and child assent for children 7 and above were obtained for each subject prior to the 
start of data collection.   
Subjects  
Subject characteristics’ data were collected and included  age in years and months , ethnicity, diagnosis, 
description of level of spinal cord lesion or anal -rectal malformation when appropriate, description of 
physical examination of anus, and the reason for undergoing an ACE procedure .  
Setting  
Following  parental consent and child assent , baseline data were collected daily for a minimum of 2 
weeks prior to surgery. Baseline data included the frequency of fecal soiling, and the frequency and 
severity of abdominal pain. Baseline b lood sample for electrolyte s and stool for calprotectin were 
obtained in the preoperative period. The baseline  samples were  collected prior to initiation of the pre-
operative bowel prep. Postoperatively, the child was ran domly assigned to either start the saline or USP 
glycerin flush protocol. A clinician from the surgical division at NCC met with the parent and child in the 
immediate postoperative period for initiation of the first  antegrade  flush. At that time, the clinician 
reviewed the flush protocol in detail, including materials and procedures. The child received the first 
antegrade infusion during that hospital visit. A home visit was scheduled by the investigator for the 
initial antegrade flush following hospital discharge . Procedural reliability was ascertained by calculating 
procedural fidelity for each procedural variable  to assure the intervention was accurately  implemented  
in keeping with  the methods section of the proposal. Procedural fid elity was ascertained  prior to each 
regimen change during the clinic visit scheduled prior to e ach phase change.   
Measures  
Dependent variables collected at baseline  were recorded daily and included  the number of episodes of 
fecal soiling per day , the frequency and severity of abdominal pain measured using the Wong -Baker 
Faces Pain Rating Scale (WBFPRS) as the age -appropriate visual analog scale, serum electrolytes, and 
stool for calprotectin . The WBFPRS scale ranges from 0 (very happy without pain)  to 10 (the worst pain 
imaginable). The WBFPRS has undergone extensive testing and has well established psychometrics in 
children (Tomlinson, von Baeyer, Stinson, & Sung, 2010; Wong & Baker, 1988).  
Dependent variables collected postoperatively were obtaine d daily throughout all phases of the  dosing 
and maintenance phase s and include d the number of episodes of fecal soiling per day , frequency and 
severity of abdominal pain  and pain associated with antegrade flush administration  measured using the 
WBFPRS as the age  appropriate visual analog , and the presence of flush associated vagal symptoms. 
Serum electrolytes and stool for were calprotectin collected at the end of each dosing phase . Total flush 
volume was recorded with each flush and measured in mL.  Direct parental observation with e vent 
recording was used to track and tally soiling episodes defined as non -toilet elimination . Dependent 
variables were measured and recorded by the parent using a data collection sheet specifically designed 
for this study.  The parent was requested to call if the child was having accidents , discomfort greater 
than a 4 on the WBFPRS associated with the antegrade flush , or vagal symptoms . The investigator 
documented any event that could potentially cause a change in lev el, stability, or trend of the 
dependent variable not related to the intervention  (i.e. initiation of antibiotics  or an intercurrent illness ).   
Materials  
Each child had a low-profile button in place to ease flush administration.  A cabinet  was identified  in the 
clinic space for storage of the flushing solution  with continuous temperature monitoring using a MCC 
USB 501 -LCD thermometer . The cabinet was locked with restricted key access. The temperature in the 
storage cabinet was consistently maintained betw een 15 and 30 degrees Centigrade .  A temperature 
monitoring log was completed daily. No ambient temperature excursions occurred. Flush solut ion type , 
volume dispensed, lot numbers , and flush solution dispensing time and date  were recorded in a 
dispensing l og.   
High Volume Flush  
Each child had a low -profile button in place to ease flush administration.  The normal saline was infused 
using a 1,000 mL enteral feeding bag with drip chamber and roller clamp hung from an IV pole or a hook 
on the bathroom wall located 5 feet above the toilet seat . Enteral feeding bag tubing and the low - 
profile device access tubing was primed with the high -volume flush prior to connecting the access tubing 
to the low -profile device and initiating the flush infusi on. Step by step procedural directions were 
reviewed verbally with the parents and were reinforced through  the provision of written  instructions  
located in a parent notebook . The written procedure served  as a check -off list to document procedural 
integrity w hich was checked during the initial home visit and each clinic visit scheduled with every 
change in flush solution and change in phase.  
Low Volume Flush  
 Each child had a low -profile button in place to ease flush administration.  For the low volume flush , 
room temperature USP glycerin was mixed with room temperature normal saline in a calibrated six - 
ounce plastic container with a screw top  and subsequently poured into a 60 mL catheter -tipped syringe 
attached to the low -profile device access tubing. The t ubing was primed and connected to the low -
profile device. The  syringe containing flush solution was held at t he child’s shoulder level while the flush 
solution infus ed. Following flush  completion , the tubing and bag or syringe w ere washed in warm  soapy 
water,  thoroughly  rinsed, and allowed to air dry. Step by step written  procedural directions were 
included in a parent notebook and served both as procedural reinforcement and as a check -off list to 
document procedural integrity which  was checked during the initial home visit and with each 
subsequent scheduled clinic visit completed with every change in flush solution and every change in 
phase.   
Procedures  
Randomiz ation  to one of the two treatment sequences occurred in the immediate postoperative period 
using restricted random assignment to force equal sample size and was accomplished using the SAS 
random number  generator . 
High Volume Regimen   
The high -volume regimen consisted of normal saline flush at a starting dose of 10mL/kg infu sed every 
other day and adjusted by flush volume and frequency of administration until stability of target 
outcomes was achieved.  Notification of any fecal soiling  resulted in an additional 5 mL/kg  volume 
adjustment with a subsequent increase in administr ation frequency, if needed, so as not to exceed a 
maximum dose of 500 mL administered daily for a child under five years of age and 1000 mL 
administered daily for a child over 5 years of age. If the child could not achieve  continence on the 
maximum dose  and had not been trialed on the alternate therapy , they were trialed on USP glycerin  but 
did not proceed to the maintenance phase of the study.  If the child experienced  side effects greater 
than 4 on the WBFPRS at the starting saline dose , flush volume was incrementally decreased as needed 
by 2.5 mL/kg to the lowest dose of 5 mL/kg. The goal of the dosing phase was to identify  the lowest 
effective dose and flushing frequency that resulted in continence with minimal side effects. If the dose 
required  to minimize side effects resulted in fecal soiling or the child had side effects greater than 4 on 
the WBFPRS at the lowest  flush  dose , and had not been trialed on the alternate therapy, they were 
trialed on USP glycerin but did not proceed to the mainten ance phase of the  study.    
Low Volume Regimen  
The low volume regimen consisted of USP glycerin diluted in normal saline instill ed through the low - 
profile device  starting on a dose of 20 mL of USP glycerin mixed in >20 mL of saline  and adjusted by flush 
volume and frequency of administration until stability of target outcomes was achieved.  The saline 
served as a diluent and was mixed at a sufficient  dose  to allow eas y infusion of the solution through the 
ACE access tubing . Notification of any fecal soilin g resulted in the addition of 5 to10 mL with subsequent 
increase in frequency of administration, if needed, so as not to exceed 50 mL of USP glycerin 
administered daily. If the child could not achieve continence on the maximum dose and had not been 
trialed  on the alternate therapy, they were trialed on high volume normal saline but did not proceed to 
the maintenance phase of the study.  If the child experienced side effects greater than 4 on the WBFPRS 
at the starting USP glycerin dose, flush volume was inc rementally decreased as needed by 5 mL 
increments to the lowest dose of 5 mL. The goal of the dosing phase was to identify the lowest effective 
dose and flushing frequency that resulted in continence with minimal side effects. If the dose required 
to minim ize side effects resulted in fecal soiling or the child had side effects greater than 4 on the 
WBFPRS at the lowest flush dose, and had not been trialed on the alternate therapy, they were trialed 
on normal saline  but did not proceed to the maintenance pha se of the study.   
Optimal Dose Regimen   
Following optimal dose determination, the child was maintained on that volume and administration 
frequency for at least 2 weeks. A clinic visit was scheduled once the above criteria had been met . At that 
visit, the child was flushed  at the optimal dose , labs were drawn, a stool sample collected, the procedure 
for the next regimen was reviewed  with the parent and child , and procedural fidelity was ascertained .   
Regimen Maintenance  Phase  
Following successful complet ion of the dose -response phase, patients were randomized for a second 
time to either a saline -glycerin -saline or a glycerin -saline -glycerin sequence. T he maintenance phase  of 
the study began by administering the established effective dose and frequency of administration for the 
first flush in the sequ ence. The child  remained on treatment for 4 weeks . The treatment was withdrawn.  
The child was subsequently placed on the nex t treatment in the sequence at the pre -established 
effective dose and frequency for 4 weeks. The second flush was then withdrawn and the initial flush in 
the sequence was reintroduced for an additional two weeks . If the child experienced recurrence of feca l 
incontinence or discomfort greater than a 4 on the pain scale, they were dropped from the study. If they 
successfully completed the maintenance phase, the child was placed on the flushing regimen of his/her 
choice at the dose and frequency of administrat ion that maintained continence.    
Specimen Collection  
A stool sample for calprotectin was obtained durin g the baseline phase prior to any pre -operative bowel 
prep and additional stool samples were obtained at the completion of each dosing phase for a tot al of 3 
samples. Blood samples for electrolytes were drawn preoperatively and postoperatively at the end of 
each dosing phase at the time stool samples were obtained for a total of three samples. Funding was 
secured. A ccounts were set up with an outside  lab for processing blood samples for electrolyte 
determination and a second  outside lab for processing stool samples for calprotectin .  
Statistical Analysis  
This study was a within subjects design with all subjects demonstrating consistent fecal incontinenc e at 
baseline and sufficient intervention and post -intervention data points to allow for time series analysis. 
Data points were graphed on an equal interval 2:3 ratio ordinate and abscissa scale line graph  to prevent 
data distortion during visual analysis.  Dependent measures were graphed on the ordinate scale with 
time -by-day graphed on the abscissa scale. Independent variable effects on target behaviors were 
analyzed using well established single -case method ology  (Gast, 2010; Hartmann et al., 1980; Ma, 2006; 
Kazdin, 2011; Portney & Watkins, 2009).  Clinicaltrials.gov is not configured to allow reporting outcomes 
from most methods of within subjects data analysis. Reported data was limited to the results from 
numeric descriptive and inferential analysis that could be adapted to the Clinicaltrials.gov format.  
In addition to single -case analytic methodology, descriptive and inferential analysis was used to 
compare interventional effects and increase the reliabili ty of visual methods analysis.  Both the dosing 
and maintenance phase of the study constituted a 2 -treatment crossover design with each child 
receiving both treatments  in both interventional phases of the study  (Portney & Watkins, 2009).    
Descriptive sta tistics included mean, median, range and standard deviation. A cross -over design 
compares two treatment sequences ; therefore, the groups are independent (Chow & Liu, 2014). Of 
concern,  carry over and direct -by-period interaction is a potential confound wit h cross -over designs, 
which if present, could bias treatment effects (Jones & Kenward, 2003; Senn, 2002; Shuster, 2007).  The 
decision was made to use a  two-tailed, two -sample pooled variance t -test to lend precision in the 
presence of carry over effects, and precision and accuracy in the presence of unequal sample size 
(Shuster, 2009 ).  Significance level was set a priori at 0.05.  Effect size was used to determine the 
magnitude of the treatment difference (Polit, 2010; Rempher & Silkman, 2007).   
 
  