Baricitinib in Relapsing Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA): A Phase II, Single- institution, Open -
label Pilot Study 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
30December 2019 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 Baricitinib in Relapsing Giant  Cell Arteritis (GCA): 
A Phase II, Single -institution,  Open- label Pilot  Study  
 
 
Participating  Institution/Investigators 
 
Mayo  Clinic,  Rochester,  MN 
 
Principal Investigator  Kenneth J.  
Warrington,  M.D. Professor  of 
Medicine  
warrington.kenneth@mayo.edu  
 
Co-principal Investigator  
Matthew  J. Koster,  M.D. Assistant 
Professor of Medicine  
koster.matthew@mayo.edu  
 
Co-investigators:  
Ashima  Makol,  M.B.B.S  Assistant 
Professor of Medicine  
makol.ashima@mayo.edu  
 
Eric L. Matteson, M.D., M.P.H  
Professor  of Medicine  
matteson.eric@mayo.edu  
 
Steven R.  Ytterberg, M.D  Associate  
Professor  of Medicine 
ytterberg.steven@mayo.edu  
 
Statistician  
Cynthia S.  Crowson,  M.S. crowson@mayo.edu 
 
Research  Coordinator  Jane  
Jaquith,  C.C.R.C  
jaquith.jane@mayo.edu 
 
Version  Date  Major Changes  
1 25 Oct 2016  Initial protocol  
2 03 Nov 2016  Added known evidence of hyperbilirubinemia to exclusions (Sect 7.2), clarified timing of study 
visit/schedule (Sect 9.6), added required information on study monitoring/auditing 
plan/inspection/ethical consideration following intraclinic regulatory review  
3 25Jul  2017 Removes screening patient global assessment; Excludes Probenecid within 2 weeks of baseline (Sect 
7.3), Additional study drug discontinuation criterion (Sect 10.2)  
4 21Sept2017  Change to excluded/ prior medication (Sect  7.3) to allow patients having been exposed to IL -6 inhibitor 
to still be considered for study if they were intolerant of the medication and did not have primary 
failure of the medication for control of GCA. This is in response to increase use of tocilizumab for GCA 
following FDA approval of tocilizumab for GCA in May 2017   
5 28Nov2017  Change to excluded/prior medication (Sect 7.3) to clarify language about prior IL -6 inhibitor use before 
study entrance  
Changed tuberculosis screening to include option of different interferon gamma release assay (T -spot 
test) if initial QuantiFERON -TB Gold test is indeterminate  
6 10Jul2018  Changed timing of hepatitis and TB screening. If have had done within the last 6 months for other 
clinical reason and they were negative without evidence of exposure or symptoms then these negative results will be used for baseline negative and not repeated. This is consistent with clinical 
practice for patient s being treated with biologics. See table 2  
7 30Dec2019  Clarification of Excl usion criteria (7.2)  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 Clarification for shingles vaccine. At time of initial drafting Zostavax was only option but now Shingrix 
is available which is okay to have administered while on immunosuppression and would not be 
exclusion to enrollment and can be done at any time prior to or during study.  (7.2.2)  
 
Clarification on exclusion language of vision changes. It has been the intent of the investigators that patients not be demonstrating any NEW features of vision loss to prevent this from being a feature of 
relapse because this is considered a severe relapse and such findings would not be advised to a rapid steroid taper as done in this study protocol. However, it was not the intent of the investigators to 
exclude patients with prior symptoms of visual ischemia (at time of diagnosis) if they are not having 
any NEW or worsening vision loss at the time of the documented relapse. We realize that “permanent 
vision loss” may be misleading if this was present at time of diagnosis (because it will always be 
present).Language is updated to clarify this point. (7.2.4)  
 
  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 Table of Contents 
 
1.   PROTOCOL OVERVIEW ………………………………………………………………………………… 4 
2.   STUDY RATIONALE / SPECIFIC  AIMS …………………………………………………………… 6 
3.   BACKGROUND/SIGNIFICANCE ……………………………………………………………………        7 
3.1. Giant  Cell Arteritis ………………………………………………………………    7 
3.2. Glucocorticoids …………………………………………………………………  7 
3.3. Steroid -sparing  Agents …………………………………………………………     7 
3.4 Immunopathologic  Studies…………………………………………………             7 
3.5. Baricitinib  in Autoimmune  Disease …………………………………….           9 
3.6. Baricitinib  in Giant  Cell Arteritis ………………………………………… 9  
4.   OBJECTIVE(S)  and ENDPOINT(S) …………………………………………………………… 9 
5.   STUDY  DESIGN ……………………………………………………………………………………… 10 
5.1.1.    Study  Definitions ……………………………………………………………………   10 
5.1.2.    Design Overview  ……………….……………………………………………………    10 
5.2.      Study  Design  and Methods …………………………………………………………            11 
5.3.  Treatment  Arms  and Duration …………………………………………………………        12 
5.4. Type and Number  of Subjects ……………………………………………………………  12 
5.5.      Design  Justification ………………………………………………………………………… 12 
5.6.      Dose  Justification …………………………………………………………………………  13 
5.6.1.    Baricitinib ……………………………………………………………………… 13 
5.6.2.    Justification  of Trial Dose …………………………………………………….. 13 
5.6.3 Glucocorticoids …………………………………………………………………………..  13 
5.6.4.    Justification of  Glucocorticoid  Taper…………………………………………. 13 
6.   BENEFIT:RISK  ASSESSMENT ………………………………………………………………………………. 14 
6.1. Benefit  Assessment ………………………………………………………………………………  14 
6.2.      Risk Assessment …………………………………………………………………………………..   14 
6.3.      Overall Benefit:Risk  Conclusion …………………………………………………………….       15 
7.   SELECTION  OF STUDY  POPULATION  AND  WITHDRAWAL  CRITERIA ………………...   15 
7.1.      Inclusion  Criteria……………………………………………………………………………….…         16 
7.2.      Exclusion  Criteria………………………………………………………………………………...          1 7 
7.3.      Excluded Prior/Concomitant Therapy ……………………………………………….            19 
8.   STUDY  TREATMENT …………………………………………………………………………………………  20 
8.1.      Investigational Product ………………………………………………………………………..          20 
9.   STUDY PROCEDURES ……………………………………………………………………………………….  20 
9.1.      Recruitment ………………………………………………………………………………………..          20 
9.2.      Screening ……………… …………………………………………………………………………….          2 1 
9.3.      Screening  Failures ……………………………………………………………………………….           2 1 
9.4.      Retesting …………………………………………………………………………………………….          2 1 
9.5.      Enrollment …………………………………………………………………………………………..          21 
9.6.      Visit Frequency/Visit  Schedule ……………………………………………………………..         22 
9.7.      Screening  and Critical Baseline Assessments ……………………………………….         2 3 
2 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 9.8.      Efficacy…………………………………………………………………………………………………     2 3 
9.9. Patient’s  and Physician’s  Global Assessment and Disease  Activity …………      23 
9.10.  Pain Assessment ………………………………………………………………………………        23 
9.11.  Disease  activity/damage ………………………………………………………………………        23 
9.12.    Study  Completion………………………………………………………………………………..        23 
10. WITHDRAWAL/STOPPING  CRITERIA ………………………………………………………………..        23 
10.1. Interruption of Investigational  Product ………………………………………………..        2 3 
10.2. Permanent  Discontinuation  of Study  Drug ………………………………………….. 24 
11. STUDY  ENDPOINTS ………………………………………………………………………………………….. 26 
12. STUDY  MONITORING AND ADVERSE  EVENT REPORTING …………………………………      26 
12.1.     Study Monitoring, Audits, Inspections .. …………………………………..         26  
      12.1. 1 Study Monitoring Plan………………………………………………………………..           26 
    12.1.2 Auditing Inspection……………………………………………………………………..           2 7 
      12.1.3 Ethical Considerations………………………………………………………………..             27 
12.2.     Safety ………………………………………………………………………………………………….      2 7 
12.3.     Adverse  Event ……………………………………………………………………………………..       27 
12.4.     Serious  Adverse  Event …………………………………………………………………………       28 
12.5. Toxicity  Grading  of Adverse Events ………………………………………………………       28 
12.6. Time  period and Frequency  for Collecting  Event  Information ……………….     28 
12.7. Method  of Detecting  AEs and SAEs ……………………………………………………..       29 
12.8.     Follow -up of AEs and SAEs ………………………………………………………………….       29 
12.9. Cardiovascular and  Death  Events ………………………………………………………..        29 
12.10.  Regulatory  Reporting  for SAEs ………………………………………………………………   3 0 
12.11.  Pregnancy …………………………………………………………………………………………….    30  
12.12.  Physical  Exams ……………………………………………………………………………………       3 0 
12.13.   Vital Signs ……………………………………………………………………………………………       31 
12.14.  Clinical Safety  Laboratory  Assessments……………………………………………….      31 
13. SAMPLE  SIZE AND  COMPUTATION  RATIONALE ……………………………………………… 31 
14. STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  PLAN …………………………………………………………………………   31 
15. PUBLICATION  STRATEGY ………………………………………………………………………………..  31 
16. REFERENCES  ………………………………………………………………………………………………….  31 
 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 1. PROTOCOL  OVERVIEW  
 
Protocol  Title:  Baricitinib  in relapsing  giant  cell arteritis (GCA):  a phase  II, 
single -institution, open -label  pilot study  
Study  Chairs:  Kenneth  J. Warrington,  M.D.  – Principal  Investigator  
Matthew  J. Koster,  M.D.  – Co-Principal  Investigator  
Statistician:  Cynthia  Crowson,  M.S. 
Study  Coordinator:  Jane  Jaquith,  C.C.R.C.  
Participating  Sites:  Mayo  Clinic,  Rochester,  MN 
Activation  Date:  1/1/2017  
Sample  Size:  15 
Target Enrollment  
Period:  60 weeks  
Study  Design:  Open -label, Phase  II 
Primary objective:  To determine  the safety  and tolerability of baricitinib,  4mg 
oral daily,  in GCA  
Secondary objective  To gather  preliminary  data on the efficacy  of baricitinib,  4mg 
oral daily,  in patients  with relapsing  GCA  
• Relapse -free survival at week  52 
• Relapse- free survival at week 24  
• Duration  of glucocorticoid- free remission  
• Number  of relapses  per subject  over time 
• Change from baseline  erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate 
(ESR) to end of study  
• Change from baseline  C-reactive  protein to end of 
study  
• Glucocorticoid  dose (mg) at week  52 compared  to 
enrollment  
• Change in BVAS from baseline to end of study  
Inclusion  criteria  1. Diagnosis  of GCA  defined  by the following  Revised  GCA  
Diagnosis  Criteria:  
• Age ≥50 years.  
• History of ESR ≥ 50 mm/hour  or CRP ≥ 10 mg/L.  
• Presence  of at least one of the following: 
o Unequivocal  cranial symptoms  of GCA  (new  
onset  localized headache,  scalp  or temporal  
artery  tenderness, otherwise  unexplained 
mouth or jaw pain upon  mastication).  
o Unequivocal  symptoms  of PMR,  defined as 
shoulder  and/or  hip girdle  pain associated  
with inflammatory  stiffness.  
o Systemic  inflammatory  disease  in which  the 
presence of the fever  (>38 degrees  Celsius  
for ≥ 7 days),  weight loss  (> 5 lbs or 10% 
premorbid weight),  and/or  night sweats  were  
attributable  to GCA  and no other  cause was 
4 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 identified.  
• Presence  of at least one of the following: 
o Temporal artery  biopsy  revealing features  of 
GCA.  
o Evidence  of large- vessel  vasculitis  by 
angiography  or cross- sectional  imaging,  
including but not limited  to magnetic  
resonance  angiography  (MRA),  computed  
tomography  angiography  (CTA),  positron 
emission  tomography -computed  tomography  
(PET -CT) or evidence of large -vessel  or 
temporal artery vasculitis  by ultrasound  (US).  
 
2. Relapse  with active  GCA  within  6 weeks  of study  entry  
where active  disease  is defined  by an ESR ≥30 mm/hr or 
CRP ≥10 mg/L  AND  the presence of at least one 
of the following:  
• Unequivocal  cranial symptoms  of GCA  (new  onset  or 
recurrent localized headache,  scalp  or temporal  
artery  tenderness, otherwise  unexplained mouth  or 
jaw pain upon mastication  [i.e., jaw claudication]).  
• Unequivocal  symptoms  of PMR,  defined as shoulder  
and/or hip  girdle  pain associated  with inflammatory  
stiffness.  
• Other feature(s) judged by the clinician  investigator  
to be consistent  with GCA  or PMR  flares  (e.g. fever  
of unknown  origin,  unexplained weight  loss, 
fatigue/malaise,  etc.) 
 
3. Clinically  stable at baseline  visit (study  drug initiation)  
such that the subject is  able to safely  participate  in the 
standardized  taper regimen  in the opinion of the investigator.  
 
. 
5 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 2.  STUDY  RATIONALE / SPECIFIC  AIMS  
Giant cell  arteritis  (GCA) is  the most  common  idiopathic  systemic  vasculitis in Europe and North  
America, with an annual  incidence of 11-29/100,000  persons  ≥ 50 years  of age [1-4]. This chronic  
immune -mediated  vasculitis  is characterized  by inflammation  of the medium - and large -sized  blood 
vessels  resulting in significant  morbidity  including  blindness,  stroke,  aortic  aneurysm  with rupture,  and 
sudden  death. GCA  affects  patients  aged  50 years  and older  and is considered  a medical emergency  
because  of the high risk of vision  loss, which  can occur  in up to 15 -20% [5, 6]. 
Glucocorticoids  (GC) have remained  the mainstay  for both induction  to remission  and 
maintenance  therapy  in GCA.  Unfortunately, GC contribute  substantial  toxicity  with up to 90% of 
patients  developing significant GC -associated  adverse events  [7, 8]. Therefore,  steroid- sparing  agent s 
for both induction and maintenance  therapy  are greatly  needed  to decrease  treatment associated 
morbidity.  Despite  efforts,  a steroid -sparing  agent  with consistent  benefit in GCA  has not been  identified  
leaving  a large  unmet need  for adjunct immunomodulatory  medications  in this condition.  
Advances  in understanding  the pathogenesis  of GCA  has led to developments  in potential  
targeted  therapeutics. Recent  studies  have  elucidated the pathogenic  role of CD4+ T cells in vasculitic  
lesions  of GCA  and two distinct  lineages  have  been  identified  as key regulators; type  17 helper  T cells 
(Th17) and type 1 helper  T cells (Th1)  [9]. While  Th17 cells appear to be steroid -responsive, Th1 cells 
appear to be steroid- resistant and  likely  contribute to ongoing disease activity  and late stage  
complications  of the disease.  Although  biologic  agents  in GCA  are currently  under  investigation,  
therapeutics  targeting  interleukin-6 (tocilizumab  and secukinumab)  only further  block  the Th17 pathway  
with little to no anticipated  effect on the pathologic  Th1 response.  
Baricitinib,  a n orally administered, potent,  selective and reversible  inhibitor  of JAK1  and JAK2  
has shown preliminary  safety and  efficacy  in chronic,  immune -mediated  inflammatory conditions  such 
as rheumatoid  arthritis [14]  and psoriasis [11].  This small  molecule is uniquely  suited  as a potential  
novel therapeutic  agent  in GCA  because  of its suppressive effect on both  the Th17  (IL-6, IL-23) and 
Th1 (IL-12, IFN -γ) pathways.  
The purpose  of this study  is to evaluate the safety  and tolerability  of baricitinib  in a population  of 
patients  with relapsing  GCA.  To accomplish  this we will perform a single -institution,  open -label pilot  
study  assessing  the safety  and tolerability  of baricitinib  (4 mg daily,  oral, for 52 weeks) in  addition  to a 
standardized glucocorticoid  taper. It is anticipated that adjunct  baricitinib  will be safe and  well tolerated  
by patients  with GCA  and demonstrate  preliminary  efficacy  as measured by reducing  inflammatory  
markers, decreasing  steroid  requirements  and increasing  relapse -free survival . 
The vasculitis  group at Mayo  Clinic  in Rochester,  Minnesota is well-suited  for this study  with 50 
years  of GCA  research  experience  accounting  for over 200 publications  in this condition. In  additio n, 
this institution  has one  of the largest referral and  population- based  GCA  cohorts  in North  America  and 
has successfully participated in three  recent multicenter,  international therapeutic  clinical trials  
evaluating biologic  agents  in patients  with GCA.  
 
Primary  Objective 
To determine  the safety  and tolerability  of adjunct baricitinib (4mg, oral daily,  for 52 weeks)  in 
combination with standardized glucocorticoid  taper  among patients  with relapsing GCA.  
 
Secondary  Objective 
To assess  preliminary  efficacy  of adjunct baricitinib (4mg, oral daily,  for 52 weeks)  in combination  with 
standardized glucocorticoid  taper  among  patients  with relapsing  GCA.  
6 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 3. BACKGROUND/SIGNIFICANCE  
 
3.1. Giant Cell  Arteritis  
Giant cell  arteritis  (GCA) is  the most  common  idiopathic  systemic  vasculitis in persons  aged  ≥50 
years. There  is a predilection for vascular inflammation in medium  and large  arteries  with a 
particular tropism for  the proximal  aorta  and its primary branches.  Arterial inflammation  leads  to 
narrowing  or occlusion  from intimal hyperplasia  and can have  dramatic  consequences.  
Specifically, ischemic  cranial symptoms  are considered  a medical emergency  due to the risk of 
transient or  permanent  visual  loss, which  can occur  in up to 15-20% of patients  with GCA  [6, 
12]. In addition, patients  with GCA  are at elevated  risk of developing aortic  complications  
(aneurysm, dissection, rupture)  which  can be associated  with significant morbidity  and mortality.  
Indeed, in a population -based  study, patients  with GCA  were  17.3 times  more  likely  to develop  
thoracic  aortic  aneurysm  [13]. Furthermore, patients  with GCA  who develop aortic  aneurysm  
and/or dissection  have a near 3-fold increased mortality  compared  to non-GCA  patients[14].  
 
3.2. Glucocorticoids  
Prompt  initiation  of high-dose glucocorticoids  (GC)  remains  the cornerstone  of treatment of GCA  
and delay  in treatment  initiation  can increase the risk of severe  ischemic  complications  [15]. 
Although highly  variable,  improvement  of inflammation  can occur within  days  to weeks,  leading  
to dramatic reduction in inflammatory  markers  and systemic symptoms. After attaining  
remission, the  GC dose is gradually  decreased  over a prolonged  course  of approximately  18-36 
months.  Nevertheless,  within  the first year of diagnosis  approximately  50% of  patients  will 
experience a clinical relapse  of the disease despite GC treatment  [16]. Furthermore,  GC 
treatment  in the affected  age-group is associated  with a high number of adverse  effects  (AEs)  
including,  but not limited  to, infection,  hypertension,  diabetes, cataracts,  glaucoma  and 
osteoporosis.  Such  AEs have  been reported  in up to 90% of patients  receiving  GC for the 
treatment  of GCA  and the risk of AEs increases  with the cumulative  dose and duration  of GC 
exposure [7, 17]. Therefore,  glucocorticoid -sparing  agents  are greatly  needed  for both induction  
and maintenance therapy  to decrease the frequency  of GC-associated  morbidity.  
 
3.3. Glucocort icoid- sparing Agents  
Many  investigations  have  attempted  to find a suitable replacement for  GC for the treatment  of 
GCA;  however,  no clear therapeutic  agent  has shown  comparable efficacy  or superiority  to date.  
Among  conventional immunosuppressive  agents, methotrexate  has been  considered  a 
reasonable second- line agent  after GC in patients  with severely  active/relapsing  disease or in 
patients  with high risk for GC-associated  adverse  events.  Nevertheless, small  clinical trials  
evaluating methotrexate in  GCA  have only found a modest  benefit in decreasing  relapse  risk and 
glucocorticoid dose reduction [18]. Limited  or no benefit has  been  observed among  other  oral 
conventional immunosuppressive  agents  including  leflunomide  [19, 20], azathioprine [21]       
and mycophenolate mofetil [22]. Biologic  agents, including  tumor  necrosis  factor  alpha  
inhibitors,  have  shown  equally  disappointing results  [23-25]. 
 
3.4. Immunopathologic Studies  
Lymphocytic  infiltration  in vascular  lesions  is largely  driven  by two T cell subsets: T helper type  
17 (Th17)  and T helper type 1 (Th1) cells  [26, 27]  (Figure  1). These T cell lineages  appear to be  
stimulated  by independent  signals  from different  antigen  presenting cells (APC)  with Th17 cells 
requiring  interleukin (IL)-1β / IL-6 / IL-21 / IL-23, whereas  the Th1 pathway  is dependent  on 
APCs  secreting  IL-12 / IL-18 and interferon  gamma  (IFN-γ) [27, 28]. In early  untreated  GCA,  
both T cell lineages  are increased  in the peripheral circulation  as well as within  vascular  
inflammatory infiltrates. The Th17 pathway  appears  to be  very sensitive  to treatment and  GC 
7 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 rapidly  control the  Th17 effector cytokine production  of IL-1, IL-6, IL- 17 and IL-23 with 
concomitant  depletion  of both circulating  and infiltrating  Th17 cells [26, 28]. 
 
FIGURE  1: Pathophysiology  of giant cell  arteritis  
 
 
 
 
Despite  the effective  reduction  of the Th17 pathway,  a Th1 cell response  persists in both biopsy  
and blood samples  of treated  patients  with GCA  [26]. The Th1 cytokine signature  (IL-2 and IFN- 
γ) associated  with chronic  vasculitis  in GCA  is poorly  susceptible to GC-mediated  suppression 
[28]. Currently, multiple  clinical trials  investigating  biologic  agents  targeting  extra cellular  
proinflammatory  cytokines  are underway  [IL-6, tocilizumab and secukinumab; IL- 12/IL -23, 
ustekinumab; IL- 1, gevokizumab].  However,  with the exception  of ustekinumab, these  biologic  
agents  do not impact the  Th1 / IL-12 / IFN-γ pathway and therefore  may be less likely  to exert  a 
greater  long-term benefit over  GC for suppression of chronic  inflammation in GCA  mediated  by 
the Th1 cell subset.  Results  from the small  open -label study  evaluating ustekinumab have  
shown  initial promise  [29]. These preliminary  findings  may further underscore  the importance  of 
blocking aspects  of both Th cell lineages  involved  in the pathogenesis  of GCA.  To date  
interruption  of the intracellular  signaling  upregulated  by proinflammatory  extracellular  cytokines  
has not been  pursued in patients  with GCA.  
 
Co
llaborative  efforts  between the Mayo  Clinic  vasculitis  group and Drs. Cornelia  Weyand  and 
Jorg Goronzy  have  identified  the importance  of signal  transducer and activator  of transcription 
(STAT) transcripts in  GCA  [30].  Human temporal  arteries  were  implanted  in immunodeficient  
mice  and peripheral  blood mononuclear  cells from patients  with GCA  were  used  to reconstitute 
the murine  immune  system.  In the arterial  lesional tissue, STAT-1 transcripts  were  notably  
abundant. IFN -γ, the major  cytokine inducer  of STAT -1, was also 10-fold higher than  in age- 
matched  non-GCA  controls. Treatment with high-dose dexamethasone  reduced  IL-6 and IL-1β 
expression but did not affect Th1 cell accumulation  in the vessel  wall or decrease IFN-γ 
production. However,  treatment  with tofacitinib, a Janus  kinase  (JAK)/STAT  inhibitor,  effectively  
8 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 prevented Th1 cell accumulation  in the vessel  wall and decreased circulating  levels  of IFN-γ by 
65%.  This proof -of-concept  study  demonstrates  that JAK/STAT  inhibition  can lead to 
reprogramming  of T cell trafficking  and prevent T cells from infiltrating  the arterial wall, an effect  
that has  not yet been  observed  with other  therapeutic  agents  in this condition.  
 
 
3.5. Baricitinib in Autoimmune  Disease  
Extracellular  cytokines  bind to cell-surface  receptors  which  then generate  downstream  signaling  
through  the activation  of tyrosine  kinases, including  JAK.  Cytokines  induce  JAK enzymatic  
activity by binding to the extracellular  portion  of their associated  receptors, leading  to activation 
of the receptor  and initiation  of intracellular  signaling  cascades.  STATs,  which  reside  in the 
cytosol,  when stimulated  by cytokines  bind active  phosphorylated  receptors  and are then in turn 
phosphorylated  by JAKs.  This leads  to STATs  translocating  to the nucleus  where  they bind DNA 
and activate transcription.  Exaggerated,  aberrant,  or protracted  JAK/STAT  signaling  has been  
implicated  in several  autoimmune diseas es and therefore  provides  potential targets  for disease 
modification  [31]. Indeed  tofacitinib  (JAK3  preferential inhibitor)  has already  been approved  for 
use in rheumatoid arthritis  and baricitinib  has shown  preliminary  efficacy  in rheumatoid arthritis  
[32-34], psoriasis [35]  and alopecia areata [36].  
 
 
3.6. Baricitinib in Giant  Cell Arteritis  
Cytokines  and mediators  that have  been associated  with aberrant  autoimmunity  and increased  
inflammatory responses  in GCA  include  IL-6, IL-12, IL-23, and interferon γ (IFN-γ). These  
cytokines  signal through  the JAK family (JAK1,  JAK2,  JAK3  and tyrosine  kinase 2 [Tyk2])  [37]. 
Baricitinib  is an oral Janus  kinase inhibitor with preferential inhibition  of JAK1  and JAK2.  IL-6 
and IFN-γ primarily signal  through  JAK1  and IL-12 and IL-23 through JAK2.  Therefore  an agent  
that preferentially inhibits  both JAK1  and JAK2  will provide  reduction of intracellular  signaling 
through  multiple  proinflammatory  pathways,  reducing  activity of both pathologic  Th17 and Th1 
cell lineages.  
 
Given  these  findings,  an open -label phase II trial of baricitinib  in patients  with relapsing  GCA  is 
proposed.  The purpose  of this study  will be to evaluate  the safety and  preliminary efficacy  of 
baricitinib  in treatment of patients  with relapsing  GCA. 
 
4. OBJECTIVE(S)  and ENDPOINT(S)  
 
Objectives  Endpoints/Measures  
Primary   
• To investigate the safety  of baricitinib,  4 
mg oral daily for duration of 52 weeks,  
administered to patients  with relapsing 
GCA  in combination with a standardized 
glucocorticoid taper  • Incidence of  adverse effects  and 
serious  adverse  effects,  changes  in 
hematology  and clinical chemistry  
patterns  
Secondary   
• To evaluate  preliminary  efficacy  of 
baricitinib,  4 mg oral daily for duration of 
52 weeks, administered to  patients  with 
relapsing GCA  in combination with a  
standardized glucocorticoid  taper  • Relapse -free survival at week 52  
• Relapse- free survival at week 24 
• Duration of  glucocorticoid -free 
remission  
9 
10  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
  
 
 
5. STUDY  DESIGN  
5.1.1.  Study  Definitions 
• Active  Disease : ongoing  signs  or symptoms  attributable to GCA  accompanied  by an 
elevated  ESR ≥ 30 mm/hour  or CRP 10 mg/L.  
• Clinically stable:  improvement in or absence of ongoing signs or symptoms 
attributable to GCA as evidenced by reduction in symptoms and/or  improvement in 
(or normalization of) inflammatory markers  
• Relapse : the recurrence  of signs  or symptoms  (i.e. active  disease)  attributable to GCA  in 
subject  previously  in remission  
• Remission : the absence  of signs  or symptoms  attributable to GCA  and normalization of 
erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate (<30 mm/hour) and C-reactive  protein  (<10 mg/L). 
• Glucocorticoid -free remission : the absence of signs  or symptoms  attributable  to GCA  
following  discontinuation  of glucocorticoids 
• Signs and symptoms of GCA : fronto -temporal headache; scalp tenderness; 
abnormality of temporal artery (tenderness, nodularity, decreased pulse); jaw, arm or 
leg claudication; polymyalgia rheumatica; vision change (blurring, diplopia);  transient (amaurosis fugax) or permanent vision loss.  
5.1.2.  Design Overview  
• A screening  phase of up to 6 weeks  in duration 
• 52-week  open -label study  drug treatment phase  with standardized  prednisone taper  
• A 12-week  follow -up phase to ensure  that all  subjects  are evaluated for safety at 12 
weeks  after receiving  the last dose of study  drug.  
 
•Duration of glucocorticoid- free remission  
•Number  of relapses  per subject  over 
time 
•Change from baseline erythrocyte  
sedimentation rate to end of  study  
•Change from baseline C- reactive  
protein to end of  study  
•Glucocorticoid  dose (mg) at week  52 
compared  to baseline 
•Change in  BVAS  from baseline  to end of 
study  
12  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 5.2. Study  Design and Methods  
 
This open -label,  single -center pilot  study  will enroll  and treat 15 subjects  with relapsing  GCA. All  
subjects  will receive oral baricitinib  4 mg daily for a duration of 12 months.  All patients with GCA 
enrolled will have undergone a recent relapse within 6 weeks prior to study entry. In  response to 
the observed relapse, prednisone will  be re-instituted  (for patients who have previously tapered off 
glucocorticoids) or increased (for patients currently on glucocorticoids)  based on the level of 
glucocorticoid treatment the patient  was on when the relapse occurred, as further outlined below . 
 
Subjects with evidence of relapse will be recruited  from the clinical practice  of Mayo  Clinic  
Rheumatology.  If initial inclusion  criteria  are met, the  subject will be consented  and begin  
screening  for study  enrollment.  The screening  period may be as  short as 2 weeks  or as long as 6 
weeks.  During  the screening  period, treating  physicians  may increas e prednisone in the following  
manner:  if relapse  occurred  with prednisone  doses  ≥ 20 but  <30 mg/day,  an increase to at least 
30 mg/day  (but not to exceed 40 mg/day)  will occur.  For those  with relapse  present  with 
prednisone dose  ≥10 but <20 mg/day  an increase to at least 20 mg/day  (but not to exceed 30 
mg/day)  will occur. For those with relapse occurring  with prednisone from 0 to <10 mg/day,  a 
reinstitution  or increase to at least 10 mg/day  (but not exceeding  20 mg) will occur. This increase  
will occur  during  the screening  phase following  informed  consent. The prednisone  increase is in 
response to the observed  relapse,  in keeping  with standard  clinical practice.  
 
To b
e enrolled,  subjects must have clinically stable disease and treated with  a prednisone dose of 
either 30  mg, 20 mg, or 10 mg (in accordance with their respective entry  tier) for a minimum  of 2 
weeks  before  initiation  of study  drug and standardized taper . As such, the patient is not, by the 
physician’s clinical assessment, showing signs of worsening disease (new symptoms or 
increasing severity of the symptoms that were observed at time of relapse) attributable to GCA.  
For example,  a patient  with relapse  occurring  at 30 mg prednisone  may be increased  to 40 
mg/day  for 2 weeks,  35 mg/day  for 2 weeks  and then 30 mg/day  for two weeks. If  deemed 
clinically  stable  on 30 mg/day  prednisone  after two weeks , the subject may  enroll  and begin 
study  drug and standardized glucocorticoid taper . Additional examples: 1) if  a relapse  occurred  at 
15 mg/day,  a patient may be increased to 20 mg for 2 weeks  and if deemed  clinically  stable may 
undergo initiation  of study  drug after being  on 20 mg for 2 weeks ; 2) if  a patient has previously 
been able to discontinue prednisone therapy and has a clinical relapse, prednisone can be re -
initiated at 10 mg/day and if clinically stable at 2 weeks may proceed to enrollment   Once 
enrolled, subjects  will begin study  drug and r educe  their prednisone  dose on a standardized  
tapering  schedule  according  to their respective  entry  dose  (30 mg, 20 mg, 10 mg), as outlined  in 
Table 1 . 
 
If a relapse  occurs  during  the standardized  taper  (without  evidence  of severe  ischemic  event:  
defined as stroke, vision  loss, critical  limb ischemia) the patient  will be removed from the 
standardized  prednisone taper  regimen  but continue  study  drug for  the remaining  balance  of the 
52-week  study  period,  provided  no contraindication  or criteria  for study  drug withdrawal  is present  
at time of relapse. Once removed  from the standardized  prednisone taper,  subsequent  prednisone  
dose and management  will be at  the discretion  of the treating provider.  If a second relapse  occurs, 
or if a relapse with the accompaniment of an aforementioned  severe  ischemic  event  is observed, 
then the study  drug will be discontinued  and prednisone  and/or  other  alternative treatments will be 
provided as directed and  at the discretion  of the treating  provider.  
 
S
afety  and efficacy  data will be collected  at the time of each  clinical visit.  In the absence of 
disease  worsening, relapse,  or drug toxicity,  subjects  will continue  baricitinib  for 52 weeks.  
Following  completion  of 52 weeks  of treatment, all subjects  will discontinue baricitinib.  For safety  
purposes  a follow -up visit will occur 12 weeks after discontinuation  of the study  drug for all 
13  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 subjects, including  those with earlier  study  drug withdrawal.  
The maximum duration of subject  participation  (including  screening) is  70 weeks.  Completion  of 
the study  is defined as completion  of the 52- week  treatment period and 12-week  follow -up visit. 
 
TABLE  1: Standardized prednisone  taper  
Time  (Week)   Prednisone  dose and tapering  schedule   
Screening:  -6 to -2* 30 20 10 
0 30 20 10 
1 25 17.5 9 
2 22.5 15 8 
3 20 12.5 7 
4 17.5 10 6 
5 15 9 5 
6 12.5 8 5 
7 10 7 4 
8 9 6 4 
9 8 5 3 
10 7 5 3 
11 6 4 2 
12 5 4 2 
13 5 3 1 
14 4 3 1 
15 4 2 0 
16 3 2  
17 3 1  
18 2 1  
19 2 0  
20 1   
21 1   
22 0   
*subjects  must  be on stable  dose of either  30 mg, 20 mg, or 10 mg for 2 weeks  prior to baseline  
(week  0) 
 
 
5.3. Treatment  Arms  and Duration  
This is an open -label,  single -arm study.  All subjects  will receive  the study  drug for a 
maximum  of 52 weeks  in combination  with a standardized  prednisone  taper.  
 
5.4. Type and Number  of Subjects  
The study  population  will be comprised of 15 subjects  with GCA  who have experienced  a 
relapse,  determined by demonstrating  active  disease,  within  6 weeks  of baseline.  Active  
disease will be defined as showing  evidence of signs  or symptoms  attributable  to GCA  
and the  presence of either an ESR ≥ 30 mm/hr  or a CRP  ≥ 10 mg/L.  Subjects  
demonstrating  symptoms  of visual  manifestations  (i.e. double vision, transient  or 
permanent  partial/complete vision  loss),  cerebrovascular compromise  (ischemic  stroke 
deemed  secondary  to GCA), or limb ischemia will be ineligible  for enrollment.  Patients on 
glucocorticoids  for ≥ 4 years  consecutively (without interruption of more than 1 month) will 
be excluded to avoid issues with precipitating secondary adrenal insufficiency and/or  
symptoms of steroid withdrawal from an accelerated standardized glucocorticoid taper.  
 
14  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 5.5. Design Justification  
This is a single -center,  open -label study  to evaluate  the safety of baricitinib  in GCA  and to 
develop preliminary  evidence of efficacy  to support the potential conduct of  a larger 
randomized trial. 
 
The design of this study  is similar  in to other  open- label phase II studies  evaluating biologic  
medications  in subjects  with GCA [29, 38].  
 
Glucocorticoids  represent the only  current standard  of care treatment for patients  with GCA.  As 
such,  prednisone will be continued  during  the initiation  of the study  drug. Subjects  will enter  the 
study  at one of three  doses  of prednisone  (30 mg, 20 mg, or 10  mg). Subjects  should be on a 
stable prednisone  dose  for a minimum  of 2 weeks  (maximum  6 weeks) prior to initiation  of study  
drug. Following  study drug  initiation  prednisone  tapering  will occur  in a standardized  manner.  
 
The 52-week  study  duration  was chosen to assess for safety of medication  use as  well as to 
observe  preliminary  evidence of efficacy  based  on duration of glucocorticoid -free remission  and 
relapse -free survival.  
 
5.6 Dose  Justification  
 
5.6.1.  Baricitinib  
  Subjects will receive  a fixed  dose  of baricitinib,  4 mg oral daily,  for duration of 52 weeks. The 
dose of baricitinib  will remain  constant throughout the study. If  serious  adverse events  occur  
related  to the study  medication, the dose  will not be decreased  rather  the study  drug will be 
withdrawn.  
 
5.6.2.  Justification of Trial Dose  
  Baricitinib  doses of 1 mg, 2mg, 4 mg, and 8 mg have been investigated  in subjects  with 
rheumatoid  arthritis.  Doses  ≤4 mg have  shown  efficacy  in rheumatoid arthritis  with adverse event  
rates  similar to placebo.  However,  adverse event  rates  have  been  noticed to be higher  in subject  
groups  receiving  8 mg [32-34, 39].  
 
 
5.6.3.  Glucocorticoids (prednisone)  
Glucocorticoids  are considered  by consensus  expert opinion  to be the only  class of medications  
that has  shown consistent  efficacy  in GCA  and are considered  standard of care.  As such all 
subjects  will receive background prednisone at time of enrollment and then undergo standardized  
taper.  
 
5.6.4.  Justification of Glucocorticoid Taper  
Consensus  guidelines  recommend an increase in glucocorticoid treatment at the time of relapse 
to a previous  higher  dose,  followed  by repeat attempts  at tapering  once symptoms  have  
improved/stabilized [40]. The protocol  standardized  tapering  regimen  is expedited compared  to 
clinical practice  in order to  assess  preliminary  efficacy  of the study  drug.  
 
Study  subjects  may enter the standardized  taper at  one of three  levels;  30 mg, 20 mg or 10 mg. 
These  strata  were  specifically designed to allow  for appropriate increase of GC in response  to the 
relapsing  disease  in a manner  proportional to the dose of GC the subject  was on at the time of 
relapse. It  is common  practice in treating  relapses  to increase  GC to a prior dose in which  the 
subject  was asymptomatic.  As such the three  tier strata  allows  for clinicians  to increase GC 
appropriately  to achieve symptomatic  control prior  to a standardized taper  instead  of mandating  
15  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 an increase to a required  entry  dose  regardless  of the GC dose at time of relapse.  For example,  it 
would  be considered  unnecessary,  in the majority  of circumstances,  to increase a patient from  5 
mg/day  of prednisone to 30 mg/day  for a moderate relapse  of PMR  symptoms,  however  an 
increase  to 10 mg/day  would  be reasonable.  
 
6. BENEFIT:RISK ASSESSMENT  
 
6.1. Benefit  Assessment  
The efficacy  of baricitinib  in subjects with GCA  has not yet  been  established.  However,  
available  pre-clinical data provide rationale for the use of JAK inhibitors  in GCA.  Furthermore, 
baricitinib  has been  shown to be safe and effective  in patients  with rheumatoid  arthritis. 
Glucocorticoids  are the current  standard  of care treatment  for GCA.  However,  prolonged use 
with GCs is associated with significant risk  of adverse  events.  This study,  if successful, will 
provide  preliminary   evidence that may result  in a new therapy  for GCA  where  there  remains  
a clear  unmet        need.  
 
Subjects will be receiving standard of care treatment with GC during  the study  period, albeit  
with a quicker taper than  is typically  followed in clinical practice. Subjects  will receive high 
level of care throughout the study  and will benefit  from the frequent physical examinations  
and frequent  monitoring  of vital signs  and blood tests.  
 
6.2. Risk  Assessment  
 
There are currently no known contraindications or identified risks requiring special warnings or 
special precautions for use of Baricitinib. Potential risks have been identified and are detailed in the included accompanying Investigator Brochure for Baricitinib (LY3009104). Potential risks 
are summarized below.  
 
Increased Adverse Events Due to Increased Exposures in Patients with Renal Impairment:  
Data from completed studies indicate that subjects with renal impairment have increased exposure to baricitinib. Increased exposure could place a person at increased risk for any other  
risk that is related to exposure.  Investigators will follow dosing  guidelines specified in the 
protocol, and monitor creatinine in study subjects and follow protocol  drug interruption and 
discontinuation criteria.  
 
Myelosuppression: Baricitinib is anticipated to down- regulate the JAK pathway and result in 
changes to white blood cell counts. Although dose- related decreases in neutrophils and other  
phagocytic cell lines have been observed, neutropenia and lymphocytopenia have been observed infrequently. Investigators will monitor leukocyte parameters in study subjects and 
follow  protocol drug interruption and discontinuation criteria.  
 
Increased Infections (including opportunistic infec tions and herpes zoster): In addition to  
the observed decreases in phagocytic cells, JAK inhibition down- regulates cytokines related to  
the immune system. Although infections and infestations were the most frequently reported  
treatment emergent adverse event (TEAE) occurrence of infections typically considered to be opportunistic has  not been observed in clinical studies with baricitinib. The incidence rate of 
herpes zoster  observed in baricitinib studies is within the range reported in observational 
studies and clinical  trials of patients with RA. Investigators will monitor subjects for clinical signs 
and symptoms of infectious events, including herpes zoster. If  a subject is clinically diagnosed 
with herpes zoster, the investigator will interrupt  investigational product, initiate standard of care 
16  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 (including antiviral therapy and relevant  supportive care as appropriate), monitor for multi -
dermatomal involvement or other evidence of  dissemination, and follow subjects until clinic al 
recovery of skin lesions (vesicles).  
 
Increased Cardiovascular Events Due to Changes in Lipids: Increases in mean total  
cholesterol, LDL, HDL, and triglycerides have been noted in studies with baricitinib. Nuclear  
magnetic resonance data indicate that the changes in cholesterol are due primarily to increases 
in the number of HDL particles without a change in HDL particle size; an increase in the number 
of large LDL particles with no significant increases in small, medium -small or very small LDL 
particle s; and an increase in the number of total, as well as medium and small, very low density  
lipoprotein particles. The mean values for the HDL/LDL ratio did not change. These changes in 
lipid particles, particularly in view of the observed increase in large LDL particles, suggest that  
the overall effect on the vasculature may not be atherogenic  Any increase in cholesterol carries a potential risk of  cardiovascular events. Data from patients with rheumatoid arthritis  given 4 to 
15 mg baricitinib QD or 5 mg baricitinib BID have shown no clinically meaningful changes in 
vital signs or ECG parameters  for baricitinib versus placebo. Investigators will monitor  for 
change in lipid profile from baseline to week 16 to assess for the development of hyperlipidemia. If present then institution of hyperlipidemia medications will be suggested if clinically recommended.  
 
Fetal Malformations: Reproductive toxicity was observed in rat and rabbit toxicology studies,  
including maternal toxicity and skeletal malformations in the rat fetus. A decrease in mating performance (fertility and copulation indices) was observed in the male rat fertility study. This  
change occurred without effects on spermatogenesis as assessed by histopathology and  
semen/sperm endpoints. Pregnant women wil l not participate in this study. To manage risks, 
women of reproductive potential should avoid becoming pregnant by using 2 forms of highly 
effective contraceptives while  participating in clinical studies and for 28 days following exposure 
to baricitinib.  Screening for pregnancy will occur during the screening period and at all study 
visits. The population affected by GCA has an average diagnosis age of 72, therefore the likelihood of patients being of childbearing age is of low likelihood.  
 
Emergence of Malignancies Previously Contained by the Immune System: Baricitinib has  
immunomodulatory effects on the immune system. Effects on the immune system may permit  
emergence of malignancies previously contained by the immune system. No signals concerning effect s of baricitinib on malignancy have emerged from clinical studies. Patients should be  
monitored closely for evidence of neoplasia or malignancy, and study drug should be discontinued if such events occur. 
 Accelerated Prednisone Taper: In addition to the information available for Baricitinib, a 
quicker taper  of steroids  may lead to withdrawal side  effects.  Subjects  may experience  GCA  
relapse  during  steroid  taper.  Inclusion  of subjects with stable  disease on study  entry  who are 
able to safely  participate in the steroid taper and have  had duration  of steroids  ≤ 4 years.  
Monitoring  of subjects  during  steroid  taper  and following  discontinuation. Subjects  with severe  
ischemic  manifestations  related  to GCA  will be excluded  from the trial. Disease  relapses  will be 
treated  with increased  dose of GCs.  
 
6.3. Overall  Benefit:Risk Conclusion
 
17  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 While  the efficacy  of baricitinib in subjects  with GCA  is unknown,  pathophysiologic  rationale 
exists  to consider  use in GCA, given  that baricitinib  has been shown  to be safe and  effective  in 
rheumatoid  arthritis.  
 
Taking  into account the measures  taken  to minimize  risk to subjects  participating  in this study,  
the potential  risks identified  in association with baricitinib are justified  by the anticipated  benefits  
that may be afforded to subjects  with GCA.  If baricitinib  is able to sustain  a GC-free remission  
this would significantly  reduce the burden  of GC-related  toxicity,  which  is commonly  
encountered  in long term management of subjects with GCA.  
 
 
7.  SELECTION  OF STUDY  POPULATION  AND  WITHDRAWAL  CRITERIA  
 
7.1 Inclusion  Criteria  
 
Subjects  are eligible  for enrollment in  the study  if the following  inclusion  criteria  are met: 
 
1. Diagnosis  of GCA  defined  by the following  Revised  GCA  Diagnosis  Criteria:  
• Age ≥50 years.  
• History of ESR ≥ 50 mm/hour  or CRP ≥ 10 mg/L.  
• Presence  of at least one of the following: 
o Unequivocal  cranial symptoms  of GCA  (new  onset  localized headache,  scalp  or 
temporal artery  tenderness,  otherwise unexplained mouth or jaw pain upon mastication).  
o Unequivocal  symptoms  of PMR,  defined as shoulder  and/or  hip girdle  pain associated 
with inflammatory  stiffness.  
o Systemic  inflammatory  disease  in which  the presence of the fever  (>38 degrees  Celsius  
for ≥ 7 days ), weight loss  (> 5 lbs or 10% premorbid  weight),  and/or  night  sweats  were  
attributable  to GCA  and no other  cause was identified.  
• Presence  of at least one of the following: 
o Temporal artery  biopsy  revealing features  of GCA.  
o Evidence  of large- vessel  vasculitis  by angiography  or cross- sectional  imaging, including  
but not limited  to magnetic  resonance angiography  (MRA),  computed tomography  
angiography  (CTA),  positron  emission  tomography -computed  tomography  (PET -CT) or 
evidence  of large- vessel  or temporal artery vasculitis  by ultrasound  (US).  
 
2. Relapse  with active  GCA  within  6 weeks  of study  entry  where  active  disease  is 
defined by an ESR ≥30 mm/hr or CRP ≥10 mg/L  AND the presence  of at least one 
of the following:  
• U nequivocal  cranial symptoms  of GCA  (new  onset  or recurrent  localized headache,  scalp  or 
temporal artery  tenderness,  otherwise unexplained mouth or jaw pain upon mastication [i.e., jaw 
claudication]).  
• Unequivocal  symptoms  of PMR,  defined as shoulder  and/or  hip girdle  pain associated  with 
inflammatory stiffness.  
• Other feature(s) judged  by the clinician  investigator to be  consistent  with GCA  or PMR  flares  
(e.g. fever  of unknown  origin,  weight loss,  fatigue/malaise,  etc.) 
 
3. Clinically  stable at baseline visit (study  drug initiation)  such that the subject  is able to safely  
participate  in the standardized  taper  regimen  in the opinion  of the investigator.  
 
 
  
18  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 7.2. Exclusion  Criteria  
  
A subject  will not be eligible for inclusion  in this study  if any of the following  criteria  
apply:  
 
 
1. Presence  of any other autoimmune disease  (such  as systemic  lupus  erythematosus,  
rheumatoid  arthritis,  inflammatory arthritis, other  vasculitides,  scleroderma, polymyositis,  
dermatomyositis, or other  similar systemic  connective tissue  diseases).  
2. Subjects demonstrating symptoms of  active or newly developing  visual loss ( transient  or 
permanent  blindness ) or diplopia attributable to GCA  at the time of relapse. Patients with 
history of visual ischemia present at the time of original GCA diagnosis will still be 
considered eligible if at the time of the documented pre- study relapse there is no evidence 
of change/progression of their known visual deficit that can be attributed to active GCA.  
3. Subjects with history of aortic  dissection, myocardial infarction, or cerebrovascular  attack  
attributable  to GCA.  
4. Has received,  or is expected  to receive,  any live virus vaccinations  (with the exception of herpes 
zoster vaccina tion) within  3 months  before  the first dose  of study  drug,  during  the study,  or within  3 
months  after the last administration of the study  drug. All patients who have not received the 
herpes zoster vaccine at screening will be encouraged (per local guidelines) to do so prior to randomization; vaccination must occur >4 weeks prior to randomization and start of investigational 
product.  Patients will be excluded if they were exposed to herpes zoster  (Zostavax)  vaccination 
within 4 weeks of planned rand omization.  Patients may receive the inactivated (non -live) herpes 
zoster vaccine (Shingrix) at any time prior to or after the study start.  
5. Organ  transplant recipient s. 
6. Have  had a major surgery  within  8 weeks  prior to screening  or will require  major  surgery  during  the 
study  that, in  the opinion  of the investigator  would  pose  an unacceptable risk to the patient.  
7. Have  experienced  any of the following  within  12 weeks  of screening: myocardial infarction  (MI), 
unstable ischemic  heart disease,  stroke, or  New York Heart  Association  Stage  IV heart  failure 
8. Have  a history or presence of cardiovascular  (including but not limited to uncontrolled hypertension) , 
respiratory,  hepatic, gastrointestinal, endocrine,  hematological,  neurological,  or neuropsychiatric  
disorders,  or any other  serious  and/or unstable illness  that, in  the opinion of the investigator, could 
constitute  an unacceptable  risk when taking  investigational  product  or interfere  with the 
interpretation  of data.  
9. A
re  largely  or wholly incapacitated  permitting little or no self-care,  such as being  bedridden or 
confined  to a wheelchair.  
10. Have  an estimated  glomerular filtration  rate (eGFR)  of <50 mL/min/1.73  m². 
11. Have  a known history of chronic  liver disease with the most recent available aspartate  
aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) > 2 times  the upper  limit of normal  (>2 
x ULN)  
12. Known evidence of hyperbilirubinemia with a prior  total bilirubin  ≥1.5 x ULN.  
13. Have  a history of lymphoproliferative  disease; or have  signs or symptoms  suggestive  of possible 
lymphoproliferative disease,  including  lymphadenopathy  or splenomegaly;  or have  active  primary  or 
recurrent malignant  disease;  or have  been  in remission  from clinically  significant  malignancy  for < 5 
years.  
a. Subjects with uterine cervical carcinoma  in situ that has been resected  with no evidence 
of recurrence  or metastatic  disease for at least 3 years  may participate in the study  
b. Subjects with basal  cell or squamous  epithelial skin cancers  which  have been 
completely  resected  with no evidence  of recurrence  for at least 3 years  may participate  
in the study.  
14. Active  infections, or  history  of recurrent infections  or have  required  management of acute  or 
chronic  infections  as evidenced  by any of the following:  
19  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 a. Currently  on any  suppressive therapy  for a chronic  infection (such as tuberculosis,  
cytomegalovirus,  herpes  simplex,  herpes  zoster, or atypical mycobacteria).  
b. History or suspicion of chronic  infection  (e.g. prosthetic  joint infection)  
c. Hospitalization  for treatment  of infection  within  60 days  of baseline  visit 
d. Use of parenteral  (IV or IM) antimicrobials  (antibacterial, antifungals,  antivirals,  or 
antiparasitic  agents)  within  60 days  of baseline  or oral antimicrobials  within  30 days  of 
baseline visit for treatment  of an active  infection. This  does  not include  the use of antibiotics  
for prophylaxis  against pneumocystis pneumonia since this is considered standard of care 
for patients on prednisone ≥  20 mg/day for longer than 3 consecutive months.   
15. Have  had symptomatic  herpes  zoster  infection  within  12 weeks  prior to screening.  
16. Have  a history of disseminated/complicated herpes  zoster (for example, multidermatomal  
involvement,  ophthalmic  zoster  or CNS involvement)  
17. In the opinion  of the investigator,  are at an unacceptable  risk for participating  in the study.  
18. Have  known or documented  diagnosis  of human  immunodeficiency  virus (HIV).  
19. Have  known or documented  primary immunodeficiency.  
20. Have  had household  contact with a person  with active  tuberculosis  (TB) and  did not receive 
appropriate  and documented prophylaxis  for TB. 
21. Have  had evidence of active  TB or have previously  had evidence of active  TB and did not 
receive appropriate  and documented  treatment.  
22. Have  evidence  of latent TB as documented  by a local lab positive  QuantiFERON® -TB Gold  test 
and a normal  chest x -ray, unless  a patient completes  at least 4 weeks  of appropriate treatment  
prior to study  entry  and agrees  to complete  the remainder  of treatment while  in the trial. 
a. If t he  QuantiFERON® -TB Gold  test results  are positive,  the patient will be considered  to 
have latent TB and will be excluded , unless treatment is initiated as outlined above. If the 
test is indeterminate, the  test may be repeated once within  2 weeks  of the initial value  with 
either a second QuantiFERON® -TB Gold Test or with a different interferon gamma release 
assay (i.e. T -Spot tuberculosis test ).. If the  second test result is again  not negative (i.e. 
positive or indeterminate) , the subject  will be considered  to have  latent TB (for purposes  of 
this study)  and will be excluded , unless treatment is initiated as outlined above. 
b. Exceptions  include subjects  with a history of active  or latent  TB who have documented  
evidence  of appropriate treatment  and with no history of re-exposure  since their treatment  
was completed. (Such subjects  would not be required  to undergo  the protocol  specific TB 
testing,  but would  require  a baseline  chest  x-ray). 
23. Have  a positive  test for HBV defined as: 
a. Positive  for hepatitis  B surface antigen  (HBsAg), or 
b. Positive  for anti-hepatitis  B core antibody  (HBcAb)   
If any of the HB tests  have an indeterminate  result,  confirmatory  testing  will be performed  by an 
alternate  method.  
 
24. Have  HCV  (positive  for anti-hepatitis  C antibody  with confirmed  presence  of HCV).  
25. Have  any of the following  specific  abnormalities  at time of relapse or during screening:  
a. ALT or AST > 2 x ULN 
b. Hemoglobin  < 10 g/dL 
c. To tal white  blood cell count (WBC) < 2500  cells/μL)  
d. Neutropenia  (absolute  neutrophil  count [ANC] < 1200  cells/μL  
e. Lymphopenia  (lymphocyte count  < 750 cells/μL)  
f. Thrombocytopenia  (platelets  < 100,000  cells/μL)  
g. eGFR  < 50 mL/min/1.73m²  
 
In the case of any of the aforementioned  laboratory  abnormalities,  the tests  may be 
repeated once  within  approximately  2 weeks  from the initial values,  and values  resulting 
from repeat testing  may be accepted  for enrollment  eligibility  if they meet the  eligibility  
20  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 criterion.  
26. Are pregnant or breast feeding  at the time of screening  or enrollment.  
27. Are females  of childbearing  potential who do not agree  to use  2 forms  of highly  effective birth 
control when engaging  in sexual  intercourse  with a male  partner  while  enrolled in the study  and for 
at least 4 weeks  following the last dose  of the study  drug 
a. Females  of non-childbearing  potential are defined  as women  ≥60 years  of age, women 
≥40 but <60 years  of age what had had cessation of menses  for at least 12 months, or 
whom  who are congenitally  or surgically  sterile  (that is have  had a hysterectomy,  or 
bilateral oophorectomy or  tubal ligation)  
b. The following  birth control methods  are considered highly  effective (the subject  should  
choose 2 to be used  with their male  partner  
i. Oral,  injectable, or implanted  hormonal  contraceptives  
ii. Condom  with spermicidal  foam,  gel film, cream  or suppository  
iii. Occlusive cap (diaphragm  or cervical/vault  caps)  with a spermicidal  foam, gel,  
film, cream  or suppository  
iv. .  Intrauterine  device 
v. Intrauterine system (for example progestin- releasing  coil) 
vi. Vasectomies  male  (with appropriate  post-vasectomy  documentation of the 
absence  of sperm in  the ejaculate)  
28. Are males  who do not agree  to use  2 forms  of highly  effective  birth control  (see above)  while  
engaging  in sexual  intercourse  with females  partners  of childbearing  potential while  enrolled in the 
study  and for 4 weeks  after the last dose of the study  drug.  
29. H ave  donated  more  than a single  unit of blood within  4 weeks  prior to screening  or intend  to 
donate blood  during the course of the study.  
30. Have  a history of chronic  alcohol abuse, IV drug abuse,  or other  illicit drug above  within  the 2  
years  prior to screening.  
31. Have  previously  received baricitinib  for other investigational study.  
32. Are unable  or unwilling  to make themselves  available for the duration  of the study  and/or are 
unwilling  to follow  study  restrictions/procedures  
33. Are currently  enrolled  in, or discontinued within  4 weeks  prior to screening  from any other  
clinical trial involving  an investigational  product or nonapproved  use of a drug  or device or 
concurrently  enrolled in any other  type of medical  research judged  not to be scientifically  or 
medically  compatible  with this study.  
34. Are investigator site  personnel  directly  affiliated  with this study  and/or  their immediate  families.  
Immediate  family  is defined  as a spouse,  parent, child,  or siblin g whether  biological or legally  
adopted.  
35. Have  a chronic  medical illness  requiring  the use of oral of IV glucocorticoid  treatment (e.g.  asthma  
or emphysema) during  the trial or requiring  long term glucocorticoid  treatment  such that they would 
not be able to safely  undergone a standardized  glucocorticoid  taper.  
 
 
7.3. Excluded  Prior/Concomitant  Therapy  
 
Had prior treatment with any of the following: 
• Systemic  immunosuppressives,  including  azathioprine,  oral cyclosporine A, tacrolimus,  
mycophenolate mofetil  and IL-1ra (anakinra)  within  4 weeks  of baseline.  
• Leflunomide within  12 weeks  of baseline  
• Methotrexate within  2 weeks  of baseline 
• Etanercept  within  4 weeks  or within  8 weeks  of baseline with adalimumab, certolizumab,  
golimumab, infliximab  
• Cyclophosphamide within  8 weeks  of baseline 
21  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 • Received any a nti-IL6 agent (tocilizumab,  sirukumab, sarilumab) and had failure to control GCA 
symptoms ( i.e. primary  therapeutic  failure)  at any point prior to study screening/entry .  
• Patients having received an anti -IL6 agent that were intolerant to the medication (e.g. 
injection site or infusion reaction) may still be considered eligible for study enrollment.  
• Patients for which an IL- 6 agent is being stopped for reason other than therapeutic 
failure are also considered eligible for study enrollment.  
• Prior to baseline visit/study drug initiation, the patient must be off of the anti -IL6 agent for 
4 weeks prior to baseline for infusible (intravenous) formulations and 2 weeks prior for 
subcutaneously administered formulations.    
• Rituximab  within  12 months  of baseline or longer  if B cell counts  have not returned  to normal  
range  or baseline  levels  
• Abatacept within  8 weeks  of baseline 
• Tofacitinib   at any point prior to study screening/entry  
• Intravenous  (pulse) doses  of glucocorticoid  defined  as methylprednisolone  > 100 mg/day  within  
8 weeks  of baseline 
• Probenecid within 2 weeks of baseline visit  
 
8.  STUDY  TREATMENT  
 
8.1 Investigational  Product  
 
 Study  Treatment  
Product  name  Baricitinib  
Dosage  form  Tablet  
Unit dose  4 mg 
Route  of administration  Oral 
Dosing  instruction  Daily  
 
The term “study  drug”  and “study  treatment”  are used throughout the protocol to describe  the 
investigational  product received  by the subject  per protocol  design (i.e. barcitinib 4 mg oral tablet).  
 
Baricitinib  will be supplied  by Eli Lilly [investigational product  (IP) manufacturer] . The tablets  are 
composed of baricitinib  free base  and the inactive  ingredients  microcrystalline  cellulose, mannitol, 
croscarmellose  sodium  and magnesium stearate. Each  tablet contains  baricitinib  equivalent to 4 mg of 
the free base compound.  The supplied tablets will be held  at the  Mayo  Clinic  Outpatient Research  
Pharmacy  during  the duration of the study  and dispensed  to the patient  at each scheduled  visit with 
sufficient  doses  until the subsequent scheduled visit. The maximum amount  of supply  provided  will be 2 
months.  The medication  will be stored  according  to specification  on the label. Patients  will keep a diary 
of all days on which  baricitinib  is taken to assess  compliance at each study  visit. 
 
 
9. STUDY  PROCEDURES  
 
9.1. Recruitment  
Recruitment  will occur  through  the clinical practices  of the investigators at the study  site. Subject  
enrollment at the study  site will not occur until  Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB)  approval of this protocol  
and the informed consent  form (ICF)  has been  obtained.  Details  of the goals  of the research  and the 
risk and benefits  of the protocol  will be reviewed  with each potential study  subject.  Recruitment  will 
occur  by physicians  or study  coordinators.  
 
22  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 Subjects who decline participation  will continue to be followed  by their current  physician as deemed 
appropriate.  
9.2. Screening  
This research  study  will be explained in lay language  to each potential research subject.  The subject   
will sign an informed  consent  form before  undergoing  any screening  inves tigations  (including  labs).  The 
screening  period  will last for a minimum  of two weeks  and a maximum  of six weeks.  
 
9.3. Screening  Failures  
Screen  failures  are defined  as subjects  who consent to participate in the trial but  are not enrolled  or do 
not receive study  drug. In order to ensure transparent reporting  of screen  failure  subjects, to meet  the 
Consolidated  Standards  of Reporting Trials  (CONSORT)  publishing requirements  and to respond to 
queries  from regulatory  authorities,  a minimal  set of screen  failure  information  will be collected  and 
retained including  demographics, screen  failure  details  and eligibility  criteria.  
 
Subjects who are not able to achieve  a clinically  stable dose (as outlined  in the tiered  entry description),  
for a minimum of two weeks  during  the screening  period  will be considered  screen  failures.It  is anticipated  
that for each  patient  enrolled,  2-3 subjects  will need to be screened.  Therefore,  it is expected  that 30-45 
patients  will be screened  in order  to enroll  15 patients.  
 
9.4. Retesting  
If the subject has  signed the Informed Consent Form (ICF)  and failed  to meet  at least one entry  criterion,  
the site may retest  laboratory values  once during  the screening  period.  Laboratory  parameters  can only  
be re-tested  once. If  a different laboratory  parameter  is found to be out of range in the re-test, no further 
testing  is allowed and the patient will be ineligible.  Re-testing  may be performed  to determine  eligibility  
within  the screening  window.  Subjects  that have  laboratory values  that do not meet the entry  criteria  
following  the re-test are deemed  a screen  failure. A Quantiferon- TB® test can only be repeated once if 
initial is  indeterminate. If  second  test is indeterminate  or positive  then the subject is  considered  a screen 
failure.  
 
9.5. Enrollment  
Women: GCA  occurs  more commonly in women  than men (approximate  2:1 ratio)  and as such  it is 
anticipated  that more women  will be enrolled  than men.  
Pregnant women: Pregnant  women  are excluded from this study.  
Pediatric  Subjects : GCA,  by classification, occurs in  subjects aged  ≥ 50 years  of age. As such pediatric  
subjects  are not included  in this study.  
Underrepresented  Ethnic/Racial Minorities :GCA  has been reported to occur in most  ethnicities;  however,  it 
is most common  in Caucasians. There will be no exclusion  of any subject  based  on sex, ethnicity,  race,  or 
socioeconomic  status.  
 
9.6. Visit Frequency/Visit  Schedule  
 
Subjects will be evaluated for potential eligibility.  Once eligibility is deemed  likely , they will be 
consented  and undergo screening.  Labs  pertaining  to determination  of eligibility  will be obtained  
during  the screening  period [ QuantiFERON -TB, Hepatitis  panel, pregnan cy test (if applicable)]. If 
standard of care labs (complete  blood  count, inflammatory markers, creatinine,  transaminases ) 
were performed at time of observed relapse these will be used for assessment of their respective 
eligibility laboratory parameters. If they were not drawn at time of observed relapse they will be 
drawn during the screening period. Standard of care labs will  be obtained at each  follow up visit, 
including the 12-week  post treatment  visit (W64). Lipid profiles will be obtained at week 0 and 
week 16.   
 
Imaging  can be performed  in the study  period  with non-invasive  angiography  if clinically  indicated  and is 
23  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
 not considered a requirement for  screening  or necessary  for study  enrollment. Computed  tomog raphy  
angiography  (CTA) and  magnetic  resonance angiography  (MRA)  is recommended at time of diagnosis  
for patients  with GCA  (level of evidence Class  I, Level C)  [41]. If  large  vessel  involvement  is observed  on 
advanced imaging,  follow  up scan at 12-15 months  is recommended. 
 
Upon  enrollment ( Week  0), the study  drug will be initiated  and standardized  GC taper  begun.  A follow -
up visit will occur at  week 4 (W4), week 8 (W8), then every 8 weeks until week 52 (W52) when study 
drug will be discontinued. After study drug is completed a 12-week follow  up visit will occur ( W64).   
Visit dates can by ±4 days from the assigned week to allow for  subject  travel and investigator  availability. 
A summary  of the visit schedule  can be  seen  in the Table 2.  
 
Table 2:  Visit Schedule 
 
Study  Date  W=Week  (±4 days)  Observed  
Relapse  Screening  
(up to 42 
days)   
W0  
W4  
W8  
W16  
W24  
W32  
W40  
W52  
W64 
Study  drug  initiation    X         
Prednisone  taper  initiation    X         
Office  visit X  X X X X X X X X X 
Data  Forms             
Informed  consent  X           
Eligibility  review  X    X X         
Demographics   X          
Baseline  medical  history   X          
Medications   X          
Tobacco  use  X          
Patient  Global  Assessment    X X X X X X X X X 
Physician  Global  Assessment    X X X X X X X X X 
Vascular  Damage  Index    X       X  
Birmingham  Vasculitis  Activity  Score    X X X X X X X X X 
Imaging             
CTA or MRA  Chesta  X          
Labs             
Hepatitis  panelb  X*          
Tuberculosis test ( Quantiferon -TB or T-
spot TB)   X*          
Lipid  profile    X   X      
Pregnancy  testc  X X X X X X X X X X 
CBC w/diff  X  X X X X X X X X X 
ESR X  X X X X X X X X X 
CRP X  X X X X X X X X X 
ALT X 
 
  X X X X X X X X X 
Creatinine  w/EGFR  X  X X X X X X X X X 
As necessary             
Hospitalization   X X X X X X X X X X 
Adverse  event  report   X X X X X X X X X X 
Death   X X X X X X X X X X 
Protocol deviation   X X X X X X X X X X 
Study therapy discontinuation   X X X X X X X X X X 
24  Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
   aComputed  tomography angiography (CTA)  and magnetic  resonance angiography  (MRA)  at physician discretion  if has not had previously  or at baseline  of 
diagnosis.  If large vessel  involvement  observed  on advanced  imaging,  follow  up scan  at 12-15 months is recommended.  These  imaging  studies are not part of 
protocol  screening  requirements  and are considered  standard of care (Class  I, Level C) [41].  
  bHepatitis  panel  consists of the following:  Hepatitis  B surface  antigen  (HBsAg), anti-hepatitis  B surface  antibody  (anti -HBs),  anti-hepatitis  B core antibody  
(anti -HBc)  total,  and anti- hepatitis  C (anti -HCV).  
  cFor women  of child  bearing  potential.  Subjects  of non-child  bearing  potential  as defined  in exclusion  criteria  are exempt  from  pregnancy screening.  
*For patients with hepatitis panel and/or tuberculosis testing (Quantiferon -TB or T -Spot TB test) performed within 6 months prior to study entry screening for  
other clinical purpose, if th ese tests were confirmed  negative and the patient has had no known exposure to either hepatitis or tuberculosis and the patient 
demonstrates no clinical symptomatology suggestive of these conditions then the prior negative result (within the aforementioned  time frame) will be 
considered as their baseline negative evaluation  and repeat testing for these conditions during the screening period is not required.  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
25   
9.7. Screening  and Critical  Baseline  Assessments  
Cardiovascular  medical  history/risk  factors (as  detailed  in the case report form ) will 
be assessed  at screening.  
 
The following  demographic  parameters  will be captured:  year of birth,  sex, and 
ethnicity.  
 
Medical/medication/family  history will be assessed  as related  to the inclusion/exclusion  criteria.  
 
9.8. Efficacy  
Efficacy of baricitinib  in GCA  will be assessed  from the presence of GCA  activity including  
investigator  assessment  of signs  and symptoms  of GCA  (new  onset  localized headache,  scalp  or 
temporal artery  tenderness,  ischemia -related  vision  loss [permanent  vision  loss due to AION, 
amaurosis  fugax,  episodic  blurry  vision],  diplopia,  or otherwise unexplained  mouth  or jaw pain upon 
mastication  [i.e., jaw claudication],  PMR  symptoms  [shoulder  and/or hip girdle pain associated with 
inflammatory  stiffness],  and other features  such as new  or worsened  extremity claudication,  and 
fever  of unknown  origin), and  laboratory results  for serum  ESR and CRP levels.  
 
9.9.  Patient’ s and  Physician’ s Global Assessment  of Disease Activit y  
The Patient’s  and Physician’s  Global Assessments  of Disease  Activity  will be recorded on a visual  
analog scale  (VAS). The scale  for each ranges  from 0 to 100 with the subject’s  disease  activity 
assessment ranging from “very well” (0) to “very poor”  (100).  The scale  for the physician’s  
assessment  ranges  from “no GCA  activity”  (0) to “extremely  active  GCA” (100). The evaluating  
physician and subject must  complete  the global assessment independently  of each  other. The 
physician should  preferably  be the same  person  at every study  visit for a given  subject.  
 
9.10.  Pain  Assessment  
Subjects will be asked  to assess their average pain now on a V AS ranging  from “no pain” (0) to “the 
worst  possible pain” (100).  
 
9.11.  Disease  activity/damage  
The Vasculitis  Damage Index  (VDI)  will be assessed  at baseline  (M0) and the visit following  
completion of study  drug (M12). The  Birmingham  Vasculitis  Activity Score (BVAS)  will be recorded at 
all visits  including the 12-week  follow  up visit (M15).  
 
9.12.  Study  Completion  
A completed subject is  one that has completed the screening  period, been enrolled  in the 52- week  
open -label enrollment period  and has attended the 12-week  post-treatment follow  up visit. The end of 
the study  is defined as the last subject’s  last visit. 
 
 
10. WITHDRAWAL/STOPPING CRITERIA  
 
10.1.  Interruption  of Investigational  Product  
In some  circumstances, it may be necessary to temporarily  interrupt treatment as a result  of an adverse  
event  (AEs) or abnormal  laboratory values  that may  have an unclear  relationship to investigational  
product.  Rete st timing  and frequency  is at the investigator’s  discretion.  
 
Investigational product  must  be held in the following  situations  and may be resumed  as noted  in the 
TABLE  3. 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
26   
Table 3. Criteria  for Temporary  Interruption  of Investigational Product  
 
Hold  investigational product if the 
following  laboratory  test results occur:  Investigational product may be resumed  
when:  
WBC  count  <2000  cells/ µL WBC  count  ≥2500  cells/ µL 
ANC  <1000 cells/µL ANC  ≥1200  cells/µL  
Lymphocyte  count  <500  cells/µL  Lymphocyte  count  ≥750 cells/µL  
Platelet  count  <75,000/ µL Platelet  count  ≥100,000/ µL 
eGFR  <40 mL/min/1.73  m2 (from serum 
creatinine)  eGFR  ≥50 mL/min/1.73  m2 
ALT* or AST >5 x ULN ALT and AST return  to <2 x ULN,  and 
investigational product  is not considered to be  
the cause  of enzyme  elevation  
Hemoglobin  <8 g/dL Hemoglobin ≥10 g/dL 
Symptomatic  herpes  zoster  All skin lesions  have  crusted  and are resolving  
Severe  infection  that, in the opinion  of the 
investigator, merits  the IP being  discontinued  Resolution  of infection  
Abbreviations:   ALT = alanine  aminotransferase;  ANC  = absolute  neutrophil  count;  AST = 
aspartate  aminotransferase;  eGFR  = estimated  glomerular  filtration  rate; IP  = investigational  
product;  ULN = upper  limit of normal;  WBC  = white  blood  cell. 
*ALT will be used for monitoring purposes . If abnormal then AST will be checked for further 
assessment of abnormalities. Alkaline phosphatase and total bilirubin will be obtained if 
evidence of liver disease present on ALT and/or AST to assess for need of drug interrup tion 
10.2.  Permanent  Discontinuation  of Study  Drug  
Any subject who is permanently  discontinued from investigational product  for an AE or abnormal  
laboratory result  should have  the reason  for investigational product discontinuation  reported  as the AE 
or abnormal laboratory  value.  
 
Patients  will discontinue study  drug if the following disease related  clinical  events  occur  during  the 
study  period:  
 
• Unprovoked venous thromboembolism (deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism)  
 
• GCA  relapse  occurs  with objective  evidence of severe  ischemic  event (vision loss, stroke,  
critical limb  ischemia)  
 
• Second GCA  relapse occurs  during study  period 
 
Patients will discontinue study drug following temporary interruption of the study drug if  either of  the 
following occurs.  
 
• Study drug has been held due to a study drug -related laboratory abnormality necessitating 
temporary interruption (Table 3) and the laboratory abnormality that led to the investigational hold 
has not returned to a level at  which the investigational product can be resumed (Table 3) by 4 
weeks (28 days) for renal function (as determined by eGFR) or  6 weeks  for the remaining 
laboratory parameters (42 days) from the date investigational hold commenced. For example:  
Example 1:  a patient would be withdrawn from the study if the  renal function declined due to 
study drug (i.e. not intercurrent illness) and the  eGFR decreased to 30 mL/min/1.73m2 and hold 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
27  commenced on January 1st.but the eGFR had not returned to ≥ 50 mL/min/1.73  m2 by January 
29th. Example 2:  a patient would be withdrawn from the study if the WBC count decreased below 
<2000 cells/ µL on  January 1st and did not return to a value of > 2500  cells/ µL by February 11th.   
  
• If following a study drug interruption for an identified laboratory abnormality (Table 3) the same 
laboratory parameter that led to study drug interruption is again affected by reinitiation of study 
drug. For example, platelet count prior to study drug was 150,000/uL but decreases to 50,000/uL 
while on the study drug. Study drug is held and the platelet count improves to 125,000/uL 
allowing reinitiation of study drug. Following reinitiation the platelet count decrease again to 
50,000/uL.  
•  
 
In addition  discontinuation  of the study  drug will occur  if any one of the following  laboratory  
abnormalities  occur:  
 
• ALT or AST >8 x ULN 
• ALT or AST >5 x ULN for more  than 2 weeks  after temporary  interruption  of 
investigational  product  
• ALT or AST >3 x ULN and either total bilirubin level (TBL) >2  x ULN or INR >1.5 x ULN 
• ALT or AST >3 x ULN with  the appearance  of fatigue,  nausea,  vomiting, right upper - 
quadrant pain or tenderness, fever,  rash,  and/or eosinophilia (>5%)  
• Alkaline  phosphatase (ALP)  >3 x ULN 
• ALP >2.5 x ULN and  TBL >2 x ULN 
• ALP >2.5 x ULN with the appearanc e of fatigue, nausea,  vomiting, right upper quadrant  
pain or tenderness,  fever, rash, and/or  eosinophilia (>5%).  
Subjects  should  be discontinued from the investigational  product  in the following  circumstances:  
• WBC count  <1000  cells/ µL 
• ANC <500  cells/µL 
• Lymphocyte  count  <200  cells/µL 
• Hemoglobin  <6.5 g/dL 
For lab values  that meet permanent  discontinuation  thresholds,  the study  drug will be discontinued  
unless,  in the opinion of the investigator, the lab abnormality  is due to intercurrent  illness  or another  
identified  factor.   Lab tests  may be repeated within  1 week  to confirm whether  discontinuation  criteria  
have been met.  Furthermore,  if investigational product  is not discontinued due to intercurrent  illness,  
the investigator must confirm the lab value  no longer  meets  discontinuation  thresholds  following  the 
resolution  of the intercurrent  illness  or other  identified factor . 
 
I
n addition, subjects  will be discontinued  from investigational product in the following  circumstances:  
• Pregnancy  
• Malignancy  (exce pt for successfully treated  basal cell  or squamous  epithelial skin 
cancers)  
Some  possible  reasons  that may lead to permanent  discontinuation  include:  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
28  • Enrollment  in any other  clinical  trial involving  an investigational  product or  enrollment in any 
other  type of medical research judged  not to be scientifically  or medically  compatible with this 
study  
• Participation  in the study  needs  to be  stopped  for medical,  safety, regulatory,  or other reasons  
consistent with applicable laws,  regulations, and  good clinical practice  (GCP)  
• Investigator Decision 
o the investigator decides  that the patient  should  be discontinued  from the study  
• Subject Decision  
o the subject  requests  to be withdrawn  from the study.  
 
The following  actions  must  be taken in relation  to a subject that fails  to attend  the clinic  for a required  
study  visit. 
o Site must  attempt  to contact the subject  and re-schedule  the missed  visit as soon as 
possible  
o The site must  counsel the  subject on  the importance of maintaining the assigned  visit 
schedule  and ascertain  whether  or not the subject  wishes  to and/or  should  continue in 
the study  
o In cases  deemed  “lost to follow -up”, the investigator must  make  every effort to regain  
contact with the subject (up  to 3 phone  calls to listed  number  and if necessary a certified  
letter to last known  mailing  address  or local equivalent  methods).  These contact  
attempts will be documented  in the medical record.  
o Should  the subject  be unreachable,  only then will the subject  be considered to have  
withdrawn  from the study  with a primary  reason  of “lost to follow -up”. 
 
Subjects  who have  withdrawn  prematurely  from the study  should attend  an early  withdrawal  visit and 
undergo the 12 week  post-study  drug follow -up period  for evaluation  of safety.  
 
Subjects withdrawn  prematurely  from the study  can be replaced  by a new  study  entry  if the study  is still 
openly  enrolling  (that is has not reached  enrollment  of 15 subjects).  
 
 
11. STUDY  ENDPOINTS  
 
Primary endpoint:  The primary  endpoint  is safety.  
 
The measure  by which  this will be determined  is the following: 
• Incidence of adverse  events  (AEs) and  serious  adverse 
events  (SAEs) related  to the study  drug 
Secondary endpoint  The secondary endpoint  preliminary  efficacy  of baricitinib  (4mg,  
oral, daily)  in patients  with relapsing  GCA.  
 
The measures  by which  this will determined are the following:  
 
 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
29   
 
 
 
12. STUDY  MONITORING AND  ADVERSE EVENT  REPORTING  
 
12.1 Study Monitoring, Auditing and Inspecting  
 
12.1.1 Study Monitoring Plan  
As a service to the sponsor -investigator and to assist with the sponsor regulatory obligation to monitor 
study progress, this study will be periodically monitored during the conduct of the trial by staff from the Mayo Clinic Office of Research Regulatory Support  (ORRS) .  Clinical trial monitoring may include but 
will not necessarily be limited to review of the study regulatory documents, source data and database 
entries throughout the duration of the study to help ensure the validity and integrity of the 
data.   Original informed consent forms will be reviewed. Written monitoring reports with findings and 
recom mended and suggested corrective actions will be provided to the sponsor . 
 
 
12.1.2 Auditing and Inspecting  
The investigator will permit study -related monitoring by ORRS and audits by the IRB Compliance Unit, if 
indicated, as well as inspections by authorized representative of government regulatory agencies such as 
FDA of all study related documents (e.g. source documents, regulatory documents, data collection instruments, drug accountability records and study data etc.).   The investigator will ensur e access is 
granted for inspection of applicable study -related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic laboratories, etc.).  
 
Participation as an investigator in this study implies acceptance of potential inspection by government 
regulatory authorities and applicable compliance offices.  
 
12.1.3 Ethical Considerations  
This study is to be conducted according to applicable United States government regulations and 
Institutional research policies and procedures. 
 This protocol and any amendments as well as subject materials such as the informed consent/assent 
forms will be submitted to a properly constituted Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board (IRB for review 
and formal approval.   The decision(s) of the IRB concerning the conduct of the study will be made in 
writing to the sponsor -investigator before commencement of this study.  
 
All subjects for this study will be provided a consent (or assent) form describing this study and providing 
sufficient information for subjects to make an informed decision about their participation in this study.   The 
•Relapse -free survival at week  52 
•Relapse -free survival at week 24 
•Duration  of glucocorticoid- free remission  
•Number  of relapses  per subject  over time  
•Change from baseline  erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR) to end of study  
•Change from baseline  C-reactive  protein to end of study  
•Glucocorticoid  dose (mg) at week  52 compared  to 
enrollment  
•Change in BVAS from baseline to end of study  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
30  formal consent of a subject, using the IRB approved consent or assent form, must be obtained before 
subject undergoes any study procedure.  The consent form must be signed and dated by the subject or 
the subject’s legally authorized representative, as well as the individual obtaining the informed consent  
 
12.2.  Safety  
The Study  Principal  Investigator has  primary  oversight responsibility  for the clinical trial. All co- 
investigators  will report  AEs and SAEs to the principal  investigator upon alert of occurrence. Safety  
will be assessed  from the documentation  of adverse  events  and review  of vital signs  and laboratory 
assessments  including  complete blood counts,  serum chemistry  profiles,  fasting  serum  lipids,  and 
hepatitis  B and C serologies . Adverse events  (including serious  and opportunistic  infections,  
cardiovascular  events,  gastrointestinal perforations,  hepatic  laboratory abnormalities, and cytopenia) 
will be monitored  on a regular and/or event -driven basis  throughout the study.  
 
The definitions  of an adverse event (AE) or  serious  adverse  event (SAE)  in the following  section  will 
comply  with the International Council  for Harmonisation  of Technical Requirements  for Pharmaceuticals  
for Human  Use (ICH)  guidelines  for good clinical practice  and applies  the standards  set forth  in the 
National  Cancer Institute (NCI)  Common  Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse  Events  version  4.0. 
 
12.3.  Adverse  Events  
An adverse event  (AE) will be defined  as any unfavorable and unintended sign (including  abnormal  
laboratory  finding),  symptom,  or disease  temporally  associated  with the use of a medical treatment or 
procedure that may or may not be considered related  to the medical treatment or procedure.  
 
Events meeting AE definition  include:  
 
Any abnormal  laboratory test results  (hematology,  clinical chemistry,  or urinalysis)  or other safety  
assessments  (e.g., ECGs,  radiological scans, vital signs  measurements), including  those that worsen  
from baseline, and  felt to be clinically  significant  in the medical and  scientific  judgment  of the 
investigator.  
• Exacerbation  of a chronic  or intermittent pre- existing  condition  including  either an 
increase  in frequency  and/or intensity  of the condition.  
• Signs,  symptoms,  or the clinical sequelae  of a suspected  interaction.  
• Signs, symptoms,  or the clinical sequelae  of a suspected  overdose  of either  study  
treatment  or a concomitant medication  (overdose  per se will not be reported  as an 
AE/SAE  unless  this is an intentional overdose taken  with possible  suicidal/self -harming  intent.  
This should  be reported  regardless  of sequelae).  
• "Lack  of efficacy" or  "failure  of expected  pharmacological action" per  se will not be reported  as 
an AE or SAE.  However,  the signs  and symptoms  and/or  clinical  sequelae resulting  from lack of 
efficacy  will be reported  if they  fulfil the  definition  of an AE or SAE.  
 
Events that do not meet  AE definition  include:  
 
Any clinically  significant  abnormal laboratory  findings  or other  abnormal safety assessments  which  are 
associated  with the underlying  disease, unless  judged  by the investigator to be  more  severe  than 
expected  for the subject’s  condition.  
• The disease/disorder  being  studied  or expected  progression,  signs,  or symptoms  of the 
disease/disorder being studied,  unless  more  severe  than expected  for the subject’s  condition.  
• Medical or  surgical procedure  (e.g., endoscopy,  appendectomy): the condition that leads  to the 
procedure is an AE. 
• Situations  where  an untoward medical occurrence did not occur (social and/or convenience 
admission  to a hospital).  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
31  • Anticipated day-to-day fluctuations  of pre-existing  disease(s)  or condition(s)  present or detected  
at the start of the study  that do not worsen.  
 
12.4.  Serious Adverse  Event  
Defined  according  to 21CFR  312.32. A serious  adverse event  (SAE)  is any untoward medical  
occurrence  that at any dose 
• Results  in death 
• Is life-threatening 
• Requires  hospitalization  or prolongs  existing  hospitalization  
• Is a congenital anomaly/bi rth defect  
• An important medical event  may be considered an SAE when,  based  upon appropriate medical 
judgment, it may jeopardize the subject and  may require  medical or surgical intervention to  
prevent  one of the outcomes  listed  above  
 
12.5.  Toxicity  Grading  of Adverse Events  
Toxicity  grades  for AE will be assessed  using  the National  Cancer Institute (NCI)  Common  Terminology  
Criteria  for Adverse  Events  (CTCAE). AEs will be recorded  and graded 1 to 5 according  to the CTCAE  
grade outlined below:  
• Grade 1 = mild adverse  event  
• Grade 2 = moderate  adverse event  
• Grade 3 = severe  and undesirable adverse event  
• Grade 4 = life-threatening  or disabling adverse  event  
• Grade 5 = death 
 
12.6.  Time  Period and Frequency  for Collecting Event  Information  
• AEs and SAEs  will be collected from the start of Study  Treatment until  the 12 week  follow -up 
visit and documented at time of occurrence  and each study  visit. 
 
• Medical occurrences  that begin  prior to the start of study  treatment  but after obtaining informed 
consent may be recorded  on the Medical History/Current  Medical Conditions  section  and will not 
be considered  treatment  related  side effects.  
 
 
• Any SAEs  assessed  as related  to study  participation  or related  to the investigational product  
will be recorded  from the time a subject consents  to participate  in the study  up to and 
including any follow -up contact.  
 
• All SAEs  will be recorded and reported  to the Sponsor (Mayo Clinic) and Eli  Lilly [Investigational 
Product (IP) Manufacturer ] within  24 hours.  
 
• Investigators are not obligated to actively seek  AEs or SAEs  in former study  subjects (those  
whom  have completed  the study  including the 12 weeks  post-study  drug visit). However,  if the 
investigator learns  of any SAE,  including  a death,  at any time  after a subject  has been  
discharged from the study,  and he/she considers  the event  reasonably  related  to the study  
treatment  or study  participation, the investigator must  promptly  notify Mayo Clinic  (Sponsor) 
and the IP manufacturer.  
 
12.7 Method  of Detecting AEs  and SAEs  
Open -ended  and non-leading  verbal  questioning of the subject  will be used  to inquire  about  AE 
occurrence. Such questions  include:  
• “How are you feeling?”  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
32  • “Have  you had any (other) medical problems since  your last visit/contact?”  
• “Have  you taken  any new medicines,  other than  those provided in this study,  since  your last 
visit/contact?”  
 
 
12.8.  Follow -up of  AEs and SAEs  
After the initial AE/SAE  report, the investigator is  required  to proactively  follow  each  subject  at 
subsequent  visits/contacts. All  SAEs,  and non-serious  AEs of special interest  will be followed until 
resolution, until  the condition  stabilizes,  until the event  is otherwise  explained,  or until the subject is  lost 
to follow -up. All SAEs  and their outcomes  will be reported to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
 
AEs of special interest  include  total or partial blindness,  limb claudication,  and scalp  or tongue necrosis.  
In addition, severe  disease flares, including  hospitalizations  will be monitored.  
 
Other  AEs of special interest  for baricitinib  are hematologic  laboratory  abnormalities, hepatobiliary 
laboratory  abnormalities  and lipid parameter  abnormalities . Changes in these values leading to 
temporary or permanent discontinuation of the study drug will be reported as an AE. Additional events 
of interest include serious  CV events,  infections  and malignancies.  
 
All initial reports  of cardiovascular  AEs (myocardial infarction,  stroke, death,  hospitalization for angina,  
hospitalization  for TIA), newly  identified  malignancies  and active  TB will be recorded by the 
investigational staff  within  24 hours of their knowledge of the event even  if these  events  do not meet  
the definition  of a SAE.  
 
Glucocorticoid -related  AEs such as diabetes  mellitus,  osteoporosis,  fractures, infection,  glaucoma,  and 
cataracts  among  others  will be evaluated  in relation  to steroid exposure  and baseline  risk. 
  
12.9.  Cardiovascular  and Death  Events  
All cardiovascular  events  and all deaths, whether or not they are considered  SAEs,  will be documented. 
Major  Adverse  Cardiovascular  Events  (MACE),  defined as myocardial  infarction,  stroke, death, 
hospitalization  for unstable angina, and  hospitalization  for TIA, will be collected . 
 
Definition  of Cardiovascular  Events : 
Investigators will be required  to fill out an adverse  event form for the following  cardiovascular  events  if 
they occur in the subject  following  the initiation  of study  drug.  
• Myocardial infarction/unstable  angina 
• Congestive  heart failure  
• Arrhythmias  
• Valvulopathy  
• Pulmonary hypertension 
• Cerebrovascular  events/stroke  and transient  ischemic  attack  
• Peripheral arterial thromboembolism  
• Deep  vein thrombosis/pulmonary embolism  
• Revascularization 
 
12.10.  Regulatory Reporting Requirements for SAEs  
Prompt  notification by the investigator  to the Sponsor  and the FDA  of all SAEs  related to study  
treatment  is essential so that legal obligations  and ethical  responsibilities  towards  the safety of subjects  
and the safety  of a product  under  clinical investigation are met. Upon identification or knowledge of a 
SAE, investigators will alert the Sponsor  and the IP manufacturer  within 24 -hours through MedWatch 
reporting form.  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
33   
The Sponsor has a legal  responsibility  to notify  both the local regulatory  authority  and other  regulatory  
agencies  about the safety  of a product  under  clinical investigation . The S ponsor  will comply  with 
regulatory  requirements  relating  to safety  reporting  to the regulatory  authority,  Institutional Review  
Board (IRB)/Independent  Ethics  Committee  (IEC) and  investigators.  
 
Investigator safety  reports  are prepared  for suspected unexpected serious  adverse  reactions  according  
to local  regulatory  requirements  and Eli Lilly policy  and are forwarded to investigators  as necessary.  
 
An investigator  who receives  an investigator safety  report  describing  a SAE(s) or other  specific  safety  
information  (e.g., summary  or listing  of SAEs)  from the IP manufacturer  will notify  the IRB/IEC, if 
appropriate  according  to local  requirements.  
 
Expedited Adverse Event Reporting Criteria to the IP Manufacturer (Eli Lilly)  
The PI or designee will report all Serious Adverse Events to  the IP Manufacturer within 24 hours of the 
Investigator(s) becoming aware of them.  
Fax all SAE forms to: Lilly Global Patient Safety at 866 -644-1697  
Additionally, the IP manufacturer will be provided with copies of all investigational product -related 
reports submitted to regulatory authorities. 
 
12.11.  Pregnancy  
Given  the age group  under  investigation,  pregnancy  during  the course  of the study  is unlikely.  
Nevertheless,  if a pregnancy  is reported  then the investigator  will inform  the IP manufacturer, Eli Lilly, 
within  24 hours  of learning  of the pregnancy.  
 
Female subjects  who become pregnant during  the study  must  have  study  drug withdrawn  immediately  
and be withdrawn  from the  study.  An early  withdrawal  visit and 12-week  follow -up will still occur.  
Information regarding the patient and fetal outcome for patients that become pregnant during the study 
will continue until the end of the pregnancy and result of the final outcome will be reported to the IP 
manufacturer for monitoring pur poses.   
 
12.12.  Physical  Exams  
A complete  physical  examination  will be conducted  during  screening and will include,  at a minimum,  
assessment  of the Cardiovascular,  Respiratory, Gastrointestinal,  Vascular  and Neurological systems.  
Height and weight will also be measured and recorded.  
 
A brief physical examination will be conducted  at all other  time points and include,  at a minimum  
assessments  of the skin, lungs,  CV system,  and abdomen (liver  and spleen).  Investigators  will pay 
special attention  to clinical signs  related to previous  serious  illnesses.  
 
12.13.  Vital Signs  
Vital signs will  be measured  in seated position  and will include  temperature,  systolic  and diastolic  blood 
pressure  and pulse  rate. 
 
12.14.  Clinical  Safety  Laboratory  Assessments  
All laboratory tests  with values  that are considered  clinically  significantly  abnormal  during  participation  
in the study  or within  12 weeks  after the last dose  of study  treatment  will be repeated  until the values  
return  to normal or baseline.  
 
13. SAMPLE SIZE AND  COMPUTATION  RATIONALE  
The study  is intended  to examine  safety  and to explore preliminary  signal of efficacy. The sample  size 
of 15 was based upon a sufficient number  of subjects to begin such explorations  prior to pursuit of a 
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
34  randomized controlled  trial. With an accrual  of 15 evaluable  subjects, there is a 95% confidence  that 
any AE (or SAE) with an incidence  of at least 18% will be reported.  The standard  error of the estimate  
of the incidence of reported  AEs will not exceed  13%.  
 
A historical cohort of patients with biopsy -proven GCA from the Mayo Clinic has recently been reported 
[16]. In this large single -institution cohort, we found the rate of second relapse in the subset of patients 
with at least one relapse was 50% at one year (or 50% relapse-free survival at one year ). These relapses 
occurred during GC treatment performed at the discretion of the treating provider and patient s were not 
subject to an accelerated taper, thus likely overestimating relapse -free survival at one year after initial 
relapse. A recent completed clinical trial evaluating the use of abatacept in GCA with standardized taper 
has been completed and preliminary results are available [42] . Relapse- free survival at one year in the 
placebo group was 31%  and 48% in the treatment group. The relapse- free survival in Langford et al.  
study may also be slightly overestimated because all patients received three months of study drug prior to undergoing a standardized GC taper. Prior clinical trials in GCA have observed one year relapse -free 
survival among placebo groups to range from 10- 29% [23,24,43] . With a sample size of 15 patients, an 
exact binomial test will have 80% power to detect an additional 37% above the expected relapse- free rate 
with a 0.05 one sided- significance level. Based on  available clinical trial data and the preliminary results 
from Langford et al. [42]  a conservative expected relapse- free survival in patients  with relapsing GCA  
receiving only GC and  undergoing an accelerated taper would be a 30% relapse- free survival at one year.  
As such, evidence of efficacy can be identified if 10 of 15  (67%)  patients receiving study drug remain 
relapse- free during the study period.  
 
14. STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  PLAN  
The primary  purpose  of this pilot study  is to evaluate the safety of baricitinib  in subjects with GCA.  No 
specific  statistical  hypothesis  tests  are planned.  Safety data  will be summarized for all treated  subjects  
using  appropriate tabulations,  descriptive statistics,  and graphical presentations. The incidence rate of 
each AE will be estimated  and reported  as number (n) and percentage  (%). 
 
Descriptive  statistics will be provided  for all secondary  outcome  measures. Differences  between 
glucocorticoid dose (mg),  C-reactive protein  (mg/L),  erythrocyte  sedimentation rate (mm/hr)  and BVAS 
score from baseline  to end of study  will be calculated and reported  with means  and standard 
deviations.  The proportion  of subjects  in sustained remission  will be reported  with exact  95% 
confidence intervals.  Kaplan -Meier  methods  will be used to evaluate relapse- free survival and the 
duration of glucocorticoid -free remission.  Number of relapses  per subject over time will be reported  as 
relapses/year.  
 
 
15. PUBLICATION STRATEGY  
This study will be registered with ClinicalTrials.gov prior to enrolling the first subject and the 
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier (NCT#) will be included in manuscripts pertaining to this study. Results will 
be reported according to the requirements for applicable clinical trials.   
Data generated  from this study  will be presented at national and  international  meetings  pertaining to 
rheumatology  (e.g. American  College  of Rheumatology  and European  League  Against  Rheumatism).  
Manuscript  publication  will target a high impact journal (Arthritis  & Rheumatology).  
 
 
16. REFERENCES  
 
1. Salvarani C,  Macchioni  P, Zizzi F, Mantovani  W, Rossi F, Castri  C, et al. Epidemiologic  and 
immunogenetic  aspects  of polymyalgia  rheumatica  and giant cell  arteritis  in northern  Italy. Arthritis  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
35  Rheum.  1991;34(3):351- 6. Epub  1991/03/01. PubMed PMID:  2003856.  
2. Gonzalez -Gay MA, Garcia -Porrua  C, Rivas  MJ, Rodriguez -Ledo  P, Llorca J. Epidemiology  of 
biopsy  proven  giant cell  arteritis  in northwestern Spain:  trend  over an 18 year period.  Ann Rheum  Dis. 
2001;60(4):367- 71. Epub 2001/03/15. PubMed  PMID:  11247867;  PubMed  Central  PMCID:  
PMC1753598.  
3. Haugeberg  G, Paulsen  PQ, Bie RB. Temporal arteritis  in Vest Agder  County  in southern  Norway:  
incidence  and clinical findings. J Rheumatol.  2000;27(11):2624 -7. Epub 2000/11/28. PubMed PMID:  
11093444.  
4. Chandran  A, Udayakumar  P, Crowson  C, Warrington  K, Matteson E. The incidence  of giant cell  
arteritis  in Olmsted  County,  Minnesota,  over a 60-year period  1950 -2009.  Scand  J Rheumatol. 2015:1- 
14. Epub  2015/01/22. doi:  10.3109/03009742.2014.982701. PubMed  PMID:  25606666.  
5. Salvarani C,  Cimino  L, Macchioni  P, Consonni D, Cantini F, Bajocchi  G, et al. Risk factors  for visual  
loss in an Italian  population- based  cohort of patients  with giant cell  arteritis. Arthritis  Rheum.  
2005;53(2):293- 7. Epub  2005/04/09.  doi: 10.1002/art.21075.  PubMed  PMID:  15818722.  
6. Gonzalez -Gay MA, Garcia -Porrua  C, Llorca  J, Hajeer  AH, Branas  F, Dababneh  A, et al. Visual  
manifestations  of giant  cell arteritis. Trends  and clinical spectrum in  161 patients.  Medicine (Baltimore).  
2000;79(5):283- 92. PubMed PMID:  11039076.  
7. Proven  A, Gabriel SE, Orces  C, O'Fallon  WM, Hunder GG. Glucocorticoid  therapy  in giant cell  
arteritis: duration and adverse  outcomes.  Arthritis  Rheum.  2003;49(5):703 -8. Epub 2003/10/15.  doi: 
10.1002/art.11388. PubMed PMID:  14558057.  
8. D unstan  E, Lester SL, Rischmueller  M, Dodd  T, Black  R, Ahern  M, et al. Epidemiology  of biopsy -
proven  giant cell  arteritis  in South  Australia. Intern Med J. 2014;44(1):32- 9. Epub  2013/10/15.  doi: 
10.1111/imj.12293. PubMed  PMID:  24118799.  
9. Weyand CM, Liao YJ, Goronzy  JJ. The immunopathology  of giant cell  arteritis: diagnostic  and 
therapeutic  implications. J Neuroophthalmol. 2012;32(3):259- 65. Epub  2012/08/24.  doi: 
10.1097/WNO.0b013e318268aa9b. PubMed  PMID:  22914691;  PubMed  Central PMCID:  PMC4278656.  
10. Keystone  EC, Taylor  PC, Drescher  E, Schlichting  DE, Beattie  SD, Berclaz  PY, et al. Safety and  
efficacy  of baricitinib  at 24 weeks  in patients  with rheumatoid arthritis  who have had an inadequate 
response to methotrexate.  Annals  of the rheumatic  diseases. 2015;74(2):333- 40. Epub 2014/11/29. doi:  
10.1136/annrheumdis -2014- 206478. PubMed  PMID:  25431052;  PubMed  Central PMCID:  
PMC4316868.  
11. Papp  K, Menter MA, Raman  M, Disch  D, Schlichting  DE, Gaich  C, et al. A Randomized  Phase  2b 
Trial of Baricitinib, an Oral JAK1/JAK2  Inhibitor,  in Patients  with Moderate- to-Severe  Psoriasis.  Br J 
Dermatol.  2016.  Epub  2016/01/23.  doi: 10.1111/bjd.14403. PubMed PMID:  26800231.  
12. Salvarani C,  Cimino  L, Macchioni  P, Consonni D, Cantini F, Bajocchi  G, et al. Risk factors  for 
visual  loss in an Italian population- based  cohort of patients  with giant cell  arteritis. Arthritis  Care  and 
Research. 2005;53(2):293 -7. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.21075 . PubMed PMID:  2005178046.  
13. Evans  JM, O'Fallon  WM, Hunder GG. Increased  incidence  of aortic  aneurysm  and dissection  in 
giant cell  (temporal) arteritis.  A population- based study.  Ann Intern  Med.  1995;122(7):502 -7. PubMed  
PMID:  7872584.  
14. Kermani  TA, Warrington  KJ, Crowson  CS, Ytterberg  SR, Hunder GG, Gabriel SE,  et al. Large - 
vessel  involvement  in giant  cell arteritis: a population- based  cohort study  of the incidence- trends  and 
prognosis. Ann  Rheum  Dis. 2013;72(12):1989- 94. Epub  2012/12/21. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis -2012 - 
202408.  PubMed  PMID : 23253927;  PubMed Central PMCID:  PMC4112513.  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
36  15. Gonzalez -Gay MA, Blanco  R, Rodriguez -Valverde  V, Martinez -Taboada  VM, Delgado - Rodriguez  
M, Figueroa M, et al. Permanent visual  loss and cerebrovascular  accidents in giant cell  arteritis: 
predictors  and response  to treatment. Arthritis  Rheum.  1998;41(8):1497- 504. PubMed  PMID:  
9704651.  
16. Labarca  C, Koster MJ, Crowson  CS, Makol A, Ytterberg SR, Matteson EL, et al. Predictors  of 
relapse  and treatment outcomes  in biopsy -proven  giant cell  arteritis:  a retrospective cohort study.  
Rheumatology  (Oxford). 2016;55(2):347- 56. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kev348.  PubMed  PMID:  
26385368;  PubMed Central PMCID:  PMCPMC4939727.  
17. Dunstan  E, Lester SL, Rischmueller  M, Dodd  T, Black  R, Ahern  M, et al. Epidemiology  of 
biops y-proven  giant cell  arteritis  in South  Australia. Intern Med J. 2014;44(1):32- 9. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/imj.12293 . PubMed  PMID:  24118799.  
18. Mahr  AD, Jover  JA, Spiera  RF, Hernandez -Garcia  C, Fernandez -Gutierrez  B, LaValley  MP, et al. 
Adjunctive methotrexate for treatment of giant cell  arteritis: An  individual patient  data meta- analysis.  
Arthritis  and Rheumatism. 2007;56(8):2789- 97. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.22754 . PubMed PMID:  
2007393900.  
19. Adizie  T, Christidis  D, Dharmapaliah  C, Borg  F, Dasgupta B. Efficacy and tolerability  of 
leflunomide  in difficult -to-treat polymyalgia  rheumatica and giant  cell arteritis:  a case series. Int J Clin 
Pract.  2012;66(9):906- 9. doi: 10.1111/j.1742- 1241.2012.02981.x.  PubMed  PMID:  22897467.  
20. Diamantopoulos  AP, Hetland  H, Myklebust G. Leflunomide  as a corticosteroid- sparing  agent  in 
giant cell  arteritis  and polymyalgia  rheumatica:  a case  series.  Biomed  Res Int. 2013;2013:120638. doi: 
10.1155/2013/120638. PubMed PMID:  24106691; PubMed  Central PMCID:  PMCPMC3784071.  
21. De Silva  M, Hazleman  BL. Azathioprine  in giant cell arteritis/polymyalgia  rheumatica:  a double- 
blind  study.  Annals  of the Rheumatic  Diseases. 1986;45(2):136- 8. PubMed  PMID:  3511861; PubMed  
Central PMCID:  PMCPMC1001834.  
22. Sciascia  S, Piras  D, Baldovino S, Russo  A, Naretto  C, Rossi D, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil  as 
steroid -sparing  treatment  for elderly  patients  with giant cell  arteritis:  Report of three cases. Aging  
Clinical and  Experimental Research. 2012;24(3):273- 7. PubMed  PMID:  2012657582.  
23. Seror  R, Baron  G, Hachulla  E, Debandt M, Larroche C, Puechal  X, et al. Adalimumab  for steroid 
sparing  in patients  with giant -cell arteritis: results  of a multicentre  randomised  controlled  trial. Annals  of 
the Rheumatic  Diseases. 2014;73(12):2074- 81. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis -2013 -  
203586 . PubMed  PMID:  23897775.  
24. Hoffman GS, Cid  MC, Rendt -Zagar  KE, Merkel PA,  Weyand CM, Stone  JH, et al. Infliximab  for 
maintenance  of glucocorticosteroid- induced  remission  of giant  cell arteritis: a randomized  
trial.[Summary  for patients  in Ann Intern Med.  2007 May 1;146(9):I12; PMID:  17470826].  Ann Intern 
Med.  2007;146(9):621- 30. PubMed PMID:  17470830.  
25. Martinez -Taboada VM, Rodriguez -Valverde  V, Carreno L, Lopez -Longo J, Figueroa M, Belzunegui 
J, et al. A double -blind placebo  controlled  trial of etanercept  in patients  with giant  cell arteritis  and 
corticosteroid  side effects. Annals  of the Rheumatic  Diseases. 2008;67(5):625- 30. PubMed PMID:  
18086726.  
26. Deng  J, Younge BR, Olshen  RA, Goronzy  JJ, Weyand CM. Th17  and Th1 T-cell responses  in 
giant cell  arteritis.  Circulation.  2010;121(7):906- 15. Epub  2010/02/10. doi:  
10.1161/circulationaha.109.872903. PubMed  PMID:  20142449;  PubMed  Central PMCID:  
PMC2837465.  
27. Weyand CM, Liao YJ, Goronzy  JJ. The immunopathology  of giant cell  arteritis: diagnostic  and 
therapeutic  implications. J Neuroophthalmol. 2012;32(3):259- 65. doi:  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
37  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/WNO.0b013e318268aa9b . PubMed  PMID:  22914691.  
28. Weyand CM, Goronzy  JJ. Immune  mechanisms  in medium and large -vessel vasculitis.  Nat Rev 
Rheumatol.  2013;9(12):731- 40. Epub 2013/11/06. doi:  10.1038/nrrheum.2013.161. PubMed PMID:  
24189842.  
29. Conway  R, O'Neill  L, O'Flynn E, Gallagher  P, McCarthy  GM, Murphy  CC, et al. Ustekinumab for the 
treatment  of refractory  giant cell  arteritis. Ann  Rheum  Dis. 2016;75(8):1578- 9. doi:  
10.1136/annrheumdis -2016- 209351. PubMed  PMID:  27143653.  
30. Hartmann  B, Mohan  SV, Goronzy  JJ, Weyand  CM. JAK/STAT -signaling in giant cell  arteritis.  
Circulation  Conference:  American Heart Association.  2013;128(22  SUPPL.  1). PubMed PMID:  
71340454.  
31. Villarino  AV, Kanno  Y, Ferdinand  JR, O'Shea  JJ. Mechanisms  of Jak/STAT  signaling in immunity  
and disease. J Immunol. 2015;194(1):21- 7. doi:  10.4049/jimmunol.1401867.  PubMed  PMID:  
25527793;  PubMed Central PMCID:  PMCPMC4524500.  
32. Tanaka  Y, Emoto  K, Cai Z, Aoki T, Schlichting  D, Rooney  T, et al. Efficacy and Safety  of 
Baricitinib  in Japanese Patients  with Active  Rheumatoid Arthritis  Receiving  Background  Methotrexate  
Therapy:  A 12-week, Double- blind,  Randomized  Placebo -controlled  Study.  J Rheumatol.  
2016;43(3):504- 11. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.150613.  PubMed PMID:  26834213.  
33. Keystone  EC, Taylor  PC, Drescher  E, Schlichting  DE, Beattie  SD, Berclaz  PY, et al. Safety and  
efficacy  of baricitinib  at 24 weeks  in patients  with rheumatoid arthritis  who have had an inadequate 
response to methotrexate.  Ann Rheum  Dis. 2015;74(2):333- 40. doi:  10.1136/annrheumdis -2014 - 
206478.  PubMed  PMID:  25431052;  PubMed  Central PMCID:  PMCPMC4316868.  
34. Genovese  MC, Kremer  J, Zamani  O, Ludivico  C, Krogulec  M, Xie L, et al. Baricitinib  in Patients  
with Refractory  Rheumatoid Arthritis. N Engl J Med.  2016;374(13):1243- 52. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1507247.  PubMed  PMID:  27028914.  
35. P app  KA, Menter  MA, Raman  M, Disch  D, Schlichting  DE, Gaich  C, et al. A randomized phase 2b 
trial of baricitinib,  an oral Janus  kinase  (JAK)  1/JAK2  inhibitor,  in patients  with moderate- to-severe  
psoriasis.  Br J Dermatol. 2016;174(6):1266- 76. doi: 10.1111/bjd.14403.  PubMed PMID:  26800231.  
36. Jabbari  A, Dai Z,  Xing L, Cerise  JE, Ramot  Y, Berkun Y, et al. Reversal  of Alopecia Areata  
Following  Treatment  With the JAK1/2  Inhibitor Baricitinib.  EBioMedicine.  2015;2(4):351- 5. doi:  
10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.02.015. PubMed  PMID:  26137574;  PubMed Central  PMCID:  PMCPMC4486197.  
37. Leonard  WJ, O'Shea  JJ. Jaks and STATs: biological implications.  Annu Rev Immunol.  
1998;16:293- 322. doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.16.1.293.  PubMed  PMID:  9597132.  
38. Loricera  J, Blanco  R, Hernandez  JL, Castaneda S, Mera  A, Perez -Pampin  E, et al. Tocilizumab  in 
giant cell arteritis:  Multicenter  open -label study  of 22 patients. Semin  Arthritis  Rheum.  2015;44(6):717-
23. doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2014.12.005.  PubMed PMID:  25697557.  
39. Shi JG, Chen  X, Lee F, Emm  T, Scherle PA, Lo Y, et al. The pharmacokinetics,  
pharmacodynami cs, and safety  of baricitinib,  an oral JAK  1/2 inhibitor,  in healthy  volunteers.  J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2014;54(12):1354 -61. doi:  10.1002/jcph.354. PubMed PMID: 24965573.  
40. Dasgupta B, Borg  FA, Hassan  N, Alexander  L, Barraclough  K, Bourke B, et al. BSR  and BHPR 
guidelines  for the management of giant cell  arteritis.  Rheumatology  (Oxford).  2010;49(8):1594- 7. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keq039a.  PubMed  PMID:  20371504.  
41. Hiratzka  LF, Bakris  GL, Beckman  JA, Bersin RM, Carr VF, Casey  DE, et al. 2010 
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM  guidelines  for the diagnosis  and management  of 
patients  with thoracic  aortic  disease: Executive  summary:  A report  of the american  college of cardiology  
 Version: 7.0 Revised 12/30/19 
 
38  foundation/american heart association  task force on practice  guidelines,  american  association for 
thoracic  surgery,  american  college  of radiology, american  stroke association.  Circulation.  
2010;121(13):e266- e369.  doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0b013e3181d4739e . PubMed PMID:  
2010224866.  
 
42.  Langford CA, Cuthbertson D, Ytterberg SR, Khalidi NA, Monach PA, Carette S, et al. A 
Randomized Double- Blind Trial of Abatacept and Glucocorticoids for the Treatment of Giant Cell 
Arteritis. Arthr itis Rheumatol. 2015;67(suppl 10). 
43.  Hoffman GS, Cid MC, Hellmann DB, Guillevin L, Stone JH, Schousboe J, et al. A multicenter, 
randomized, double- blind, placebo- controlled trial of adjuvant methotrexate treatment for giant cell 
arteritis. Arthritis Rheum. 2002;46(5):1309- 18. doi: 10.1002/art.10262. PubMed PMID: 12115238.  
 