Official Title:  Mobile Health Obesity Wellness Intervention in Rural Older 
Adults (MOWI): Research Pilot    
NCT number : 
Document Type:  Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  and 
Informed Consent Form 
Date of the 
Document:  July 3, 2018[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
 
Overview: The study will: 1) Obtain input on feasibility, usability, and acceptability of using mHealth in 
behavior change by adapting a device for rural older adults; 2) Develop, refine and tailor MOWI in research 
settings; 3) Conduct MOWI in subjects’ homes. The overall goal is to improve older adult physical function in 
rural areas and use the results as a basis for an R01 randomized trial testing the MOWI’s delivery in the home.  
 
Study Setting/Population: Dartmouth-Hitchcock (D-H) serves 1.5 million persons from a circumscribed area 
of rural New Hampshire/Vermont. The site of Lebanon, NH, is a typical rural New England town (16.2% aged 
≥65 years; 95.4% Caucasian83). Of 13,293 primary care patients ≥65years old at D-H, 3,987 are study eligible 
(~30% obese84). The Center for Health & Aging (CHA) has ro oms for study assessment s. In-home evaluations 
will use CHA video equipment.   
Recruitment: As a Geriatrician working with an interdisciplinary team, I 
have ready access to potential subjects from a practice panel of ~3000 
older adults. In addition the Centers for Health and Aging provide a venue for recruitment, as indicated by successfully recruiting 111 elderly subjects this past year for pilot studies by 3 junior faculty. Patients meeting study 
criteria will be identified using record review and e-mailed/mailed letters 
describing the study (after HIPAA waiver). Posters/handouts will be placed strategically at D-H. Colleagues will give information materials to patients requesting permission for contact by the study research assistant. With respect to the qualitative component, the PI will recruit 6 clinicians (from 87 in the provider network) to participate in interviews. Dr. Bartels will use the 
CHA’s extensive aging services network to recruit 4 leaders of aging 
services organizations for study participation.  
 
Selection Criteria: Focus groups, interviews, and usability testing will target English-speaking obese older 
adults (age ≥65years and BMI ≥30kg/m217 or waist circumference ≥88/102cm85 in females/males). Excluded 
from eligibility are adults with severe mental or life-threatening illness, dementia, substance use, history of 
bariatric surgery, suicidal ideation, unable to provide consent/perform measures, or residing in a nursing home.. Older adult participants in Aims 2 & 3 will r equire the presence of home Wi-Fi high-speed internet, 
medical clearance, have less than a 5% weight loss in the past 6 months, and be without advanced co-
morbidity, exercise restrictions88 or involvement in other research studies. 
 
Screening/Consent: Subjects expressing interest will be mailed/emaile d forms, evaluated by chart review to 
confirm eligibility, and those meeting criteria invited to an RA-led session to verify final eligibility, review and 
complete consent forms, and answer queries. Competence for consent will be assured by: no diagnosis of 
dementia (all Aims) and a Callahan score ≥ 4 (Aims 2 & 3). Written consent will be obtained before enrollment. 
The RA will obtain screening/baseline measures, and provide a list of contact details (see Human Subjects).    
 
Aim 2 (Develop & Refine MOWI): Develop and refine a mHealth obesity wellness intervention (MOWI) for 
rural, older, obese adults: MOWI will be informed by Aim 1 (qualitative assessment & adapting Amulet) 
consisting of a 12-week, 3x/week program of: weekly nutrition counseling; 2x/week group exercise visits; and Amulet to monitor activity, strength, and gait speed. A dietician and physical therapist will lead the in-person 
(15-20 min) nutrition and exercise (70-90 min) sessions. The team will provide advice and troubleshooting of each element. Two waves of 8 individuals each will be asse ssed at 0, 4, 8 and 12 weeks and be given Amulet. 
Further, Amulet/Fitbit will measure steps, activity type, duration and distance.  
A 2x/week, physical therapist-led guideline-based exercise regimen88 will be held at CHA focusing on 
progressive resistance, flexibility, balance and aerobic ex ercise at moderate intensity to improve strength, 
quality, and mobility113. Adjustable cuff weights and Thera-bands will be given for upper/lower limb exercises. 
Resistance training will target major muscle groups88 (30-45min, 3 sets, 8-12 repetitions). After 15 repetitions 
of full range of motion, loads will increase, followed by f lexibility exercises (15-30min) of static stretches (30-
60s). Neuromotor training will focus on agility, balance, and coordination, including static, dynamic, vestibular and Tai Chi (15-30min). Subjects will be trained to perfo rm exercises 1-2 days/week and educated in aerobic 
activity (30min/day, minimum 10min bouts,150min/week
88,114,115) outside the sessions. Baseline personalized 
plans will be created aimed at gradual workload increases. Individual weekly dietician counseling sessions116 at 
the CHA. will consist of behavioral modification117 and motivational interviewing118 based on the 5 A’s.91,119 The FIGURE 2:  STUDY OVERVIEW 

initial visit is the basis for an individualized program using a point-of-care 24-hour diet recall120, reducing recall 
bias, and avoiding the burden and non-adherence of self-reported, home-based measures. Elements include: 
caloric restriction (500-750 kCal/d); high protein (1-1.5g/kg /day)94,121,122; 800IU vitamin D123,124 and weekly 
weigh-in125. This approach counters weight loss induced sarcopenia and bone loss88,89,107,108.  
I will conduct a usability evaluation consisting of individual semi-structured interviews, interview and 
satisfaction questionnaires, repeating the process after the 2nd wave. The RA will record and transcribe all 
sessions allowing me to discuss these with my team. Outcomes and analyses are detailed below.   
 
Recruitment and Retention Strategies  
Participants  will be recruited from referrals  from Family  Medicine/General Internal  Medicine providers  
(Primary  Care),  providers  from the Dartmouth  Weight  & Wellness  Center,  and community  members  attending 
the Dartmouth  Center  for Health  and Aging  (DCHA).  I will inform  clinicians  of Family  Medicine and General  
Internal  Medicine and the staff at the Weight  & Wellness  Center  of the proposed study  during section 
meetings.  Dr. Bartels  has an extensive network  of community -care providers  and will send e- mails/le tters to 
the CHA’s  listserv  and mailing  list requesting  participation.  Posters  will be placed in each examination room,  in 
the patient  waiting  areas  and in common  areas  of the DCHA.  All posters  will have been pre-approved by 
DHMC  patient/family  advisors  and the Committee  for the Protection for Human  Subjects.  Additionally,  postings  
in the DCHA  quarterly  newsletter,  the DHMC weekly  D-H Today  online bulletin,  the weekly  Geisel  School  of 
Medicine  at Dartmouth newsletter,  and electronic  mailing  lists will promo te the study.  We anticipate advertising  
in the local newspaper  as well. A dedicated phone number  and e-mail will be assigned to this study.    
Patients  will be i dentified  from the PI’s clinical practice group at D-H, word  of mouth,  or other  means  as 
indicated below.  We will also identify  prospective individuals  fulfilling  basic  eligibility  criteria  after obtaining  a 
HIPAA waiver  for electronic  record  review  from the Committee  for the Protection of Human  Subjects.  A pre-
assessment eligibility  would  be performed to limit the burden on patients  should they be ineligible  after full 
informed  consent  for the requisite  aims.  This will allow  the investigators  to query  our electronic  medical  record  
and if necessary  send  targeted  messages  and/or  letters  to individuals  that may possibly  qualify  for this study.  If 
needed,  the study  staff will send a letter  to prospective individuals  requesting their involvement  either  by mail 
or email  (through the electronic  medical  record).  This letter  will describe the study  and provide contact  
information  for those  interested.  The CTO  will also have details  of the study.  Any individuals  that have  
expressed interest  will be contacted  by the team  by phone or by email  which  will be the most  preferable 
method  of communication.  A pre-screeni ng questionnaire or electronic  link to RedCAP  (See  below)  or by 
phone will be mailed/emailed to participants  (depending  on patient  preference).   
As part of Aim 1a, eligible  patients  will be asked  to participate in qualitative  focus  groups  and individual  semi-
structured  interviews  with a member  of the team.  It is anticipated  that the focus  group  will occur  4-6 weeks  
after interest  is expressed.  The investigators  will perform  four separate  patient  focus  groups.  Semi -structured  
interviews  will take place  for clinicians  and community  leaders  of health  and senior  centers.  At the time of 
communication,  the consent  form will be sent to these  individuals  for review  (paper  or electronic)  and if they 
agree to the terms  of the consent,  the individuals  will attend these  sessions  at a mutually  convenient  time for 
the study  participants  and the Research  Team.  A reminder  letter  will be sent either  via myDH  (through  the 
electronic  medical  record)  by the PI, and/or  a hard copy  letter  to the patient’s  address.    
As part of Aim 1b, eligible  patients  will be asked  to attend the DCHA  to confirm  eligibility  and informed consent  
process  by the RA/PI  (See  Section on Informed  Consent  Procedures  for Full details).  Those  ineligible  will be 
informed  by the team  and any information will be destroyed.  We anticipate  that eligibility  to study  onset  will be 
roughly  4-6 weeks  after screening.   
As part of Aim 2 and 3 (including  the pre-pilot Aim 2), eligible  patients  will be asked  either  to attend  a baseline 
visit with the RA or PI at the DCHA  to confirm  study  full eligibility  for measurements  and full informed consent  
process  by the RA/PI  (See  Section on Informed  Consent  Procedures  for Full Details ). Those  ineligible  will be 
informed  by the team  and any information will be destroyed.  We anticipa te that eligibility  to study  onset  will be 
roughly  4-6 weeks  after screening.  The patient’s  primary  care provider  will provide medical  clearance prior to 
study  enrollment  and sign a paper  or electronic  form allowing  the individual  to undergo this intervention.  They  
will be kept informed of any abnormal  symptoms  or problems  throughout  the study.   
The investigators  recognize  that this intervention may lead to attrition.  To reduce the risk of participant  
drop- out, participants  will be reminded of sessions  with a phone call, e- mail,  and Amulet  messaging  reminder  
from the RA. Individuals  will be compensated  with sandwiches/snacks  plus $25 gift card for the focus  groups  of 
the qualitative  aim (Aim 1a), $25 gift card for the subject  semi -structured  interviews,  a nominal  $10/hour  
payment  for the prevalidation phase of Aim 1b (cash,  gift-card),  a $25 gas card each for Aim 1b, $100 for 
completing  >80%  of the visits  and assessments  for the three -month  program  (Aim 2) - $25 per assessment,  
and $200 for completing >80%  of the visits  and assessments  at 6-months  (Aim 3). Payment  will be made at 
study  conclusion according to institutional  policies.  They  will also receive a fixed  schedule of items  (pens,  
notepads,  thank  you cards)  to recognize their participation to date.  Participants  will have the option of declining  
such incentives  at any time.  We will provide a $25 gas card or equivalent  for each visit (Aim 4).  
 No involvement  of special  vulnerable population such as fetuses,  neonates,  pregnant  woman,  children,  
prisoners,  institutionalized individuals  or others  who may be considered  vulnerable will be included in this 
study.  The study  will be a single -arm study  and there will be no assignment  to a study  group for this study.   
 
Retention  
We recognize that a ttrition  rates  in obesity  studies  range between 25-50%.  For Aim 1a (qualitative  
studies),  we will target  4 focus  groups  of 6-8 individuals  (24-32 individuals  total),  6-8 individual  semi -structured  
interviews,  6 primary  care clinicians,  and 4 community  leaders  for a maximum  total of 50 individuals.  For Aim 
1b, we anticipate  recruiting 75 individuals  for a target  of 60 individuals.  Conservative estimates  suggest  that 14 
individuals  need to be recruited to allow  for 16 individuals  for Aim 2 at study  conclusion.  For Aim 3, our target is 
40 individuals.  We anticipate recruiting  53 individuals.  We believe that these  targets  are feasible with our local 
population.  We anticipate recruiting  individuals  in one wave  for Aim 1, two waves  for Aim 2, and in 4 waves  for 
Aim 3 to reach target  enrollment  and completion.  Should we exceed target  enrollment  and completion,  we will 
continue gathering  measurements  on all individuals.  With the new arm (MOWI -P), we anticipate recruiting  an 
additional 16 subjects.  For Aim 4 (Weight  Maintenance),  we anticipate  recruiting 60% of each  of the original  
sample for Aim 2 (ie: 4 waves  @ 8 = 32 x 0.6 = approximately  19 subjects).   
 
PROTECTION  OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  – AMENDED  
This Human  Subjects  Research meets  the definition  of a clinical trial. The Dartmouth  Committee  for the 
Protection of Human  Subjects  (CPHS)  has approved the study,  CPHS#28905 (see Appendix)  and includes  a 
partial  waiver  of HIPAA authorization to collect  the minimum  information  required  to identify,  contact  and recruit  
eligible  patients.  This proposal  has been  discussed with Dr. William  Nelson,  Geisel  School  of Medicine at 
Dartmouth  health care ethicist,  and Dr. David  Kotz,  our technology  information security expert  and Chair  of the 
Department  of Computer  Science,  who will both serve  as advisors  to guide  the development  of the responsible 
conduct  for research.   
 
Human Subjects Involvement,  Characteristics and Design: 
Justification  of Use of Human  Individuals  
The proposed  intervention requires  human involvement  to develop a mobile health Obesity  Wellness  
Intervention (MOWI).  MOWI  consists of a 3x/week  in-person intervention at the Dartmouth Center  for Health  
and Aging,  comprising  of three  components:  an individu al weekly  nutritional  counseling  session led by a 
dietician,  2x/week  group  exercise visits  led by a clinical physical  therapist,  and a patient -self-monitoring 
mHealth  device capable of remote  sensing (Amulet).  The intervention is based on previous  studies  
demonstrating the importance of intensive behavioral therapy  and caloric  restriction16,19,21,80-82 and the 
emerging  evidence of the importance  of group  meetings161. We will also use focus  groups  and semi -structured  
interviews  to obtain input  into the utility,  acceptability  and perceived value of Telehealth modalities  (Aim 1a); 
adapt  Amulet  in older  adults  to assess  geriatric  functional  measures  (Aim 1b); develop,  refine,  and tailor  MOWI  
to evaluate its effectiveness  (Aim 2); and conduct  and assess the feasibility,  acceptability  and preliminary  
effectiveness  of a video- delivered home -based program  (Aim 3). It is impossible  to assess  study  feasibility,  
acceptability  or effectiveness  without  human involvement.  The MOWI -P arm will consist of an additional  16 
participants  
 
Characteristics of the Subject Population  
 We will recruit  older  motivated adults  with obesity  (aged ≥65years)  to participate in the three  separate 
aims  of this study.  Aim 1a will recruit  up to 50 individuals,  Aim 1b will recruit  100 individuals  (pre-validation and 
validation),  Aim 2 aims  to recruit  and retain  10 individuals,  and Aim 3 aims  to recruit  and retain 40 individuals.  
No special  or vulnerable populations,  including older  adults  with cognitive  impairment,  will be included in this 
study.  No assignment  to study  group will occur.  For Aim 1b (pre-validation)  on younger  local 
personnel/students,  we approximate ~30-50 individuals  to participate  and 10-20 older  adults  as well. MOWI -P 
will consist of an additional  16 participants  
 
Sources 
of Materials  
Sources  of information  
Data  from this study  includes  clinical characteristics  abstracted from the medical  record  (age,  race,  
ethnicity,  employment  status,  ability  to communicate in English, marital  status,  education level,  number  and 
names  of medications,  co-morbidities,  smoking  status,  admissions  to the nursing home  or hospital,  BMI, 
documented  dementia,  weight  loss of >5% in the past year,  recent  angina/coronary  events,  bariatric  surgery).  
Self-reported  data from questionnaires  will be obtained including  Katz86 and Lawton87 activities  of daily living  
scales, PAM137, PROMIS139, CHAMPS144, Social  Support  with Exercise145 , Social  Support  and Eating Habits, 
Readiness  to Change,  and number  of household members.  Objective  outcome measures  will be assessed 
including  grip strength127, Five Times  Sit-to-Stand106, Six Minute Walk Test130, gait speed135, weight,  and waist  
circumference.  Field  notes  from the physical  therapist  and the dietician  (detailing  the experience of the 
intervention,  reactions  from the participants,  aspects  that work  well or need improving upon,  insights  etc.),  and 
questions  regarding  patient  satisfaction  will be assessed.   
All qualitative  data from focus  groups  or semi -structured  interviews  will be recorded,  transcribed and/or  
videotaped by the RA. Satisfaction questionnaires  will be completed by participants.  This information will 
subsequently  be imported  for analysis  and review  using Dedoose and STATA,  R or SAS.   
All questionnaire  data wi ll be either  in paper  format,  or populated by individuals  using the RedCAP  
(Research  Electronic  Data  Capture)   software.  Study  data will be collected and managed  using  REDCap  
electronic  data capture  tools  managed  at Dartmouth College  through  the license from the Clinical and 
Translational Science Institute  (SYNERGY)146. REDCap  is a secure,  web-based application designed to 
support  data capture  for research  studies,  providing 1) an intuitive  interface for validated data entry;  2) audit  
trails  for tracking  data manipulation and export  procedures;  3) automated export  procedures  for seamless  data 
downloads  to common  statistical packages;  and 4) procedures  for importing data from external  sources.  
 
Study  Personnel  with Access to Identifiable Data 
The PI and RA will have access to all data.  All data would be considered protected health information  
(PHI)  subject  to HIPAA and D-H regulations.  Only the PI and the RA will have access to this individual -level 
data and to the electronic  medical  record  (eDH)  which  has pertinent  PHI and laboratory  assessments  obtained.  
Drs. Kotz & Pletcher  and their teams  will also have access to technology -related data that will be 
communicated to the RA and study  team.  This is necessary  in the capacity  of the RA to serve  as a health 
coach102 to be aware of such  information.  All other  data communicated  to other  study  personnel will be de-
identified  and communicated only in aggregate.  
 
 The MOWI  comprises  of a multidisciplinary  treatment  strategy,  including nutritional,  behavioral,  and 
physical interventions,  augmented  by Telehealth modalities  (telemedicine,  mHealth  and remote  sensing).  The 
confidentiality  of focus  group or individual  data cannot  be guaranteed.  We will encourage and ask our study  
participants  not to share  the information  discussed within  the session.  
 
 
Str
ategies  for Protecting Personal  Information  
All investigators  will have  completed the requisite  Human Individuals  protection training,  CITI,  or 
training as required  by local institutional  standards.  All Dartmouth investigators  would abide by HIPAA policies,  
and as such, would have  full understanding  of privacy  rules.  Access to medical  records  would be from private  
D-H work  computers  accessed using  a unique electronic  portal  identifier.  A password- protected  datafile  on 
password -protected computers  of the PI will contain linking  data with identifiers.  All written  material  will be 
coded using  a unique  identifier  and not by participant  name.  All questionnaires  or other  study -related 
documents  will be kept in the PI’s locked  office. All consent  forms  (paper  or electronic)  will be kept separately  
in the PI’s locked  office (or in a secure electronic  location).  All data will be accessible by the PI and 
downloaded to a D-H password protected computer.  Data  from audio recordings  will be transcribed  by the RA, 
other  study  personnel or by an official transcription service (ie: rev.com). A non-disclosure  agreement  will be 
signed by the PI.  
Data  from the Amulet  will be transmitted to a Wi-Fi- secure  cloud- based repository  via HTTP  post,  
decrypted and stored  on an Amazon virtual  machine running  a MySQL  database.  The data can be downloaded 
by the RA. Individual  data in Aim 1b and 2 will be kept confidential,  although sharing  of information  that is 
communicated in group  exercise sessions  cannot  be kept confidential  to other  participants.  
Survey  data wil l be performed  on RedCAP  software  and be encrypted per institutional  policies. The 
Department  of Bioinformatics  through  the Center  for Translational  Science  Activities  will facilitate  this process.  
Additionally,  any video- conferencing  will be performed  through  the Vidyo  or Zoom  software  platforms  are 
encoded to transmit  securely  between participant  and study  staff.  At the conclusion of each  wave,  any software 
and tablets  will be erased and data will be expunged  per IT policies.   
Data  from the fitness  devices  and their applications  will be password protected,  and only study  
personnel  would have access to the complete  data.  All data from the EHR will be HIPAA- compliant.  No PHI 
information  will be relayed during  any of these sessions. The investigators  will discuss this with the eligible  
subjects  and ensure they are fully aware of these minimal,  but possible  risks.  The risk of a contact  allergy  with 
the fitness  device is possible,  although we anticipate this risk being  quite  low, and if indeed this does  occur, a 
communication with the patient’s  primary  care provider  will be made.  Should the contact  allergy  be significant, 
the patient  will be treated  symptomatically  or withdrawn from the study.  
 
Potential  Physical  and Psychological  Risks to Individuals (including  possible  alternative treatments)  
and Mitigation  of Such Risks.  
 The MOW I comprises  of a multidisciplinary  treatment  strategy,  including nutritional,  behavioral,  and 
physical  interventions,  augmented  by Telehealth modalities  (telemedicine,  mHealth  and remote  sensing).  The 
confidentiality  of focus  group or individual  data cannot  be guaranteed.  We will encourage and ask our study  
participants  not to share  the information  discussed within  the session.  
Physical  activity  interventions  may lead to mild muscular  fatigue or soreness  but will be monitored  in a 
setting  by trained professionals.  Risk of falling  is elevated in older  adults178 and will need to be supervised.  
Physical  activity  is recommended,  even in sedentary  individuals  who may be at risk for cardiovascular  
events179,180 . As such, primary  care clinicians  need to provide medical  clearance for individuals  to participate  in 
this program.  Injuries  may occur  while  engaging in the physical  therapy  program  which  will be allayed  by a 
graded approach to activity.  As with all functional  measures  there  are safety  issues.   Physicians  are on site at 
the Dartmouth  Center  for Health  and Aging  at the time of these  sessions  all of whom  are certified  in cardiac  life 
support.  If at any time during the study,  the patient  expresses  any unexplained physical  symptoms,  the RA or 
clinical staff will share this information  with the PI, who in turn will contact  the participant’s  primary  care 
provider  to ensure  prompt  evaluation.  Should the primary  care provider  not be available,  the participants  will be 
transported,  if deemed medically  necessary,  to the closest Emergency  Department.  A member  of the study  
staff will remain with the participant  until there is a safe transfer  of care.  For Aim 3, additional safety  measures  
have been established to ensure  the safety  of participants  while  participating in at home  exercise classes 
where an RA or physical  therapist  will not have direct  contact  with them  at the time a physical  symptom  may 
arise.  (See  attached saf ety flowchart)  Lastly,  rarely  during  focus  groups  or semi -structured  interviews  would 
individuals  become uncomfortable;  however,  they will be reminded  that they are participating voluntarily  and 
may leave the group  at any time.  Our Institution  Review  Board expects  notification of any incidental findings,  
as well as about  any unanticipated problems  involving  risk to subjects.  Any newly  identified psychiatric  disorder  
will be referred to the primary  care provider  for assess ment  and treatment.   
Data  from the A mulet  and its applications  will be password protected,  and only study  personnel  would 
have access to the complete  data.  All data will be HIPAA- compliant.  Additionally,  we deliberately  chose Vidyo  
as this is a software  platform  that has been  used by the Center  for Telehealth and this software  is HIPAA-
compliant.  The investigators  will discuss this with the eligible  subjects  and ensure they are fully aware  of these 
minimal,  but possible  risks.  The risk of a contact  allergy  with Amulet  is possible,  although we anticipate this risk 
being  quite  low, and if indeed this does  occur,  a communication with the patient’s  primary  care provider  will be 
made.  Should the contact  allergy  be significant,  the patient  will be treated  symptoma tically  or withdrawn from 
the study.  
Venipuncture will be considered in all participants  in Aim 2 – this will be performed  at the Dartmouth-
Hitchcock  laboratory  under  standard  clinical conditions.  We expect  minimal risk from this procedure.  Volume of 
blood work  will be <500cc  in this population.  Bloodwork  will be obtained at baseline and again  at 12 weeks.   
 
   
Adequacy  of Protection  Against Risks 
Description  of Informed  Consent  Procedures  
Please refer to the above section  regarding  the HIPAA waiver  to allow  for identification of subjects  in 
the electronic  medical  record.  Competence to provide informed consent  will be assured  by a review  of personal  
history/medical  record  (all Aims  for subje cts) and the Callahan Cognitive  screener  score ≥4 prior to informed  
consent  evaluation for Aims  2 & 3 (Appendix ). No chart r eview  will be performed  for clinicians/leaders  in Aim 
1a or the pre-validation in Aim 1b.  
After  the study par ticipant  expresses  interest  and is eligible  based  on inclusion/exclusion criteria  (see 
Recruitment  & Retention Strategies  above),  they will be presented  with a written  consent  form (paper  or 
electronic  form) and initiation  of the informed consent  discussion will occur  by either  the PI or RA or member  of 
the study  staff.  Participants  will be encouraged to ask questions  about  the study  or research process.  If the 
participants  need more  time to consider  enrolling, a follow -up telephone call to continue this consent  process  
will occur  according to IRB-approved procedures  for telephone consent  by the PI/RA  with contact  telephone 
numbers  if they have additional  questions.  Participants  will be encouraged  to ask questions  about  the study  or 
research  process  and be given  ample time to review  the informed consent  form.  A telephone script will be 
available which  will encourage questions  and clarification  of the study  procedures  as needed.  All individuals  
agreeing will be asked to sign an informed consent  document  (paper  or electronic),  or if done  by telephone,  a 
return  postage envelope will be used to return  the consent  form.  The individual  who agrees  by phone will not 
commence the study  until this form is received.  The form will be s canned into the Dartmouth -Hitchcock 
Electronic  Medical  Reco rd and the encounter  will be documented.  Once targeted  enrollment  for a given  
iteration occurs, the PI/RA  will arrange and notify  the patient  the time and date of the first session.  Primary  
care provider  permission will be necessary  prior to commencing  this study  for Aims  2 and 3.  
All consent  pr ocesses  will be performed at the Dartmouth  Centers  for Health  and Aging,  the Amulet  
laboratory  on campus,  or a mutually  convenient  location as designated  by the participant/PI.  The overall  
purpose of the research will be presented  to the participant  and the specific component  they will be recruited 
for will be discussed.  The reason  why the individual  was asked  to be involved will be provided.   The anticipated  
outcome  will be explained to the individuals.  We shall emphasize to the prospective subject  that their 
involvement  is entirely  voluntary  and will not influence nor impact  their care at Dartmouth-Hitchcock. 
Individuals  will be encouraged  to discuss the study  with their family  and friends  and take their time to make 
such a decision.  We will emphasize that their participation in all aims  is based  on their willingness  to engage  in 
the requisite  technology.  
The time commitment  for the research project  will be described  and the anticipated discomforts  and 
risks (both  physical and nonphysical).  The potential  benefits  to the participant  and the potential  benefits  to 
others  will be provided (see below).  A description of their confidentiality  will be provided,  including  how their 
information  will be treated,  stored,  maintained (and for what  duration)  and how the materials  will be disposed 
of.  They  will be provided  with the freedom  to participate in research  and/or  withdrawal  of the research 
permission at any time and the institutional  processes  for doing so. The sources  of information that data can be 
collected will be given,  along with the contact  information  for questions  or concerns  will be provided along  with 
the PI’s name,  address,  phone number.  Any costs or description for compensation for injury  will be described.  
The grantor  for this research will be given  as well and any potential  conflicts  of interest  that the investigators  
may have.   
 
A separ a
te consent  form will be provided for Aim 4. 
For Aim 1a: Qualitative  Assessment  (Focus Groups/Semi -Structured Interviews)  Subjects:  The 
Dartmouth  CPHS  considers  this type of research minimal risk. An information page  and consent  form (paper  or 
electronic)  will be provided to each participant.  The RA will explain  the purpose of this component  of the study  
and answer  any questions  that any of the participants  may have.  Each  individual  will have the opportunity  to 
answer  questions  in the group (or individually  for the semi -structured  interview),  in a non-pressured  manner.  
Should the participant,  following  discussion of the study  purpose  and consent  not be willing  to participate,  the 
subject  shall be thanked  for their time but not included in the group.  None  of their information  shall be used and 
any information to date will be destroyed.     
 
For Aim 1a: Qualitative  Assessment  (Clinician  & Community  Leader Semi-Structured Interviews):  The 
Dartmouth  CPHS  considers  this type of research minimal risk. An information page  and consent  form will be 
provided to each  participant  (paper  or electronic).  The RA will explain  the purpose of this component  of the 
study  and answer  any questions  that any of the participants  may have.  Each  individual  will have  the 
opportunity  to answer  questions  in a non-pressured  manner.  Should the participant,  following  discussion of the 
study  purpose  and consent  not be willing  to participate,  the subject  shall be thanked  for their time but not 
included in the study.  None  of their information  shall be used and any information to date will be destroyed.     
 For Aim 1b: Pr 
evalidation of Amulet Information:  As per CPHS  discussion of 7/6/2016,  an information  
sheet  will be provided (either  paper/electronic)  to the participants.   
 
For Aims 1b (Adapt Amulet), Prevalidation Aim 2, Aim 2  (Define/refine MOWI) & Aim 3 (Home-based 
MOWI): The RA will review  the respective aim study  with the patient,  answer  any questions,  and assess the 
patient’s  eligibility.  Description  of the intervention and the possible risks,  benefits  and alternatives  will be 
presented.  Much  of the eligibility  criteria  will have been screened  in advance (see above).  The RA will present  
the information  sheet  (Aim 1b), consent  form (Aim 2+3 - paper  or electronic)  and initiate  the informed  consent  
discussion (as described above).  Should the participant,  following  discussion of the study  purpose and consent  
not be willing  to participate,  the subject  shall be thanked  for their time but not included in the group.  None of 
their information  shall be used and any information  to date will be destroyed.     
 
The completed form will be scanned into the Dartmouth -Hitchcock  Electronic  Medical  Record (Aims  2+3) and 
the encounter  will be documented  for study  subjects. For community  leaders,  clinicians  and pre-validation 
subjects,  the consent  forms  (paper  or electronic)  will be kept in the PI’s locked office.  
 
Adequacy
 of Protection Against Risks  
Participants  are informed  that information  obtained through  research  interviews  and assessments  are 
confidential.  Talking  about  life experiences  may cause discomfort.  If participants  feel uncomforta ble they are 
encouraged to take a break  and continue again  later or are offered  to stop the interview  or assessment.  
Participants  may also choose not to answer  certain  questions.  The interviewer  also may offer to call the 
participant’s  family,  a program  staff member,  or concerned others  (such as a close friend)  to make sure he or 
she has someone  to talk with about  the program.   
The team  will also encourage continual  communication with the primary  care provider  if any medical  concerns  
are raised by participants.  Should any participant  endorse  any symptoms, we will immediately  contact  the 
nursing staff of the patient’s  primary  care physician at Dartmouth-Hitchcock or to the individual’s  local 
community  provider  to communicate this risk. On site, there will be individuals  and other  members  that are 
certified  in Basic  Life Support  by the American  Heart  Association as required by Institutional  Policies.  Urgent  
care can be provided in the event  of an emergency  prior to calling  9-1-1 for an ambulance to arrive.   
Any other  medically -related questions  will be referred  to the patient’s  primary  care provider  during  normal  
business  hours  (Monday  to Friday  8am-5pm)  and after-hours  on-call coverage  is available through the Family  
Medicine/General Internal  Medicine  practices  or to the local community  practice.  All study  activities  will be 
performed  during  normal  clinic  hours  (8am  to 5pm)  and hence  access  to participant’s  primary  care team  is 
possible.  Study -related  questions  can be communicated to the Principal  Investigator  at 603-653-9500 or by e-
mail at John.A.Batsis@dartmouth.edu.  Additionally,  the patient’s  emergency  contact  will be contacted as 
indicated in the consent  form.  Our team  intends  on collaborating  with each  participant’s  primary  care provider  
to determine an appropriate action plan to minimize  any risk. 
 
Potent
ial Benefits of Proposed Research  
 Research participants  have  an opportunity  to engage  in a medically  supervised Obesity  Wellness  
Intervention using novel  technologies  and would benefit  from the discussions with other  participants  in similar  
situations.  For the intervention development,  participants  will participate in this program  which  has the potential  
to improve  their overall  function,  aerobic  and resistance activity  and wellness.  Approximatel y 150minutes  
weekly  of aerobic  physical  activity  is recommended166,167. While  our program  focuses  primarily  on resistance  
training,  we will encourage  individuals  to achieve the aerobic  objective  on their own.  Individuals  will obtain data 
that could potentially  be used in clinical settings.  The monetary  appreciation is another  benefit  of this proposed  
research  that will offset  travel  costs.   The overall  risks of this study  are quite  minimal, yet in line with 
recommendations  from major  medical  societies.  Obesity  interventions  are recommended even in older  
adults168, yet we believe  that any benefits  received from this intervention far exceed those  risks.  The 
components  of the obesity  intervention would be considered medically  necessary  for older  adults  with obesity.   
 
Importance of the Knowledge  to be Gained 
The information  gained in this study  will allow  the investigators  to ascertain the benefits  from a 
technology -based  wellness  program  and anticipate furthering  our understanding  of the implications  of this 
program  on functional  and biological  biomarkers.  Understanding  these  relationships  in a clinical setting  will 
allow  further  refinement  into a wellness  program  for obese  older  adults  with the goal of limiting  the acceleration 
of sarcopenia and improving  function.  The program  engages  and empowers  patients  in altering  their lifestyle,  
thereby  promoting  healthy  living,  proper  nutrition,  physical  activity,  and maintenance of function.  The risks of 
the study  are minimal to individuals  in relation to the potential  benefits  they may receive.   
Additionally,  the Amulet  is intended on becoming  a commercially  available  device intended on 
improving  physical  health and wellness.  The device  has been  granted  a Non-Significant  Risk exemption (NSR)  
according  to published intent  of Amulet100 and review  of the protocol  by the Committee  for the Protection of 
Human Subjects  at Dartmouth,  dated 7/23/2015 based on 21 CFR 812.2(b)(ii)  (Appendix).  
 
Confidentiality  and Data Integrity:   
Confidentiality  protections  include confidentiality  training  for all new employees  and refresher  seminars  
annually  for all employees;  coding subjects  by number;  filing code  sheets  separately  from data;  removing  or 
obscuring  names  from data forms;  using  an acronym  in return  addresses  on correspondence  to subjects; 
storing  all data in locked  file cabinets;  and password- protected computer  databases.   
All data collected by Amulet  will be recorded to an internal  memory  card (standard  MicroSD  card)  but 
can only be accessed by removing  it from the Amulet  (by unscrewing  the back  cover)  and then read by any 
device with an SD-card adapter.  This approach  provides  a secure and reliable  means  of collecting  data and 
transferring it to the researcher’s  computer  when the su bject  returns  the Amulet  at the end of the study.  There  
will be automated upload  of live data via standard  Bluetooth wireless  protocols  to a computer  server  in the Kotz 
lab (or virtual  server  in the Amazon Cloud).  This transfer  of data will be conducted over authenticated and 
confidential  channels  using standard protocols  (https  – which  is used by all common  e-commerce  and banking 
websites).  Fitbit  data will be collected through  the application or through  a 3rd party  vendor  (Fitabase).   
STATISTICAL DESIGN AND POWER  
Aim 1 (Qualitative assessment ) will use mixed -methods to adapt Amulet and MOWI for use in rural 
older obese adults. Aim 2 (Develop/refine MOWI ) and Aim 3 ( Evaluate home -based MOWI ) will explore 
feasibility/acceptability, and preliminary effectiveness of the above outcomes. Data will be analyzed as 
follows:  
 
Aim 2 (Develop and refine MOWI ): Develop and refine MOWI for rural, older, obese adults.  
 Feasibility/Acceptability : The following rates  will be assessed: screening (# screened / # potentially 
eligible); eligibility [(# screened positive & eligible) / # screened]; enrollment [# enrolled / (# screened 
positive & eligible)]; assessment (# completing / # enrolled); completion (# completing / # enrolled). We will 
evaluate entry criteria (reasons for non -adherence/dropouts) and data collection time. Successful 
recruitment, retention, and acceptability is defined as meeting enrollment  of n=16, >80% completing study 
measures, and attending >80% of sessions. Adherence consists of Amulet’s attachment ≥50% of awake 
time. RA -performed survey and semi -structured interviews will assess satisfaction, usability, and feasibility 
related to Amulet focusing on ease of use and function at 12 weeks (Appendix). Equipment, software, 
technical issues (malfunctions, hardware, data loss, connectivity) will be quantified.  Themes allow 
modification and enhancement informing future iterations.  
 Statistical An alysis : The 1o outcome of Physical Function will be assessed by strength, fitness and life- task 
function. Outcomes of behavioral activation, health status, and activity will be explored. All will be measured at 0, 4, 8, 12 weeks, and 12- weeks post -study. Means, medians, standard deviations, 95% 
confidence intervals, logarithmic transformations, data plots, and interquartile ranges will allow inspection 
of means over time. Linear mixed effects modeling with a covariate for the effect of time and a random intercept (for each patient) will test the hypothesis of no change over time. Significant changes on the coefficients for time will be tested (baseline to each time) using paired t -test or Wilcoxon signed rank test. 
Successful completion consists of changes in STS, grip strength, 6MWT, gait speed and LLDFI any of 5kg, 
2.3 s, 25 m, 0.1m/s, and 24.5.  
 Sample Size: Consistent with the intent of a feasibility study  and the biostatistics guidelines by NIH, this 
exploratory analysis is not intended to be powered to detect statistically significant difference s or test 
hypotheses, but aimed to evaluate recruitment, feasibility, acceptability and outcomes . The purpose of 
Hypothesis 2 is to pilot test MOWI, maximize chances of identifying problems arising in Aim 3, and obtain 
preliminary estimates of variance  on 4 assessment points.  We will enroll 16 patients having assessments 
at 0, 4, 8 and 12 weeks, expecting 80% of enrolled subjects to complete the study. This sample size will allow us to develop and refine MOWI. We acknowledge that this aim is underpowered as this is a pilot and 
that we may overestimate effect sizes biasing future power calculations. For instance, a binomial test to 
test the null hypothesis that improvement in grip strength is just as likely as deterioration will detect an effect if the underlying proportion who improve is 90%, for typical settings of 80% power and 5% type I error rate. A more powerful test (Wald test of time term in a mixed effects model) will detect an effect at 12 
weeks equal to 1.1 within subject standard deviations (equivalent to 1.5 standard deviations of a change 
from 0 to 12 weeks).  
v. 01/17/2019 1CONSENT TO TAKE PART IN RESEARCH
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and Dartmouth College 
Fitbit/Amulet
Study title:    Mobile Obesity Wellness Intervention in Rural Older Adults with Obesity
Aim 2
Principal Investigator: John A. Batsis, MD
You are being asked to take part in a research study.  Taking part in research is voluntary.  
Your decision whether or not to take part will have no effect on the  quality of your medical 
care.     Please ask questions if there is anything about this study you do not understand.
What is the purpose of this study?
The purpose of the study is to learn if incorporating technology into a wellness program is 
valid, effective and can improve one’s care.  
Will you benefit from taking part in this study?
You may or may not personally benefit from being in this research study. We hope that the 
information we gather will be helpful in advancing our research to help older adults who need to lose weight in the future.
What does this study involve?
Your participation in this study will last three months. During this time, we will provide each 
person with a mobile health device (Amulet) that was designed by Dartmouth researchers.  The Amulet is worn on the wrist, like a watch.  We will also provide you Fitbit for a comparison. You will participate in a 12-week program (3 times per week) of weekly nutrition counseling, twice weekly group exercise visits at the Centers for Health & Aging, and be asked to use the Amulet. Each nutrition session will last 15-20 minutes, and each exercise session will last 70-90 minutes. 
To ensure that you are eligible to participate in the study, we will review your medical record, 
measure your blood pressure, heart rate and give you a memory test.
We will provide you with a tablet computer that will allow the Amulet to communicate with 
us. We will set this up for you. The Research Assistant will provide verbal and electronic feedback to motivate you throughout the process twice weekly. Questionnaires, and physical strength and fitness measures will be assessed at baseline, 4, 8, and 12 weeks. Post-study assessments will be performed as well. 
We will ask you for a blood draw before the study begins and again at the end.  Any unused 
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 2blood will be banked. Some of your blood cells or serum may be stored for future research use. 
Any future research that uses your blood will be reviewed by the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at Dartmouth College, who will determine if the research requires your permission or may be properly done without further permission from you.
These results will be available in your Dartmouth-Hitchcock electronic medical record. In 
addition, we will accurately measure your metabolic rate using our Resting Energy Expenditure device. This device asks you to breathe while you are resting into a tube at your regular breath rate. There are no known side effects to this test. Lastly, we will measure your body composition using a bioelectrical impedance device which measures muscle and fat mass that is used for routine clinical care at the Weight & Wellness Center at Heater Road. 
What are the options if you do not want to take part in this study?
You do not have to take part in this study if you do not wish to nor do you need to take part in 
this study to receive medical care or treatment.  
What are the risks involved with being enrolled in this study? 
We cannot be sure how your body may respond to the exercises you will be asked to do in this 
study. The research team will discuss possible problems and the chances that they will happen. Unknown problems may happen.  Problems are likely to be small, such as a minor side effect such as muscle soreness or fatigue, or they may be so serious that they result in death, which would be extremely unlikely. Or they may be somewhere in between.  
A risk of providing blood is mild to moderate pain at the site of the needle puncture into your 
vein.  Other risks are redness, minor bleeding, swelling and a bruise at the site of the needle puncture or, rarely, an infection.  Some people feel dizzy or faint when blood is taken; however, most people do not experience any problems.
All participants will need permission from their primary care doctor to participate in this 
study. You should report any problems to your doctor or to the director of this study : John A. 
Batsis, MD, 603-653-9500
Other important items you should know: 
• Leaving the study:   You may choose to stop taking part in this study at any time. If you 
decide to stop taking part, it will have no effect on the quality of medical care you receive. Any 
equipment must be returned to the study director. The investigator reserves the right to stop the study participant from continuing without participant consent. • Number of people in this study:   We expect 10 people to enroll in this study here
• Funding:  The National Institutes on Aging, the Office of Dietary Supplements, and the 
Department of Medicine provides funding to Dartmouth College for this research.
• Product Development: If the results of this research are used to develop a product sold for a 
profit, you will not share in the profit.  
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 3How will your privacy be protected?
The information collected as data for this study includes: 
Data that is available in the Dartmouth-Hitchcock electronic medical record and audiotaped data as outlined above.  Study data will be maintained for a period of six (6) years or longer if needed for other purposes. At that time, data will be deleted from computer hardware or shredded on the DHMC campus. 
We are careful to protect the identities of the people in this study.  We also keep the 
information collected for this study secure and confidential.  All data will be kept in a locked office, and all computer data will be on a password protected encrypted computer as outlined by the Committee of Protection of Human Subjects. 
The information collected for this study will be used only for the purposes of research as stated 
earlier in this form.  
Who may use or see your health information?
By signing this form, you allow the research team to use your health information and give it to 
others involved in the research.  The research team includes the study director plus others working on this study at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and elsewhere.  You also permit any health care provider holding health information needed for this study to give copies of your information to the research team.
The information collected for this study may be used by researchers or officials of the 
following institutions.
•Dartmouth College
•Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital
•Dartmouth-Hitchcock Clinic
•Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center 
•Mayo Clinic Rochester
•University of New Hampshire
All information that is collected and shared with study investigators will be de-identified 
outside of the Dartmouth and shared in aggregate.
During this study, information that identifies you may be given to some organizations that 
may not have a legal duty to protect it.  These organizations may also use and disclose your information for other purposes.
Your permission to use your health information for this study will not end until the study is
completed. During this study, you and others who take part in the study may not have access to the study data.  You may ask for study data once the study is over.
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 4It is possible for a court or government official to order the release of study data including 
information about you.  
What if you decide not to give permission to use and share your personal health information?
If you do not allow use of your health information for this study, you may not take part in this 
study. If you choose to stop taking part in this study, you may cancel permission for the use of your health information.  You should let the researcher know if you want to cancel your permission. The study team will assist you in putting your wishes in writing. Information collected for the study before your permission is cancelled will continue to be used in the research.
What about the costs of this study? 
There are no costs charged to the participant Will you be paid to take part in this study?
If you complete at least 80% of all visits and assessments at 3-months, you will be paid $100 
token of appreciation for your time and effort. A fixed schedule of items (pens, notepads, thank-you cards) will be given to you as recognition of your participation. You have the option of declining these gifts.
The sessions will be done only for research purposes and paid for by the sponsor. Insurance 
plans will not be billed as part of this project. All medical issues resulting from this study would need to be covered through your regular healthcare insurance. You or your insurance plan will be expected to pay for the costs of this usual medical care. For assistance in determining your coverage, please call the billing specialist in DHMC Patient Financial Services at 603-653-1047 or 800-368-4783.  
Your name, address, and social security number will be given to an office at DHMC that 
arranges for payments and reports payments to the IRS.  If you do not provide a social security number, no payment can be made.  This DHMC office sometimes checks to make sure that social security numbers and names match.
Whom should you call with questions about this study?
If you have questions about this study or need to report a study related injury, you can call 
your doctor or the research director for this study: Dr. John A. Batsis, MD, (603) 653-9500 normal business hours.  If Dr. Batsis is not available, all concerns should be addressed by your primary care provider’s office who will be available to answer your questions during normal business hours. An emergency contact number is (603) 650-5000, the main hospital number. 
If you have questions, concerns, complaints, or suggestions about human research at 
Dartmouth, you may call the Office of the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at Dartmouth College (603) 646-6482 during normal business hours.
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 5CONSENT
I have read the above information about  Mobile Obesity Wellness Intervention in Rural 
Older Adults with Obesity  and have been given time to ask questions.  I agree to take part in 
this study and I have been given a copy of this signed consent form.
Participant's Signature and Date / PRINTED NAME 
Researcher or Designee Signature and Date PRINTED NAME 
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 1CONSENT TO TAKE PART IN RESEARCH
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and Dartmouth College 
Ftudb title/    Mobile Obesity Wellness Intervention in Rural Older Adults with Obesity
Aim 2
Yitbit Only
Srinciyal :nPep tigator/ Iohn Av  s atp ip J MD
gou are beink asped to tape c art in a resear. h studyf   Tapink c art in resear. h is voluntaryf   
. our decip ion B hether or not to take yart B ill haPe no e,,ect on the  Yualitb o, bour medical 
carev     Sleap e ap k Yuep tionp  i, there ip  anbthing aw out thip  p tudb bou do not underp tandv
What is the c urc ose o? this study:
f he yuryop e o, the p tudb ip  to learn i, incoryorating technologb into a B ellnep p  yrogram ip  
PalidJ e,,ectiPe and can imyroPe oneq p  carev   
Will you bene?it ?rom tapink c art in this study:
. ou mab or mab not yerp onallb w ene,it ,rom w eing in thip  rep earch p tudbv  T e hoye that the 
in,ormation B e gather B ill w e hely,ul in adPancing our rep earch to hely older adultp  B ho need 
to lop e B eight in the ,uturev
What does this study involve:
. our yarticiyation in thip  p tudb B ill lap t three monthp v  During thip  timeJ B e B ill yroPide each 
yerp on B ith a mow ile health dePice ’W itwit(v f he W itwit ip  B orn on the B rip tJ like a B atchv   . ou 
B ill yarticiyate in a ) 1-B eek yrogram ’2 timep  yer B eek( o, B eeklb nutrition counp elingJ tB ice B eeklb grouy e3ercip e Pip itp  at the Centerp  ,or Health x  AgingJ and w e ap ked to up e the 
Amuletv  & ach nutrition p ep p ion B ill lap t ) E-15 minutep J and each e3ercip e p ep p ion B ill lap t 05-75 
minutep v  
f o enp ure that bou are eligiw le to yarticiyate in the p tudbJ B e B ill rePieB  bour medical recordJ 
meap ure bour w lood yrep p ureJ heart rate and giPe bou a memorb tep tv
T e B ill yroPide bou B ith a taw let comyuter that B ill alloB  the W itwit to communicate B ith up v  
T e B ill p et thip  uy ,or bouv  f he 9 ep earch Ap p ip tant B ill yroPide Perw al and electronic ,eedw ack 
to motiPate bou throughout the yrocep p  tB ice B eeklbv  Ruep tionnairep J and yhbp ical p trength 
and ,itnep p  meap urep  B ill w e ap p ep p ed at w ap elineJ Q J 4J and ) 1 B eekp v  S o pt - pt u d b  a ppe ppm e n t p 
B ill w e yer,ormed ap  B ellv
T e p hall ap k bou ,or a w lood draB  w e,ore the p tudb w eginp  and again at the endv   Anb unup ed 
wlood B ill w e wankedv  Fome o, bour w lood cellp  or p erum mab w e p tored ,or ,uture rep earch up ev  
Anb ,uture rep earch that up ep  bour w lood B ill w e rePieB ed w b the Committee ,or the Srotection 
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 2o, Human Fuw 8ectp  at Dartmouth CollegeJ B ho B ill determine i, the rep earch reYuirep  bour 
yermip p ion or mab w e yroyerlb done B ithout ,urther yermip p ion ,rom bouv
f hep e rep ultp  B ill w e aPailaw le in bour Dartmouth-Hitchcock electronic medical recordv  :n 
additionJ B e B ill accuratelb meap ure bour metaw olic rate up ing our 9 ep ting & nergb 
& 3yenditure dePicev  f hip  dePice ap kp  bou to w reathe B hile bou are rep ting into a tuw e at bour 
regular w reath ratev  f here are no knoB n p ide e,,ectp  to thip  tep tv  j ap tlbJ B e B ill meap ure bour 
wodb comyop ition up ing a w ioelectrical imyedance dePice B hich meap urep  mup cle and ,at 
map p  that ip  up ed ,or routine clinical care at the T eight x  T ellnep p  Center at Heater 9 oadv  
What are the oc tions i? you do not want to tape c art in this study:
. ou do not haPe to take yart in thip  p tudb i, bou do not B ip h to nor do bou need to take yart in 
thip  p tudb to receiPe medical care or treatmentv   
What are the risps involved with beink enrolled in this study:  
T e cannot w e p ure hoB  bour w odb mab rep yond to the e3ercip ep  bou B ill w e ap ked to do in thip  
pt u d b v  f he rep earch team B ill dip cup p  yop p iw le yrow lemp  and the chancep  that theb B ill hayyenv  
L nknoB n yrow lemp  mab hayyenv   Srow lemp  are likelb to w e p mallJ p uch ap  a minor p ide e,,ect 
p uch ap  mup cle p orenep p  or ,atigueJ or theb mab w e p o p erioup  that theb rep ult in deathJ B hich 
B ould w e e3tremelb unlikelbv  Ur theb mab w e p omeB here in w etB eenv   
A rip k o, yroPiding w lood ip  mild to moderate yain at the p ite o, the needle yuncture into bour 
Peinv   Uther rip kp  are rednep p J minor w leedingJ p B elling and a w ruip e at the p ite o, the needle 
yuncture orJ rarelbJ an in,ectionv   Fome yeoyle ,eel diO Ob or ,aint B hen w lood ip  takenz  
hoB ePerJ mop t yeoyle do not e3yerience anb yrow lemp v
All yarticiyantp  B ill need yermip p ion ,rom their yrimarb care doctor to yarticiyate in thip  
pt u d b v  . ou p hould reyort anb yrow lemp  to bour doctor or to the director o, thip  p tudb J Bohn Af  
, atsisD  M6 D  03- 5 09- 5 •933
Other imc ortant items you should pnowJ  
L Feavink the studyJ   . ou mab choop e to p toy taking yart in thip  p tudb at anb timev  :, bou 
decide to p toy taking yartJ it B ill haPe no e,,ect on the Yualitb o, medical care bou receiPev  Anb 
eYuiyment mup t w e returned to the p tudb directorv  f he inPep tigator rep erPep  the right to p toy 
the p tudb yarticiyant ,rom continuing B ithout yarticiyant conp entv  
; Number o? c eoc le in this studyJ   T e e3yect ) 5 yeoyle to enroll in thip  p tudb here
; YundinkJ   f he • ational :np titutep  on AgingJ the U,,ice o, Dietarb Fuyylementp J and the 
Deyartment o, Medicine yroPidep  ,unding to Dartmouth College ,or thip  rep earchv
; Produ. t 6 eveloc mentJ  :, the rep ultp  o, thip  rep earch are up ed to dePeloy a yroduct p old ,or a 
yro,itJ bou B ill not p hare in the yro,itv   
How will your c riva. y be c rote. ted:
f he in,ormation collected ap  data ,or thip  p tudb includep / 
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 3Data that ip  aPailaw le in the Dartmouth-Hitchcock electronic medical record and audiotayed 
data ap  outlined aw oPev  Ftudb data B ill w e maintained ,or a yeriod o, p i3 ’N ( bearp  or longer i, 
needed ,or other yuryop ep v  At that timeJ data B ill w e deleted ,rom comyuter hardB are or 
p hredded on the DHMC camyup v  
T e are care,ul to yrotect the identitiep  o, the yeoyle in thip  p tudbv   T e alp o keey the 
in,ormation collected ,or thip  p tudb p ecure and con,identialv   All data B ill w e keyt in a locked 
o,,iceJ and all comyuter data B ill w e on a yap p B ord yrotected encrbyted comyuter ap  outlined 
wb the Committee o, Srotection o, Human Fuw 8ectp v  
f he in,ormation collected ,or thip  p tudb B ill w e up ed onlb ,or the yuryop ep  o, rep earch ap  p tated 
earlier in thip  ,ormv   
Who may use or see your health in?ormation:
s b p igning thip  ,ormJ bou alloB  the rep earch team to up e bour health in,ormation and giPe it to 
otherp  inPolPed in the rep earchv   f he rep earch team includep  the p tudb director ylup  otherp  
B orking on thip  p tudb at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and elp eB herev   . ou alp o 
yermit anb health care yroPider holding health in,ormation needed ,or thip  p tudb to giPe coyiep  o, bour in,ormation to the rep earch teamv
f he in,ormation collected ,or thip  p tudb mab w e up ed w b rep earcherp  or o,,icialp  o, the 
,olloB ing inp titutionp v
•Dartmouth College
•Marb Hitchcock Memorial Hop yital
•Dartmouth-Hitchcock Clinic
•Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center 
•Mabo Clinic 9 ochep ter
•L niPerp itb o, • eB  Hamyp hire
All in,ormation that ip  collected and p hared B ith p tudb inPep tigatorp  B ill w e de-identi,ied 
outp ide o, the Dartmouth and p hared in aggregatev
During thip  p tudbJ in,ormation that identi,iep  bou mab w e giPen to p ome organiO ationp  that 
mab not haPe a legal dutb to yrotect itv   f hep e organiO ationp  mab alp o up e and dip clop e bour 
in,ormation ,or other yuryop ep v
. our yermip p ion to up e bour health in,ormation ,or thip  p tudb B ill not end until the p tudb ip  
comyletedv  During thip  p tudbJ bou and otherp  B ho take yart in the p tudb mab not haPe accep p  
to the p tudb datav   . ou mab ap k ,or p tudb data once the p tudb ip  oPerv
:t ip  yop p iw le ,or a court or goPernment o,,icial to order the releap e o, p tudb data including 
in,ormation aw out bouv   
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 4What i? you de. ide not to kive c ermission to use and share your c ersonal health in?ormation:
:, bou do not alloB  up e o, bour health in,ormation ,or thip  p tudbJ bou mab not take yart in thip  
pt u d b v  :, bou choop e to p toy taking yart in thip  p tudbJ bou mab cancel yermip p ion ,or the up e o, 
bour health in,ormationv   . ou p hould let the rep earcher knoB  i, bou B ant to cancel bour 
yermip p ionv  f he p tudb team B ill ap p ip t bou in yutting bour B ip hep  in B ritingv  :n,ormation 
collected ,or the p tudb w e,ore bour yermip p ion ip  cancelled B ill continue to w e up ed in the 
rep earchv
What about the . osts o? this study:  
f here are no cop tp  charged to the yarticiyant Will you be c aid to tape c art in this study:
:, bou comylete at leap t 456  o, all Pip itp  and ap p ep p mentp  at 2-monthp J bou B ill w e yaid % ) 1E ap  
a token o, ayyreciation ,or bour time and e,,ortv  A ,i3ed p chedule o, itemp  ’yenp J noteyadp J 
thank-bou cardp ( B ill w e giPen to bou ap  recognition o, bour yarticiyationv  . ou haPe the oytion 
o, declining thep e gi,tp v
f he p ep p ionp  B ill w e done onlb ,or rep earch yuryop ep  and yaid ,or w b  t h e  py o n po r v  :np urance 
ylanp  B ill not w e willed ap  yart o, thip  yro8 ectv All medical ip p uep  rep ulting ,rom thip  p tudb 
B ould need to w e coPered through bour regular healthcare inp urancev  . ou or bour inp urance 
ylan B ill w e e3yected to yab ,or the cop tp  o, thip  up ual medical carev  Wor ap p ip tance in 
determining bour coPerageJ yleap e call the w illing p yecialip t in DHMC Satient W inancial 
FerPicep  at N 52-NE2-) 5Q 0 or 455-2N 4-Q042v  
. our nameJ addrep p J and p ocial p ecuritb numw er B ill w e giPen to an o,,ice at DHMC that 
arrangep  ,or yabmentp  and reyortp  yabmentp  to the :9 Fv   :, bou do not yroPide a p ocial p ecuritb 
numw erJ no yabment can w e madev   f hip  DHMC o,,ice p ometimep  checkp  to make p ure that 
p ocial p ecuritb numw erp  and namep  matchv
Whom should you . all with questions about this study:
:, bou haPe Yuep tionp  aw out thip  p tudb or need to reyort a p tudb related in8 urbJ bou can call 
bour doctor or the rep earch director ,or thip  p tudb/ Drv  Iohn Av  s atp ip J MDJ ’N 52( N E2-7E55 
normal w up inep p  hourp v   :, Drv  s atp ip  ip  not aPailaw leJ all concernp  p hould w e addrep p ed w b bour 
yrimarb care yroPiderq p  o,,ice B ho B ill w e aPailaw le to anp B er bour Yuep tionp  during normal 
wup inep p  hourp v  An emergencb contact numw er ip  ’N 52( N E5-E555J the main hop yital numw erv 
:, bou haPe Yuep tionp J concernp J comylaintp J or p uggep tionp  aw out human rep earch at 
DartmouthJ bou mab call the U,,ice o, the Committee ,or the Srotection o, Human Fuw 8ectp  at 
Dartmouth College ’N 52( N QN-NQ41 during normal w up inep p  hourp v
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 5CONSENT
: haPe read the aw oPe in,ormation aw out Mobile Obesity Wellness Intervention in Rural 
Older Adults with Obesity  and haPe w een giPen time to ap k Yuep tionp v   : agree to take yart in 
thip  p tudb and : haPe w een giPen a coyb o, thip  p igned conp ent ,ormv
Sarticiyant$ p  Fignature and Date ' S9 :• f & D • AM&  
9 ep earcher or Dep ignee Fignature and Date S9 :• f & D • AM&  
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 1CONSENT TO TAKE PART IN RESEARCH
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and Dartmouth College 
Fitbit/Amulet
Study title:    Mobile Obesity Wellness Intervention in Rural Older Adults with Obesity
MOWI-P
Principal Investigator: John A. Batsis, MDYou are being asked to take part in a research study.  Taking part in research is voluntary.  
Your decision whether or not to take part will have no effect on the  quality of your medical 
care.     Please ask questions if there is anything about this study you do not understand.
What is the purpose of this study?
The purpose of the study is to learn if incorporating technology into a wellness program is 
valid, effective and can improve one’s care and whether a whey protein supplement can improve your muscle function during a weight-loss study.  
Will you benefit from taking part in this study?
You may or may not personally benefit from being in this research study. We hope that the 
information we gather will be helpful in advancing our research to help older adults who need to lose weight in the future.
What does this study involve?
Your participation in this study will last three months. During this time, we will provide each 
person with a mobile health device (Amulet) that was designed by Dartmouth researchers.  The Amulet is worn on the wrist, like a watch.  We will also provide you Fitbit for a comparison. You will participate in a 12-week program (3 visit times per week) of weekly nutrition counseling, twice weekly group exercise visits at the Centers for Health & Aging and be asked to use the Amulet. Each nutrition session will last 15-20 minutes, and each exercise session will last 70-90 minutes. In addition, we will ask participants to drink a whey protein supplement post-exercises three times weekly.
To ensure that you are eligible to participate in the study, we will review your medical record, 
measure your blood pressure, heart rate and give you a memory test.
We will provide you with a tablet computer that will allow the Amulet to communicate with 
us. We will set this up for you. The Research Assistant will provide verbal and electronic feedback to motivate you throughout the process twice weekly through messaging and phone calls. Questionnaires, and physical strength and fitness measures will be assessed at baseline, 
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 24, 8, and 12 weeks. Post-study assessments will be performed as well. 
We will ask you for a blood draw before the study begins and again at the end.  Any unused 
blood will be banked. Some of your blood cells or serum may be stored for future research use. Any future research that uses your blood will be reviewed by the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at Dartmouth College, who will determine if the research requires your permission or may be properly done without further permission from you.
These results will be available in your Dartmouth-Hitchcock electronic medical record. In 
addition, we will accurately measure your metabolic rate using our Resting Energy Expenditure device. Lastly, we will measure your body composition using a bioelectrical impedance device which measures muscle and fat that is used for routine care at the Weight & Wellness Center at Heater Road. 
What are the options if you do not want to take part in this study?
You do not have to take part in this study if you do not wish to nor do you need to take part in 
this study to receive medical care or treatment.  
What are the risks involved with being enrolled in this study? 
We cannot be sure how your body may respond to the exercises you will be asked to do in this 
study. The research team will discuss possible problems and the chances that they will happen. Unknown problems may happen.  Problems are likely to be small, such as a minor side effect such as muscle soreness, or they may be so serious that they result in death, which would be extremely unlikely. Or they may be somewhere in between.  There are few known side effects of the whey protein supplement. They include increased bowel movements, nausea, cramps, and fatigue. Some patients may not tolerate whey due to undiagnosed lactose intolerance or an allergy. Very rarely, kidney function or bleeding may be affected but we will screen for these. Additionally, in adults with diabetes, blood sugars may drop. 
A risk of providing blood is mild to moderate pain at the site of the needle puncture into your 
vein.  Other risks are redness, minor bleeding, swelling and a bruise at the site of the needle puncture or, rarely, an infection.  Some people feel dizzy or faint when blood is taken; however, most people do not experience any problems.
All participants will need permission from their primary care doctor to participate in this 
study. You should report any problems to your doctor or to the director of this study : John A. 
Batsis, MD, 603-653-9500
Other important items you should know: 
• Leaving the study:   You may choose to stop taking part in this study at any time. If you 
decide to stop taking part, it will have no effect on the quality of medical care you receive. Any 
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 3equipment must be returned to the study director. The investigator reserves the right to stop 
the study participant from continuing without participant consent. • Number of people in this study:   We expect 16 people to enroll in this study here
• Funding:  The National Institutes on Aging, the Office of Dietary Supplements,  and the 
Department of Medicine provides funding to Dartmouth College for this research.
• Product Development: If the results of this research are used to develop a product sold for a 
profit, you will not share in the profit.  
How will your privacy be protected?
The information collected as data for this study includes: 
Data that is available in the Dartmouth-Hitchcock electronic medical record and audiotaped data as outlined above.  Study data will be maintained for a period of six (6) years or longer if needed for other purposes. At that time, data will be deleted from computer hardware or shredded on the DHMC campus. 
We are careful to protect the identities of the people in this study.  We also keep the 
information collected for this study secure and confidential.  All data will be kept in a locked office, and all computer data will be on a password protected encrypted computer as outlined by the Committee of Protection of Human Subjects. 
The information collected for this study will be used only for the purposes of research as stated 
earlier in this form.  
Who may use or see your health information?
By signing this form, you allow the research team to use your health information and give it to 
others involved in the research.  The research team includes the study director plus others working on this study at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and elsewhere.  You also permit any health care provider holding health information needed for this study to give copies of your information to the research team.
The information collected for this study may be used by researchers or officials of the 
following institutions.
•Dartmouth College
•Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital
•Dartmouth-Hitchcock Clinic
•Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center 
•Mayo Clinic Rochester
•University of New Hampshire
All information that is collected and shared with study investigators will be de-identified 
outside of the Dartmouth and shared in aggregate.
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 4During this study, information that identifies you may be given to some organizations that 
may not have a legal duty to protect it.  These organizations may also use and disclose your information for other purposes.
Your permission to use your health information for this study will not end until the study is 
completed. During this study, you and others who take part in the study may not have access to the study data.  You may ask for study data once the study is over.
It is possible for a court or government official to order the release of study data including 
information about you.  
What if you decide not to give permission to use and share your personal health information?
If you do not allow use of your health information for this study, you may not take part in this 
study. If you choose to stop taking part in this study, you may cancel permission for the use of your health information.  You should let the researcher know if you want to cancel your permission. The study team will assist you in putting your wishes in writing. Information collected for the study before your permission is cancelled will continue to be used in the research.
What about the costs of this study? 
There are no costs charged to the participant Will you be paid to take part in this study?
If you complete at least 80% of all visits and assessments at 3-months, you will be paid $100 as 
a token of appreciation for your time and effort. A fixed schedule of items (pens, notepads, thank-you cards) will be given to you as recognition of your participation. You have the option of declining these gifts.
The sessions will be done only for research purposes and paid for by the sponsor. Insurance 
plans will not be billed as part of this project. All medical issues resulting from this study would need to be covered through your regular healthcare insurance. You or your insurance plan will be expected to pay for the costs of this usual medical care. For assistance in determining your coverage, please call the billing specialist in DHMC Patient Financial Services at 603-653-1047 or 800-368-4783.  
Your name, address, and social security number will be given to an office at DHMC that 
arranges for payments and reports payments to the IRS.  If you do not provide a social security number, no payment can be made.  This DHMC office sometimes checks to make sure that social security numbers and names match.
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 5Whom should you call with questions about this study?
If you have questions about this study or need to report a study related injury, you can call 
your doctor or the research director for this study: Dr. John A. Batsis, MD, (603) 653-9500 normal business hours.  If Dr. Batsis is not available, all concerns should be addressed by your primary care provider’s office who will be available to answer your questions during normal business hours. An emergency contact number is (603) 650-5000, the main hospital number. 
If you have questions, concerns, complaints, or suggestions about human research at 
Dartmouth, you may call the Office of the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at Dartmouth College (603) 646-6482 during normal business hours.
CONSENT
I have read the above information about  Mobile Obesity Wellness Intervention in Rural 
Older Adults with Obesity  and have been given time to ask questions.  I agree to take part in 
this study and I have been given a copy of this signed consent form.
Participant's Signature and Date / PRINTED NAME 
Researcher or Designee Signature and Date PRINTED NAME 
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 1CONSENT TO TAKE PART IN RESEARCH
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and Dartmouth College 
Fitbit Only
Study title:    Mobile Obesity Wellness Intervention in Rural Older Adults with Obesity
MOWI-P
Principal Investigator: John A. Batsis, MDYou are being asked to take part in a research study.  Taking part in research is voluntary.  
Your decision whether or not to take part will have no effect on the  quality of your medical 
care.     Please ask questions if there is anything about this study you do not understand.
What is the purpose of this study?
The purpose of the study is to learn if incorporating technology into a wellness program is 
valid, effective and can improve one’s care and whether a whey protein supplement can improve your muscle function during a weight-loss study.  
Will you benefit from taking part in this study?
You may or may not personally benefit from being in this research study. We hope that the 
information we gather will be helpful in advancing our research to help older adults who need to lose weight in the future.
What does this study involve?
Your participation in this study will last three months. During this time, we will provide each 
person with a mobile health device (Fitbit).  The Fitbit is worn on the wrist, like a watch. You will participate in a 12-week program (3 visit times per week) of weekly nutrition counseling, twice weekly group exercise visits at the Centers for Health & Aging and be asked to use the device. Each nutrition session will last 15-20 minutes, and each exercise session will last 70-90 minutes. In addition, we will ask participants to drink a whey protein supplement post-exercises three times weekly.
To ensure that you are eligible to participate in the study, we will review your medical record, 
measure your blood pressure, heart rate and give you a memory test.
We will provide you with a tablet computer that will allow the Fitbit to communicate with us. 
We will set this up for you. The Research Assistant will provide verbal and electronic feedback to motivate you throughout the process twice weekly through messaging and phone calls. Questionnaires, and physical strength and fitness measures will be assessed at baseline, 4, 8, and 12 weeks. Post-study assessments will be performed as well.
We shall ask you for a blood draw before the study begins and again at the end.  Any unused 
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 2blood will be banked. Some of your blood cells or serum may be stored for future research 
use. Any future research that uses your blood will be reviewed by the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at Dartmouth College, who will determine if the research requires your permission or may be properly done without further permission from you.
These results will be available in your Dartmouth-Hitchcock electronic medical record. In 
addition, we will accurately measure your metabolic rate using our Resting Energy Expenditure device. Lastly, we will measure your body composition using a bioelectrical impedance device which measures muscle and fat that is used for routine care at the Weight & Wellness Center at Heater Road. 
What are the options if you do not want to take part in this study?
You do not have to take part in this study if you do not wish to nor do you need to take part in 
this study to receive medical care or treatment.  
What are the risks involved with being enrolled in this study? 
We cannot be sure how your body may respond to the exercises you will be asked to do in this 
study. The research team will discuss possible problems and the chances that they will happen. Unknown problems may happen.  Problems are likely to be small, such as a minor side effect such as muscle soreness, or they may be so serious that they result in death, which would be extremely unlikely. Or they may be somewhere in between.  There are few known side effects of the whey protein supplement. They include increased bowel movements, nausea, cramps, and fatigue. Some patients may not tolerate whey due to undiagnosed lactose intolerance or an allergy. Very rarely, kidney function or bleeding may be affected but we will screen for these. Additionally, in adults with diabetes, blood sugars may drop. 
A risk of providing blood is mild to moderate pain at the site of the needle puncture into your 
vein.  Other risks are redness, minor bleeding, swelling and a bruise at the site of the needle puncture or, rarely, an infection.  Some people feel dizzy or faint when blood is taken; however, most people do not experience any problems.
All participants will need permission from their primary care doctor to participate in this 
study. You should report any problems to your doctor or to the director of this study : John A. 
Batsis, MD, 603-653-9500
Other important items you should know: 
• Leaving the study:   You may choose to stop taking part in this study at any time. If you 
decide to stop taking part, it will have no effect on the quality of medical care you receive. Any 
equipment must be returned to the study director. The investigator reserves the right to stop the study participant from continuing without participant consent. • Number of people in this study:   We expect 16 people to enroll in this study here
• Funding:  The National Institutes on Aging, the Office of Dietary Supplements,  and the 
Department of Medicine provides funding to Dartmouth College for this research.
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 3• Product Development: If the results of this research are used to develop a product sold for a 
profit, you will not share in the profit.  
How will your privacy be protected?
The information collected as data for this study includes: 
Data that is available in the Dartmouth-Hitchcock electronic medical record and audiotaped data as outlined above.  Study data will be maintained for a period of six (6) years or longer if needed for other purposes. At that time, data will be deleted from computer hardware or shredded on the DHMC campus. 
We are careful to protect the identities of the people in this study.  We also keep the 
information collected for this study secure and confidential.  All data will be kept in a locked office, and all computer data will be on a password protected encrypted computer as outlined by the Committee of Protection of Human Subjects. 
The information collected for this study will be used only for the purposes of research as stated 
earlier in this form.  
Who may use or see your health information?
By signing this form, you allow the research team to use your health information and give it to 
others involved in the research.  The research team includes the study director plus others working on this study at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and elsewhere.  You also permit any health care provider holding health information needed for this study to give copies of your information to the research team.
The information collected for this study may be used by researchers or officials of the 
following institutions.
•Dartmouth College
•Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital
•Dartmouth-Hitchcock Clinic
•Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center 
•Mayo Clinic Rochester
•University of New Hampshire
In order to conduct this study, researchers need to use your health care information.  This data 
is called Protected Health Information ("PHI”).  PHI is protected by federal privacy laws (HIPAA).  By signing this consent form, you give your permission to have your PHI collected, used and disclosed for purposes of this study.  There is no intention to disclose your PHI to others outside of the study. There are protections in place to keep your PHI and research data confidential.  However, HIPAA requires notification so you are aware if your PHI is disclosed to others, it may no longer be protected by federal privacy laws.
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 4No publication or public presentation about the research described above will reveal your 
identity without another authorization from you.
Identifiable data collected for this study will be used for research purposes which are 
determined to be reasonable and in line with expectations by a review committee.
Once data collected for this research study is no longer identifiable, the data may be used or 
disclosed for other purposes.
Your permission to use your health information for this study will not end until the study is 
completed. During this study, you and others who take part in the study may not have access to the study data.  You may ask for your study data once the study is over. You have a right to receive a copy of the information in your medical record at any time.
This research is covered by a Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of 
Health. The researchers with this Certificate may not disclose or use information, documents, or biospecimens that may identify you in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other action, suit, or proceeding, or be used as evidence, for example, if there is a court subpoena, unless you have consented for this use. Information, documents, or biospecimens protected by this Certificate cannot be disclosed to anyone else who is not connected with the research except, if there is a federal, state, or local law that requires disclosure (such as to report child abuse or communicable diseases but not for federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings, see below); if you have consented to the disclosure, including for your medical treatment; or if it is used for other scientific research, as allowed by federal regulations protecting research subjects. 
The Certificate cannot be used to refuse a request for information from personnel of the United 
States federal or state government agency sponsoring the project that is needed for auditing or program evaluation by NIA which is funding this project or for information that must be disclosed in order to meet the requirements of the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  You should understand that a Certificate of Confidentiality does not prevent you from voluntarily releasing information about yourself or your involvement in this research. If you want your research information released to an insurer, medical care provider, or any other person not connected with the research, you must provide consent to allow the researchers to release it.
The Certificate of Confidentiality will not be used to prevent disclosure as required by federal, 
state, or local law of: child or elder abuse and/or neglect, or harm to self or others.
What if you decide not to give permission to use and share your personal health information?
If you do not allow use of your health information for this study, you may not take part in this 
study. If you choose to stop taking part in this study, you may cancel permission for the use of your health information.  You should let the researcher know if you want to cancel your permission. The study team will assist you in putting your wishes in writing. Information 
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 5collected for the study before your permission is cancelled will continue to be used in the 
research.
What about the costs of this study? 
There are no costs charged to the participant Will you be paid to take part in this study?
If you complete at least 80% of all visits and assessments at 3-months, you will be paid $125 as 
a token of appreciation for your time and effort. A fixed schedule of items (pens, notepads, thank-you cards) will be given to you as recognition of your participation. You have the option of declining these gifts.
The sessions will be done only for research purposes and paid for by the sponsor. Insurance 
plans will not be billed as part of this project. All medical issues resulting from this study would need to be covered through your regular healthcare insurance. You or your insurance plan will be expected to pay for the costs of this usual medical care. For assistance in determining your coverage, please call the billing specialist in DHMC Patient Financial Services at 603-653-1047 or 800-368-4783.  
Your name, address, and social security number will be given to an office at DHMC that 
arranges for payments and reports payments to the IRS.  If you do not provide a social security number, no payment can be made.  This DHMC office sometimes checks to make sure that social security numbers and names match.
Whom should you call with questions about this study?
If you have questions about this study or need to report a study related injury, you can call 
your doctor or the research director for this study: Dr. John A. Batsis, MD, (603) 653-9500 during normal business hours.  If Dr. Batsis is not available, all concerns should be addressed by your primary care provider’s office who will be available to answer your questions during normal business hours. An emergency contact number is (603) 650-5000, the main hospital number. 
If you have questions, concerns, complaints, or suggestions about human research at 
Dartmouth, you may call the Office of the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at Dartmouth College (603) 646-6482 during normal business hours.
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 01/17/2019 6CONSENT
I have read the above information about  Mobile Obesity Wellness Intervention in Rural 
Older Adults with Obesity  and have been given time to ask questions.  I agree to take part in 
this study and I have been given a copy of this signed consent form.
Participant's Signature and Date / PRINTED NAME 
Researcher or Designee Signature and Date PRINTED NAME 
CPHS Approval Date 1/18/2019                   STUDY00028905
v. 7.11.2018 1CONSENT TO TAKE PART IN RESEARCH
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and Dartmouth College 
Study title:    Mobile Obesity Wellness Intervention in Rural Older Adults with Obesity
Aim 4-Maintenance
Principal Investigator: John A. Batsis, MD
Project Director: Courtney J. Stevens, PhD
You are being asked to take part in a research study.  Taking part in research is voluntary.  
Your decision whether or not to take part will have no effect on the quality of your medical 
care.  Please ask questions if there is anything about this study you do not understand.
What is the purpose of this study?
The purpose of this study is to better understand factors that promote long term weight 
management among older adults. 
Will you benefit from taking part in this study?
You may or may not personally benefit from being in this research study. We hope that the 
information we gather will be helpful in advancing our research to help older adults who need to lose weight in the future.
What does this study involve?
Your participation in this study will last 9 months. During the first 6 months, you will be asked 
to take part in 8 group workshop sessions, which will be 90-120 minutes in length, occurring approximately once every 3 weeks. These workshops are designed to teach you behavioral skills and psychological strategies to help maintain your weight loss in the long-term. These group-based workshops will take place at the Aging Resource Center.  Questionnaires will be administered, and physical strength and fitness measures will be assessed at baseline, 3, 6, and 9 months. Post-study assessments will be performed as well, all at the study site. 
What are the options if you do not want to take part in this study?
You do not have to take part in this study if you do not wish to nor do you need to take part in 
this study to receive medical care or treatment.  
What are the risks involved with being enrolled in this study? 
We cannot guarantee you will benefit from participating in these skills training group 
workshops. The research team will discuss possible problems and the chances that they will happen. Unknown problems may happen. The risks involved in this part of the study are a potential loss of confidentiality and/or psychological distress within the group setting. Should the latter occur, we will mitigate by providing support and redirecting the conversation. 
CPHS Approval Date 8/31/2018                   STUDY00028905
v. 7.11.2018 2You should report any problems to your doctor or to the project director of this study : 
Courtney J. Stevens, PhD, 603-653-3420 
Other important items you should know: 
• Leaving the study:   You may choose to stop taking part in this study at any time. If you 
decide to stop taking part, it will have no effect on the quality of medical care you receive. The 
investigator reserves the right to stop the study participant from continuing without participant consent. • Number of people in this study:   We expect approximately 35 people to enroll in this entire 
study here.
• Funding:  The National Institutes on Aging, the Office of Dietary Supplements, and the 
Department of Medicine provides funding to Dartmouth College for this research.
• Product Development: If the results of this research are used to develop a product sold for a 
profit, you will not share in the profit.  
How will your privacy be protected?
The information collected as data for this study includes: 
Data that is available in the Dartmouth-Hitchcock electronic medical record and audiotaped data as outlined above.  Study data will be maintained for a period of six (6) years or longer if needed for other purposes. At that time, data will be deleted from computer hardware or shredded on the DHMC campus. 
We are careful to protect the identities of the people in this study.  We also keep the 
information collected for this study secure and confidential.  All data will be kept in a locked office, and all computer data will be on a password protected encrypted computer as outlined by the Committee of Protection of Human Subjects. 
The information collected for this study will be used only for the purposes of research as stated 
earlier in this form.  
Who may use or see your health information?
By signing this form, you allow the research team to use your health information and give it to 
others involved in the research.  The research team includes the study director plus others working on this study at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and elsewhere.  You also permit any health care provider holding health information needed for this study to give copies of your information to the research team.
The information collected for this study may be used by researchers or officials of the 
following institutions.
•Dartmouth College
•Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital
•Dartmouth-Hitchcock Clinic
CPHS Approval Expires 7/24/201 9 CPHS Approval Date 8/31/2018                   STUDY00028905
v. 7.11.2018 3•Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center 
•Mayo Clinic Rochester
•University of New Hampshire
In order to conduct this study, researchers need to use your health care information.  This data 
is called Protected Health Information ("PHI”).  PHI is protected by federal privacy laws (HIPAA).  By signing this consent form, you give your permission to have your PHI collected, used and disclosed for purposes of this study.  There is no intention to disclose your PHI to others outside of the study. There are protections in place to keep your PHI and research data confidential.  However, HIPAA requires notification so you are aware if your PHI is disclosed to others, it may no longer be protected by federal privacy laws.
No publication or public presentation about the research described above will reveal your 
identity without another authorization from you.
Identifiable data collected for this study will be used for research purposes which are 
determined to be reasonable and in line with expectations by a review committee.
Once data collected for this research study is no longer identifiable, the data may be used or 
disclosed for other purposes.
Your permission to use your health information for this study will not end until the study is 
completed. During this study, you and others who take part in the study may not have access to the study data.  You may ask for your study data once the study is over. You have a right to receive a copy of the information in your medical record at any time.
It is possible for a court or government official to order the release of study data including 
information about you.  
This research is covered by a Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of 
Health. The researchers with this Certificate may not disclose or use information, documents, or biospecimens that may identify you in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other action, suit, or proceeding, or be used as evidence, for example, if there is a court subpoena, unless you have consented for this use. Information, documents, or biospecimens protected by this Certificate cannot be disclosed to anyone else who is not connected with the research except, if there is a federal, state, or local law that requires disclosure (such as to report child abuse or communicable diseases but not for federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings, see below); if you have consented to the disclosure, including for your medical treatment; or if it is used for other scientific research, as allowed by federal regulations protecting research subjects. 
The Certificate cannot be used to refuse a request for information from personnel of the United 
States federal or state government agency sponsoring the project that is needed for auditing or 
CPHS Approval Expires 7/24/201 9 CPHS Approval Date 8/31/2018                   STUDY00028905
v. 7.11.2018 4program evaluation by NIA which is funding this project or for information that must be 
disclosed in order to meet the requirements of the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  You should understand that a Certificate of Confidentiality does not prevent you from voluntarily releasing information about yourself or your involvement in this research. If you want your research information released to an insurer, medical care provider, or any other person not connected with the research, you must provide consent to allow the researchers to release it.
The Certificate of Confidentiality will not be used to prevent disclosure as required by federal, 
state, or local law of: child or elder abuse and/or neglect, or harm to self or others.
What if you decide not to give permission to use and share your personal health 
information?
If you do not allow use of your health information for this study, you may not take part in this 
study. If you choose to stop taking part in this study, you may cancel permission for the use of your health information.  You should let the researcher know if you want to cancel your permission. The study team will assist you in putting your wishes in writing. Information collected for the study before your permission is cancelled will continue to be used in the research.
What about the costs of this study? 
There are no costs charged to the participant Will you be paid to take part in this study?
You will be compensated with a $25 gas card or equivalent for each questionnaire assessment 
you complete. There are 4 planned questionnaire assessment time points: Baseline (before workshop session 1), 3-months (after workshop session 4), 6-months (after workshop session 8) and 9-months (3 months after completing workshop session 8) . 
The sessions will be done only for research purposes and paid for by the sponsor. Insurance 
plans will not be billed as part of this project. All medical issues resulting from this study would need to be covered through your regular healthcare insurance. You or your insurance plan will be expected to pay for the costs of this usual medical care. For assistance in determining your coverage, please call the billing specialist in DHMC Patient Financial Services at 603-653-1047 or 800-368-4783.  
Whom should you call with questions about this study?
If you have questions about this study or need to report a study related injury, you can call 
your doctor or the research director for this study: Dr. John A. Batsis, MD, (603) 653-9500 normal business hours.  If Dr. Batsis is not available, all concerns should be addressed by your primary care provider’s office who will be available to answer your questions during normal business hours. An emergency contact number is (603) 650-5000, the main hospital number. 
CPHS Approval Expires 7/24/201 9 CPHS Approval Date 8/31/2018                   STUDY00028905
v. 7.11.2018 5If you have questions, concerns, complaints, or suggestions about human research at 
Dartmouth, you may call the Office of the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at Dartmouth College (603) 646-6482 during normal business hours.
CONSENT
I have read the above information about  the Maintenance Component of the Mobile Obesity 
Wellness Intervention in Rural Older Adults with Obesity  and have been given time to ask 
questions.  I agree to take part in this study and I have been given a copy of this signed consent 
form.
Participant's Signature and Date / PRINTED NAME 
Researcher or Designee Signature and Date PRINTED NAME 
CPHS Approval Expires 7/24/201 9 CPHS Approval Date 8/31/2018                   STUDY00028905