MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 1 -  
I.  Background and Significance  
Cardiovascular related complications are a leading cause of morbidity and 
mortality in well -treated  HIV patients in whom we have shown increased activation 
of the renin -angiotensin –aldosterone system (RAAS). The availabilit y of newer 
antiretroviral therapies (ART) with improved efficacy, safety and tolerance has allowed 
HIV patients to achieve good virologic 16 control and reduce the burden of AIDS defining 
illnesses. In this regard, HIV patients are living longer and the foc us of their healthcare is 
now driven by chronic co -morbidities. Among these co -morbidities, large cohort studies 
of the well -treated HIV population have revealed that cardiovascular disease (CVD) 
accounts for approximately 10% of all deaths1,2 and CVD is 1.5 -2 fold higher in the HIV 
population compared to a matched non -HIV population.3,4 This proposal will provide 
evidence supporting mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) blockade as a novel strategy for 
CVD risk reducti on in HIV. We present significant data demonstrating for the first time 
impaired physiological regulation of RAAS leading to excess RAAS activation among 
HIV patients. We demonstrate significant increases in aldosterone linked to metabolic 
abnormalities, i ncluding visceral fat accumulation, insulin resistance and inflammation in 
HIV and further hypothesize that RAAS activation has critical effects on CVD in HIV.  
 
Unique RAAS physiology may modulate increased burden of CVD in HIV. The 
RAAS is an important h ormone system, which classically regulates blood volume and 
sodium balance through MR activation in epithelial tissues. Compelling data from animal 
and human studies suggest that RAAS activity may also contribute to the development 
of vascular and myocardi al injury, largely through stimulatory effects on inflammation 
and fibrosis. These data and new observations by our group on the effect of blocking 
RAAS activation suggest a compelling management strategy aimed at reducing CV 
related morbidity and mortalit y in this at -risk HIV population, for whom comprehensive 
strategies to reduce CVD are lacking.  
 
HIV patients have increased risk of vascular inflammation and subclinical 
atherosclerosis, which may be addressed by MR blockade. Using aortic FDG -PET, 
we have shown direct evidence of increased arterial inflammation among HIV patients.5 
While studies show that HIV patients have impaired endothelial dependent vasod ilation 
vs. non -HIV patients,6 functional assessment of this inflamed coronary vasculature in 
HIV is lacking. Moreover, ART treated HIV patients have persistent elevatio ns in ICAM 
and VCAM,7,8 markers of vascular inflammation which correlate with the extent of 
atherosclerosis  in the non -HIV population.9 Using coronary CTA, we have shown 
increased subclinical atherosclero sis in HIV and demonstrated the plaque most often to 
be noncalcified with high risk features, including positive remodeling and low 
attenuation —plaque characteristics more vulnerable to rupture.10 Indeed, noncalcified 
plaque is distinct from long -standing, hardened cal cified plaque, which is more often 
associated with traditional CV risk factors than noncalcified plaque. In this regard, we 
have established a significant link between noncalcified plaque and specific markers of 
inflammation and immune activation, soluble CD163 and CD14 and Lp -PLA 2, in HIV as 
opposed to traditional risk factors.11-13 Moreover, progression of carotid intima -media 
thickness over 24 months was associ ated with increased baseline urinary aldosterone 
excretion (preliminary data r=0.67, P=0.049) in HIV. Taken together, these data suggest 
inflamed coronary vasculature and high risk plaque in HIV, in whom our preliminary data 
suggest a potential linkage of inflammation and atherosclerosis to RAAS activation. In 
this proposal, we will test the hypothesis that M blockade addresses these unique  
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 2 - features of CVD in HIV.  
 
Coronary flow reserve (CFR) is a physiologic marker of vascular function of the 
coronary be d, which is reduced in HIV. CFR, the ratio of maximally stimulated to rest 
coronary blood flow (CBF), is well -validated to characterize coronary vasculature 
function.14-16 Both large vessel coronary lesions (i.e. coronary artery disease [CAD]) and 
microvascular dysfunction may lead to impaired CFR.  Our group and others 
demonstrated that impaired CFR predicts cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in non -
HIV po pulations. Specifically, we found impaired CFR (median 1.9) to be associated with 
a 4.9 -fold increase in CV mortality among non -HIV patients.17 Furthermore, CV mortality 
is increased among non -HIV patients with impaired vs. normal flow reserve (4.2 vs. 
0.4%/yr).17 In addition, 59% of patients with non -obstructive  CAD have a reduced CFR 
<1.93 on cardiac PET,15 and impaired CFR predicts cardiac mortality independent of 
obstructive disease.16,18 While CFR may be a useful physiologic biomarker for CVD, few 
studies have examined CFR in HIV. A short 5 week study reported reduced CFR in HIV 
patients after initiation of ART.19 In this proposal, we present new preliminary data 
demonstrating greater impairment of CFR in HIV compared to non -HIV 
subjects20(1.74±0.73 vs. 3.88±0.70) assessed by cardiac PET, the gold standard for 
evaluation of CFR. These data highlight CFR as a diagnostic tool to uniquely capture 
those asymptomatic patients of inter mediate CVD risk with potential limitations to flow 
reserve of the coronary microvasculature, which may contribute to ischemia, a clinical 
scenario relevant to HIV patients with increased subclinical plaque progression. 
Importantly, we show that MR blockad e improves CFR, suggesting it may be a useful 
strategy to improve vascular dysfunction in HIV.  Reduced stress my ocardial blood flow 
on cardia c MRI may be a nother marker of reduced myocardial  perfusion  and has been 
independently  associated with major advers e cardiovascular  events among those 
without known CVD .  
 
In addition to reduced CFR, HIV patients demonstrate myocardial fibrosis and 
diastolic dysfunction which may also uniquely contribute to CVD in HIV. 
Myocardial fibrosis is characterized by expansion of the extracellular matrix and 
accumulation of interstitial collagen marked by increases in circulating PINP  and 
PIIINP.21,22 Cardiac MRI with T1 mapping is a sophisticated technique we have validated 
to qua ntify myocardial extracellular volume ( ECV) and is a standard method for non -
invasive assessment of myocardial inflammation and fibrosis in lieu of an 
endomyocardial biopsy. Data suggests a relative increase in ECV by 10% is linked to a 
50% increase in adv erse CV events.23 Myocardial fibrosis contributes to impaired 
diastolic relaxation and is a key mediator of diastolic dysfunction. Myocardial damage is 
linked to a 4-fold increase in heart failure risk .24 Importantly, the progression to heart 
failure is preventable, as pathological remodeling in the myocardium related to these 
fibrotic changes is reversible25-27 prior to establishment of diastolic dysfunction. In a 
cross -sectional study, Holloway et al. demonstrated that a majority (76% ) of ART treated 
HIV patients had evide nce of myocardial fibrosis on cardiac MRI compared to only 14% 
of well -matched non -HIV patients.28 Furthermore, a meta -analysis reported that diastolic 
dysfun ction is prevalent in approximately 43% of HIV patients.29 Despite the alarming 
prevalence of myocardial fibrosis30 and diastolic dysfunction in H IV, no longitudinal 
studies have been p erformed to date assessing changes in myocardial structure in HIV 
over time, nor have there been any interventional studies of strategies to regress 
changes in cardiac remodeling to prevent CV events in HIV.  
 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 3 - Mechani stic pathways leading to impaired cardi ovascular structure and function 
in HIV are not well understood. The conventional paradigm for CVD presumes a 
higher prevalence of traditional risk factors. Indeed, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and 
diabetes are all mor e prevalent in HIV vs. non -HIV patients , and smoking rates are 
increased almost 2 -fold among HIV patients, but these traditional risk factors only 
account for 25% of the increased risk of CVD in the HIV compared to the non -HIV 
population.3,4 In addition, emerging studies have provided insight on the benefit of ART 
use on CVD, such that viral suppression may b e associated with a reduction in CV 
events.31 While immunologic control is important for CVD risk reduction, ART alone only 
partially mitigates this risk. Ther efore, our knowledge of CVD in HIV is i ncomplete, and 
significant advances in this area are needed to further our understanding of specific HIV -
related mechanisms that may account for the excess burden of CVD. Mechanisms 
implicated in cardiac injury and dy sfunction specific to controlled HIV in fection may 
include persistent inflammation and immune activation or abnormal fat redistribution. In 
this grant, building on data from our existing grant, we hypothesize that increased RAAS 
activation in HIV may be a mediator of structural and function cha nges of the heart either 
directly through vascular injury or indirectly through stimulating a pro -inflammatory, pro -
fibrotic milieu.  
 
Evidence from animal studies and studies of non -HIV patients demonstrate that 
MR a ctivation is linked to vascular dysfunc tion, vascular inflammation, and 
subclinical atherosclerosis. We and others have shown that MR activation leads to 
coronary vascular inflammation and dysfunction.32 Aldosterone mediated vascular injury 
is associated with an increase in inflammatory and vascular markers, such as MCP -1, 
IL-6, ICAM and PAI -1.33-35 In animal models of aldosterone mediated injury, such as 
rodents infused with Ang II and a NO synthase inhibitor36 and double transgenic rats for 
the human renin and angiotensi nogen genes,37 blocking the actions of aldosterone with 
an MR antagonist or removing the aldosterone source through adrenalectomy reduces 
vascular damage and myoc ardial inflammation . These beneficial effects of MR blockade 
are independent of changes in blood pressure (BP).38 We have shown that diabetics  
without known CAD have impaired CFR and subsequently, treatment with a MR 
antagonist (eplerenone or spironolactone) improves coronary vascular function marked 
by improvements in CFR.39,40 Moreover, aldosterone may have direct effects on 
atherogenesis through increased oxidative stress and foam cell formation.41 Under 
condition of RAAS activation, development of atherosclerotic plaque increased 3 -fold in 
apolipoprotein E -deficient mice.42 Moreover, MR blockade attenuated the pro -
atherogenic effects of RAAS activation43 by reducing oxidation, cholesterol 
accumulation, an d inflammation. Other animal studies have similarly shown that 
eplerenone can inhibit atherosclerosis41 independent of  BP lowering effects.44 Data in 
mice also show that aldosterone promotes T cells and monocyte infiltration into plaque 
prone regions and is associated with an un stable lipid laden and inflammatory pla que 
phenotype prone to rupture.45 Moreover, eplerenone reduces expression of IL -6 and 
MCP -1 in macrophages during early a therosclerosis development in mice.46 While a few 
human studies in non -HIV patients have been performed to support these precli nical 
findings linking aldosterone to p laque progression,47 no studies have evaluated MR 
activation and blockade on CVD indices in HIV, a population in whom RAA S activation 
may indeed contribute to a bnormal coronary vasculature and progression of plaque.  
 
MR activation is also related to myocardial fibrosis and diastolic dysfunction.  
Animal studies have demonstrated that MR activation by aldosterone or 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 4 - deoxycort icosterone acetate contributes to cardi ac fibrosis and adverse remodeling of 
the coronary vasculature, independent of BP changes48 Moreover, preclinical data show 
that Ang II -stimulated changes in myocardial inflammation, myo cardial necrosis and PAI -
1 expression i n coronary endothelial cells were attenuated with MR blockade.36,38 
Myocardial fibrosis secondary to tiss ue injury by aldosterone can increase LV 
hypertrophy, reduce vascular compliance, and impair diastolic dysfunction. Indeed, MR 
blockade with spironolactone or eplerenone markedly improves CV morbidity and 
mortality re lated to heart failure in human studies ,49-51 and may have more efficacy in the 
HIV subpopulation in whom we have demonstrated significant RAAS activation. We 
have shown that 24 hour urinary aldoster one excretion is correlated with ECV in 
diabetics.52 Studies in non -HIV patients complement these findings, demonstrating  that 
MR blockade improves diastolic dy sfunction,49,53,54 and is also linked to impro ved 
markers of collagen turnover and myocardial fibrosis in those with the metabolic 
syndrome.53 Similar results were co nfirmed among non -HIV patients, in whom  
eplerenone treatment improved measures of diastolic dysfunction and reduced markers 
of collagen turnover, including P1NP and PIIINP.55,56 Lipocalin 2 has been implicated in 
mediating the profibrotic and tissue remodeling activity of mineralocorticoids through its 
action in cardiac myocytes, endothelium, and v ascular smooth muscle cells.57 In human 
studies, lipocalin 2 is associated with adverse CV events58 and correlates w ith 
aldosterone levels.59 Taken together, this evidence suggests that MR blockade may 
have significant benefit in HIV, a population with a high prevalence of  myocardial fibrosis 
and diastolic dysf unction.  
 
Increased RAAS activation contributes to inflammation and metabolic 
complications in HIV, suggesting the utility of MR blockade for CVD in HIV. 
Together the Co -PI’s Grinspoon and Adler conducted the first c omprehensive 
investigation of the RAAS in HIV. Initial data revealed increased urinary aldosterone in 
HIV vs. controls in association with increased visceral adipose tissue (VAT) and 
HbA1c.60 New published data from the Co -PIs further suggests that HI V subjects with 
relative increases in a bdominal fat accumulation demonstrate significantly increased 
RAAS activation under standardized dietary and posture conditions. Also, increases in 
aldosterone are associated with insulin resistance.61 Furthermore, markers of 
inflammation, including hsCRP and IL -6, are increased under conditions of RAAS 
activation among HIV patients. Indeed, these novel studies perfor med in HIV serve as a 
paradigm to sugge st a previously unexplored mechanism through RAAS activation by 
which HIV patients with an adverse metabolic phenotype are predisposed to CVD. 
Indeed, increased VAT is a predictor of subclinical CVD in HIV62 and, this proposal will 
test the hypothesis that increases in RAAS activation contributes to CVD in HIV. We will 
obtain novel information on the link between RAAS activ ation and myocardial and 
vascular injur y in HIV through these studies. To that end, other studies have indicated 
that aldosterone levels independently correlate with CV mortality.63,64 Importantly, we will 
assess for the first time in HIV the specific contribution of MR signaling to multiple 
cardiac endpoints, including impaired CFR, myocardial fibrosis,  diastolic dysfunction, 
and subclinical  atherosclerosis, by applying MR blockade in an interventional trial among 
HIV patients selected based on the presence of metabolic abnormalities associated with 
RAAS activation and related subclinical atherosclerosis .  
 
Summary and Implications:  MR signal ing may have an adverse role in CVD through 
vascular dysfunction, abnormal collagen deposition, vascular and myocardial 
inflammation, and increased oxidative stress65. The burden of structural and functional 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 5 - heart disease in HIV is greater compared to the general population. We have 
demonstrated significant RAAS activation in HIV patients with metabolic abnormalities, 
includ ing increased visceral adiposity and in sulin resistance, and suggest that this 
unique physiology may contribute to a metabolic phenotype that is pro -inflammatory, 
pro-fibrotic, and pro -atherogenic. It is plausible that a cascade of excess MR activation in 
HIV potentiates cardiac injury and dysf unction. Moreover, there is relevant data to 
support testing the efficacy of MR blockade in managing impaired myocard ial pe rfusion , 
myocardial fibrosis, diastolic dysfunction, and plaque. The grant will provide new 
mechanistic insight  and enhance our u nderst anding of CVD in HIV. We will take 
advantage of advanced imaging methods to permit a non -invasive longitudinal 
assessment of structural and functional CV defects in HIV to add new information to the 
field. This is an ideal proposal aiming to integrat e seve ral manifestations of CVD in HIV 
through a novel hormone pathway. The clinical utility of MR blockade could have far 
reaching effects towards overall CV risk reduction in HIV, and such studies could serve 
as a model for other at -risk metabolic groups . 
  
II.  Specific Aims  
We will perform a randomized double -blind study among HIV subjects with increased 
visceral adiposity and subclinical atherosclerosis , administering eplerenone vs. placebo 
for 12 months. We will provide all subjects with lifestyle mod ification throughout the 
study. We hypothesize that adding eplerenone to lifestyle modification will significantly 
improve key indices of cardiac structure and function.  
 
Among the large population of HIV patients in whom we have shown r enin-angiotensin -
aldoste rone activation and subclinical atherosclerosis , we will determine:  
 
❖ Specific Aim I:  The effect of MR blockade on myocardial perfusion . 
      We hypothesize:  
a) MR blockade will improve coronary flow rese rve (CFR)  on cardi ac positr on emission  
      tomograp hy (PET)  or stress myocardial blood f low (sMBF)  on cardiac magnetic    
       resonance imaging (MRI).  
 
b)  MR blockade will reduce markers of vascular dysfunction.  
 
❖ Specific Aim II:  The effect of MR blockade on my ocardia l inflammation and 
fibrosis. We hyp othesize:  
a) MR blockade will reduce myocardial extracellular volume fractio n, a measure of 
myocardial fibrosis and inflammation, assessed by  serial myocardial T1 mapping 
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  
b)   MR bl ockade  will improve markers of infl ammation and immune activation.  
c)   Reduced myocardial fibrosis and infla mmation resulting from MR blockade will      
      relate to improvements in diastolic dysfunction evaluated through diastolic strain  
      by tag ged my ocardial imaging on cardiac M RI.  
 
❖ Specific Aim III:  The effect of MR blockade on coronary plaque .  
We hypothesize:  
a) MR blockade will result in plaque regression and reduced high risk plaque     
      Morphology on coronary computed tomography  angiog raphy (CTA).  
     b)  Baseline CFR will relate to coronary plaque features in HIV patients with subclinical  
    atherosclerosis.   
     c)  Improvements in coronary plaque with MR blockade will relate to improvements in      
          CFR and inflam mation.  
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 6 -  
Optional Substudy -- 
❖ Specific Aim IV:  The effect of RAAS activation on systemic inflammation and 
specific i ndices of arterial inflammation.  
      We hypothesize :  
a)  Markers of syst emic and arterial inflammation will be increased during the RAAS    
     activated state carefully controll ed conditions of sodium restriction) when compared     
     to the RAAS  suppressed state (under carefully controlled conditions of sod ium      
     loading) . 
 b) Higher serum aldosterone levels during the RAAS acti vated s tate ( under carefully   
     contro lled conditions of sodium restriction) will be related to greater in situ arterial  
     inflammation measured by aortic TBR using  cardiac 2-deoxy -2-18F-     
     Fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography/ Com puted T omogra phy (18F-   
     FDG -PET/CT).  
 
❖ Specific Aim V : The effect of MR blockade on arterial inflammation.  
We hypothesize :  
a)  Treatment with MR blockade  for 12 months will reduce in situ arterial  inflammation     
      measured b y aortic TBR using  cardia c18F-FDG-PET/CT. 
b)  Treatment with  MR will reduce markers of systemi c and vascular inflammation . 
c)  Changes  in aortic TBR will be related to changes in markers of arterial inflammation.  
 
 
Optional Study for those who do not qualify  following both  screen  visits— 
❖ Specific Aim V I: The d egre e of inflammation and cardio metabo lic disease 
among those with/ without vis ceral fat and  those with/without  coronary plaque  
We hypothesize:  
a)   Worsening markers of inflammation and heart disease across the spectr um stra tified  
by presence and absence of e xcess VAT and presence and absence of coronary plaque 
(i.e  increased wors ening a cross the following  groups : low VAT/absence of plaque, low 
VAT/presence of plaque, high VAT/absence of plaque, high VAT/presence of p laque).   
 
 
III. Subject Selection  
Inclusio n/Exclusion:  
Inclusion Criteria : Up to  160 HIV male  and female subjects will be  consen ted to 
achieve the number of e valuable subjects. 42 subjects will be consented  for the optional 
study.   
Subjects wil l be included for:  
1)  Ages 40 -65 years  
2)  Antiretroviral u se (ART ) >12 months and viral load <100 copies/mL  
3)  VAT> 110cm2  
 
Exclusion Criteria :  
1) Antihypertensive use including, AC E Inhibitor, ARB, MR blockade,  diuretic, potassiu m    
    (K) supplementation; or BP >140/90 mmHg. Stable use (>3  months) of beta -blockers    
    or calcium channel blockers (CCB) (except verapamil) is  allowed.  
2) Unstable s tatin use  <12 months . Stable use (>12 months) is  allowed.  
3) Use of full dose ritonavir, nelfinavir, clarithro mycin, and other strong inhibit ors of   
    CYP3A4, as well as  CYP3A4 inducers.  
4) Continuous oral steroid use (equivalent to prednisone > 5 mg daily) within the last 3        
   months.  
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 7 - 5) Uncontrolled diabetes requiring insulin and/or HbA1c > 7.5%.  
6) Creatinine (Cr) > 1.5 mg/dL or estimated GFR<60 mL/min/ 1.73m2. 
7) K > 5.5 mEq/L.  
8) Hemoglobin < 1 0 g/dL.  
9) Known liver disease or ALT >3x ULN.  
10) History of congestive heart f ailure, stroke, myocardial infarction, or known coronary  
      artery disease.  
11) Pregnant, actively seeking pregnancy or breastfee ding.  Women of childbearing    
      age may be on a non -hormonal form of contraception.  
12) Estrogen, progestin derivativ e, or other sex steroid use within last 3 months. Stable     
      physiologic testo sterone replacement (> 3 months) is acceptable.  
13) Curr ent bacterial or other infections.  
14) Active substance abuse.  
15) Significant radiation exposure over the course of  the year prior to randomization  
      (e.g., radiation therapy, PCI, catheter  ablation of arrhythmia) within 12 months of  
      randomiza tion. 
16) Previous reaction  or contraindication  to gadolinium.  
17) Coronary artery luminal narrowing >70% on coronar y CTA.  
 
Source of subjects and recruitment methods:  
Participants will be recru ited from community flyers and announcements at HIV fo cused 
community centers, community newspaper advertising, community on -line websites, 
Partner’s - affiliated Recruitment Too ls, and referrals from infectious disease physicians 
and primary care physi cians fam iliar with the study  and through the utilization of the 
Partners Research Data Registry (RPDR) .  Potential participants, from all referral 
sources, wil l contact the study i nvestigator  directly by phone for a pre -study evaluation 
via telephone to deter mine eligibility. In addition, if a provider obtains a  subjec t’s 
permission for us to contact them directly, then we may do so.  We will not contact any 
subjects for whom permis sion was not obtained in advance by their medical providers.  
For RPDR, we will  perform an RPDR search to identify patients with HIV infecti on, ages 
40-65 without known diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disease.  We will subsequently review 
the resulted medical records to hone in on those that match our inclusion/ exclusion 
criteria. We wi ll directly contact patients who have agreed to be app roached  by research 
staff as part of the Research Opportunities Direct to You (RODY) Program.  For patients 
not enrolled in  RODY, we will contact each eligible patient’s provider to request that s/he 
mention  the study to the patient and ask that individual  for pe rmission to be contacted by 
the study staff.  Only if permission is granted, we will call the patient to conduct a p hone 
screen and provide study information.  
 
IV. Subject Enrollment  
Informed con sent will be obtained at the screening visit by a lice nsed ph ysician  or nurse 
practitioner , prior to an y procedures or interventions. Potential research subjects will 
have the e ntire protocol explained in detail and study investigators will review the 
cons ent form item by item, an swering any and all questions . Once risks and benefits 
have been reviewed and subjects have agreed to participate by signing the consent, the 
screening visit will continue as described in the subject selection section. Only patient s 
capable of providing informed consent will be enroll ed. Once final eligibility has been 
determined subjects will be scheduled for a baseline visit.   
 
Optional Study Participa tion:  
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 8 - Upon confirmation of eligibility, subjects will be given the option throu gh a formal 
consenting process to participate in the s ubstudy  prior to randomization . Participat ion in 
the main study will not be affected i f subjects choose to decline particip ation in the 
substudy ; however, subjects withdrawn from the main study  will be withd rawn from the 
substudy.  
 
If subjects do not qual ify for  the main study following completion of both screening visits, 
subjects will be given the option to participate in a n optional blood sampling visit.  
 
Treatment assignment and randomization:  
During th e Baseline V isit randomization will be done. Subj ects wi ll be randomized 1:1 to 
receive eplerenone PO 50mg daily or identical placebo for 12 months. The 
randomization  list, stratified by gender, statin use , and presence of plaque  will be 
generated by the b iostatistician and kept by the research pharmacy.  Daily dosing starts 
at 50 mg for the first week to avoid hypotension and will be increased to 50 mg  twice 
daily at the 1 w eek safety visit. The study will be double -blinded. All subjects will receive 
lifestyle modification as described below.   
 
Prior to randomi zation in all cases, the subject’s primary care physician will be consulted 
regarding the appropriateness of the pro tocol including the lifestyle modification program  
with the subject’s perm ission. Subjects are not eligible if they do not meet all o f the 
enrollment criteria . 
 
In the event that a subject wishes to withdraw from the study, the subject will be asked to 
return all unused study medication.  
 
V.  Study Procedures  
Data Collection  
Screenin g Vis it 1 (to determine eligibility) : 
We will obtain:  
1) Informe d consent, history and physical, urine pregnancy test for females.  
2) Blood for Cr, K, ALT, CBC, HbA1c, and HIV viral load.  
 
Screening Visit 2 (to determine eligibility) : Subjects will present aft er a 12 hr fast. If 
eligible from Screening Visit 1, w e will obtain:  
1)  Urine pregnancy test for females  as appropriate . 
2) Coronary CTA for coronary plaque assessment.  (This will no t be performed if  
the subject has a previous reaction or contraindication to io dine-containing contrast 
media).  
3) CT Abdomen for singl e slice  screening at L4 for VAT determination.  
 
Optional Blood Sampling Visit (For those who do not qualify after both scr eening  
visits) : Subjects will present after an overnight 12 hr fast.  
1)  Fastin g blo od for markers of heart disease and inflammation  
 
Bionut rition Visit (prior to both  Baseline Visit 1 and 12 M onth Visit) :  Subjects will 
be tested on an ad lib diet, after an overnight 12 hr fast. We will obtain:  
1)   Blood for Cr, K, lipids, glucose,  insulin, CD4/8, HIV viral load  (12 M onth Visit only)  
and bio markers for vascular dysfunction (sICAM, sVCAM), inflammation/ immune 
activation (CRP, IL6, MCP -1, sCD14, sCD163), s ubclinical injury (BNP, high 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 9 - sensitivity cardiac troponin T [hs -cTnT]), and fib rosis  (galectin -3, cardiotrophin 
1[CT1], lipocalin 2, PINP, P IIINP). DNA collection  for genetic testing  is optional.  
2)   24 hr u rine collection for sodium (Na) and Cr for sodiu m balance  will be started one 
day prior to the visit . In consultation with the bionu tritionist, broth packets will be 
given to achiev e stand ardized sodium conditions (urinary Na >200mmol/24 h r) for 
Baseline Visit 1 and 12 M onth Visit. Urine pregnancy test for females as  appropriate.  
3)  Standardized lifestyle counseling as per goals deriv ed from the AACE and NCEP -
ATP III guidelines and modeled  after the Diabetes Prevention Program.  
4)   Coronary CTA only at the  end of study visit prior to 12 Months.  (This w ill not be 
performed if the subject has a previous reaction or contraindication  to iodine -
containing contrast media).  
5)   Optional Consent  for substudy.  
 
Baseline Visit 1 (Imaging) : Subjects will present after a 12 hr fast on 2 consecutive 
days. CCB will  be held 36 hrs prior to coronary perfusion assessment.  
1)   24 hr urine will b egin on the morning of this visit  for volume, Na, K, C r, cort isol and 
aldosterone excretion rate.  
2)   STAT serum  pregnancy test for females  as appropriate.   
3)   Urine Na and Cr for sodium balance.       
4)   Interval history and physical, including orth ostat ics.  
5)   Cardiac PET to assess CFR.  
6)   Subjec ts will  begin fast and lie supine overnight.  
7)   Fasting bloo d for PRA, serum aldosterone, K. DNA collection for genetic t esting is 
optional.  
8)   Cardiac MRI for ECV, endo to epicardial flow (perfusio n) ratio, diastolic and systolic 
strains and pe ak stra in rate s, LVEF and LV mass.  
9)   Abdominal MRI for VAT and SAT.  
 
Baseline Visit 2 (RAAS Characterization) : After Baseline Visit 1,  subjects will be 
placed on an isocaloric low sodium diet for 6 days pr epare d by the metabolic 
phenotyping core at the BWH Ce nter fo r Clinical Investigation for assessment of RAAS 
activation. Subjects will be asked only to consume the prescribed di et, containing 10±2 
mEq Na+, 100±2 mEq K+, and 1000±50 mg Ca2+ per 24 hours.  
1)   24 hr urine will begin on the morning of this visi t for v olume, Na, K, Cr, cortisol, and    
      aldosterone excretion rate.  
2)   Urine pregnancy test for females  as appro priate .  
3)   Urine Na and Cr (rescheduled if subject is not in sodium balance) . 
4)   Interval history and physical, including orthos tatics.   
5)   Subjects will begin fast and lie supine overnight.  
6)   Fasting blood  for PRA, serum aldosterone, K. DNA coll ection for genetic testing is 
optional.  
7)   Resume ad lib diet and administer study  medi cation (eplerenone vs. placebo) to be 
starte d on th e following day.  
 
Substudy Visit 1  (Optional ): Subjects will present on a  low carbohydrate diet, after an  
overnight 12 hr fast. We will obtain:  
1)   STAT serum pregnancy test for females  as appro priate.  
2)   Cardiac 18F-FDG -PET/CT to assess arteria l infla mmation.  
 
Randomization and Blinding : Subjects will be randomized 1:1 to receive eplerenone 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 10 - 50mg daily or identical placebo for 12 months. The randomizatio n list, stratified by 
gender, statin use  and presence of plaque  will be generated by the biost atistic ian and 
kept by the research pharmacy.  Daily dosing starts at 50 mg daily for the first week to 
avoid hypotension an d will be increased to 50 mg  twice daily  at the 1 week safety visit. 
The study will be double -blinded. All subjects will receive life style m odification as 
described below.   
 
Safety Visits (1 wk, 2 wk, 4 wk, 3 mo, 6 mo, 9 mo post baseline visits ): Subjects  will 
only present after an overnight 12 hr fast for the 6 month visit.  All saf ety v isits include:  
1)  Urine pregnancy test for fema les.  
2)  Interval history and physical, including vitals . 
3)  Blood for Cr, K . Blood for markers of heart disease and infl ammation for the 6 month 
visit only.  
4)  Collection of used study drug and pro vision of new supply . 
5)  Standardized lifestyle couns eling  as per goals derived from the AACE and NCEP -
ATP III  guidelines and modeled after the Diabetes Prevention Program. At the 1 week 
visit, the study dose will be escalated to 50mg  twice daily  as toler ated based on blood 
pressure and labs.  
 
12 M onth Visi t: Same  as Baseline Visit 1  
 
Substudy  Visit 2 (Optional) : Same as Substudy  Visit 1  
 
COVID19 Contingency Plan:  MGH and BWH h ave instituted restricted visits for  
research purposes in response to the evolv ing C OVID -19.  These restrictions have  
prompted the fo llowing  changes to the study:   
 
1) We may conduct visits remotely until restrictions are lifted. Remote visits will be 
cond ucted over zoom video conferencing or telephone and every attempt will be made 
to ke ep the visit schedule the same. Changes may occur  to the  visit schedule due to 
factors related to covid19 . During these visits, someone from the study staff will contact 
the subject (via zoom video conferencing or telephone) and may conduct the follow ing 
research ac tivities:  
 
• Consenting * 
• Obtaining inform ation a bout past and present health  
• Questionnaires  
• Lifestyle Counseling  
• Obtaining information related to safety assessments   
 
2) We may ship study drug directly to the subject.  
 
3) If blood work cannot  be obtained at  the study site, we may ask the subject  to hav e 
labs performed locally. We will provide a lab requisition and help locate a facility.  
 
4) We will try to arrange for assessments to occur remotely and continue to follow the  
visit schedule. So me st udy proced ures require a visit to the study site,  for ex ample,  
imaging procedures. We may provide the subject with additional study drug until we are  
able to perform the st udy procedure, and this may extend the visit schedule. If a study  
procedure req uires  an in -person visit and cannot be scheduled at th e study  site due to  
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 11 - COVID19 policies, then the procedure may be omitted.   
 
 
*COVID19 Contingency Plan for Informed Consent : 
 
A consent form may b e mailed or emailed to the subject and a licensed physic ian 
or nurse pr actitioner will arrange a phone call  or zoom v ideo conference  with the subject  
to review the consent form  in detail. The consent form will be signed and completed  via 
one of the following options:  1) If the subject has electronic capabilitie s/internet to u se 
REDCap, the consent form  will be ele ctronic ally signed by both parties and a PDF of th e  
consent form will be  available for both the subject and the licensed p hysician  or nurse  
practitioner , or 2) The subject will sign the consent form du ring the phone discussion and 
either  mail/email  the signed fo rm to  study staff or bring the signed form to the next in  
person  visit at which time the  consent form will be signed  by the licensed  physician or  
nurse  practitioner , or 3) To minimize exposure ti me be tween the subject  and study team,  
an iPad may be offered  to the subject to perform a  zoom video conference  with the  
licensed  physician or nurse practitioner to discuss the  consent form prior to meeting in  
the same  room to sign the consent form. Study proce dures will  not be performed prior to  
obtaining  informed consent and  obtaining a  copy of the signed consent  form. 
 
Study Procedures   
Computed Tomography (CT) Abdomen   
Images  with be acquired via single -slice acquisition through L4 with tube current of mA, 
voltage of 80kV and 70mAs, slice thickness 10 mm, and 45 cm field -of-view.  
 
Coronary Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA)  
Contrast -enhanced CCTA allows for non -invasive as sessment of atherosclerotic plaque 
burden and morphology. Image acquisition wil l take place at  MGH using the SOMATOM 
Definition Flash , a dua l source 128 detector row CT scanner, or the SOMATOM Force, a 
dual source 196 detector -row CT scanner (Siemens Healt hineers, Forchheim, 
Germany).  Semiautomated reference tube current selection an d exp osure cont rol 
(CAREDose 4D) are tailored to the s ubject’ s body size, in conjunction with 
semiautomated reference tube potential (voltage) selection (CARE kV), with individu ally 
adapted exposure settings on a per -patient basis.  Prospective ECG -trigger ed ax ial-
sequen tial or retrospective ECG -gated spiral with ad aptive pulsing scan modes are used 
based on the heart rate and rhythm.  Iterative image reconstruction algorithms al low for 
further reductions in radiation dose.  
 
The CCTA protocol is as follows,  and is based o n the standard clinical CCTA protocol a t 
MGH:  Prior to imaging, intravenous (IV) access will have been obtained in an arm or 
hand vein, usually in the right ante cubital vein. The subject’s blood pressure will be 
taken, and ECG leads will be  attached to mo nitor heart rate and rhythm.  Sublingua l 
nitroglycerin (0.3 -0.9 mg, typically 0.6 mg) or transdermal nitroglycerin (0.6 -0.8 mg/hr for 
~45 minutes) will also be ad ministered as per standard protocol for cardiac CT scans. 
Contraindications to nitroglycerin i nclude known narrow angle glaucoma, hyp otensio n 
with systolic blood pressure < 90 mm Hg, known severe aortic stenosis, or use of 
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibito r (e.g. sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil) within the 5 days 
prior to scan.  A prosp ectively -ECG triggered noncontrast CT of the hear t is ob tained to 
measure coronary calcium. The test bolus method will be used to plan the CTA timing, 
via a test bolus inje ction of nonionic iodinated contrast medium (approximately 20 ml), 
followed by a flush of sali ne solution (approximately 40 ml). Cont rast-enhanced CT 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 12 - acquisition will then take place. Based on subject size, 60 -100 ml of nonionic iodinated 
contrast (iopamid ol 370 g/cm3, Isovue 370, Bracco Diagnostics, Princeton, NJ) will be 
injected, followed by a f lush of 40 ml of saline solution. After  a dela y based on the test 
bolus, a CT acquisition will be performed from the aortic arch to the diaphragm: tube 
voltage 70  - 120 kVp, tube current -time product reference 320 mAs, detector collimation 
2 x 128 x 0.6 mm  or 2 x 196 x 0.6 mm. A number of high -resolut ion images of the heart 
at slightly different time -positions within the cardiac cycle will be reconstructed, of whic h 
the best phase will be used to evaluate the coronary artery lumen, plaque dis tribution, 
and plaque morphology.  
 
Cardiac Positron Em ission Tomography (PET)   
Regional and global coronary blood flow will be assessed using PET imaging. 
Vasoactive medications  and beta -blockers will be withheld on the morning of the study. 
Subjects will be al lowed to c ontinue using nitroglycerin as needed. Studies  will be 
performed after at least 4 hours of fasting. The protocol will take approximately 2.5 
hours, including pati ent preparation. Regional coronary blood flow will be measured at 
rest and duri ng an  intraveno us (IV) infusion of regadenoson (0.4mg)  or ade nosine (0.14 
mg/kg/min) using 13N -ammonia as a flow tracer. After IV administration of 13N -
ammonia (20 mCi), serial images will be acquired for 20 min, as previously described. 
After 30 min, IV r egade noson or a denosine will be infused for 4 minutes.  Two mi nutes 
into the regadenoson or adenosine infusion, a second dose of 13N -ammonia (20mCi) 
will be injected and images r ecorded again in the same sequence. HR, BP, and 12 -lead 
ECG will be recorded at  base line and e very minute during and after the infusi on of 
regadenoson or adenosine. All images will be analyzed by an expert in cardiac PET 
blinded to treatment assignment.  
  
Cardiac  Magnetic Resonance Imaging  (MRI)  
T1 imaging before and after contrast,  using a breath -hold, modified Look - Locker 
imaging (M OLLI) t echnique, will be used for mapping of the total and segmental 
extracellular volume fraction to detect expansion of t he extracellular matrix. Typical 
MOLLI acquisition parameters are: TR/TE=2.14/1 .07 m s, flip an gle=35º, FOV=  
340x255mm, matrix=192x144 , 107 p hase encoding steps, interpolated voxel size=  
0.9x0.9x8mm, parallel acceleration factor=2 with 24 reference lines (i PAD), cardiac 
trigger delay TD=500ms; 206 ms acquisition time per SSFP image re ad-out. The pre -
contrast T1 mapping will use a 5(2) -3 MOLLI s cheme, while the post -contrast T1 
measurements will use a 4(2) -3(2)-3(2) scheme, where the numbers in brackets indic ate 
the duration of the rest period as a multiple of the R -to-R duration. The p ost-contrast T1  
measurements are interleaved with the other M R protocol components, such that T1 
measurements are not performed within less than 5 minutes of a contrast injectio n to 
assure contrast -equilibrium between tissue and blood. Multiple T1 measurem ents are 
used w ith regression analysis to obtain an ac curate estimate of extracellular volume 
(ECV) fraction, thereby improving upon the precision of “two -point” measurement 
protocols.66 Only R1 data -pairs with R1 in bloo d < 3.5 s -1 will be used to meet the 
conditions of fast transcytolemmal water exchange, underpinning the linear mode l for 
ECV.  67 ECV will be  multiplie d by LV mass index and reported as ECM i (g/m2). The T1 
protocol comprises on e pre -contrast measurement, and 3 post contrast measurements 
as outlined above.  Microvascular coronary function via a combinat ion rest/stress MRI 
perfusion study  will be quan tified . Study subjects will be admin istered regadenoson (5 ml 
containing 0.4 mg re gadenoson bolus via IV, followed by flush)  or adenosine (400 
microgram bolus via IV, followed by flush) . A saturatio n-recovery  prepared fast 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 13 - “TurboFLASH” gradient echo -technique, w ith iPAT (with mSENSE) acceler ation (x2) will 
be used to measure perfusion a t rest and after vasodilatory stress in three slices (basal, 
mid, apical levels) with an in -plane resolution of 2.2 x 2.2 mm i n three short -axis slices, 
using TR/TE/flip = 2.3/1.0/ 18°; 10 msec delay after satur ation before image read -out; 
linear phase -enco ding order. In addition, a low -resolution TurboFLASH image is 
acquired within 50 ms during each heart -beat at the ba sal level.  This low resolution 
image has a T1 -weighting that all ows to measure the arterial in put function (AIF) without 
significant signal saturation68. (Siemens software patch WIP578 for syngo  MR B1 7). The 
saturation-recovery time for the AIF readout is kept to < 20 ms. The software also 
automatically generates motion -corrected images ( in addition to the “raw” images), 
which substantially reduces the post -processing time for quantification of myocard ial 
perfus ion (reserve). A contrast bolus dosage of 0.06 mmol of  Dotarem (gadoterate 
meglumine , Guerbet,Inc.)  is injected to allow coronary  blood flow quantification using the 
arterial input measured with the low -resolution AIF “scout”, and keeping arteria l and 
myoc ardia l signal saturation to < 5%.  (We use a dosage of 0.06 mmol/kg for this reason, 
rather than 0.1 mmol/kg used by Gatehouse et a l68, though this dosage is fully adequate 
for analyzing myoc ardial con trast enhancement.). Rest perfusion imaging will be 
performed > 20 minutes after str ess perfusion imaging. We will quantify corona ry blood 
flow, as we have done previously.69,70 The rat ionale for acquiring perfusion images with 
MRI in parallel with the PET studies, is the higher spatial resolution of MRI compared to 
PET to assess myocardial bloo d flow in the e ndocardial layer, and also determine the 
ratio of  endo - to epi -cardial flows, a s a marker of ischemia. For post -processing, t he 
perfusion images will be segmented along the endo - and epi -cardial borders of the LV, 
and a reference point will be placed at the anterior LV/RV junction. Coronary  blood flow 
will be quantified by model -independent deconvolution of  the myocardial signal  curves 
with the AIF. Myoca rdial signal curves for endo - and e picardial layers in 16 segments of 
the AHA segmentatio n model wi ll be analyzed.  All images will be analyzed by an expe rt 
in cardiac MRI blinded to t reatment assignment.  
 
Abdominal MRI  
Images wil l be acquired using an axial T1 -weighted fat suppressed pulse sequence 
obtained at the level of L4 vertebral body. A bdominal v iscer al and subcutaneous fat 
areas from MRI and CT are  determined based on offline a nalysis of tracings obtained 
utilizing commerc ial software (Vitrak, Merge e/Film).  
 
Nutritional Analysis and Dietary Protocol  
Protein, carbohydrate, fat, micronut rient, die tary supplements and alcohol intake will be 
determined  from 4 -day food records (Nutr ition Data systems). For 6 days prior to 
Basel ine Visit 2 (RAAS characterization), subjects will be provided low sodium meals 
and snacks (10 mEq daily sodium, 100  mEq potas sium,  1000 mg calcium, water intake 
ad lib) and they w ill be asked not to consume an y food not provided to them, in cluding 
no caff eine or alcohol.  For 3 days prior to Baseline Visit 1 and 12 M onth Visit, subjects 
will be provided sodium supplemen ts through  broth packets as needed to achieve 
urinary Na >200mmo l/24 hr, and they will be aske d not to consume any food not 
provided to them , including no caffeine or alcohol. Urine aliquots for sodium and 
creatinine and 24hr urine sodium will be measured for the pe riod immediately prior to 
each visit to ensure complia nce with the diet.   
 
Lifestyl e Modification  
Goals derived from the AACE and  NCEP -ATP III guidelines and the Diabetes Prevention 
Program are as follows: <35% calories from fat, < 7% calories f rom satura ted fat, up to 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 14 - 10% calories from polyunsaturated fat, reduction of trans fatty acid intake, up to 20% 
calories from monounsaturate d fat, and 25 -35g of  fiber per day. 3 hrs of physical 
activity/week at moderate intensity . The curriculum is modeled  after the  Diabetes 
Prevention Program.  Subjects will complete lifestyle sessions at the Clin ical Research 
Center at MGH  with nutritionists  traine d to implement the curriculum. The curriculum will 
be introduced and reinforced until the completion of the s tudy.  
 
Optiona l Substudy:  
Cardiac 2 -deoxy -2-18F-Fluorodeoxygluc ose Positron Emission Tomograp hy/ 
Computed Tomography  (18F-FDG -PET/CT)  
An approach to detecting macrophage activity in atherosclerotic plaques uses FDG as 
the contrast radiotracer for positro n emission  tomo graphy (PET). FDG competes with 
glucose for uptak e into metabolically active ce lls, including macrophages in 
atherosclerotic plaques, and is trapped inside cells after phosphorylation. FDG -PET can 
image metabolic activity (as a marker of pla que inflam matio n) quantitatively in 
atherosclerotic plaques71,72, has been shown to have high reproducibil ity73, and 
correlates with histologic data72. Taki ng advantage of the myocardium’s preference fo r 
free fatty acids over glucose as an energy source, to minimize myocardial glucose 
uptake in order to better visual ize corona ry plaque activity, patients will be asked to 
adhere t o an Atkins style diet for the  evening prior to imaging and then to fast ove rnight.  
A fasting glucose will be checked prior to the start of the study.  Cardiac PET/CT imaging 
will be performed two hours following intravenous administrati on of approximately 10mCi 
of 18F-FDG. Imaging will  be performed using a Siemens Biograph PET/CT system 
(Siemens Medical Solutions, Forchheim, Germany) . Semi automated co -registration of 
PET and CT images will be accomplish ed us ing the Siemens MultiModality WorkPlace 
TrueD (Fo rchheim, Germany).  Once co -registered, the standardized uptake value 
(SUV) of FDG will be measured in various arteries. The SUV is the decay -corrected 
tissue concentration of FDG (in kBq/ml) divided by  the injected dose per body weight 
(kBq/g). Target -to-background ratio (TBR) will be  calculated for each vascular segment 
as the s egment SUV divided by vena cava or at rial blood SUV.  All images will be 
analyzed by an expert in cardiac FDG -PET/CT  blinded t o treatment assignment.  
 
 
VI.  Biostatistical Analysis   
Statistical Consideration:  Aim I:  The primary endpoint is change in CFR a ssessed 
by cardiac PET  or change  in sMBF  by card iac MRI . Secondary endpoints will include 
the following: ch ange in sICAM and s VCAM. Shapiro -Wilk test  will be used to assess 
for nor mality of distribution, and variables that are not n ormally dis tributed will be 
appropriately transformed prior to inclusion in multivariable models. We will compare 
the change in CFR  from mo nths 0 to 1 2 between treatment gro ups (eplerenone vs. 
placebo) us ing student’s t -test for variables that are normally  distribute d or Wilcoxon 
rank sum test for variables that are not normally distributed. We will also compare 
changes in sICAM and s VCAM over 12 mo nths between treatment grou ps using similar 
statistical me thods. In all Aims, for subjects who withdraw after 6 mo nths, but before the 
final 12 mo nth visit, we will obtain biomarkers and imaging similar to that scheduled for 
the final 12 mo nth visit if the sub ject agrees to have end  of study testing. The analysis  
will be intention to treat (ITT). In order to prope rly handle subjects with missing 
outcomes (those who withdrew before 12 months), we will apply longitudinal linear 
mixed effects mo del analysis with r andom subject level int ercepts and time slopes by 
which the longitudinal treatment effect can be examined by testing the significance of 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 15 - time x treatment interaction, which will provide unbiased effect estimate under missing 
at random co ndition, which will  be carried out by usin g augmented data sets created b y 
multiple imputation. A sensitivity analysis will b e performed  to include only those 
subjects who completed the study. Baseline variables will be compared between 
treatment groups, a nd any variable tha t is statistically diff erent between groups will be 
controlled for using multivariable modeling. It may be  that subje cts with more significant 
RAAS activation and dysregulation in aldosterone at baseline) are more responsive to 
eplerenon e. We will phenotyp e the RAAS in subjects at the low sodium visit and, 
guided by this data, may use aldosterone levels prior to interven tion as an index of 
RAAS activation and a covariate in assessing treatment response, to determine if 
eplerenone is more effective in the su bpopulation with greate r baseline aldosterone 
dysregul ation and RAAS activation. Covariates that will be c onsidered f or inclusion in 
modeling, include variables that differ at baseline and those variables that may affect 
vascular dysfunc tion, inflammation,  fibrosis and plaque (a ge, race, gender, BP, 
tobacco/i llicit drug use, family history of CVD, lipids, and glucose), H IV parameters (viral 
load, CD4, and duration of HIV and ART use) and compliance. This will permit us to 
assess relevant factors that may me diate the effect of epl erenone on CFR in HIV and 
interactions between HIV and traditional risk factors con tributing t o eplerenone effects. 
Moreover, we will compare changes in CFR and vascular biomarkers over 12 mo nths 
using regression a nalysis. We will pe rform Pearson’s correla tion for variables that are 
normally distributed and Spearman’s correlation for var iables that  are non -normally 
distributed. If we see significant changes in specific biomarkers that correlate with 
changes in CFR, then we will run th ose specific biomarkers  from stored serum at earlier 
time points (e.g. 6 mo nths) to see if early changes i n biomarker s can predict changes in 
CFR, as well as predict response to MR blockade. Biostatistician Role:  The 
biostatistician  will monitor data colle ction, quality and comp leteness of the study 
throughou t all years of the grant. The biostatistician will c reate the r andomization plan, 
using a permuted block algorithm, stratified for gender , statin use , and presence of 
plaque  and provi de the list to the study pharmacist (inves tigators will remain blinded). 
Identical placebo will be provided by the pharmacy. Sample Size  Determination: 
Preliminary data from HIV subjects presented in this grant demonstrate a CFR 
1.74±0.73 (mean±SD) using c ardiac PET Supporti ve data are also derive d from a 
longitudinal study by our team using cardiac PET, showing mean±SD change o f CFR in 
diabetics treated with spironolactone 0.33±0.83 vs. placebo: 0.02±1.03 over 6 mo nths 
(mean SD=0.93).40 Given these data, we considered the range 0.73 -0.93 SD to 
accurately reflect the potential variability of change in CFR for the proposed study. 
Based on this data, we now provide  a range of detecta ble differences using 8 5% power 
and a revised increase d sample size of 80 subjects, with an attrition rate  of 15%, 
leaving 68 evaluable subjects. Thus, even choosing a conservative SD of 0.93, the 
study will be well powered to detect a d ifference in mean c hange of CFR  of at leas t 
0.69. As our preliminary data , using PET, show that HIV patients have a mean CFR 1.7, 
an inc rease of CFR to 2.4 with eplerenone is a clinically relevant increase associated 
with decreased morbidity and mortality.  For the sMBF and biomarkers, this study has 
85% po wer at a two -sided 0.0 5 α level to show a change in the variable of at least 0.74 
SD after tre atment with eplerenone vs. placebo.  
 
Aim II:  For this aim, t he endpoint  is change in myocardial ECV  assessed by myocardial 
T1 mapping on cardiac MRI. Se condary endpoin ts will include the following: change in 
plasma IL -6, MCP -1, sCD163, sCD14 and serum hsCRP, galectin -3, cardiotrophin 1, 
lipocalin, PINP, PIIINP, BNP . Statistical algorithms as detailed in Aim I will be applied to 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 16 - these specific endpoints. S imilar to Aim I , changes in ECV  and inflammatory/fibrosis 
biomarkers over 12 mos comparing eplerenone vs. pla cebo will be assessed using ITT 
and longitudinal linear effects modeling with imputation and sensitivity analyses. By 
regression techniques and cov ariate analyses , we will also a ssess whether 
improvements in ECV from MR blockade will relate to improvements  in diastolic strain. 
Sample Size Determination: Thiara et al. show mean±SD ECV 0.28±0.04 vs. 
0.26±0.03 in HIV vs. non -HIV using cardiac MRI.30 To estimate the SD of change in 
ECV, we assu med an intrasubj ect longitudinal correlation over time r=0.7 among the HIV 
group, which result s in a conservative SD estimate of 0.03. Based on this SD, the 
proposed study, with a revised sample size of 80 subjects and therefore 68 eva luable  
subjects consi dering a 15% att rition rate, will attain 85% power at a two sided α of 0.05 
to detect a difference of at least 0.02 in longitudinal means of ECV. Thus our study is 
well powered to find a significant difference between arms that is clin ically  relevant, as 
each 0.03 increas e in ECV raises the risk for mortality or CV morbidity by 50%.23 For 
biomarkers, we have 85% power at a two -sided 0.05 α leve l to s how a change of  at least 
0.74 S D comparing eplerenone vs. placebo.  
 
Aim III:  For this aim, t he endpoint  is change in noncalcified plaque volume assessed by 
coronary CTA. Secondary endpoints will include: change in high risk plaque morphology 
(num bers of l ow attenuation and po sitively r emodeled plaque) by coronary CTA . 
Statistical algorithms as detailed in Aim I will be applied to these specific endpoints. 
Moreover, the relationship between baseline CFR and non -calcified plaque volume will 
be asses sed. Last ly, we will also dete rmine whet her longitudinal changes in coronary 
plaque are associated with changes in biomarkers of inflammation and immune 
activation to understand the potential relationship of these inflammatory indices as 
markers of improve d indices  of the coronary vasc ulature in  response to MR blockade in 
the HIV. Sample Size Determination: In our prior studies assessing plaque in HIV, the 
median [IQR] change of noncalcified plaque volume over 12 mos was 6.7[ -6.5, 29.8] 
mm3.13  We assumed a conservative SD of 18mm3 taking the mean of the IQR. This 
study enroll ing 80 subjects with 68 evaluab le subjects will attain 85% power at a two 
sided α of 0.05 to detect a difference in noncalcified plaque volume of 13.3mm3 between 
eplerenone vs. placebo, a clinically relevant change. For biomarkers, this study has 85% 
power  at a two -sided 0.05 α level to  show a ch ange of at least 0.74 SD after treatment 
with eplerenone vs. placebo.  
 
Aim IV:  For this aim, t he endpoint  is change in MCP -1 between the low sodium and 
liberal sodium diets. Secondary endpoints will include: change in hs CRP, p entraxin3, 
IL6, Lp-PLA 2, sCD14, sCD163. We will test the change in biomarkers between the RAAS 
activated (sodium restricted) and RAAS suppressed states (sodium loaded) using the 
paired Student’s t -test for normally distributed variables or Wilcoxon s igned -rank test for 
non-normally distributed variables. We will apply Pearson’s correlation for variables that 
are normally distributed and Spearman’s correlation for variables that are non -normally 
distributed to determine whether there is a significant c orrela tion between al dosterone 
during the RAAS activated state and TBR. Covariates considered for inclusion in 
modeling include variables that may affect vascular dysfunction, inflammation, and 
plaque (age, race, sex, BP, tobacco/illicit drug use, family h istory  of CVD, lipids , 
glucose), and HIV parameters (viral load, CD4, duration of HIV and ART use). This will 
permit us to assess relevant factors that may mediate the effect of aldosterone on 
inflammation in HIV and interactions between HIV and traditiona l risk factors contri buting 
to inflammation. Sample Size Determination: Preliminary data in HIV presented in this 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 17 - grant demonstrate a mean change in MCP -1 of 44.0 +41.8 pg/mL between a low sodium 
and ad lib sodium diet. Based on this SD, the proposed study , with  a sample size of 42 
subjects, and therefore 36 evaluable subjects considering a 15% attrition rate, will at tain 
85% power at a two sided α of 0.05 to detect a difference of at least 44.0 pg/mL in mean 
MCP -1 between the formally tested RAAS activated (sodi um restricted) and RAAS 
suppressed (sodium loaded) states. For other biomarkers, we have 85% power at a two -
sided 0.05 α level to show a change of at least 0.95 SD between RAAS activated and 
suppressed states.  
 
Aim V : For this aim, t he endpoint  is change in TBR assessed by cardiac 18F-FDG -
PET/CT. Secondary endpoints include: change in hsCRP, pentraxin3,  IL6, Lp -PLA2, 
MCP -1, sCD14, sCD163. Statistical algorithms as detailed in Aim I will be applied to 
these specific endpoints. Similar to Aim I, changes in TBR and inflammatory biomarkers 
over 12 mos comparing eplerenone vs. placebo will be assessed using I TT and 
longitud inal linear effects modeling with imputation and sensitivity analyses. We will also 
determine whether longitudinal changes in arterial inflammation are associated with 
changes in biomarkers of inflammation and immune activation to understand  the 
potential relationship of these inflammatory indices as markers of improved indices of 
the coronary vasculature in response to MR blockade in the HIV. Sample Size 
Determination: In our prior studies assessing arterial inflammation on 18F-FDG PET, the 
mean±SD  (95% CI ) TBR at baseline among HIV subjects was 2.23 ± 0.45 (2.07, 
2.40)mm3.74 In order to estimate the S D of chan ge in TBR, we assumed the intrasubject 
longitudinal correlation over time r=0.75, which results in a conservative SD estimate of 
0.34.This study enrolling 42 subjects with 36 evaluable subjects will attain 85% power at 
a two sided α of 0.05 to det ect a dif ferenc e in mean TBR changes of 0.32 between 
eplerenone vs. placebo, a clinically relevant difference in the changes as our preliminary 
data show that non -HIV subjects have a mean TBR 1.89. For biomarkers, this study has 
85% power at a two -sided 0. 05 α leve l to s how a mean change of at least 0.95 SD after 
treatment with eplerenone vs. placebo.  
 
Aim VI:  In an exploratory analysis, s ubjects will be enrolled using  a factorial sampling 
strategy into 4 analytic strata (low VAT/absence of plaque, low VAT/ presence of pla que, 
high VAT/absence of plaque, high VAT/presence of plaque). Using this design, we will 
first analyze whether there are differences in markers of inflammation and heart disease 
by VAT status (main effects model comparing presence and absen ce of exc ess VA T) 
using student’s t -test for variables that are normally distributed or Wilcoxon rank sum 
test for variables that are not normally distributed. Based on the ex clusion criteria excess 
VAT is determined to be >110cm2.  After assessing for dif ferences in VAT  in the main 
effects model, we will examine the degree to which markers of inflammation and heart 
disease are related to coronary plaque in both the high and low VAT groups, and 
whether this relationship is stronger in the coronary plaque g roup as a result  of 
increased VAT  using ANOVA for variable that are normally distributed and Kruskal -
Wallis Test for variables that are not normally distributed .  
 
VII.  Risks and Discomforts  
Blood Drawing : The total blood drawn for subjects completing the study is equiva lent to 
approximately  560 ml (over a period of 12 months).  This quantity of blood drawing does 
not pose excessive risk to subjects. By comparison, the Red Cross allows a healthy 
adult to donate 1 pint of blood every 8 weeks, which is about 4 73 ml.  S ubject s with a 
hemoglobin <  10 mg/dL w ill be excluded from the study.  There will be minimal risk and 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 18 - discomfort associated with blood drawing and IV placement. The risks of these 
procedures are minor bruising or bleeding at the site of the blood d raw or IV  cathe ter or 
feeling faint. Standard clean insertion techniques will be utilized to minimize risk of 
infection.  
 
Intravenous Catheter Placement : There are minor risks and discomforts associated 
with having an intravenous line and with injection o f contras t agen t through the 
intravenous line, including the possibility of bleeding, pain, inflammation (redness and 
swelling), and leaking of contrast agent outside of the vein at the site of the IV.  These 
problems usually self -resolve or only require m inor trea tments , such as application of an 
ice-pack or slight pressure for a few minutes.  
 
CT Abdomen : This study is obtained once during the screening process to evaluate for 
visceral adipose tissue area. The radiation risk associated with the single slic e CT scan  
of the abdomen is approximately 0.55 mSv.  This is equivalent to the amount of radiation 
an individual would normally get in 2 months from natural background sources from the 
earth and the sky.  As with the other imaging studies, there may be incid ental fin dings on 
the CT study . If any of these findings are clinically significant, the subjects will be 
withdrawn from the study and referred to the primary care physician for further 
evaluation.  
 
Coronary CTA and Radiation : With the implementation of m easures t o limi t radiation 
exposure, the total dose of the coronary CTA examination will be approximately 4 mSv, 
depending on the weight, gender and heart rate. The added radiation from the two CTA 
scans (screening and follow -up) will be 8 mSv. This is equ ivalent t o the amount of 
radiation an individual would normally get in 2 years and 7 months from natural 
background sources from the earth and the sky.   State -of-the-art dose reduction 
techniques at MGH allow the dose to be substantially lower than histori cally rep orted 
median coronary CTA doses. Iterative image reconstruction algorithms allow for further 
reductions in radiation dose.  These techniques allow for up to a 50% reduction in 
radiation dose compared with previous generation protocols. Massachusett s General  
Hospi tal was the first hospital in New England to use the Siemens Definition Flash 
second -generation dual -source 128  or Siemens SOMATOM Force dual -source 196  
detector -row CT, an advanced cardiac -capable CT scanner which allows ultra -fast 
cardiac imaging a t the lowest possible radiation doses potentially equivalent to or less 
than a chest CT scan. HIV patients may have clinically significant subclinical CAD. We 
will assess the first coronary CTA for this condition. Any subject with evidence of seve re 
corona ry art ery stenosis, defined as ≥50% stenosis in the left main coronary artery or 
>70% stenosis in the other major coronary arteries will be withdrawn from the study prior 
to further evaluative imaging and procedures and prior to randomization to s tudy drug . 
Subjects with evidence of clinically significant atherosclerosis will be referred to a 
cardiologist for appropriate evaluation and treatment.  
 
CTA contrast medium : CTA requires the intravenous administration of iodinated 
contrast medium. These contrast media have been known to cause renal failure, 
particularly in subjects with a pre -existing renal impairment. Adequate hydration will also 
be emphasized to each study participant. The contrast dose in coronary CTA has 
decreased with the introductio n of fast er sca nners. The dose required will be between 60 
to 100 ml. Allergic reactions to iodinated contrast media may cause skin reactions or in 
very rare occasions result in breathing difficulty and hypotension. Subjects will be closely 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 19 - monitored for t he develo pment of any allergic reactions. To minimize risk from iodinated 
contrast, subjects with previous allergic reactions to iodine -containing contrast media or 
signs of renal failure or history of renal disease will be excluded  from the CTA study . 
Additional s afety criteria will be implemented by measuring serum creatinine and 
excluding subjects with serum creatinine >1.5 mg/ml or estimated GFR<60  
mL/min/1.73m2. Metformin use is an exclusion criteria for the study, so the risk of lactic 
acidosis will b e avoided .  
 
Nitroglycerin : Nitroglycerin is commonly used in subjects with angina pectoris and is 
generally considered safe. The side effects and risks of nitroglycerin are generally mild 
and of short duration and include hypotension, tachyarrhythmia, hea dache, 
lighthea dedness, and visual disturbance. Subjects who are on sildenafil, tadalafil, or 
vardenafil (PDE5 inhibitor) will need to stop these drugs at least 5 days prior to receiving 
nitroglycerin on the day of the coronary CTA scan. If baseline systol ic blood pressu re is 
below 90, nitroglycerin will not be given. If a participant’s blood pressure were to drop 
precipitously or if the participant develops symptoms, standard clinical care will be 
provided. Other contraindications to nitroglycerin include severe ao rtic s tenosis or 
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.  
 
Cardiac PET and Radiation : The two cardiac PET scans will involve exposure to 
radiation for research purposes.  Subjects will receive a research related rest and stress 
13N-ammonia PET sca n before and af ter a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist . 13N-
ammonia (20 mCi) will be injected twice prior to rest and stress scans. Each PET scan 
will expose subjects to 3.36 mSv of radiation. The added radiation from the two PET 
scans (b aseline and fo llow-up) will b e 6.72  mSv. This is equivalent to the amount of 
radiation an individual woul d normally get in 2 years and 2  months from natural 
background sources from the earth and the sky.  The radioactive tracer will be 
administered at baseline and at 12 months. H IV pat ients may have silent ischemia. We 
will assess the first regadenoson /adenosine -stimulated coronary blood flow study for this 
condition. Any subject with evidence of clinical significant ischemia will be withdrawn 
from the study prior to furt her evalu ative studies and prior to randomization to study 
drugs. Subjects with evidence of ischemia will be referred to a cardiologist for 
appropriate evaluation and treatment. In addition, there may be incidental findings on the 
PET study.  If any of thes e finding s are clinically significant, the subjects will be 
withdrawn from the study and referred to the primary care physician for further 
evaluation.  
 
Regadenoson/ Adenosine : Regadenoson or a denosine will  be administered during the 
cardiac PET and MRI st udies. Regadeno son stress and adenosine stress have been  
used routinely for many years for evaluating patients with known or suspected CAD.  
Regadenoson and/or adenosine will be administered at the radiologist’s discretion.  The 
most common side effects asso ciated wi th the  Regadenoson or adenosine infusion 
include: flushing, chest pain/pressure, shortness of breath, palpitations, headache, mild 
hypotension and heart block. These side effects are usually mild and self -limiting. If they 
are severe in intensity,  aminophy lline IV (1 mg/kg) will be given as per standard protocol. 
Subjects will have their blood pressure and heart rate monitored closely by a physician 
and/or nurse in attendance at all times. The protocol will be immediately discontinued if 
clinically  signific ant at rial or ventricular arrhythmias are observed.   
 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 20 - Radiation Exposure : The total estimated radiation exposure from Aims 1 and  3 is 
approximately 15.27  mSv.  Aim 2 has no specific radiation associated.  This is 
equivalent to the amount of radiatio n an indi vidual  would normally get in 4  years and 
11 months from natural background sources from the earth and the sky.  To minimize 
radiation exposure, coronary CTA dose reduction techniques including ECG -triggered 
tube modulation and automatic exposure co ntrol wil l be a pplied when possible . Larger 
patients  can get higher doses (up to twice that of an average size patient) from any CT 
exam compared to the mean dose.  If a patient has received previous radiation 
exposure prior to participation in the study, w e will al so cal culate the total radiation 
exposure and if prior cumulative exposure during the 12 months prior to the study 
exceeds 15 mSv (which is 30% of the maximum recommended annual dose for 
research subjects set by the MGH Radiation Safety Committee) , then th e subj ect will 
be excluded from participating. Pregnancy test will be performed prior to CT or PET 
scanning in women. (See also sections for coronary CTA and cardiac PET above for 
specific radiation exposure.)  
 
Abdominal MRI and Cardiac MRI : Subjects will  be ca refully screened for metal 
implants such as surgical clips or pacemakers prior to MRI scanning. Sources of 
discomfort during the MRI study may include noise and possible claustrophobia.  
Subjects will be given earplugs due to the loud noises during th e test .  Subjects who feel 
uncomfortable in confined spaces may have difficulty in the narrow cylinder of the MRI, 
and the MRI can be stopped at any time at the subject’s request. There are no known 
hazards for pregnant women; however, pregnancy i s an excl usion for this study. The 
MRI has the potential, during normal routine use, to cause localized warming of the skin 
and the underlying tissues. If the subject experiences discomfort due to warming, the 
procedure will be stopped.  Radio -frequency pow er deposi tion i s strictly controlled by the 
scanner software, in conformance with the applicable FDA guidelines, and cannot be 
overridden by the user. An IV line, placed just prior to the MRI exam, may cause 
tenderness, swelling, warmth at the injection si te, and r arely infection. There is no 
radiation exposure other than exposure to the magnetic and non -ionizing radio -
frequency fields, which meet FDA guidelines.  All pulse sequences used for this study 
have been approved by the hardware vendor for cardiac M RI studie s, and  received FDA 
clearance, except for the sequence that is used for perfusion imaging, which is a “works -
in-progress” package that has undergone safety testing by Siemens Medical Systems, 
and been licensed for use to Brigham and Women’s Hospit al. A sin gle ax ial slice of the 
abdomen will be obtained with MRI. The total amount of time in the  magnet will be 
approximately 45  min. For the cardiac MRI, the total amount of time in the magnet will be 
approximately 80 min . In addition, there may be inci dental fi ndings  on the MRI study.  If 
any of these findings are clinically significant, the subjects will be withdrawn from the 
study and referred to the primary care physician for further evaluation.   
 
Gadolinium Contrast : Gadolinium contrast has been wide ly used a nd is very well 
tolerated. Gadolinium will be administered with the cardiac MRI studies. No contrast is 
administered with the abdomen MRI. The most common adverse reactions of gadolinium 
are transient headache (3.6%), injection site coldness (3.6% ), and na usea ( 1.5%).  
There is a very rare occurrence of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis after gadolinium, but 
this has only been reported in subjects with impaired renal function.  All subjects will 
have a serum creatinine assessed prior to each MRI and subjects wi th ser um creatinine 
>1.5 mg/ml or estimated GFR<60 will be excluded from the study.  For this study a 
macrocyclic Gd -contrast agent will be used (Gadoterate meglumine, DOTAREM, 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 21 - Guerbet) which has the highest thermodynamic stability constant among a ll availa ble 
gadolinium -bound contrast agents to reduce the chance of any exposure to Gd3+ ions.  
 
Incidental Findings : Incidental non -coronary and coronary findings may be obtained, 
and significant non -coronary and coronary findings will be communicated to  the subj ect 
and provider  as appropriate .  
 
Standardized High Sodium Diet : Select subjects will be receive broth packets for 3 
days. Increases in dietary sodium may cause mild elevations in blood pressure, but 
usually only by a small amount depending upon the subje cts’ s alt-sensitivity status. 
Blood pressure will be monitored frequently during study visits. Procedures will not be 
initiated if the subject’s blood pressure is too high or symptoms are present. When 
subjects resume their usual home diets, blood  pressure  is expected to return to baseline.  
 
Medications : Administration of all medications will be conducted by the appropriate 
health care professional. A physician will be available on -call 24 hours/day, 7 days/week, 
to all study participants for any questions  or co ncerns.   
 
Eplerenone : The eplerenone dose of 50mg daily has been used safely in previous 
studies to improve coronary circulation in individuals with Type 2 diabetes and by others 
in numerous studies of patients with CVD. This dose is FDA app roved for  indef inite use 
in patients with hypertension or left -ventricular dysfunction following myocardial 
infarction. Hyperkalemia is a potential side effect of eplerenone use, and any subject 
with serum K > 5.5 mEq/L at screen will be excluded . During t he study,  a sub ject who 
has an elevated K of > 5.5 mEq/L at any study visit will have a recheck; if the K remains 
elevated after recheck, the dose will be decreased to 50mg daily. If the K remains 
elevated> 5.5 mEq/L, the subject will be excluded from the study.  A dditio nally, subjects 
who experience symptoms of hyperkalemia and have a K > 5.0 mEq/L will be excluded 
from continued participation in the study.  Subjects who have hypotension (SBP<90 
mmHg) at any study visit after titration to full dose epleren one 50mg twice daily will be 
given a dose reduction to 50 mg daily. If a subject remains hypotensive (SBP <90 
mmHg) or symptomatic of hypotension at the reduced dose they will be dropped from 
the study.  Since subjects with renal insufficiency may require reduced d osing based on 
creatinine clearance, subjects with serum creatinine > 1.5 mg/dl will also be excluded.  
Other rare side effects include dizziness, fatigue, and diarrhea; these will be assessed 
for throughout the study. The effe ct of eplerenone on an embryo , fetus, or on a 
breastfeeding infant, is unknown and may be harmful.  Because of these unknown risks, 
women cannot take part in this study if they are: pregnant, trying to beco me pregnant, 
breastfeeding. If  wome n become pregnant or think they  are pregnant  durin g the study, 
they must stop taking the study medication and will be withdrawn from the study.  We 
have received FDA IND exemption for the use of eplerenone in HIV for insulin resistance 
and recently received an FDA IND exemption for applicat ion in CV D indi ces in HIV.  
Protease inhibitors with the most significant effect on CYP3A4 will be exclusionary as in 
our prior trials of HIV patients. We will also exclude subjects using other strong inhibitors 
of CYP3A4, as well as CYP3A4 inducers. Furthe rmore, al l subj ects will be carefully 
monitored for side effects, including frequent potassium and BP monitoring. A 50mg 
twice daily  dose of eplerenone has been chosen, such that even if concentrations do 
increase somewhat through pharmacokinetic interacti ons, we e xpect the drug to be well 
tolerated. The dose of 100 mg/day has been effective in numerous studies of non -HIV 
patients and is expected to be effective in the proposed studies.  
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 22 -  
Optional Substudy --Cardiac 2 -deoxy -2-18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose Positron 
Emission Tomogr aphy /Computed Tomography  (18F-FDG -PET/CT) and Radiation: 
The two cardiac PET /CT scans will involve exposure to radiation for research purposes.  
Subjects will receive a scan before and after a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist. For 
18F-FDG-PET/CT,  the a dministered dose from 18F- FDG for a typical cardiac study is 370 
MBq (10 mCi=7.03 mSv) and the effective dose for an attenuation correction scan of 
head/neck/chest/upper abdomen is about 1.58 mSv . The total effective dose from two 
FDG -PET/C T studies  would  be 17.22 mSv.  This is equivalent to the amount of radiation 
an in dividual wou ld normally get in 5 years and 7  months from natural background 
sources from the earth and the sky. A STAT serum pregnancy test will be performed on 
the day of pri or to com mencem ent of the study. In addition, there may be incidental 
findings on the PET study. If any of these findings are clinically significant, subjects will 
be informed, referred to their primary care physician for further evaluation, and 
withdrawn as approp riate from the study.  
 
Optional Substudy --Radiation Exposure  The total estimated radiation exposure for 
the entire study  (main study+substudy)  would be 32.49 mSv. This is equivalent to the 
amount of radiation an individual would normally get in 10  years an d 6 mo nths from 
natural background sources from the earth and the sky. (See also sections radiation 
exposure for other precautions and cardiac 18F-FDG -PET/CT above for specific radiation 
exposure related to the substudy.)  
 
Optional Substudy --Blood  draw  The total amount of blood drawn for the substudy will 
be approximately 4 mL over 1 year for females only. This will be a minimal amount 
added to the main study. The total blood drawn for subjects completing the entire study  
(main study+substudy)  is equivalent  to ap proximately 564ml (over a period of 12 
months).  
 
Optional Blood Sampling Visit (for those that do not qualify after completion of 
both screening visits) --Blood draw  The total amount of blood drawn for the Optional 
Blood Sampling Visit will be approx imatel y 48 ml . This will be a minimal amount added 
to the screening visits . The total blood drawn for subjects completing this optional  visit 
(screening  visits +optional  visit) is equivalent to approximately 73 ml.  
 
 
VIII.  Potential Benefits  
There are no direct  benefits related to participation in the study, but subjects will receive 
regular physical exams with blood pressure monitoring, lifestyle counseling to improve 
nutrition and physical activity, and screen testing that will evaluate for clin ically 
signific ant coronary artery disease. There may be potential improvements in CVD and 
inflammation as a result of treatment with eplerenone and/or lifestyle modification.  In 
addition, all subjects will be provided with tools to help them meet the pre scribed g oals, 
including a core curriculum binder. Clinically interpretable information on metabolic 
parameters will be provided to the subject and may help subjects and their clinicians to 
better understand their metabolic risk if they choose to obtain su ch inform ation.  Any 
abnormal testing will be conveyed to the subjects’ primary care physicians with their 
permission. In addition, information obtained from this study will benefit HIV patients in 
the future. Therefore, the benefits of this study are felt to outwei gh its  risks described 
above.  
 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 23 - For those who do not qualify and choose to participate in the optional blood sampling 
visit, there are no direct benefits, but subjects will receive screen tests that will evaluate 
clinically for visceral fat and cor onary art ery pl aque and inform their medical history.  In 
addition, information obtained from the stored blood will benefit HIV patients in the 
future. Therefore, the benefits of this study are felt to outweigh its risks described above.  
 
IX.  Monitoring an d Quality  Assur ance  
Written informed consent for this protocol will be obtained from all subjects at the first 
screening visit, prior to a ny procedures or interventions.  In all cases, consent will be 
witnessed by an appropriate health care professional (in vestigato r/co-investigator staff).  
All efforts will be made to insure the privacy rights of the subject. No written or oral 
communication will be made about any subject with anyone other than the subject, 
unless the subject s o requests.  Medical informatio n obtaine d from  the study may 
become part of the subject’s permanent hospital record, subject to the confidentiality and 
privacy regulations of the Massachusetts General Hospital . Subjects will be closely 
monitored to ensure that study participation is not  adversel y affe cting their quality of life, 
and any adverse events will be reported in a timely fashion and in accordance with the 
Partners HRC guidelin es for adverse event reporting.  PHRC requires the reporting of 
unanticipated problems, including risks, within 5  workin g days or 7 calendar days.  
Kidney function and potassium levels wi ll be serially monitored. If a subject experiences 
an opportunistic infection or any acute illness, the lifestyle modification program will be 
held while the subject is acutel y ill.   
 
Hyper kalemia is a potential side effect of eplerenone use, and contraind ications for the  
use of eplerenone include serum K > 5.5 mEq/L at initiation.  Therefore, any subject with 
serum K >5.5 mEq/L at screen will be excluded from the study. Durin g the stu dy, a 
subject who has an elevated K of > 5.5 mEq/L at any study visit will have a recheck; if 
the K remains elevated after recheck they will be excluded from the study.  Additionally, 
subjects who experience symptoms of hyperkalemia and have a K >  5.0 mEq/ L will  be 
excluded from continued participation.  Subjects who have symptomatic hypotension at 
any study visit after titrati on to full dose eplerenone 50mg twice daily will be given a dose 
reducti on to 50 mg daily . Since patients with renal insuff iciency m ay req uire reduced 
dosing based on creatinine clearance, subjects with renal insufficiency (serum creatinine 
> 1.5 mg/dl) will also be excluded from participation.  Other  side effects have been 
reported and include dizziness, fatigue, diarrhea, he adache, s tomach  pain, cough, 
breast enlargement or breast enlargement, rash, abnormal vaginal bleeding.  Rare but 
serious side effects include chest pain, tingling in arms and legs, loss of muscle tone, 
weakness or heaviness in legs, confusion, lack of ene rgy, cold , gray  skin or irregular 
heartbeat.   These potential side effects will be assessed for throughout the study.  
Exclusion criteria during the study include initiation of ACE -I, ARB, or spironolactone; 
Hgb < 10; ALT >3.0 x ULN; persistent hyperkalemia (K >5.5 m Eq/L d espite recheck 
and/or symptoms of hyperkalemia if K >5.0 mEq/L).  If a subject remains hypotensive 
(SBP <90  mmHg ) or symptomatic of hypotension after a dose reduction of eplerenone to 
50 m g for this same reason during the study, they will be dropped f rom th e study.  
 
Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
Prior to the start of study, a data safety monitoring board will be created and this board 
will consist of a statistician , a clinician not directly related to the research project, but one 
who is familia r with HI V infe ction and its complications, and a member of the HIV 
community.  This board will meet quarterly to review any potential side effects or 
adverse events in relation to the use of eplerenone or participation in the study. The 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 24 - DSMB will meet and  review a dverse  events in accordance with the guidelines of the 
Massachusetts General Hosp ital Human Research Committee. Reports generated by 
the DSMB will be submitted to the Partners Institutional Review Board  after when 
otherwise indicated or requested.  
The prin cipal investigator and/or co -investigator will be responsible for follow ing patients 
during the study. Patients will be assessed at every visit during their study participation.  
The investigators and study staff will assure that all CRFs, source documents  and 
informed consent are accurate and complete after each study visit.  
The data from these studies are stored in a password protected file with access only to 
study staff and those interpreting the studies. All data are securely stored and only 
accessible  to co -investigators and study staff in order to protect confidentiality . 
 
X.  References  
 
1. Morlat P, Roussillon C, Henard S, et al. Causes of death among HIV -infected patients in 
France in 2010 (national survey): trends sinc e 2000. AIDS. May 15 2014;28(8):1181 -
1191.  
2. Angulo P. GI epidemiology: nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Alimentary pharmacology & 
therapeutics. 2007;25(8):883 -889. 
3. Triant V, Lee H, Hadigan C, Grinspoon S. Myocardial infarction rates among HIV -infecte d 
patient s in a  U.S. health care system. Presented at XVI International AIDS Society. 2006.  
4. Freiberg MS, Chang CC, Kuller LH, et al. HIV Infection and the Risk of Acute Myocardial 
Infarction. JAMA Intern Med. Mar 4 2013:1 -9. 
5. Subramanian S, Tawakol A,  Burdo TH , et a l. Arterial inflammation in patients with HIV. 
JAMA. Jul 25 2012;308(4):379 -386. 
6. de Keyser CE, Koehler EM, Schouten JN, et al. Statin therapy is associated with a 
reduced risk of non -alcoholic fatty liver in overweight individuals. Digest ive and L iver 
Disease. 2014;46(8):720 -725. 
7. Calza L, Pocaterra D, Pavoni M, et al. Plasma levels of VCAM -1, ICAM -1, E-Selectin, 
and P -Selectin in 99 HIV -positive patients versus 51 HIV -negative healthy controls. J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. Apr 1 2009;50 (4):430 -432. 
8. Pastori D, Polimeni L, Baratta F, Pani A, Del Ben M, Angelico F. The efficacy and safety 
of statins for the treatment of non -alcoholic fatty liver disease. Digestive and Liver 
Disease. 2015;47(1):4 -11. 
9. Blankenberg S, Rupprecht HJ, Bickel  C, et al . Circ ulating cell adhesion molecules and 
death in patients with coronary artery disease. Circulation. Sep 18 2001;104(12):1336 -
1342.  
10. Zanni MV, Abbara S, Lo J, et al. Increased Coronary Atherosclerotic Plaque Vulnerability 
by Coronary Computed  Tomograp hy Ang iography in HIV -Infected Men. AIDS. Jan 16 
2013.  
11. Fitch K, Srinivasa S, Abbara S, et al. Noncalcified Coronary Atherosclerotic Plaque and 
Immune Activation in HIV -infected Women. Journal of Infectious Diseases (In Press). 
2013.  
12. Burdo TH, Lo J,  Abbar a S, et al. Soluble CD163, a novel marker of activated 
macrophages, is elevated and associated with noncalcified coronary plaque in HIV -
infected patients. J Infect Dis. Oct 15 2011;204(8):1227 -1236.  
13. Lo J, Lu MT, Ihenachor EJ, et al. Effe cts of st atin t herapy on coronary artery plaque 
volume and high -risk plaque morphology in HIV -infected patients with subclinical 
atherosclerosis: a randomised, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial. The Lancet HIV. 
2015;2(2):e52 -e63. 
14. Alexander C, Riet schel ET.  Bacte rial lipopolysaccharides and innate immunity. J 
Endotoxin Res. 2001;7(3):167 -202. 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 25 - 15. Ferre P, Foretz M, Azzout -Marniche D, Becard D, Foufelle F. Sterol -regulatory -element -
binding protein 1c mediates insulin action on hepatic gene expression . Biochem  Soc 
Trans. Aug 2001;29(Pt 4):547 -552. 
16. M. Sundaram PS, J.C. Anitha, C.N. Srinivas, S.S. Sunil, N. Ashwin, P. Balakrishnan, K.G. 
Muragavel, S. Suniti, N. Kumarasamy. C -reactive protein in HIV -infected patients - could it 
be a marker of immunosup pression?  Paper  presented at: XVI International AIDS 
Conference; 13 -18 August 2006, 2006; Toronto, Ontario.  
17. Shimomura I, Bashmakov Y, Ikemoto S, Horton JD, Brown MS, Goldstein JL. Insulin 
selectively increases SREBP -1c mRNA in the livers of rats with s treptozot ocin-induced 
diabetes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. Nov 23 1999;96(24):13656 -13661.  
18. Friis-Moller N, Ryom L, Smith C, et al. An updated prediction model of the global risk of 
cardiovascular disease in HIV -positive persons: The Data -collection on A dverse Ef fects 
of Anti -HIV Drugs (D:A:D) study. Eur J Prev Cardiol. Apr 16 2015.  
19. Horton JD, Goldstein JL, Brown MS. SREBPs: activators of the complete program of 
cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis in the liver. J Clin Invest. May 2002;109(9):1125 -
1131. 
20. Kwan Tat  S, Padrines M, Theoleyre S, Heymann D, Fortun Y. IL -6, RANKL, TNF -
alpha/IL -1: interrelations in bone resorption pathophysiology. Cytokine Growth Factor 
Rev. Feb 2004;15(1):49 -60. 
21. Borges AH, O'Connor JL, Phillips AN, et al. Determinants of IL-6 levels during HIV 
infection. J Int AIDS Soc. 2014;17(4 Suppl 3):19482.  
22. Lau B, Sharrett AR, Kingsley LA, et al. C -reactive protein is a marker for human 
immunodeficiency virus disease progression. Arch Intern Med. Jan 9 2006;166(1):64 -70. 
23. Wong TC, Pi ehler KM, Kang IA, et al. Myocardial extracellular volume fraction quantified 
by cardiovascular magnetic resonance is increased in diabetes and associated with 
mortality and incident heart failure admission. Eur Heart J. Mar 2014;35(10):657 -664. 
24. Weisbe rg SP,  Hunter D, Huber R, et al. CCR2 modulates inflammatory and metabolic 
effects of high -fat feeding. The Journal of Clinical Investigation. 2006;116(1):115 -124. 
25. Barakat LA, Juthani -Mehta M, Allore H, et al. Comparing clinical outcomes in HI V-
infecte d and uninfected older men hospitalized with community -acquired pneumonia. HIV 
Med. Aug 2015;16(7):421 -430. 
26. Looby SE, Fitch, K.V., Srinivasa, S., Lo, J., Rafferty, D. Martin, A., Currier, J., Grinspoon, 
S., Zanni, M. Reduced Ovarian Reserve Re lates to Monocy te Activation and Subclinical 
Coronary Atherosclerotic Plaque in Women with HIV. AIDS. 2015;(In Press).  
27. Looby SE, Fitch, K.V., Srinivasa, S., Lo, J., Rafferty, D. Martin, A., Currier, J., Grinspoon, 
S., Zanni, M. Reduced Ovarian Reserve Relates t o Mono cyte Activation and Subclinical 
Coronary Atherosclerotic Plaque in Women with HIV. AIDS. 2015 2015;In Press.  
28. Holloway CJ, Ntusi N, Suttie J, et al. Comprehensive cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging and spectroscopy reveal a high burden of  myocardi al dis ease in HIV patients. 
Circulation. Aug 20 2013;128(8):814 -822. 
29. Cerrato E, D'Ascenzo F, Biondi -Zoccai G, et al. Cardiac dysfunction in pauci symptomatic 
human immunodeficiency virus patients: a meta -analysis in the highly active antiretro viral 
therapy e ra. Eur Heart J. May 2013;34(19):1432 -1436.  
30. Thiara DK, Liu CY, Raman F, et al. Abnormal Myocardial Function Is Related to 
Myocardial Steatosis and Diffuse Myocardial Fibrosis in HIV -Infected Adults. J Infect Dis. 
May 11 2015.  
31. El-Sadr  WM, Lund gren J D, Neaton JD, et al. CD4+ count -guided interruption of 
antiretroviral treatment. N Engl J Med. Nov 30 2006;355(22):2283 -2296.  
32. Westerbacka J, Kolak M, Kiviluoto T, et al. Genes involved in fatty acid partitioning and 
binding, lipolysis, m onocyte/m acroph age recruitment, and inflammation are 
overexpressed in the human fatty liver of insulin -resistant subjects. Diabetes. Nov 
2007;56(11):2759 -2765.  
33. Rocha R, Rudolph AE, Frierdich GE, et al. Aldosterone induces a vascular inflammatory 
phenot ype in th e rat heart. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. Nov 2002;283(5):H1802 -
1810.  
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 26 - 34. Furuya -Kanamori L, Kelly MD, McKenzie SJ. Co -morbidity, ageing and predicted 
mortality in antiretroviral treated Australian men: a quantitative analysis. PLoS One. 
2013; 8(10):e78 403. 
35. Cohen MH, Hotton AL, Hershow RC, et al. Gender -related risk factors improve mortality 
predictive ability of VACS Index among HIV -infected women. J Acquir Immune Defic 
Syndr. Aug 17 2015.  
36. Resanovic I, Rizzo M, Zafirovic S, et al. Anti -atherogen ic eff ects of 17beta -estradiol. 
Horm Metab Res. Sep 2013;45(10):701 -708. 
37. French MA, Cozzi -Lepri A, Arduino RC, Johnson M, Achhra AC, Landay A. Plasma levels 
of cytokines and chemokines and the risk of mortality in HIV -infected individuals: a c ase-
contr ol ana lysis nested in a large clinical trial. AIDS. Apr 24 2015;29(7):847 -851. 
38. Lai S, Lima JA, Lai H, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus 1 infection, cocaine, and 
coronary calcification. Arch Intern Med. Mar 28 2005;165(6):690 -695. 
39. Joffe HV, Kwong  RY, G erhard -Herman MD, Rice C, Feldman K, Adler GK. Beneficial 
effects of eplerenone versus hydrochlorothiazide on coronary circulatory function in 
patients with diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. Jul 2007;92(7):2552 -2558.  
40. Rohatgi A,  Khera A,  Berry  JD, et al. HDL cholesterol efflux capacity and incident 
cardiovascular events. N Engl J Med. Dec 18 2014;371(25):2383 -2393.  
41. El Khoury P, Ghislain M, Villard EF, et al. Plasma cholesterol efflux capacity from human 
THP-1 macrophages is r educed in  HIV-infected patients: impact of HAART. J Lipid Res. 
Mar 2015;56(3):692 -702. 
42. Tikellis C, Pickering RJ, Tsorotes D, et al. Activation of the Renin -Angiotensin system 
mediates the effects of dietary salt intake on atherogenesis in the apolipopr otein E 
knockou t mouse. Hypertension. Jul 2012;60(1):98 -105. 
43. Silverberg MJ, Neuhaus J, Bower M, et al. Risk of cancers during interrupted 
antiretroviral therapy in the SMART study. AIDS. Sep 12 2007;21(14):1957 -1963.  
44. Takai S, Jin D, Muramatsu M, Ki rimura K,  Sakon jo H, Miyazaki M. Eplerenone inhibits 
atherosclerosis in nonhuman primates. Hypertension. Nov 2005;46(5):1135 -1139.  
45. McGraw AP, Bagley J, Chen WS, et al. Aldosterone increases early atherosclerosis and 
promotes plaque inflammation through  a placen tal gr owth factor -dependent mechanism. 
J Am Heart Assoc. Feb 2013;2(1):e000018.  
46. Schouten J, Wit FW, Stolte IG, et al. Cross -sectional comparison of the prevalence of 
age-associated comorbidities and their risk factors between HIV -infected and uninfecte d 
individuals: the AGEhIV cohort study. Clin Infect Dis. Dec 15 2014;59(12):1787 -1797.  
47. Kuller LH, Tracy R, Belloso W, et al. Inflammatory and coagulation biomarkers and 
mortality in patients with HIV infection. PLoS Med. Oct 21 2008;5(10):e203 . 
48. Gabay C. Interleukin -6 and chronic inflammation. Arthritis Res Ther. 2006;8 Suppl 2:S3.  
49. Borges AH, Silverberg MJ, Wentworth D, et al. Predicting risk of cancer during HIV 
infection: the role of inflammatory and coagulation biomarkers. AIDS. Jun 1  
2013;27( 9):143 3-1441.  
50. Pitt B, Remme W, Zannad F, et al. Eplerenone, a selective aldosterone blocker, in 
patients with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. Apr 3 
2003;348(14):1309 -1321.  
51. Brown ST, Tate JP, Kyriakid es TC, et  al. The VACS index accurately predicts mortality 
and treatment response among multi -drug resistant HIV infected patients participating in 
the options in management with antiretrovirals (OPTIMA) study. PLoS One. 
2014;9(3):e92606.  
52. Dougan M, Li D, Neuber g D, e t al. A dual role for the immune response in a mouse 
model of inflammation -associated lung cancer. J Clin Invest. Jun 2011;121(6):2436 -2446.  
53. Hileman CO, Labbato DE, Storer NJ, Tangpricha V, McComsey GA. Is bone loss linked 
to chronic inf lammation  in an tiretroviral -naive HIV -infected adults? A 48 -week matched 
cohort study. AIDS. Jul 31 2014;28(12):1759 -1767.  
54. Eisenberg PR, Jaffe AS, Stump DC, Collen D, Bovill EG. Validity of enzyme -linked 
immunosorbent assays of cross -linked fibrin degr adation p roduct s as a measure of clot 
lysis. Circulation. Oct 1990;82(4):1159 -1168.  
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 27 - 55. Bebu I, Tate J, Rimland D, et al. The VACS index predicts mortality in a young, healthy 
HIV population starting highly active antiretroviral therapy. J Acquir Immune De fic Syndr . 
Feb 1 2014;65(2):226 -230. 
56. Hamlyn E, Fidler S, Stohr W, et al. Interleukin -6 and D -dimer levels at seroconversion as 
predictors of HIV -1 disease progression. AIDS. Mar 27 2014;28(6):869 -874. 
57. Musselwhite LW, Sheikh V, Norton TD, et al. Mar kers of e ndothe lial dysfunction, 
coagulation and tissue fibrosis independently predict venous thromboembolism in HIV. 
AIDS. Mar 27 2011;25(6):787 -795. 
58. Green SA, Smith M, Hasley RB, et al. Activated platelet -T-cell conjugates in peripheral 
blood of pati ents with  HIV i nfection: coupling coagulation/inflammation and T cells. AIDS. 
Jul 17 2015;29(11):1297 -1308.  
59. Marchetti G, Cozzi -Lepri A, Merlini E, et al. Microbial translocation predicts disease 
progression of HIV -infected antiretroviral -naive patients  with hig h CD4+  cell count. AIDS. 
Jul 17 2011;25(11):1385 -1394.  
60. Lo J, Looby SE, Wei J, Adler GK, Grinspoon SK. Increased aldosterone among HIV -
infected women with visceral fat accumulation. Aids. Nov 13 2009;23(17):2366 -2370.  
61. Fischer -Smith T, Croul  S, Svers tiuk A E, et al. CNS invasion by CD14+/CD16+ peripheral 
blood -derived monocytes in HIV dementia: perivascular accumulation and reservoir of 
HIV infection. J Neurovirol. Dec 2001;7(6):528 -541. 
62. Orlando G, Guaraldi G, Zona S , et al. Ectopic fat is linked to prior cardiovascular events 
in men with HIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. Apr 15 2012;59(5):494 -497. 
63. Levi M, van der Poll T, Buller HR. Bidirectional relation between inflammation and 
coagulation. Circulation. Jun 8 20 04;109(22):2698 -2704.  
64. Vivithanaporn P, Heo G, Gamble J, et al. Neurologic disease burden in treated HIV/AIDS 
predicts survival: a population -based study. Neurology. Sep 28 2010;75(13):1150 -1158.  
65. Ishimi Y, Miyaura C, Jin CH, et al.  IL-6 is produced by osteoblasts and induces bone 
resorption. J Immunol. Nov 15 1990;145(10):3297 -3303.  
66. Neilan TG, Coelho -Filho OR, Shah RV, et al. Myocardial extracellular volume fraction 
from T1 measurements in healthy volunteers and mice: relationsh ip to aging and ca rdiac 
dimensions. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. Jun 2013;6(6):672 -683. 
67. Marquine MJ, Umlauf A, Rooney AS, et al. The veterans aging cohort study index is 
associated with concurrent risk for neurocognitive impairment. J Acquir Immune Defic 
Syndr. Feb 1 2014;6 5(2):190 -197. 
68. Gatehouse PD, Elkington AG, Ablitt NA, Yang GZ, Pennell DJ, Firmin DN. Accurate 
assessment of the arterial input function during high -dose myocardial perfusion 
cardiovascular magnetic resonance. J Magn Reson Imaging. Jul 2004;20(1):39 -45. 
69. Jerosch -Herold M, Swingen C, Seethamraju RT. Myocardial blood flow quantification with 
MRI by model -independent deconvolution. Medical Physics. May 2002;29(5):886 -897. 
70. Wang L, Jerosch -Herold M, Jacobs DR, Jr., Shahar E, Detrano R , Folsom AR. Coron ary 
artery calcification and myocardial perfusion in asymptomatic adults: the MESA (Multi -
Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis). J Am Coll Cardiol. Sep 5 2006;48(5):1018 -1026.  
71. Rudd JH, Warburton EA, Fryer TD, et al. Imaging atherosclerotic  plaque inflammati on 
with [18F] -fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography. Circulation. Jun 11 
2002;105(23):2708 -2711.  
72. Tawakol A, Migrino RQ, Bashian GG, et al. In vivo 18F -fluorodeoxyglucose positron 
emission tomography imaging provides a noninv asive measure of c arotid plaque 
inflammation in patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. Nov 7 2006;48(9):1818 -1824.  
73. Rudd JH, Myers KS, Bansilal S, et al. (18)Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission 
tomography imaging of atherosclerotic plaque inflammation is highly reproducible: 
implications for atherosclerosis therapy trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. Aug 28 2007;50(9):892 -
896. 
74. Lo J, Lu MT, Ihenachor EJ, et al. Effects of statin therapy on coronary artery plaque 
volume and high -risk plaque morphology in HIV -infected pa tients with subcli nical 
atherosclerosis: a randomised, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial. Lancet HIV. Feb 
2015;2(2):e52 -63. 
 
MIneralocorticoid  Receptor Antagonism for Cardiovas cuLar hEalth in HIV 
The MIRACLE HI V Study  
 
Deta iled Protocol Version 17:11/8/2022                    - 28 -  
 
 
Appendix A  
 
Strong Inhibitors of CYP3A4  
• Ketoconazole  
• Itraconazole  
• Fluconazole  
• Ritonavir  
• Nelfinavir  
• Indinavir  
• Clarithromyci n 
• Telithromycin  
• Erythromycin  
• Nefazadone  
• Bergamottin (in grapefruit juice)  
• Quercetin (nutritional supplement)  
• Aprepitant  
• Verapamil  
• Chloramphenicol  
• Saquinavir  
 