Protocol version:  1 
 
Date updated:  1/03/24  
 
Reopening Schools Safely and Educating Youth (ROSSEY) : Early Learning Ancillary 
Study  
 
Investigator List  
Principal  PI: 
Linda K. Ko, PhD  
Department of Health Systems and Population Health  
University of Washington (UW)  
Hans Rosling Center for Population Health 3980 
15
th AVE NE, UW Mailbox 351621  
Seattle, WA 98195  
Phone: 206- 685-4978  
lindako@uw.edu 
 Co-Investigator:  
Allison Cole, MD, MS  
UW Medicine/Family Medicine  
University of Washington  
Phone: 206- 685-9879  
Acole2@uw.edu  
Site PI/Co -Investigator:  
Parth Shah, Pharm D, PhD  
Division of Public Health Sciences  
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center  
1100 Fairview AVE, N  
M3-B232  
Seattle, WA 98109  
pshah@fredhutch.org  
 Co-Investigator/Biostatistician:  
Chuan Zhou, PhD  
Seattle Children’s Hospital/  Department of Health 
Systems and Population Health 
1920 Terry Ave, Building Cure, #04- 228M/S 
CURE -4, PO Box 5371  
Seattle, WA 98145  
Phone: 206- 854-128 
Chuan.zhou@seattlechidlrens.org  
Co-Investigator:  
Michelle M. Garrison, PhD  
College of Health and Human Services  
Purdue University  
Matthews 229  
812 W. State Street  
West Lafayette, IN 47907 
mmgarris@purdue.edu   
 Co-Investigator:  
Magaly Ramirez, PhD  
Department of Health Systems and Population 
Health  
University of Washington (UW)  
Hans Rosling Center for Population Health 3980 
15th AVE NE, UW Mailbox 351621  
Seattle, WA 98195  
maggiera@uw.edu  
Co-Investigator:  
Paul Drain, MD, MPH  
Department of Global Health 
Hans Rosling Center for Population Health 3980 
15th AVE NE, UW Mailbox 351620  
Seattle, WA 98195  
Phone: 206- 520-3820  
pkdrain@uw.edu    
 
Funding: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development  
Role of funders:  The funders had a role in the design of this study.  
  
I. Study Design  
This ancillary study incorporates one primary aim which  is meant to help students return to school 
safely by providing free health education to families and their children. Simultaneously, free 
COVID -19 testing will be offered to families for their children at schools through the Yakima 
School District . We want to learn if health education can increase the uptake of COVID -19 
mitigation measures, improve children’s school attendance, and increase families’ physical and 
mental well -being using single -arm pre/post-study . 
 
The ancillary study runs parallel with the larger ROSSEY RCT.  Recruitment , enrollment , and 
baseline assessment  are expected to last two months (September -November  2022).  Enrolled 
participants will not receive the comic book and parent video series until after completion of the 
ROSSEY RCT  Post 1 follow -up Survey to  not bias the data of older siblings participating in the 
ROSSEY RCT.  A follow- up assessment for Early Learning participants is anticipated to take 
place 10 months after the launch of recruitment (July -August 2023)  
 
II. Aim 1  
Evaluate if risk communication health education can increase uptake of COVID -19 mitigation 
measures, improve children’s school attendance, and increase families’ physical and mental 
well-being using a single- arm pre/post study.  
 
III. Study Population  
We will collaborate with the Yakima School District to recruit Early Learning students (3, 4 and 5 
years old) and their parent  or Guardian(s) into the research study. We will recruit Early Learning  
students into the study regardless of their participation in SARS -CoV-2 testing provided by  the 
Yakima School  District.  This will allow us to evaluate the effect  of the risk communication 
strategies on the uptake of  SARS- CoV-2 testing and other mitigation measures . 
 
IV. Sample Size  
Early Learning is an ancillary study with no defined sample size.  We will enroll and recruit 
participants for a total of eight weeks.  
 
V. Enrollment Criteria  
Parent/ Guardian eligibility criteria for participation in the study include:  
● Must have a child attending  the Early Learning Program in the Yakima School District  
● Must be able to provide informed consent and legal guardian assent either virtually , on 
the telephone,  or in- person.  
● Must have a permanent mailing address available for study staff to mail necessary 
materials OR a working email address.  
 
VI. Study Procedures  
Recruitment, Screening and Consent  
Enrollment and recruitment of the Early Learning ancillary study will start the second academic 
year of the RCT (2022- 2023) . Study information in the form of a flyer will be sent home with 
students  to parents through school email by the principal and posted 
on the school Parent Square site in September of 2022.  In addition, 
ROSSEY staff will attend the Early Learning Open House to hand out 
study information and obtain the phone number or email address  of 
interested parents. ROSSEY staff will follow up with interested parents  
and provide further information about the study.   
 
Families will have two options to enroll children in the study: online 
through a website portal (Project REDCap ), or with assistance from 
study staff over the phone.  
 
• Parents/guardians who choose to enroll children in the study 
online will provide informed consent by reading and e- signing 
consent and assent forms through a web -based REDCap 
portal, and then the participant’s parent/legal guardian will complete a baseline survey (same enrollment and secondary 
outcomes survey from the RCT of the main study ). 
• Parents/guardians who choose to enroll with staff assistance over the phone will be verbally guided through the REDCap 
consent/assent  forms , enrollment questionnaire  and 
secondary outcomes questionnaire.  
 
Parents who choose online enrollment  will be screened for eligibility via the REDCap web- based 
portal . Parents who choose enrollment with staff assistance will be screened over the telephone.  
The online consent portal will encourage parents/legal guardians to contact research staff by 
phone or email to review the risks and benefits of study participation, or to review the study 
procedures outlined in the consent f orm. Since all children are under the age of 7 , the parent or 
legal guardian will sign the consent form, and the child will provide verbal assent if able.  Electronic 
copies of the e- signed consent and assent documents will be automatically emailed to 
participants. For those who enroll ed by telephone, copies of the consent and assent documents 
will be sent to the participants either via e- mail, through the mail, or in person.  
 
NEEDS A SECTION ON BASELINE SURVEY.  
 
After enrollment is complete, parents/guardians of study participants will take part in the following study procedures:  
 
Risk Communication: Risk communication, in the form of comic book s with accompanying read -
along videos for the children (n=3) and videos for the parents  (n=2) will be distributed in English 
and Spanish to all enrolled students  within two weeks of completion of the ROSSEY RCT final 
assessment ( December 2023) . Three comic books will be distributed by mail and parents will be 
sent a password- protected  link with the mailed comic  to access the parent  videos and comic book 
read- along videos. All intervention materials  (i.e., children’s comic books and parent videos) will 
be distributed after  the final assessment of the larger ROSSEY RCT study is complete.  The delay 
is to eliminate possible contamination of the RCT by siblings of comparison students who will 
receiv e the comic books  as part of this ancillary study . 
 

Follow -up Survey :  We will contact parents   6 weeks after the risk communication intervention 
distribution.   Parents will be asked to complete the follow- up survey either online or by phone . 
The surveys will ask for updates to their contact and demographic information, child’s COVID -19 
vaccination status, and child’ s SARS- CoV-2 mitigation behaviors  and the secondary outcome 
measures.   
 
Following the protocol from the ROSSEY RCT, the post assessment will take place over 6 weeks, 
allowing two weeks for final contact prior to closure.   For EL participants with missing or phone 
numbers no longer in service, ROSSEY staff will contact the YSD to 1) determine if the student 
is still attending YSD, 2) find out school and teachers name to send a notice through the school 
to the parent letting them know we are trying to reach them.  Students determined to still be 
enrolled at YSD, and are non- responders to the follow up survey, will receive an at home visit by 
ROSSEY staff as a final attempt to reach student and parent to complete survey.   Follow-up 
assessment closure will take place one week after completion of home visits.   
 
 