1 
  
 
Ancillary Effects of Oral Naloxegol  (Movantik)  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Alparslan Turan MD¹, Wae l Saasouh MD², Steve Leung MD²,  
Karen Hovsepyan, MD2, Guangmei Mao, PhD, MPH ³ 
and colleagues  
 
 
1 Department of Outcomes Research and General Anesthesiology, Anesthesiology Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic  
2 Department of Outcomes Research, Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland Clinic  
3 Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Cleveland Clinic  
 
Version  1: 19/03/2017 
Version 2: 11/10/2017  
Version 3: 1/17/2018  
Version 4: 10/30 /2018  
Version 5: 11/26/2019  
  
2 
 Summary of changes in Version 2:  
1. Page 14 table 1 - Sedation scores and follow -up on POD3 were removed from table 1 (to conform to the 
protocol text). Evening bladder scan timing description changed, since the is no evening drug administration  
2. Page 15 inclusion criteria – added revision arthroplasties and general anesthesia  
3. Page 15 -Removed the requirement for PCA, added a general requirement for post -op opioids  
4. Page 17 -The need for straight catheterization in PACU and/or on the floor when it is medically indicated 
(volumes exceeding 400 ml) will be recorded by the study team and subsequent bladder scan will therefore 
not be done. Postoperatively, all pati ents will be given intravenous or oral opioids for pain control. 
Clinicians will adjust analgesic management as necessary in an effort to adjust verbal response pain scores 
to less than 4.  
5. Bladder scan to be done on the evening of surgery.  
6. Patient clinical ly does not ha ve ileus if he is passing gas ( no need to record /look for bowel sounds)  
Summary of changes in Version 3:  
1. Page 16 Exclusion criteria - removed antihistamines, phenothiazines, antidepressants and antipsychotics  
Summary of changes in Version 4:  
1. Page 14 Secondary Aim Hypothesis – changed ORSDS questionnaire from being asked on first, second, 
and third post -operative days to just the first two post -operative days.  
2. Page 15 Study Overview – wording added to maintain consistency with previous revision s for including 
knee surgery cases  
3. Page 15 Table – bladder scanning during PACU stay omitted. Far right column in version 3 that represented 
nothing was removed for clarification.  
4. Page 22 Secon dary and exploratory analysis - ORSDS was changed to only being  asked on post -operative 
days 1 and 2. Myles Quality of Recovery scale was changed to only be asked on either post -operative day 
2 or the day of discharge.  
5. Removal of  requirement for bladder scanning to be done on the evening of surgery  
Summary of changes in Version 5:  
1. Page 21  – “POD 1 to 3” changed to “POD 1 and 2” regarding ORSDS follow up  
2. Page 21  – “POD 1 and 3” changed to “POD 2” regarding Quality of Recovery follow up  
3. Page 21  – Added clause regarding loss of follow up rate and the need for extra patients to reach planned 
power to 136 patients with 2 pilots  
 
3 
 Table of Contents  
Ancillary Effects of Oral Naloxegol (Movantik)  ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
1. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  4 
A. Opioids Analgesics and side effects  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 4 
B. Opioid -related side effects - composite  ................................ ................................ ............................  7 
C. Naloxegol  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  9 
D. Rational of  the study  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  11 
2. STUDY OBJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  12 
A. Primary Aim  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 12 
B. Secondary Aims  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  12 
C. Exploratory Aims  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  13 
3. METHODS and STUDY DESIGN  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 14 
A. Study Overview  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 14 
B. Setting and Population  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  15 
C. Withdrawal Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  16 
D. Administration of Naloxegol  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  16 
E. Protocol  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  16 
F. Measurements  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 18 
G. Data Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 20 
H. Sample Size Considerations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  21 
I. Blinding and unblinding  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  22 
J. Treatment compliance  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  22 
4. Safety monitoring and reporting  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  22 
5. Ethical and regulatory requirements  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 28 
6. Study Drug handling  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  29 
Refere nces  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  31 
Appendix  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  34 
 
 
 
4 
 INTRODUCTION  
Pain is a psychological sensory experience, which is caused by various factors. Surgery results in 
tissue damage which leads to postoperative pain. Studies in recently developed animal models of 
postoperative pain have advanced our knowledge o f the mechanisms of pain resulting from 
surgical incision and associated tissue injury. Postoperative pain results from combination of 
nociceptive and inflammatory components [1]. The noc iceptive component results from activation 
of peripheral sensory neurons damaged by surgical incision, and fades gradually as tissues heal. 
The inflammatory component enhances pain sensitivity via release of mediators from the 
surgically injured tissue. Ce ntral neuronal sensitization also seems to contribute to postoperative 
pain and hyperalgesia. [1, 2] Due to aforementioned mechanisms , pain is present in spontaneous 
resting at the site of surgery plus surrounding tissues. Movement or touching o f the wound site, 
breathing, coughing, and gastrointestinal motility can all evoke pain. Unrelieved postoperative 
pain leads to multiple physiological and psychological consequences, which worsen outcomes. For 
example, inadequate perioperative analgesia is  associated with myocardial ischemia, impaired  
wound healing, delayed gastrointestinal motility, atelectasis, and postoperative pneumonia. [3-5] 
Furthermore, poorly controlled acute pain is strongly associated with development of persistent 
incisional pain, which can be devastating for patients. [6, 7] 
A. Opioids Analgesics and side effects  
Although the concept of “multimodal analgesia” of using different drugs with different 
mode of action to interfere with the pain pathway, such as using non -opioid adjuvants (e.g. 
NSAIDS, steroids, regional anesthesia) have been developed to improve postoperative pain 
management, opioids remain the cornerstone of treatment of postoperative pain. Opioids produce 
analgesia and other effects by bindi ng to specific opioid receptors in the peripheral and central 
nervous system. Three types of opioid receptors and their subtypes have been discovered: mu, 
delta, and kappa receptors. The most commonly used opioids bind to mu receptors. The mu1 
receptor is responsible for the production of opioid -induced analgesia, whereas mu2 receptors 
provoke  respiratory depression, cardiovascular effects, and inhibition of gastrointestinal motility 
commonly seen with opioids. [8-10] Sole reliance on opioids is often inadequate and leads to 
significant side effects. [11] 
5 
 Adverse events associated with opioids include an increased risk of  postoperative urinary 
retention (POUR).  It has been shown in multiple studies that systemic opioids contribute to urinary 
retention. Opioids inhibit the release of acetylcholine and thereby decreases the parasympathetic  
output to the detrusor and thus bla dder contractility. This effect is directly related to the dose of 
opioids given and the opioid sparing multi -modal analgesia has been shown  to reduce urinary 
retention. [12, 13] The true incidence of POUR is unclear but is estimated to vary between 5 -
70%. [14] 
The opiates or its analogues decrease the sensation of bladder fullness by partially 
inhibiting the parasympathetic nerves that innervate the bladder. In addition, opiates have been 
shown to increase the sphincter tone of the urinary bladder via sympatheti c overstimulation,  
resulting in increased bladder outlet resistance. The combination of decreased sensation of fullness 
and increased outlet resistance increase the risk of urinary retention. Studies suggest that the half -
life of the opioid used has an imp act on urinary function and risk of retention.  
Type of opioids used and delivery methods seem to affect the POUR as well. Studies that 
evaluated orthopedic patients who received fentanyl (short half -life) for post -operative analgesia 
noted that these patie nts experienced significantly less risk for urinary retention than those who 
received morphine  (intermediate half -life).  Several authors have demonstrated that the risk of 
retention is also increased in patients using PCA compared to those receiving interm ittent IV or 
IM opioids.  
Although the cause of POUR is multifactorial and depends on type and duration of surgery 
as well as existence of comorbidities, systemic opioids are an important risk factor. Urinary 
retention requires urethral catheterization and potentially indwelling catheter, leading to patient 
discomfort, hemorrhage, and increased risk of UTI . Urinary catheters can provide an opportunity 
for gram negative bacterial infections that can lead to further urological and infectious 
manifestations (e. g. pyelonephritis, urosepsis, death). [15] Catheter -related UTI  is responsible for 
13% of 100,000 nosocomial infection related deaths each year .[16] It affects about one million 
Americans annually and is a significant source of morbidity and mortality. It is the most common 
“preventable” nosocomial infection that accounts for over $400 million spent annually in the U.S. 
alone. [15, 17] Bacteria causing the UTI can potentially hematogenously spread  and lead to surgical 
site infection. [18] Bacterial seeding from UTI is a special concern after certain type of su rgery,  
6 
 especially those with prosthetic hardware  implanted. For instance, ample evidence related UTI 
with deep joint infection, hemiarthroplasties and total hip arthroplasties in orthopedic procedures , 
which carries significant morbidity and financial costs.  There is currently no  effective medical 
treatment for POUR from opioids. Previous trials of using p henoxybenzamine to treat POUR h ave 
shown mixed results. [19, 20] Naloxone  had been tried in the past its reversal of analgesia has 
limited its usefulness in the clinical setting. [21] Furthermore, naloxone’s short half -life of 1 -1.5 
hours is outlasted by the opioids’ effects on the bladder. There is a need for an effective treatment 
to for urinary  retention without mitigating  the analgesic effects of opioids. [22] 
Postoperative ileus ( POI) is  common after surgery (incidence of 4.5%), and is a transient 
loss of peristalsis from inflammatory response and release of endogenous opioids from surgical 
stress. [23-25] POI contributes to patient discomfort, morbidity, and is the one of  the major reasons 
for prolonged hospital stay and overall health care costs. [25, 26] Opioid receptors, belonging to 
the G -protein coupled receptor family, are found throughout the enteric nervous system . The 
actions of opioids on the GI tract are mainly mediated by mu -receptors which lead to: inhibition 
of release of excitatory acetylcholine, non -peristalsis contractions, decreased water/electrolyte 
secretion, and increased tone of pyloric and intestinal  sphincters. [27-30] The result is an 
exacerbated postoperative ileus and prolongs the return of bowel function . The true  incidence of 
POI is unknown and varies between the type of surgery but is estimated between 3 -15%. [31] 
Currently there is no promising treatment for POI. Several peripheral opioid antagonists have been 
developed to treated opioid related POI but with limited application.  [32, 33]   
Patients in the postoperative period will experience many unavoidable physio logic 
derangements as a result of anesthesia and surgery. Most studies have examined the effect of 
anesthetic practices on major clinical outcomes, such as recovery time, cardiovascular 
complications, stroke, length of hospital stay, and mortality.  These e ndpoints are clinically relevant 
but do not necessarily reflect the overall state of recovery after anesthesia. Quality of Recovery 
(QoR),  first developed in 2000 by Myles et al., is a psychometric has become an important clinical 
outcome in anesthesia res earch because it describes the global quality of life from the patients’ 
perspective after surgery and anesthesia.  It indicates the impact of adverse events on such as pain 
and immobility on the patient’s recovery and also indirectly reflects quality of h ealth care.  The 
original quality of recovery 9 (QoR ‐9) score was later evolved into a more extensive QoR -40 
7 
 that has improved reliability and validity. The most recent validated version is a 15 -item QoR scale 
as discussed by Stark et. al. [32] It incorporates five dimensions of health, including patient support, 
comfort, emotions, physical independence, and pain, and has been proven useful in multiple setting 
and languages. Quality of recovery will undoubtedly have influenc e patients’ satisfaction of their 
care, which in the current economic constraints of the healthcare system, and the fact that Centers 
of Medicare & Medicaid Services are linking hospital reimbursement  based on patient’s 
satisfaction, quality of recovery ha s real financial implications. Opioid analgesia, although an 
indispensable part of postoperative pain management, is often needed to satisfy the high 
expectation of pain relief of patients. Overuse of opioids is associated with numerous side effects, 
(e.g. nausea and vomiting, delay return of bowel function, sleep disturbance, pruritus)  which has 
negative impact on quality of recovery.  
B. Opioid -related side effects - composite  
In addition to urinary retention and postoperative ileus, other common side effects 
associated with opioids are nausea/vomiting, pruritus, and respiratory depression. Postoperative 
nausea and vomiting (PONV)  affects about 20-70% of postoperative patients and are highly 
distressing to patients. It is mainly mediated by triggering of opioid -receptors in chemoreceptor 
trigger zone of the medulla.  Opioid induced nausea and vomiting may prolong the recovery room 
time and a potential h ospital stay and lower the degree of patient satisfaction. It has been shown 
in study that PONV has an impact on quality of recovery. In patients’ perspective, PONV is one 
the most undesirable outcomes in the recovery period. In fact, in one survey, patien ts were willing 
to pay out of their own expense to rid of nausea and vomiting completely. Another common side 
effect of opioid is pruritus, affecting up to 50% patient  receiving intravenous opioids and an even 
higher incidence with neuraxial opioids. The c urrent treatment of pruritus is with antihistamines, 
5-HT3-receptor antagonists, opiate -antagonists, propofol, and droperidol , with variable success 
and with each associated with its side effects.  Physicians often respond by dose reduction or 
discontinuat ion, which leads to inadequate analgesia and patient discomfort. Another important 
side effect is opioid induced respiratory depression which is an important source of adverse events 
in hospitalized patients [33]. Respiratory depression is common in the post operative period and 
largely unrecognized, causing significant hypoxemia  and potential harm [34].  
8 
 Worth noting is that opioids might theoretically increases the risk of infections, which 
might have implications in surgical site infections and infections of hardware in certain surgeries. 
Opioids have long been recognized as are  immune modulators compromising compromise both 
cellular and humoral immune function s.[35-37] The exact mechanism of this immune modulation 
is unclear but opioids are hypothesized to act centrally on the hypothalamus -pituitary -adrenal axis 
and peripherally on the immune cells directly. [38] Opioids bind to 3 major types of receptors: mu -
, delta -, and kappa -opioid receptors, which are all identified among immune cel ls, such as PMNs, 
macrophages, T -lymphocytes, splenocytes, and macrophages. [39] Opioids also alter the 
macrophage protein expression profile a nd impair macrophage function including chemo taxis and 
phagocytosis. [40-42] And finally, opioids reduce B -cell proliferation and antibody production. [43]  
Opioid -induced immunodysfunction  can potentially lead to surgical site infection. This , a 
theory is supported by multiple animal studies demonstrating the effect of opioids on 
mortality. [44] Breslow et al. compared the effect opioids on infection. Mu-receptor knockout  and 
wild-type mice were both pretreated with morphine and were inoculated with S almonel la and the 
knockout mi ce were resistant to infection, while the wild -type had 100 percent mortality. [45] 
Furthermore, there is evidence that increased doses of opioids are asso ciated with wound infections 
in patients who suffer from major burn injuries. [46] High -dose opioids have been associated with 
surgical site infection (SSI) after colorectal  surgery possibly secondary to 
immunosuppression. [47] It is plausible to assume that high dose opioids might contribute to SSI.  
Duration of hospitalization, or length of stay, is an important indicator of quality of care 
and inefficiencies of heal thcare and has been used by multiple government agencies to measure 
quality of care from hospitals. The importance of this parameter was demonstrated by the effort to 
develop new surgical and anesthetic techniques  that facilitate recovery in multiple areas  of surgery 
to reduce stay in intensive care unit and length of stay in hospital. It was suggested that one major 
reason for prolonged duration of hospitalization is from postoperative complications and 
management of those complications. Prolonged hospital ization also translates to increase d 
healthcare resources. In a study by Collins et al. examining risk factors that contribute to prolonged 
hospitalization of 23,919 adults undergoing major elective surgery, postoperative adverse events 
was associated with  a high risk of prolonged hospitalization. [48] Opioids -related side effects affect 
postoperative recovery and contribute to prolonged hospital stay. For example, prolonged ileus has 
9 
 multiple consequences, including decreased patients’ comfort, del ay of mobilization, and 
pulmonary complications. For example, patient with opioid -induced ileus significantly  stay longer  
in the hospital  after abdominal surgery than those who do not  (20 vs. 11 days, p<0.001 ). Another 
study of patients who underwent spine surgery and reported urinary  retention was associated with 
longer hospital stay (3. 94 d vs. 2.34 d; P=0.005).  PONV, a considerable cause of discomfort, 
should not be taken lightly. PONV has been shown to pro long hospital stay. In severe PONV, it 
has been documented to cause suture dehiscence and aspiration, which will likely lead to additional 
treatment and extended hospitalization. In summary,  opioid -related side effects hinder  recovery 
and prolongs hospital  stay. 
In summary, opioids provoke numerous severe complications that cause substantial patient 
morbidity. They also delay discharge, increase the cost of care, and reduce patient satisfaction. We 
have a strong need for a peripheral opioid antagonist that could be a part of a multimodal approach 
to manage and possibly prevent opioid induced side effects that has good oral bioavailability, 
effective, no effect on centrally mediated analgesia and favorable side effect profile .  
C. Naloxegol  
Peripheral opioid an tagonist s may prevent some opioid -induced side effects. Naloxegol 
(marketed as Movantik, by AstraZeneca) is a pegylated (PEG) derivative of naloxone that inhibits 
µ-opioid receptors. The PEG moiety offers several functions including reduced permeability an d 
increased efflux (substrate for P -glycoprotein transporter) across the blood brain barrier making it 
a mainly peripherally acting µ -opioid receptor antagonist. At recommended doses, its ability to 
only act peripherally allows it to reverse  peripheral  opioid -related side effects without interfering 
with opioid -related analgesia or causing withdrawal, as seen with naloxone . The PEG moiety also 
increases oral bioavailability and allowing oral administration. Naloxegol was approved in 2014 
by the U.S. Foo d and Drug Administration after it passed phase III trials for opioid -induced 
constipation in adults with chronic non -cancer pain.  
Naloxegol binds to all three opioid receptors with greater affinity for µ - and K -receptors, 
the former (µ) being the main re ceptor implicated in its side effects related to the gut and bladder. 
The recommended dosage for adults is 12.5 mg to 25 mg daily . After intake orally, it is rapidly 
absorbed, reaching maximum concentration (C -max) in 2 hours  with a second peak appearing 0 .4-
10 
 3 hours  after the first peak. Its absorption is increased by a fatty meal.  Its volume of distribution at 
the terminal phase is 968-2,140 L  and it has low plasma binding (~4.2%)  in humans. Clearance is 
mainly by hepatic  metabolism (P450 -CYP3A) with metab olites whose actions are yet to be 
defined. A small portion of naloxegol is elimination by renal excretion.  The half -life of naloxegol 
is 6-11 hours .  
Naloxegol does not significantly inhibit the CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, CYP3A4 or 
CYP2C19 or induce CYP1A2,  CYP2B6 or CYP3A4 and is thus not expected to affect 
concentrations of drugs metabolized by these enzymes.  Drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 ( e.g. 
ketoconazole, verapamil, cimet idine) might increase Naloxegol concentration, and might need 
dose adjustment. Naloxeg ol does not appear to affect the efficacy of other opioids when 
administered together. In a clinical study of healthy volunteers receiving morphine (5 mg/70 kg), 
naloxegol has no effect on the pharmacokinetics and metabolic profile of morphine. [49] 
Naloxegol is a well -tolerated drug for long -term use (up to 52 weeks ) based on clinical 
trials. [50] The incidence of adverse events ranges from 8 -19% and is dose -related. [51] Most 
adverse events were mild to moderate in intensity and mostly gastrointestinal related including 
abdominal pain, diarrhea , with a minority experiencing headache  and hyperhidrosis. [51] The 
cardiovascular safety for naloxegol was extensively studied during phase III trials. AstraZ eneca 
organized an independent committee, called Cardiovascular Event Adjudication Committee (CV -
EAC) to authenticate major adverse events including MACE (CV death, MI, stroke). Naloxegol 
was not associated with increased CV risk. The incidence of MACE was  0.6% for placebo versus 
0.4% for naloxegol and the incidence of MI was 0.3% for placebo versus 0.2% for naloxegol. [52] 
Multiple clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of naloxegol including relief of 
opioid -related side effects while without affecting increasing pain score and daily opioid dose. 
Two identical phase III, randomized, multi -centered, double blinded studies (KODIAC -04 and 
KODIAC -05) investigated the efficacy of 12.5 mg/day and 25 m g/day naloxegol versus placebo 
in adults patients with opioid -induced constipation over a 12 week treatment period. [51] Naloxegol 
was associated with a significant improvement in bowel function with 25 mg/day and was more 
effective than 12.5 mg/day. Furthermore, naloxegol did not alter pain scores, daily opioid 
requirements, or the incidence of opioid -withdrawal across all  control and treatment groups. [51] 
11 
 These findings prove naloxegol’s utility as a peripheral opioid a ntagonist in decreasing opioid’s 
side effects while maintaining analgesia.  
D. Rational e of the study  
Previous clinical evidence has already demonstrated naloxegol’s efficacy and safety in the 
treatment of opioid -induced constipation in the outpatient setting.  To our knowledge, there have 
been no clinical studies that investigated its potential in the perioperative  setting. Opioid analgesia 
has potential downsides including urinary retention, prolonged ileus, which translates to potential 
prolonged hospital sta y and costs. The aim of this study is to test if the novel peripheral opioid 
receptor antagonist naloxegol is effective in mitigating these opioid -related side effects and 
reducing duration of hospitalization and overall costs.  
  
12 
 1. STUDY OBJECTIVES  
This will  be a prospective , randomized , double -blinded  study and will be performed at  the 
Cleveland Clinic Foundation. The study group will receive Naloxegol 25  mg to be given once in 
the morning every day and  the control group will receive placebo.   
 
Specifically,  the proposed research will have the following aims:  
 
A. Primary Aim  
To assess whether patients who received Naloxegol  have a lower volume of residual urine 
in bladder.  
Hypothesis : Our primary hypothesis is that patients who received Naloxegol 25  mg given 
once in the morning every day  will have lower volume of residual urine in bladder when compared 
to placebo.  
Post-void residual volume  will be measured after asking patient to urinate independent of 
their previous urination. Post -void residual is a measure ment of the urine that remains in the 
bladder less than 30 minutes following voiding that identifies urinary retention.   
Ultrasound has  been used as an imaging modality to evaluate bladder function, and its use 
in the perioperative period as a diagnostic t ool for POUR has gained popularity in the past decade. 
Several studies have shown good correlation between the volumes measured by bladder 
catheterization and by ultrasound.  
 
B. Secondary  Aims  
Secondary Aim 1:  
To evaluate  the effect of  Naloxegol on  other  opioid related side effects.  
Hypothesis . Patients in Naloxegol group have fewer opioid -related side effects than control 
group. We will use a validated composite outcome, Opioid –Related Symptom Distress Scale 
(ORSDS), to evaluate opioid -related side effect. ORSDS is 4 -point scale that evaluates 3 
symptom distress dimensions (frequency, severity, bothersomeness) for 12  opioid related side 
13 
 effects [53]. ORSDS questionnaire will be administered by a trained research fellow on first, 
second, and third postoperative mornings while patients remain hospitalized.  
Secondary Aim 2: 
To assess whether Naloxegol is associated with lower need for indwelling urinary 
catheterization.  
Hypothesis : Our hypothesis is that patients who received Naloxegol 25 mg given once in the 
morning every day will have less need of indwelling catheterization determined by the residual 
volume to be above 400 ml  when compared to placebo.  
 
Secondary Aim 3 : 
To assess whether Naloxegol is  associated with improved quality of recovery, as measured by 
the 15 -item Quality of Recovery scale.  
Hypothesis : Our hypothesis is that patients who received Naloxegol 25 mg given once in the 
morning every day will have improved quality of recovery.  Qualit y of recovery in the 
postoperative period is an important measure of the early postoperative health status of patients, 
and the 15-item Quality of Recovery scale is a validated and efficient measure [32]. Patients will 
be questioned on the morning of postoperative day ( POD ) 2 or day of discharge (whichever 
comes earlier) . 
 
C. Exploratory  Aims  
Exploratory Aim 1:  
To assess patient satisfaction with the quality of recovery.  
Hypothesis:  Our hypothesis is that patients who received Naloxegol 25 mg given once in the 
morning every day will have improved satisfaction with the quality of recovery, as measured on 
a subjective 100 -point scale (where 0 means not satisfied at all and 100 means co mpletely 
satisfied).  
Exploratory Aim 2:  
To assess the effect of Naloxegol on opioid -related prolongation of hospital stay after surgery.  
Hypothesis.  Patients in control group will have prolonged length of hospital stay compared to 
Naloxegol patients due t o opioid -related adverse events.  
 
14 
 2. STUDY DESIGN  and METHODS  
A. Study Overview  
We propose to assess the effect of Naloxegol on reversing opioid -related side effects in 
patients recovering from elective primary hip surgery under spinal anesthesia who will be  
randomly assigned to oral Naloxegol or placebo for two postoperative days or until the date of 
discharge, whichever occurs earlier ( Table 1 ). The design will be a randomized, double -blind, 
placebo -controlled trial of oral Naloxegol in adults having electi ve primary hip or knee surgery 
under spinal anesthesia. The study will be performed at the Cleveland Clinic hospitals.  
Table 1: study flowchart.(Detailed information will be in the CRF`s)  
 Preopera
tive visit  Morning 
of surgery  During 
surgery  PACU* POD** 1 POD 2  Day of 
discharge   
Screening for eligibility  X X       
Consenting  X        
Baseline medical, 
demographics, Apfel score, 
Patient functionality and 
drug history  X X       
Pertinent blood studies 
(laboratory)  X    X X   
AE/SAE collection   X   X X   
Study drug (in morning, 1 hr 
before or 2 hr after meal)   X   X X   
Bladder scan at least 2 hours 
after study drug (morning)      X X   
Bladder scan  (evening)     X X X   
Intraoperative record data 
collection    X      
Opioid –Related Symptom 
Distress Scale (ORSDS)      X X X   
Opioid complications 
survey***     X X X X  
Numerical pain score     X X X X X 
Quality of recovery survey        X  
* PACU = post -anesthesia care unit  
** POD = post -operative day  
*** Opioid complications survey includes nausea, vomiting, itching, ileus, anti-emetic use, anti -
pruritic use, anti -opioid use  
 
  
15 
 B. Setting and Population  
 
i. Inclusion criteria  
For inclusion in the study subjects should fulfill the following criteria:  
1. Provision of informed consent prior to any study specific procedures  
2. Female or male  aged at least 18 years  
3. American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status 1 -4; 
4. Scheduled for elective primary or revision hip or knee surgery under spinal or general 
anesthesia;  
5. Expected to have significant postoperative pain  requiring administration of opioids  
6. Negative pregnancy test  
 
ii. Exclusion criteria  
Subjects should not enter the study if any of the following exclusion criteria are fulfilled:  
1. Severe hepatic impairment, with/or twice the upper normal levels of liver enzymes  
2. Severe renal impairment, or creatinine level > 2.0  
3. History of bladder cancer  
4. Patients receiving perioperative regional anesthesia blocks  
5. Presence of a sacral nerve stimulator  
6. Medications (a nticholinergic), conditions or comorbidity causing urinary retention  
7. Patient with  planned  requirement of indwelling urinary catheter insertion before or 
immediately post -surgery due to immobility  
8. Urinary Tract  Infections and other urogenital comorbidity (i ncontinence, cysto -ureteric 
reflux, known bladder retention) or conditions which can cause urinary retention  
9. Severe peptic ulcer disease, diverticular disease, infiltrative gastrointestinal tract 
malignancies, or peritoneal metastases  
16 
 10. Patients with known o r suspected disruption of blood brain barrier, which may include but 
not limited to: Alzheimer’s disease, stroke, poliomyelitis, cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, 
spinal lesions, and Parkinson’s disease  
11. Gastrointestinal obstruction/Gastrointestinal perforation  
12. Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (some antibiotics, antifungals, protease inhibitors, and 
antidepressants), Strong CYP3A4 inducers, Other opioid antagonists  
13. Hypersensitivity to MOVANTIK (naloxegol) or any of its excipients  
 
C. Withdrawal Criteria  
Patients will be free to withdraw from study at any time. Withdrawn patients will no longer 
receive study drug but will be contacted for follow up and safety checks if patient allows.  
 
D. Administration of Naloxegol  
The investigational drug for this study  is Naloxegol 25  mg per dose to be given once in the 
morning every day ( morning of surgery & on postoperative days - 1 hour before or 2 hours after 
the morning meal ). The placebo control is equal in size, shape , and color to the active tablets  and 
administered according to the same protocol.  The Pharmacy team will have the appropriate 
randomization in case of a safety or emergency situation, and the study drug label will mention 
that it is “Naloxegol or Placebo”.  
 
E. Protocol  
Patients must meet  all inclusion and exclusion criteria to be eligible for the study. After 
eligibility is confirmed, patients will receive complete information about the study both verbally 
and in writing. Informed consent must be obtained from the patients prior to random ization and 
study -specific procedures.  
Anesthetic management will follow pre -established clinical and institutional guidelines. 
Patients can be pre -medicated and will receive spinal or general anesthesia  per institutional routine 
according to attending ane sthesiologist discretion. Spinal anesthesia will include the standard 
monitoring for the given operation, and will occur after the electrocardiogram and monitoring 
equipment are placed on the patient. Prophylactic antibiotics will be given per surgical rou tine. 
During the induction of general anesthesia, i ndwelling  urinary catheters will be inserted only in 
17 
 the patients with operation time exceeding 3 h or who required meticulous  monitoring of the 
intraoperative fluid status. Intraoperative and postoperativ e fluid management will be left to 
discretion of the clinicians, who will be administrating them using institution standards.   
Randomization (1:1)  will be web -based and initiated prior to conclusion of surgery; 
allocation will thus be concealed from investigators.  Randomization will be stratified  based on 
chronic opioid use (if present)  to ensure balance between treatment groups within chronic opioid 
users and nonusers . Chronic opioid use will be defined as opioid use for more than 30 consecutive 
days, at a daily dose of 15  mg or more of morphine or equivalent, within the 3 months before 
surgery. The treatment groups will be oral Naloxegol and placebo.  
Naloxegol or placebo will be administered starting the first morning of surgery and 
continued for tw o postoperative days or until hospital discharge (whichever occurs first) with 25 
mg (or equivalent size and shape of Placebo). The post -operative study drug doses will be given 
in the morning 1 hour before or 2 hours after the morning meal. Intraoperative  and postoperative 
pain medications will be left to discretion of the anesthesiologist.  
In the PACU and postoperative periods, patients will be managed at the discretion of the 
primary care team and the staff anesthesiologist. The need for straight cathet erization in PACU 
and/or on the floor when it is medically indicated (volumes exceeding 400 ml) will be recorded by 
the study team and subsequent bladder scan will therefore not be done. Postoperatively, all patients 
will be given intravenous or oral opioi ds for pain control.  Clinicians will adjust analgesic 
management as necessary in an effort to adjust verbal response pain scores to less than 4.  
Clinical evaluators for the outcomes will be blinded to group allocation and Pharmacy 
personnel not involved in  evaluations will prepare the study drugs. Clinicians including nurses will 
be blinded to monitoring and will be required to perform their standard of care management after 
surgery.  
 
Enrollment procedures  
The following events will occur in order:  
1. Screening for eligible patients  
2. Informed consent  
3. Randomization  
18 
 4. Administration of study drug starting the morning of surgery and for 2 additional mornings  
5. Collection of data  
6. Completion of CRF information  
 
The treatment periods extends from the morning of surgery until the earlier of POD 2 or hospital 
discharge. Study personnel will follow the study subject until the earlier of POD 2 or hospital 
discharge. In the case of an adverse event, the study subject w ill be followed until the resolution 
of the event.  
 
Handling incorrect randomization  
Any event where a subject receives the incorrect treatment or is assigned to the incorrect group 
will be recorded and judged as an unanticipated problem or protocol deviat ion at the discretion of 
the principal investigator.  
 
F. Measurements  
 
Data will be recorded on a case report form (CRF) which will be available electronically and on 
paper format.  
Demographic data to be obtained includes height (cm), weight (kg), age (yr), gender, physical 
status (ASA), and self -declared ethnicity. Patients will be questioned for social history (tobacco) 
and medical history (pulmonary disease, kidney disease, diabete s mellitus, neurological disease, 
chronic pain conditions, illegal drug usage, alcohol abuse, myocardial infarction, previous surgery 
or stent placement and medications usage). Available preoperative laboratory tests and medication 
list will be recorded. I ndividual risk for nausea and vomiting will be determined using the Apfel 
score.   
 
Data obtained from electronic medical records will include: operation time, surgery type, 
intraoperative opioid consumption, postoperative opioid consumption in PACU and in ward, 
19 
 breakthrou gh pain medication requirements, pain scores in PACU and ward, requirement of 
oxygen in PACU and ward, nausea and vomiting, requirement of antiemetics, pruritus, 
requirement of antihistami nic medications , ambulation time, flatus, ileus, bow el movements, 
constipation, length of stay and any side effects or complications . Preoperative and postoperative 
laboratory data  including but not limited to l iver function and coagulations test results  will also be 
collected from electronic medical record s. Patient functionality will also be recorded including 
bathing, toileting, walking and moving.  
 
The Residual volume will be measured within 30 minutes after urination using the battery -
powered, portable Bladder scan™ BVI 3000® ( Verathon, Bothell, WA, USA ). The scanner will 
be placed on the suprapubic area and held stationary during measurement scanning. The diameter 
of the bladder and volume of urine will be calculated from the scan data. Scans will be repeated 
several times to ensure accuracy in measurem ents. The average of the measurements at each 
measurement time will be analyzed. All clinical procedures will be performed by trained MD 
research fellows in the ward twice daily.  Surgical team will be blinded to volume determined by 
scanning and we will al so record if they had ordered  indwelling catheterization.  
 
We will use Myles QoR scale to formally evaluate quality of recovery on  2 or day of discharge 
(whichever comes earlier) . Myles QoR scale is a validated scoring system allows quantification of 
patient’s early postoperative health status, which is also a description of quality of recovery [32]  
 
ORSDS is 4 -point scale that evaluates 3 symptom distress dimensions ( frequency, severity, 
bothersomeness  for 12 opioid related side effects [53]. ORSDS questionnaire will be administered 
by a trained research fellow on first and second  postoperative  days/day of discharge (whichever 
comes earlier)    
 
Patient satisfaction with their recovery will be questioned before discharge using a 0 -100 scale 
(where 0 indicates no satisfaction and 100 indicates complete satisfaction).  
 
Adverse events and serious adverse events occurring at any time during the study  period will be 
recorded on a specific form in the CRF.  
20 
  
G. Data Analysis  
Naloxegol group and placebo group will be compared for balance of baseline 
characteristics using standard descriptive statistics (i.e., mean ± standard deviation, median [Q1, 
Q3], or  N (%) as appropriate) and standardized difference. The standardized difference is the 
difference in means or proportions divided by the pooled standard deviation. Any covariable  with 
a standardized difference greater than 0.2 in absolute value will be regarded as a potential  
confounder, and will be adjusted for when comparing Naloxegol and placebo groups on all the 
outcomes.  
 
Primary analysis.  
We will test the primary hypothesis t hat subjects who received Naloxegol 25  mg give n 
once in the morning every day will have lower volume of residual urine in bladder when compared 
to placebo. We will compare the randomized groups on the volume of residual urine in bladder, 
which will be measured twice per day for  up to  3 days  (i.e., a m aximum of 6 measurement times 
in total) , using a linear mixed model adjusting for the within -subject correlation (using an 
autoregressive correlation structure ). At each measurement time, the average of the measurements 
will be analyzed. Any imbalanced baseline characteristics and volume of residual urine in bladder 
prior to the procedure will be included as covariates  in the model. If the group -by-time interaction 
is non -significant (P > 0.20), we will assess the group difference on the v olume of residual urine 
across over all the measurements. In the presence of a group -by-time interaction, the group 
difference will be assessed separately at each measurement time and a Bonferroni correction will 
be made for multiple comparisons to maintai n the hypothesis -wise 2-sided  type I error at 0.05  (the 
significance criterion will be 0.05 / 6).  
Second , we will assess the treatment effect within chronic opioid users and nonusers using 
the same statistical methods as above. The significance level will  be 0.025  for each of the two 
subgroup analyses (Bonferroni correction).  
 
Secondary and exploratory analysis . 
21 
 We will test the following three secondary hypotheses: subjects who received Naloxegol 
25 mg given once in the morning every day will have ( 1) fewer opioid -related side  effects , (2) less 
need of indwelling catheterization determined by the residual volume to be above 400 ml, and (3) 
improved quality of recovery as compared to placebo.  
The two groups will be compared on the incidence of any opioid -related side effects using 
a logistic regression.  The frequency, severity, and bothersomeness for each of the 12 opioid -
related side effects on POD 1 and 2  will be summarized.  We will compare  the two groups on 
incidence (any versus none) of need for indwelling urinary catheterization (defined as residual 
urine volume > 400 ml) using logistic regression. The two groups will also be compared on the 
Quality of Recovery scale measured on POD  2 (or day of discharge if it occurs earlier) using a 
linear mixed model with an autoregressive correlation structure. All the analyses will be adjusted 
for imbalanced baseline characteristics , if any. The hypothesis -wise 2 -sided type I error for each 
of the sec ondary outcome will be  controlled at  0.017 (i.e., 0.05/3, Bonferroni correction).   
In addition, we will summarize the following exploratory outcomes, including satisfactory 
of the quality of recovery (a subjective 100 -point scale) and l ength  of hospital s tay after surgery.   
 
H. Sample Size Considerations  
The sample size consideration was based on the test for the primary hypothesis that patients 
who received Naloxegol 25  mg given once in the morning every day will have lower volume of 
residual urine in bladder when compared to placebo. We would need 62 patients per group [56] to 
have 90% power at a 2-sided alpha level  of 0.05 to detect an effect size of 0.4 or more . The effect 
size estimation of 0.4 was very conser vative as compared to the mean difference of 120 ml (SD: 
approximate 60 ml) in the volume of residual urine observed by Jose Carlos, I. T., et al  [57]. The 
effect size is the difference in means of the two randomized groups divided by the pooled standard 
deviation.  A maximum of six measurements are planned, twice per day for 3  days. However, we 
assumed 4 measurements per patients with a correlation of 0.3 to be conservative for the sample 
size calculation. Considering a loss of follow -up rate of 10%, we wil l need 12 more patients to 
reach the planned power with an end sample size of 136. A blinded data quality check will be 
conducted at 50% (68 patients) of the planned enrollment of 136 patients . In addition to the 136 
patients, w e will enroll 2 pilot patients to test feasibility of recruitment, protocol adherence, 
randomization process, and data collection .  
22 
 SAS software version 9.4 for Windows (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) will be used for all 
statistical analyses and graphics.  
 
 
I. Blinding and unblinding  
Study drug will be prepared by the hospital pharmacy and labeled as “Naloxegol 25 mg or 
Placebo”. Placebo will have an identical shape and color. Blinding will be maintained unless 
unblinding is  requested for an adverse event or any other reason  as deemed necessary.  
If clinically indicated, an investigator can request unblinding for a specific dose from the Pharmacy 
personnel. Such an event will be reported and documented. Unblinding can also be requested by 
the data safety and monitoring board at any time for safety concerns.  
 
J. Treatment compliance  
Subjects  will be given clear instructions on medication doses and research -related follow -up prior 
to enrollment. A member of the study team  will follow each patient for the duration of the 
intervention in order to ensure compliance  with the protocol. Any deviations will be reported on 
the case report form and communicated as necessary.  
If the need arises to discontinue  the investigational product, the investigator will inform Pharmacy 
personnel to halt any further drug dispensing. The team will also communicate with the primary 
care nursing staff to return any unused investigational drug to the pharmacy for proper dispo sal. 
 
4. Safety monitoring  and reporting  
Definition of adverse events  
An adverse event is the development of an undesirable medical condition or the deterioration of 
a pre -existing medical condition following or during exposure to a pharmaceutical product, 
whether or not considered causally related  to the product.  An undesi rable medical condition can 
be symptoms (eg, nausea, chest pain), signs (eg, tachycardia, enlarged liver) or the abnormal 
23 
 results of an investigation (eg, laboratory findings, electrocardiogram).   In clinical studies, an AE 
can include an undesirable medic al condition occurring at any time, including run -in or washout 
periods, even if no study treatment has been administered.  
The term AE is used to include both serious and non -serious AEs.  
Adverse events of particular interest  are: 
Opioid withdrawal: hyperh idrosis, chills, diarrhea, abdominal pain, anxiety, irritability  
Severe abdominal pain (>8/10) and/or diarrhea  
Gastrointestinal perforation  
 
Definitions of serious adverse event  
A serious adverse event is an AE occurring during any study phase that fulfill s one or more of 
the following criteria:  
Results in death  
Is immediately life -threatening  
Requires in -patient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to 
conduct normal life functions  
Is a congenital abnormality or birth defect  
Is an important medical event that may jeopardize the subject or may require medical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above.  
 
The causality of SAE s (their relationship to all study treatment/procedures) will be assessed by 
the investigator(s) and communicated to AstraZeneca.  
 
Causality assessment  
The Investigator will assess causal relationship between Investigational Product and each 
Adverse Event,  and answer ‘ yes’ or ‘no’  to the question ‘Do you consider that there is a 
reasonable possibility that the event may have been caused by the investigational product?’  
24 
 For SAEs a causal relationship will also be assessed for other concomitant medications, s tudy 
procedures, and comparator study drugs.  Note that for SAEs that could be associated with any 
study procedure the causal relationship is implied as ‘yes’.  
 
Time period for collection of adverse events  
Patients enrolled in the study will be followed until discharge from hospital. Adverse events 
occurring during this period will be recorded and communicated to the principal investigator and 
study team. Any events deemed serious  by the principal investigat or will be communicated to the 
IRB and Astra Zeneca  as required and within 10 days of discovering the event.  
 
Follow -up of unresolved adverse events  
The principal investigator and the study team will follow any unresolved adverse events and 
communicate wit h the IRB and Astra Zeneca accordingly.  
The following variables will be collected for each AE:  
AE (verbatim)  
The date when the AE started and stopped  
Whether the AE is serious or not  
Investigator causality rating against the Investigational Product (yes or  no) 
Action taken with regard to investigational product  
AE caused subject’s withdrawal from study (yes or no)  
Outcome of AE(s)  
In addition to the AE variables referenced above, the following variables will be collected for 
SAEs:  
Date AE met seriousness cr iteria  
Date Investigator became aware of serious AE  
AE is serious due to which criterion  
If hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization:  
Date of hospitalization  
25 
 Date of discharge  
If death:  
Probable cause of death  
Date of death  
Autopsy performed (Ye s/no) and conclusion of cause of death from autopsy  
Causality assessment in relation to Study procedure(s)  
Causality assessment in relation to Other medication  
 
Description of AE(s)  
An AE of severe intensity need not necessarily be considered serious.  For  example, nausea that 
persists for several hours may be considered severe nausea, but not a SAE. On the other hand, a 
stroke that results in only a limited degree of disability  may be considered a mild stroke but 
would be a SAE.  
 
Adverse Events based on signs and symptoms  
When collecting AEs, the recording of diagnoses is preferred (when possible) to recording a list 
of signs and symptoms.  However, if a diagnosis is known and there are other signs or symptoms 
that are not generally part of the diagnosis,  the diagnosis and each sign or symptom will be 
recorded separately.  
 
Adverse Events based on examinations and tests  
Deterioration as compared to baseline in protocol -mandated laboratory values and/or vital signs 
should only be reported as AEs if they fulf ill any of the SAE criteria or are the reason for 
discontinuation of treatment with the investigational product.  
If deterioration in a laboratory value/vital sign is associated with clinical signs and symptoms, 
the sign or symptom will be reported as an AE  and the associated laboratory result/vital sign will 
be considered as additional information.  Wherever possible the reporting investigator uses the 
clinical, rather than the laboratory term  (eg, anemia versus low hemoglobin value). In the 
absence of clin ical signs or symptoms, clinically relevant deteriorations in non -mandated 
parameters should be reported as AE(s).  
26 
 Deterioration of a laboratory value, which is unequivocally due to disease progression, should 
not be reported as an AE/SAE.  
Any new or aggra vated clinically relevant abnormal medical finding at a physical examination as 
compared with the baseline assessment will be reported as an AE.  
 
Disease progression  
Disease progression can be considered as a worsening of a subject’s condition attributable  to the 
disease for which the investigational product is being studied.  It may be an increase in the 
severity of the disease under study and/or increases in the symptoms of the disease. Events, 
which are unequivocally due to disease progression, should no t be reported as an AE during the 
study.  
 
Overdose  
Overdose in itself is not considered to be an AE or SAE.   
Investigator/site staff are responsible for recording and reporting overdose in accordance with the 
clinical study protocol instructions. All over doses with AstraZeneca product are collected and 
reported to AstraZeneca.  Overdoses associated with SAEs will be reported according to SAE 
reporting.  All other overdoses can be sent to AstraZeneca on a monthly basis.  
The following information should be provided in the event of an Overdose ( Overdose Report 
Form can be provided upon request) :  
Details of the Patient who was dispensed study medication (Randomization code)  
Details of the Patient who took the overdose (demographic information, was patient a s tudy 
participant?)  
Details of the drug overdose (total daily dose, route, formulation, Overdose start and stop dates)  
Was the overdose accidental or intentional?   
Was the overdose associated with an adverse event ( serious or non -serious ) 
Provide an Adverse  Event description (use same wording as in CRF). Provide start and stop 
dates of the event, or indicate if the event is ongoing.  
Provide Investigator’s signature and date.  
 
27 
 Pregnancy  
Pregnancy in itself is not considered to be an AE or SAE. However, if the  subjects become 
pregnant during the study, Investigator/site staff are responsible for recording and reporting 
pregnancies and their pregnancy outcomes until pregnancy resolution in accordance with the 
clinical study protocol instructions.  
If a patient be comes pregnant during the course of the study the study medication should be 
discontinued immediately . The investigator must inform AstraZeneca of any pregnancies 
occurring in a female patient or a female partner of a male patient within 24 hours  of when h e or 
she becomes aware of it.  
 
Maternal exposure  
All reports of pregnancy with an AstraZeneca product (that is, those with or without associated 
SAE, AE or no symptoms) are collected and reported to AstraZeneca.  If the pregnancy is 
accompanied by an SAEs (e.g. events of c ongenital  abnormality/birth defect, spontaneous 
miscarriage or ectopic pregnancy, or any complications in the subject which meet the criteria for 
a serious adverse event), it should be reported according to the SAE reporting requirement.   All 
other maternal exposure reports can be sent to AstraZeneca on a monthly basis.  
Normal births and elective abortions without complications are not considered to be SAEs.  
 
Paternal exposure  
If paternal exposure pregnancy occurs in the course of the st udy, then the Sponsor/Investigators 
should inform AstraZeneca within the same timeframe as the maternal exposure.  The female 
partner of the patient will be asked to consent to allow collection of information and follow -up 
on the pregnancy.  The outcome of  the pregnancy is also followed and reported in accordance 
with the processes written in maternal exposure section.  
 
Reporting of serious adverse events  
Investigators and other site personnel must inform the FDA, via a MedWatch/AdEERs  form, of 
any serious  or unexpected adverse events that occur in accordance with the reporting obligations 
of 21 CFR 312.32,  and will concurrently forward all such reports to AZ.  A copy of the 
MedWatch/AdEERs report must be faxed or email to AstraZeneca at the time the event is 
reported to the FDA.  It is the responsibility of the investigator to compile all necessary 
information and ensure that the FDA receives a report according to the FDA reporting 
28 
 requirement timelines and to ensure that these reports are also submitted to  AstraZeneca at the 
same time.  
When reporting to AstraZeneca, a cover page should accompany the MedWatch/AdEERs form 
indicating the following:  
Investigator Sponsored Study (ISS)  
The investigator IND number assigned by the FDA  
The investigator’s name and ad dress  
The trial name/title and AstraZeneca ISS reference number  
Investigative site must also indicate, either in the SAE report or the cover page, the causality of 
events in relation to all study medications and if the SAE is related to disease progression , as 
determined by the principal investigator.  
Send SAE report and accompanying cover page to AstraZeneca by email to AE Mailbox Clinical 
Trial (TCS) <AEMailboxClinicalTrialTCS@astrazeneca.com> or by fax to 1 -302-886-4114 (US 
Fax number). Email is the pref erred method.  
Serious adverse events that do not require expedited reporting to the FDA need to be reported to 
AstraZeneca preferably using the MedDRA  coding language for se rious adverse events on a 
monthly basis .  
In the case of blinded trials, AstraZenec a will request that the Sponsor either provide a copy of 
the randomization code/ code break information or unblind those SAEs which require expedited 
reporting.  
All SAEs have to be reported to AstraZeneca, whether or not considered causally related to the 
investigational product.  All SAEs will be documented in the study database.  The investigator is 
responsible for informing the IRB and/or the Regulatory Authority of the SAE as per local 
requirements.  
 
5. Ethical and regulatory requirements  
A regulatory binder will be kept at the Department of Outcomes Research including the following:  
 Delegation log: names and responsibilities of all study team members  
 Copy of the most recent study protocol  
 Copy of the most recent consent form  
29 
  Copy of the most recent case report form  
 Copies of any relevant communications with the IRB, sponsor, DSMB, pharmacy, or other 
entities  
 Audit reports  
The study site pharmacy will be responsible for the storage and control of study drug and placebo 
doses. Adequate records of recei pt and dispensing of study drug will be kept and will be available 
for inspection if required. Any expired or unused drug will be disposed of as per an agreement 
with the sponsor.  
An independent data safety and monitoring board (DSMB) will be formed and wi ll consist of at 
least 2 anesthesiologists and 1 statistician not included in the study team. The DSMB will review 
study data at the time of the blinded data quality check  (Section H)  and as required throughout the 
study. The DSMB can request unblinding of  study data and has the authority to terminate the study 
if significant harm to study patients is suspected.  
The study will be conducted preserving the privacy and rights of all patients to the best of the study 
team’s ability. Protected health information  will not be shared outside of the entities described in 
the consent form. All study -related information will be kept at the Department of Outcomes 
Research in compliance of existing rules.  
 
6. Study Drug handling  
Identity of investigational product(s)  
Naloxegol 25mg tablets and matching placebo will be used in the study.  This material will be 
supplied by AstraZeneca in unlabeled HDPE bottles containing 18 tablets per bottle.   Labels will 
be prepared at the study site according to Good Manufacturing Pra ctice (GMP) and local 
regulatory guidelines. Labels will fulfill GMP Annex 13 requirements for labels.  
Storage  
Naloxegol will be stored in a secure location under appropriate storage conditions.  All study drug 
will be stored in original containers until d ispensed to study subjects. Naloxegol and matching 
30 
 placebo must be stored at controlled r oom temperature between 20 -25°C (68 -77°F).  Storage 
temperature must be monitored and temperature excursions reported to AstraZeneca.  
Accountability  
The PI and the stu dy staff are responsible for maintaining accountability records for all study drugs 
according to local regulatory requirements.  Unused and expired study drugs will be disposed of 
in accordance with sponsor regulations. Copies of the study medication accou ntability records will 
be retained at completion of the study and will be made available for review in the event of an 
inspection or audit.   
31 
 Reference s 
 
1. Buvanendran, A. and J.S. Kroin, Multimodal analgesia for controlling acute postoperative pain.  
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol, 2009. 22(5): p. 588 -93. 
2. Brennan, T.J. and H. Kehlet, Preventive analgesia to reduce wound hyperalgesia and persistent 
postsurgical pain: not an easy path.  Anesthesiology, 2005. 103(4): p. 681 -3. 
3. Desborough, J.P., The stress response to trauma and surgery.  Br J Anaesth, 2000. 85(1): p. 109 -17. 
4. Wilmore, D.W., From Cuthbertson to fast -track surgery: 70 years of progress in reducing stress in 
surgical patients.  Ann Surg, 2002. 236(5): p. 643 -8. 
5. Holte, K. and H. Kehlet, Postoperative ileus: a preventable event.  Br J Surg, 2000. 87(11): p. 1480 -
93. 
6. Nikolajsen, L. and C.E. Minella, Acute postoperative pain as a risk factor for chronic pain after 
surgery.  European Journal of Pain Supplements, 2009 . 3(S2): p. 29 -32. 
7. Perkins, F.M. and H. Kehlet, Chronic pain as an outcome of surgery. A review of predictive factors.  
Anesthesiology, 2000. 93(4): p. 1123 -33. 
8. Argoff, C., Mechanisms of pain transmission and pharmacologic management.  Curr Med Res Opi n, 
2011. 27(10): p. 2019 -31. 
9. Labianca, R., et al., Adverse effects associated with non -opioid and opioid treatment in patients 
with chronic pain.  Clin Drug Investig, 2012. 32 Suppl 1 : p. 53 -63. 
10. Barletta, J.F., Clinical and economic burden of opioid use for postsurgical pain: focus on ventilatory 
impairment and ileus.  Pharmacotherapy, 2012. 32(9 Suppl): p. 12s -8s. 
11. Benyamin, R., et al., Opioid complications and side effects.  Pain Physician, 2008. 11(2 Suppl): p. 
S105 -20. 
12. Petros, J.G., et al., Patient -controlled analgesia and postoperative urinary retention after open 
appendectomy.  Surg Gynecol Obstet, 1993. 177(2): p. 172 -5. 
13. Romsing, J., et al., Reduction of opioid -related adverse events using opioid -sparing analgesia with 
COX -2 inhibitors lacks documentation: a systematic review.  Acta Anaesthesiol Scand, 2005. 49(2): 
p. 133 -42. 
14. Kreutziger, J., et al., Urinary retention after spinal anaesthesia with hyperbaric prilocaine 2% in an 
ambulatory setting.  Br J Anaesth, 2010. 104(5): p. 582 -6. 
15. Jacobsen, S.M., et al., Complicated catheter -associated urinary tract infections due to Escherichia 
coli and Proteus mirabilis.  Clin Microbiol Rev, 2008. 21(1): p. 26 -59. 
16. Rothfeld, A.F. and A. Stickley, A program to limit urinary catheter use at an  acute care hospital.  
Am J Infect Control, 2010. 38(7): p. 568 -71. 
17. Stamm, W.E., Catheter -associated urinary tract infections: epidemiology, pathogenesis, and 
prevention.  Am J Med, 1991. 91(3b): p. 65s -71s. 
18. Nunez -Pereira, S., et al., Postoperative u rinary tract infection and surgical site infection in 
instrumented spinal surgery: is there a link?  Clin Microbiol Infect, 2014. 20(8): p. 768 -73. 
19. Leventhal, A. and A. Pfau, Pharmacologic management of postoperative overdistention of the 
bladder.  Surg Gynecol Obstet, 1978. 146(3): p. 347 -8. 
20. Cataldo, P.A. and A.J. Senagore, Does alpha sympathetic blockade prevent urinary retention 
following anorectal surgery?  Dis Colon Rectum, 1991. 34(12): p. 1113 -6. 
21. Wang, J., S. Pennefather, and G. Russell, Low-dose naloxone in the treatment of urinary retention 
during extradural fentanyl causes excessive reversal of analgesia.  Br J Anaesth, 1998. 80(4): p. 
565-6. 
32 
 22. Baldini, G., et al., Postoperative urinary retention: anesthetic and perioperative considera tions.  
Anesthesiology, 2009. 110(5): p. 1139 -57. 
23. Augestad, K.M. and C.P. Delaney, Postoperative ileus: impact of pharmacological treatment, 
laparoscopic surgery and enhanced recovery pathways.  World J Gastroenterol, 2010. 16(17): p. 
2067 -74. 
24. Schwar z, N.T., et al., Selective jejunal manipulation causes postoperative pan -enteric 
inflammation and dysmotility.  Gastroenterology, 2004. 126(1): p. 159 -69. 
25. Taguchi, A., et al., Selective postoperative inhibition of gastrointestinal opioid receptors.  N En gl J 
Med, 2001. 345(13): p. 935 -40. 
26. Lubawski, J. and T. Saclarides, Postoperative ileus: strategies for reduction.  Ther Clin Risk Manag, 
2008. 4(5): p. 913 -7. 
27. Camilleri, M., Opioid -induced constipation: challenges and therapeutic opportunities.  Am J 
Gastroenterol, 2011. 106(5): p. 835 -42; quiz 843.  
28. Rachinger -Adam, B., P. Conzen, and S.C. Azad, Pharmacology of peripheral opioid receptors.  Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol, 2011. 24(4): p. 408 -13. 
29. Holzer, P., Pharmacology of Opioids and their Effects on Gastrointestinal Function.  Am J 
Gastroenterol Suppl, 2014. 2(1): p. 9 -16. 
30. Kurz, A. and D.I. Sessler, Opioid -induced bowel dysfunction: pathophysiology and potential new 
therapies.  Drugs, 2003. 63(7): p. 649 -71. 
31. Wolff, B.G., et al., Patterns of gastrointestinal recovery after bowel resection and total abdominal 
hysterectomy: pooled results from the placebo arms of alvimopan phase III North American clinical 
trials.  J Am Coll Surg, 2007. 205(1): p. 43 -51. 
32. Stark, P.A., P.S. Myles, and J.A. Burke, Development and psychometric evaluation of a 
postoperative quality of recovery score: the QoR -15. Anesthesiology, 2013. 118(6): p. 1332 -40. 
33. Belcher, A.W., et al., Long -Acting Patient -Controlled Opioids Are Not A ssociated With More 
Postoperative Hypoxemia Than Short -Acting Patient -Controlled Opioids After Noncardiac Surgery: 
A Cohort Analysis.  Anesth Analg, 2016.  
34. Sun, L.Y., et al., Association of intraoperative hypotension with acute kidney injury after electi ve 
noncardiac surgery.  Anesthesiology, 2015. 123(3): p. 515 -23. 
35. Sacerdote, P., et al., The effects of tramadol and morphine on immune responses and pain after 
surgery in cancer patients.  Anesth Analg, 2000. 90(6): p. 1411 -4. 
36. Beilin, B., et al., Effects of anesthesia based on large versus small doses of fentanyl on natural killer 
cell cytotoxicity in the perioperative period.  Anesth Analg, 1996. 82(3): p. 492 -7. 
37. Yeager, M.P., et al., Morphine inhibits spontaneous and cytokine -enhanced natural kil ler cell 
cytotoxicity in volunteers.  Anesthesiology, 1995. 83(3): p. 500 -8. 
38. Wei, G., J. Moss, and C.S. Yuan, Opioid -induced immunosuppression: is it centrally mediated or 
peripherally mediated?  Biochem Pharmacol, 2003. 65(11): p. 1761 -6. 
39. Vallejo, R ., O. de Leon -Casasola, and R. Benyamin, Opioid therapy and immunosuppression: a 
review.  Am J Ther, 2004. 11(5): p. 354 -65. 
40. Stefano, G.B., et al., Regulation of various genes in human leukocytes acutely exposed to 
morphine: expression microarray analys is. Med Sci Monit, 2005. 11(5): p. Ms35 -42. 
41. Yossuck, P., et al., Effect of morphine sulfate on neonatal neutrophil chemotaxis.  Clin J Pain, 2008. 
24(1): p. 76 -82. 
42. Ninkovic, J. and S. Roy, Morphine decreases bacterial phagocytosis by inhibiting acti n 
polymerization through cAMP -, Rac -1-, and p38 MAPK -dependent mechanisms.  Am J Pathol, 2012. 
180(3): p. 1068 -79. 
43. Eisenstein, T.K. and M.E. Hilburger, Opioid modulation of immune responses: effects on phagocyte 
and lymphoid cell populations.  J Neuroimmunol, 1998. 83(1-2): p. 36 -44. 
33 
 44. Weinert, C.R., S. Kethireddy, and S. Roy, Opioids and infections in the intensive care unit should 
clinicians and patients be concerned?  J Neuroimmune Pharmacol, 2008. 3(4): p. 218 -29. 
45. Breslow, J.M., et al. , Potentiating effect of morphine on oral Salmonella enterica serovar 
Typhimurium infection is mu -opioid receptor -dependent.  Microb Pathog, 2010. 49(6): p. 330 -5. 
46. Schwacha, M.G., et al., The contribution of opiate analgesics to the development of infec tious 
complications in burn patients.  Am J Surg, 2006. 192(1): p. 82 -6. 
47. Inagi, T., et al., Remifentanil -based anaesthesia increases the incidence of postoperative surgical 
site infection.  J Hosp Infect, 2015. 89(1): p. 61 -8. 
48. Collins, T.C., et al., Risk factors for prolonged length of stay after major elective surgery.  Ann Surg, 
1999. 230(2): p. 251 -9. 
49. Bui, K., et al., The effect of quinidine, a strong P -glycoprotein inhibitor, on the pharmacokinetics 
and central nervous system distribution of na loxegol.  J Clin Pharmacol, 2015.  
50. Webster, L., et al., Randomised clinical trial: the long -term safety and tolerability of naloxegol in 
patients with pain and opioid -induced constipation.  Aliment Pharmacol Ther, 2014. 40(7): p. 771 -
9. 
51. Chey, W.D., et  al., Naloxegol for opioid -induced constipation in patients with noncancer pain.  N 
Engl J Med, 2014. 370(25): p. 2387 -96. 
52. Products, N.B.D.f.t.A.a.A.D. and A.C. (AADPAC). 
http://www.fda.go v/downloads/%E2%80%A6/UCM400209 . 
53. Yadeau, J.T., et al., Performance characteristics and validation of the Opioid -Related Symptom 
Distress Scale for evaluation of analgesic side effects after orthopedic surgery.  Anesth Analg, 2011. 
113(2): p. 369 -77. 
 
 
  
34 
 Appendix  
 
 
 
Opioid -Related Symptom Distress Scale (ORSDS)  [53] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 Quality of Recovery Scale  
QoR -15 (Development and Psychometric Evaluation of a Postoperative Quality of Recovery 
Score [32] 
 
