Study Protocol cover page  
 
Official study name: Sharing Digital Self -Monitoring Data with Others to Enhance Long -Term 
Weight Loss: A Randomized Trial Using a Factorial Design  
R01DK129300  
Most recent protocol IRB approval: December 5, 2022  
Approval letter included in this document.  
Approval of Modifications  
 
Date : December 5, 2022  
Protocol Number:  2103008421A01 7 
Principal Investigator:  Meghan Butryn, PhD  
Review Type:  Expedited  
Review Date :  December 5, 2022  
Approved On: December 5, 2022  
Committee:  IRB 3  
Sponsor:  National Institute of Health  
Project Title:  Sharing Digital Self -Monitoring Data with Others to Enhance 
Long- Term Weight Loss: A Randomized Trial using a Factorial 
Design  
 
On December 5, 2022, the IRB approved the following modifications:  
 
- 3 month assessment - clarifying language in protocol and index consent form about the 3 
month assessment point.  
- addition of radio language for recruitment 
- Fengqing Zhang - co-investigator personnel, FCOI and HRP -201 
 If you modified the consent form, you can access your IRB -approved, stamped consent 
document or consent script through Coeus. Open the Attachments tab to find the approval letter 
or approval packet. The stamped documents are labeled as such. Copies of the IRB approved 
stamped consent document or consent script must be used in obtaining consent.  
 
Please contact the IRB at (267) 359- 2471  or HRPP@drexel.edu if you have any questions.   Office of Research  & 
Innovation  
Human Research Protection 
Program  
Drexel University  
Bellet Building  
1505 Race Street, 7th Floor  
Philadelphia, PA 19102  Institutional Review Board  
Phone : (267) 359 -2471   
Fax: (215) 762 -6258 
E-mail: HRPP@drexel.edu   
 
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  1 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
  
1) Abstract  of the study  
Adults attempting weight loss through lifestyle modification (LM) typically find 
maintenance of behavior change difficult. Outcomes might be improved if 
participants  are provided  with sustained  sources  of accountability  and support  and 
ongoing  opportunities  to reflect  with others  on goal progress.  This study  proposes 
that sharing digital data with other parties has the potential to improve long -term 
weight loss. The proposed study will enroll adults (“index  participants”) (N = 
320) with overweight/obesity in  a 24-month  LM program  and instruct  them  to use 
digital  tools for self -monitoring of weight, physical  activity, and eating on a  daily 
basis. Groups will  meet  remotely each week in months 1 -3 to initiate  weight  loss. 
In months 4 -24, intervention contact will be remote and will include the 
following: quarterly group meetings held via videoconference; brief phone calls 
with the coach held twice per quarter; and monthly text messages with the coach, 
with a small group of fellow group participants, and with a friend or family 
member outside of the program. Text message content will vary according to 
treatment condition, i.e. three types of data sharing partnerships: Coach Share, 
Group Share, and Friend /Family Share. Outcomes will be measured at months 0, 
3, 6, 12, and 24. Primary aims include determining if Coach Share, Group Share, 
and Friend/ Family Share each improve long -term weight loss, PA, and calorie 
intake, and examining if effects are additive  when participants are assigned to 
engage  in more  than one type of data sharing  partnership.  The secondary aim is  to 
explore mediators and moderators of intervention effects. The tertiary aim is to 
determine how the quality of relationship with coach, grou p members, and 
friends/family member over time may differentially moderate treatment effects 
and predict data sharing efficacy. As digital technology makes data sharing 
increasingly  feasible,  it is critical  to determine  how to  optimize  these  partnerships 
to improve long -term outcomes in LM.  
2) Protocol  Title  
Sharing  Digital  Self-Monitoring  Data  with Others  to Enhance  Long -Term  Weight 
Loss: A Randomized Trial using a Factorial Design  
3) Sponsor  / Funding  
National  Institutes  of Health  
4) IRB Review  History  
This is an original  IRB submission  for this project.  
5) Investigator  
Meghan  Butryn,  Principal  Investigator 
Drexel University  
 
Evan  Forman,  Co-Investigator 
Drexel University  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  2 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
  
Danielle  Arigo,  Co-Investigator 
Rowan University  
 
Fengqing  Zoe Zhang,  Co-Investigator 
Drexel University  
 
Bonnie  Spring,  Co-Investigator 
Northwestern University  
 
Brandy -Jo Milliron,  Co-Investigator 
Drexel University  
 
6) Objectives  
This study is designed to test  new approaches to supporting long -term behavior change. 
Specifically,  this study  will test whether  using  coaches,  program  peers,  or family/friends 
as sources of support and accountability can improve long -term weight loss.  
Aim 1: Test the hypotheses  that Coach  Share, Group Share,  and Friend/Family  Share  will 
each improve long -term weight loss (primary outcome) and PA and calorie intake  
(secondary outcomes) (i.e., outcomes will be compared for participants who are 
randomized to engage in that type of data sharing partnership, versus those who are not). 
Exploratory analyses also will determine if effects are partially or fully additive, 
antagonistic, or synergistic when participants are assigned to more than one type of data 
sharing partnership.  
Aim 2: Test the following  mediators  of intervention effects:  perceived  supportive 
accountability,  motivation,  self-regulation,  self-monitoring  engagement,  coaching 
quality, social comparison, and social support.  
Aim 3: Determine how quality of the relationship with the coach, group members, and 
friend/family  member  over time may differentially  moderate  treatment  effects  and predic t 
data sharing efficacy.  
7) Background  
In the proposed study, adults with overweight/obesity (i.e., “index participants”) will 
enroll in a 24 -month LM program and use digital self -monitoring tools on a daily basis 
(wireless body weight scale, wearable PA sens or, and app to record dietary intake). In 
months  1-3, groups  will meet  remotely  every  week  through  videoconferencing  to initiate 
weight loss. Contact in months 4 -24 will continue remotely, with group meetings 
continuing to be held via videoconferencing (on ce per quarter) and brief, individual 
phone calls with the coach (twice per quarter). Participants also will exchange monthly 
text messages with the coach; monthly text messages with a small group of fellow 
participants; and monthly text messages with a fr iend or family member outside of the 
program who will be trained to provide support. A factorial design will be used to 
efficiently test the independent effects of three types of data sharing partnerships:  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  3 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 1) Coach  Share: The  behavioral coach will view digital self -monitoring data 
throughout  the program  and will directly  address  data observations  during 
intervention contacts.  
2) Group  Share:  Participants  in a given  LM group  will view  each other’s  self- 
monitoring data in their small -group text mes sages.  
3) Friend/Family  Share:  A friend  or family  member  will view  the participant’s  data 
via automated text message.  
Coaches, group members, and friends/family in Share conditions will be trained to 
respond to shared data in ways that support motivation and self -regulation, without 
judgment or a critical tone. With the 2 x 2 x 2 factorial design, index participants will be 
randomly  assigned  such that  half receive  Coach  Share  and half do not; half receive  Group 
Share and half do not; and half re ceive Friend/Family Share and half do not. Amount of 
intervention contact between the participant and each party is comparable in all 
conditions, isolating the effects of data sharing. Outcomes will be measured at months 0,  
3, 6, 12, and 24.  
 
8) Setting  of the Human  Research  
Group  treatment  for all months  will be held over Zoom  videoconferencing  software. 
All study visits will be held remotely and copies of physical data will be held at 
Drexel’s University City Campus.  
 
9) Resources  Available  to Conduct  the Human  Research  
Center  for Weight,  Eating  and Lifestyle  Science  (WELL  Center)  
Drexel University’s WELL Center is actively engaged in vibrant research initiatives to 
advance the science and practice of weight control. The WELL Center currently houses 
26 faculty, staff,  and trainees and  has a  portfolio  of $15M in  research  funding.  Adequate 
space in the WELL Center will be devoted to this project. Project staff will have offices 
available for conducting project management tasks, conducting phone screening of 
participants, conducting assessments, and storing data and project supplies. The WELL 
Center  is primarily  a research  center,  but there  is also an arm with a  clinic  that serves  the 
community. There is no involvement of the clinic in this study.  
 
Dr. Butryn  and Dr. Forman,  principal  and co-investigator  on the project  respectively, are 
experts in the area of the development of treatments for health -related behavior change. 
Their  lab has several  NIH-funded  research  grants related  to eating  behavior  and lifestyle 
modification, many of which Dr. Zhang (co -investigator) similarly has the primary 
responsibility of data analyses. Dr. Milliron (co -investigator) is an expert in the areas of 
community nutrition science and cancer prevention. Dr. Arigo (co -investi gator) 
specializes in understanding social influences on health and health behavior (e.g., social 
comparison, social support) and harnessing social influences to improve outcomes in 
health behavior interventions (e.g., for weight  loss and physical  activity  promotion). Dr. 
Spring (co -investigator) has more than 30 years of experience leading interdisciplinary 
science teams funded by NIH, VA, and foundation grants to develop and evaluate 
technology -supported interventions that promote healthy change in multip le chronic  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  4 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 disease  risk behaviors,  particularly  poor quality  diet, physical  inactivity,  obesity,  and 
smoking.  
 
Collective research expertise from the team and past success recruiting for studies ensure 
that this study will likewise be successful in its recruitment goals. As described in 
Recruitment Methods below, 320 index participants will be recruited in five cohorts (n = 
64 per cohort) through digital media, radio stations, and public transportation, and 
publicizing  the program in  primary  care practices  and community  centers.  These methods 
have  yielded  large  samples  in previous  NIH-funded  clinical  trials  conducted at  the WELL 
Center by this research team. Also, to enhance  retention, study staff will  send newsletters 
and birthday/holiday cards to participants. All study staff are well -qualified and well - 
trained in conducting weight  and eating -related research, as well  as general  best practices 
for research with human subjects. All persons assisting with research will be t rained and 
monitored by the Principal Investigator.  
 
Department  of Psychology  
The Department of Psychology is actively engaged in research initiatives to advance 
the science  and practice  of psychology.  The faculty  is highly  collaborative,  frequently 
cooper ating on research projects, co -mentoring doctoral students, and providing 
consultation to one another as needed. The department currently houses several 
prominent research laboratories that focus on research similar to the proposed study.  
 
Computing  Facilities  
At present,  all relevant  personnel  at Drexel  have  desktop  computers  equipped  with 
broadband Internet connections and all necessary word processing and statistical 
software. The system is protected by firewalls and password protection to ensure 
security for sensitive data.  
 
10) Prior  Approvals  
Does  not apply  
 
11) Study  Design  
a) Recruitment  Methods  
Recruitment will be conducted in five waves using methods that have yielded a high rate 
of recruitment  in recent  NIH-funded  obesity  trials  conducted  by this research  team.  Broad 
study  details  (including  the study  purpose and  time commitment) and  contact information 
will be provided via digital media, WELL Center mailing list, radio stations, and public 
transportation, and publicizing the program in primary car e practices and community 
centers via flyers.  
The WELL Center Screening and Registry Study is a screening and enrollment tool 
that collects information of interested participants to determine  preliminary eligibility for 
WELL Center research studies and matches  participants with the study that best fits their 
needs.  There  are 4 phases  within  the WELL  Center  Screening  and Registry  Study tool, 
consisting of (1) General Interest Survey, (2) WELL Center Informed Screening  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  5 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 Consent, (3) Universal El igibility Screener, and (4) Weight Loss Phone Screen. 
Prior  to their scheduled  phone  screen,  participants  will be sent the Fitlink  Screening 
Informed  Consent  Form . The Fitlink  Screening  Informed  Consent  is required  for 
Participation  in the Project FitLink screening process. At the beginning of the phone 
screen, the assessor will review the Fitlink Screening Informed Consent Form with the 
participant. The participant will then be prompted to ask any questions they have.  If the 
partici pant chooses  not to sign the Fitlink  Screening  Informed  Consent  Form, the phone 
screen will not continue. Fitlink Phone Screen acts as a preliminary eligibility  check  
specific  to Fitlink  study,  including  participants’  interest,  friends/family nomination, and 
availability for meetings.  
Participants who are interested and preliminarily appear eligible for this study will be 
invited to sign up for an information session (specific  to this study), at  which prospective 
participants learn more detaile d information about the study and the enrollment process 
(including risks, benefits, and alternatives to participation) and have the opportunity to 
ask additional questions. Finally, participants who remain interested are scheduled for a 
remote study visit , when research staff will complete assessment of other aspects of 
eligibility that were not well suited for the phone screen (e.g., measurement of weight, 
psychiatric conditions). Participants that completed all materials at the time of the study 
visit wi ll be sent a copy of the study consent to review. After the clinic visit, index 
participants will be randomized to treatment condition, stratifying by biological sex and 
baseline  BMI  category . During  Session  0, participants  will review  the study  consent  form 
with a member of the research team present, able to answer any questions the participant 
may have. After eligibility is determined and all enrollment requirements are complete, 
the participant will digitally sign the consent form.  
 
During enrollment, al l index participants will nominate one friend or family member to 
provide  support  for their LM efforts.  After  a friend/family member  has been  selected,  the 
friend/family member will be sent an email from study staff. The email will give a 
description of th e study and provide the friend/family member a link to complete an 
online consent form and complete self -report measures. The friend/family member will 
be given the opportunity to sign up for a visit with study staff if they have additional 
questions. Afte r providing consent, the friend or family member will be asked to 
participate  in one webinar  at the start of the program  and three  booster zoom  meetings  (at 
Months 6, 12, and 18) to learn how to provide support for the participant’s LM efforts.  
 
b) Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria  
Overweight/obese  index  participants  (N = 320) will be recruited and  screened  by 
website to assess initial eligibility.  
Inclusion  criteria  for index  participants : 
● Individuals  must  be of overweight  or obese  BMI  (27-50 kg/m2) 
● Individuals  must  be adults  (aged  18-70) 
● Able  to engage  in physical  activity  (defined  as walking  two city blocks  without 
stopping)  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  6 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 ● Access  and willingness  to use a smartphone and  internet  
● Has one adult  friend  or family  member  who indicates  willingness  to serve  in a 
support role  
● Satisfactory  completion  of all enrollment  procedures  
● English  fluency  
Exclusion  criteria  for index  participants:  
● Medical  or psychiatric  condition  (e.g.,  cancer,  type I diabetes,  psychosis,  full- 
threshold eating disorder) that may pose a risk to the participant during 
intervention or cause a change in weight, or limit ability to comply with the 
program or participate appropriately in group -based treatment  
● Currently  pregnant  or breastfeeding,  or planning  to become  pregnant  in the next 
24 months  
● Use of insulin  or a medication  that can cause  significant  change  in weight  
● History  of bariatric  surgery  
● Weight loss of  > 5% in the previous  3 months  
● Weight loss of > 10% within the past 3 years  
 
No adults  unable  to consent,  children,  pregnant  women,  or prisoners  will be enrolled  as 
index participants.  
Data  for those  who fail screenings  and do not meet  inclusion  criteria  will be destroyed 
or, with consent from the part icipant, participants may be screened for another study 
or added to the WELL Center database to be contacted for future studies.  
Friends and family members (N = 320) have the following eligibility criteria: Age 18 
or older;  access  and willingness  to use a smartphone  and internet;  willingness  to serve 
in a support role. No adults unable to consent, children, or prisoners will be enrolled 
in the friend/family member role.  
 
c) Local  Number  of Subjects  
We expect to enroll 320 index participant s in total (64 per wave). To reach this, 
we expect  to screen  2844  participants  over the phone  (568 per wave),  conduct  525 
study  visits (105  per wave),  and consent  400 participants (80  per wave).  Based  on 
previous obesity trials run in the WELL Center, these projections will yield 320 
index participants in total enrolled in the study.  
In addition  to the 320 index  participants,  we expect  to enroll  320 friends/family 
members of the index participants.  
Thus,  the total sample  size will be 640 partici pants.  
d) Study -Wide  Number  of Subjects  
This is not a multicenter  study.  Recruitment  will be restricted  to participants  enrolling 
at Drexel. Please see the recruitment methods specified above for more information 
on participant recruitment.  
 
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  7 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 e) Study  Timelines  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  8 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 Recruitment and enrollment of all participants is expected to take twenty -seven 
months from the start date, and each participant will be enrolled in the study for 
duration  of twenty -four months.  Index  participants  will complete  assess ments  at 0 
months (baseline), 3 months, 6 months, 12 months (mid -treatment), and 24 
months (post -treatment). Friend/family members will not be required to attend 
any assessments. Primary and secondary analyses will be completed within five 
years of the sta rt date.  
f) Study  Endpoints  
The study is expected to begin in June 2021 and complete data collection by 
September  2025.  Data  analyses  and write -up will be completed  by the summer  of 
2026.  
g) Procedures  Involved  in the Human  Research  
Study  Design  
In the proposed study, 320 index participants will be recruited via digital media, radio 
stations,  and public  transportation,  and publicizing  the program  in primary  care practices 
and community centers. These index participants will each select one friend/family 
member to serve in a support role (N = 320).  
 
Screening  and Enrollment  Tools  
 
The screening  process  for this study  will utilize  the following  tools  to screen  participants 
for preliminary eligibility:  
 
• WELL  Screening  and Registry  Study  (#2112008968)  
• Project  FitLink  Screening  Consent  Form  
• Project  FitLink  Phone  Screen  
 
After attending an information session, participants must complete a total of five self - 
report surveys before their clinic visit appointment. This information will be used to 
make  determinations  about  a participant’s  study  eligibility and  will not be used for data 
analyses.  
 
● WALI -A: Weight  And Lifestyle  Inventory -Abbreviated  
● Beck  Depression  Inventory -II 
● PARQ:  Physical  Activity  Readiness  Questionnaire  
● Technology  Use Survey  
● Pre-Clinic  Visit  Food  Records  
 
If participants  are unable  to attend  the scheduled  clinic  visit, they  may reschedule  one 
time before they are deemed ineligible.  
 
Participants  must  do the following to  continue  in the  enrollment  process  after the Clinic 
Visit:  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  9 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 ● Sign up for Session  0 
● Complete  Pre-Session  0 instructions  
● Attend  Session  0 
● Successfully  set up all study  devices  and sign the Informed  Consent Form  
● Complete  all baseline  assessment  requirements  
● Attend  Session  1 
 
 
Intervention:  Index  Participants  
Uniform  Components  
All index  participants  will receive  a 24-month  lifestyle  modification  (LM)  intervention. 
They will receive 20 sessions of group -based behavioral treatment for weight loss. 
Groups will meet weekly in months 1 -3 over the Zoom videoconferencing platform. In 
months  4-24, one group  meeting  held over Zoom  will take place  every  3 months,  and two 
brief (15 -minute) individual coach phone calls will occur twice per quarter (14 calls in 
total over 21 months). During phone calls, coaches will check in about progress towards 
goals, review core behavioral skills that are most relevant, and collaborat ively set goals 
for the next month. All index participants also will regularly exchange program text 
messages with the LM coach; with fellow LM participants; and with a designated 
friend/family member. All index participants will be instructed to use digit al self - 
monitoring devices daily (PA sensor, food record app, smart scale) throughout the 
program.  
Treatment  Conditions  
The content of the text messages (in particular, whether or not the message includes the 
participant's digital device data) delivered d uring months 4 -24 will vary according to 
treatment condition. These three treatment conditions will be provided to 50% of 
participants,  with an equal  number  of participants  randomized  to have  each of the below 
three treatment conditions ON or OFF. For exam ple, 160 index participants will have 
their self -monitoring digital data accessible to their friend/family member, and 160 
participants will not have this feature as part of their intervention. Random assignment 
will be conducted using minimization procedu res, which results in better condition 
balance than simple randomization. Baseline covariates used for randomization will 
include biological sex and BMI.  
1. Coach Share: If an index participant is randomized to have Coach Share ON, the 
coach will have continu ous access to objective, real -time, detailed device data, and 
address data directly in all individual interactions with index participants (groups, 
individual weigh -ins, phone calls, texts), conveying that they are closely monitoring 
progress. Among index participants who are randomized to have Coach Share OFF, 
the coach  will have  no access  to their device  data.  Index  participants  will be explicitly 
told their coach does not have data access. During groups and phone calls, the 
participant  will self-report  progress, and goal setting will  be based on that  self-report. 
Text messages from the coach will be personalized in the OFF condition, as they are 
when coach data sharing is ON, though these messages will not be informed by  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  10 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 device  data.  Instead,  text messages  will provide  a reminder  of key goals  and strategies 
discussed in the previous phone call and provide encouragement for participant  
efforts in that area.  
2. Group Share: If Group Share is ON, participants in a given LM group  will view and 
respond to aspects of each other's self -monitoring device data in their small -group  
text messages. The project 'bot' will begin each text exchange by highlighting one 
participant's data. Over the course of 3 or 4 days, one participant's data  will be 
highlighted each day, in order to maximize engagement. Among index participants 
randomized  to have  Group  Share  OFF,  supportive  accountability  will not be the target 
of participant interactions  and no data will be shared with  LM program  peers.  Instead, 
prompts for the once monthly small group text exchanges will encourage index 
participants to provide social support (primarily of the informational type) to each 
other. Index participants will be explicitly told that they should not include  
information on goal progress such as weight change or minutes of PA. Similar to 
Group Share ON, prompts to continue the conversation will continue for several days 
in a row.  
3. Friend/Family Share: Index participants who are randomized to have Friend/Family 
Share  ON will give their friend  or family  member  access  to their self-monitoring  data. 
Text messages sent by the program bot, which includes the index participant and 
friend/family member,  will use a similar  format  as described  in Group  Share  ON. The 
friend or family member will be trained to respond to data in ways that enhance the 
participant’s motivation and self -regulation. If an index participant is randomized to 
Friend/Family Share OFF, the text messages from the bot will prompt the participant 
and friend/family member to communicate about the LM program; those messages 
will be standardized, except for names, and will not be tailored to index participant 
progress. Index participants will be instructed to refrain from sharing any device data 
with f riends or family members.  
Assessments:  Index  Participants  
Research assistants who are  blind to study condition will  administer assessme nts 
remotely  at months 0, 3, 6, 12, and 24. These st aff members will have no involvement 
with the intervention. Index participants will be instructed not to disclose information 
about their treatment condition to assessment staff. Assessment staff will receive training 
in adherence to the data collection pr otocol, and their skills will be periodically 
reassessed for quality control. As compensation for time , index participants will be paid 
for assessment visits 6, 12, and 24. To enhance retention, study staff will send newsletters 
and birthday/hol iday cards to index participants.  Self-report d ata will be electronically  
captured  and managed  through  REDCap, a  secure web -based research database 
application.  
 
 
Primary  and secondary  outcomes  
Weight  will be measured  using  a wireless  scale,  which  is accurate  to 0.2 kg. In order  to 
maximize accuracy, we will (1) provide instructions (e.g., place scale on flat, hard 
surface; weigh upon waking, without clothes, after using the bathroom), (2) require  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  11 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 participants to confirm that they are follo wing instructions at each assessment point, (3) 
use an average of 4 consecutive daily weights for each timepoint, (4) remove errant 
weights (e.g., 3%+0.1%*daysbtwnweights  ).(Height also will be measured at baseline using a 
tape measure  or yard stick to calculate  BMI.) Minutes per week of moderate -to-vigorous 
PA will be measured by using FitBit, a consumer -grade wrist -worn activity tracker 
utilized in several other studies. The wearable FitBit  has superior compliance and close - 
to-equivalent accuracy as a research -grade accelerometer. The Fitbit is sufficiently well - 
validated for steps and minutes of PA to support its role in this study and has demonstrated 
high inter -device reliability (crucial for obtaining accurate within -perso n change in PA).  
Seven  days of calorie intake as derived from a digital food log will be used as a 
secondary outcome.  
Participants  will already  be tracking  their consumption  using  the app as part of standard 
treatment. .  
 
Mediators  
Perceived supportive accountability for weight  control will be measured with the 
Supportive Accountability Measure. Self -regulation will be measured with the 
Helpfulness of Program Components measure. Self -monitoring will be objectively 
measured as the number of days in which digital devices were used  to measure weight, 
record eating (with a minimum threshold of 5 foods/beverages recorded), or PA 
(minimum threshold of 500 steps). Coaching quality will be assessed by rating 1 5% of 
each coach’s group sessions, text messages, and phone calls with a rubric  adapted from 
the ASPIRE -VA checklist. The tendency for participants to engage in social comparison 
with fellow  LM group  members  will be measured  with the Iowa -Netherlands  Comparison 
Orientation Measure, with items modified to be focused on the LM group, and with the 
FitLink Social Comparison Measure. Perceived social support will be assessed with the 
Social Support for Healthy Behaviors measure. Index participants will repo rt the 
frequency with which friends and family members engaged in behaviors that support or 
undermine healthy eating and physical activity in the past month. Quality of group and 
friend/family interactions will be assessed with the Quality of Interactions measure.  
Weight stigma will be assessed using the Weight Self -stigma Measure. A demographic 
questionnaire will also be administered to participants at the baseline assessment. The 
Power of Food Scale will be used to assess individual reactions to food in their 
environment. The food environment will be assessed with Grocery Shopping and Home 
Food  Environment  Items. Food  Addiction  will be assessed  using  the Modified  Yale Food 
Addiction Scale 2.0 (mYFAS 2.0). Utilization of stimulus control strategies will be  
assessed with the Measure of Stimulus Control. Satisfaction with the FitLink program 
will be assessed with the Treatment Acceptability Questionnaire.  
Moderators  
Relationship quality will be measured with items adapted from the client version of the 
Workin g Alliance  Inventory -Bond  Subscale.  Ratings will  be completed  separately  for the 
relationship with the coach, the LM group, and the designated friend/family support  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  12 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 person, with adaptation in wording as needed, yielding scores for each party. M ost 
mediators and the moderator are only measurable once treatment has begun (e.g., 
coaching quality, social comparison with the LM group, and quality of the relationship 
with the  group cannot  be rated at  pretreatment). Therefore, the “baseline”  administra tion 
of such variables  will occur  at month  3 of treatment, with  analyses  controlling  for weight 
loss achieved from months 0 -3 as appropriate.  
Qualitative  data 
Semi -structured interviews (n = 30) will be conducted at post -treatment to gather 
qualitative information about index participant experiences. 30 of the 320 index 
participants  will be randomly  selected  with representation  across  conditions,  age, sex, and 
race/ethnicity; additional interviews will be conducted if saturation is not reache d. 
Interviews  will last 45-60 minutes  and will be digitally  recorded  and transcribed 
verbatim.  
Optional Ecological Momentary Assessment - Wave 1 Only  
 
Wave 1 participants only will have the opportunity to take part in a five -day 
ecological momentary assessment (EMA)  to learn more about participants’ 
thoughts and feelings about self -monitoring their weight , their weight loss 
trajectory  in the program so far , and whether these re sponses differ by treatment 
condition (i.e., based on which sources of support they have been sharing their self -
monitoring data with).  Participants will be paid an additional $ 75 for completing 
this optional assessment and will lose $3 for every survey th ey do not complete.  
 
Wave 1 participants will be verbally informed about the opportunity to complete 
the optional additional assessment by their coaches. All Wave 1 participants will be 
emailed a revised informed consent through RedCap that includes the i nformation 
on this additional assessment. All participants will digitally read and submit and 
revised informed consent. After, they will indicate whether or not they would like 
to opt -in to the study. Those who do not want to participate will exit the RedC ap 
survey. Those who do want to participate will be asked to complete a 5 -minute 
survey that asks about their overall satisfaction with weight loss so far, their lowest 
weight during the program, and their current weight loss goals (maintain, lose a 
little more, lose a lot).  
 
EMA assessment  will last five days. Participants will complete  three  assessments 
per day : 1) immediately upon waking , 2) immediately after self -weighing (or if 
they do not self-weigh, at 10:00 am), and 3) at the end of the day (9:00 pm ). The 
morning survey  will ask participants to respond to report their state self -
compassion (3 items), state distress tolerance (1 item), affect ( 5 items) , motivation 
for weight control  (1 item) , body -related shame  (1 item) , and guilt  about weight 
control behaviors (1 item) . The post-weighing survey  will ask participants to 
respond to the same questions as the morning survey, as well as a qualitative 
question  (1 item) . Participants will be asked to type a couple sentences in response 
to the question “Please explain your immedi ate thoughts and feelings about your 
weigh -in today .” Participants who did not weigh in will instead be asked to “Please 
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  13 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 explain your thoughts and feelings about your weight loss progress right now.”  On 
the final day of the surveys, the post -weighing surve y will include an additional 
open -ended question (1 item) asking participants who skipped any weigh -ins 
during the period to explain why they chose not to  weigh  those days.  At the end of -
day survey , participants will be asked to report their expectations f or their weight 
control trajectory based on their behavior that day (1 item), their expectations for 
whether the following day’s weigh -in would show weight gain , maintenance , or 
loss (1 item), and how they expect to feel about the next day’s  weigh -in (1 it em). 
They will also report their perceived calorie intake at the end of the day  (1 item) . 
Finally, participants  will also be asked to respond an open -ended item: “Please 
explain your thoughts and feelings about your weight loss progress right now.”  (1 
item).  
 
Training  and Supervision  
Coaches will have a minimum of masters -level training in psychology or a related field 
and will have experience conducting LM. We anticipate that many of the coaches will be 
existing  members  of the research  staff who provide  intervention  for other  research  studies 
within the WELL Center. If needed, we will hire additional coaches for this study by 
advertising the position. Coaches are not participants. Coaches will be balanced across 
conditions. Initial training, as we ll as quarterly retraining to prevent drift, will include  
role plays of session content. Weekly supervision will be conducted. Using a structured 
rubric, 15% of each coach’s group sessions, phone calls, and text messages will be rated 
for fidelity to the t reatment protocol. The rubric will take into account treatment integrity 
(delivering treatment as intended) and differentiation (the intended separation of study 
arms).  Any coach  deviations  from  the protocol  (i.e., fidelity  rated  at <90%)  will be tagged 
during review and addressed in supervision and retraining sessions.  
 
Intervention  and Assessment:  Friends/Family  Members  
 
Friends/family members are asked to attend a webinar (held in Month 1 of the program, 
over Zoom), where they will learn how to provide support for the index participant’s 
lifestyle modification. Following the workshop, they will receive monthly text messages 
for a period of 2 years (24 message exchanges in total) that will prompt them to provide 
support to the index participant. D epending on which condition the index participant is 
assigned to, the messages may include information about the index participant’s food 
intake,  exercise,  and weight  data.  Friends/family  member  also will be asked  to participate 
in three  booster  zoom  meeti ngs(one  at month  6, one at month  12, and  one at month  18) to 
receive additional guidance and tips about how to provide support.  
 
Friends/family  members  are not asked  to complete  any assessment  tasks  or measures.  
 
a) Data  and Specimen  Banking  
Does  not apply.  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  14 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 b) Data  Management  
Data  Collection,  Storage,  and Quality  Control  
This study will use methods that have been effective in previous studies in this lab to 
ensure data security and quality control. Dr. Butryn will administer a data collection and 
storage training to all project staff, who must demonstrate competence in all tasks (e.g., 
phone screening, informed consent, etc.) before commencing their responsibilities. Staff 
will be assigned to review assessment data for accuracy and completion, and to pursue 
missing data by re -contacting participants. Specialized validity tools (e.g., customized 
spreadsheets and data entry software) will be used to maximize data accuracy. Double - 
entry will be utilized where appropriate. To maximize efficiency, d ata will be 
electronically  captured and  managed  through  REDCap,  a secure  application that  has been 
successfully used by this team  on several  projects. For the optional ecological 
momentary assessment  for Wave 1 participants , data will be collected and mana ged 
through Ethica, a secure experience sampling platform. Study messages will  be sent 
through a secure, web -based portal to an app on your phone. Index Participants and 
friends/family members  will be assigned a  username  and password  to receive  these  
messages.  Their  first name, user name, phone number, and email address will be stored 
on the web -based portal. Information from the participant’s scale, Fitbit, and food record 
will be collected through the Fitbit API, and also stored on the study web -based portal. 
The study portal will  be accessed  only by authorized  study  staff.  The development  team  
for the  web portal has been approved by Drexel’s Information Security Office. The 
development team has agreed to abide by Drexel’s Application Development Stan dards 
under the Security of Information and Networked Systems policy, encrypt at rest and in 
motion, and abide by privacy by design, security by design, and responsible computing 
principles. As part of participation, participants will be provided with info rmational 
handouts that correspond to the skills taught in that week’s session. Participants will 
access these handouts in Google  Classroom  There  will be no personal, identifying, or 
health information shared in any of these documents. Other features of Go ogle 
Classroom, such as discussion boards, will not be used; participants will simply be using 
Google Classroom as a user -friendly place to locate these handouts. All paper -based data 
will be stored in a locked filing cabinet, and all  electronic  data will be password 
protected and stored on secure computer servers. On -site and off -site backup storage will 
be utilized to protect against loss. All data and informed consent forms will be stored for 
three years following completion of the study, in accordance w ith Drexel policy. After 
this time, the data will be destroyed.  
 
Statistical  Analysis  
Descriptive statistics and exploratory graphing will be generated for all variables. Data 
summaries will be produced for the full sample and by condition. Continuous vari ables 
will be transformed  if necessary.  Baseline  characteristics  will be compared  for each ON 
versus OFF contrast, as well as for each of the 8 study arms, using ANOVAs for 
continuous variables and a chi -square tests for categorical variables. Key baseline 
variables  that differ  by condition  will be considered  for use as covariates  in the analyse s 
described  below.  Likelihood -based  estimation  methods  and multiple  imputation  models 
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  15 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 will be used to handle missing data.  
Aim 1 
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  16 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 This study  will evaluate  the hypotheses  that long-term weight  loss (primary  outcome)  and 
PA and calorie intake (secondary outcomes) will be superior in Coach Share ON vs.  
OFF; in Group Share ON vs. OFF; and in Friend/Family Share ON vs. OFF. We will 
model the pattern of change in weight over time using multilevel models. The first level 
will model individual  weight loss over time with baseline as time 0. At the second level, 
the individual  intercept  and slope  will be entered  as outcomes  with each of the three  types 
of data sharing examined separately as a predictor. The cross -level interaction between 
time an d type of data sharing (e.g., Coach Share ON vs. OFF) will be used to determine 
the effect of the partnership factor on the pattern of change in weight. Restricted 
maximum likelihood will be used to estimate model parameters and to test the 
significance of  random effects. Both linear and higher -order time effects will be 
examined. Similar multilevel models will separately examine the effect of each of the 
three partnerships on PA and calorie intake. As an exploratory aim, we also will test the 
interaction e ffects of the three data sharing partnerships by adding higher -order 
interaction terms to the aforementioned multilevel models.  
Aim 2 
Analyses will determine if change in potential mediators from baseline to 12 months 
predict weight loss at 24 months. Anal yses will determine whether temporally precedent 
changes in hypothesized mediators explain the effect of condition on weight loss, with 
the expectation that the Share ON participants will maintain a high level of the proposed 
mediator  from  baseline to  12 months,  while  decreases  in that variable  will be observed  in 
Share OFF. Coach Share, Group Share, and Friend/Family Share will each be examined 
separately, with possible mediators including perceived supportive accountability, 
motivation, self-regulation, and self -monitoring. In addition, coaching quality will be 
examined as a mediator for Coach Share ON vs. OFF, social comparison will be 
examined as a mediator for Group Share ON vs. OFF, and perceived social support will 
be examined as a m ediator for Friend/Family Share ON vs. OFF. We will use the 
mediation model outlined by Preacher and Hayes to estimate the indirect effect of each 
hypothesized mediator individually. The bias -corrected bootstrap test will be applied to 
test the significanc e of the indirect effect, which allows for the most robust and accurate 
interpretation  of the mediating  effects.  Should  these  mediation  analyses  prove  promising, 
we will explore how the entire pattern of changes in the mediators from baseline to later 
time periods influences the corresponding pattern of weight loss over time using parallel 
process growth models.  
Aim 3 
To test if intervention  effects  depend  on quality  of the relationship  with the coach,  group 
members, or friend/family member, relationship qu ality will be examined as a potential 
moderator by adding it to the multilevel model described in Aim 1 and determining 
whether the effect of condition on change in weight depends on this variable.  
Relationship  quality  will be examined  at baseline, and  also will be examined  separately at 
6 and 12 months (controlling for weight loss up to that point). Statistically significant 
interactions  will be interpreted  by plotting  simple  regression  lines for high and low values 
of this variable. To an alyze qualitative data, transcribed interviews will be coded for 
thematic analysis. Coding steps will include the development of preliminary themes,  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  17 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 additional  codes  based  on themes  that arise,  non-substantive  codes,  and detailed  codes  for 
analysis of specific topics. We will create a coding dictionary based on analysis of the 
first five transcripts, and every fifth subsequent transcript will be double -coded in order  
to assess interrater reliability. If there is <90% agreement in coding, we will  re-assess 
domains to identify areas in which different labeling may have been used for similar 
ideas.  
Power analyses suggest that a sample size of 238 is required for 80% power with the 
significant  level  of 0.05 and four assessment  points, assuming  the ratio of the variability 
of level -1 coefficient to the variability of level -1 residual is at least one. The study is 
adequately powered with the proposed sample size of 320 with up to 25% attrition.  
 
c) Withdrawal  of Subjects  
Participants will be  withdrawn from the research without their consent if there is a 
change  in the  subject’s  medical  condition,  if all or part of the study  is discontinued  for 
any reason by the sponsor, investigator, university authorities, or government 
agencies, new informa tion is available to the investigator, or there are harmful 
unforeseen reactions experienced by the participant or other participants in the study. 
Participants will be notified about any new information that may affect their health, 
welfare, or choice to stay in the research.  
If the friend/family member identified by the index participant does not consent to 
participate in the study, the index participant will be asked to identify another 
friend/family member. If they cannot find another friend/family memb er who would 
be willing to consent to the study (which is an inclusion criteria), then the index 
participant  will be deemed ineligible  and provided  with relevant  weight  loss referrals.  
Index participants and friends/family members may withdraw from the study at any 
time, and it will not be held against them. If an index participant or friend/family 
member stops being involved in the research, already collected data may not be 
removed from the study database. Any fee the index participant or friend/family  
member may  be paid will be determined  by the amount  of time they spend in  the trial 
and, if they do not complete the study, the reason for leaving the study early.  
If termination  is necessary,  the project  coordinator  will contact  the index  participant 
or friend/family member immediately to discuss the grounds for their termination.  
2) Risks  to Subjects  
Potential  risks  to participants  are considered  minimal.  Participants  will be informed  of 
all potential risks when providing consent and assent b efore study participation.  
However,  key personnel  will address  any discomfort  or concerns  expressed  by the 
participant in regard to  any aspect of the study if they do occur. If participants 
indicate any substantial distress, then risk assessment will occur and appropriate 
referrals for treatment will be provided as necessary . 
One risk of the program is  that as  index  participants  lose weight,  they may  need  to take 
less of  any medications they  are on, or they  may develop  gallstones.  Index  participants 
taking any medication will be instructed to carefully coordinate the oversight of these  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  18 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 medications with their primary care ph ysicians to make any necessary adjustments of 
dosage  necessary if weight  loss occurs. Gallstones can result  if weight  is lost  too quickly, 
but our study is designed to help individuals lose weight at only approximately 1 -2 
pounds per  week.  When  using  exercise  equipment,  however  briefly, there  is always a  risk 
for injury if adequate precautions are not taken. In addition, PA may be uncomfortable to 
those index participants who are inactive or overweight, or may cause exacerbation of 
certain  medical  cond itions.  However,  this is unlikely  given  the moderate  recommendation 
(walking). An Adverse Event Questionnaire will be administered to all participants at 6, 
12, and 24 months. This questionnaire will collect information about any medical events 
that have o ccurred during the course of the program. If an adverse event is reported and 
more information is necessary, an interview will be conducted with the participant to 
collect the additional information.  This information will then be reported to NIH.  
Psycholog ical risks include reduced self -esteem in persons who fail to lose weight or 
regain weight, a sense of shame if not meeting program goals, or fellow program 
members or friends/family making critical remarks about an individual’s weight or LM 
habits.  Howeve r, several  precautions  will be taken  to guard  against  psychological  risks  to 
participants.  A methodical  process  of treatment  development  will be carried  out to ensure 
that participant needs are met in a sensitive, caring, and culturally competent way. All 
clinicians will have had prior training and experience delivering LM programs. In 
addition, clinicians will receive specialized training in the delivery of the intervention 
programs, in particular how to monitor, respond to, and prevent participant feelings of 
shame or embarrassment. Dr. Butryn will take responsibility for ensuring that adequate 
training and supervision are provided, with assistance from the stud y co-investigators.  
There also is a risk that group members or the designated friend/family member could 
share information about that index participant outside of the program. For both index 
participants and friends/family members, there is the risk that h aving the friend/family 
member serve in a support role could introduce a strain in the relationship. In all 
conditions  in which  any form  of data sharing  occurs, the  coach  will regularly  discuss  with 
participants any concerns they have about data sharing, s o that problem can be addressed 
(e.g., if a data sharing friend/family member is making critical remarks, the index 
participant can be coached how to address this with that party, or that party can be 
replaced with a different friend/family member for data  sharing). Coaches will be given 
training in how to assess any possible iatrogenic effects of data sharing that are disclosed 
by index participants (e.g., relationship strain with the data sharing partner), and coaches 
will log all such reports in a REDCap  field to allow for trial monitoring and reporting.  
Several steps will be taken to protect index participant confidentiality in the context of 
group -based treatment. At the first group meeting the importance of confidentiality will 
be discussed and concret e guidelines will be provided regarding permissible versus 
inappropriate  disclosure  of information  about  group -based  treatment  to others,  including 
via social media (e.g., when discussing this LM program with other parties, the focus 
should be limited to o ne’s one experience, not what is shared by others in group; names 
and identifying details of other index participants should never be disclosed to others; 
etc.). To maximize adherence to these guidelines, they will be presented in a way that 
elicits feedba ck from the group (so that group members have a sense of ownership  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  19 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 regarding these norms) and index participants will be encouraged to publicly commit in 
group to upholding these standards of confidentiality. Index participants will be notified  
that failure  to respect  the confidentiality  of other  group  members  is grounds  for dismissal 
from the program. Similar training about confidentiality will be conducted with 
designated friends/family members who participate in the program to support an inde x 
participant’s LM efforts.  
 
3) Potential  Benefits  to Subjects  
Participants may or may not benefit directly from this study. It is possible that the 
intervention may promote healthy behaviors, such as increasing physical activity and 
reducing  caloric  consumption,  which  may benefit  index  participants  psychologically  and 
medically. Also, the prescribed behavioral changes for index participants are known to 
promote improved quality of life and positive health outcomes. Participants in LM 
programs  typicall y report  that mood  and quality  of life also improve  during  the course  of 
the program.  
 
4) Privacy  and Confidentiality  
This study  will not use nor disclose  Protected  Health  Information  (PHI).  
As per policy of the IRB, all participant data, including the fact of their participation, 
will be treated as confidential and will be safeguarded according to the practices 
described above. All study staff will be trained regarding the importance of 
confidentiality,  and all  possible  efforts  to protect  participant  privacy  will be observed. 
Participant materials will be labeled with a study identification number rather than 
personally -identifiable information (e.g., name). All data will be stored in password - 
protected files on secure servers that are only accessible t o identified study staff.  
After being stripped of identifiable information, written materials from participants 
will be stored  in locked  filing  cabinets.  Drexel  University  Institutional  Review  Board 
and HIPAA guidelines will be observed.  
Privacy  and confid entiality  will be explained to  participants  during the  consent  process,  and 
questions about privacy will be answered as needed throughout the study. Participants 
will be reminded that they can decline to answer person questions as appropriate (e.g., 
during  assessments). They also will be provided with contact information for the 
principal  investigator and  community mental  health  resources,  to be used in the  event  of 
unforeseen distress.  
Dr. Butryn will  administer a  data collection and storage  training to all  project  staff, 
who must demonstrate competence in all tasks (e.g., phone screening, informed 
consent, etc.) before commencing their responsibilities. Staff will be assigned to 
review  assessment  data for accuracy  and completion,  and to pursu e missing  data by 
re-contacting participants. Specialized validity tools (e.g., customized spreadsheets 
and data entry  software)  will be used to maximize  data accuracy.  Double -entry  will 
be utilized where appropriate. To maximize efficiency, data will be e lectronically 
managed through  REDCap,  a secure  application  that has been  successfully  used by 
this team on several projects. All paper -based data will be stored in a locked filing  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  20 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 cabinet,  and all electronic  data will be password  protected and  stored  on secure 
computer  servers.  On-site and off-site backup  storage  will be utilized to  protect 
against loss.  
All data given to the statistician, as well as given to the DSMP -identified security 
officer,  will be masked  and, therefore,  will contain  no identifying  information,  except 
as required when reporting adverse events. No identifying information will be 
contained within study databases. All research data will be kept separate from 
identifiers and linked with a participant number. Only Dr. Butryn and her research 
coordinator will have access to the file linking names and participant numbers, and 
this file will be stored in their locked offices.  
5) Economic  Burden  to Subjects  
This research  includes  free assistance  with developing  healthy  eating  and physical 
activity and use of a commonly used digital self -monitoring device and wireless 
scale. Index participants will be financially compensated for their time spent in 
assessments . 
 
Index  participants  and friend/family  members  are required  to have  access  to a 
smartphone  and data plan for using  the study app.  Financial  assistance  will be 
provided as needed for this technology or for text message costs.  
 
6) Subject  Compensation  
Index  participants  can earn up to $140  for participating  in this study,  contingent  upon  the 
completion of all assessment assignments.  
 
Index participants will be paid $40 for completing the 6 -month assessment, $50 for 
completing  the 12-month  assessment  (mid-treatment),  and $50 for completing  the 24- 
month (post -treatment) assessment. Compensation is contingent upon participants 
completing assigned study tasks.   
 
Wave 1 participants who volunteer to complete the optional ecological momentary 
assessment study  will receive an additional $ 75, making the ir total compensation $ 215.  
 
The selected  friend/family  member  involved  in the study  intervention  will be 
compensated $50 upon completion of their webinar attendance.  
 
Payment will be provided for index participants and friend/family members as an e-gift 
card from Amazon or through direct ACH payments to the participant’s bank 
account.  ACH is a  very common,  secure  and fast electronic  payment  method  used by 
all major  banks.  The use of ACH  as a payment  option  allows  for remote  payment  and 
helps us pro tect the privacy and safety of the participants and the research staff. To 
use this form of payment, we will provide JPMorgan Chase Bank the participant’s 
study ID, name, and email or phone number. Chase will then send the participant an 
invitation to rece ive payment either as an email or a text message. Once the 
participant accepts the invitation, the funds will be deposited to their bank  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  21 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 account. Drexel University and the research team do not have any access to the 
participant’s  account  information  and are not directly  involved  in the  disbursement  of 
the funds.  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  22 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 If participants cannot or do not want to receive a direct, electronic payment nor an e -gift 
card, they will have the option of receiving a check from Drexel University. This option 
takes  several weeks to process, requires the participant to complete a federal W9 form 
and requires disclosing their name and social security number to Drexel’s Accounts 
Payable  department.  They  will also need to disclose  their name  and address  to JPMorgan 
Chase Bank, who would be the distributor of the check.  
 
7) Consent  Process  
The consent  process  will follow  the IRB recommended “Investigator  Guidance:  Informed 
Consent  (HRP -802)”  document.  Index  participants  will be told  that the purpose  of the 
study  is to test new approaches  to supporting  long-term behavior change,  specifically, 
that this study will test whether using coaches, program peers, or family/friends as 
sources of support and accountability can improve long -term weight loss. They will 
be told participation is voluntary and they can withdraw from the study at any time.  
Participants will be sent a copy of the screening consent before the phone screen. 
They will be prompted to ask any questions and will be assessed for comprehension. 
After  reviewing  the form  and clarifying  any confusion,  signatures  will be collected.  If 
the participant chooses not to sign the screening consent, the phone screen will not 
continue.  
At the end of the clinic  visit, each index participant will  be given a  copy of the  full study 
consent  form.  Participants  will then review  the consent  form  ahead  of their Session  0. 
At Session 0, a staff member will review the consent in detail and the index 
participant will digitally sign and return it if.  
Full eligibility will not be determined until following the study visit. Index participants 
will be explicitly informed that their eligibility is still not final at  the conclusion of 
the study visit. There may be some occasions on which it is more subjective wh ether  
a prospective participant meets the inclusion or exclusion criteria (e.g., psychiatric 
condition) and so eligibility cannot be confirmed immediately during the study visit. 
Throughout the enrollment process, we will hold consensus meetings where thes e 
types of enrollment decisions and questions will be reviewed by staff and 
investigators. We cannot inform index participants of their final eligibility until after 
these  meetings  are held and criteria  are discussed.  Index  participants  will be contacted 
after the visit to  confirm  whether  they are enrolled. We  do expect  that a small  number 
of index participants will be deemed ineligible after the consensus meeting. We will 
make a phone call to these participants and provide relevant weight loss referrals.  
 
Wave 1 participants who are invited to participate in the optional ecological momentary 
assessment will b e sent an electronic version of the informed consent form to 
digitally sign and return. Changes to the original informed consent will be clearly 
highli ghted.  
Dr. Butryn will provide several hours of training to familiarize study staff with the 
process of properly obtaining informed consent. Before signatures are collected, 
participants  will be asked  the following  questions  to assess  their understanding  of the 
risks and benefits of participation:  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  23 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 - What  are we going  to ask you to do as part of this study?  
- What  time commitment  will the study  require?  
- What  are the main  risks  and benefits  of participating?  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  24 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 Friend/family members who have been selected by index participants will be sent an 
email  from  the research team  with study  details  and a  link to provide  consent  digitally 
and to complete self -report measures. The friend/family member will be given the 
opportunity to sign up for a s tudy visit with study staff if they have additional 
questions. This session will give adequate time for friends/family members to 
understand the study and ask any questions.  
 
8) Process  to Document  Consent  in Writing  
We will be following “INVESTIGATOR  GUIDANCE:  Informed  Consent  (HRP - 
802).” Fitlink Informed Screening Consent Form will be sent out to index 
participants  prior to  scheduled  phone  screen  with Fitlink  screeners.  If participants 
do not complete the Informed Screening Consent Form  before scheduled phone 
screen, screeners will guide participants to read the consent form. They will then 
be asked to sign the screening consent via a REDCap survey and encouraged to 
contact the PI at any time if they have any questions or concerns.  
 
The Index Participant Informed Consent Form will be provided to participants 
after the clinic visit is complete. The participant will review it ahead of their 
Session 0. At Session 0 participants will have time to ask any questions that they 
may have. They  will then sign the  form  via an online  REDCap  survey  and submit. 
Participants will be encouraged to contact the PI at any time if they have any 
questions or concerns.  
 
Friends/family members will be provided with a digital consent form before they 
begin  any self-report  measures.  After  friends/family  read the consent,  they will be 
asked if they have any questions regarding the research and a member of the 
research team  will be available to read through the consent  and answer questions. 
They will then be asked to sign the consent and encouraged to contact the PI at 
any time if they have any questions or concerns.  
 
9) Vulnerable  Populations  
Does  not apply.  
 
10) Multi -Site Human  Research  
Does  not apply.  
 
11) Sharing  of Results  or Incidental  Findings  with  Subjects  
Findi ngs will be disseminated to the research and practice communities through 
presentations  at professional  conferences  and publication  of results  in peer-reviewed 
journals. We will register our clinical trial at ClinicalTrials.gov before subject 
recruitment a nd ensure that summary results data are submitted there in a timely 
fashion  (e.g.,  participant  flow,  baseline  characteristics,  outcome  measures,  statistical 
analyses, data on adverse events). Our informed consent documents will include 
specific statements related to posting information and results at ClinicalTrials.gov.  
Template  Version  Date:  December  11, 2020  – Page  25 
Approved on 14-JUN -2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13 -JUN -2099   
 Consent forms will also explain that all data will be de -identified prior to the 
registration of results in order to protect participant privacy and confidentiality. 
Drexel University has an internal policy in place to ensure that clinical trial 
registration  and results  reporting  occur  in compliance  with NIH policy  requirements. 
We will assume full responsibility for following the appropriate requirements and 
timelines.  
 
12) Research  Conducted  in a Foreign  Country  
Does  not apply  
13) Community -Based  Participatory  Research  
Does  not apply  
Research  Subject  Consent  Form  
Template  Version 01022020 (Revised March  11, 2020– Page  1 APPROVED   
Human Research Protection  
Protocol : 2103008421A017 
Approval  Date: 12/05202 2 
  
 Title:  Sharing Digital Self-Monitoring Data with Others  to Enhance Long Term  Weight Loss:  A 
Randomized  Trial  using a Factorial  Design  
 
Protocol Number.:  2103008421  
 
Sponsor:  National  Institutes  of Health  
 
Investigator: Dr. Meghan Butryn, PhD 3141  
Chestnut St. Stratton 
Hall 119 Philadelphia, 
PA, 19104  
mlb34@drexel.edu  
 
Daytime Phone  Number:  (570)391-4641 
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099
Research  Subject  Consent  Form  
Template  Version 01022020 (Revised March  11, 2020– Page  2 APPROVED   
Human Research Protection  
Protocol : 2103008421A017 
Approval  Date: 12/05202 2 
  
 Consent  to Take  Part  in a Research  Study  
You are being invited to  take part in a research  study. A person who takes  part in a research 
study is called a research subject, or research participant.  
 
Concise  Summary of  Key Information:  
● This research is being done to test new approaches to supporting long-term behavior 
change. Specifically, this study will test whether using coaches, program peers, or family/friends  as sources  of support and accountability  can improve long- term weight 
loss. 
● Your consent and participation  in this  study is completely  voluntary.  
● Participants will be enrolled in the study for a total of 2 years (24 months), with assessments at baseline (0 months), 3 months, 6 months, mid-treatment  (12 months), and 
post treatment (24 months). 
● Every day for the full two years, you will use a smart scale to weigh yourself, wear a 
physical activity  tracker,  and track  your meals on a food record  smartphone application. 
● For the first 3 months of your participation  in the study, you will attend  weekly  remote 
group- based behavioral weight loss sessions. 
● For months 4-24, you will: 
o Attend  a group- based  behavioral  weight loss session  online via Zoom 
videoconferencing software once every 3 months, and 
o Participate in  a brief,  individual phone call with a coach  once a month.  
● Every  month, you will exchange text  messages  concerning  your progress in the program 
with a coach, with fellow group members, and with a friend/family member. 
● Depending on your random condition assignment your coach,  fellow  group members, 
and/or your friend/family member may have real- time access to the data gathered by 
your smart scale, physical activity tracker, and food record app to inform their text 
messages.  
 
● Study messages  will be sent through a secure,  web-based  portal to  an app on your phone. 
You will be assigned a username and password to receive these messages. Information 
from  your scale, Fitbit, and  food record  will be collected  through the Fitbit API, and also 
stored on the study web-based portal. The study portal will be accessed only by authorized study staff. 
● We cannot promise any b
 enefits  to you or others from  your taking part in this  research. 
However, possible  benefits include  weight loss as the  behavioral weight loss treatment 
employed in this study has much scientific support. 
● Participation  in the study may involve unforeseen  risks.  If unforeseen  risks  are seen,  they 
will be reported to the Drexel Office of Human Protection Office. If any events occur that might be related to the treatment, you should bring them to the attention of your 
personal physician. 
● If you do not wish  to take part in this  research,  we can  provide you with a list of referrals 
for other weight loss programs in the area or you can talk to your doctor. 
● You will only be responsible for any smartphone data use incurred  from  using the 
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099
Research  Subject  Consent  Form  
Template  Version 01022020 (Revised March  11, 2020– Page  3 APPROVED   
Human Research Protection  
Protocol : 2103008421A017 
Approval  Date: 12/05202 2 
  
 program app. 
You can receive a total compensation of $140 for completion of all assessments. 
Contingent upon completing all assignments, you will receive $40 for 6- months, $50 
mid-treatment  (12 months), and $50 for post- treatment  (24 months). Payment  will be in 
the form of e -gift cards (Target or Amazon), direct ACH payments, or by check. 
 
What  should  I know  about  this research?  
 
● Someone will explain  this research  to you. 
● This form  sums up that explanation.  
● Taking part in this research  is voluntary. Whether  you take part is up to you. 
● You can choose not to take part. There will be no penalty  or loss of benefits to which 
you are otherwise entitled.  
● You can agree to  take part and later  change your mind. There will be no penalty  or loss 
of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. 
● If you don’t understand, ask  questions.  
● Ask all the questions you want  before you decide.  
 
Why is this research  being  done?  
The purpose of this research  is to test new approaches  to supporting long- term behavior change. 
Specifically, this study will test whether using coaches, program peers, or family/friends as 
sources of support and accountability can improve long- term weight loss.  
 
320 participants  and 320 friends  and/or family members  of the participants  will take part in this 
research.  
 
 
How  long will I be in this research?  
We expect  that your taking part in this research  will last  2 years (24  months).  
 
What  happens  to me if I agree  to take  part in  this research?  
 
If you choose to participate in this research study, you will be given a smart scale, physical 
activity tracker, and access to a food recording smartphone app. You will use these digital data 
trackers  to weigh  yourself, track  your physical activity,  and record all  of your meals  and snacks 
daily for the duration of the study (24 months). Due to study requirements, you may only be 
eligible if you own a smartphone. 
For the first three months, you will attend and participate in weekly, remote group- based 
behavioral weight loss treatment  sessions (90 minutes)  through the Zoom videoconferencing 
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099
Research  Subject  Consent  Form  
Template  Version 01022020 (Revised March  11, 2020– Page  4 APPROVED   
Human Research Protection  
Protocol : 2103008421A017 
Approval  Date: 12/05202 2 
  
 platform. Each group will be led by a Masters- level coach, who will teach you skills related 
to losing weight and maintaining that weight loss in the long term. For the rest of the study, 
groups will continue to be held online via Zoom videoconferencing, and will take place  once 
every three months. You also will participate in brief (15 minutes), individual phone calls 
with your coach once per month. During these phone calls, your coach will check in about 
your progress towards your goals, review  core behavioral  skills  that are most relevant  to you, 
and co llaboratively set goals with you for the next month. Lastly, you will exchange text 
messages monthly with your coach; with 3-4 fellow members of your group; and with a designated friend/family member. 
 
You will be randomly placed in 1 of 8 conditions. Your study condition determines which 
components of the intervention  you will receive.  There are 3 components, and  they differ by the 
party with whom your weight, physical activity, and food record data will be shared with: your 
coach, a small group of your fellow group members, and your friend/family member. Neither 
you nor the study investigator will choose which components you receive or your study 
condition.  
Every  participant  will take part in 20 group sessions, 14  coach  calls,  and monthly text e xchanges 
with a coach, with a small group of fellow group members, and with a friend/family member. 
Depending on your study condition, your coach, small group of fellow group members, and/or 
your friend/family member  will have access  to the data collected  by your scale,  physical activity 
tracker, and food record app (i.e. your weight, minutes of physical activity, and caloric intake). 
They will use this information to inform the text exchanges you have monthly. If they do not 
have access to your digital data, you will still engage in the text exchanges with each of them. Study messages will be sent through a secure, web-based portal to an app on your phone. You 
will be assigned a username and password to receive these messages. Your first name, use r 
name, phone number, and email address will be stored on the web-based portal. Information 
from  your scale, Fitbit, and  food record  will be collected  through the Fitbit API, and also stored 
on the study web-based  portal.  The study portal will be  accessed  only by authorized  study staff. 
The development team for the web portal has been approved by Drexel’s Information Security Office. The development team has agreed to abide by Drexel’s Application Development 
Standards under the Security  of Information and Networked  Systems  policy, encrypt at rest and 
in motion, and abide by privacy by design, security by design, and responsible computing 
principles. As part of participation,  participants  will be provided with informational handouts that 
correspond to the skills taught in that week’s session. Participants will access these handouts in 
Google Classroom. There will be no personal, identifying, or health information shared in any of these documents. Other  features  of Google Classroom such as discussion boards will not be used; 
participants will simply be using Google Classroom as a user -friendly place to locate these 
handouts.  
Assessments will be completed at the beginning of treatment (0 months), 3 months after 
treatment  begins, 6 months after treatment begins, at the  mid-point of treatment  (12 months), and 
at the end of treatment (24 months). At this time, you will be asked to complete a set of surveys 
and to track weight, physical activity, and food intake for 7 days. 
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099
Research  Subject  Consent  Form  
Template  Version 01022020 (Revised March  11, 2020– Page  5 APPROVED   
Human Research Protection  
Protocol : 2103008421A017 
Approval  Date: 12/05202 2 
  
 The exception is  month 3 assessment , where you will only be asked to complete a limited battery 
of self -report measures and 7 days of self-weighing. During your final assessment, you may be 
randomly chosen to participate in a 45-60 minute semi- structured interview to provi de feedback 
about the study. 
 
What  are my responsibilities  if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this research,  you will be responsible to: 
● Attend  all required  study visits  and assessments.  
● Every  day, you will: 
○ Weigh  yourself using the smart  scale  you were  given,  
○ Wear  the physical activity  tracker  
○ Record  your food intake using the designated  program smartphone application.  
● Attend  and participate in  all group behavioral  weight  loss sessions  
● Participate  in all phone calls with  your coach.  
● Read  and participate  in all text message exchanges  between  you and your coach,  you 
and your small group of fellow group members, and you and your friend/family 
member.  
● Contact  the investigator if any complications  arise 
 
Could  being  in this research  hurt  me? 
Participation in this research study includes minimal risk. During this study, you will be 
undergoing behavioral weight loss treatment with prescriptions of gradual exercise increase 
and decreased caloric intake with the goal of losing approximately 1-2 pounds per week. If 
you lose a large  amount of weight too quickly, you are at risk of developing gallstones. You 
also may injure yourself when  engaging in physical activity.  Both of these risks  are unlikely 
given the prescribed physical activity of brisk walking. If you are taking any medication, 
you should carefully coordinate the oversight of these medications with your primary care 
physicians to make any necessary adjustments of dosage necessary if weight loss occurs. 
There may also be psychological risks to you such as feelings of shame or embarrassment 
related to eating habits and/or weight, which may be amplified if you are randomly assigned 
to share your digital data with a coach,  small group of group members,  and/or a friend/family 
member. However, your coach will be trained to deliver the program in a way that feels 
positive to you and will be able to address your concerns if they arise. Lastly, there is always 
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099
Research  Subject  Consent  Form  
Template  Version 01022020 (Revised March  11, 2020– Page  6 APPROVED   
Human Research Protection  
Protocol : 2103008421A017 
Approval  Date: 12/05202 2 
  
 a risk for loss of privacy  and confidentiality,  though the research  team  will take many 
precautions to protect against this. 
Participation in  the study may involve unforeseen  risks.  If unforeseen  risks  are seen,  they will be 
reported to the Drexel Office of Regulatory Research Compliance. In addition to these risks, 
taking part in this research may harm you in unknown ways. 
 
Will it  cost me money  to take part in this research?  
This research includes free assistance with developing healthy eating and physical 
activity  and use of a commonly used physical activity  tracker and  Fitbit Aria Air smart 
scale. You will be financially compensated for your time spent in assessments . 
 
You will only be responsible for any smartphone data use incurred from using the program 
app. Financial  assist ance will be provided as needed  for this technology or for text message 
costs.  
 
Will being  in this research  benefit  me? 
We cannot promise any direct benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. 
However, it is possible that  the intervention may promote healthy behaviors, such as increasing 
physical activity  and reducing  caloric consumption, which  may benefit  you psychologically and 
medically. Also, the prescribed behavioral changes are known to promote improved quality of life and positive health  outcomes.  Participants in LM programs such as this one typically  report 
that mood and quality of life also improve during the course of the program. 
 
What  other  choices  do I have  besides taking  part in this research?  
Instead  of being  in this research,  your choices  may include:  
● Other  programs in the area,  for which  we can provide you with a list of referrals.  
● Talking to your doctor about other weight loss options that may be a better  fit for you.  
 
 
What  happens  to the information  collected  for this research?  
Your private information will be shared  with individuals and organizations that conduct or 
watch over this research, including: 
 
● The research  sponsor: National Institutes  of Health  (NIH)  
● People who work  with the research  sponsor(s)  
● Government agencies,  such as the Food and Drug  Administration  or the Department  of 
Health and Human Services  
● The Institutional Review  Board  (IRB)  that reviewed this research  
● Drexel  University  and its affiliates  
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099
Research  Subject  Consent  Form  
Template  Version 01022020 (Revised March  11, 2020– Page  7 APPROVED   
Human Research Protection  
Protocol : 2103008421A017 
Approval  Date: 12/05202 2 
  
 We may publish the results  of this research.  However, we will keep  your name and other 
identifying information confidential. 
 
We protect your information from  disclosure to  others to the extent  required by law. We cannot 
promise complete secrecy.  
Data collected  in this  research might  be de-identified and used for future  research  or distributed 
to another investigator for future research without your consent. 
 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/, as required 
by U.S. Law.  This Web  site will not include information  that can identify  you. At most,  the Web 
site will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web si te at any time.  
 
What  is a Certificate  of Confidentiality?  
This research is  covered  by a Certificate  of Confidentiality from the National  Institutes  of Health. 
A Certificate of Confidentiality helps protect your identifiable information and biological 
samples.  The researchers  with this  Certificate may  not disclose or use information, documents, or 
biospecimens that may identify you in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, 
legislative, or other action, suit, or proceeding, or be used as evidence, for example, if there is a 
court subpoena, unless you have consented for this use. Information, documents, or 
biospecimens protected by this Certificate cannot be disclosed to anyone else who is not connected with the re search except, if there is a federal, state, or local law that requires  
disclosure (such as to report child abuse or communicable diseases but not for federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings, see below); if you have 
consented to the disclosure, including for your medical treatment; or if it is used for other 
scientific research, as allowed by federal regulations protecting research subjects.  
The Certificate  cannot be used to refuse  a request  for informatio n from  personnel of the United 
States federal or state government agency sponsoring the project that is needed for auditing or program evaluation by The National Institutes of Health which is funding this project or for 
information that must be disclosed in order to meet the requirements of the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA). You should understand that a Certificate of Confidentiality does 
not prevent you from voluntarily releasing information about yourself or your involvement in 
this research.  If you want your research information released to an insurer, medical care 
provider, or any other person not connected with the research, you must provide consent to 
allow the researchers to release it.  
The Certificate  of Confidentiality  will not be used to prevent disclosure as required  by federal, 
state, or local law, such as child abuse and neglect, or harm to self or others . 
 
Who  can answer  my questions  about  this research?  
If you have  questions, concerns,  or complaints,  or think this research  has hurt you or made you 
sick, talk to the research team at the phone number listed above on the first page. 
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099
Research  Subject  Consent  Form  
Template  Version 01022020 (Revised March  11, 2020– Page  8 APPROVED   
Human Research Protection  
Protocol : 2103008421A017 
Approval  Date: 12/05202 2 
  
 This research is  being overseen  by an Institutional Review  Board  (“IRB”).  An IRB is a group of 
people who perform independent review of research studies. You may talk to them at (267) 
3592471 or HRPP@drexel.edu if:  
 
● You have questions, concerns,  or complaints  that are not being answered  by the research 
team.  
● You are not getting  answers  from  the research  team.  
● You cannot reach  the research  team.  
● You want  to talk to someone else about the research.  
● You have questions about your rights as  a research  subject.  
 
Can I be removed  from  this research  without  my approval?  
The person in charge of this research  can remove you from  this research  without your approval. 
Possible reasons for removal include: 
● If there  is a change in your medical  condition.  
● If the study is discontinued for any reason  by the sponsor, investigator, university 
authorities, or government agencies. 
● If new information is available to the investigator.  
● If there are harmful  unforeseen  reactions  experienced  by you or other participants  in the 
study.  
We will tell you about any  new information that may affect  your health, welfare,  or choice to 
stay in this research.  
 
What  happens  if I agree  to be in this research, but  I change  my mind  later?  
You can agree to take part in the research  now and  stop at any time.  
Participation in  this study  is voluntary, and  you can refuse  to be in the  study or stop at  any time. 
Any fee you may  be paid will be determined  by the amount  of participation  you completed and, 
if you do not complete the study, the reason for leaving the study early. 
If you stop being in  the research, already  collected  data may not be removed  from the  study 
database.  
 
Will I be paid  for taking part in  this research?  
For taking part in  this research,  you may be paid up to a total of $140 in the form  of e- gift cards 
(Target  or Amazon,  your choice)  or direct  ACH payments to  your bank account. ACH is  a very 
common, secure and fast electronic payment method used by all major banks. The use of ACH 
as a payment option allows for remote payment and helps us protect the privacy and safety of the participants and the research staff. To use this form of payment, we will provide JPMorgan 
Chase Bank your study ID, name, and email or phone number. Chase will then send you an 
invitation to receive p ayment either as an email or a text message. Once you accept the  
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099
Research  Subject  Consent  Form  
Template  Version 01022020 (Revised March  11, 2020– Page  9 APPROVED   
Human Research Protection  
Protocol : 2103008421A017 
Approval  Date: 12/05202 2 
  
 invitation  the funds will be deposited to your bank  account. Drexel  University  and the  research 
team  do not have any  access to  your account  information,  and they are not directly  involved in 
the disbursement of the funds. 
 
The payment is contingent upon completion  of all  assessment  materials  and procedures  at each 
time point, such as surveys and dietary recalls, and is broken down as follows: 
● $40 for completing  the 6-months assessment  
● $50 for completing  the mid-treatment  (12 months) assessment  
● $50 for completing  the post- treatment  (24 months) assessment  
 
If you cannot, or do not want to, receive a direct, electronic payment, you have the option of 
receiving  a check  from  Drexel  University. This option takes  several  weeks  to process,  requires 
you to complete a federal  W9 form and  requires  you to disclose your social  security  number to 
Drexel’s Accounts Payable department. You will also be required to disclose your name and 
address to JPMorgan Chase Bank, who would be the distributor of the check. 
Federal  tax law requires  to you to report  this payment as income to the Internal  Revenue Service 
if you are compensated more than $599.00 (in total) this year for participating in research. You 
may be asked to tell us your social security number or other identifying information (e.g., full name). If payments for this study are more than $599.00, we will report them to the Internal 
Revenue Service and send you a Form  1099- MISC. Th is information  will not be associated  with 
the information  or data you provide for this research. It  will be stored  separately  from  your data, 
it will not be linked in any way, and your identifying information will be destroyed within 1 year of study completion. 
What  else should  I know  about  this research?  
If in your initial assessment, we determine that you do not meet the eligibility for this particular 
study, you have the option to elect  to be screened  for other studies at Drexel  University’s WELL 
Center as well  as to remain in the  WELL Center database for future  studies. Please initial below 
if you are interested in one or both of these options: 
  I elect  to be  screened  for other studies at Drexel  University  WELL  Center  if I am not 
eligible for this study.  
 
 
  I would like to be added to the WELL  Center  database to be contacted  for future studies 
that I might be eligible for.  
 
Signature  Block  
 
Your signature documents your consent to take part in this research.  
 
 
Printed  Name and  Signature of adult subject  capable of consent  Date 
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099
Research  Subject  Consent  Form  
Template  Version 01022020 (Revised March  11, 2020– Page  10 APPROVED   
Human Research Protection  
Protocol : 2103008421A017 
Approval  Date: 12/05202 2 
  
 Printed  name and Signature of person obtaining consent  Date 
Approved on 14-JUN-2021 - Drexel IRB Protocol #: 2103008421 - Expires on: 13-JUN-2099