Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	1	of	50  	
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: 
EL CENTRO: Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options - RCT of 
Usual Chemotherapy Educational Tool s versus Investigati onal Chemotherapy 
Educational Tools 
  Overall Study PI:   
Andrea Enzinger, MD  
andrea_enzinger@dfci.harvard.edu  
617-582-7335 
 Participating Sites under DF/HCC 
IRB: 
 Lead Site & Coordinating Center: Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Co-I: Deborah Schrag, MD, MPH  Deb_schrag@dfci.harvard.edu  
 
Co-I: Richard Leiter, MD Richard_Leiter@DFCI.HARVARD.ED
U 
 
Collaborating Site not under DF/HCC 
IRB: 
University of Massachusetts Boston Site PI: Ana Lindsay, PhD Ana.Lindsay@umb.edu   
 
  
Participating Sites not under DF/HCC 
IRB: 
University of New Mexico Cancer Center Site PI: Heloisa Soares, MD  HSoares@salud.unm.edu  
 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center  Site PI: Muhammed Beg, MD  Muhammad.Beg@UTSouthwestern.edu   
 
Moffitt Cancer Center  Site PI: Sarah Hoffe, MD  Sarah.Hoffe@moffitt.org  
 
Boston Medical Center Site PI: Kevan Hartshorn, MD  Kevan.Hartshorn@bmc.org   
 
Baystate Medical Center  Site PI: Chandravathi Loke, MD  Chandravathi.loke@baystatehealth.org  
 
 
VERSION NUMBER: 
Protocol Version #2 
DATE: 
Initial Protocol Submission: July 19, 2018 
    
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	2	of	50  	
1.0 Objectives*	................................................... ............................................................... .....................	3  
2.0 Background*	................................................... ............................................................... .................	3  
3.0 Inclusion	and	Exclusion	Criteria*	............................. .............................................................	5  
4.0 Study‐Wide	Number 	of	Subjects*	................................ ..........................................................	7  
5.0 Study‐Wide	Recruitment	Methods*	............................... .......................................................	7  
6.0 Multi‐Site	Research*	.......................................... ............................................................... ...........	9 
7.0 Study	Timelines*	.............................................. ............................................................... ..............	9  
8.0 Study	Endpoints*	.............................................. ............................................................... ..........	10 
9.0 Procedures	Involved*	.......................................... ............................................................... .....	13 
10.0 Data	and	Specimen	Banking*	.................................... ...........................................................	26  
11.0 Data	Management*	and 	Confidentiality	.......................... .................................................	27  
12.0 Provisions	to	Monitor	the	Data	to 	Ensure	the	Safety	of	Subjects *	.......................	30  
13.0 Withdrawal	of	Subjects*	....................................... ............................................................... ...	30 
14.0 Risks	to	Subjects*	............................................ ............................................................... ............	30  
15.0 Potential	Benefits 	to	Subjects*	............................... ..............................................................	 31 
16.0 Vulnerable	Populations*	....................................... ............................................................... ...	32 
17.0 Community‐Based	Participatory	Research*	....................... ...........................................	32  
18.0 Sharing	of	Results	with	Subjects*	............................. ..........................................................	32  
19.0 Setting	....................................................... ............................................................... .......................	32  
20.0 Resources	Available	........................................... ............................................................... ........	32 
21.0 Prior	Approvals	............................................... ............................................................... ............	34  
22.0 Recruitment	Methods	........................................... ............................................................... ....	34 
23.0 Local	Number	of	Subjects	...................................... ............................................................... ..	35 
24.0 Provisions	to	Protect	the	Pri vacy	Interests	of	Subjects	....... .....................................	35  
25.0 Compensation	for	Resea rch‐Related	Injury	...................... .............................................	36  
26.0 Economic	Burden	to	Subjects	................................... ............................................................	36  
27.0 Consent	Process	............................................... ............................................................... ...........	36  
28.0 Process	to	Document	Consent	in	Writing	........................ ...............................................	36  
29.0 Drugs	or	Devices	.............................................. ............................................................... ...........	37	
30.0 References..................................................... ............................................................... .................	37	
31.0 Appendices	.................................................... ............................................................... ................	49	
	
	
	
	
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	3	of	50  	
1.0 Objectives 
 
Objective 1: Determine the impact of a multimedia chemotherapy educational intervention on understanding of chemothe rapy risks and benefits among Latinos 
with advanced gastrointestinal cancers and their caregivers.  
	
Objective 2: Determine the impact of the multimedia chemotherapy educational 
intervention on communication satisfacti on and quality of informed decision-
making about palliative chemotherapy among Latinos with advanced GI cancers.  
 
Objective 3: Characterize Latino patients ’ & caregivers’ fina ncial well-being, 
financial strain, and occupational outcomes  over the first 6 months of palliative 
chemotherapy. Explore relationships be tween financial strain and patients’ 
quality of life and symptoms , and caregiver well-being. 
 Hypothesis 1a: The intervention will improve patients’ understanding of the 
purpose and benefits of palliative chemotherapy. (Primary outcome)  
Hypothesis 1b: The intervention will improve patients’ understanding of the risks 
associated with their chemotherapy regimen. (Secondary outcome)  
Hypothesis 1c: The intervention will improve car egivers’ understanding of the 
purpose and benefits of th e patients’ chemotherapy. 
	
Hypothesis 2a: The educational intervention will improve patients’ satisfaction 
with communication with clinicians  around treatment decision-making. 
Hypothesis 2b: Patients who receive the intervention will be more likely to 
achieve their preferred role in treatment decision-making. Hypothesis 2c: Patients who receive the intervention will experience less 
decisional conflict. 
	
Objective 3 is exploratory.  
 
2.0 Background* 
 
Patient-centered communication is an essent ial element of quality care for patients 
with advanced incurable cancer.1-3 Skilled and compassionate communication is a 
cornerstone of shared decision-making, it is necessary to equip patients with an 
understanding of their prognosis and treatment options, and it plays a critical role in 
supporting terminally-ill patients and their caregivers.1,4 Unfortunately the quality of 
patient-provider communication is suboptimal  for ethnic minorities with advanced 
cancer,4-6 particularly Latinos .7,8-10  
 
Latinos are the largest minority  group in the US, yet they suffer some of the greatest 
barriers to quality cancer communication.11 Nearly 40% of Latinos have limited 
English proficiency (LEP),11 60% have low health-literacy,12 and Latinos have the lowest 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	4	of	50  	
educational attainment of any US ethnic group.13 Use of professional interpreters 
partially mitigates these barriers,14 but interpretation can also introduce errors that result 
in misinformation15 and missed opportunities for rapport building.16 It is not surprising 
that Latinos have high rates of dissati sfaction with their healthcare providers’ 
communication skills.9,10 Oncologists are similarly frustrated by their inability to 
communicate with Latinos effectively, and report that discussions about prognosis & 
treatment options are not patient-centered.8 These co-occurring barriers uniquely 
compromise Latinos’ ability to understand their cancer care providers and to participate 
optimally in their care.10  
 
Communication disparities are evidenced by gaps in Latinos’ understanding about 
the prognosis of advanced cancer and the benefits of palliative chemotherapy.7,17-20 
We recently reported from the Cancer Care Outcomes Research & Surveillance 
Consortium (CanCORS) study that an alarming 91% of Latinos with metastatic 
colorectal cancer and 79% of those with metastatic lung can cer failed to understand 
chemotherapy was unlikely to cure their cancer .20 Other research demonstrates that 
Latino advanced cancer patients are less likely than Whites to acknowle dge that they are 
terminally ill,21 and have poor understanding of advance directives,19,22 and hospice.18 
These findings belie the fact that most patients23,24 including Latinos25-27 want detailed 
information about prognosis, chemotherapy bene fits, and end-of-life (EOL) care options.  
 Misconceptions about prognosis and chemoth erapy benefits are detrimental to the 
quality of advanced cancer care, and may co ntribute to known disparities in quality 
of EOL care for Latinos.  A realistic grasp of curability  and prognosis is essential to 
patients’ ability to come to te rms with their illness, make value-consistent care decisions, 
prioritize their limited time, and plan for EOL. Patients with unrealistic expectations have been shown to prefer care focused on life-extension rather than comfort,
23,28-29 to be less 
likely to complete advance directives,23 less likely to access hospice,30 and more likely to 
receive intensive care near EOL.28 These examples of poor quality EOL care31 contribute 
to suffering of patient s and their families,32 and pose significa nt financial burdens33 
without appreciable benefit.28,32  Because prognostic misc onceptions are more common 
among Latinos than Whites, these knowledge  gaps may partly drive Latino EOL care 
disparities including high rates of hospital and ICU death, underutilization of hospice, 
and EOL care counter to patients’ preferences.34-36 Interventions to enhance Latino 
advanced cancer patients’ understanding of their illness and chemotherapy options are 
desperately needed, and are a promising appr oach to reduce ethnic disparities in EOL 
care.5 
 
We have developed a dual Spanish/English language suite of chemotherapy 
educational tools with the goal of better informing patients about the risks, 
benefits, and goals of common chemotherapy regimens used to treat advanced GI 
cancers. Each chemotherapy educational to ol consists of a video, website, and 
written booklet, and improves upon existi ng resources in several ways: 1) 
balanced discussion of benefits as well as risks, 2) focus on regimens rather than 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	5	of	50  	
drugs, 3) use of both written and video fo rmat, and 4) inclusion of Latino patient 
and provider perspectives (e.g. video clips of Latino patients describing their 
experiences on treatment). 
The overarching objective of this project is to evaluate whether the developed 
chemotherapy educational toolkit improves the quality of advanced cancer care 
and treatment decision making by Latinos. If effective, the tools will be amenable 
to broad dissemination via patient a ccessible cancer education websites and 
oncology clinics. 
 
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria* 
 
The research assistant will identify potentially eligible participants by systematically reviewing new patient and existing patient scheduling reports, as well as by accepting physician referrals. We are requesting a HIPA A waiver of authorization so that the 
research assistant may look in the Electronic H ealth Record to determine eligibility before 
approaching potential participants.  
1) For patients presenting to oncology c linic for an initial consultation/new 
treatment decision regarding first-line chemotherapy for their metastatic 
colorectal cancer, locally advanced pancreatic cancer, or metastatic 
pancreatic cancer: the research assist ant will identify potentially eligible 
patients by screening new patient scheduling reports. The research assistant will notify the oncology attending physician of the patients’ potential eligibility prior to this initial consultation, will confirm the patients’ potential eligibility, and will ask perm ission to approach the patient for 
participation. The study team will reac h out to the clinician via email the 
day before a consult to ask permission to approach a potential participant. 
The email will contain an “opt-out” message meaning that clinicians only have to respond if they do not want a patient to be approached. Therefore, no response from a clinician will be c onsidered as approval for a potential 
approach. Study research assistants will keep track of the number of 
potentially eligible patients, the number  of physician refusals, and the reason 
for those refusals. Most potentially eligible patients will be approached before their initial consultation with the oncologist.  
2) Oncology clinicians (p hysicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, 
and pharmacists from medical oncology,  surgical oncology, and radiation 
oncology) will be able to refer eligib le participants for enrollment in the 
study. Each site will determine the logistics of the referral process depending on its clinic m odel and staffing. At all sites, if the referral is 
made by a provider other than the atte nding physician, the research assistant 
will ask the attending physician’s permis sion prior to approaching a patient. 
The research assistants will keep track of the number of potentially eligible 
patients referred, the number of physic ian refusals, and the reason for those 
refusals. 
 
 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	6	of	50  	
Patient Inclusion Criteria: 
 
Group 1 – Patients: 
 Self-identifies as Hispanic/Latino OR self-i dentifies with nationality from a Spanish-
speaking country or territory  
 Has been diagnosed with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) OR locally advanced 
pancreatic cancer (LAPC) OR metastatic pancreatic cancer (mPC) AND  is making a 
decision regarding treatment with 1st line palliative chemotherapy .  
 Treating oncologist has recommended consideration  of one or more of the regimens for 
which we have develope d chemotherapy educational (CEI) toolkits  
o For mCRC: FOLFOX, FOLFOX + bevacizumab, FOLFIRI, FOLFIRI + 
bevacizumab 
o For LAPC or mPC: FOLFIRINOX, Ge mcitabine, or Gemcitabine + nab-
paclitaxel  
o Patients who are also considering treatment on a clinical trial of one of these 
regimens +/- an investigational agent would still be eligible, so long as the 
treating MD believes to the content of the CE I to be relevant to the trial regimen. 
 Planning to receive treatment at the enrolling site 
 Age ≥ 21 
 English  proficient  
 
Group 2 – Patients: 
 Self-identify as Hispanic/Latino OR self-identifies with nationality from a Spanish-
speaking country or territory 
 Has been diagnosed with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) OR locally advanced 
pancreatic cancer (LAPC) OR metastatic pancreatic cancer (mPC) AND  is making a 
decision regarding treatment with 1st line palliative chemotherapy .  
 Treating oncologist has recommended consideration  of one or more of the regimens for 
which we have develope d chemotherapy educational (CEI) toolkits  
o For mCRC: FOLFOX, FOLFOX + bevacizumab, FOLFIRI, FOLFIRI + 
bevacizumab 
o For LAPC or mPC: FOLFIRINOX, Ge mcitabine, or Gemcitabine + nab-
paclitaxel  
o Patients who are also considering treatment on a clinical trial of one of these 
regimens +/- an investigational agent would still be eligible, so long as the 
treating MD believes to the content of the CE I to be relevant to the trial regimen. 
 Planning to receive treatment at the enrolling site 
 Age ≥ 21 
 Spanish proficient  
 
Patient Exclusion Criteria: 
 For mCRC patients: Patients with oligom etastatic disease who have a definitive 
plan for curative surgical  resection are not eligible. 
 Significant delirium/dementia as judged by  the treating oncologist  
 
  
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	7	of	50  	
 
 
Caregiver Inclusion Criteria: 
 
Group 1 – Caregivers: 
 Caregivers of eligible patient participants  
 Age ≥ 21 
 English proficient  
 
Group 2 – Caregivers: 
 Caregivers of eligible patient participants  
 Age ≥ 21 
 Spanish proficient  
 
Caregiver Exclusion Criteria:  
 Unable to comply with the study requirements per study team 
 
This study will exclude patients who are una ble to consent, individuals who are 
not yet adults, pregnant women, and pr isoners. The study will exclude caregivers 
who are unable to consent, individuals w ho are not yet adults , and prisoners.  
Also, please note: patients will still be able to enroll in the study if they do not have a 
participating caregiver. Caregivers, however,  can ONLY enroll with a participating 
patient . 
4.0 Study-Wide Number of Subjects* 
A total of 154 subjects and up to 154 car egivers will be recruited (both English 
and Spanish-speaking). The study team expects to recruit 77 English-speaking 
patients and caregivers and 77 Spanish-speaking patients and caregivers. Assuming a subject attrition rate of 25%, wh ich would decrease the n to 116, this 
sample size would give the study 80% power to detect a two-fold improvement in 
our primary outcome (accurate chemothe rapy expectations), with a one-sided 
p<0.05. The effect size for our primar y outcome is based upon conservative 
projections of accurate understanding regarding cure from palliative 
chemotherapy reported in the literature ,
20,37 and based upon what would constitute 
a clinically meaningful im provement in understanding. 
 
5.0 Study-Wide Recruitment Methods* 
Subject Recruitment:  The majority of potential subjects will be recruited at their 
initial consultation with the oncologist at  participating study sites. Potential 
subjects will be approached by study research  assistants prior to their consultation 
and offered participation in a study seek ing to study a new tool to enhance 
education around cancer treatment options. The RA will discuss the overall aims 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	8	of	50  	
of the study (to improve understanding around cancer treatments), the study 
intervention (educational tools)  and assessments (surveys). If the patient agrees to 
participate the RA will obtain written informed consent at that time.  
If it is not possible for logistic reasons to  approach the patient prior to the initial 
consultation, or if the patient asks the RA  to come back later, potential subjects 
may also be recruited after their initial consultation with th e oncologist, but not 
after they have received their first ch emotherapy infusion. If the subject meets 
eligibility criteria bu t was not approached prior to their consultation, the study RA 
will approach the potential subject, eith er at the conclusion of the initial 
consultation, or at a subsequent visit pr ior to the initiation of chemotherapy. The 
RA will again describe the study and offe r the potential subject the opportunity to 
participate. If the subject agrees to particip ate, the RA or an authorized member of 
the study staff will obtain written in formed consent at that time. 
Identifying Potential Participants:  The research assistant will identify potentially 
eligible participants by reviewing patien t scheduling reports, as well as by accepting 
physician referrals. We are requesting a HIPA A waiver of authorization so that the 
research assistant may look in the Electronic H ealth Record to determine eligibility before 
approaching potentially eligible participants.  
1) For patients presenting to oncology c linic for an initial consultation/new 
treatment decision regarding first-line chemotherapy for their metastatic 
colorectal cancer, locally advanced pancreatic cancer, or metastatic pancreatic cancer: the research assist ant will identify potentially eligible 
patients by screening new patient scheduling reports. The research assistant will notify the oncology attending physician of the patients’ potential 
eligibility prior to this initial consultation, will confirm the patients’ 
potential eligibility, and will ask perm ission to approach the patient for 
participation. The study team will reac h out to the clinician via email the 
day before a consult to ask permission to approach a potential participant. 
The email will contain an “opt-out” message meaning that clinicians only 
have to respond if they do not want a patient to be approached. Therefore, 
no response from a clinician will be c onsidered as approval for a potential 
approach.  Study research assistants will keep track of the number of potentially eligible patients, the number  of physician refusals, and the reason 
for those refusals. Most potentially eligible patients will be approached before their initial consultation with the oncologist.  
2) Oncology clinicians (p hysicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, 
and pharmacists from medical oncology,  surgical oncology, and radiation 
oncology) will be able to refer eligib le participants for enrollment in the 
study. Each site will determine the logistics of the referral process depending on its clinic m odel and staffing. At all sites, if the referral is 
made by a provider other than the atte nding physician, the research assistant 
will ask the attending physician’s permis sion prior to approaching a patient. 
The research assistants will keep track of the number of potentially eligible 
patients referred, the number of physic ian refusals, and the reason for those 
refusals. 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	9	of	50  	
All potential subjects will be approach ed by a study research assistant or 
referred by an oncology provider. Adve rtisements (printed, audio, or 
video), will not be used to r ecruit subjects in this study. 
6.0 Multi-Site Research* 
All sites will have the most curren t version of the protocol, consent 
document, and HIPAA authorization. A ll required approvals (the initial 
and continuing reviews, and any modifications) will be obtained at each site. This includes approval by each site’s IRB of record. All 
modifications will be communicated to participating sites and approved by 
the IRBs of record before the modifi cations are implemented. All engaged 
participating sites will safeguard data, including secure transmission of data, as required by local informati on security policies. All local site 
investigators will conduct the study in accordance with applicable federal 
regulations and local laws . All non-compliance with the study protocol or 
applicable requirements will be report ed in accordance with local policy. 
Prior to patient enrollment, there will be a site initiation visit webinar to 
orient all investigators, research assistants, and study staff to study 
procedures, including eligibility cr iteria, and procedures for subject 
recruitment and study assessments. Fo llowing study commencement, there 
will be regular check-ins with study staff led by the study project manager (PM) and/or PI by conference call. These will initially take place weekly. Once deemed appropriate by the study PI, the co-investigators, and PM, the frequency of these check-ins will decrease to monthly and will 
continue for the duration of the study. 
Participating sites will receive regul ar updates during the weekly, then 
monthly conference calls with the pr oject manager. For urgent updates, 
such as those relating to problems (inc lusive of reportable events), the PI 
and project manager will contact s ite investigators and study staff by 
phone and email. Ad hoc conference calls will be convened as necessary. To the extent they are available, interim results will be communicated to participating sites during the regu lar conference calls and will be 
summarized via email. The closure of the study will be communicated to participating sites via an email from the study PI to the site investigators 
and study staff.  
 
7.0 Study Timelines* 
Individual subjects (patients and caregive rs) will participate in the study for 6-8 
months. Their participation run from the time of informed consent to the completion of the final study assessment, which takes place between 6 and 8 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	10	of	50  	
months after either the initiation of chem otherapy or the decision not to initiate 
chemotherapy. 
We anticipate it will take 20 months to en roll all study subjects. Given the target 
sample size of 154 and that there are 6 pa rticipating sites, this timeline accounts 
for the enrollment of just over 1 subject  and caregiver per month at each site, 
which we believe is reasona ble and attainable given our knowledge of each site 
and its Latino GI cancer patient population. 
We estimate that we will complete primar y analyses for the study after 24 months. 
Assuming enrollment is complete over 20 months, all data for the primary and secondary outcomes will be obtained by 23 months (at the 3-month assessment). We estimate it will take 1 additional month to complete primary analyses. 
Exploratory outcomes will take an additional 5 months to collect (at the 6-8-month assessment) and analyze and will therefore be completed by 29 months after study initiation.  
8.0 Study Endpoints* 
 
Objective 1: Determine the impact of a multimedia chemotherapy educational intervention on understanding of chemotherapy risks and benefits among Latinos with 
advanced gastrointestinal cancers and their primary informal caregivers.  
	
 Understanding of chemotherapy benefits
: The primary study outcome is the 
proportion of patients who have accura te understanding of chemotherapy 
benefits , assessed at the 8-12-week follow-up. P atients and caregivers  will be asked a 
single item from the CanCORS study20: “After talking with your doctors...how likely do 
you think chemotherapy is to cure your cancer ?” Options: very likely, somewhat likely, a 
little likely, not at all likely, or don’t know. Responses will be dichotomized into accurate 
(not at all likely) and inaccurate (all othe rs). Our primary outcome assessment has been 
successfully used among thousands of patients in the CanCORS study,20 and in a prior 
trial of our parent intervention, with littl e missing data. This outcome is relevant because  
it reflects core understanding required for in formed consent; and it is predictive of 
hospice utilization.30 The 8-12 week timepoint was chosen to allow participants 
adequate time to review the interventi on and discuss the information with their 
family and care providers. The post-deci sion assessment will have several other 
secondary assessments of patients unders tanding of chemotherapy benefits. This 
will include an item assessing their understanding of the purpose of the treatment (e.g. to cure, prolong life or palliate symptoms), and how likely they believe the treatment is to shrink their cancer. At 8- 12 weeks’ patients and caregivers will be 
asked to estimate life expectancy, and will be asked about the typical prognosis of 
their cancer, using methods described by Weinfurt et al.
38 Prognostic 
understanding will be analyzed as an or dinal variable, and dichotomized into 
realistic or unrealistic39 based upon published survival statistics.40-42 
 Understanding of chemotherapy risks. At  the post-decision assessment, patients 
will answer a series of 6 items asking  how likely they believe they are to 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	11	of	50  	
experience specific chemotherapy side  effects (fatigue, nausea/vomiting, 
neuropathy, myalgias/arthralgias, hair lo ss, diarrhea) using a 4-point likert scale 
(not at all likely to very likely). Pati ents’ responses to each question will be 
compared to the known side effect profile of their chemotherapy regimen, and characterized as accurate or inaccurate. Th e responses to all 6 questions will then 
be summed for a composite knowledge score. 
 
Objective 2: Determine the impact of the multimedia chemotherapy educational 
intervention on communication satisfaction a nd quality of informed decision-making 
about palliative chemotherapy among La tinos with advanced GI cancers.  
 
Communication satisfaction: will be a ssessed by five communication satisfaction 
items from the validated and widely used Consumer Assessment for Health 
Providers and Systems (CAHPS) Cancer Survey43: “How often did your 
doctor...listen carefully to you, explai n things in a way that was easy to 
understand, seem to know important info rmation about your medical history, 
spend enough time with you, and show resp ect for what you had to say?” Options: 
always, usually, sometimes, or never.44 Patient responses will be summed, with 
possible score of 0-100 (with higher scor es indicating better communication) and 
then categorized into tertiles.  Patients will complete this assessment at the post-decision and 3-month survey, but our primary analysis for this outcome will consider the post-decision assessment because it is most proximate to chemotherapy decision-making and exposure to the intervention.  
 Satisfaction with the CEI tools and pro cess: At the post-decision assessment, 
patients will rate their satisfaction with the CEI or standard chemotherapy 
education tools using a Likert  scale ranging from Very Po or to Excellent. Patients 
in the CEI arm will provide several other assessments of the intervention, which will not be used for comparative testing.   
 Decisional conflict: At the post-decision assessment, patients will assess 
decisional conflict using the 4 question SURE decisional conflict screening 
assessment developed by Legare et al.45 A score of < 3 is indicative of decisional 
conflict.  
 Decisional involvement: Whether patient s achieved their desired degree of 
involvement in decision-making (patie nt-controlled, shared, or physician 
controlled) will be assessed post-decision using the modified Control Preferences Scale and compared with desired involvement (measured at baseline) using methods described elsewhere and wide ly used in decision aid trials.
46  
 Decisional regret: Patient deci sional regret will be asse ssed at 8-12 weeks using 5-
item Decisional Regret Scale developed by Brehaut et al.47 
 Advance care planning:  At 8-12 weeks and 6 months, patients will indicate 
whether they have designated a healthcar e proxy, or discussed end-of-life wishes 
with their physicians or proxy.  
 
Objective 3 (Exploratory):  Characterize Latino patients’ & caregivers’ financial well-
being, financial strain, and occupational outcomes over the first 6 months of palliative 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	12	of	50  	
chemotherapy. Explore relationships between fina ncial strain and patients’ quality of life 
and symptoms, and caregiver wellbeing.   Patients’ quality of life, occupational and financial well-being will be assessed at baseline, 3 months, and 6 months to allow fo r evaluation of the outcomes over the first 6 
months of treatment. 
 Quality of life: Patient and caregiver quality of life will be assessed using the 10-
item PROMIS Global Health Short Form48, which will be administered at all 
survey time points.  
 Symptoms: Patient symptoms will be measured using items from the PRO-
CTCAE49 that have been developed to reflect  the expected and most common side 
effects and symptoms associated with mCRC and pancreatic cancer.  
 Occupation: Patient and caregiver occupa tion will be assessed using questions 
adapted from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES)50 that assess occupational status and reasons for not working. Hours 
worked will also be assessed.  
 Income:  Total household income and the number of individuals living in the 
household will be assessed and benchmarked with the Federal Poverty Limit  (for 
1-8 household members).  
 Household material hardship:  Patient and caregiver household material hardship 
will be assessed using 3 questions from Children’s Healthwatch that assess 
whether patients have been unable to pay their rent or  mortgage, have had their 
electricity/gas/oil shut off for not paying bills or have  experience significant food 
insecurity.51-53 
 Financial toxicity: Financial toxicity will be assessed using items adapted from 
the literature that assess cost-shifting (e.g. taking out a new mortgage or loans) 
and care-altering behaviors (e.g. not filling a prescription or skipping a 
recommended test) due to the costs of can cer care, in addition to catastrophic 
financial consequences (e.g. declar ing bankruptcy, having home or car 
repossessed).54-56 
 Financial strain : Patient and caregiver financial strain will be assessed at baseline, 
3 months, and 6 months using measures  derived from CanCORS and from the 
literature. Patients and caregivers will be asked “to what degree have the costs of 
cancer treatment been a financial burd en for you or your family?” Response 
options range from not a financial burd en at all to a catastrophic financial 
burden.57  
 Caregiver wellbeing: Caregiver quality of lif e, anxiety, depression, and emotional 
support will be assessed using PROMIS measures.48 Caregiver support will be 
assessed using questions from the Calif ornia Universal Caregiver Assessment.58 
Caregiver burden will be assessed using the Zarit Burden Interview.59 Caregiver 
health behaviors will be assessed using items adapted from the literature that 
ascertain whether caregivers have delayed or otherwise altere d their care due to 
their caregiving responsibilities.60  
 
Additional exploratory outcomes: End-of-study chart abstraction will assess the 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	13	of	50  	
duration and type of chemothe rapy, hospitalizations, ER visi ts, and survival. These chart 
abstractions will be performed at 6 months.  
 Study Covariates  assessed at baseline  will include age, sex, race/ethnicity, marital 
status, education, and insurance. Given our  focus on Latinos we will collect information 
on nativity/country of origin, and acc ulturation (using the Marin scale
61 for language 
preference). Health l iteracy and numeracy will be asse ssed using measures found in the 
literature.62-63 Patients will report religious affiliation & religiousness/spirituality,64 which 
influence prognostic beliefs,23 EOL care preferences,65 and care.66 Sources of health 
information will be assessed using items found in the HINTS survey.67-68 
There are no primary or secondary sa fety endpoints for this project.  
 
9.0 Procedures Involved* 
This is a non-blinded randomized controll ed trial of 154 patients with advanced 
colorectal or pancreatic cancer who ar e candidates to receive chemotherapy and 
their caregivers. Eligible patients will be  randomized to receive either standard 
chemotherapy education or an enhanced  chemotherapy education intervention 
(CEI) developed by our study team and cons isting of a booklet and a video hosted 
on a secure website. Patients’ and their caregivers’ will be assessed at multiple time points throughout the study period on a variety of domains, including their 
understanding of chemotherapy’s risks and benefits, the patient’s prognosis, 
communication with their providers around tr eatment decisions, quality of life, 
financial well-being, and a variet y of sociodemographic factors.  
The study schema can be found in Figure 1 below: Figure 1. Study Schema Study	Procedures 	&	Assessments 	 Enrollment 	
▪Screening	
	▪Eligibility		
▪Sign	consent	for	
study Baseline 	Survey	
▪Demographics	
▪Psychosocial	
characteristics	
▪Clinical	characteristics	
▪Communication	
preferences	
▪Quality	of	
life/symptoms	
▪Financial	well‐being	
 
   		 Post‐Decision 	
Survey		
▪Knowledge	
▪Decision	quality	
▪Communication	
&	care	
satisfaction	
▪Quality	of	
life/symptoms	
▪MD	relationship  Follow‐up	
Survey	1	(8‐
12weeks) 		
▪Knowledge	
▪Care	satisfaction	
▪Quality	of	
life/symptoms	
▪Advance	care	
planning	
▪Financial	well‐
being	
▪Caregiver	
burden	and	
distress	
 
 Follow‐up	
Survey	2	(6‐8	
months) 	
▪Quality	of	life	
▪Financial	well‐
being	
▪Advance care 
planning 
▪Caregiver	
burden	and	
distress	
	
	Data	
Sourc ▪Patient	
▪Caregiver 	
▪Oncologist 	▪Patient	
▪Caregiver 	
▪Chart	abstraction 		
			 ▪Patient	
	▪Patient	
▪Caregiver 	
	▪Patient	
▪Caregiver 	
 C
li     Usual	CE	Arm		 			
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	14	of	50  	
	
	
Procedure for registration: After the participant signs written informed consent to 
participate in research, the research assistant will fill out the registration form and register the participant and his/her care giver using REDCap managed by the study 
team. 
 
Procedure for randomization (see schema above):  
After study consent and the baseline assessment, the study team will then 
randomize the participant to either the Usual IC Arm or the Investigational IC Arm of the study using REDCap’s 1:1 randomi zation algorithm, stratified by whether 
the participant has colorectal or panc reatic cancer (diagnos is) and stratified by 
language preference (English or Spanish).  
 
The name and telephone number of th e research study person who will be 
responsible for registration and ra ndomization is: Christine Cronin, 
Christine_cronin@dfci.harvard.edu, 617-632-3784. 
 
When registering subjects, the study team will ask for the following information (see 
Appendices 8-9): 
 Full name, telephone number, and email address of research assistant enrolling the participant 
 Date subject signed informed consent  
 Subject and caregiver’s phone numbers, emails, and postal mail 
addresses (reason for collecting these: so central research assistant at 
Dana-Farber can administer follow-up assessments) 
 Subject  and caregiver ’s ranks of preference regarding contact method  
 Subject  and caregiver ’s gender 
 Subject  and caregiver ’s race  
 Subject  and caregiver ’s ethnicity  
 Subject and caregiver’s initials 
 Subject  and caregiver’s  dates of birth  
 Subject ID number  
 Primary oncologist 
 Confirmation of eligibility  
 Stratification or classification factors (colorectal or pancreatic cancer 
diagnosis AND English or Spanish language preference)  
 
Procedure for patient assessment contact and reminders: It is acceptable to 
administer each assessment aloud (via phone or in-person), via email (REDCap  Initial	Clinic	Visit	
▪	Options	
discussed	
▪	Treatment	
recommendation   Standard	chemo	
teaching	  	 Return	to	
Clinic	
▪	Chemo	
decision	
▪	Chemo	start			
 	
CEI	Arm		
Review	CEI	tools	
(in	clinic	&	home)  	 ®	Ongoing 	care/	
 
Chemotherapy 		
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	15	of	50  	
weblink), via iPad (REDCap), or via hard copy (in-person or postal mail). 
Participants and caregivers will be offered the opportunity to complete all assessments in either English or Spanish.  Spanish language interpreters may assist 
the RA with survey administration as necessary.  The baseline assessment will be administered immediately after the participant signs informed consent, and prior to randomiza tion. If immediate administration is not 
possible, the RA will follow-up with the participant up to 4 times post-informed 
consent.  One follow-up is defined as: an in-person approach OR a phone call with an accompanying email. If the participant is non-responsive after 4 attempts, the participant will be considered to have  withdrawn from the study prior to 
randomization.  
 
The post-decision assessment will be administered by a research assistant at any point between the day the participant has started chemotherapy, and 3-weeks after 
they have received their first chemotherapy cycle. For patients who delay or decide 
against chemotherapy, they may complete  the post-decision assessment up to 3 
weeks after the decision not to pursue ch emotherapy. The first follow-up assessment 
will be administered between 8 and 12 weeks after their first chemotherapy treatment. 
 
The second follow-up assessment will be admi nistered either by a central study RA 
at Dana-Farber or by the site research assi stant, a determination that will be made 
by each site. The assessment will be given at any point between 6-months and 8-months post-chemo start. Prior to contact ing the participant, the study staff will 
confirm the participant’s vital status.  
 
For all assessments, the RA can contact or  approach the participant up to 4 times. 
One follow-up is defined as: an in-person approach OR a phone call with an accompanying email. If the participant is non-responsive after 4 attempts, then the 
study research assistant will mark the post- decision assessment as missing and will 
not contact the participant about the missing assessment. 
 
Procedure for caregiver recruitment:  To identify the appropriate caregiver, the 
RA will ask the consented patient who s/he would identify as his/her primary informal caregiver, if any.  If the caregiver  is physically present with the patient, the 
RA will provide the caregiver the study letter, explain the study, answer any 
questions, and ask if the caregiv er would like to participate.  If the caregiver verbally 
agrees, the RA will administer the caregiv er baseline survey (available on paper, 
electronically, or orally per ca regiver preference).   If the caregiver is not physically 
present, the RA will send the patient home  with the caregiver study letter and follow 
up with a phone call.  When speaking to  the caregiver on the phone, the RA will be 
sure that the caregiver has had time to r ead and consider the study letter.  If the 
caregiver does not have the study letter, the RA will offer to email or postal mail a duplicate.  Because the caregiver is not always phy sically present at clinic visits, 
we are requesting waiver of documentation of consent for caregivers.  This will 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	16	of	50  	
allow the RA the flexibility needed to v erbally consent caregivers in person and 
over the phone since caregivers will not always be present in clinic.  
Procedure for caregiver assessments and contact reminders: It is acceptable to 
administer each assessment aloud (via phone or in-person), via email (REDCap weblink), via iPad (REDCap), or via hard copy (in-person or postal mail). 
Participants and caregivers will be offered the opportunity to complete all assessments in either English or Spanish.  Spanish language interpreters may assist 
the RA with survey administration as necessary.  The baseline assessment will be administered immediately after the participant agrees to consent to the study, and prior to randomization. If immediate 
administration is not possible, the RA will follow-up with the participant up to 4 times post-informed consent.  One follow-up is defined as: an in-person approach OR a phone call with an accompanying email.  If the participant is non-responsive 
after 4 attempts, the participant will be considered to have withdrawn from the study prior to randomization.  
 
The first follow-up assessment will be administered between 8 and 12 weeks after the patient’s first chemotherapy treatment. 
 
The second follow-up assessment will be admi nistered either by a central study RA 
at Dana-Farber or by the site research assi stant, a determination that will be made 
by each site. The assessment will be given at any point between 6-months and 8-months post-chemo start. Prior to contact ing the participant, the study staff will 
confirm the participant’s vital status.  
 
For all assessments, the RA can contact or  approach the participant up to 4 times. 
One follow-up is defined as: an in-person approach OR a phone call with an accompanying email. If the participant is non-responsive after 4 attempts, then the 
study research assistant will mark the post- decision assessment as missing and will 
not contact the participant about the missing assessment. 
 Description of Intervention 
 
Intervention Overview : The intervention consists of 10 sets of 
chemotherapy educational intervention (CE I) tools. Each tool consists of a 
video and a complementary booklet which explain a common chemotherapy option for metastatic co lorectal cancer, locally advanced 
pancreatic cancer, or metastatic pa ncreatic cancer. This suite of tools 
reviews the following treatment options: 
 CEI Tool 1: FOLFOX & FOLFOX + bevacizumab are 
reviewed together in one CEI tool, comprised of a booklet and 
complementary video hosted on a password protected website 
(English Version – See Appendix 40 )  
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	17	of	50  	
 CEI Tool 2: FOLIRI & FOLFIR I + bevacizumab are reviewed 
together in one CEI tool: comprised of a booklet and complementary 
video hosted on a password protected website ( English Version - See 
Appendix 41 ) 
 CEI Tool 3: FOLFIRINOX is reviewed in one CEI tool:  
comprised of a booklet and complementary video hosted on a 
password protected website ( English Version - See Appendix 42 ) 
 CEI Tool 4: Gemcitabine + nab-paclitaxel is reviewed in one CEI tool:  
comprised of a booklet and complementary video hosted on a 
password protected website ( English Version - See Appendix 43 ) 
 CEI Tool 5: Gemcitabine is reviewed in one CEI tool:  
comprised of a booklet and complementary video hosted on a 
password protected website ( English Version - See Appendix 44 ) 
 CEI Tool 6: FOLFOX & FOLFOX + bevacizumab are 
reviewed together in one CEI tool, comprised of a booklet and 
complementary video hosted on a password protected website 
(Spanish Version – See Appendix 45 ) 
 CEI Tool 7: FOLIRI & FOLFIR I + bevacizumab are reviewed 
together in one CEI tool: comprised of a booklet and complementary 
video hosted on a password protected website ( Spanish Version – 
See Appendix 46 ) 
 CEI Tool 8: FOLFIRINOX is reviewed in one CEI tool:  
comprised of a booklet and complementary video hosted on a 
password protected website ( Spanish Version – See Appendix 47 ) 
 CEI Tool 9: Gemcitabine + nab-paclitaxel is reviewed in one CEI tool:  
comprised of a booklet and complementary video hosted on a 
password protected website ( Spanish Version – See Appendix 48 ) 
 CEI Tool 10: Gemcitabine is reviewed in one CEI tool:  
comprised of a booklet and complementary video hosted on a 
password protected website ( Spanish Version – See Appendix 49 ) 
 
Description of chemotherapy educational (CEI) websites: CEI videos and content described in  the booklets will be available for 
patients to review at www.chemovideo.org . The website will use an 
individual site-specific password, with unique passwords for each of the 5 
chemotherapy regimens. This will ensure that participants will only see educational information for the ch emotherapy regimen(s) recommended 
by their doctor. Website tracking will only produce aggregate data (i.e. # 
of views). There will not be any we bsite tracking that is linked to 
individual patient IDs.. Website co ntent includes the main chemotherapy 
educational videos, two brief supplem entary videos about coping, all 
written content from the booklets, an d some supplementary content taken 
from well vetted online educational materials (e.g. from NCI patient educational materials).   
 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	18	of	50  	
Description of chemotherapy educational (CEI) videos  
Each video is approximately 20 minutes and was filmed and edited by a 
professional health communications firm. There are both English and 
Spanish versions of each video. Videos and booklets are complementary 
but do not entirely overlap. Latino and non-Latino oncologists and 
nurses narrate factual information about the chemotherapy regimen of interest. “B-roll” visually illustrates potentially confusing aspects of the 
chemotherapy regimen (for example: a chemotherapy home infusion 
pump). Candid patient interviews ar e interspersed throughout the video 
to present patients’ experience, with pa rticular attention to quality of life 
and coping. Information about life e xpectancy is included as an optional 
link, allowing patients/caregivers a choice about whether or not to hear 
this information. Patients 
and provider s in the video are diverse with 
respect to age, gender, and ethnicity  – with a preponderance of Latinos. 
Videos will be accessible via a passwo rd-protected website suitable for 
viewing on tablet, mobile device, or computer. Website activity will be 
monitored. Website tracking will only  produce aggregate data (i.e. # of 
views). There will not be any website tracking that is linked to individual patient IDs.  
 
The structure & content of th e videos are outlined below. 
 Basics : The drugs used as part of each regimen, their route of 
administration, schedule, logistics of administration. A nurse 
demonstrates a 5FU infusion pump. 
 Risks : Toxicities reviewed, with greatest attention to the most common 
toxicities, followed by rare but serious complications. Side effects 
specific to bevacizumab highlighted. 
 Benefits : State that chemo alone cannot cure mCRC, locally advanced 
pancreatic cancer, or metastatic pancreatic cancer, and review the 
palliative intent of chemotherapy. 
 Alternatives : Mention other chemotherapy regimens, clinical trials, & 
palliative/supportive care. 
Description of chemotherapy educational (CEI) booklets  
Booklets are regimen-specific CEI documents, which serve as a regimen-specific educational tool. There are bo th English and Spanish versions of 
each booklet with attention paid to pa tients’ information preferences. The 
tools are written at an 8th grade read ing level, use generic drug names, and 
communicate risk clearly. 
 Basics : The drugs used as part of each regimen are outlined, along with 
their route of administration. 
 Benefits : Includes the purpose of tr eatment (palliative, prevent 
symptoms, not cure). 
 Impact on prognosis : Patients have the option of reviewing a section that 
describes typical life-expectancy of mCRC and pancreatic cancer with and without chemotherapy. This section is closed by a seal, and preceded by a warning to allow them to make a conscious choice of whether or not 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	19	of	50  	
to be exposed to this information. 
 Risks : Most common toxicities listed in order of frequency (and 
approximate rates). Rare complications  are listed, but de-emphasized to 
avoid the feel of a “laundry list.” 
 Alternatives : Clinical trials, palliative /supportive care, & other 
chemotherapy regimens. 
 FAQ’s : Identified by patient stakeholders 
 Question prompt list : A list of questions developed by investigators and 
patient stakeholders that patients and caregivers may commonly ask their oncologists about the cancer and chemotherapy regimens.  
 
Randomization and Administration of Intervention  
 
Overview: Patients will be  randomized by the study team using REDCap’s 1:1 
randomization algorithm. Patients randomized to the Usual CE Arm w ill 
undergo the standard institutional practice of chemotherapy education. The 
oncologist may also choose to give the patient the institutionally approved 
chemotherapy information sheets according to site-specific policies and clinical practice. 
 
Patients randomized to the CEI Arm will be given regimen specific written and video chemotherapy educational t ools developed by the study team. The 
treating oncologist will identify whic h chemotherapy regimen(s) are being 
considered, in order to select the appr opriate chemotherapy educational tool(s) 
to give the patient. The patient may be given more than one CEI tool if they 
are considering more than one regimen. Patients randomized to the 
intervention arm may receive the intervention in addition to OR in place of the 
standard institutionally approved chem otherapy information sheets (both are 
acceptable); this is at the discretion of the treating site or the treating physician. If sites have other standa rd chemotherapy educational processes 
aside from printed teaching materials (e.g. a nurse teaching session, or a group chemotherapy class), the patient will participate in these standard 
teaching processes.   At the beginning of the study period,  the video and booklet chemotherapy 
educational tools will be shared with medical oncologists, mid-level providers, or clinical staff who play a role in patient education. The purpose of this orientation 
is to help facilitate any subsequent conversations about the study chemotherapy educational tools that might occur between providers and 
patients randomized to the intervention. 
 
Timing of randomization and intervention delivery : Patients will be 
randomized to the intervention or con trol arm after comp leting the baseline 
assessment and receiving a treatment recommendation from their oncologist. 
Randomization and delivery of the interven tion will occur as soon  as possible after 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	20	of	50  	
the initial treatment recommenda tion, and no later than th e end of the day on their 
first chemotherapy treatment (see protocol schema in Figure 1).  
 
Administration of intervention : After completion of the baseline assessment and 
randomization, a RA or the treating physician/nurse practitioner (depending 
site preference) will give the patien t the relevant CEI booklet(s) along with 
printed information containing the URL address and password to the relevant 
CEI video(s). Patients will be encouraged to review the CEI on their own; however, the RA will also schedule a time to meet the patient to orient them 
to the materials and allow them to watch the video on a study iPad. This 
meeting will ideally be anchored to a normal chemotherapy teaching session, 
depending upon the participating site’s us ual clinical practi ce. If the patient 
does not receive the study materials at th e initial consult, th ey will be mailed 
to the patient’s home and the research assistant will follow-up by phone and/or email to answer any questions and schedule a time to meet in-person. 
Patients will be encouraged to review the CEI with their caregiver or other supporters, and to discuss any questions with their care t eam. The RA will be 
instructed not answer any clinical ques tions raised as a result of the CEI. 
 
Study participants will complete 4 study assessments. Caregivers will complete 3 study assessments. Questionnaire-based instruments will be administered 1) in person by a trained research assistant at the time of a 
routinely scheduled visit, 2) by e-surv ey, 3) by phone, or 4) by postal mail. 
Mode of collection will be recorded. REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) will be used to collect an d store all participant information and 
survey answers. REDCap is a secure, web-based, HIPAA-compliant 
application hosted by the Partners HealthCare Research Computing, 
Enterprise Research Infrastructure & iServices (ERIS) group, designed to support data capture for research studie s, providing: 1) an intuitive interface 
for validated data entry; 2) audit trai ls for tracking data manipulation and 
export procedures; 3) automated expo rt procedures for seamless data 
downloads to common statistical packag es; and 4) procedures for importing 
data from external sources. 
 
Each patient will be asked to complete four assessments: 
 
Patient Instrument 1: Baseline Assessment (See Appendices 20,30)  
A baseline survey will occur immediately after enrollment and no later than 
the initiation of chemotherapy to as sess socio-demographics, communication 
and information preferences, and quality of life. The baseline assessment will take approximately 15-20 minutes to complete. Patients will be compensated 
$10 for completing this assessment. 
 
Patient Instrument 2: Post-Decision Assessment (See Appendices 21,22,31, 32)  
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	21	of	50  	
A post-decision survey  within 0-2 weeks of the initiation of chemotherapy 
will assess understanding of prognosis and chemotherapy risks/benefits; 
quality of informed decision-making;  distress; satisfaction with the 
chemotherapy education process and communication. The post-decision 
assessment will take approximately 15-20 minutes to complete.  
 
Patient Instrument 3: 3-Month Fo llow-up Assessments (See Appendices 
23,24,33,34)  
A follow-up survey  at 8-12 weeks post-chemo start will assess 
stability/change in understanding of prognosis and chemotherapy benefits, 
patient-physician relationship, comm unication & care satisfaction, and 
financial strain. The post-decision as sessment will take approximately 15-20 
minutes to complete. Patients will be compensated $10 for completing this 
assessment.  
 
Patient Instrument 4: 6-Month Fo llow-up Assessment (See Appendices 
25,35) 
A follow-up survey at 6-8 months post-chemo start will assess 
stability/change in quality of life a nd occupation/income, in addition to the 
financial strain (significant material hardship, care tradeoffs due to cost) of 
cancer care. Patients will be comp ensated $25 for completing this 
assessment. 
 
Each caregiver will be asked to complete three assessments: 
 
Caregiver Instrument 1: Baseline Assessment (See Appendices 26,36)  
A baseline survey will occur immediately after enrollment (but prior  to 
intervention exposure) to assess socio- demographics, illness understanding, 
communication and information preference s, and quality of life. The baseline 
assessment will take approximately 15-20 minutes to complete. Caregivers 
will be compensated $10 for completing this assessment. 
 
Caregiver Instrument 2: 3-Month Follow-up Assessment (See Appendices 27,37)  
A follow-up survey  within 8-12 weeks of the pati ent’s chemo start will assess 
understanding of prognosis and chemot herapy risks/benefits; quality of 
informed decision-making; distress; sa tisfaction with communication, quality 
of life, caregiver burden, and financial strain. The first follow-up assessment 
will take approximately 15-20 minutes to complete. Caregivers will be compensated $10 for completing this assessment. 
 
Caregiver Instrument 3: 6-Month Follow-up Assessment (See 
Appendices 28,29,38,39) 
A follow-up survey at 6-8 months post-decision will assess stability/change 
in quality of life and occupation/income, the financial strain (significant material hardship, care tradeoffs due to cost) of cancer care, quality of life, 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	22	of	50  	
and caregiver burden. The second follow-up assessment will take 
approximately 15-20 minutes to complete . Caregivers will be compensated 
$25 for completing this assessment.  
 
Medical Record Abstraction (see Appendices 10-11): Research assistants 
will perform medical record abstraction for all enrolled patients. These medical record abstractions will be designed to assess relevant information about their clinical condition (e.g. stag e at diagnosis, da te of recurrence, 
performance status, comorbid conditions ), treatment decision, and treatment 
experience. Information will be entered into a study specific structured medical record abstraction tool. See below for specific information to be abstracted: 
 date of diagnosis; stage at dia gnosis; prior adjuvant or palliative 
chemotherapy; date of metastatic recurrence (if relevant); comorbid 
medical conditions; performance st atus; treatment decision made 
(e.g., what chemotherapy regimen, clinical trial, no chemotherapy); changes in treatment (e.g. dose redu ctions, change in chemotherapy); 
results of restaging scans (disease  progression, stable disease, or 
response); changes in treatment; medical record documentation of advance care planning; and vita l status at study completion. 
 
NOTE: Each site has the option to conduc t the medical record review for 
their site’s participan ts using the unique study ID # and enter the 
information into REDCap using the participants’ unique study ID #. 
Medical records from participating sites will not be released to Dana-Farber unless the participant signs the medical record release form 
(Appendices 6-7).  
In some cases, a participan t will consent to participate in this study and begin 
this study while at a participating site, but then continue/tr ansfer care at a 
non-participating site. In th ese instances, the participan t will be asked to sign 
an optional, voluntary Global Medical Record Release Form (see Appendices 
6-7) so that the central research assistant at Dana-Farber can access the participant’s medical records in order to complete the study Medical Record Abstraction (Appendices 10-11). 
 There are 3 types of risk to this study: 
 Physical risks: Physical risk to subjec ts in the proposed st udy is negligible. 
 Psychological risks: Participants may e xperience emotional/psychological distress 
as a result of participating, as a result of their diagnos is of advanced GI cancer, 
and/or as a result of learning that pallia tive chemotherapy is not at all likely to 
cure their cancer. Participants may deci de at any time and for any reason not to 
participate in the proposed study. The alte rnative to participat ing in the proposed 
study is to not participate in the prop osed study in which case the patient will 
receive the usual care chemotherapy informed consent materials. 
 Privacy risks: There is a risk of privacy violation or loss of confidentiality; 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	23	of	50  	
however, this is anticipated to be minimal, and the study team is committed to 
guaranteeing adequate protection against risk as described in the following 
section.  
Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Participants will be approached by the RA in a private and confidential manner. If the 
patient is eligible and interested in part icipation, the IRB-approved IC document for 
research will be reviewed  with and signed by the participan t. The RA will keep all signed 
IC documents in a locked drawer, accessible only to the PI-designa ted study team member 
who holds the key.  The informed consent to participate in research documents will be approved by each site’s IRB and 
will adhere to strict standards regarding its content. Required sections 
include: Introduction; Why is this research study being done ? What other options are 
there? What is involved in the research study? How long will I be in this research 
study? What are the risks or discomforts of th e research study? What are the benefits of 
the research study? Can I stop being in th e research study and what are my rights? 
What are the costs? What happens if I am in jured or sick because I took part in this 
research study? What about confidentiality? Whom do I contact if I have questions 
about the research study?   Protection against the 3 types of risk to this study: 
 Protection against physical risks: physical risk to subjects in  the proposed study is 
negligible. 
 Protection against psychological risks: First, we are minimizing risk by our 
extensive process of stak eholder involvement, pilo ting of the CEI tools on 
patients/caregivers of patients with advan ced GI cancer, with iterative rounds of 
revisions to ensure that the CEI tools developed meet the information needs and 
preferences of Latino can cer patients/caregivers. Any patients who exhibit 
psychological distress stress as result of the study tools will be referred to the 
patients’ oncologist and so cial worker, or a mental health professional as 
appropriate. 
 Protection against privacy risks: To protect PHI, the following measures will be 
taken. Patients will be approached and interviewed in private settings. All study 
form hard copies will use only de-identif ied unique study ID numbers and be kept 
in the patients’ study files in locked drawers to which only the designated study 
team member has a key. All electronic da ta will be kept on Dana-Farber’s secure, 
password protected servers as manage d by the Dana-Farber Department of 
Research Computing and IS.  
Departmental and institute-wide policies enforce the protection of our electronic 
information, especially with regards to HI PAA regulations and the integrity of patient 
care. These policies also safeguard again theft, 
abuse,  misuse, and any form of damage. 
The scope of protection includes informati on which is printed from or stored on a 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	24	of	50  	
database, mainframe, server desktop, lapt op, PDA, CD-ROM, hard disk, flash drive, 
optical platter, tape, smart phone, network,  telephone, and other computer-enabled 
medical devices. These policies regulate usage of system IDs, passwords, e-mail 
accounts, anti-virus mechanisms, encryption, mobile devices, remote access, remote control software, and wireless devices. IS  responsibilities and governance include 
firewall protection of all Dana-Farber internal networks and the internet, system evaluation, risk analysis, information access, regular review of user accounts, systems 
audit, regular review of remote access, a nd physical location access. Specific to this 
project, no data will be stored on laptops at a ny point and secure transfer protocols will be 
used for any electronic exchange of inform ation. All staff/users receive mandatory 
institutional trainings on Information Security and must adhere to policies at all times. 
Data will be collected using survey materials developed by the study team. 
These are attached in the appendices. Information from the medical record 
will be obtained through chart abstrac tion. The chart abstraction form is 
attached (Appendices 10-11). 
No specimens will be collected from study participants. Data will be collected (using 
unique study ID numbers) from each participant on the 4 study assessments, completed in either English or Spanish. Data will also be collected from each participant’s medical record via chart abstraction performed by the research staff at each site. Data will be 
collected (using unique study ID numbers ) from each caregiver on the 3 study 
assessments, completed in either English or Spanish.  
Summary of measures used at each patient assessment  
Table 1: Key study outcomes, measu res, and time points of assessment  
Domain Measures Baseline 
Assessmen
t Post-
decision 
Assessmen
tFollow-up 
Assessmen
t 1 (3 
months)Follow-up 
Assessmen
t 2 (6 
months)
Covariates 
Socio-demographics Standard assessments     
Health Literacy/numeracy Self-reported health 
literacy/numeracy     
Sources of health 
information Adapted from HINTS       
Communication & 
decision-making 
preferences Control Preferences Scale46      
Prognostic information preferences25     
Religion/spirituality Balboni RSCC      
Acculturation SASH Language subscale     
Language concordance Adapted from literature      
Use of interpreters From CAHPS      
Key Outcomes 
Aim 1: Core Understanding   
     Chemotherapy benefits Adapted from CANCORS ( primary 
outcome)20      
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	25	of	50  	
 
Summary of measures used at each caregiver assessment. All caregiver outcomes are exploratory. Information important to 
treatment decision-
making Adapted from parent study 
      
Risks, Benefits, 
Alternatives Adapted from parent study69     
     Prognosis Adapted from Coping with Cancer      
AIM 2: Satisfaction with communication and care  
     With MD 
communication  5 items from CAHPS43,70      
     With CE process/CE 
tools Developed from parent study     
With communication 
around chemotherapy PACE scale       
Aim 2: Decision Making about cancer treatment  
     Decisional conflict SURE     
     Decisional involvement Modified Control Preferences 
Scale46      
Decisional regret Decisional Regret Scale      
     Advance care planning Standard metrics3      
Aim 3: Impact of cancer on quality of life, occupation, and financial strain 
Quality of life  PROMIS Global Health Short Form      
Symptoms related to 
chemotherapy and GI 
cancer PRO-CTCAE 
       
Occupation/income Standard assessments        
Health Insurance Standard assessments       
Financial stress/strain From CanCORS, Zafar        
Significant material 
hardship From Children’s Healthwatch       
Adverse financial effects Adapted from literature       
Cost-shifting behaviors Adapted from literature       
Table 2: Key study outcomes, measu res, and time points of assessment 
Domain Measures Baseline 
Assessment Follow-up 
Assessment 
1 (3 months) Follow-up 
Assessment 
2 (6-8 
months )
Covariates 
Socio-demographics Standard assessments     
Health Literacy/numeracy Self-reported health literacy/numeracy     
Religion/spirituality Balboni RSCC     
Acculturation SASH Language subscale     
Key Outcomes 
Core Understanding  
     Chemotherapy benef its Adapted from CANCORS 1     
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	26	of	50  	
 
 
 
These data will be collected at each site by a member of the study team as designated by 
the site’s lead study investigator as overseen by the site’s IRB. All original study form hard copies/source documentation will be kept  in the patients’ study files in locked 
drawers to which only the designated study team member has a key. All electronic 
data will be securely transmitted to the lead  site (Dana-Farber Ca ncer Institute) via 
encrypted file transfer where it will be  kept on Dana-Farber’s secure, password-
protected servers as managed by the Dana-Farber Department of Research Computing and IS. Only the DF/HCC PI and her designees as overseen by the DF/HCC IRB will have access to the data collected during this study. All data collected during this study will be collected and stored using unique st udy ID numbers. All data analysis will be 
done in-house at Dana-Farber/UMB; no data wi ll be released to an outside institution. 
Stakeholders will have access to aggregate interim results, but not to individual 
participant or raw study data. 
 
	
10.0 Data and Specimen Banking* Information important to 
treatment decision-making Adapted from parent study     
     Prognosis Adapted from Coping with Cancer      
Satisfaction with communication and care 
     With MD communication  5 items from Cancer CAHPS1      
Decision Making about cancer treatment     
Information sharing 
preferences Adapted from literature     
     Advance care planning Standard metrics23     
Quality of life & distress    
Quality of life  PROMIS Global Health Short Form       
Anxiety PROMIS Anxiety Short Form       
Depression PROMIS Depression Short Form       
Emotional support PROMIS Emotional Support Short Form       
Caregiver support Californ ia Universal Caregiver 
Assessment      
Caregiver health behaviors Adapted from literature      
Caregiver burden Zarit Burden Interview       
Occupation/income/financial strain 
Occupation/income Standard assessments       
Health Insurance Standard assessments     
Financial stress/strain From CanCORS, Zafar      
Significant material hardship From Children’s Healthwatch      
Adverse financial effects Adapted from literature      
Cost-shifting behaviors Adapted from literature     
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	27	of	50  	
For this study, no specimens will be collected from participants. All participants 
will however, complete up to 4 study surveys. All original study forms (including study surveys, consent forms, registra tions forms, etc.) including hard 
copies/source documentation will be kept in the patients’ study files in locked 
drawers in Dana 1011 to which only the de signated study team member has a key. 
All electronic data will be securely transm itted to the lead site (Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute) via encrypted file transfer where it will be kept on Dana-Farber’s secure, 
password-protected servers as manage d by the Dana-Farber Department of 
Research Computing and IS. Only the DF/HCC PI and her designees as overseen by the DF/HCC IRB will have access to the data collected during this study. All data collected during this study will be collected and stored using unique study ID 
numbers. Data will be stored on DFCI se rvers for 2 years afte r the completion of 
the study.  
 Only the DFCI/HCC PI and her designees will have access to the data. Interim data will 
be released to stakeholders only in aggregate. 
	
Study results will be available on clinicaltria ls.gov and study participants will also be 
asked if they would like to receive overall study results du ring the informed consent 
process.   Collected study data may be stored and used  for future research. If so, any personal 
identifiers will be removed so that the information or samples cannot be linked back to individual participants.   Investigators, including invest igators from collaborating institutions, can request this data 
for new research.  Data may also be shared with outside non-profit academic 
investigators as well as with for-profit pharmaceutical investigators or commercial entities, with whom we collaborate. All re quests for data usage will be up to the 
discretion of the study PI.   
 
11.0 Data Management* and Confidentiality 
	
Primary	analyses	of	the	intervent ion	effect	will	reflect	the	“i ntention	to	treat”	
principle,	however,	results	will	 also	be	described	according	to 	participants’	actual	
use	of	the	intervention.	Differe nces	between	study	arms	in	our	 primary	outcome	
(patients’	understanding	of	chemo therapy	benefits	at	8‐12	weeks )	will	be	examined	
using	the	Fisher’s	exact	test.	Differences	in	all	other	patient 	and	caregiver	outcomes	
will	be	tested	using	Fisher’s	exa ct	test	(for	nominal	categoric al	outcomes),	and	
Wilcoxon	tests	for	ordinal	measur es.	Subgroup	analyses	will	exp lore	the	effect	of	the	
intervention	by	cancer	diagnosis 	(colorectal	or	pancreatic),	pr imary	language,	
health	literacy,	and	b y	components	of	the	intervention	utilized .	Because	the	
intervention	effect	may	be	moderated	by	patient	characteristics 	(e.g.,	English	
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	28	of	50  	
proficiency,	degree	of	acculturat ion),	interaction	tests	will	e xamine	treatment	
heterogeneity.		
	
Descriptive statistics will explore patient/caregiver fina ncial and occupational outcomes 
and financial toxicity over time. Of note, we do not expect these “outcomes” to be 
impacted by the intervention, but we plan to  analyze them across the overall study cohort. 
Trajectories in these outcomes over time w ill be examined using paired Wilcoxon tests, 
or difference scores. We will also explore relationships between financial toxicity, strain and household material hardship (independent  variables) and patie nts’ and caregivers’ 
quality of life and emotional well-being (depen dent variables) using multivariable linear 
regressions controlling fo r potentially confounding sociodemographic factors. 
Generalized estimating equations will also examine the influence of these independent 
variables on relevant outco me trajectories over time. 
 
Primary analysis for our primary and key secondary outcomes will employ multiple 
imputation to mitigate potential bias associ ated with missing data.  Multiple imputation 
will be performed according to a “missing at random” assumption, which postulates that 
the missingness of data is not completely random, but may be partly accounted for by 
observed data.71 
 
Accurate chemotherapy understand ing (primary outcome): Assu ming an attrition rate of 
25% and a resultant n=116, this study has 88%  power to detect a two-fold improvement 
in our primary outcome, with a one-sided p< 0.05 (see table 3). The effect size for our 
primary outcome is based upon conservative projections of accurate expectations 
regarding cure from palliative chemotherapy reported in the literature,20,37 and based 
upon what would constitute a clinically m eaningful improvement in understanding.  
 
Excellent	communication	rating:	Th e	study	also	has	88%	power	to 	detect	a	50%	
increase	in	the	proportion	of	pat ients	providing	excellent	comm unication	ratings,	a	
clinically	meaningful 	effect	size	derived	from	CanCORS20,	with	a	one‐sided	p<0.05.	
	
Decisional	conflict:	In	the	pare nt	study,	25%	of	patients	in	th e	usual	care	arm	
experienced	any	degree	of	decisio nal	conflict.	With	80%	power,	 we	will	be	able	to	
detect	a	17%	decrease	in	decisio nal	conflict	with	a	one‐sided	p <0.05.		
	
Achievement	of	desired	decisiona l	control:	In	the	parent	study, 	38%	of	patients	in	
the	usual	care	arm	achieved	thei r	desired	level	of	decisional	c ontrol,	which	is	
consistent	with	the	literature.72	With	80%	power,	we	will	be	able	to	detect	a	23%	
increase	in	achievement	of	desired	decisional	control	with	a	on e‐sided	p<0.05.		
	
Given	that	multiple	imputation	w ill	be	used	for	missing	data,	T able	3	also	presents	
power	calculations	for	the	recruitment	goal,	n=154.	
 
 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	29	of	50  	
Table 3: Power for primary and secondary  outcome with n=116 and n=154, one-sided 
p<0.05 
	
Outcomes & source of estimate Estimated Effect Power for n=116, 
p<0.05, one-sided Power for n=154, 
p<0.05, one-sided
Usual care 
armCEI arm  
Accurate chemotherapy 
expectations1,73,74 25% 50% 88% 95% 
Excellent communication rating1 50% 75% 88% 95% 
Decisional conflict 25% 8% 80% 100% 
Achievement of desired 
decisional control 38% 61% 80% 89% 
 
 
In	order	to	secure	all	data	colle cted	during	this	study,	the	re search	team	will	work	
on	conjunction	with	all	departme ntal	and	institute‐wide	policie s.	These	policies	
enforce	the	protection	of	our	electronic	information,	especiall y	with	regards	to	
HIPAA	regulations	and	the	integr ity	of	patient	care.	These	poli cies	also	safeguard	
against	theft,	 abuse,	misuse,	and	any	form	of	damage.	The	scope	of	protection	
includes	information	which	is	printed	from	or	stored	on	a	datab ase,	mainframe,	
server	desktop,	laptop,	PDA,	CD‐ROM,	hard	disk,	flash	drive,	op tical	platter,	tape,	
smart	phone,	network,	telephone, 	and	other	computer‐enabled	med ical	devices.	
These	policies	regulate	usage	of	system	IDs,	passwords,	e‐mail	 accounts,	anti‐virus	
mechanisms,	encryption,	mobile	devices,	remote	access,	remote	c ontrol	software,	
and	wireless	devices.	IS	responsibilities	and	governance	includ ing	firewall	
protection	of	all	Dana‐Farber	internal	networks	and	the	interne t,	system	evaluation,	
risk	analysis,	information	access,	regular	review	of	user	accou nts,	systems	audit,	
regular	review	of	remote	access,	a nd	physical	location	access.	 Specific	to	this	
project,	no	data	will	be	stored	on	laptops	at	any	point	and	sec ure	transfer	protocols	
will	be	used	for	any	electronic	exchange	of	information.	All	st aff/users	receive	
mandatory	institutional	trainings	on	Information	Security	and	m ust	adhere	to	
policies	at	all	times.	All	study	 files	will	be	stored	in	a	shar ed	folder	in	a	HIPAA‐
compliant	Dropbox	Business	folder	shared	ONLY	with	the	study	te am	(all	of	whom	
have	Partners	Dropbox	Business).		
	
All	consented	patients	and	interested	caregivers	will	be	inputt ed	into	the	 Clinical 
Trials Management System (CTMS) OnCo re as required by DF /HCC SOP REGIST-101. 
All Dana-Farber Participants will  be registered with OnCore as soon as possible after the 
consenting/registration period,  and always within the sa me day of enrollment. All 
external site participants will have registered  with OnCore as soon as the external team 
notifies DFCI about the new enrollment and sends a copy of the consent form and registration form.  
 
Appendix 5 provides the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) for this study. 
The DSMP will ensure that our DF/HCC multi- site project will comply with Federal 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	30	of	50  	
Regulations, Health Insurance Portab ility and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
requirements, and applicable DF/HCC,  DFCCC, and Standard Operating 
Procedures, and NCI Guidelines.  
 
12.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to  Ensure the Safety of Subjects* 
 
This is a social behavioral research project,  not a treatment protoc ol.  The study involves 
questionnaire-based assessments.  As such, the only adverse event that will be monitored 
and reported is psychological distress as de termined by the treati ng oncologist. For any 
patient who exhibits severe distress as resu lt of the study procedur es, the study research 
assistant will notify the patients’ oncologist and social worker for appropriate response, 
including possible mental health referral if necessary. Furthermore, participants will be 
reminded that participation is voluntary and can be stopped at any time for any reason.  
 
13.0 Withdrawal of Subjects* 
Subjects who do not complete the baseline assessment prior to the initiation of 
chemotherapy, or within 2 weeks of th e decision not to undergo chemotherapy 
will be withdrawn from the research st udy without their consent. These patients 
will be informed of their withdraw al from the study by study staff.  
The overall DF/HCC study PI, Dr. Andrea Enzinger, will make all decisions 
regarding early termination of the study. The study team will then notify all participants accordingly.   
 When subjects withdraw from the research, they will no longer be contacted by 
study staff to complete remaining assessments. Their assessments up to their withdrawal will be included in intenti on-to-treat analyses of the primary and 
secondary outcomes. If a participant wit hdraws consent at any time, all of their 
assessments will be discarded and will not  be included in study analyses, unless 
otherwise noted by the w ithdrawing participant.  
14.0 Risks to Subjects* 
 Physical risks: Physical risk to subjec ts in the proposed st udy is negligible. 
 Psychological risks: Participants may e xperience emotional/psychological distress 
as a result of participating, as a result of their diagnos is of advanced GI cancer, 
and/or as a result of learning that pallia tive chemotherapy is not at all likely to 
cure their cancer. Participants may deci de at any time and for any reason not to 
participate in the proposed study. The alte rnative to participat ing in the proposed 
study is to not participate in the prop osed study in which case the patient will 
receive the usual care chemotherapy informed consent materials. 
 Privacy risks: There is a risk of privacy violation or loss of confidentiality; 
however, this is anticipated to be minimal, and the study team is committed to guaranteeing adequate protection against risk as described in the following 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	31	of	50  	
section. 
 
Protection Against Risks  
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Participants will be approached in by the RA  in a private and confidential manner. If the 
patient is eligible and interested in part icipation, the IRB-approved IC document for 
research will be reviewed  with and signed by the participan t. The RA will keep all signed 
IC documents in a locked drawer, accessible only to the PI-designa ted study team member 
who holds the key.  The informed consent to participate in research documents will be approved by each site’s IRB and 
will adhere to strict standards regarding its content. Required sections 
include: Introduction; Why is this research study being done ? What other options are 
there? What is involved in the research study? How long will I be in this research 
study? What are the risks or discomforts of th e research study? What are the benefits of 
the research study? Can I stop being in th e research study and what are my rights? 
What are the costs? What happens if I am in jured or sick because I took part in this 
research study? What about confidentiality? Whom do I contact if I have questions 
about the research study?   Protection against the 3 types of risk to this study: 
 Protection against physical risks: physical risk to subjects in  the proposed study is 
negligible. 
 Protection against psychological risks: First, we are minimizing risk by our 
extensive process of stak eholder involvement, pilo ting of the CEI tools on 
patients/caregivers of patients with advan ced GI cancer, with iterative rounds of 
revisions to ensure that the CEI tools developed meet the information needs and 
preferences of Latino can cer patients/caregivers. Any patients who exhibit 
psychological distress as a result of the study tools will be referred to the patients’ oncologist and social worker, or a ment al health professional as appropriate. 
 Protection against privacy risks: To protect PHI, the following measures will be 
taken. Patients will be approached and interviewed in private settings. All study 
form hard copies will use only de-identif ied unique study ID numbers and be kept 
in the patients’ study files in locked drawers to which only the designated study 
team member has a key. All electronic da ta will be kept on Dana-Farber’s secure, 
password protected servers as manage d by the Dana-Farber Department of 
Research Computing and IS. 
 
15.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects* 
By taking part in the research, individual  subjects, particularly those randomized 
to the intervention, may gain an improve d knowledge of the risks and benefits of 
the chemotherapy regimen for their cancer . This knowledge may prepare them for 
what lies ahead in their treatment course and may therefore impr ove quality of life 
and decrease distress. Subjects may also  gain a more accura te understanding of 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	32	of	50  	
their prognosis, which may help facilitate  end-of-life planning and the pursuit of 
goal-concordant care. It is our hope that  the knowledge gained through this study 
will be durable and subjects will retain  it beyond the completion of the study. 
 
16.0 Vulnerable Populations* 
Not applicable to this study. 
17.0 Community-Based Participatory Research*. 
Not applicable to this study. 
18.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects* 
Study results will be shared with participan ts in aggregate at the conclusion of 
primary and secondary analyses. 
19.0 Setting 
Study Setting: The study will be conducted at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
Longwood Campus. Participants will be identif ied through 2 different methods: 1) direct 
referral from clinicians in the Gastrointes tinal Oncology group and 2) review of new and 
existing patient scheduling reports in EPIC . For consenting purposes, both patients and 
caregivers will be approached in clinic in-person by a member of the research team. All study assessments can be completed in-person, over the phone, or vi a email in order to 
minimize burden on participants. This study wi ll also be open at 6 additional academic 
and community oncology practices across th e US, serving large and diverse Latino 
populations. Diversity of sites will en sure generalizability of our findings. 
	
20.0 Resources Available 
This	study	team	will	be	taking	pl ace	under	the	Population	Scien ces	Division	at	Dana‐
Farber.	The	Population	Sciences	 Division	maintains	its	own	serv er	infrastructure	
and	systems	administration	staff 	that	provide	data	storage,	dat a	backup,	and	data	
security	in	support	of	large	data	 analysis	projects.	The	server s	are	configured	as	a	
virtual	server	pool	with	virtual	 server	hosts	connected	to	a	ce ntralized	Storage	Area	
Network	(SAN)	device.	Server	virtualization	increases	the	effic iency	and	flexibility	of	
the	server	pool	while	minimizing	 downtime	and	cost.	The	server	 pool	currently	has	
20	processor	cores	and	a	data	sto rage	capacity	of	9	terabytes.	 This	server	
infrastructure	has	a	dedicated	S ystems	Administrator	to	optimiz e	performance,	
maintain	security	patches,	perfo rm	backups,	and	execute	other	r elated	tasks.	
Researchers	in	the	Division	have 	access	to	additional	resources 	through	the	
Research	Computing	group.	Resear ch	Computing	provides	a	variety 	of	services	
including	file	server	space,	backup	services,	website	hosting,	 and	support	of	some	
workstation	computers.	
Additionally,	the	research	staff	 is	well‐qualified	to	perform	t heir	duties.	Drs.	
Enzinger	and	Schrag	have	extensi ve	experience	in	conducting	mul ti‐center	research	
studies	in	cancer	disparities,	h ealth	services,	and	education.	 They	have	deep	
knowledge	of	the	clinical	and	re search	environments	and	the	pat ient	population	and	
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	33	of	50  	
culture	at	DFCI.	Dr.	Lindsay	has 	extensive	experience	in	health 	disparities	and	socio‐
behavioral	intervention,	particu larly	with	regard	to	Latino	hea lth.	The	project	
manager,	Christine	Cronin	has	si gnificant	experience	in	running 	large,	multi‐center	
trials	in	this	area,	and	she	has 	overseen	the	management	of	DF/ HCC	Protocol	#15‐
143	(the	parent	study	for	this	project	that	was	funded	by	PCORI ).		
 
We believe that it is feasible to recrui t the required number of suitable subjects 
within the agreed recruitment period. Th e GI oncology clinic at DFCI sees an 
average of 25-30 patients with advanced colorectal and pancreatic cancers about 
to start chemotherapy per month. Of th ese, roughly 10% are Latino. This study 
will also be open at 6 additional acad emic and community oncology practices 
across the US, serving large a nd diverse Latino populations.  
 Dr. Enzinger will devote 5% of her ti me to conducting and completing the 
research project. Her main responsib ilities will include overseeing subject 
recruitment and ensuring interim project analyses. Christine Cronin, the PM will 
also devote 75% of her time to the overs ight and management of this project.  
The Population Sciences Division maintains it s own server infrastructure and systems 
administration staff that provide data storage, data backup, an d data security in support of 
large data analysis projects. The servers are configured as a virtual server pool with 
virtual server hosts connected to a cent ralized Storage Area Network (SAN) device. 
Server virtualization increases the efficiency  and flexibility of the server pool while 
minimizing downtime and cost. The server poo l currently has 20 processor cores and a 
data storage capacity of 9 terabytes. This se rver infrastructure has a dedicated Systems 
Administrator to optimize performance, mainta in security patches, perform backups, and 
execute other related tasks. Researchers in the Division have access to additional 
resources through the Research Computing group. Research Computing provides a 
variety of services including file server space, backup services , website hosting, and 
support of some workstation computers. 
 
Any patients who exhibit psychological distre ss as a result of the study tools will be 
referred to the patients’ oncologist and social worker, or a mental health professional as 
appropriate. Given the nature of the inte rvention, there are no anticipated medical 
consequences of this study.  
 
All investigators, research assistants, and study staff will be oriented to the protocol 
during a study-initiation webinar. During this  webinar, the PI and PM will provide a 
detailed orientation to all study procedur es and all study staff members’ duties and 
functions. Each site will also have electronic and hard copies of the protocol which will 
be made available to study staff. Regular check-in conference calls with study staff will 
be used to provide updates on the protocol if changes have been made, discuss issues at 
the individual sites with regard to recru itment, administration of the intervention, 
assessment, or any other issue that may arise.  
  
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	34	of	50  	
21.0 Prior Approvals 
Not applicable for this study.  
 
22.0 Recruitment Methods 
The majority of potential subjects will be recr uited at their initial consultation with the 
oncologist at participating study sites. These patients will be aware that they have been diagnosed with either colorectal or pancre atic cancer but will have not yet started 
treatment with chemotherapy. Potential s ubjects will be approached by study research 
assistants prior to their cons ultation and offered participatio n in a study seeking to study a 
new tool to enhance educati on around treatments for colorectal and pancreatic cancers. 
The RA will discuss the overall aims of the study (to improve education around cancer 
treatments), the study intervention (educational tools) and assessments (surveys). The RA 
will refer to cancer treatments and not mention chemotherapy specifically as these patients have not yet discussed treatment opti ons and the potential for chemotherapy with 
their oncologists. If the patient agrees to pa rticipate the RA will obtain written informed 
consent at that time.  
	
Potential subjects may also be recruited after their initial consultation with the oncologist. 
If the subject meets eligibility criteria but was not approached prior to their consultation, the study RA will approach the potential subjec t, either at the conclusion of the initial 
consultation, or at a subsequent visit prior to the initiation of chemotherapy. The RA will 
again describe the study and offer the potential  subject the opportunity  to participate. If 
the subject agrees to participate, the RA will obtain written informed consent at that time. 
	
The source of subjects at DFCI will be the GI Oncology clinic where patients with 
colorectal and pancreatic cancers. 
 
The research assistant will identify potentially eligible participants by systematically reviewing new patient and existing patient scheduling reports, as well as by accepting 
physician referrals. We are requesting a HIPA A waiver of authorization so that the 
research assistant may look in the Electronic H ealth Record to determine eligibility before 
approaching potential participants.  
1) For patients presenting to oncology c linic for an initial consultation/new 
treatment decision regarding first-line chemotherapy for their metastatic 
colorectal cancer, locally advanced pancreatic cancer, or metastatic 
pancreatic cancer: the research assist ant will identify potentially eligible 
patients by screening new patient scheduling reports. The research assistant will notify the oncology attending physician of the patients’ potential eligibility prior to this initial consultation, will confirm the patients’ potential eligibility, and will ask perm ission to approach the patient for 
participation. Study research assistants will keep track of the number of 
potentially eligible patients, the number  of physician refusals, and the reason 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	35	of	50  	
for those refusals. Most potentially eligible patients will be approached 
before their initial consultation with the oncologist.  
2) Oncology clinicians (p hysicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, 
and pharmacists from medical oncology,  surgical oncology, and radiation 
oncology) will be able to refer eligib le participants for enrollment in the 
study. Each site will determine the logistics of the referral process depending on its clinic m odel and staffing. At all sites, if the referral is 
made by a provider other than the atte nding physician, the research assistant 
will ask the attending physician’s permis sion prior to approaching a patient. 
The research assistants will keep track of the number of potentially eligible 
patients referred, the number of physic ian refusals, and the reason for those 
refusals. 
 
All potential subjects will be approached by a study research assistant or referred by an 
oncology provider. Advertisements (printed, audi o, or video), will not be used to recruit 
subjects in this study. 
 Subjects will be paid $10 for completion of the baseline assessment. They will be 
paid $10 for the 8-12-week follow-up ques tionnaire. Participants will receive $25 
for the final follow-up questionnai re given at 6-8 months.   
 
23.0 Local Number of Subjects:  
The study team is looking to enroll 100 total subjects and car egivers locally. 
 
24.0 Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects 
To protect PHI, the following measures will be taken. Patients will be approached and 
interviewed in private settings . All study form hard copies will use only de-identified 
unique study ID numbers and be kept in the patients’ study files in locked drawers to 
which only the designated study team member ha s a key. All electronic data will be kept 
on Dana-Farber’s secure, password protected  servers as managed by the Dana-Farber 
Department of Research Computing and IS.  Departmental and institute-wide policies enforce the protection of our electronic 
information, especially with regards to HI PAA regulations and the integrity of patient 
care. These policies also safeguard again theft, 
abuse,  misuse, and any form of damage. 
The scope of protection includes informati on which is printed from or stored on a 
database, mainframe, server desktop, lapt op, PDA, CD-ROM, hard disk, flash drive, 
optical platter, tape, smart phone, network,  telephone, and other computer-enabled 
medical devices. These policies regulate usage of system IDs, passwords, e-mail 
accounts, anti-virus mechanisms, encryption, mobile devices, remote access, remote control software, and wireless devices. IS  responsibilities and governance including 
firewall protection of all Dana-Farber internal networks and the internet, system 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	36	of	50  	
evaluation, risk analysis, information access, regular review of user accounts, systems 
audit, regular review of remote access, a nd physical location access. Specific to this 
project, no data will be stored on laptops at a ny point and secure transfer protocols will be 
used for any electronic exchange of inform ation. All staff/users receive mandatory 
institutional trainings on Information Security and must adhere to policies at all times. 
Subjects will be approached for potential pa rticipation in private They will also 
complete all study assessments in private. At each assessment, subjects will be reminded that they can skip any questions they do not wish to answer and are free to withdraw from the study at any time. 
Study research assistants will have access to  subject’s medical records to abstract 
information as discussed in other sections of this protocol. RAs will only access information that is necessary to collec t for the study protocol and will not be 
permitted to access the medical record for other purposes. 
25.0 Compensation for Research-Related Injury 
Not applicable for this study.  
 
26.0 Economic Burden to Subjects 
Subjects will complete study assessments at  previously scheduled oncology visits. 
We do not anticipate that the study will lead to any new costs for subjects. 
27.0 Consent Process 
We will be obtaining informed consent for this study. The study RAs will obtain 
written informed consent from subjects afte r they agree to part icipate in the study. 
For most subjects, this will occur imme diately before their initial oncology 
consultation. We will follow SOP: Informed Consent Process for subjects enrolled at DFCI. Each site will follow  its own institutionally-mandated informed 
consent procedures. 
Because the caregiver is not always physic ally present at clinic visits, we are 
requesting waiver of documentation of consen t for caregivers.  This will allow the 
RA the flexibility needed to verbally consent caregivers in person and over the 
phone since caregivers will not always be present in clinic. 
Non-English Speaking Subjects: Many study participants will speak Spanish. All 
study materials, including informed consent forms, will be translated into Spanish 
by native Spanish speakers with exper tise in medical oncology or health 
communication. Spanish speaking subjects will be approached either by Spanish-speaking research assistants, or by resear ch assistants with professional Spanish 
interpreters.  
 
28.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	37	of	50  	
For patient subjects, we will follow SO P: Informed Consent Process (CON-100). 
For caregivers, we will be requesting a waiver of documentation of consent as they may not always be present with the patients for whom they care. All 
caregivers, however, will be given a st udy letter that contains  the elements of 
informed consent and informs them about their involvement with this project.  
See Appendices 1-2 for the model informed consent forms in Spanish and English for 
patient subjects. See Appendices 3-4 for c onsent scripts in English and Spanish for 
caregiver subjects.  
	
29.0 Drugs or Devices 
Not applicable for this study.  
 
30.0 References 
	
1.  Baile WF, Aaron J. Patient-physician communication in oncology: past, present, 
and future. Curr Opin Oncol. 2005;17(4):331-5. 
2.  Institute of Medicine (IOM) Report: Delivering high quality cancer care: Charting 
a new course for a system in crisis. Washington, D.C.2014. 
3. Epstein RM, Street RL. Patient-centered communication in cancer care. National 
Cancer Institute; 2007. 
4.  Trice ED, Prigerson HG. Communication in end-stage cancer: review of the 
literature and future research. J Health Commun. 2009;14 Suppl 1:95-108. 
5.  Ashton CM, Haidet P, Paterniti DA, Collins TC, Gordon HS, O'Malley K, Petersen 
LA, Sharf BF, Suarez-Almazor ME, Wray NP, Street RL, Jr. Racial and ethnic disparities in the use of health services: bias, preferences, or poor 
communication? J Gen Intern Med. 2003;18(2):146-52. 
6. Ackerson LK, Viswanath K. The social context of interpersonal communication 
and health. J Health Commun. 2009;14 Suppl 1:5-17. 
7. Smith AK, McCarthy EP, Paulk E, Balboni TA, Maciejewski PK, Block SD, 
Prigerson HG. Racial and ethnic differences in advance care planning among patients with cancer: impact of terminal illness acknowledgment, religiousness, 
and treatment preferences. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(25):4131-7. 
8. Karliner LS, Hwang ES, Nickleach D, Kaplan CP. Language barriers and patient-
centered breast cancer care. Patient Educ Couns. 2011;84(2):223-8. 
9. Morales LS, Cunningham WE, Brown JA, Liu H, Hays RD. Are Latinos less 
satisfied with communication by health care providers? J Gen Intern Med. 
1999;14(7):409-17. 
10. Sudore RL, Landefeld CS, Perez-Stable EJ, Bibbins-Domingo K, Williams BA, 
Schillinger D. Unraveling the relationship between literacy, language proficiency, and patient-physician communication. Patient Educ Couns. 2009;75(3):398-402. 
11.  Statistical portrait of hispanics in the United States, 2012. [Cited December 1, 
2015]. Available from www.pewhispanic.org/2014/04/29/statistical-portrait-of-
hispanics-in-the-united-states-2012/ . 
12. Sentell T, Braun KL. Low health literacy, limited English proficiency, and health 
status in Asians, Latinos, and other racial/ethnic groups in California. J Health Commun. 2012;17 Suppl 3:82-99.  
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	38	of	50  	
13. Kutner M, Greenbery E, Baer JA. A first look at the literacy of America's adults in 
the 21st century. National Center for Education Statistics. 2005. 
14. Kale E, Syed HR. Language barriers and the use of interpreters in the public 
health services. A questionnaire-based survey. Patient Educ Couns. 
2010;81(2):187-91. 
15. Pham K, Thornton JD, Engelberg RA, Jackson JC, Curtis JR. Alterations during 
medical interpretation of ICU family conf erences that interfere with or enhance 
communication. Chest. 2008;134(1):109-16. 
16. Thornton JD, Pham K, Engelberg RA, Jackson JC, Curtis JR. Families with 
limited English proficiency receive less information and support in interpreted intensive care unit family conferences. Crit Care Med. 2009;37(1):89-95. 
17.  Allen RS, Allen JY, Hilgeman MM, DeCoster J. End-of-life decision-making, 
decisional conflict, and enhanced information: race effects. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2008;56(10):1904-9. 
18. Born W, Greiner KA, Sylvia E, Butler J, Ahluwalia JS. Knowledge, attitudes, and 
beliefs about end-of-life care among inner-city African Americans and Latinos. J Palliat Med. 2004;7(2):247-56. 
19. Fischer SM, Sauaia A, Min SJ, Kutner J. Advance directive discussions: lost in 
translation or lost opportunities? J Palliat Med. 2012;15(1):86-92.  
20. Weeks JC, Catalano PJ, Cronin A, Finkelman MD, Mack JW, Keating NL, Schrag 
D. Patients' expectations about effects of chemotherapy for advanced cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(17):1616-25. 
21. Smith AK, Sudore RL, Perez-Stable EJ. Palliative care for Latino patients and 
their families: whenever we prayed, she wept. JAMA. 2009;301(10):1047-57, E1. 
22. Romero LJ, Lindeman RD, Koehler KM, Allen A. Influence of ethnicity on 
advance directives and end-of-life decisions. JAMA. 1997;277(4):298-9. 
23. Enzinger AC, Zhang B, Schrag D, Prigerson HG. Outcomes of prognostic 
disclosure: Associations with prognostic understanding, distress, and relationship with physician among patients with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol. 
2015;33(32):3809-16. 
24. Hagerty RG, Butow PN, Ellis PA, Lobb EA, Pendlebury S, Leighl N, Goldstein D, 
Lo SK, Tattersall MH. Cancer patient preferences for communication of prognosis in the metastatic setting. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22(9):1721-30. 
25. Noguera A, Yennurajalingam S, Torres-Vigil I, Parsons HA, Duarte ER, Palma A, 
Bunge S, Palmer JL, Bruera E. Decisional control preferences, disclosure of 
information preferences, and satisfaction among Hispanic patients with advanced 
cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2014;47(5):896-905. 
26. Yennurajalingam S, Parsons HA, Duarte ER, Palma A, Bunge S, Palmer JL, 
Delgado-Guay MO, Allo J, Bruera E. Deci sional control preferences of Hispanic 
patients with advanced cancer from the United States and Latin America. J Pain 
Symptom Manage. 2013;46(3):376-85. 
27. Yennurajalingam S, Noguera A, Parsons HA, Torres-Vigil I, Duarte ER, Palma A, 
Bunge S, Palmer JL, Delgado-Guay MO, Br uera E. A multicenter survey of 
Hispanic caregiver preferences for patient decision control in the United States and Latin America. Palliat Med. 2013;27(7):692-8. 
28.  Weeks JC, Cook EF, O'Day SJ, Peterson LM, Wenger N, Reding D, Harrell FE, 
Kussin P, Dawson NV, Connors AF, Jr., Lynn J, Phillips RS. Relationship 
between cancer patients' predictions of prognosis and their treatment preferences. JAMA. 1998;279(21):1709-14. 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	39	of	50  	
29. Meropol NJ, Weinfurt KP, Burnett CB, Balshem A, Benson AB, 3rd, Castel L, 
Corbett S, Diefenbach M, Gaskin D, Li Y, Manne S, Marshall J, Rowland JH, 
Slater E, Sulmasy DP, Van Echo D, Washington S, Schulman KA. Perceptions of 
patients and physicians regarding phase I cancer clinical trials: implications for physician-patient communication. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21(13):2589-96. 
30. Mack JW, Walling A, Dy S, Antonio AL, Adams J, Keating NL, Tisnado D. Patient 
beliefs that chemotherapy may be curative and care received at the end of life among patients with metastatic lung and colorectal cancer. Cancer. 
2015;121(11):1891-7. 
31. Earle CC, Park ER, Lai B, Weeks JC, Ayanian JZ, Block S. Identifying potential 
indicators of the quality of end-of-life cancer care from administrative data. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21(6):1133-8. 
32. Wright AA, Zhang B, Ray A, Mack JW, Trice E, Balboni T, Mitchell SL, Jackson 
VA, Block SD, Maciejewski PK, Prigerson HG. Associations between end-of-life 
discussions, patient mental health, medical care near death, and caregiver bereavement adjustment. JAMA. 2008;300(14):1665-73.  
33. Zhang B, Wright AA, Huskamp HA, Nilsson ME, Maciejewski ML, Earle CC, 
Block SD, Maciejewski PK, Prigerson HG. Health care costs in the last week of 
life: associations with end-of-life conversations. Arch Intern Med. 
2009;169(5):480-8. 
34. Iwashyna TJ, Chang VW. Racial and ethnic differences in place of death: United 
States, 1993. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002;50(6):1113-7. 
35. Lackan NA, Eschbach K, Stimpson JP, Freeman JL, Goodwin JS. Ethnic 
differences in in-hospital place of death among older adults in California: effects 
of individual and contextual characteristic s and medical resource supply. Med 
Care. 2009;47(2):138-45. 
36. Smith AK, Earle CC, McCarthy EP. Racial and ethnic differences in end-of-life 
care in fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries with advanced cancer. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009;57(1):153-8. 
37.  El-Jawahri A, Podgurski LM, Eichler AF, Plotkin SR, Temel JS, Mitchell SL, 
Chang Y, Barry MJ, Volandes AE. Use of video to facilitate end-of-life discussions with patients with cancer: a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(2):305-10. 
38. Weinfurt KP, Seils DM, Lin L, Sulmasy DP, Astrow AB, Hurwitz HI, Cohen RB, 
Meropol NJ. Research participants' high expectations of benefit in early-phase 
oncology trials: are we asking the right question? J Clin Oncol. 
2012;30(35):4396-400. 
39. Liu PH, Landrum MB, Weeks JC, Huskamp HA, Kahn KL, He Y, Mack JW, 
Keating NL. Physicians' propensity to discuss prognosis is associated with patients' awareness of prognosis for metastatic cancers. J Palliat Med. 
2014;17(6):673-82. 
40. Burris HA, 3rd, Moore MJ, Andersen J, Green MR, Rothenberg ML, Modiano 
MR, Cripps MC, Portenoy RK, Storniolo AM, Tarassoff P, Nelson R, Dorr FA, Stephens CD, Von Hoff DD. Improvements in survival and clinical benefit with gemcitabine as first-line therapy for patients with advanced pancreas cancer: a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol. 1997;15(6):2403-13. 
41. Von Hoff DD, Ervin T, Arena FP, Chiorean EG, Infante J, Moore M, Seay T, 
Tjulandin SA, Ma WW, Saleh MN, Harris M, Reni M, Dowden S, Laheru D, Bahary N, Ramanathan RK, Tabernero J, Hidalgo M, Goldstein D, Van Cutsem 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	40	of	50  	
E, Wei X, Iglesias J, Renschler MF. Increased survival in pancreatic cancer with 
nab-paclitaxel plus gemcitabine. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(18):1691-703. 
42. Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, Bouche O, Guimbaud R, Becouarn Y, Adenis 
A, Raoul JL, Gourgou-Bourgade S, de la Fouchardiere C, Bennouna J, Bachet JB, Khemissa-Akouz F, Pere-Verge D, Delbaldo C, Assenat E, Chauffert B, Michel P, Montoto-Grillot C, Ducreux M, Groupe Tumeurs Digestives of U, Intergroup P. FOLFIRINOX versus gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(19):1817-25. 
43.  CAHPS Cancer Care Survey. Content last reviewed September 2017. Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, MD. http://www.ahrq.gov/cahps/surveys-guidance/cancer/index.html  
44.  Weeks JC, Catalano PJ, Cronin A, Finkelman MD, Mack JW, Keating NL, Schrag 
D. Patients' expectations about effects of chemotherapy for advanced cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2012;367(17):1616-25. 
45.  Legare F, Kearing S, Clay K, Gagnon S, D’Amours D, Rousseau M, O’Connor A. 
Are you SURE?: Assessing patient decision conflict with a 4-item screening test. Can Fam Physician. 2019; 56(8); e308-14.  
46.  Degner LF, Kristjanson LJ, Bowman D, Sloan JA, Carriere KC, O'Neil J, Bilodeau 
B, Watson P, Mueller B. Information needs and decisional preferences in women 
with breast cancer. JAMA. 1997;277(18):1485-92. 
47.  Brehaut JC, O’Connor AM, Wood TJ, Hack TF, Simioff L, Gordon E, Feldman-Stewart D. Validation of a decision regret scale. Med Decis Making. 2003; 23(4): 281-92. 
48.  Hays RD, Bjorner JB, Revicki DA, Spritzer KL, Cella D. Development of physical 
and mental health summary scores from the patient-reported outcomes 
measurement information system (PROMI S) global items. Qual Life Res. 2009; 
18(7): 873-880). 
49.  Dueck AC, Mendoza TR, Mitchell SA, Reeve BB, Castro KM, Rogak LJ, Atkinson 
TM, Bennett AV, Denicoff AM, O'Mara AM, Li Y, Clauser SB, Bryant DM, 
Bearden JD 3rd, Gillis TA, Harness JK, Siegel RD, Paul DB, Cleeland 
CS, Schrag D, Sloan JA, Abernethy AP, Bruner DW, Minasian LM, Basch E; 
National Cancer Institute PRO-CTCAE Study Group. Validity and Reliability of 
the US National Cancer Institute's Patient-Reported Outcomes Version of the 
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO-CTCAE). JAMA Oncol. 
2015 Nov;1(8):1051-9. 
50.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Center for Health 
Statistics (NCHS). National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Questionnaire (or Examination Protocol, or Laboratory Protocol). Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, [2015-2016] [https:// wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/2015-
2016/questionnaires/OCQ_Family_I.pdf]. 
51. Hager ER, Quigg AM, Black MM, Coleman SM, Heeren T, Rose-Jacobs R, Cook 
JT, Ettinger de Cuba SA, Casey PH, Chilton M, Cutts DB, Meyers AF, Frank DA. 
Development and validity of a 2 
item screen to identify families at risk for food insecurity. Pediatrics. 2010 
Jul;126(1):e26-32;  
52.  Garg A, Toy S, Tripodis Y, Silverstein M, Freeman E. Addressing social 
determinants of health at well child care visits: A cluster 
RCT. Pediatrics 2015; 135:e296–e304. 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	41	of	50  	
53.  Children's Healthwatch Survey. 2010. Available 
at: http://www.childrenshealthwatch.org/ upload/resource/englishinterview_revisio
n4a.pdf  
54.  Cagle JG, Carr DC, Hong S, Zimmerman S. Financial burden among US 
households affected by cancer at the end of life. 
Psychooncology.  2016 Aug;25(8):919-26 
55.  Irwin B, Kimmick G, Altomare I, Marcom PK, Houck K, Zafar SY, Peppercorn J. 
Patient experience and attitudes toward addressing the cost of breast cancer 
care. Oncologist. 2014 Nov;19(11):1135-40. 
56.  Abel GA, Albelda R, Khera N, Hahn T, Salas Coronado DY, Odejide OO, et al. 
Financial hardship and patient-reported outcomes after hematopoietic cell 
transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2016;22: 1504–10. 
57.  Zafar SY, Peppercorn JM, Schrag D, Taylor DH, Goetzinger AM, Zhong X, 
Abernethy AP. The financial toxicity of c ancer treatment: a pilot study assessing 
out-of-pocket expenses and the insured cancer patient’s experience. Oncologist. 
2013; 18(4): 381-90. 
58.  California Caregiver Resource Centers Uniform Assessment Tool. 2003. 
Available at: 
https://www.caregiver.org/sites/caregiv er.org/files/pdfs/tk_california_assessment
_tool.pdf  
59.  Higginson IJ, Gao W, Jackson D, Murray J, Harding R. Short-
form Zarit Caregiver Burden Interview s were valid in advanced conditions. J Clin 
Epidemiol. 2010 May;63(5):535-42 
60.  Burton LC, Newsom JT, Schulz R, Hirsch CH, German PS. Preventive health 
behaviors among spousal caregivers. Prev  Med. 1997 Mar-Apr;26(2):162-9. 
61.  Marin G, Marin BV, Perez-Stable EJ, Sabogal F, Otero-Sabogal R. Changes in 
information as a function of a culturally appropriate smoking cessation community intervention for Hispanics. Am J Community Psychol. 1990;18(6):847-64. 
62.  Sarkar U, Schillinger D, López A, Sudore R. Validation of self-reported health 
literacy questions among diverse English and Spanish-speaking populations. J 
Gen Intern Med. 2011 Mar;26(3):265-71. 
63.  Stagliano V, Wallace LS. Brief health literacy screening items predict newest vital 
sign scores. J Am Board Fam Med. 2013 Sep-Oct;26(5):558-65. 
64.  Balboni TA, Paulk ME, Balboni MJ, Phelps AC, Loggers ET, Wright AA, Block 
SD, Lewis EF, Peteet JR, Prigerson HG. Provision of spiritual care to patients 
with advanced cancer: associations with medical care and quality of life near death. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(3):445-52.  
65. Balboni TA, Maciejewski PK, Balboni MJ, Enzinger AC, Paulk E, Munoz F, 
Rivera L, Mutchler J, Finlay E, Marr L, McCorkle R, Temel JS, Weeks JC, 
Vanderweele TJ, Prigerson HG, editors. Racial/ethnic differences in end-of-life 
(EoL) treatment preferences: The role of religious beliefs about care. American Society of Clinical Oncology; 2013; Chicago, IL. 
66. Phelps AC, Maciejewski PK, Nilsson M, Balboni TA, Wright AA, Paulk ME, Trice 
E, Schrag D, Peteet JR, Block SD, Prigerson HG. Religious coping and use of intensive life-prolonging care near death in patients with advanced cancer. 
JAMA. 2009;301(11):1140-7. 
67. Price M, Cameron R, Butow P. Communicating risk information: the influence of 
graphical display format on quantitativ e information perception-Accuracy, 
comprehension and preferences. Pat Educ Couns. 2007;69(1-3):121-8. 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	42	of	50  	
68. Rothman RL, Montori VM, Cherrington A, Pignone MP. Perspective: the role of 
numeracy in health care. J Health Commun. 2008;13(6):583-95.  
 
69.  Leighl NB, Shepherd HL, Butow PN, Clarke SJ, McJannett M, Beale PJ, Wilcken 
NR, Moore MJ, Chen EX, Goldstein D, Ho rvath L, Knox JJ, Krzyzanowska M, 
Oza AM, Feld R, Hedley D, Xu W, Tattersall MH. Supporting treatment decision making in advanced cancer: a randomized trial of a decision aid for patients with advanced colorectal cancer considering chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 
2011;29(15):2077-84. 
70.  Consumer Assessment of Healt hcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS). 
Retrieved March 2, 2019, from https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-
and-Systems/Research/CAHPS/  
71.  Schafer JL. Multiple imputation: a primer. Stat Methods Med Res.  1999 
Mar;8(1):3-15. 
72.  Leighl NB, Shepherd HL, Butow PN, Clarke SJ, McJannett M, Beale PJ, Wilcken 
NR, Moore MJ, Chen EX, Goldstein D, Horvath L, Knox JJ, Krzyzanowska 
M, Oza AM, Feld R, Hedley D, Xu W, Tattersall MH. Supporting treatment decision making in advanced cancer: a randomized trial of 
a decision aid for 
patients with advanced colorectal cancer considering chemotherapy. J Clin 
Oncol. 2011 May 20;29(15):2077-84 
73. Strauss AL, Corbin JM. Basics of qualitative research: techniques and 
procedures for developing grounded theory. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1998. 
74. Shoemaker SJ, Wolf MS, Brach C. The Patient Education Materials Assessment 
Tool (PEMAT) and User's Guide. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2013. 
75. QOPI Certification Site Assessment Standards. 2013 [updated 2013; cited 
December 15, 2015]; Available from: 
http://qopi.asco.org/Documents/QCPstandards_Round8_01_15_2013.pdf. 
76.  Colon Cancer. Version 3.2013. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology 
[serial on the Internet]. 2013 [cited December 15, 2015]: Available from: www.nccn.org. 
77. Abrams TA, Meyer G, Moloney J, Meyerhardt JA, Schrag D, Fuchs CS. Patterns 
of chemotherapy use in a U.S.-wide population-based cohort of patients with 
metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(suppl; abstr 3537). 
78. Shoemaker SJ, Wolf MS, Brach C. The Patient Education Materials Assessment 
Tool (PEMAT) and User's Guide. In: Quality AfHRa, editor. Rockville, MD: AHRQ; 2013. 
79. Hawley ST, Zikmund-Fisher B, Ubel P,  Jancovic A, Lucas T, Fagerlin A. The 
impact of the format of graphical presentation on health-related knowledge and 
treatment choices. Pat Educ Couns. 2008;73(3):448-55. 
80. Zikmund-Fisher BJ, Fagerlin A, Ubel PA. A demonstration of ''less can be more'' 
in risk graphics. Med Decis Making. 2010;30(6):661-71. 
81. Fagerlin A, Zikmund-Fisher BJ, Ubel PA. Helping patients decide: ten steps to 
better risk communication. J Natl Cancer Instit. 2011;103(19):1436-43. 
82.  El-Jawahri A, Traeger L, Park ER, Greer JA, Pirl WF, Lennes IT, Jackson VA, 
Gallagher ER, Temel JS. Associations among prognostic understanding, quality of life, and mood in patients with advanced cancer. Cancer. 2014;120(2):278-85. 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	43	of	50  	
83. Temel JS, Greer JA, Admane S, Gallagher ER, Jackson VA, Lynch TJ, Lennes 
IT, Dahlin CM, Pirl WF. Longitudinal perceptions of prognosis and goals of 
therapy in patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer: results of a 
randomized study of early palliative care . J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(17):2319-26. 
84. Arora NK, Hesse BW, Rimer BK, Viswanath K, Clayman ML, Croyle RT. 
Frustrated and confused: the Amer ican public rates its cancer-related 
information-seeking experiences. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2008;23(3):223-8. 
85. Gabrijel S, Grize L, Helfenstein E, Brutsche M, Grossman P, Tamm M, Kiss A. 
Receiving the diagnosis of lung cancer: patient recall of information and satisfaction with physician communication.  J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(2):297-302. 
86. Gaston CM, Mitchell G. Information giving and decision-making in patients with 
advanced cancer: a systematic review. Soc Sci Med. 2005;61(10):2252-64. 
87. Jenkins V, Solis-Trapala I, Langridge C, Catt S, Talbot DC, Fallowfield LJ. What 
oncologists believe they said and what patient s believe they heard: an analysis of 
phase I trial discussions. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(1):61-8. 
88. Di Maio M, Gallo C, Leighl NB, Piccirillo MC, Daniele G, Nuzzo F, Gridelli C, 
Gebbia V, Ciardiello F, De Placido S, Ceribelli A, Favaretto AG, de Matteis A, 
Feld R, Butts C, Bryce J, Signoriello S, Morabito A, Rocco G, Perrone F. 
Symptomatic toxicities experienced during anticancer treatment: agreement between patient and physician reporting in three randomized trials. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(8):910-5. 
89. Pollak KI, Arnold RM, Jeffreys AS, Al exander SC, Olsen MK, Abernethy AP, 
Sugg Skinner C, Rodriguez KL, Tulsky JA. Oncologist communication about 
emotion during visits with patients with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol. 
2007;25(36):5748-52. 
90. Viswanath K, Emmons K. Message effects and social determinants of health: its 
application to cancer disparities. Journal of Communication. 2006;56(s1):S238-64. 
91. Deep KS, Hunter A, Murphy K, Volandes A. "It helps me see with my heart": How 
video informs patients' rationale for decisions about future care in advanced dementia. Patient Educ Couns. 2010;81(2):229-34. 
92. Cooper-Patrick L, Gallo JJ, Gonzales JJ, Vu HT, Powe NR, Nelson C, Ford DE. 
Race, gender, and partnership in the patient-physician relationship. JAMA. 1999;282(6):583-9. 
93. Volandes AE, Lehmann LS, Cook EF, Shaykevich S, Abbo ED, Gillick MR. Using 
video images of dementia in advance care planning. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167(8):828-33. 
94. Mack JW, Cronin A, Taback N, Huskamp HA, Keating NL, Malin JL, Earle CC, 
Weeks JC. End-of-life care discussions among patients with advanced cancer: a 
cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156(3):204-10. 
95. Mack JW, Wolfe J, Cook EF, Grier HE, Cleary PD, Weeks JC. Hope and 
prognostic disclosure. J Clin Oncol 2007;25(35):5636-42. 
96. Annas GJ. Informed consent, cancer, and truth in prognosis. N Engl J Med. 
1994;330(3):223-5. 
97. Faden R, Beauchamp T. A history and theory of informed consent. New York: 
Oxford University Press; 1986. 
98. Audrey S, Abel J, Blazeby JM, Falk S, Campbell R. What oncologists tell patients 
about survival benefits of palliative chem otherapy and implications for informed 
consent: qualitative study. BMJ. 2008;337:a752.  
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	44	of	50  	
99. Koedoot CG, Oort FJ, de Haan RJ, Bakker PJ, de Graeff A, de Haes JC. The 
content and amount of information giv en by medical oncologists when telling 
patients with advanced cancer what their treatment options are. palliative 
chemotherapy and watchful-waiting. Eur J Cancer. 2004;40(2):225-35. 
100. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J Clin. 
2015;65(1):5-29. 
101. Siegel RL, Fedewa SA, Miller KD, Goding-Sauer A, Pinheiro PS, Martinez-Tyson 
D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics for Hispanics/Latinos, 2015. CA Cancer J Clin. 
2015;65(6):457-80. 
102. Lindsay AC, Sussner KM, Greaney M, Wang ML, Davis R, Peterson KE. Using 
qualitative methods to design a culturally appropriate child feeding questionnaire for low-income, Latina mothers. Matern Child Health J. 2012;16(4):860-6.  
103. Lindsay AC, Sussner KM, Pfeiffer EM, Greaney M, Wang M, Petersen KE. 
Social-cultural, organizational and community influences on physical activity and 
sedenteray behaviors of Latina mothers and their preschool-aged children enrolled in the WIC program: a qualitative study. International Journal of Child Health and Nutrition. 2014;3(1):27-40. 
104. Greaney ML, Hardwick C, Megzebu S, Lindsay AC, Roover ML, Peterson KE. 
Assessing the feasibility of a multi-program intervention to promote physical 
activity and healthful eating in middle schools prior to wide-scale implementation. Am J Health Educ. 2007;38(5):250-7. 
105. Tournigand C, Andre T, Achille E, Lledo G, Flesh M, Mery-Mignard D, Quinaux 
E, Couteau C, Buyse M, Ganem G, Landi B, Colin P, Louvet C, de Gramont A. FOLFIRI followed by FOLFOX6 or the reverse sequence in advanced colorectal 
cancer: a randomized GERCOR study. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22(2):229-37. 
106. Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, Bouche O, Guimbaud R, Becouarn Y, Adenis 
A, Raoul JL, Gourgou-Bourgade S, de la Fouchardiere C, Bennouna J, Bachet JB, Khemissa-Akouz F, Pere-Verge D, Delbaldo C, Assenat E, Chauffert B, Michel P, Montoto-Grillot C, Ducreux M. FOLFIRINOX versus gemcitabine for 
metastatic pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(19):1817-25. 
107. Saltz LB, Clarke S, Diaz-Rubio E, Scheithauer W, Figer A, Wong R, Koski S, 
Lichinitser M, Yang TS, Rivera F, Couture F, Sirzen F, Cassidy J. Bevacizumab in combination with oxaliplatin-based chem otherapy as first-line therapy in 
metastatic colorectal cancer: a randomized phase III study. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(12):2013-9. 
108. Van Cutsem E, Rivera F, Berry S,  Kretzschmar A, Michael M, DiBartolomeo M, 
Mazier MA, Canon JL, Georgoulias V, Peeters M, Bridgewater J, Cunningham D. Safety and efficacy of first-line bevacizumab with FOLFOX, XELOX, FOLFIRI and fluoropyrimidines in metastatic colorec tal cancer: the BEAT study. Ann Oncol 
ESMO. 2009;20(11):1842-7. 
109. del Carmen MG, Joffe S. Informed consent for medical treatment and research: a 
review. Oncologist. 2005;10(8):636-41. 
110. Ko LK, Reuland D, Jolles M, Clay R, Pignone M. Cultural and linguistic 
adaptation of a multimedia colorectal cancer screening decision aid for Spanish-speaking Latinos. J Health Commun. 2014;19(2):192-209. 
111. Balboni TA, Paulk ME, Balboni MJ, Phelps AC, Loggers ET, Wright AA, Block 
SD, Lewis EF, Peteet JR, Prigerson HG. Provision of spiritual care to patients 
with advanced cancer: associations with medical care and quality of life near death. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(3):445-52.  
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	45	of	50  	
112. Phelps AC, Lauderdale KE, Alcorn S, Dillinger J, Balboni MT, Van Wert M, 
Vanderweele TJ, Balboni TA. Addressing spirituality within the care of patients at 
the end of life: perspectives of patients with advanced cancer, oncologists, and 
oncology nurses. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(20):2538-44. 
113. Shane DM, Ayyagari P. Will health care reform reduce disparities in insurance 
coverage?: Evidence from the dependent coverage mandate. Med Care. 2014;52(6):528-34. 
114. Talamantes M, Gomez C, Braun K. Advanced directives and end-of-life care: The 
Hispanic perspective.  Cultural issues in end-of-life decision making. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2000. 
115. Bureau UC. Latino/Hispanic definition. 2015. 116. Larkey LK, Gonzalez JA, Mar LE, Glantz N. Latina recruitment for cancer 
prevention education via Community Based Participatory Research strategies. 
Contemp Clin Trials. 2009;30(1):47-54. 
117. Temel JS, Greer JA, Admane S, Gallagher ER, Jackson VA, Lynch TJ, Lennes 
IT, Dahlin CM, Pirl WF. Longitudinal perceptions of prognosis and goals of therapy in patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer: results of a randomized study of early palliative care . J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(17):2319-26. 
118. Tellez-Giron P. Providing culturally sens itive end-of-life care for the Latino/a 
community. WMJ. 2007;106(7):402-6. 
119. Ayanian JZ, Zaslavsky AM, Arora NK, K ahn KL, Malin JL, Ganz PA, van Ryn M, 
Hornbrook MC, Kiefe CI, He Y, Urmie JM, Weeks JC, Harrington DP. Patients' experiences with care for lung cancer and colorectal cancer: findings from the Cancer Care Outcomes Research and Surveillance Consortium.  J Clin Oncol. 
2010;28(27):4154-61.  
120. Mack JW, Block SD, Nilsson M, Wright A, Trice E, Friedlander R, Paulk E, 
Prigerson HG. Measuring therapeutic alliance between oncologists and patients with advanced cancer: the Human Connection Scale. Cancer. 2009;115(14):3302-11.  
121. Trevino KM, Abbott CH, Fisch MJ, Friedlander RJ, Duberstein PR, Prigerson HG. 
Patient-oncologist alliance as protection against suicidal ideation in young adults with advanced cancer. Cancer. 2014;120(15):2272-81. 
122. Trevino KM, Fasciano K, Prigerson HG. Patient-oncologist alliance, psychosocial 
well-being, and treatment adherence among young adults with advanced cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(13):1683-9. 
123. Fiset V, O'Connor AM, Evans W, Gra ham I, Degrasse C, Logan J. Development 
and evaluation of a decision aid for patients with stage IV non-small cell lung cancer. Health expectations : an international journal of public participation in health care and health policy. 2000;3(2):125-36. 
124. O'Connor AM. User Manual - Decisional Conflict Scale (10 item question format).  
[cited December 5, 2015]; Available from: 
http://decisionaid.ohri.ca/docs/develo/Us er_Manuals/UM_Decisinal_Conflict.pdf. 
125. Bass PF, 3rd, Wilson JF, Griffith CH. A shortened instrument for literacy 
screening. J Gen Intern Med. 2003;18(12):1036-8.  
126. Lee SY, Bender DE, Ruiz RE, Cho YI. Development of an easy-to-use Spanish 
Health Literacy test. Health Serv Res. 2006;41(4 Pt 1):1392-412.  
127. O'Connor AM. Validation of a decisional conflict scale. Med Decis Making. 
1995;15(1):25-30. 
128. Weeks JC, Cook EF, O'Day SJ, Peterson LM, Wenger N, Reding D, Harrell FE, 
Kussin P, Dawson NV, Connors AF, Jr., Lynn J, Phillips RS. Relationship 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	46	of	50  	
between cancer patients' predictions of prognosis and their treatment 
preferences. JAMA. 1998;279(21):1709-14. 
129. Cella DF, Tulsky DS, Gray G, Saraf ian B, Linn E, Bonomi A, Silberman M, Yellen 
SB, Winicour P, Brannon J, et al. The Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy scale: development and validation of t he general measure. J Clin Oncol. 
1993;11(3):570-9. 
130. Dapueto JJ, Francolino C, Servente L, Chang CH, Gotta I, Levin R, Abreu Mdel 
C. Evaluation of the Functional Assessment  of Cancer Therapy-General (FACT-
G) Spanish Version 4 in South America: classic psychometric and item response 
theory analyses. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2003;1:32.  
131. Mack JW, Weeks JC, Wright AA, Block SD, Prigerson HG. End-of-life 
discussions, goal attainment, and distress at the end of life: predictors and outcomes of receipt of care consistent with preferences. J Clin Oncol. 
2010;28(7):1203-8. 
132. Silveira MJ, Kim SY, Langa KM. Advance directives and outcomes of surrogate 
decision making before death. The N Engl J Med. 2010;362(13):1211-8.  
133. Karnofsky DA. Determining the ext ent of the cancer and clinical planning for 
cure. Cancer. 1968;22(4):730-4. 
134. Mack JW, Cronin A, Keating NL, Taback N, Huskamp HA, Malin JL, Earle CC, 
Weeks JC. Associations between end-of-life discussion characteristics and care received near death: A prospective cohort study. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(35):4387-95. 
135. Newgard CD, Lewis RJ. Missing Data: How to Best Account for What Is Not 
Known. JAMA. 2015;314(9):940-1. 
136. Tech V. What is RE-AIM.  [cited December 15, 2015]; Available from: www.re-
aim.hnfe.vt.edu/about_re-aim/what_is_re-aim/. 
137. Viswanath K, Ackerson LK. Race, ethnicity, language, social class, and health 
communication inequalities: a nationally-repr esentative cross-sectional study. 
PLoS One. 2011;6(1):e14550.  
138. Gattellari M, Voigt KJ, Butow PN, Tattersall MH. When the treatment goal is not 
cure: are cancer patients equipped to make informed decisions? J Clin Oncol. 2002;20(2):503-13. Epub 2002/01/12.  
139. Cassileth BR, Zupkis RV, Sutton-Smith K, March V. Informed consent -- why are 
its goals imperfectly realized? N Engl J Med. 1980;302(16):896-900. 
140. Bureau UC. Facts for Features: Hispanic Heritage Month 2014 2015 [December 
17, 2015]. Available from: www.census.gov/newsroom/facts-for-
features/2014/cb14-ff22.html. 
141.   Blake K, Flynt-Wallington S, Viswanath K. Health communication channel 
preferences by class, race, and place.  In: Kreps G, editor. Health communication: building the evidence base in cancer control. Cresskill (NJ): 
Hampton Press; 2011. p. 149-174. 
 
 
	
 
 
    
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	47	of	50  	
 
31.0 Appendices 
  
1. Model Informed Consent Form for Ex ternal Sites (ENGLISH VERSION)  
2. Model Informed Consent Form for Ex ternal Sites (SP ANISH VERSION)  
3. Caregiver Informed Consent Study Letter (ENGLISH VERSION)  
4. Caregiver Informed Consent Study Letter (SPANISH VERSION)  
5. Multi-Center Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
6. Global Medical Release Form (ENGLISH VERSION)   
7. Global Medical Release Form (SPANISH VERSION)  
8. Participant Registration Form  
9. Caregiver Registration Form  
10. Medical Record Abstraction Form – Pancreatic Cancer   
11. Medical Record Abstraction Form – Colorectal Cancer  
12. Phone script for approaching potenti al participants via phone (ENGLISH 
VERSION) 
13. Phone script for approaching potenti al participants via phone (SPANISH 
VERSION)  
14. Phone script for approaching poten tial caregivers via phone (ENGLISH 
VERSION)  
15. Phone script for approaching potenti al caregivers via phone (SPANISH 
VERSION)  
16. Phone script for assessment administration (ENGLISH VERSION)  
17. Phone script for assessment admi nistration (SPANISH VERSION)  
18. Site Recruitment Checklist (ENGLISH VERSION)  
19. Site Recruitment Checklist (SPANISH VERSION)  
 Study Assessments  
20. Patient Baseline Assessment (ENGLISH VERSION)  
20a. Patient Baseline Assessment - for administration online 20b. Patient Baseline Assessment - for written administration   
21. Patient Post-Decision Assessment Version 1 - Usual CEI Arm (ENGLISH 
VERSION)        21a. Patient Post-Decision Version 1 – for administration online  
      21b. Patient Post-Decision Version 1 – for written administration 
22. Patient Post-Decision Assessment Version 2 - Investigational CEI Arm 
(ENGLISH VERSION)  
22a. Patient Post-Decision Version 2 – for administration online  
22b. Patient Post-Decision Version 2 – for written administration  
23. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Assessment Version 1 - Usual CEI Arm (ENGLISH 
VERSION) 
23a. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Vers ion 1 – for administration online  
23b. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Versi on 1 – for written administration  
24. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Assessment Version 2 - Investigational CEI Arm 
(ENGLISH VERSION)  
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	48	of	50  	
24a. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Vers ion 2 – for administration online  
24b. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Versi on 2 – for written administration  
25. Patient 6-Month Follow-Up Assessment (ENGLISH VERSION)  
25a. Patient 6-Month Follow-U p – for administration online 
25b. Patient 6-Month Follow-Up – for written administration  
26. Caregiver Baseline Assessm ent (ENGLISH VERSION)  
26a. Caregiver Baseline Assessment – for administration online 26b. Caregiver Baseline Assessment – for written administration 
27. Caregiver 3-Month Follow-Up Assessment (ENGLISH VERSION)  
27a. Caregiver 3-Month Follow-Up Assessment – for administration online 27b. Caregiver 3-Month Follow-Up Assessment – for written administration 
28. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Assessmen t Version 1 – For Active Caregivers 
(ENGLISH VERSION)  
28a. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Ve rsion 1 – for administration online 
28b. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Ve rsion 1 – for written administration 
29. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-up Assessment Version 2- For Bereaved Caregivers 
(ENGLISH VERSION)  
29a. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Ve rsion 2 – for administration online 
29b. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Ve rsion 2 – for written administration 
30. Patient Baseline Assessment (SPANISH VERSION)  
30a. Patient Baseline Assessment - for administration online 30b. Patient Baseline Assessment - for written administration   
31. Patient Post-Decision Assessment Version 1 - Usual CEI Arm (SPANISH 
VERSION)  
31a. Patient Post-Decision Versi on 1 - for administration online 
31b. Patient Post-Decision Version 1 - for written administration   
32. Patient Post-Decision Assessment - Investigational CEI Arm (SPANISH 
VERSION)  
32a. Patient Post-Decision Versi on 2 - for administration online 
32b. Patient Post-Decision Version 2 - for written administration   
33. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Assessment Version 1 - Usual CEI Arm (SPANISH 
VERSION)  
33a. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Vers ion 1 – for administration online 
33b. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Versi on 1 – for written administration 
34. Patient Follow-Up Assessment 1 - Investigational CEI Arm (SPANISH 
VERSION)  
34a. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Vers ion 2 – for administration online 
34b. Patient 3-Month Follow-Up Versi on 2 – for written administration 
35. Patient Follow-Up Assessment 2 (SPANISH VERSION)  
35a. Patient 6-Month Follow-Up Asse ssment – for administration online 
35b. Patient 6-Month Follow-Up Asse ssment – for written administration 
36. Caregiver Baseline Assessm ent (SPANISH VERSION)  
36a. Caregiver Baseline Assessment – for administration online 36b. Caregiver Baseline Assessment – for written administration 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	49	of	50  	
37. Caregiver Follow-Up Assessment 1 (SPANISH VERSION)  
37a. Caregiver 3-Month Follow-Up Asse ssment – for administration online 
37b. Caregiver 3-Month Follow-Up Assessment – for written administration 
38. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Assessmen t Version 1 – For Active Caregivers 
(SPANISH VERSION)  
38a. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Ve rsion 1 – for administration online 
38b. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Ve rsion 1 – for written administration 
39. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Assessment Version 2 – For Bereaved Caregivers 
(SPANISH VERSION)  
39a. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Ve rsion 2 – for administration online 
39b. Caregiver 6-Month Follow-Up Ve rsion 2 – for written administration 
 
Investigational Chemotherapy Educational Materials  
40. FOLFOX +/- bev CEI Materials (ENGLISH VERSION) 
a. Video & Website 
b. Booklet  
41. FOLFIRI +/- bev CEI Materials (ENGLISH VERSION)  
a. Video & Website 
b. Booklet  
42. FOLFIRINOX CEI Materials (ENGLISH VERSION)  
a. Video & Website 
b. Booklet  
43. Gemcitabine + nab-paclitaxel CEI Materials (ENGLISH VERSION)  
a. Video & Website 
b. Booklet  
44. Gemcitabine CEI Materials (ENGLISH VERSION)  
a. Video & Website 
b. Booklet  
45. FOLFOX +/- bev CEI Materials (SPANISH VERSION)   
a. Video & Website 
b. Booklet  
46. FOLFIRI +/- bev CEI Materials (SPANISH VERSION)   
a. Video & Website 
b. Booklet  
47. FOLFIRINOX CEI Materials (SPANISH VERSION)    
a. Video & Website 
b. Booklet  
48. Gemcitabine + nab-paclitaxel CEI Materials (SPANISH VERSION)  
a. Video & Website 
b. Booklet  
49. Gemcitabine CEI Materials (SPANISH VERSION)  
a. Video & Website 
b. Booklet  
50. Video Vignette – Coping with a new cancer diagnosis (ENGLISH & SPANISH 
VERSIONS) 
 
Protocol Title:  Engaging Latinos in the Center of Cancer Treatment Options  
Protocol Version/Date:  Version #2/July 19, 2018 
	 Page	50	of	50  	
51. Video Vignette – How do I feel the be st that I can on chemo? (ENGLISH & 
SPANISH VERSIONS)   
	
 
     
 
 