APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  1 of 21
                   
                                   
HRP-503B – BIOMEDICAL  RESEARCH  PROTOCOL  
(2017-1)
Protocol Title:  Lidocaine  Patches After  Cesarean Section (LPACS Trial)
Principal Investigator: Christopher  Arkfeld,  MD
Version Date: 3/7/2021
(If applicable ) Clinicaltrials.gov Registration  #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
INSTRUCTIONS
This template is intended to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes  all of the necessary information 
needed by the IRB to determine whether a study  meets approval criteria.  Read  the following instructions 
before proceeding:
1.Use this protocol  template for a PI initiated study  that includes  direct interactions with research 
subjects. Additional templates for other types of research protocols are available in the system  Library.
2.If a section or question does not apply  to your research study,  type “Not Applicable” underneath.
3.Once completed, upload your protocol in the “Basic Information” screen in IRES IRB system. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  2 of 21SECTION  I: RESEARCH  PLAN
1.Statement  of Purpose:  State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested.  
The aim of this study  is to investigate  the impact  of using lidocaine patches after cesarean  section  on pain 
control and opioid use in the immediate post-operative  period. We hypothesize the use of lidocaine patches 
in the immediate  post-operative period will lead to a decrease in the total opioid used for pain control 
compared to patients  that do not have  a lidocaine patch  in place. We also hypothesize a decrease in the 
visual analog pain score  compared to women who  do not use a lidocaine patch in the immediate  post-
operative period  following cesarean delivery.
2.Probable Duration  of Project: State the expected duration of the project,  including all follow-up and data 
analysis activities.  
7/1/2020 to 6/1/2023
3.Background: Describe  the background information  that led to the plan for this project.  Provide  references to 
support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.
The use of lidocaine as a local anesthetic  is a common  and widely used  in practice.  Lidocaine patches can be 
used for localized pain control and can be placed every 24 hours.  The use of lidocaine patches in post-
operative patients has been reported in one case report in obstetric literature.[1] There is one study that 
reports decreased  immediate postoperative  pain when  lidocaine  patches  were placed at laparoscopic  port 
sites following  gynecologic surgery as measured by visual analog scale  score and the Prince Henry and 5-point 
verbal rating pain scale . [2] There have  been  no studies looking  at the impact of lidocaine patches in obstetric 
surgical procedures,  specifically  cesarean sections. 
Cesarean sections are one of the most common surgeries in the United States. Following cesarean sections it 
is common to utilize opioids in the hospital  and upon discharge to manage  patient’s  post-operative pain. 
According to the CDC overdose deaths  involving  prescription opioids were five times higher in 2017 than in 
1999 with  over  200,000 deaths.[3]  This creates an opportunity to decrease the use of post-operative opioids 
with the application of a lidocaine patch as an adjunctive post-operative pain management  modality following 
cesarean sections. 
Women undergoing  routine cesarean delivery typically receive regional anesthesia in one of the following 
forms: spinal, epidural or combined spinal epidural.   This anesthesia provides for a pain free surgery and 
residual analgesia  effects  can last up to 24 hours  after the procedure,  even as movement  and sensation 
begins to return. Current  practice at Yale New Haven Hospital  also involves  the use of transversus  abdominus 
plane   blocks after  the cesarean delivery  is completed, which  are performed  by anesthesia for additional 
analgesia in the first 24 hours after the operation.  Despite these  measures, as in other surgical procedures, 
women require narcotic pain  medicine to help control their post-operative pain in addition to other non-
narcotic medications such as acetaminophen   and  NSAIDs.  4
Current pain regimen at Yale includes  acetaminophen  650mg and Ibuprofen 600mg alternating every 3 hours  
with oxycodone 5mg or 10mg available every  6 hours for pain that is not relieved with  acetaminophen and 
ibuprofen. Nationally,  there  is no standardized post-partum  c-section  pain regimen And historically women 
have been over-prescribed narcotics following cesarean deliveries.5
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  3 of 21Lidocaine patches are a common topical analgesia  therapy used  for localized pain control in the inpatient and 
outpatient setting. It’s use in the postoperative  period is less understood and the use of topical lidocaine 
patches has not been thoroughly investigated in the surgical literature. Thus far, it has been shown as an 
effective therapy at laparoscopic  port sites following  laparoscopic appendectomies. [6] It’s use in obstetrical  
surgeries has not been studied.  While  lidocaine patches were not specifically studied in obstetrical patients  
during FDA approval, at Yale it is used in antepartum and  postpartum  settings. Regarding lidocaine in 
breastfeeding postpartum mothers; lidocaine patches  have not been studied. Lidocaine  given through the 
epidural for pain  control during the cesarean delivery with a dosage  averaging  183mg (ranging from 60-
500mg) were found to have 860mcg/L  at 2 hours after  delivery, 460mcg/L  at 4 hours after delivery and 
220mcg/L at 12 hours after delivery.  [7] This amount of lidocaine administration and presence in breastmilk is 
not a contraindication to breastfeeding and the amount present  in breastmilk from a lidocaine patch would 
be presumed to be substantially lower. 
Overall, the limited  research  on this topic making it a valuable area of research. 
References:
1. Gilhooly, D., et al. (2011). "Topical lidocaine patch 5% for acute postoperative pain control."  BMJ case  
reports(pagination).
2. Kim, J. B., et al. (2012).  "Treatment for postoperative wound pain in gynecologic  laparoscopic surgery: 
Topical lidocaine patches." Journal  of Laparoendoscopic and Advanced Surgical Techniques  22(7): 668-673.
3. Wide-ranging online data for epidemiologic research (WONDER). Atlanta, GA: CDC, National Center for 
Health Statistics; 2016.  Available at http://wonder.cdc.gov. 
4.“ACOG  Committee Opinion No. 742.”  Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology,  vol. 132,  no. 1, 2018, 
doi:10.1097/aog.0000000000002683.
5. Bateman BT, Cole NM, Maeda A, et al. Patterns  of Opioid Prescription and Use After Cesarean Delivery.  
Obstet Gynecol. 2017;130(1):29-35. doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000002093
6.WooSurng Lee, KooYong Hahn, JungPil  Hur, and YongHun Kim.Journal of Laparoendoscopic & Advanced 
Surgical Techniques.Sep 2018.1061-1067. http://doi.org/10.1089/lap.2018.0013
7.Ortega D, Viviand X, Lorec AM, Gamerre M, Martin C, Bruguerolle B. Excretion of lidocaine and bupivacaine in 
breast milk following  epidural anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 1999  Apr;43(4):394-
7. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-6576.1999.430405.x. PMID: 10225071.
8.
9.Research Plan: Summarize the study  design and research  procedures  using non-technical language that can 
be readily understood  by someone outside the discipline. Be sure to distinguish between standard of care vs. 
research procedures when applicable, and include any flowcharts of visits  specifying  their individual  times  and 
lengths.  Describe the setting in which the research will take place.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  4 of 21All patient's that are admitted to the labor and delivery floor have a complete  H&P collected at the time  of 
their admission. This H&P will be used to evaluation co-morbid conditions, medications. All demographic 
information will be abstracted from the patient’s EPIC  medical  record.  The medical  records  of the 
participants will be gathered from the start of their pregnancy up to 72 hours  following C-section and the 
information will be reviewed to determine  eligibility  for this study and will be used for analysis of the data. 
The information will include  daily  pain scores  done  by nurse staff during the hospital  stay,  a list of medication 
and all the other information  from the medical record.”
All patient’s who receive  prenatal care within the YNHH system have obstetric providers that utilize  EPIC for 
their outpatient records as well so all demographic and medical history information  will be in the chart. 
Patients undergoing a cesarean delivery after a trial of labor have  time  to be adequately consented  (i.e. arrest 
of dilation, arrest of descent, failed  induction) . Those  undergoing cesarean  delivery  for emergent reasons  (i.e. 
non-reassuring fetal heart tracing, fetal bradycardia, maternal compromise)  will be excluded.
All patient's undergoing  c-sections are at risk for pain. All patients undergoing  c-sections  require opioid 
medications after their surgery, similar to other surgical procedures where the abdominal cavity  is entered via 
laparatomy. Many mother's  express desire to use the least amount of opioids possible during their  recovery. 
Since this is a randomized  control trial we will be able to compare both groups  and see if there  are similar  
numbers of patients that did not require any acetaminophen or ibuprofen  as well as looking at the primary 
outcome which  is opioid  use. 
This will be a prospective  randomized  subject   blinded  controlled trial. The subjects  will be randomized 1:1 by 
the Yale Maternal  Fetal Medicine statistician  at the time of enrollment using REDCap. Prearranged  
folders/packages will be created containing  all needed  materials and labeled with subject  numbers. These  will 
be distributed to the care team and will serve  as the blinding mechanism for study subjects.  All cesarean  
sections, excluding women undergoing their third  or higher repeat cesarean sections  or those done for 
emergent reasons  out of a trial of labor,  would be candidates for this study.  Additional exclusion criteria  
would include  women with previous abdominal hernia repairs with  mesh  or those women with a previous 
abdominoplasty. Patients will be approached and consented during the pre-operative period  when presenting 
for scheduled surgery or at the time of consent  for a non-scheduled cesarean  section.  The lidocaine patch  
would be placed on the superior-lateral aspect of the Pfannenstiel  incision  in the PACU prior  to being 
transferred to the postpartum floor.  The primary outcome of this study would be the total amount of 
narcotic, or opioid, medication that a patient receives within the first 72 hours  following  surgery as calculated 
by morphine equivalent units. The secondary outcome  will be daily pain scores  conducted by the nursing stuff 
will be done as part of standard of care and the study  team will collect the results from subject medical chart  
or from medical documentation. The efficacy  of the lidocaine patch for pain control will be based on the 
amount of narcotic  or opioid medication used. If no opioids are used  then  this will be viewed as lidocaine 
patch providing  adequate analgesia in conjunction with  ibuprofen and acetaminophen. 
After consenting to participate in the study  the subjects will complete  a pre-study questionnaire. Prior  to 
discharge from the hospital the study subjects will be asked to complete a post-study questionnaire.  
A single lidocaine patch or placebo (a bandage with gauze similar  in appearance to the lidocaine patch) will be 
placed within 1 hour  of completing the c-section.  The patients are moved to the PACU within 15 minutes of 
completing the c-sections and after  the initial set of vitals has been collected the lidocaine patch will be 
placed. The lidocaine patch  or placebo patch  will be placed on the superior aspect of the abdominal incision.  
The patch remains in place  for 12 hours  at a time.  It will then be replaced every 24 hours and the 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  5 of 21replacement patch will be placed in the same position as the previous patch. The standard lidocaine patch 
formulation available at YNHH is 5% lidocaine. There  is no dose adjustment based on weight because it is a 
local and not systemic analgesic.  Patches will be managed throughout the patient’s admission.  Once the 
subject is released  from the hospital their participation  in the study ends.
The lidocaine patches  are one sided. Lidocaine  will not be absorbed through contact with the outward facing 
surface. When placed, the patients will be informed to let nursing staff know if it is not adherent to their  
abdomen and to not place the infant on the lidocaine  patch. Heatpacks  and icepacks are allowed  to be used 
near the incision  and lidocaine patch. The lidocaine patch  will not put it on over  an area with skin irritation or 
breakdown. If a lidocaine patch  fell off during the study it would be replaced. 
There are currently no restrictions for lidocaine used at the time of epidural, infusions, or local 
administrations in breastfeeding mothers. The amount of lidocaine in breast  milk is low and the absorption by 
the newborn  is minimal.  Lidocaine is not a contraindication to breastfeeding. Of note, lidocaine  is also used  
during newborn circumcisions further supports the safety of lidocaine. [1] With  the use of lidocaine patches 
there is an unforeseen amount of lidocaine and lidocaine metabolites in breast milk. 
Of note, patients  will not be allowed to bring in additional lidocaine patches for use during the postpartum, 
consistent with current  hospital policies. Also, patients will not be allowed to use lidocaine patches for 
management of other pains during the study time. 
1.  Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed)  [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US); 
2006-. Lidocaine. [Updated  2019 Jan 7]. Available  from:  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501230/
10.Genetic Testing   N/A ☒
A.Describe
i.the types of future  research to be conducted using  the materials, specifying if immortalization  of 
cell lines, whole exome or genome sequencing,  genome  wide  association studies, or animal 
studies are planned Write here
ii.the plan for the collection of material or the conditions under  which  material will be received 
Write here
iii.the types of information about the donor/individual contributors  that will be entered into a 
database Write here
iv.the methods  to uphold confidentiality Write here
B.What are the conditions  or procedures  for sharing of materials  and/or distributing for future research 
projects? Write here
C.Is widespread sharing of materials planned? Write here
D.When and under what conditions will materials be stripped of all identifiers?  Write here
E.Can donor-subjects withdraw their materials  at any time, and/or withdraw the identifiers that connect 
them to their materials?  Write  here
i.How will requests to withdraw materials be handled  (e.g., material no longer identified: that is, 
anonymized) or material destroyed)? Write here
F.Describe the provisions for protection of participant  privacy Write here
G.Describe the methods  for the security of storage  and sharing of materials  Write  here
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  6 of 2111.Subject Population: Provide a detailed  description  of the types of human  subjects  who will be recruited into 
this study.
The inclusion  criteria are as follows: 
The subject population will be females in the immediate post-operative period  following a primary  or 
secondary cesarean section conducted under  neuraxial  anesthesia,  which  includes spinal  or epidural 
anesthesia. The age range will be women 18-50 years old. Lactating mothers are included in this study.  
The exclusion criteria are as follows:  
Any woman who has 3 or more  prior cesarean sections
History of abdominoplasty
History of abdominal  hernia repair  with  mesh
Allergy  to either lidocaine or adhesives  used  in medical tape
Subjects who received general anesthesia for their cesarean section
Women receiving  methadone  or suboxone  for a history of substance abuse and women  with a history  
of active substance use will also be excluded (opioids). 
Women undergoing  emergency cesarean sections or those that receive general anesthesia. 
Concurrent anti-arrhythmic  drugs
Hepatic disease
Underlying  CNS excitation/depression to other amide local anesthetic agents,
Methemoglobinemia (G6PD  deficiency,  congenital methemoglobinemia,  and other unstable 
hemoglobin variants).  
non-scheduled emergent c sections

12.Subject classification:  Check off all classifications of subjects  that will be specifically recruited for enrollment 
in the research project. Will subjects who  may require  additional safeguards  or other considerations be 
enrolled in the study? If so, identify the population of subjects requiring  special safeguards and provide a 
justification for their involvement.
☐Children ☐ Healthy ☐Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus
☐Non-English Speaking ☐ Prisoners ☐Economically  disadvantaged  persons
☐Decisionally Impaired ☐ Employees ☒Pregnant  women  and/or fetuses
☐Yale Students ☒ Females of childbearing potential
The subjects recruited will be pregnant when  signing  the consent form (prior to the cesarean  section) but will be 
postpartum during the study. 
NOTE: Is this research  proposal  designed  to enroll children who are wards of the state  as potential subjects?
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
13.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What  are the criteria  used to determine  subject  inclusion or exclusion?
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  7 of 21Inclusion criteria will be any woman undergoing a primary  or secondary cesarean section  at Yale New Haven 
Hospital under neuraxial anesthesia. 
Exclusion:
Any woman who has 3 or more  prior cesarean sections
History of abdominoplasty
History of abdominal  hernia repair  with  mesh
Allergy  to either lidocaine or adhesives  used  in medical tape
Subjects who received general anesthesia for their cesarean section
Women receiving  methadone  or suboxone  for a history of substance abuse and women  with a history  
of active substance use will also be excluded. 
Women undergoing  emergency cesarean sections or those that receive general anesthesia. 
Concurrent anti-arrhythmic  drugs
Hepatic disease
Underlying  CNS excitation/depression to other amide local anesthetic agents,
Methemoglobinemia (G6PD  deficiency,  congenital methemoglobinemia,  and other unstable 
hemoglobin variants).  
non-scheduled emergent c sections

14.How will eligibility be determined,  and by whom?  Write here
Eligibility will be determined by the principal investigator  and study personnel through review of the cesarean  
sections at Yale New Haven  Hospital. The scheduled cesarean  sections will be reviewed  the day prior  to 
determine eligibility.   Additionally, those women who undergo a cesarean delivery following  attempts  at labor 
will also be screened for eligibility.
15.Risks: Describe the reasonably  foreseeable risks, including risks to subject  privacy, discomforts, or 
inconveniences associated with  subjects  participating in the research. 
The main  risk of this study is loss of confidentiality even though data will be coded.
Concerns related to adverse  effects:
Familial malignant hyperthermia: Many drugs  used during the conduct of anesthesia may trigger familial 
malignant hyperthermia; not known whether amide-type local anesthetics trigger this reaction.  However,  
standard protocol for management  should  be available. Early unexplained signs of tachycardia, tachypnea, labile 
blood pressure, and metabolic acidosis may precede temperature elevation. If familial malignant hyperthermia is 
confirmed, discontinue triggering agent and initiate appropriate therapy (eg, oxygen, dantrolene) and other 
supportive measures.
Hypersensitivity: Use with caution in patients with known drug sensitivities.  Allergic reactions (cutaneous lesions,  
urticaria, edema,  or anaphylactoid  reactions) may be a result  of sensitivity to lidocaine (rare) or preservatives 
used in formulations. Patients allergic to para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) derivatives (eg, procaine,  tetracaine, 
benzocaine) have not shown cross sensitivity to lidocaine.
Local effects: Irritation,  sensitivity and/or infection  may occur at the site of application; discontinue use and 
institute appropriate  therapy if local effects occur. Mild and transient application site reactions may occur during 
or immediately after treatment with patch; spontaneously resolves  within a few minutes to hours; may include 
blisters, bruising, burning sensation, depigmentation, dermatitis, discoloration, edema, erythema, exfoliation, 
irritation, papules, petechial,  pruritus, vesicles,  or the area may be the locus of abnormal sensation.
Methemoglobinemia: Has been reported  with local anesthetics; clinically significant  methemoglobinemia requires 
immediate treatment along  with discontinuation  of the anesthetic and other oxidizing  agents.  Onset may be 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  8 of 21immediate or delayed (hours)  after anesthetic  exposure. Patients  with  glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase  
deficiency, congenital or idiopathic methemoglobinemia, cardiac  or pulmonary compromise, exposure to 
oxidizing agents  or their metabolites, or infants <6 months are more susceptible and should  be closely monitored 
for signs and symptoms of methemoglobinemia (eg, cyanosis, headache, rapid pulse, shortness of breath, 
lightheadedness, fatigue).
Systemic adverse effects:  Potentially life-threatening side effects (eg, irregular  heartbeat,  seizures, coma,  
respiratory depression, death) have  occurred  when  used prior to cosmetic  procedures. Excessive  dosing for any 
indication (eg, application to large areas, use above  recommended dose, application to denuded  or inflamed skin,  
or wearing of device for longer than recommended), smaller patients, and/or impaired elimination may  lead to 
increased absorption and systemic toxicity; patient should adhere strictly  to recommended dosage and 
administration guidelines; serious adverse effects may require  the use of supportive care and resuscitative  
equipment; lidocaine toxicity may occur at blood concentrations above 5 mcg/mL.
Disease-related concerns:
Bleeding tendencies/platelet disorders: Intradermal  injection:  Use with caution; may have a higher risk of 
superficial dermal bleeding.
Cardiovascular disease: Use with  caution in patients with severe  shock or heart block.
Dermal integrity reduced: Application to broken  or inflamed skin may lead  to increased systemic absorption;  use 
caution.
Familial malignant hyperthermia: May potentially trigger malignant hyperthermia;  follow standard  protocol for 
identification and treatment.
Hepatic impairment: Use caution in patients with  severe hepatic disease due to diminished ability to metabolize 
systemically-absorbed lidocaine.
Pseudocholinesterase deficiency: Use with  caution; these patients have a greater risk of developing toxic plasma 
concentrations of lidocaine.
Sepsis/severely traumatized mucosa:  Use with  extreme caution in the presence of sepsis and/or severely 
traumatized mucosa  due to an increased risk of rapid systemic absorption at application  site.
16.Minimizing Risks: Describe the manner in which the above-mentioned  risks  will be minimized.
The data will be de-identified, kept  on a secure computer that is password protected.  
Adverse effects of the lidocaine patch and placebo patch will be regularly  screened  for by the 
healthcare team, specifically the most common adverse effect  of skin irritation  will be mitigated by a 
daily physical exam performed by the healthcare team. If these adverse effects take place the study 
participant will not receive another lidocaine patch  or placebo  patch and will be withdrawn from the 
study. 
17.Data and Safety Monitoring  Plan:  Include  an appropriate Data and Safety  Monitoring  Plan (DSMP) based  on 
the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the final determination of the risk to 
subjects.)
a. What is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for subjects  participating in this 
study? Minimal Risk
b. If children are involved, what  is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for the 
children participating  in this study? n/a
c. Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan. Examples of DSMPs are  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  9 of 21available here  http://your.yale.edu/policies-procedures/forms/420-fr-01-data-and-safety-
monitoring-plans-templates for minimal risk:
The principal investigator is responsible for monitoring  the data, assuring protocol compliance, 
and conducting the safety reviews  at the specified frequency [e.g., monthly, quarterly, etc].  
During the review process  the principal investigator will evaluate whether the study should 
continue unchanged, require modification/amendment,  or close to enrollment.
The principal investigator and the Institutional Review  Board  (IRB) have the authority to stop or 
suspend the study or require modifications.
This protocol presents minimal risks to the subjects and Unanticipated  Problems Involving  Risks 
to Subjects  or Others (UPIRSOs),  including  adverse events, are not anticipated. In the unlikely 
event that such events occur, Reportable Events (which are events  that are serious or life-
threatening and unanticipated (or anticipated but occurring with a greater frequency than  
expected) and possibly, probably, or definitely related) or Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks  
to Subjects  or Others that may require  a temporary or permanent interruption of study  activities 
will be reported immediately (if possible),  followed by a written report within 5 calendar days of 
the Principal  Investigator becoming aware of the event to the IRB (using  the appropriate forms 
from the website) and any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies. The investigator will 
apprise fellow investigators and study personnel  of all UPIRSOs and adverse  events  that occur 
during the conduct of this research project through weekly email communication and monthly 
meetings as they are reviewed by the principal investigator. The protocol’s research monitors and 
study sponsors, regulatory  agencies,  and regulatory and decision-making bodies  will be informed 
of reportable  adverse events (as described  above) within 5 days  of the event  becoming known to 
the principal  investigator.
d. For multi-site studies for which  the Yale PI serves  as the lead investigator:
i.How will adverse events and unanticipated  problems involving  risks to subjects  or others be 
reported, reviewed and managed? Write here
ii.What provisions are in place for management of interim results?  Write here
iii. What will the multi-site process be for protocol modifications? Write  here
18.Statistical Considerations: Describe the statistical  analyses that support the study design. 
The primary  outcome will be total opiate use (as calculated by morphine-equivalents).  This  information will 
be obtained and calculated from the patient’s medication administration record. Secondary outcomes t be 
studied include daily average pain score,  using the visual analog system, following the cesarean delivery.  A 
secondary analysis will take  into account patients who  received TAP blocks. This information  is routine 
documented by the postpartum nurses and will be abstracted  from the patient’s chart. Pain scores for 
patients will the lidocaine patch will be compared to those who were randomized  to receive the placebo  
patch.  Data will be analyzed by intention to treat and comparisons  between  the groups will be made  using 
student’s t-test  with  adjustments made as needed for baseline demographic characteristics between the 
groups.
There is a notable dearth  of literature on this topic.  The only published  data on lidocaine patches  as pain 
control following c-sections are  case reports.  1, 2 Expanding the literature  search to include general  surgery  
literature it has been shown  that lidocaine patches improve post-operative  pain following  laparoscopic  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  10 of 21appendectomies.3 Current literature investigating lidocaine patches after gynecologic surgery used expert 
opinion to determine that a difference of 2 in the VAS pain score would be clinically  relevant.  This lead to a 
power analysis determining  a minimum  of 16 patients per group  would be required. Similarly, in general 
surgery literature  when assessing  lidocaine patches  effect  on postoperative pain after appendectomies  a 
sample size of 40 was determined by expert opinion. Due to the dearth of information  available,  we are 
unable to calculate a predetermined sample size but feel with a goal of 50 patients in each  arm we will be 
able to determine a clinically relative difference  in VAS pain score of 2 or decrease in total postoperative  
opioid use by 20%.
1. Gilhooly, D., et al. (2011). "Topical lidocaine patch 5% for acute postoperative pain control."  BMJ case  
reports(pagination).
2. Kim, J. B., et al. (2012).  "Treatment for postoperative wound pain in gynecologic  laparoscopic surgery: 
Topical lidocaine patches." Journal  of Laparoendoscopic and Advanced Surgical Techniques  22(7): 668-673.
3. WooSurng  Lee, KooYong Hahn, JungPil Hur, and YongHun Kim.Journal  of Laparoendoscopic & Advanced 
Surgical Techniques.Sep 2018.1061-1067.http://doi.org/10.1089/lap.2018.0013
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  11 of 21SECTION II: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS , BIOLOGICS, RADIOTRACERS,  PLACEBOS AND DEVICES
If this section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not applicable,  check  off N/A and delete  the rest of the section.
A.  RADIOTRACERS ☒N/A
1.Name of the radiotracer: Write here
2.Is the radiotracer FDA approved?     ☐YES ☐NO
If NO, an FDA issued IND is required for the investigational  use unless RDRC assumes  oversight.  
3. Check  one:    ☐IND#  Write here  or  ☐ RDRC oversight (RDRC  approval will be required prior to use)
4.    Background Information: Provide a description of previous human use, known risks,  and data addressing 
dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration,  and any other factors that might influence risks. If this is the first 
time this radiotracer  is being  administered to humans, include relevant  data on animal models. 
Write here
4.    Source:   Identify the source  of the radiotracer  to be used. Write here
5.    Storage,  Preparation  and Use:  Describe the method  of storage, preparation, stability information, method of 
sterilization and method of testing sterility  and pyrogenicity.
 Write  here
B.  DRUGS/BIOLOGICS    ☐N/A
1.If an exemption from IND filing requirements is sought for a clinical investigation of a drug product that is 
lawfully marketed in the United States, review  the following categories  and complete the category  that 
applies (and delete  the inapplicable categories) :
Exempt Category 1: The clinical investigation of a drug product that is lawfully marketed  in the United States  
can be exempt from  IND regulations if all of the following  are yes: 
1.The intention of the investigation is NOT to report  to the FDA as a well-controlled study in support  
of a new indication  for use or to be used to support any other  significant  change in the labeling for 
the drug.☒
2.The drug that is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed  as a prescription drug product, and 
the intention of the investigation is NOT  to support  a significant change  in the advertising for the 
product.☒
3.The investigation does NOT involve  a route of administration  or dosage level or use in populations 
or other factor  that significantly increases the risks (or decreases  the acceptability of the risks) 
associated with the use of the drug product☒
4.The investigation will be conducted  in compliance with the requirements for institutional (HIC) ☒
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  12 of 21review and with the requirements for informed consent of the FDA regulations (21 CFR Part 50 and 
21 CFR Part 56).
5.The investigation will be conducted  in compliance with the requirements regarding promotion and 
charging for investigational drugs.☒
 Exempt Category 2 (all items i, ii, and iii must  be checked  to grant  a category 2 exemption)
☐i. The clinical investigation is for an in vitro diagnostic  biological product that involves  one or
more of the following (check all that apply):
☐ Blood  grouping serum
☐ Reagent red blood cells 
☐ Anti-human globulin
☐ii. The diagnostic  test is intended to be used  in a diagnostic  procedure that confirms  the
diagnosis made by another,  medically established,  diagnostic product or procedure; and
☐iii.  The diagnostic  test is shipped in compliance with 21 CFR §312.160.
 Exempt Category 3
☐ The drug is intended solely for tests in vitro  or in laboratory research animals if shipped  in accordance with 
21 CFR 312.60
 Exempt Category 4 
☐ A clinical  investigation  involving use of a placebo if the investigation does not otherwise  require submission  
of an IND. 
2. Background Information: Provide  a description of previous  human use, known risks, and data addressing 
dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration,  and any other factors that might influence risks. If this is the first 
time this drug is being  administered to humans, include relevant  data on animal models. 
Lidoderm 5% lidocaine  patch was originally approved by the FDA for management  of post-herpetic  neuralgia. 
Lidocaine patches are commonly used in clinical  practice for management  of localized pain in surgical  and non-
surgical patients . 
3. Source:  Identify  the source of the drug  or biologic to be used. Hospital formulary
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  13 of 21a) Is the drug provided free of charge to subjects? ☐YES ☒NO 
If yes, by whom? Write here
4.Storage, Preparation and Use:  Describe the method of storage, preparation, stability information, and for 
parenteral products, method  of sterilization and method  of testing sterility  and pyrogenicity.
The lidocaine patches  are already used in the hospital and do not require any special storage.  They are 
currently stored in compliance with package insert guidelines in the hospital  pharmacy.  The cost of use is 
included in routine post-operative  care  for patients in the hospital. 
Check applicable Investigational Drug Service  utilized:
    ☐  YNHH  IDS                                                        ☐  CMHC Pharmacy                                           ☐ West  Haven VA
    ☐  PET Center                                                      ☒    None       
    ☐  Other: 
Note: If the YNHH IDS (or comparable service  at CMHC  or WHVA) will not be utilized, explain in detail  how the PI 
will oversee these aspects of drug accountability, storage, and preparation.   
5.Use of Placebo:  ☐Not applicable to this research project
If use of a placebo  is planned, provide a justification  which addresses  the following:
a)Describe the safety and efficacy  of other available therapies. If there  are no other available therapies, state 
this. Routine postpartum  analgesia therapies include NSAIDs, acetaminophen, and opioids.  These are all safe 
during the postpartum period.  
b)State the maximum total  length  of time a participant  may receive placebo while on the study.  
The maximum  time a participant  may receive  a placebo  while on the study is 4 days.  
c)Address the greatest potential harm that may come  to a participant as a result  of receiving placebo. 
The greatest  potential  harm  that may  come  to a participant as a result of receiving the placebo is less than 
optimal pain control. 
d)Describe the procedures  that are in place to safeguard participants receiving placebo. 
The pain  scores provided will ensure that adequate pain  control is obtained for study participants since prn 
opioids will remain available to both  participants  receiving the placebo  and those receiving the lidocaine  
patch. 
6.Continuation of Drug Therapy After Study Closure   ☐Not applicable to this project
Are subjects  provided the opportunity to continue to receive the study drug(s) after the study has ended?
☒ Yes   If yes, describe the conditions under which continued access to study drug(s) may apply  as well as 
conditions for termination of such access.  Patients will be unblinded  prior  to hospital discharge and those on the 
lidocaine patch that noted the improvement  will have  the option to use the patch  at home as SOC. If they patients 
found the effects of the lidocaine patch improved their pain scores  and their  subjective  pain assessment then  
they could be written for a 7-day supply  on discharge  from the hospital  with a discussion with their  healthcare  
team.  The coverage of the medication  and cost to the patient after leaving the hospital would be dependent on 
their insurance status/type.  Patients would need to request continuation of the lidocaine patch if desired. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  14 of 21☐ NO   If no, explain  why this is acceptable. Write here
 B.  DEVICES  ☒N/A
1. Are there any investigational devices used  or investigational procedures performed at Yale-New Haven 
Hospital (YNHH) (e.g.,  in the YNHH  Operating  Room or YNHH Heart and Vascular  Center)?   ☐Yes   ☐No    
 If Yes, please be aware of the following requirements :
A YNHH New  Product/Trial Request Form must be completed via EPIC:  Pull down  the Tools tab in the EPIC Banner,  
Click on Lawson,  Click  on “Add new”  under  the New Technology Request Summary and fill out the forms 
requested including  the “Initial Request  Form,” “Clinical Evidence Summary”, and attach any other pertinent  
documents. Then select “save and submit” to submit your request;    AND
Your request  must be reviewed  and approved in writing by the appropriate YNHH  committee before 
patients/subjects may be scheduled to receive  the investigational device or investigational procedure.
2.Background Information: Provide  a description of previous human use, known risks, and any other factors  
that might influence risks.  If this is the first time this device is being used  in humans,  include relevant  data on 
animal models. 
Write here
3.Source: 
a) Identify the source of the device to be used. Write here
b) Is the device provided free of charge to subjects? ☐Yes   ☐No     
4.Investigational device accountability:  State how the PI, or named designee, ensures that an investigational 
device is used only in accordance with the research protocol approved by the HIC, and maintains control of 
the investigational device  as follows:
a)Maintains appropriate records,  including  receipt of shipment, inventory at the site, dispensation  or use 
by each participant, and final disposition  and/or  the return of the investigational device (or other 
disposal if applicable): Write here
b)Documents pertinent information  assigned to the investigational device (e.g., date, quantity, batch or 
serial number, expiration  date if applicable, and unique code number): Write here
c)Stores the investigational device according to the manufacturer's recommendations with  respect to 
temperature, humidity,  lighting, and other environmental considerations: Write here
d)Ensures that the device is stored in a secure area  with limited access in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements: Write here
e)Distributes  the investigational  device to subjects enrolled in the IRB-approved protocol: Write here
SECTION III: RECRUITMENT/CONSENT AND ASSENT  PROCEDURES 
1.Targeted Enrollment:  Give the number of subjects:  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  15 of 21a.Targeted for enrollment at Yale for this protocol: 100 total. 50 subjects in each arm (lidocaine  patch  versus  
no lidocaine patch)
b.If this is a multi-site study, give the total number  of subjects targeted across all sites: n/a
2.Indicate recruitment methods below.  Attach  copies of any recruitment materials that will be used.
☒Flyers ☐ Internet/web postings ☐ Radio
☒ Posters ☐ Mass  email solicitation ☐ Telephone
☐ Letter ☐ Departmental/Center website ☐ Television
☐ Medical  record review* ☒ Departmental/Center research  boards ☐ Newspaper
☐ Departmental/Center newsletters ☐ Web-based  clinical trial registries ☐ Clinicaltrails.gov 
☐ YCCI Recruitment database ☐ Social Media  (Twitter/Facebook): 
☐ Other: 
* Requests for medical  records should be made  through JDAT  as described  at 
http://medicine.yale.edu/ycci/oncore/availableservices/datarequests/datarequests.aspx
3. Recruitment Procedures: 
a.Describe how potential subjects  will be identified.  Potential subjects  will be women  with cesarean sections  
planned for surgery  at Yale New Haven Hospital. We may  include  patient's that see private  OBGYN providers 
in the community  in the study since  they  have  their surgeries performed at YNHH.  Flyers will be provided for 
these locations
b.Describe how potential subjects  are contacted. Subjects will be approached during their  pre-operative 
counseling regarding the placement  of lidocaine patches following completion of their surgery.  
c.Who is recruiting potential  subjects? The primary  recruiters will Christopher Arkfeld, MD and Audrey Merriam, 
MD.  
4.Assessment of Current  Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical relationship  with any 
potential subject? 
☐Yes, all subjects
☒Yes, some of the subjects.  
☐No
If yes, describe the nature of this relationship.
PI and the study team could have seen  potential patients during their well women visits, prenatal care,  or if they 
had presented to the hospital in the ER or to be evaluated  in OB triage for any obstetrical complaints during their 
pregnancy.
Prenatal care and postpartum care may  be provided by one or both  of the investigators  but this is done  as part of 
a team  and the relationship  with the patient will not be affected  by their  decision to participate or not participate 
in the study. 
5.Request for waiver  of HIPAA authorization: (When  requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either  the 
entire study, or for recruitment  purposes  only.  Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of a phone or email  
screen, you must  request  a HIPAA  waiver for recruitment purposes.)
Choose one: 
☐ For entire  study  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  16 of 21☒ For recruitment/screening purposes only
☐ For inclusion of non-English speaking subject if short form is being used  and there  is no translated  HIPAA 
research authorization form available on the University’s  HIPAA website at hipaa.yale.edu.
i.Describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for use/disclosure of this 
data: For patients  that will call us to participate in the study and those that are our patients we will 
need to review the medical  record to determine  if potential  subjects  meet inclusion  criteria or have 
exclusion criteria before participating in the study. 
ii.If requesting a waiver of signed authorization, describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the 
subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data:  For patients  that will call us to 
participate in the study and those that are our patients  we will need to review the medical record to 
determine if potential subjects  meet  inclusion criteria or have exclusion criteria before participating  
in the study.
The investigator assures that the protected health information for which  a Waiver of Authorization has been 
requested will not be reused or disclosed to any person  or entity other than those  listed in this application, except 
as required by law, for authorized oversight  of this research study, or as specifically approved for use in another 
study by an IRB.
Researchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale HIPAA-Covered 
entity must be accounted for in the “accounting  for disclosures log”, by subject name,  purpose,  date, recipients,  
and a description of information provided.  Logs are to be forwarded to the Deputy  HIPAA Privacy Officer.
6.Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, 
including parental permission  or surrogate permission  and the steps taken to ensure  subjects’ independent 
decision-making. 
Subjects will be approached during their pre-operative  evaluation or at the time  of consent for cesarean 
delivery out of labor and will sign if willing to participate in the study.  This may be on the same day of their  c-
section. They  will be given  adequate  time to decide if they wish to participate  and are able to decline the 
lidocaine patches at any time  during  the study.  Patient typically present anywhere between 1-3 hours prior to 
c-section or the night before for pre-op testing during which there would be no time  limit on reviewing  the 
study.
7.Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide  Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the personnel obtaining 
consent will assess the potential subject’s  ability  and capacity to consent to the research being proposed. 
The same  manner of determining whether  or not a patient can consent for surgery will be used for 
participating in our study. If patients can demonstrate understanding of the situation, appreciation of the 
risks and benefits, and reasoning in their thought process, and can communicate their wishes then  they 
would have capacity. Patients who  received IV narcotic/anxiolytic medication within the preceding  60 minutes  
will not be asked to participate. 
8.Non-English  Speaking  Subjects:  Explain  provisions in place to ensure comprehension for research involving  
non-English speaking subjects.  If enrollment of these  subjects is anticipated, translated  copies of all consent 
materials must be submitted for approval prior to use. 
Non-English speaking subjects will not be enrolled.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  17 of 21As a limited alternative to the above  requirement, will you use the short form* for consenting process  if you 
unexpectedly encounter a non-English speaking individual  interested in study  participation and the translation of 
the long  form is not possible prior  to intended enrollment?  YES ☐  NO ☒
Note* If more  than 2 study participants are enrolled using a short form translated  into the same language, then 
the full consent form should be translated into that language for use the next time a subject speaking  that 
language is to be enrolled.
Several translated short form templates  are available on the HRPP website (yale.edu/hrpp)  and translated HIPAA  
Research Authorization Forms are available on the HIPAA website (hipaa.yale.edu). If the translation  of the short 
form is not available on our website, then the translated  short form needs  to be submitted to the IRB office for 
approval via modification  prior to enrolling  the subject.   Please review the guidance and presentation on use of 
the short form available  on the HRPP website.
If using a short  form  without  a translated HIPAA Research  Authorization Form,  please request a HIPAA waiver in 
the section above. 
9. Consent  Waiver: In certain circumstances, the HIC may grant  a waiver of signed consent, or a full waiver 
of consent, depending on the study.  If you will request either a waiver of consent,  or a waiver of signed  consent 
for this study, complete  the appropriate section below.  
☒Not Requesting any consent waivers 
☐Requesting  a waiver of signed consent:
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment,  the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)
☐ Entire  Study  (Note that an information  sheet may  be required.)
 For a waiver of signed consent,  address the following:
Would  the signed consent form be the only  record  linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☐ 
Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal  risk to subjects? YES ☐  NO ☐
 
OR
Does the research pose  greater  than minimal  risk? YES ☐    NO☐ 
Does the research include any activities  that would require  signed consent in a non-research  context? YES ☐   
NO ☐
 ☐ Requesting a waiver  of consent:
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment,  the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)
☐ Entire  Study  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  18 of 21 
For a full waiver of consent,  please  address all of the following:
Does the research pose  greater  than minimal  risk to subjects?   
☐ Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted.  
☐ No
Will the waiver  adversely affect  subjects’  rights  and welfare? YES ☐    NO☐
Why  would the research be impracticable to conduct  without the waiver? Write here
Where  appropriate,  how will pertinent information  be returned to, or shared  with subjects at a later  date?  
Write  here
SECTION  IV: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH  SUBJECTS
    Confidentiality & Security  of Data:
1.What protected health information (medical  information along  with the HIPAA identifiers) about subjects will 
be collected and used  for the research?   
Mother Name
Mother MRN
Delivery Date
Gravida/Para
Gestational Age
Number of prior C-sections
Surgical History
TAP block  yes or no
MAR Record (amount of analgesic medication,  including narcotics)
Pain Scales
The patients will be assigned a study  participant  number which will be used to organize the initial  data collection.  
2.How will the research data be collected, recorded  and stored? The research data will be collected  through 
medical record reviews  and pre/post  c section questionnaire and stored on secure computers. 
3.How will the digital data be stored? ☐CD  ☐DVD  ☐Flash Drive  ☐Portable Hard  Drive   ☒Secured Server – 
Yale box  ☒Laptop Computer   ☐Desktop Computer  ☒Other – redcap data collection
4.What methods and procedures will be used to safeguard the confidentiality and security of  the identifiable 
study data  and the storage media indicated above during and after the subject’s participation in the study? 
Once the data has been collected the subjects will be deidentified for data analysis. 
All portable devices  must contain encryption  software, per University Policy 5100.  If there  is a technical reason a 
device cannot  be encrypted  please submit an exception  request to the Information  Security,  Policy and Compliance 
Office by clicking on url http://its.yale.edu/egrc or email it.compliance@yale.edu
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  19 of 215.What will be done with the data  when the research  is completed? Are there plans to destroy the identifiable 
data? If yes, describe how, by whom and when  identifiers  will be destroyed. If no, describe how  the data and/or 
identifiers will be secured. The data will remain on an encrypted in Redcap and secured  laptop computer. 
6.If appropriate, has a Certificate of Confidentiality  been obtained? n/a
SECTION V: POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Potential Benefits: Identify any benefits  that may be reasonably expected to result  from  the research, either  to 
the subject(s) or to society  at large. (Payment  of subjects is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk 
benefit assessment.) 
There may  be no benefit  to the patients during the post-operative period and pain  may worsen because of use of 
placebo patch The benefit  to society as a whole would be a potential decrease in opioid prescription amount and 
utilization after  cesarean deliveries decreasing the amount of opioid  prescriptions  available to the community and 
likely decreasing the amount of unused opioids  present in the community  as well.  
         SECTION  VI: RESEARCH  ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC  CONSIDERATIONS
1.Alternatives: What other  alternatives are available to the study subjects outside  of the research? 
The alternatives  would be to adhere to our standard postoperative analgesic regiment of opioids, NSAIDs and 
acetaminophen. Occasionally, TAP (transversus abdominis plane) blocks are used  at the discretion of the 
obstetric anesthesia  providers for all patients that opt to enroll in the study  and those that decline. The TAP 
blocks are performed once at the conclusion of the c-section.  
2.Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any payments that will be made to subjects, 
the amount and schedule of payments,  and the conditions for receiving  this compensation.
There will be no payments made to subjects.  
3.Costs  for Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly  describe the subject’s costs  associated with 
participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost 
to subjects.  
You or your insurance carrier  will be expected to pay the costs of this treatment. Lidocaine  patches  are covered 
by most insurances as a part of obstetric  care during  admission to the hospital. All lidocaine patches  
prescribed at time of discharge  will also be billed to your insurance. 
4.In Case of Injury: This section is required for any research involving more than  minimal risk, and for minimal 
risk research that presents  the potential for physical harm (e.g.,  research involving blood draws).
a.Will medical  treatment  be available if research-related injury occurs? Yes the treatment will be 
available. There is the potential for skin irritation  due to the adhesive in the lidocaine patch.  
b.Where and from whom may treatment  be obtained? Inpatient healthcare providers  including 
residents, attendings,  and nurses. 
c.Are there any limits to the treatment  being  provided?  No.
d.Who will pay for this treatment? It will be covered under traditional post-partum care and patient  
or patients insurance will have  to pay. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  20 of 21e.How will the medical treatment be accessed by subjects? Patient’s will be able to seek out any 
treatments by asking their caregivers. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021Page  21 of 21IMPORTANT REMINDERS
Will this study  have a billable service?  Yes ☐  No☒
A billable service is defined as any service  rendered  to a study subject that, if he/she was not on a study,  would 
normally generate a bill from  either Yale-New  Haven  Hospital or Yale Medical Group to the patient  or the patient’s 
insurer. The service may or may not be performed  by the research staff on your study, but may be provided by 
professionals within either Yale-New Haven Hospital or Yale Medical Group (examples include  x-rays, MRIs, CT 
scans, specimens sent to central labs,  or specimens sent to pathology). Notes: 1. There is no distinction  made  
whether the service is paid for by the subject or their insurance (Standard of Care)  or by the study’s  funding 
mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally includes new services  or orders placed in EPIC for research 
subjects. 
If answered, “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore, Yale’s clinical research management  system, for 
Epic to appropriately route research  related  charges. Please contact oncore.support@yale.edu
Are there any procedures  involved in this protocol that will be performed at YNHH or one of its affiliated entities?  
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
If Yes, please answer questions a through c and note  instructions below.   
a. Does your  YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that you will perform? Yes ☐  No  
☐
b. Will you be using any new equipment or equipment that you have not used in the past  for this procedure? Yes 
☐  No ☐
c. Will a novel approach using existing equipment be applied? Yes ☐  No ☐
 
If you answered “no”  to question 4a, or "yes" to question  4b or c, please contact the YNHH Department  of 
Physician Services (688-2615) for prior approval  before commencing with  your research protocol.
IMPORTANT REMINDER ABOUT RESEARCH AT YNHH  
Please note that if this protocol includes Yale-New Haven Hospital patients, including  patients  at the HRU, the 
Principal Investigator  and any co-investigators  who are physicians or mid-level  practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, 
psychologists and speech pathologists)  who may have  direct patient  contact  with patients on YNHH premises 
must have medical staff appointment and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.  If you are uncertain whether 
the study personnel  meet the criteria, please telephone  the Physician  Services  Department at 203-688-2615. By 
submitting this protocol as a PI, you attest that you and any co-investigator  who may have patient contact has a 
medical staff  appointment  and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 2/24/2021