 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vale+Tú Salud: Corner -Based Randomized Trial to Test a Latino Day  
Laborer  Program Adapted to Prevent COVID -19 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 05/01/2023  
  
Protocol  Title:  Vale+Tú Salud: Corner -Based Randomized Trial to Test a Latino Day Laborer 
Program Adapted to Prevent  COVID -19 
 
Principal Investigator: Maria Eugenia Fernandez -Esquer  
 
Co-Investigators:  Casey Durand , Andrew  Springer  
 
Study  Coordinator:  Ana Llamas Yesmel King  
 
Population:  Latino day laborers, N= 600, males, ages 18 and older, ordinary health  status 
living in the Houston metropolitan area  location  
Number  of Sites:  Single  site 
 
Study  Duration:  Five years  
 
Subject  Duration:  From baseline to post -test is one month  approximately.  
 
 
General Information  
 
Our project,  Vale+Tú  Salud  (Your  Health  is Worth  More)  is a five- year  intervention  study  that extends  our 
previous work addressing injury prevention among Latino Day Laborers (LDL). Our project’s goal is to 
promote group problem solving and a commitment to implement COVID -19 mitigation strategies among 
LDL by using evidence -based participant recruitment, e ngagement, and intervention strategies that have 
been successfully tested among LDL in our previous study (Vale+Tú ). We hope to address the following 
question: Can an adapted Latino Day Laborer program increase adherence to COVID -19 mitigation 
practices, including vaccination, which reduce the risk of  COVID -19? 
Background Information  
 
Latinos  across  the US, particularly  those  born  outside  the US, are disproportionally  affected  by the COVID 
19 pandemic. In Texas, although Latinos compose 40% of the State’s population, they account for the 
majority  of COVID  19 fatalities.  Within  the immigrant  Latino  community,  LDL may  be especially  vulnerable. 
LDL are older, on average, than other Latino s and are less likely to have health insurance. LDL often 
experience periods of homelessness or live in substandard housing and share living quarters in crowded 
conditions. Many LDL are engaged in occupations such as construction and cannot work from home.  LDL 
perceive  their  well-being  (bien  estar)  in terms  of their  ability  to provide  for their  families,  but experiences 
of wage  theft  and other  forms  of abuse  lead  to feelings  of isolation  and despair  (desesperación ) as well as 
depression and anxiety. On the other hand, LDL possess resources which promote resiliency. These 
include  social  support  networks  composed  of other  LDL,  family,  friends,  employers,  church  members,  and 
sports  teams.  
Adherence  to COVID  19 mitigation  pract ices among  LDL is often  lacking.  LDL do not always  have  access  to 
restrooms  or are given  time  by employers  to engage  in hand  washing.  Social  distancing  at locations  where 
LDL gather to seek employment (corners) may be problematic as LDL want to socialize with their 
coworkers and approach potential employers in groups. Our recent observations of Houston corners 
found low levels of mask use and social distancing among L DL. In addition, less than 50% of Hispanics 
received the influenza vaccine during the 2018 -2019 flu season in  Texas.  
 
 
UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPR OPagVe 1AofL21  DATE : 05/01/2023  

Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   
How  these  structural  and psychological  factors  effect  COVID -19 mitigation  practices  and how  they  can be 
addressed in a brief intervention have not been studied  locally.  
Program content . Vale+ Tu Salud is designed as a small group, corner -based participatory learning and 
action intervention that is intended to be easily adopted by existing community -based organizations 
working with the LDL community for dissemination across geographic si tes in the U.S. and corners where 
LDLs gather for work. Three core components comprise the intervention:  
Group Problem Solving Component : This component incorporates popular education activities aimed 
at: developing social cohesion among LDLs; building awa reness about COVID -19 risks and protective 
behaviors; and developing a plan of action to reduce their and their peers’ risk for COVID -19 
transmission.  Action  plans  to be developed  by the participants  may  include  development  of a personal 
and group  commitme nt to keep  each  other  safe via COVID -19 prevention  practices;  increasing  PPE use 
(masks),  handwashing,  and observing  social  distancing  practices  (e.g.,  new  ways  for greeting  other  than 
handshaking) at worksites; and dissemination of information regarding social service resources to 
buffer the effects of COVID -19. As part of this component, LDL participants will be presented with 
pictures and narratives describing hypothetical hazard ous COVID -19 workplace scenarios, and then 
problem  solve  together  to gauge  COVID -19 knowledge  and develop  risk reduction  strategies,  resulting 
in a plan of action to promote individual and LDL coworker protection from COVID -19. The dialogue  
will be guided by a script developed by the  team.  
 
Navigation Component : This component will consist of providing information and linking LDLs with 
social service providers that can help buffer some of the social and economic effects of the COVID -19 
pandem ic, which may include resources for increasing food security, access to healthcare, and other 
social service support. As cited above, we will also aim to link LDL participants with COVID -19 testing 
and vaccination sites.  
“Multiplicador de salud”/Health Mul tiplier Component . The health multiplier component builds from 
the theoretical and practice -based method of mobilizing social networks and social support, defined 
as encouraging social networks to provide informational, emotional, appraisal, and instrument al 
support as cited in the Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods. LDL participants will be invited to be 
key partners with Vale+ Tú Salud and to participate in our diffusion efforts by mobilizing their peers, 
co-workers, and families to take action to protec t themselves and others from COVID -19. In doing so, 
participants will be provided with COVID -19 prevention flyers and social resource lists to distribute 
within their immediate social circles.  
Study Design  
 
Being mindful of the need to address the current pandemic emergency, we propose to implement our 
COVID prevention program using an adaptive, pragmatic approach for pandemic trials recently 
recommended  by Branch -Elliman  et al., (2020)  that will allow  us to deliver  our intervention  promptly.  We 
will test the effectiveness  of our program  in three  phases  that progressively  build  on each  other  and target 
evolving  prevention  priorities -including  those  that are emerging  (e.g.  vaccination)  and those  that are more 
established (e.g. face mask use), using prevention strategies previously tested in our Vales+Tu injury risk 
reduction intervention and adapted for our current  purposes.  
Implementation of the trial will occur using a phased approach, including a rapid initial phase that will 
adapt our current resources so that we may start the intervention program faster. The three phases will 
proceed as follows:  
Rapid adaptation – AIM 1 & AIM 2 (Phase 1).  
 
We will combine AIM 1 and AIM 2 (Phase 1) into a rapid adaptat ion phase by using existing Vales+Tu 
(injury risk reduction) manuals of study procedures describing enrollment, intervention, and evaluation 
procedures applicable to this new trial; this will save valuable time in getting the study up and running.  IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/01/2023  
UT Houston  Protocol  Template  Page 2 of 21 
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Using intervention mapping, the program content will be adapted from COVID data on mitigation 
practices (PPE, mask, and hand sanitizer use) and barriers collected in the current injury trial, and from a 
review of the literature identifying antecedent facto rs to implementing COVID -related mitigation 
practices  among  day laborers  and other  Latino  immigrants.  We will combine  the process  described  above 
to expedite  the implementation  of the trial,  to develop  a baseline  survey  instrument  to collect  information 
about the determinants of COVID 19 mitigation practices among Latino Day  Laborers.  
The information collected during this rapid phase will serve as the foundation to answer our AIM 1 
research  question  and as the initial  phase  1 of our clinical  trial (AIM  2) from  which  subsequent  phases  will 
be adapted.  
AIM 2 (Phase 2 & 3).  
 
These phases will build on lessons learned in the rapid adaptation/Phase 1, including the structural 
equation  modeling  of psychosocial  determinants  (AIM1)  that will improve  our ability  to more  solidly  target 
determinants of COVID prevention practices unique among our target population in the second iteration 
of the program. We will conduct two additional clinical trial phases, each consisting of 200 participants, 
to test our AIM 2 hypothesi s. After each phase, analysis will be conducted, and the information will be 
used to improve upon the next  phase.  
Our study also includes a third aim (AIM 3) that is focused on disseminating the results from phases 1 -3 
and on capacity building.  
Implementat ion phases 1 -3 are part of the cluster randomized trial to determine our COVID program 
efficacy  among  Houston  LDL . We will use an experimental  and control  group  design  with  both  conditions 
randomly  assigned  at the street -corner  level,  while  and the intervention s will be delivered  at the individual 
(LDL)  level.  The treatment  arm will consist  of a small  group,  corner -based  participatory  learning  and action 
intervention.  The standard  of care  arm will consist  of COVID -19 informational  and OSHA  safety  brochures. 
This will be a five -year study. An individual’s participation would consist of a baseline and a one -month 
follow -up survey , with future additional follow -ups to be considered by the  team . 
We will develop  a survey  tool to gather  information  relat ed to workers’  current  personal  and psychosocial 
characteristics,  work  conditions,  attitudes  and beliefs  regarding  COVID -19 and vaccination,  and COVID -19 
mitigation practices. The assessment will validate psychosocial and other measures used in our previous 
studies as well as newly developed items. This assessment will be used during our rapid implementation 
phase and allow us to make any necessary  adjustments to our study measures before conducting phase 
2 and phase 3 of our clinical  trial.  
OInitially, o ur intention is to use the same baseline instrument for all three phases unless our formative 
work post phase 1 indicates a need to make substantia l changes to our tool before conducting phases 2 
and 3. If changes are made to the instrument after phase 1, we will re -submit our materials for CPHS 
approval.  
Objectives  
 
There are three specific aims of this study.  
 
Rapid Adaptation phase includes AIM 1 and AIM 2 (PHASE 1)  
 
AIM 1: Determine the cultural, socioeconomic, inter/personal and work -related factors that 
influence COVID 19 mitigation practices including social distancing, hand -washing and PPE use.  
Due to increasing needs of our population and the disproportionate impact that COVID 19 is having on 
Latino Immigrant workers, we are doing a rapid adaptation phase to accomplish aim 1. The goal of  
the rapid assessment include:  IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/01/2023  
UT Houston  Protocol  Template  Page 3 of 21 

 a. Conduct COVID 19 needs assessment survey with 200 LDL at randomly selected  corners.  
b. Establish the influence of multilevel determinants on mitigation practices using a structural 
equation  model.  
Research question : What multilevel determinants influence LDL adherence to COVID 
19 mitigation practices?  
AIM 2: Adapt, implement, and test Vale+T ú Salud in a cluster randomized trial to assess the extent 
to which LDL report increased adherence with COVID 19 mitigation practices 1 month post 
intervention.  
a. Use Intervention Mapping to adapt current LDL program (NIH Stage I) for COVID 19  prevention.  
 
b. Test Vale+Tú Salud efficacy in a CRT with 600 LDL (200 X Phase 1 (Rapid Adaptation) (200 x 
Phase 2) (200 x Phase 3) from 30 randomly selected  corners.  
Hypothesis:  At post -test, LDL who participate in (a) a small group problem -solving activity 
will report g reater adherence with COVID 19 mitigation practices compared to (b) LDL 
receiving COVID -related resources only.  
Aim 3: AIM 3: Promote Vale+Tú Salud just -in-time results and increase its capacity to rapidly 
disseminate findings among groups that serve LDL a nd other Latino immigrants.  
a. After CRT Phase 1, work closely with the CAB and LDL leaders to rapidly disseminate 
strategies  that effectively  increase  COVID  19 mitigation  using  social  media  and other 
appropriate Latino media  channels.  
b. If CRT Phase 1 and 2 ar e successful, work with community -based organizations to disseminate 
best practices, and provide curriculum materials and technical assistance to maximize the 
adoption of practices that can assist multiple groups of vulnerable Latino workers in 
preventing COVID  19. 
This application is being submitted in response to PAR -20-237 Community Interventions to Address 
the Consequences of the COVID -19 Pandemic among Health Disparity and Vulnerable Populations . In 
the short term, we expect our program to address the urgent need to prevent COVID 19 among LDL 
by testing its effectiveness in promoting mitigation practices and the COVID 19 vaccine, when it 
becomes available. Over the longer term, we expect that the lessons learned in this COVID 19 
prevention program will transfer to other work and life domains where LDL may adopt similar 
practices to reduce other health risks.  
Clinical Trial Description  
 
Clinical Trial  
 
Selection of the study population . The study population will be Latino Day Laborers present at 
randomly selected study corners.  
Inclusion/exclusion  criteria . A screener  form  will be used  to assess  eligibility.  In order  to be eligible,  an LDL 
must  be at least  18 years  old; identify  as Hispanic  or Latino;  be at the corner  for the purpose  of looking  for 
work;  and have  been  previously  hired  at a corner.  LDL not meeting  these  requirements  will be thanked  for 
their  time  and informed  they  are not eligible  to participate.  LDL will also be asked  if they  have  experienced 
symptoms of COVID -19 in the previous 48 hours (fever, cough, sore  throat,  
 
UT Houston  Protocol  Template  Page 4 of 21 
Adapted from NIH protocol template and  ICH Guidelines   IRB NUMBER:  HSC -SPH-20-1389  
    IRB APPROVAL DATE:  05/01/2023  

 
See table 1 below for additional information about the constructs to be included in our survey.  fatigue, etc.). Those reporting symptoms will be thanked for their time and informed they are not 
eligible to participate and will be given a brochure with COVID related resources.  
Obtaining Informed Consent:  
 
Participants will be asked to provide oral informed consent to take part in the survey. Potential 
participants will be told the purpose of the assessment, that they can refuse to answer any item and 
that they can pause the assessment to talk to potential e mployers or attend a job. The interviewer 
will explain  that the study  has been  granted  a Certificate  of Confidentiality  and that all responses  will 
be protected.  If the potential  study  participant  does  not provide  informed  consent,  he will be thanked 
for h is time but will not be able to take part in the  survey.  
Recruitment Strategy . The Outreach Coordinator and the LDL interviewers will visit the selected 
corners  and approach  LDL about  participating  in our study.  After  obtaining  oral informed  consent,  the 
participant  will be asked  to complete  the baseline  survey,  which  should  take  no more  than  45 minutes 
to complete. Corners will be randomly assigned to receive the intervention or the standard of care, 
with  all LDL recruited  at a given  corner  being  assigned  to the same  study  arm.  We will select  a mixture 
of corners based on the number of LDL previously observed: small (less than 15 LDL), medium (15 -29 
LDL), and large (30 or more  LDL).  
Study Procedures  
 
Eligible LDL who wish to participate will be asked to provide verbal informed consent  by selecting the  
appropriate button on an iPad -based form . After enrollment into the study, participants will complete a 
baseline survey. The survey will be administered electronically via an iPad and each participant will 
complete the survey in private, with assistance from study personnel. The baseline survey should take 
approximately  45 minutes  to an hour  to complete.  The purpose  of the assessment  is to gather  informati on 
related to workers’ current personal and psychosocial characteristics, work conditions, attitudes and 
beliefs regarding COVID -19 and vaccination, and COVID -19 mitigation practices. The assessment will 
validate psychosocial and other measures used in our  previous studies as well as newly developed items. 
The results of the assessment will help us identify priority needs for COVID -19 prevention and mitigation 
that will inform  the intervention  mapping  process  and implementation  of phase  2 and 3 of the intervention 
program.  
 
 
The intervention will consist of three core components:  
Group Problem Solving Component : This component incorporate s popular education activities aimed at: 
developing social cohesion among LDLs; building awareness about COVID -19 risks and protective 
behaviors;  and developing  a plan  of action  to reduce  their  and their  peers’  risk for COVID -19 transmission. 
Action plans may include development of a personal and group commitment to keep each other safe via 
COVID -19 prevention  practices;  increasing  PPE (masks),  handwashing,  and social  distancing  practices  (e.g., 
new  ways  for greeting  other  than  handshaking)  at worksites;  and dissemination  of social  service  resources 
to buffer the effects of COVID -19. As part of this component, LDL participants will be presented with 
pictures and narratives describing hypothetical hazardous COVID -19 workplace scenarios, and then 
problem sol ve together to develop risk reduction strategies, resulting in a plan of action to promote 
individual and LDL coworker protection from  COVID -19. 
Navigation Component : This component will consist of providing information and linking LDLs with 
social  service  providers  that can help  buffer  some  of the social  and economic  effects  of the COVID -19 
pandemic, which may include resources for increasing food security, access to healthcare, and other 
social service support. As cited above, we will also aim to link LDL  participants with COVID -19 
vaccination services contingent upon vaccination  availability.  
 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -SPH-20-1389  
    IRB APPROVAL DATE:  05/01/2023  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  Page 5 of 21 
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  

IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPR OPagVe 6AofL21  DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   
“Multiplicador  de salud”/Health  Multiplier  Component . The health  multiplier  component  builds  from 
the theoretical and practice -based method of mobilizing social networks and social support, defined 
as encouraging social networks to provide informational, emotional, appraisal, and instrumental 
support as cited in the Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods. LDL participants will be invited to be 
key partners  with  the Vale+Tú  Salud  by mobilizing  their  peers,  co-workers,  and families  to take  action 
to protect  themselves  and others  from  COVID -19. In doing  so, participants  will be helping  our diffusion 
efforts  and they  will be provided  with  COVID -19 prevention  flyers  and social  resource  lists to distribute 
within their immediate social  circles.  
The specific elements of the intervention will be refined based on the results of the intervention 
mapping sessions described above to adapt our Vales+ Tu injury program. In addition, results from 
the rapid  adaptation will be used to further improve our intervention.  
The standard of care arm will receive COVID -19 prevention flyer and social resources list only.  
 
One-month follow -up surveys with participants will be conducted following the baseline survey and  
intervention. The follow -up survey will be conducted by phone at a time convenient for the 
participant.  We will consider  using  an automated  phone  survey  system  such  as CallFire  to conduct  the 
follow -up. 
The clinical trial will be conducted in three phases  and will follow the schedule below:  
Rapid Adaptation Phase 1 (AIM 1 & AIM 2 (Phase 1)) will be conducted with 200 LDL. 
Phase 2 (AIM 2 (phase 2) will be conducted with 200 LDL.  
Phase 3 (AIM 2 (phase 3) will be conducted with 200 LDL.  
After each phase, we w ill review the implementation of the trial and baseline survey results. 
Recruitment activities, the survey, and the intervention will be revised as necessary.  
No invasive procedures will be employed, and no biological specimens will be collected.  
 
Clinical  Trial Compensation  
 
Participants in the trial will receive a $50 gift card for completing the baseline survey and group 
activity and a second $75 gift card for completing the follow -up survey. At post test, arrangements 
will be made  to mail  the gift card  to the participant  or to deliver  the card  in person  at an agreed  upon 
location. Interviewers will be responsible for the distribution of the incentives. An incentives log will 
be kept to track the distribution  process.  
Table 1. Constructs and Measures for Vale+Tú Salud  
 
Construc 
ts Scale  Previous Use  Original Source  # of 
Items  α 
COVID - 
19 COVID -19 
Knowledge  Adapted  from Geldsetzer,  2020.  4  
Psychos 
ocial  
Factors  Perceived Severity  Adapted - John Hopkins University COVID -19 Community 
Response Survey  4  
Perceived  Adapted - John Hopkins University COVID -19 Community  3  
 susceptibility  Response Survey   
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPR OPagVe 7AofL21  DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   
 COVID Self -Efficacy 
and Outcome 
Expectations  Adapted - World Health Organization COVID -19 Survey Tool and 
Guidance, 2020.  5  
COVID Exposure  Adapted – Boston University COVID -19 Symptoms & Social  
Distancing Web Survey  6  
Health Status and  
Access to Care  Adapted – Boston University COVID -19 Symptoms & Social  
Distancing Web Survey & the Houston Education Research 
Consortium – Gulf Coast Coronavirus (COVID -19) Community 
Impact Survey  12  
COVID -19 Impact  UTHealth Community Attitudes Toward COVID -19 and Mental  
Well-Being & Data Foundation COVID -19 Household Impact 
Survey  22  
COVID -19 Work  
Impact  Adapted – Boston University COVID -19 Symptoms & Social  
Distancing Web Survey  11  
Sources of  
Information  Adapted - Data Foundation COVID -19 Household Impact Survey  5  
Trust in sources of  
information  Adapted - Data Foundation COVID -19 Household Impact Survey  1  
Intention to adhere  
to Mitigation 
Practices  Developed by the research team  11  
Barriers to Health  
Care Access  Developed by the research team  3  
COVID -19 Vaccine  
attitudes  Adapted - World Health Organization COVID -19 Survey Tool and  
Guidance, 2020.  8  
Social Isolation  Social Isolation  Diaz, Ayala, Bein et al., 2001.  7 .78 
Stress  Perceived Stress Scale  Adapted from Cohen, Kamarck, &  
Mermelstein, 1983.  6 .86 
Anxiety  6-item STAI -E (STAI -E6) Perpiñá -Galvañ, et al, 2013.  6 .79 
Quality of Life  CDC    
Substance use  Adapted - Alcohol Use  
Disorders Identification 
Test (AUDIT)  Used in Fernández -Esquer, Gallardo,  
& Diamond, 2018.  10 - 
Depression  Used in Corner survey  7-item CES -D Levine, 2013.  7 .83 
Resilience  Brief Resilience Scale  Smith, Dalen, Wiggins et al., 2008.  6 .84 
Optimism  Life Orientation Test – 
Revised (LOT -R) Efuni, 1994.  9 .66 
Religiosity  Religiosity  Boyas, Valera & Ruiz, 2018.  3 - 
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPR OPagVe 8AofL21  DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   
 Coping Strategies  Brief COPE  Carver, 1997.  24 .50 
+ 
Perceived Social  
Support  Used in Rapid Needs  
Assessment  Barrera, Sander, & Ramsay, 1981.  10 .93 
Practice  
s COVID Mitigation  
Practices  Adapted from Park, Russell, Fendrich et al., 2020.  8 - 
 
 
 
 
Work 
conditi 
ons Wage Theft  Used in Rapid Needs  
Assessment  Adapted from Zoeckler, Lax, Gonos,  
et al., 2014.  2 - 
Safety Climate  Used in Corner Survey  Fugas, Silva, & Mejia, 2012.  6 .85 
Risks at the jobsite  Used in Corner Survey  Fernández -Esquer, Fernández - 
Espada, Atkinson et al. 2015.  6 .77 
Work Conditions  Used in Corner Survey  Fernández -Esquer, Fernández - 
Espada, Atkinson et al., 2015.  14 .89 
Risks at the corner  Used in Corner Survey  From Focus Groups  9 .77 
Working Climate  Used in Corner Survey  Fernández -Esquer, Fernández - 
Espada, Atkinson et al. 2015.  11 .82 
Socio - 
Econom 
ic 
Stressor  
s Everyday  
Discrimination  Used in Rapid Needs  
Assessment  Williams, et al., 1997;  Kessler,  
Michelson, & Williams,  1999.  5 .84 
Discrimination  
justification  Used in Rapid Needs  
Assessment  Williams, et al., 1997;  Kessler,  
Michelson, & Williams,  1999.  13 .90 
Immigration Stress  Disappointment about  
Life in US.  
Deportation -Related 
Worry  
Fear of Venturing Out as 
an Imm.  Fernández -Esquer, Gallardo, &  
Diamond, 2018.  5 
3 
7 .71 
.71 
.89 
Situational Stress  Used in SHILOS  Fernández -Esquer, Gallardo, &  
Diamond, 2018.  19 .80 
 
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  
 HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Overview  
The School of Public Health is mindful of the need to balance two concerns during the current pandemic. 
One is to conduct robust and significant community -based research. The other is two respect the safety 
of research participants and staff. Towards addre ssing these concerns, the School has developed 
Guidelines  for Conduct  of Community -based  Research  During  the COVID -19 Pandemic . This Guide  includes 
best practices for preparing staff, participants, and study sites for research  activities.  
Summary of Investigator Actions Needed to Conduct Research with the COVID -19 Pandemic  
1. Follow standard recommendations where applicable. This include UTHealth guidance; state -, 
county -, and city-level  rules;  Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention  (CDC)  recommendations; 
OSHA recommendations; and any guidance specific to the community setting (e.g., Texas 
Education Agency (TEA) for  schools).  
2. Prepare for community -level research with COVID -19. Preparations include: staff 
preparation/training, assessment of staff risk, modification to protocols, obtaining personal 
protective equipment  (PPE).  
3. Assess risk level in the community and for study participants. Entry into the community and 
staff/research  preparation  will depend  on the current  level  of community  trans mission,  as well as 
the setting (e.g., school, childcare center, long -term care facility, prison,  etc.).  
4. Communicate  frequently  with  research  staff,  community  partners,  and appropriate  UTHealth 
departments (e.g., Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects,  etc.).  
5. Document the  process.  
Research  staff  will adhere  to recommendations  regarding  the use of PPE and social  distancing,  both  at the 
School  and in the field.  Staff  will be trained  in the proper  use of equipment  and other  protective  measures. 
We will maintain an adequate supply of equipment for use by staff and distribution to participants in the 
field. We will maintain use of PPE and social distancing in the field. We will a ssess risks in the field by 
consultation with LDL at potential recruitment sites and monitoring of relevant data sources. We will 
provide  testing  information  and referrals  to staff  member  and participants  and will take  appropriate  step 
for individuals who may exhibit symptoms. We will maintain regular communication between research 
staff and our community partners. We will adjust protocols as  necessary.  
The Guidelines contain a set of Checklists for the recommended guidelines. Training in the use of these 
will be provided to research staff. The use of these and other relevant procedure will be included in a 
Manual of Procedures.  
 
We have incorporated Covid mitigation procedures into our activities below.  
Subject Characteristics.  
As outlined in the body of t he proposal, study participants will be Latino day laborers (LDL). Participants 
will be Latino immigrant men from Mexico and Central America (mostly from Honduras, El Salvador and 
Guatemala), recruited from street corners and other day labor sites located in neighborhoods 
predominantly populated by Latinos in the Houston metropolitan area. Program activities will be 
conducted by phone and in -person.  
Sources of Materials  
Once participant consent has been requested and obtained, primary assessment data will b e collected 
through individual interviews. All the information will be stored in a password -protected computer and 
only the principal investigator (Dr. Fernandez -Esquer) and the project director will be granted access to  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389  
UT Houston Protocol Template  IRB APPR OPagVe 9AofL21  DATE : 05/01/2023  

IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V0 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   records that identify individual participants. Any tracking information written on paper will be destroyed 
after it has been entered in the computer.  
Potential Risks  
We anticipate that the most likely risks of participation in the interviews are the follow ing: (1) 
embarrassment and anxiety, (2) lack of trust in the interviewers, (3) fear of loss of privacy, (4) missed 
opportunity  to get a job, (5) conflict  with  coworkers,  (6) conflict  with  police.  We discuss  the strategies  we 
will adopt to minimize these risks  below.  
Experiencing embarrassment and anxiety during the interview : The discussion of the impact of COVID 19 
related social and contextual stressors may be sensitive for some workers who prefer not to share this 
inform ation  with  outsiders.  Although  most  participants  in our previous  surveys  spoke  candidly  about  their 
experiences, we expect there will be a few LDL unwilling to share this information. Given the precarious 
nature of day laborers’ living conditions (poverty,  undocumented status, unstable jobs), they may feel 
anxious about sharing information of a sensitive nature during the interviewing process. We will instruct 
interviewers  to address  participants’  concerns,  to note  their  comments  in the section  indicated  at the end 
of the interview, and to provide a list of health services and other community referrals (e.g. community 
organizations, churches, support groups) to assist LDL with COVID 19 -related needs or other health 
concerns for which they may need  support.  
Lack of trust in the interviewing team : Strategies to reduce distrust and increase comfort with the 
interviewers will be discussed during interviewer training. Although day laborers at the corners selected 
for recruitment  may  already  be familiar  with  the UT team  through  our previous  injury  prevention  program 
activities, they might not be familiar with the LDL interviewers to be hired for this proposed study. To 
foster trust in both the face -to-face and in the phone administration of program activities, we wi ll 
emphasize  the anonymous  nature  of the activities  and procedures  to protect  data  collected  for this study. 
To foster trust in the interviewers, for surveys conducted over the phone (Aim 1), we will train the 
interviewing staff to establish rapport before  the start of the interview. If the survey is conducted on 
location, staff members familiar with the corners will introduce the interview team to the workers 
present,  explain  the purpose  of the interviews  and will stay present  (observing  social  distance)  during  the 
interview process to be of further assistance if necessary. Interviewers will also provide workers with the 
names  and telephone  numbers  of the principal  investigators  and will encourage  workers  to contact  them 
by phone if they have any  questions.  
Loss of privacy:  Interviewers will conduct phone -based activities form our office location, where we will 
be able to use cubicles designated for interviewing purposes. Each interviewer will be assigned to a 
separate cubicle to maintain social distance and  privacy of the interview. Field -based activities will be 
conducted  in a public  location,  most  likely  the corner  itself.  This means  that there  will be activity  and other 
people  present,  while  the day laborers  are completing  the interview  or intervention  and that there  will be 
a need to enforce social distancing. We will create social distance by creating “rooms” with the use of 
orange  cones  and yellow  tape  that will allow  the interviewing  team  to create  a barrier  between  onlookers 
and the interview process, while at the same time maintaining auditory privacy in a public space. Each 
interviewer  will also be trained  to be aware  of other  people  in the vicinity  of the interview  and respectfully 
request onlookers to move away f rom this location. We will position the interviewing “rooms” in an area 
that is at a distance  from  the busiest  hiring  location  to avoid  interfering  with  other  workers’  activities.  LDL 
who participate in our program activities will be required to wear a face covering while interacting with 
program  staff.  If they  do not have  a face  covering,  we will provide  them  with  a face  mask.  In addition,  we 
will provide  them  with  hand  sanitizer  at the beginning  and at the end of their  participation  in our research 
activities.  Project  staff  will also be required  to use hand  sanitizer  frequently  and to wear  gloves.  All COVID - 
19 protective equipment will be provided as part of our  project.  
Loss of a potential job:  We are aware that day laborers are at the corner waiting for an opportunity to get a 
job. We will be mindful of their needs and will be ready to suspend interviews when necessary. During the 
informed consent process, participants w ill be told that they can leave the interview at any time. If they are 
waiting for a boss, and he arrives, they can stop the interview and complete it on a different date.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V1 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Balancing the need to suspend an interview with the need to minimize attrition will be monitored 
carefully,  and the workers’  needs  will take  priority.  Intervi ew times  will vary  throughout  the day,  so as not 
to have  interviewers  always  present  at the peak  of the hiring  activity.  We will design  an interview  that will 
take no more than 45 minutes to administer, considering the time pressures at the corner. We will 
implement a detailed set of procedures to minimize the risk of missed job opportunities. Procedures will 
include being flexible in conducting and suspend ing program activities, allowing participants to leave for 
jobs and resume activities at a later time, and minimizing interfering with day laborer  activities.  
Conflict  with  coworkers  not participating  in the interviews : We expect  that not all LDL looking  for work  at 
a selected  corner  will be interested  in participating  in our study.  In our previous  programs  at the corners, 
we have found that participants not interested in being interviewed simply ignored the presence of our 
team and kept their attention on ongoing job hiring activities. Considering that the mere presence of our 
team  at the corner  may  make  some  LDL uncomfortable,  we will inform  all LDL during  recruitment  that the 
program will emphasize documenting the experiences of LDL in dealing with COVID -19 while protecting 
conversations  and respecting  day laborers’  ability  to make  their  own  choices.  If workers  at a location  feel 
uncomfortable  with  our activities,  we will opt for a different  program  location  and will document  instances 
of resistance to our  study.  
Despite the low incidence of conflict in our previous studies, the safety and well -being of day laborers is 
a constant concern that will be revisited during the current study. In the previous project we instituted 
strategies  that we plan  to implement  again  to protect  the confidentiality  and safety  of study  participants. 
Interviews  at the corner  will be conducted  away  from  the area  where  job hiring  activities  are taking  place. 
This distance  may  minimize  employers’  curiosity  about  program  activities.  However,  if employers  want  to 
inquire about the presence of the project team at the corner and the ongoing activities, they will be 
informed about our study and provided with the contact information of the principal investigator if they 
would like more information . Typically, most potential employers stop at a day labor corner long enough 
to solicit workers and establish a basic working agreement. This engagement lasts no more than 3 -5 
minutes, and we expect that after they are informed about the purposes of our pr oject, most employers 
will be satisfied and move on to focus on their own  affairs.  
Conflict  with  the police : Even  when  the presence  of the Latino  day laborers  is public  and at locations  where 
there  is heavy  traffic,  they  are rarely  the direct  target  of police  intervention  or immigration  raids.  Instances 
when  a corner  group  is targeted  by the police  due to a neighborhood  complaint,  the group  often  relocates 
to a different nearby location before returning to the corner. As local businesses that cater to LDL are 
typically  aware  of their  movements,  we will contact  them  to identify  the new  corner  location  and continue 
our program  activities.  
An immigrat ion arrest  is an event  likely  to happen  to Latino  immigrants  anywhere  in Houston,  even  at day 
labor corners, without warning, and due to circumstances outside the control of our study. We believe 
that participation in our study will not bring undue attenti on from ICE or alter LDL arrest risk. We will 
request a Certificate of Confidentiality to reassure day laborers concerned about sharing personal 
information  with  our project.  If a worker  is arrested  or could  have  been  arrested  in an immigration -related 
event, we will provide assistance by linking the study participants or their families to professionals and 
other community organizations who can provide legal and other types of  assistance.  
Adverse events  
Should any unintended or adverse events occur, we will follow procedures for reporting adverse events 
which  is required  by the University  of Texas  Health  Science  Center  Committee  for the Protection  of Human 
Subjects.  
The research team will utilize the foll owing response procedures for adverse events:  
1. Research team members will immediately report any breaches of data security or confidentiality  
directly to all other research team members and to members of the CAB via  email.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V2 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   2. Research team members will immediately report any perceived distress related to program activities  
as well as the response of the team member to that distress such as providing a specific referral. These 
reports  will be further  discussed  at team  meetings  and with  the CAB to insure  that our current  procedures 
are minimizing the risk and are working as  desired.  
3. Research team members will immediately report any perceived loss of a work opportunity  related to 
program activities as well as the response of the team member to that situation. These reports will be 
further  discussed  at team  meetings  and with  the CAB to insure  that our current  procedures  are minimizing 
the risk and working as  desired.  
4. For all events listed above, the PI (Drs. Fernandez -Esquer ) will complete a Problem Report Form  and 
submit the form to the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects (CPHS) at UTSPH. The form is 
reviewed by an IRB  Administrator/Coordinator.  
5. Upon  receipt  of the Problem  Report  Form  and appropriate  level  of review  by staff,  CPHS  will make  a 
determination about whether further action may be required. Available actions may  include:  
a. Modification to the  protocol.  
b. Notification to past participants by phone or  letter.  
c. Modification of the continuing review  schedule.  
d. Monitoring of the  research.  
e. Suspension or termination of the research according to IRB SOP on “Suspension  or 
Termination of IRB Approved  Research”.  
f. Referral to legal counsel, risk management or the in stitutional  official.  
g. Other appropriate action as determined by the  IRB. 
 
Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent.  
All 3 phases of the study will involve the completion of a baseline survey, delivery of the interventions at 
the corner, and post -test survey conducted over the phone. Day laborers will be approached at the 
corners  where  they  wait  for work  by the corner  coordinator  and other  study  recruitment  staff  and will be 
invited to participate in the study. We will describe procedures to protect the confidentiality of the 
collected information. If an individual agrees to take part in an interview, they will be directed to one of 
our interviewing  “rooms.”  As described  above,  this will consist  of a space  delineated  by orange  cones  and 
tape. The interviewer will request oral consent after reading a consent statement explaining the overall 
purpose of the study and of the interview and intervention, the right to refuse to ans wer any question, 
and the right  to terminate  the interview  at any point  without  reprisals.  The consent  process  will include  a 
balanced discussion of the potential benefits and harms associated with participation in this study. We 
will specify  in the consen t form  that any participant  can withdraw  from  the interview,  at any time  without 
fear of experiencing harm, reprisals, or incurring ill will. This will be explained in the Informed Consent 
Form and discussed with each worker prior to his participation. The consent form will also explain that 
the benefits  of participation  includ e getting  a better  understanding  of the their  ability  to adopt  actions  to 
mitigate  the transmission  of COVID -19. It will note  that potential  harms  include  anxiety,  minor  discomfort 
or concern  due to the content  of the survey,  the potential  for missing  a job opportunity  while  participating 
in the survey, and breach of confidentiality. These factors will be clearly delineated in the consent form 
and discussed individually with each potential  participant.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V3 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   When recruiting at the corners, researc h personnel will wear masks, apply hand sanitizer, and maintain 
social distancing. LDL will be offered masks and sanitizer and will be required to wear masks for the 
duration  of the baseline  survey  and intervention.  Promotores  leading  the group  session  will observe  safety 
practices. Personnel will observe practices and minimize physical interaction in the distribution of the 
safety cards in the intervention arms employing  them.  
Follow -up interviews  conducted  by phone.  As with  Aim 1, these  will be conducted  from  separate  cubicles 
at UT. Each  interviewer  will be assigned  its own  cubicle  as to observe  social  distance.  In addition,  UT offices 
require that all personnel wear masks while in the  building.  
The navigation component will consist of providing information and linking LDL with social service 
providers that can help buffer some of the social and economic effects of the COVID -19 pandemic. We 
expect most interactions between navigators and LDL will not involve face -to-face contact.  
Day laborers  approached  for this study  will only  be recruited  at street  corners  and other  day laborer  hiring 
sites. Interaction with all study participants is expected to occur only in Spanish and at the day labor 
corners or by phone. We will request their name or nickname and names and contact information for 
those  who  may  know  how  to reach  the participant  if necessary  to conduct  their  follow -up survey  and who 
we may contact with the participant’s  permission.  
We will provide  incentive  payments  that will be tracked  by number  and monitored  by the project  director 
and an administrative  assistant  who  has fiscal  responsibility  for all disbursements  at the Center  for Health 
Promotion and Prevention Research, where this proje ct will be housed. All procedures will be submitted 
for approval to the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at the University of Texas Health 
Science Center at  Houston.  
All consent instructions and procedures will be prepared in Spanish and Engl ish and will be available for 
review by the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects, to whom all forms will be submitted for 
approval.  
Protection against Risk  
We will also protect the confidentiality of the interview location. All data records will be coded by unique ID 
numbers.  Each  post  card  will contain  a unique  bar code  number  to deter  LDL from  sharing  their  post  cards  with 
Non LDL family  members  and friends . In addition,  postcards  will include  the corner  ID of the corner  where  they 
were distributed to accurately track corner location information. This information will be stored in password 
protected computers. Research personnel retrieving tracking informati on from this computer file will be 
instructed  to keep  it in a locked  cabinet  while  in use, and to destroy  it immediately  after  it is no longer  needed. 
Data will be coded using ID numbers; as the interviews are anonymous, and all data contained in the dataset 
will be absent of personal identifiers. All contact information will be securely stored, on password protected 
computers and/or locked file  cabinets.  
3. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and  Others  
Potential  direct  benefits  to study  participants  will include  increased  understanding  of the safety  measures 
they  may  need  to take  to protect  themselves  against  COVID -19. Furth ermore,  participants  will be provided 
a resource sheet with contact information for food banks, low cost health clinics, COVID -19 testing 
centers,  the Fe y Justicia  Worker  Center  and other  resources  which  may  help  them  obtain  access  to health 
care and other community resources. Information obtained from this study will be provided to the 
Community Advisory Board and to local community and employer organizations interested in the safety 
of day laborers including those involved in worker s afety and health care  professionals.  
4. Importance of the Knowledge to be  Gained  
Latino Day Laborers are an especially vulnerable population within the population of Latino immigrants. 
The long -term effects of COVID -19 are yet to be determined. As such, the p otential benefit of our study 
to society is great in that a clearer understanding of the factors related to the COVID -19 mitigation  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V4 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   practices of LDL and the resulting interventions may increase adherence to mitigation practices. This, in 
turn , can help minimize hospitalizations and other adverse health outcomes. Reducing day laborers’ 
COVID -19 risk will also reduce public health, economic and social costs to themselves, their families and 
the larger society.  
Inclusion of Women  
It is very unlikely that we will interview women as part of this study, as there are very few women day 
laborers  in the local  area.  However,  if a woman  is present  at a corner,  she will be enrolled  if she consents 
to take part in the study. Given our experience conducting interviews with day laborers, we expect to 
interview fewer than five women throughout the  study.  
Inclusion of Minorities  
Most day laborers contacted at the corner are likely to be foreign -born immigrants mostly of Hispanic/ 
Latino  ancestry  or descent.  Recruitment  data  collected  in our previous  local  studies  indicate  that members 
of other ethnic minority groups are rarely present at day labor corners and if present, they rarely 
participate i n job hiring activities. Thus, these individuals do not meet the main inclusion criteria for this 
study: looking for work at the day labor  corner.  
Inclusion of Children  
Children under the age of 18 will not be included in this study, and those between ages  18 and 21 will be 
included if they are seeking work as day laborers at one of the corners where we conduct recruitment. Our 
previous recruitment records indicate that the total number of minors under 18 likely to found at day labor 
corners  is extremely  small. Participation  of minors  in the study  is less an issue  of excluding  them  from  scientific 
inclusion, but rather a rare event as evidenced by our previous study. Additionally, their participation would 
have to be evaluated separately, introducing additio nal heterogeneity to our  study.  
Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  
Several procedures will be used to maintain the integrity of the data. All databases will be stored in a 
centralized location on an UTSPH server, which is backed up daily, with access limited to specific users at the 
discretion of the principal investigato rs. The PI will monitor security of the data throughout the study and will 
work with the project director and data manager to monitor data collection activities and the transfer of 
personal  data  collected  during  interviews  to our password  protected  compute r drive.  The PI will audit  selected 
subsets  of data  and work  with  Dr. Atkinson,  the data  manager,  to set up appropriate  safeguards  of participant 
privacy. Privacy safeguards will include appropriate password protection and the physical security for all 
com puter systems. There will be no personal names stored in data  files.  
Study data will be collected from human subjects using survey interviews. No invasive measures will be 
used  to generate  data.  As data  collection  objectives  will be finalized  during  the study,  we expect  that data 
will consist of socio -demographic characteristics, mitigation practices, and psychosocial variables that 
influence those practices. To protect confidentiality of the participants, code numbers will be used as 
identifiers for part icipants and corner  locations.  
The data  manager  will program  the survey  interview  using  Qualtrics  to capture  data  electronically.  He will 
conduct data quality checks on a weekly basis during the data collection period and will provide reports 
of detected e rrors in the data file such as out of range responses, skip pattern errors, duplicate 
identification  numbers,  and inconsistent  responses.  Data  will be transferred  for analysis  to SPSS,  and data 
monitoring reports will be generated to assess completion time  and data quality, and for statistical 
analysis.  
Survey  data  will be maintained  on a secure  server  that is password  protected  and accessible  only  to study  staff 
who are engaged in data analytic activities. The survey data will be collected by interviewers using tablets to 
be disinfected before and after each use. Data will be downloaded from the tablets on a regular basis by the 
data manager to a secure serv er. These tablets will be equipped with state of the art  security,  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V5 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   and the data will be encrypted; the encryption is another level of security in case a tablet is lost. When 
not in use, tablets will be stored in a locked cabinet. If we need to transfer files, identifying information 
will be deleted, and the new file will be encrypted before transmission, in accordance with HIPPA and 
University policy. Survey data will not be associated with personal identifiers since each participant will 
be assigned a study number at the time of consent.  
The Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB) for the Committee  for the Protection  of Human  Subjects  at University 
of Texas Health Science Center at Houston will review and approve all aspects of the proposed study, 
including protecting the confidentiality of study participants and informing partic ipants of the potential 
benefits  and risks  of taking  part in the study.  The IRB requires  that the confidentiality  of study  participants 
be protected and that procedures be implemented to securely collect and process data. Principal 
investigators are required by the IRB to report any adverse events as a condition of conducting the 
research. The IRB also requires that principal investigators inform study participants of these 
requirements and provide them with the principal investigator’s and the IRB’s phone numbers. If 
members  of the IRB have  questions,  investigators  are required  to provide  written  responses.  The IRB must 
approv e any proposed changes to study protocols prior to  implementation.  
Study investigators will be responsible for creating the survey instrument and the guidelines for its 
administration. The principal investigator will work closely with our community partner , Fe y Justicia 
Worker Center, to coordinate project activities. All personnel will be appropriately trained in all aspects 
of the study  and will complete  a Human  Subjects  certification  available  in Spanish.  They  will be introduced 
to the goals and signifi cance of the study and to the procedures for recruitment, tracking, and retention 
of participants. They will also sign a confidentiality agreement. All interviewers will be fluent in Spanish. 
Study investigators will require field personnel to inform the p roject director if any adverse events are 
reported during survey  administration.  
F. VERTEBRATE ANIMALS 
Not applicable  
DATA SHARING PLAN  
The proposed research will conduct surveys with Latino Day Laborers (LDL) in the Houston metropolitan 
area. Data from the survey will be used to assess a conceptual model describing the factors which 
influence LDLs’ adherence to COVID -19 prevention measure s. Data will also be used to evaluate the 
effects of interventions designing to improve adherence. It is anticipated that approximately 600 
participants  will be enrolled  for all three  phases  of the study.  The principal  investigator  of the study  is Dr. 
Mari a Fernandez -Esquer of the Center for Health Promotion at the University of Texas School of Public 
Health in  Houston.  
Following  data  collection,  the research  team  will develop  a policy  to share  data  collected  from  this project 
with the scientific community.  This policy will include a dissemination plan, a central repository for the 
data through which requests can be funneled, and a plan to evaluate requests for data  use. 
The dissemination plan will include publishing manuscripts and presenting results at aca demic 
conferences. Manuscripts and presentations will contain notices that the data are available for use by 
other researchers and a link to a web page housed at the University of Texas -Houston School of Public 
Health that can be accessed by those interest ed in the data. The web page will provide contact 
information  (surface  mail  address,  email  address,  phone  number,  and fax number)  of a designated  project 
representative. This representative will coordinate receipt of requests, as well as review of the proposal 
and notification of the proposal status for the applicant requesting data  access.  
De-identified files will be maintained for all data collect ed during the study period, and we will operate 
under the guidance of the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston Committee for the 
Protection of Human Subjects, to ensure that University Institutional Review Board requirements for 
confidentia lity of subjects will be met.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V6 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Applicants will be required to submit a data application form along with a brief research proposal and 
biographical data. The applicant must agree to several restrictions before being allowed to use the data. 
These will include:  
 
1) Use of the data for the so le purpose of the research  described;  
 
2) Prior notification of the investigators of any publications or presentations with the  data;  
 
3) Acknowledgement of the study  investigators;  
 
4) Agreement not to contact  subjects;  
 
5) Compliance with informed consent  forms;  
 
6) Compliance with IRB requirements at both the University of Texas and the requester’s 
institution.  
The new investigator will be required to provide 6 -month reports on use of the data files. If, at any time, 
the requestor  does  not adhere  to the requirements  of this agreement,  the agreement  will be terminated, 
and the requestor will be required to abandon the proposed research  project.  
 
DISSEMINATION PLAN  
We will ensure that the clinical trial proposed under the current award is registered and the results 
are submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov as outlined in the NIH Policy on the Dissemination of Clinical Trial 
Information (the Policy NOT -OD-16-149) and accord ing to specific timelines stated in the Policy.  
Registration and results reporting in ClinicalTrials.gov will be completed within the following 
timeframes:  
Registration will occur no later than 21 days after enrollment of the first participant.  
Once a stud y record is established, required updates will be performed at least once every 12 
months, or more frequently as required, confirming the completeness and accuracy of the study 
record.  
Summary results will be submitted by the standard results due date (no later than 12 months after 
the trial's primary completion date); however, results submission may be delayed for up to two 
additional years for trials results whose approval, or clearance is being sought. Any required results 
updates will be submitted withi n the time frames specified in the ClinicalTrials.gov regulations.  
The informed consent documents of our clinical trial will include the FDA -required statement related to 
posting of clinical trial information at ClinicalTrials.gov: “A description of this clinical trial will be 
available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov,  as required by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include 
information that can identify you. At most, the website will include a summary of t he results. You can 
search this website at any time.”  
Our institution (The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston) has an internal policy in 
place to ensure that clinical trials registration and results reporting occur in compliance with the NIH 
Policy and HHS regulations. Processes are in place at our institution to ensure compliance include the 
following:  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V7 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   At the time of IRB review, the PRS administrator reviews all studies that are reviewed by the 
full board to determine whethe r they are subject to the NIH Policy, the HHS  
regulations, and/or ICMJE recommendations.  
The PRS administrator notifies the investigator of the registration requirements, and the 
PRS administrator offers to assist with registration. The PRS administrator follows up with 
the investigator until the study is registered.  
The PRS administrator remi nds the investigator to update their study records at least annually.  
The PRS administrator contacts the investigator at least 6 months in advance of the results 
reporting due date to remind the investigator of the reporting obligation, and offers to assis t 
the investigator with results reporting. The PRS administrator follows up with the 
investigator until results are reported in ClinicalTrials.gov.  
Non -compliance will be reported to the investigator’s Department Chair. If the issue is still 
not resolved, then it will be reported to the institution’s Executive Vice President and Chief 
Academic Officer or designee.  
The PRS administrator provides resources and training on ClinicalTrials.gov reporting 
requirements to investigators and study teams.  
The PRS admi nistrator assists investigators and study teams with access to and questions 
about the PRS system.  
The PRS administrator facilitates communication between investigators and PRS staff.  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/01/2023   Statistics  
 
Corner selection and randomization  
 
A “corner”  is a) a labor hiring public location such as a street corner, bus stop, gas station or home 
improvement  stores  within  the designated  geographic  area,  b) an independent  hiring  site (independence 
as defined  by at least  3 blocks  of physical  distance  from  the nearest  corner),  and c) a hub for day laborers 
observed seeking employment at that location. Locally, corners range in size from quite small (5 to 10 
men)  to very  large  (> 75 men),  with  the majority  supporting  12 to 30 LDL looking  for work  on a given  day.  
Our recent rapid needs assessment in October -November 2019 mapped corners in the Houston area 
(mainly bounded by the Sam Houston Tollway), covering about 350 square miles. The Corner Outreach 
Coordinator from Fe y Justicia will survey the corner sites to confirm their stability and identify new 
corners prior to the start of the trial. To reach our enrollment goal of a total of 200 LDL each in phases 1 
and 2 of the trial, we will randomly sample 20 corners from the total number identified and select an 
aver age of 10 LDL at each corner to enroll in the study. To account for unmeasured cluster -level factors 
that may  differ  by corner  size,  we will randomize  corners  within  three  strata  of corner  size (small  medium 
and large), thus treating corner size as a blocking factor. Within strata, corners will be randomly assigned 
to intervention or control conditions. Since this is a cluster -randomized design, all individuals recruited 
from a given corner will receive  the same  condition.  
 
Aim 1  
 
COVID survey . Prior to formal data analysis, we will look for evidence of variability, patterns of missing data, 
and check for data accuracy and adherence to the assumptions of planned statistical procedures (basic data 
cleaning). We will look at frequency distributio ns or calculate means and standard deviations for responses to 
all questions  on the questionnaire  as well as any computed  scales.  We will evaluate  differences  in proportions 
or means by salient sample characteristics using appropriate statistics, and we wi ll look at salient zero order 
correlations among items/scales. The primary statistical analyses for AIM 1 will be descriptive (frequencies, 
correlations, means) in order to understand how participants vary by time in the US, age, corner type, and 
other cri tical demographic factors. Appropriate psychometric analyses (e.g. EFA, CFA) will be conducted to 
determine the reliability and validity of all multi -item scales needed for Aim 1 and for subsequent analyses of 
more  complex  predictive  relationships,  both  cross-sectional  and longitudinal,  needed  to answer  the questions 
of Aim 2. For the initial descriptive and correlational analyses, a significance level of 0.05 will be used. As we 
will conduct multiple tests, we will realize the limitations of any test of significance and will interpret results 
accordingly.  We will also conduct  preliminary  analyses  to identify  predictors  of mitigation  behaviors.  Since  this 
survey is only conducted at one time point, the results of any predictive analyses should be interpreted with 
caution, however they will inform subsequent an alyses when we do have longitudinal data. We have 
strategically included measures of how LDL cope with illness, poverty, immigration, and loneliness, which are 
known to be significant stressors that have been intensified by the pandemic. We will use regres sion analysis 
to identify significant predictors of individual mitigation behaviors (PPE, hand washing, and social distancing) 
as well as the COVID Mitigation Practices Summative Index described at the end of the Measures  section.  
Proposed  Structural  Model s. We will use Structural  Equation  Modeling  (SEM)  to test several  competing  models 
looking at the influence of COVID 19 on the mitigation, health, and practices of Latino day laborers. These 
analyses will differ from the ones discussed above in that we wil l use Exploratory and confirmatory factor 
analyses to develop latent variables consistent with some of the key constructs of interest. We will then use 
these  latent  variables  to test structural  models  suggested  by the Pathways  to Health  Model  or other  empirical 
work. The advantage of this approach is that it will allow us to explicitly account for measurement error, 
provide  a way to look  at both  direct  and indirect  effects  among  the constructs,  and test hypothesized  mediated 
and moderated effects betwee n predictors and mitigation behaviors. Initially we will model a latent variable 
regression that parallels the regression modeling conducted with manifest variables. Model 1 shown below 
reflects this type of model. All predictors are seen as correlated wit h one 
 
UT Houston Protocol Template  IRB NUMPaBgeE18Rof:21HSC -SPH-20-1389  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V9 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   another and each is predictive of the outcome. Model 2 shows how a more complex relationship among 
the latent variables can be developed and tested. Here COVID -19 is seen as an upstream variable having 
a direct effect on Socioeconomic Stressors, Mental Hea lth, and Protective Factors. Those 3 variables are 
then  predictive  of Mitigation  Practices.  This model  implies  that the COVID -19 factor  does  not have  a direct 
effect  on mitigation  practices  but influences  them  through  its relationship  with  the 3 mediators  pictured. 
We will develop models similar to these examples based on the focus group conversations (see 
preliminary studies), our proposed conceptual framework, and empirical work with similar constructs. 
Models that meet established criteria for fit will g uide the adaptation of the program to be tested in a 
controlled trial in Aim 2. Data collected in Aim 2 will be used to cross -validate models developed, and 
tested in Aim  1. 
 
Power and Precision . External validity and a careful description of the populatio n is of utmost importance for 
the analyses  in Aim 1. We estimated  the sample  size consistent  with  the objective  of Aim 1, which  is to provide 
descriptive data needed to inform the development of the intervention in Aim 2. As such, sample size is 
optimized to provide precise point estimates of variables of interest. Assuming a 95% confidence interval, an 
estimated true prevalence of betwe en 0 and 30% for the factors of interest (or, equivalently, between 70 and 
100%), and a desired precision of +/ - 5% (that is, the width of the confidence interval), we require a sample 
size for Aim 1 of 290 individuals. For the structural modeling analyses  and other difference testing we will be 
concerned more with internal validity . For the structural equation modeling it is important to have enough 
power  to reject  models  that are inconsistent  with  the data.  One-way power  to reject  a model  can be estimated  
is to select a value for the RMSEA (one of our primary measures of fit) beyond which we would conclude that 
the model  is inconsistent  with  the data  (e.g.  . 10); we also need  to choose  a value  below  which  we can conclude 
that the data fits adequately (e.g. .05). We can then use procedures outlined by Browne and Sugawara (1996) 
to the sample size required to obtain adequate power to reject hypothesized models. Loehlin (2004) provides 
tabled  power  values  for several  combinations  of df (degrees  of freedom)  and sample  size.  Using  this table  and 
calculating  hypothetical  df for our Model  2 assuming  a minimum  of 2 indicators  per latent  variable  and the cut- 
offs for RMSEA noted above we can expect power of > 90 to reject the model with our planned sample size  of 
300.  Since  the structural  equation  modeling,  requires  a larger  sample  size than  the descriptive  aspect,  this N 
will control  

Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  
 sample selection for Aim 1. Given a sample size of 300, we will also have 85% power to detect a group 
difference in PPE usage of 0.6 points or higher (a difference consistent with our pilot data), giving us 
sufficient power to conduct inferential analyses in Aim 1 as well.  
 
Aim 2  
 
Sample size . To determine sample size for Aim 2, we made the following assumptions: A cluster - 
randomized  design  (with  corners  as the clusters),  two assessment  points  (one  pre-test and one post -test), 
20 corners randomized to tw o conditions (intervention and control), an intraclass correlation coefficient 
(ICC)  of 0.025,  an across  time  correlation  in the outcome  of 0.60,  a minimum  detectable  difference  in the 
previously described COVID -19 Mitigation Practices Index outcome a minimum detectable difference 
expressed as a standardized effect size of 0.5, desired power of at least 0.80, and nominal alpha of 0.05. 
Based on these assumptions, we require an averag e of 10 workers per corner, and 10 corners per 
condition (20 total corners), for a total of 200 individuals per phase of Aim  2. 
Data  analysis . To estimate  the treatment  effect  for Aim 2, we propose  to use cluster -robust  standard  error 
regression models. Si nce our design includes two time points (a pre -test and post -test) and 20 clusters 
total, more complex longitudinal models, such as multilevel models for repeated measures and 
generalized estimating equations, would not be appropriate. In this approach, th e post -test value of the 
dependent variable is modeled as a function of both intervention group membership (intervention v 
control) and the baseline value of the dependent variable. To correct for clustering of individual workers 
within corners (the cluste rs), the standard errors are inflated using the sandwich estimator. While not 
explicitly part of our aims, it is possible to incorporate exploratory moderators into this model, whereby 
proposed moderator variables are interacted with intervention status. T his will help us understand the 
conditions under which the intervention does or does not achieve an effect. Examples of possible 
moderators include demographic variables, anxiety, alcohol use, country of origin,  etc. 
Missing  data . To counteract  the possibi lity that we will have  missing  data  due to loss to follow  up, we will 
implement a multiple imputation strategy. Dr. Durand The team  has extensive practical experience in 
developing statistically valid multiple imputation models in the context of randomized controlled  trials.  
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389  
UT Houston Protocol Template  IRB APPRPaOge 2V0 oAf 2L1 DATE: 05/01/2023  

Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  
 Ethics  
 
IRB approval will be sought from CPHS.  
 
Study  personnel  will explain  the nature  of the study  and the benefits  and risks  of participating.  LDL will be 
assured  that they  can pause  the interview  if they  are offered  a job and resume  the interview  later.  Consent 
will be sought after this process, and eligible LDL wishing to participate will signify their consent by 
selecting the appropriate button presen ted on the iPad used to present the consent  form.  
Quality control and assurance  
 
All data collection procedures and instruments will be pilot tested and revised as necessary. 
Computerized surveys will be programed to minimize out of range, inconsistent, or  missing date.  
The data manager will regularly audit data for problematic entries and provide feedback to the Principal 
Investigator and data collectors.  
We do not have plans to employ third party monitoring.  
 
Publication Plan  
 
Manuscripts will be prepared for submission to relevant peer reviewed journals. Anticipated manuscripts will 
address participants’ characteristics at baseline and the significance of changes in workplace injury and 
psychosocial items from baseline to follo w-up within and between intervention groups.  
 
We do not anticipate retuning results to participants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UT Houston Protocol Template   
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/01/2023  