Cover Page  
Official Title of the Study: Validation of Point Partial User Needs With Partial Finger Amputees  
Document Date: March  15, 201 9 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Protocol Template Page 1 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 Protocol #
: 
Project Title: The Point Digit: A Family of Ratc heting Prosthetic Finger Technology  
Principal Investigator:  Levin Sliker 
Version Date: 8/2/2018 
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims :  The purpose of this research is to study the use of passive 
prosthetic devices.  T he design of passive prosthetic dev ices for  amputees will be tested by 
human subjects for strength, function, and durabilit y.  The hypothesis of the study asks whether 
certain design features can withstand activities of daily living.  Examples of activities include 
lifting objects, pouring water, turning keys, etc.     
II.Backgr
ound and Significance : There are approximately 500,000 people living with mino r
upper lim
b loss in the USA [1],[2].  Minor upper limb loss (also partial hand amputation) is defined 
as the amputation of the bones distal to the wrist joint.  While the field refers to these types of 
amputation as ‘minor,’ it can be a severe disability,  especially if the amputation involves the thumb 
and/or multiple digits.  In fact, partial hand ampu tees self-report a higher level of disability 
compared to other major unilateral upper limb amputees [3].  Furthermore, it was reported that 
fewer than half of partial hand amputees were able to return to the same job after amputation and 
most found that the prosthetic devices were insu fficient to meet the demands of their work [4]. 
Amputation can cause physical, psychosocial, and economic damage to an individual and can lead 
to depression, anxiety, loss of self-esteem, a nd social isolation [5],[6]. While the number of 
individuals with partial hand amputation is 10 ti mes more than all other categories of upper limb 
amputation combined, the state of available tec hnology for this underserved patient population is 
relatively poor [7].  
Current partial hand prostheses are limited in seve ral ways. First, they generally lack robustness, 
and there are frequent reports of devices breaking under normal use. Second, most current options 
offer a one-size-fits-all approach, which limits t he acceptance by people who want a prosthesis that 
matches their original finger size. A complete lack  of prosthetic finger options can occur for women 
with smaller anatomical size. Third, rotation of t he finger about the anatomical center of rotation of 
the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint is not possible wi th current options resulting in a prosthesis 
that is frequently too long. Fourth, current pros theses require the use of the opposite hand to 
operate the device. There is a need for a durable,  scalable, anatomically suitable for women, 
single-handedly operable prosthetic finger. [1] K. Ziegler-Graham, E. J. MacKenzie, P. L. Ephraim, T. G. Travis on, and R. Brookmeyer, 
“Estimating the prevalence of limb loss in the United States: 2005 to 2050,” Arch. Phys. Med. 
Rehabil., vol. 89, no. 3, pp. 422–429, 2008. 
[2] M. P. LaPlante and D. Carlson, “Disability in the United States: Prevalence and Causes, 
1992. Disability Statistics Report 7.,” Aug. 1996. [3] J. Davidson, “A comparison of upper limb amputees and patients with upper limb injuries 
using the Disability of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH),” Disabil. Rehabil., vol. 26, no. 14–15, 
pp. 917–923, Jul. 2004. [4] H. Burger, T. Maver, and Č. Marinček, “Partial hand amputation and work,” Disabil. 
Rehabil., vol. 29, no. 17, pp. 1317–1321, Jan. 2007. [5] D. Desmond and M. MacLachlan, “Psychological issues in prosthetic and orthotic practice: 
A 25 year review of psychology in Prosthetics and Orthotics International,” Prosthet. Orthot. Int., 
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 182–188, Dec. 2002. w Western IRB Protocol 20182002
IRB Conditions 
Satisfied at the Protocol 
Level 
Mar 15, 2019
Protocol Template Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 [6] C. M. Parkes, “Psycho-social Transitions: Comparison between Reactions to Loss of a 
Limb and Loss of a Spouse,” Br. J. Psychia try, vol. 127, no. 3, pp. 204–210, Sep. 1975. 
[7] Committee on the Use of Selected Assistive Products and Technologies in Eliminating or 
Reducing the Effects of Impairments, Board on Health Care Services, Health and Medicine 
Division, and National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, The Promise of 
Assistive Technology to Enhance Activity and Wo rk Participation. Washington, D.C.: National 
Academies Press, 2017.  
 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
 IV. Research  Methods 
 
A.  Outcome Measure(s):   
Outcome measures include completion rate, completion time, SHAP score, DASH score, box and 
blocks test, clothespin test, and other measures  of function.  These metrics quantify the 
performance of prosthetic devices. 
 
B. Description of Population to be Enrolled:   
 
The subject population will consist of a convenient sample of people. The subjects will have various 
ethnicity, age, and gender. An estimated total of 30 subjects will be enrolled. The subjects must be 
normal intact individuals and/or persons with amputation who are able to understand and follow 
directions in English, assessed by their ab ility to respond during the recruitment and consent 
process. Exclusion criteria include any subjects  that are not able to understand the procedures 
and/or are less than 18 years of age. 
 
C. Study Design and Research Methods   
 
The experiments will take place at the Point Designs LLC he adquarters, at partner clinics, and/or at 
home. The participant will come up to 3 times fo r up to 4 hour sessions. During this session the 
participant will be asked to perform activities of  daily living in a laboratory setting. The only 
devices/materials coming into contact with  the participant will be standard of care 
orthopedic/prosthetic equipment including gauze, cast ing tape, medical tape, prosthetic sockets.  
Risks from the above devices are possible minor sk in discomfort.  Standard of care procedures will 
be used to mount the prosthetic device. A training period will be followed by several tests to 
measure the function of the prosthetic device. Di fferent versions of the device may be presented to 
the subject in a randomized order.  
  D.   Description, Risks and Justification of Procedures and Data Collection Tools: 
 
Risks from the above devices are possible minor skin discomfort. If you feel that 
you have been harmed while participating in this  study, you should inform Levin Sliker at 
720-600-4753 immediately.      
E.   Potential Scientific Problems:   
 
Potential scientific problems include a lack of subj ects with amputation and/or a lack of ability 
to perform the activities of daily liv ing with the prosthetic devices.   
 
F.   Data Analysis Plan:   
 
Data will be processed with standard stat istical methods using MATLAB (Mathworks, 
Inc.) in order to produce the metrics descri bed previously (completion rate, completion 
time, etc.) 
Protocol Template Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  
G.  Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:   
 
The development of more functional/robust prosthetic devices will augment the quality 
of life for people with amputation. 
  H. References:  
 
N/A 