 
Effects of Adrenaline Infiltration on Surgical Field of View in 
Endoscopic Sinus Surgery 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
March 27, 2018  
1. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
a. Brief Summary 
Minimizing bleeding during endoscopic sinus surgery is important for optimal patient 
outcome. Since there is a great variation in the structure of the sinuses among the 
population, without a clear surgical field, there may be inadvertent injury to the 
surrounding structures or an incomplete opening  of sinuses. We hope to learn the best 
method for controlling bleeding i the field of view to help optimize the surgical outcome.  
b. Objectives  
We hope to learn the preparation for the best field of view with minimal bleeding that may interfere with the visualization for endoscopic sinus surgery. Studies in the past 
commonly looked at the estimated blood loss which may not reflect the actual surgical 
field. We would like to assess the actual surgical field to help determine the best possible 
technique to optimize endoscopic sinus surgery.  
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
Human subjects must be used because the purpose of the study is to study the method which provides  the best field of view for endoscopic sinus surgery in human.  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
We will first perform chart review to screen for patients who were scheduled for endoscopic sinus surgery for rhinosinusitis that meet both our inclusion and exclusion 
criteria. We will check the date of the patient’s  next visit to meet them and explain th e 
study protocol and ask for their consent. If they consent to the study, on the day which they have the surgery we will follow the protocol, giving topical adrenaline on both side 
and infiltrating lateral nasal wall with the medication according to the st udy (patient will 
receive 1% xylocaine with adrenaline (1:100,000) on one side and saline on the contralateral side, they will be randomized to which side receive which solution for 
infiltration). The Estimated blood loss on each side and the duration of the surgery on 
each side will also be recorded. The Video of the surgery will be evaluated by 2 different 
otolaryngologists to give grading score for surgical field of view using Wormald Surgical  
Field Grading Scale. Patients  will have regular post operativ e follow up as for endoscopic 
sinus surgery. At the patient's first follow up at 1 week after the surgery , the patient will 
be asked to fill out a questionnaire  about the postoperative bloody discharge they 
experienced.  
b. Procedure Risks  
Any medications may lead to inadvertent effects, however the use of infiltration of 
xylocaine with adrenaline is widely accepted and has originally been used in preparation 
for endoscopic sinus surgery and also for variety  of surgical procedures both under 
general and local anesthetic. With correct route and dosage given, infiltration performed 
by specialist under a well -controlled  circumstance as under general anesthesia where 
patient's vital signs are closely monitored we believe that it is safe to perform th e 
procedure. Topical adrenaline has recently gained popularity among a number of 
surgeons world wide in the use for endoscopic sinus surgery and has known to be safe 
and potent with great result in bleeding control.  
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
Deception will not be used to enroll the patient. We will not perform the procedure 
without the patient’s consent.  
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  
Video recording will be performed in the study (our department usually has all the 
surgeries recorded as a routine pr ocedure). This will be reviewed by 2 otolaryngologists 
at Stanford's university (attendings or rhinology fellows). The otolaryngologist  reviewing 
and grading the video will be blinded to which side of the sinus surgery was  performed under only topical adr enaline or with the  combination of both topical and infiltration of 
adrenaline. The  video given will be labeled  by the number and not by name of the patient and the video will be  secure with  passcode lock external hard disk.  
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
Many different methods and many different agents have been used to help reduce bleeding in endoscopic sinus surgery. Currently, adrenaline has become the consensus as 
the best agent used for this purpose; however, there is no one conse nsus method of 
delivery, each center practices according to their experience for the best of the patients. 
At our center, half of the team use only topical adrenaline before the surgery and the 
other half combine infiltration of xylocaine with adrenaline w ith topical adrenaline. 
Therefore, the alternative at our center depends on the surgeon’s experience between 
topical adrenaline only and topical adrenaline combine with infiltration. In this study the 
participant instead of one or the other will get a comb ination of pure topical on one side 
and combine topical with infiltration on the other side of the nasal cavity. Using both topical and infiltration of adrenaline may result in less bleeding and better field of view, 
however infiltration of adrenaline may have potential side effect e.g. cardiovascular and 
central nervous system side effects. However, xylocaine with adrenaline is a widely used anesthesia and administering at appropriate dosage and route under an extremely well 
controlled environment as being under general anesthesia in the operating room where all 
patient's vital signs are monitored shouldn't be risky. Now that topical adrenaline is more 
widely used than before we want to examine the benefit of additional infiltration of 
adrenaline to the surgical field of view to determine the best optimal practice for 
endoscopic sinus surgery.  
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
After the study, the participants will be  able to use any therapy that is appropriate for 
them.  
g. Study Endpoint(s)  
The study will end after the required number of participant has been enrolled. Since both 
method is the standard we currently perform at  the department we do not expect any 
harmful results to the participants.  
3. BACKGROUND  
a. Past Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
In the past there have been studies which tried to address the best methods to help 
optimize the surgical field. However, none has actually compared the injection of 
adrenaline to the control using a proper endoscopic grading score (which is a more 
accurate way of assessing visual field in comparison to using the estimated blood loss). 
Since estimated blood loss may give just a crude estimate of the surgical field, we suspect 
that it may be the reason why the previous studies couldn't demonstrate the significant of 
infiltration of adrenaline to the surgical field of view in endoscopic sinus surgery.  
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments 
Animal studies were not identified in ou r literature review . 
4. RADIOISOTOPES OR RADIATION MACHINES  
N/A 
5. DEVICES  USED IN THE STUDY  
N/A 
6. DRUGS , BIOLOGICS , REAGENTS , OR CHEMICALS  USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Drugs, Biologics, Reagents, or Chemicals  
N/A 
b. Commercial Drugs, Biologics, Reagents, or Chemicals 
Commercial Product 1  
Name:  1%Xylocaine with adrenaline  
Dosage:  1% 
Administration Route  Intranasal infiltration  
New and different use? (Y/N)  No 
7. DISINFECTION PROCEDURES  FOR MEDICAL EQUIPMENT USED ON BOTH HUMANS AND 
ANIMALS  
N/A 
8. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
(i) 40 participants to be enrolled at Stanford  
(ii) total of 40  participants overall (the study will only be performed at Stanford)  
(iii) the participants will be the patients from the rhinology clinics who have sinusitis that 
have failed medical treatment and were scheduled for endoscopic sinus surgery  
b. Age, Gender, a nd Ethnic Background 
Age range 18 -75 years old  
Both males and females  
All ethnic backgrounds  
c. Vulnerable Populations 
Potentially vulnerable subjects (including children, pregnant women, economically and educationally disadvantaged, decisionally impaired, homeless people, employees and 
students) will not be enrolled in the study.  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
Women and minorities are included, however children are not included since endoscopic sinus surgery is not widely perform in children.  
e. Stanford Populations  
The study will not involve participants who are laboratory personnel, employees and 
students.  
f. Healthy Volunteers  
We do not take  healthy volunteers for the study since they would have no indications for 
the surgery.  
g. Recruitment Details  
We will identify the participants for recruitment by chart review prior to their 
preoperative visit. No flyers or other advertisement will be used i n the study.  
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
1. Patients between the age of 18 -75 years old who were diagnosed with recurrent 
acute or chronic rhinosinusitis that are recalcitrant to medical treatment and were 
scheduled for endoscopic sinus surgery  
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
1. Patients who have asymmetrical disease on the two sides (Lund Mackay score 
difference of 2 or more) 
2. Patients who have endoscopic sinus surgery for treatment of tumor or disease other 
than sinusitis  
3. Patients with nasal polyps  
4. Patients with underlying uncontrolled hypertension  
5. Patients with bleeding disorder or are unable to discontinue antiplatelet or anticoagulant before the surgery 
6. Patients who are allergic to adrenaline or to xylocaine 
7. Patients who are not consent to the procedure  
i. Screening Procedures  
Screening will be done by chart review. Personal health information, e.g., patient’s 
history, symptoms, prior treatment, endoscopic and computer tomography of paranasal 
sinus findings may be reviewed to see if the patient may fit the inclusion criteria. If the 
patient meets the criteria then on the patient's preoperative visit we will explain the study 
and discuss enrollment. No additional laboratory test apart from their routine preoperative 
test will be requir ed. 
j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
Participants will not be enrolled in more than one study. The consent form will include 
the question to whether they are enrolled in other studies or not and the protocol director 
taking the consent will ask the question before explaining the research protocol.  
k. Payments to Participants  
There is no payment for enrolling in the study.  
l. Costs to Participants 
There will be no charge to the participant.  
m. Planned Duration of the Study  
The probable duration of the entire study is 10 months. The estimated total time per 
participant is approximately 2 weeks, starting on the day for screening and asking for 
consent from the participant which wil l usually be on the preoperative visit which is 
usually about a week before the surgery. Conducting the actual study will happen during the time the participant is in the operating room, then at the first postoperative visit which 
usually take place 1 week  after the surgery, a short questionnaire will be given for the 
participant to fill out.  
9. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Investigational devices  
The study doesn't involve an investigational device.  
ii. Investigational drugs 
The study doesn't involve an investigational drug.  
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
Irritation to infiltration site, persistent paresthesia, central nervous system excitatory or 
depressant effect which may cause headache, nausea, ringing in the ear, confusion, 
cardiovascu lar effect such as bradycardia, hypotension and cardiovascular collapse or 
tachycardia, palpitations and hypertension,  hypersensitivity reaction .  
 
Correct route and dosage of the medication is important to avoid the adverse effects, the 
medication will be  infiltrated by specialist the study.  
iv. Procedures 
The procedure is intranasal infiltration of 1% xylocaine with adrenaline which is a 
routine procedure in endoscopic sinus surgery.  
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines  
There will be no use of radioisotopes/radiation-producing machine for the study.  
vi. Physical  well-being  
We do not anticipate that participants in this study will be placed at risk in terms of 
physical well -being.  
vii. Psych ological  well-being 
We do not anticipate that participants in this study will be placed at risk in terms of psychological well -being.  
viii. Economic well -being  
We do not anticipate that participants in this study will be placed at risk in terms of economic well -being.  
ix. Social  well-being 
We do not anticipate that participants in this study will be placed at risk in social well -
being.  
x. Overall evaluation of risk  
Low risk  
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
N/A 
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  

Overall potential risk to the patient should be very low. The patient will get the 
infiltration right before the surgery after general anesthesia where the vital signs will be 
closely monitored in the intra operative setting by anesthesiologist. Also any intranasal 
bleeding from the surgery is easily controlled in the operating room under endoscopic 
view with medications and equipment set up ready for the surgery.  
d. Study Conclusion 
The participants will only be given one dose of the infiltration throughout the study. If any adverse effects were to happen, the participant will be terminated from the study and 
will be closely taken care of. As the infiltration will take place in the operating room after 
the patient is under general anesthesia, where the patient will be fully monitored, any 
adverse effects would be easily detected at a very early stage and best appropriate 
treatment will be given.  
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan 
i. Data and/or events subject to review 
Monitoring will include bleeding intraoperatively and postoperatively, the visual 
field grading sc ale score, patient's vital sign intraoperatively, the overall blood loss 
on each side, the operative time on each side.  
ii. Person(s) responsible for Data and Safety Monitoring 
The protocol director, co-protocol director and academic sponsor will be responsible 
for data and safety monitoring of the study.  
iii. Frequency of DSMB meetings  
The protocol director will meet with the other researchers conducting the study on a 
weekly  basis (every Monday evening) to review the protocol.  
iv. Specific triggers or stopping rules  
Any major complications secondary to the study will terminate the study. However, this is very unlikely since intranasal infiltration of xylocaine with adrenaline is a 
routine procedure perform for endoscopic sinus surgery and infiltration at correct 
dosage and by specialist under well controlled environment shouldn't result in any 
major complications.  
v. DSMB Reporting  
The IRB will be informed if any abnormal outcomes were to occur.  
vi. Will the Protocol Director be the only monitoring entity? (Y/N)  
Yes 
vii. Will a board, committee, or safety monitor be responsible for study monitoring? 
(Y/N)  
No 
f. Risks to Special Po pulations  
N/A 
10. BENEFITS  
The study will help determine the best surgical field for endoscopic sinus surgery which will lead 
to optim al sinus surgery with the best result for the patient in the future.  
11. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information and specimens are handle d in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Care, and Stanford Children’s Health.  