Detailed Protocol 1 ORGANIZATION OF DETAILED PROTOCOL  Title: Effects of contralesional repetitive magnetic stimulation combined with fluoxetine on motor recovery in stroke patients Protocol #:2014P001046 Date: 08/10/2017  I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  Overview/summary: This proposal is a NIH R21 sponsored study with the goal to investigate the effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) combined with pharmacotherapy (fluoxetine) in the rehabilitation of post-stroke subjects. This research will help to reveal the relationship between function restorations via pharmacological intervention when combined with noninvasive neuromodulation in patients after ischemic stroke. Stroke is the leading cause of disability in the United States (Nowak et al., 2009) According to the American Heart Association, over 795,000 people experience stroke annually in the USA (Lloyd-Jones et al., 2009). Unfortunately, restitution of post-stroke motor function is frequently incomplete, with the majority of stroke patients unable to perform professional duties or activities of daily living by six months after their stroke (Hummel and Cohen, 2006). Currently, there are only a few treatments available to improve motor function in stroke; most of them are based on motor learning strategies. Although these treatments may improve motor function significantly, their effects are often limited. The general objective of this research project is to assess the clinical and neurophysiological properties of rTMS and fluoxetine to promote motor recovery in post-stroke subjects as indexed by clinical motor function scales. This will be done by delivering low-frequency rTMS over the brain primary motor cortex (M1) in the unaffected hemisphere while the subjects are receiving fluoxetine treatment, subjects will be assessed at one and three months post intervention. Finally, we will investigate the mechanisms of this treatment by studying the induced neurophysiological and functional changes. This will be indexed by motor evoked potentials, cortical excitability/inhibition measurements, transcallosal inhibition evaluation, and paired associative stimulation. Regarding assurance of success, this proposal has two main specific aims: Aim 1: To determine whether low- frequency rTMS associated with fluoxetine offers additional benefits on motor rehabilitation and retention of motor skills, than pharmacotherapy alone. Aim 2: To determine the effects on cortical excitability when rTMS is combined with pharmacotherapy, whether fluoxetine is capable to induce positive or negative effects in M1 neuromodulation.   Significance: Stroke is a leading cause of disability in the United States (Nowak et al., 2009). According to the American Heart Association, over 795,000 people experience strokes annually in the USA, with 185,000 presenting as recurrent strokes (Lloyd-Jones et al., 2009). Moreover, every 40 seconds-, at least one person in the United States suffers from a stroke (Lloyd-Jones et al., 2009). Unfortunately, restitution of post-stroke motor function is frequently incomplete, with the majority of stroke patients unable to perform professional duties or activities of daily living by six months after their stroke (Hummel and Cohen, 2006).   Currently there are only a few treatments available to improve motor function in stroke, most of which are based on motor learning strategies. Although these treatments may improve motor 
Detailed Protocol 2 function significantly, their effects are often limited, possibly due the lack of skill consolidation. Herein we propose to enhance the effects of post-stroke motor rehabilitation using a powerful noninvasive technique of brain modulation, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), in combination with the serotonergic agent fluoxetine to modulate cortical plasticity and facilitate motor restoration.  Neuroimaging analyses of stroke subjects have demonstrated critical post-morbid aberrances in cortical excitability in the intact primary motor cortex (M1) of the unaffected hemisphere (Hummel and Cohen, 2006).This increased cortical excitability has been noted to correspond with movements of the paretic arm in patients with motor impairment (Ward et al., 2003), (Calautti and Baron, 2003). In addition, the level of cortical excitability of the intact hemisphere directly correlates with the degree of paresis in the affected extremity (Hummel and Cohen, 2006). Lastly, post-stroke subjects exhibited changes in motor cortical excitability and abnormal levels of interhemispheric inhibition from the unaffected to the affected motor cortex (Hummel and Cohen, 2006).These four observations have helped orchestrate several theories: (1) that there is maladaptive interhemispheric competition after stroke which worsens hand paresis, and (2) that modulation can improve motor function (Hummel and Cohen, 2006).  Repetitive Magnetic Stimulation improves motor function in stroke subjects: Recent studies have demonstrated that cortical brain stimulation with invasive and non-invasive brain stimulation improves motor function in stroke patients. An animal and a human study have indicated that epidural stimulation of the motor cortex results in motor function enhancement after stroke (Plautz et al., 2003, Brown et al., 2003, Brown et al., 2006). Furthermore recent clinical trials have demonstrated that motor cortex stimulation with noninvasive techniques such as repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) can also enhance motor function in stroke patients. Beneficial effects on motor function can be induced, as shown by our recent clinical trials, with either inhibitory 1-Hz rTMS (Mansur et al., 2005) and cathodal-tDCS (Fregni et al., 2005a) of the contralateral, unaffected hemisphere or excitatory 3-Hz rTMS (Khedr et al., 2005) and anodal-tDCS (Hummel et al., 2005, Fregni et al., 2005a) of the affected hemisphere. In a recent review with 50 studies on noninvasive brain stimulation of motor cortex to modulate motor function, there was a significant pooled effect size towards improvement of motor function; however these effects were small and short-lived (Adeyemo, 2012). Here we propose to enhance further these effects by combining rTMS with a serotoninergic agent.  Pharmacologically induced motor recovery in stroke : Studies have suggested that serotonergic agents fluoxetine and citalopram have a positive effect on motor function in hemiplegic patients after stroke. (Dam et al., 1996, Zittel, Weiller, and Liepert 2008; Pariente et al., 2001; Gainotti et al., 2001). While the drugs’ effect on mood or motivation may be responsible for some of this effect, Acler et al.(2009) found that citalopram decreased contralesional motor cortex excitability as recorded by transcranial magnetic stimulation, suggesting a specific effect on motor systems, and Pariente et al., (2001) confirmed this when they found hyperactivation in the ipsilesional primary motor cortex on fMRI in 8 patients during fluoxetine administration.  Recently Chollet et al., 2011, in a randomized controlled trial of 118 ischemic stroke patients – the FLAME trial - concluded on the basis of changes in the Fugl-Meyer Motor Scale scores that motor recovery is enhanced by fluoxetine compared to placebo in combination with usual rehabilitation therapy. 
Detailed Protocol 3  Sponsors: NIH  II. INNOVATION  On the one hand, it has been recognized physically and biologically the influence an induced magnetic pulse has in excitable tissue, on the other hand, pharmacological induction of motor recovery is gaining more attention and the mechanisms behind such properties are being gradually understood. It seems plausible to combine the mechanistic properties of both therapeutic approaches, in order to add synergism in their effects on neuromodulation and function restoration. The idea of combining both therapies comes from our recent trial coupling the use of noninvasive brain stimulation with sertraline (another SSRI) for the treatment of depression. In this relatively large trial with 120 subjects, we showed that noninvasive brain stimulation plus sertraline has a synergistic effect as compared with sertraline alone or noninvasive brain stimulation alone (Brunoni, 2012). The hypothesis is that because rTMS has its main effect via top-down mechanisms and fluoxetine via bottom up mechanisms (see figure 1), then combination of both therapies may enhance the effects when compared to fluoxetine alone. This research project is proposing a new perspective for the treatment of motor deficits in stroke subjects. On one hand, we are taking into account the network properties for learning and consolidation and understanding how to modify them by balancing interhemispheric connectivity using low-frequency rTMS in a top-down stimulation; and on the other we are modulating the restorative mechanism associated with fluoxetine in a bottom-up fashion, see figure No. 1  Figure 1 , Schematic representation of neuromodulatory mechanisms on motor recovery. rTMS at 1Hz over unaffected M1 will regulate interhemispheric inhibition, while fluoxetine will provide bottom-up regulation  throughout subcortical pharmacological effects (selective neurotransmitter interaction and possibly promoting trophic factors expression). Modified from Fregni et al. 2007      III. SPECIFIC AIMS  This research will generate knowledge regarding stroke motor rehabilitation, including potential strategies to help coordinate assessments and treatment protocols in the future. For this population, this is extremely important as several critical facts should be considered: (i) Existing treatments, such as traditional physical or occupational therapy still underestimate the role of brain cortical modulation in motor recovery processes; (ii) As this population ages, and lack of function perpetuates abnormal motor patterns, inner mechanisms of brain plasticity becomes less available, and progressive physical symptomatology (such as spasticity or arthrosis) becomes more prevalent and exasperates abnormal function; and (iii) A primary reason for the lack of efficacy of current 

Detailed Protocol 4 treatments is that current therapeutic approaches do not take into account the mechanisms underlying motor re-organization in this condition. In fact, evidence indicates that abnormal cortical motor plasticity (maladaptive) is a phenomenon related to significant reorganization at different levels of the neuroaxis, particularly at the motor cortex and within the hemispheres. For these reasons, it is important to guide therapeutic approaches towards functional neuroplasticity. In this context the combination of brain stimulation with endogenous pharmacological modulation may be a profitable strategy to improve functional outcomes in stroke motor rehabilitation.  Given that rTMS has its direct effect on cortical areas; secondary modulation of subcortical neural networks is established via top-down mechanisms. Therefore, combining rTMS with other approaches that can modulate primarily subcortical systems such as the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) may result in a synergistic benefit on the motor system. Based on the recent results of the multicenter trial assessing fluoxetine for stroke recovery (FLAME study) and our recent large factorial trial testing the combination of non-invasive brain stimulation with sertraline for the treatment of depression (Brunoni et al, 2013), we will test the hypothesis that rTMS will enhance further the effects of fluoxetine on neuroplasticity and consequently motor function. We will evaluate cortical plasticity using single and paired pulse TMS including the following assessments; paired associative stimulation (PAS), intracortical inhibition and facilitation, cortical silent period, and transcallosal inhibition; and motor function as to grade the impact of the proposed interventions on motor performance. The specific aims of this study, which seeks to recruit 45 subjects, are to;  Aim 1: Determine whether low-frequency rTMS of the unaffected M1 associated with fluoxetine offers an additional benefit on motor function over pharmacotherapy (fluoxetine) alone after three months of the combined therapy. Our hypothesis is that low-frequency rTMS combined with fluoxetine will induce greater improvement in motor function as compared to sham rTMS and fluoxetine.  Sub Aim 1.1: As to control for the effects of spontaneous recovery, we will also assess whether the superior effects of the combined effects will be superior to spontaneous recovery by comparing the results of the two groups against a placebo group (placebo fluoxetine and sham rTMS). We hypothesize that both groups (combined treatment and fluoxetine alone) will have a superior effect as compared to placebo only.  Aim 2:  Determine whether fluoxetine combined with rTMS results in additional positive modulation of motor cortex excitability and cortical plasticity as compared to fluoxetine alone. Our hypothesis is that active rTMS combined with fluoxetine will induce a greater increase in the amplitude of motor evoked potential and greater LTP-like (long-term potentiation) as indexed by PAS-25 of the affected hemisphere (M1) as compared to sham rTMS combined with fluoxetine.   IV. MEDICAL MONITOR   Medical Monitor:   Nevena Zubcevik, DO Professor, Department of Physical Medicine and 
Detailed Protocol 5 Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical School  The principal investigator will be available during the course of each study session.  The medical monitor is required to review all unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects or others, serious adverse events and all subject deaths associated with the protocol and provide an unbiased written report of the event.  At a minimum, the medical monitor must comment on the outcomes of the event or problem and in case of a serious adverse event or death, comment on the relationship to participation in the study.  The medical monitor must also indicate whether he/she concurs with the details of the report provided by the principal investigator.  This person must also be available by pager during the course of each study session.   V. SUBJECT SELECTION  We will recruit 45 patients with ischemic stroke. The desired sample size is calculated, with some assumptions, based on the amount of patients treated in Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital and affiliate hospitals and clinics. The study eligibility criteria that will be used for this study are based on the FLAME trial (as we will investigate the additional benefits of combining fluoxetine with rTMS). We broadened the motor score criteria and time since stroke in order to significantly improve the impact of the study and improve our understanding of the mechanisms behind plasticity after stroke in a broad population.   Subjects will conform to the following criteria:   Inclusion Criteria: • Ischemic infarction within the past 2 years post event that has caused hemiparesis or hemiplegia, as self-reported and/or confirmed by medical record.  • Older than 18 years old.  • Upper extremity weakness defined as a score of >11 and ≤56 on the arm motor Fugl-Mayer motor scale.  • Minimal pre-stroke disability defined as a score of <3 in the Modified Rankin Scale.  • Subjects need to be able to follow directions and participate in 2 hours of testing with short breaks. • Subjects need to be able to provide informed consent.   Exclusion Criteria: • Any substantial decrease in alertness, language reception, or attention that might interfere with understanding instruction for motor testing • Excessive pain in any joint of the paretic extremity (not applicable to severe stroke subjects), as self reported • Contraindications to single pulse TMS (will be used to measure cortical excitability) such as: history of seizures, unexplained loss of consciousness, any metal implants in the head, frequent or severe headaches or neck pain, any other electronic implanted medical devices such as pacemakers, defibrillators, or implant medication pump. 
Detailed Protocol 6 • Patients who are currently taking fluoxetine should accept a 5 week washout period before baseline (to be reconfirmed during baseline visit). • Patients taking any other SSRI at the time of enrollment or in the previous month (the patients should accept a 5 week washout period before baseline - to be reconfirmed during baseline visit).  • Patients taking any other medication likely to have adverse interaction with SSRIs (all the medications the patient is taking will be carefully reviewed, as noted below in “Monitoring of important drug interactions”). • Active depression on admission to SRH defined by a score of 24 or higher in the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D) • Concurrent medical condition likely to worsen patient’s functional status in the next 6 months such as: cancer, terminal heart, kidney or liver disease, as self-reported and/or confirmed by medical record.  • Pregnancy.    Exclusion of Pregnancy in the Study: The decision to exclude pregnant women is based on the current guidelines stated in “Safety, ethical considerations, and application guidelines for the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation in clinical practice and research” by Rossi et al. 2009, of which the principal investigator of this study, Dr. Felipe Fregni is one of the authors.  There is no specific recommendation for or against pregnancy. However since this study will be utilizing Repetitive TMS as a mode of intervention, we will take the conservative approach and exclude pregnancy.  Female subjects of child bearing potential will be asked to take a pregnancy test. If the pregnancy test is positive, the subject may not enroll in the study. We will also perform a pregnancy test weekly to all female subjects of childbearing age    Monitoring of important drug interactions: We will be monitoring for any drugs the patient might be taking that may have interactions with fluoxetine. Since fluoxetine is a potent inhibitor of CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, drugs metabolized by these enzymes should be avoided or dosage should be modified. Mainly, fluoxetine should also be avoided in combination with any drugs that have increase risk of serotonin syndrome or QT- interval prolongation.   Prior to patients enrollment, the licensed physicians collaborating with the study – Dr. Black-Shaffer - will perform a close review of the medications the patient is receiving while inpatient in SRH or as an outpatient. They will determine if any drug the patient is taking has any possible interactions with fluoxetine. If needed and if possible, dose adjustments of these medications will be made. A log of the medications the patient is taking will be kept and patients will be asked to inform the study staff if any changes have been made in the medications or in the dosage. Study staff will otherwise confirm with subjects weekly that no changes have been made.     VI. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
Detailed Protocol 7 Eligible subjects will be identified at the time of admission to Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital or affiliated hospitals in the Boston area with the diagnosis of ischemic stroke. During the first month after the ischemic events they will be screened for inclusion and exclusion criteria and asked to be enrolled in the study. Spaulding Rehabilitation Network is the largest rehabilitation provider in the New England Area; thus captures most patients in our geographical area. There are approximately 500 stroke admissions per year. Patients are referred from Massachusetts General Hospital, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and a variety of other centers in the Boston area and beyond. The study staff may contact physicians, clinicians and other health care providers from inside and outside Partners Network (such as Massachusetts General Hospital, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, inpatients or outpatient units) and ask for collaboration with recruitment. Their collaboration can include handing out research study fliers to patients for recruitment and directly talking with potential ones. Subjects within the Partners network may be indentified through medical records systems (such as LMR, Meditech and Epic) in conjunction with cooperation from collaborating physicians.  Patients who elect to enroll in the Research Patient Data Registry (RPDR) may also be located within the Partners Network in collaboration with referring physicians.  Patients can be enrolled as outpatients or inpatients. If patients are enrolled during their inpatient condition in SRH and if they are discharged before the ending of the study they will continue their enrollment by coming to our lab for visits and taking the medication at home or in any other facility they were transferred to. Outpatient subjects may be identified through the SRN or also through alternative recruitment methods such as flyers, email, digital signage, internet ads, or newspaper ads. We would also like to attend events, such as stroke related conferences, talks, and support groups to speak about the study and hand out IRB-approved materials.   When contacting subjects by email, we will communicate through the Partners network as per the Partners policy regarding secure email communication.  If the first method of contact with the subject is through email, we will explain that they will receive encrypted emails going forward. This initial unencrypted email will not contain any PHI or study information, and will have instructions on how to open encrypted emails. We will also explain that they have the option to opt out of secure emails after informing them of the possible security risks. If they chose this option, this preference will be noted in our contact log.   Stimulation sessions with rTMS will be administered to the patients either in SRH while inpatient or in our lab if outpatient. The drug will be dispensed by the pharmacy and nursing staff of Spaulding while subjects are inpatient at the hospital. Upon discharge from Spaulding subjects will be given the remaining pills in their prescribed amount supply and instructed to take one each day until finished. If the subject is discharged to a skilled nursing facility a copy of the protocol and contact information will be sent with the patient and the medication.  Study staff will call the facility to answer questions and enlist support in continuing the study medication there.  Study drug compliance will be monitored weekly via self-report measures either during a study visit or by phone. Subject’s responses will be kept in a compliance log.    Informed consent will be obtained by a licensed physician or the Principal Investigator   (not involved in the patient’s care) at SRH. The subject will meet with the PI or licensed physician, and the test procedures will be described and the testing equipment will be shown to the subject. The 
Detailed Protocol 8 PI or licensed physician will clearly explain all the procedures and risks of the testing outlined in the consent form. The subject will be given an hour to consider their decision (if they have not received the consent form prior to the screening visit) and will be encouraged to ask questions, both during the initial phone interview and throughout the study. The PI or licensed physician will answer any questions regarding the study at the time consent is given.  Once enrolled, the subject may pause or terminate his/her participation at any time during the study.    VII. STUDY OVERVIEW AND PROCEDURES   Study overview:   This study is a parallel, randomized, double blind, placebo controlled clinical trial. We will use the same duration and regimen of fluoxetine treatment as the FLAME trial as this trial showed that fluoxetine is efficacious when compared against placebo. Subjects will be randomized to one of three groups, where they will receive: 1) fluoxetine + active rTMS, 2) fluoxetine + sham rTMS or 3) sham rTMS + placebo fluoxetine. With a total of 45 patients, 15 patients will be randomized to each group using a computer based randomization program.  This study is structured in 3 visits where baseline and post intervention assessments will be collected, 10 daily stimulation sessions (from 3rd until 12th visit), and subsequently, subjects will return for a weekly stimulation session for the next 8 weeks (visit 14th to 21th). Last visit will be the 22nd and the whole battery of assessments is going to be collected. A table of the study flow is presented below.  Protocol Details: There will be ten stimulation visits (to be given over a period of 15 days), followed by weekly sessions of stimulation for the next 8 weeks. During each stimulation visit, rTMS equipment will be placed on the subject’s unaffected hemisphere over the primary motor cortex (M1). They will receive either active or sham rTMS with fluoxetine – or sham rTMS and placebo. The 30  subjects randomized to receive sham  rTMS will have the opportunity to enroll into an open label at the conclusion of their participation in the randomized portion of the trial. This will consist of 10 daily active stimulation sessions that can be carried out over the course of 2 weeks. Subjects will only receive rTMS and not the study drug, Fluoxetine.  Intervention Details:  Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation:  Low frequency rTMS stimulation (active stimulation) • During this stimulation session, the participant will receive a session of low-frequency rTMS to the primary motor cortex of the unaffected cerebral hemisphere. The resting motor threshold (MT) of the first dorsal interosseous (FDI) in the affected and unaffected hemispheres will be measured. The participants will receive the rTMS over the area corresponding to the “hot spot” for stimulation as defined by motor threshold determination, as described by prior rTMS application studies (Rossini et al., 1994). 
Detailed Protocol 9 • Low frequency rTMS stimulation will be applied according to the following parameter: intensity of 100% MT, frequency of 1 Hz, 1200 pulses as a single, continuous train lasting 20 minutes. This intervention is associated with significant motor gains in chronic (Mansur, 2005)(Fregni, 2006) and acute stroke. In addition, it is a safer approach to be used in chronic stroke (Fregni review).  Sham rTMS stimulation: • For sham rTMS stimulation, we will place the coil in the same location usually used for the active stimulation. We will also utilize the same stimulation parameters. However, we will replace the active coil with a sham coil to ensure no stimulation is actually provided.  Drug Intervention:  Fluoxetine: • Subjects will receive fluoxetine 20 mg daily after enrollment during their baseline visit. They will take the study drug by mouth once daily from this day  until the protocol is completed (for 90 days) - we will use the same regimen as in the FLAME study.  • The drug will be dispensed by the pharmacy and nursing staff of Spaulding while subjects are inpatient at the hospital. Upon discharge from Spaulding subjects will be given the remaining pills in their prescribed amount supply and instructed to take one each day until finished. • If the subject is discharged to a skilled nursing facility a copy of the protocol and contact information will be sent with the patient and the medication.  Study staff will call the facility to answer questions and enlist support in continuing the study medication there. Study drug compliance will be monitored weekly via self-report measures either during a study visit or by phone. Subject’s responses will be kept in a compliance log.   • If the subject is enrolled as outpatient a licensed physician on the study staff will dispense the medication to the subject during the baseline visit.   Placebo control: • Subjects will receive a placebo pill daily after enrollment during their baseline visit. They will take the study drug by mouth once daily from this day until the protocol is completed (for 90 days). The placebo will be dispensed by the pharmacy and nursing staff of Spaulding while subjects are inpatient at the hospital. Upon discharge from Spaulding subjects will be given the remaining pills in their prescribed amount supply and instructed to take one each day until finished. The procedure for taking the study drug and to monitor for compliance will be the same as for the patients receiving the active drug.    Detailed Study Outline  Screening 
Detailed Protocol 10 Screening Visit (Visit 1) - (Approx Time: 45 mins)  Screening Procedures: At Screening the PI and the co-investigators will conduct a review of inclusion/exclusion criteria to determine the subject’s eligibility for enrollment. Study procedures will be reviewed with the subject, and documentation of informed consent will be obtained.   At Screening the following procedures will be completed:  • Discuss study-specific procedures with the subject  • Review inclusion and exclusion criteria, including list of current medication (for review with Dr. Black-Schaffer)   • Obtain a signed and dated consent form. • Perform a Fugl-Meyer motor scale • HAM-D (depression scale) • Modified Rankin Scale (mRS) • Demographic Data • Urine pregnancy exam (if applicable)  Randomization: Once eligibility and consent have been approved and completed, randomization will occur using the randomized list generated by an automatic web-base randomization program (www.randomization.com). Subjects will be randomly assigned to one of the three groups described in a 1:1:1 allocation ratio. We will use blocks from 3-5 subjects. Randomization order will be kept in sealed envelopes; therefore subjects will get their assignment according to the order of entrance in the study. The study coordinator will retain the original randomization list which will be kept in a locked place. The randomization list will be given to the pharmaceutical company compounding the study drug, and copy will be kept locked in the pharmacy in case of necessary unblinding. If the subject receives sham stimulation, at the end of their participation in the study he/she may re-enroll into an open label portion of the study where he/she will receive 10 days of active rTMS stimulation over the course of 2 weeks. These data will be used for exploratory analyses only.   Visit 2 Baseline Visit - (Approx Time: 3 hours)   In this visit, patients will start receiving the study drug either Fluoxetine or placebo Fluoxetine, by mouth, once daily until the protocol is over (90 Days total).   Single and Paired pulse TMS Assessments - A baseline assessment of cortical excitability will be performed in this visit, and repeated in Visit 12 and 21. For this we will evaluate the motor evoked potential (MEP) and the resting motor threshold (MT) using single pulse TMS. We will also used paired-pulse techniques to measure intra- and inter- cortical excitability. Both the 
Detailed Protocol 11 affected and unaffected M1 will be studied. Baseline assessment of the following will also be performed in this visit by a trained co-investigator:  • Jebsen-Taylor Hand Function Test (JTHF) • Fugl-Meyer motor scale (FMMS) • Modified Ashworth Scale • Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) • National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) • Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) • Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for anxiety • Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for pain/comfort • Side Effects Questionnaire for rTMS/TMS • Side effects Questionnaire for Fluoxetine (to have baseline data) Patients will also be asked about how many hours of occupational or physical therapy they are receiving and a log will be kept. This log will be updated every week. A log of their current medication will also be kept and updated weekly.   Visit 3-12 Daily Stimulation Visits (10 sessions over 15 days) - (Approx Time: 1 hour) • During each stimulation session - the subject will receive 20 minutes of either low frequency rTMS or Sham rTMS.  • In each visit they will also answer the rTMS and Fluoxetine side effects questionnaires (in the case of unexpected or severe side effects a study physician will be notified immediately. Serious adverse events will be reported  in accordance with IRB policies. All other expected side effects will be reviewed with the study physician on a monthly basis.) ( • We will also update the compliance, therapy and medication logs weekly. Visit 13 Follow Up Visit (Approx Time 3hrs) • Jebsen-Taylor Hand Function Test (JTHF) • Fugl-Meyer motor scale (FMMS) • Modified Ashworth Scale • Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) • Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for anxiety • Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for pain/comfort • TMS Assessments • Side Effects Questionnaire for rTMS/TMS • Fluoxetine side effects Questionnaire • Blinding questionnaire  Visits 14-21 Weekly Stimulation visits - (Approx Time: 1 hour) • During each stimulation session - the subject will receive 20 minutes of either low frequency rTMS or Sham rTMS. 
Detailed Protocol 12 • In this visits they will also answer the rTMS and the Fluoxetine side effects questionnaires, and the adverse event log (in the case of unexpected or severe side effects a study physician will be notified immediately. Serious adverse events will be reported  in accordance with IRB policies. All other expected side effects will be reviewed with the study physician on a monthly basis.) •  • We will also update the compliance, therapy and medication logs weekly.  Visit 22 Post- Intervention assessment visit - (Approx Time: 3 hours) • Jebsen-Taylor Hand Function Test (JTHF) • Fugl-Meyer motor scale (FMMS) • Modified Ashworth Scale • Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) • Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) • Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for anxiety • Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for pain/comfort • TMS Assessments • Side Effects Questionnaire for rTMS/TMS • Fluoxetine side effects questionnaire • Blinding questionnaire  Study Visit Summary Table: Assessments and Interventions Screening (Visit 1) Visit 2 Visit  3-12  Visit 13 Visit  14-21  Visit  22  Review of eligibility criteria  X     
  Demographic Data X    NIHSS  X   Modified Rankin Scale X    HAM-D X    Jebsen Taylor Hand Function Test (JTHF)  X X X Visual analogue scale (VAS) for anxiety  X X X Modified Ashworth Scale    X X X Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) for pain/comfort    X X X Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE)   X  X Fugl Meyer (FM)  X X X X Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)   X X X 
Detailed Protocol 13 TMS Assessments  X X X STIMULATION 1. Low-Frequency rTMS + fluoxetine OR 2. Low-Frequency sham  rTMS + fluoxetine OR 3. Low-Frequency sham  rTMS + placebo    X  X  Side Effects Questionnaire for rTMS (post-stimulation) and for fluoxetine  X X X X X Blinding Questionnaire (post-stimulation)    X  X Approximate Time 45 mins 3 hrs 1 hour 3 hrs 1 hour 3hrs  Blinding Procedure:  Participants, family members, treating staff, physicians, data collectors, SRH pharmacists, site investigators and the statistician at the lead site will be blinded to group assignment until after the final analyses. The lead pharmacist who prepares the study drug kits will be blinded to group assignment. Johnson Compounding and Wellness Center, which is responsible for manufacturing/delivering the correctly randomized study drug, will be unblinded. When Johnson Compounding and Wellness Center sends the medication to SRH for dispensing to the subject, a note indicating the contents, “Active” or “Placebo,” will be with the medication. This note will be placed in a sealed envelope should the subject’s medication require unblinding to treat an adverse event.   Guidelines and Procedures for Breaking the Blind: In rare cases, it may be necessary to break the blind to facilitate management of a serious adverse event (SAE). At each site, an assigned person (the PI or designee) will have access to unblinding. In the vast majority of cases where adverse events are noted, however, the decision about whether or not to continue the study drug, and what treatment to provide, if any, can be made without knowing whether the patient was receiving study drug or placebo. Since most SAEs might be due to something else even if the patient is in the active treatment group, the treating physician should assess multiple possible causes of the adverse event and should stop the study drug at least temporarily as long as there is some chance that it is responsible for the event. Just as in clinical practice, if an adverse event is thought to be due to a given drug, and that drug is stopped, clearance of the adverse event tends to support the causal connection. On the other hand, failure of the symptoms to resolve with stopping the drug requires the physician to search for alternative causes. Thus, in general, the treating physician should make a decision about whether or not an adverse event is likely to be connected to the study drug in a blinded fashion, and stop the drug where appropriate, at least temporarily. If the adverse event does not resolve, the physician may identify another etiology and make a decision, in the future, to restart the study drug. 
Detailed Protocol 14 In order to meet the criteria for unblinding the following scenario should be true. In uncommon instances, the treating physician may feel that it is critical to know which drug the subject is receiving, because:  1. The adverse event is serious; and 2. It will be potentially harmful or costly to stop the study drug and act simultaneously on other possible causes of the adverse event; and 3. It will be dangerous to stop the study drug and wait for a few days to see whether the adverse event resolves before acting on other possible causes.  In all cases, the Treatment Unblinding form, which prompts the PI to address the need to unblind to ensure unblinding is indeed necessary, should be completed prior to unblinding the participant. Unmasking/unblinding should be considered a serious action. The treating physician may unblind the participant if unblinding is considered to be essential to clinical management.   The following questions should be answered on the Treatment Unblinding form by the treating physician whenever unblinding is being considered or has been implemented:  1. What is the adverse event that leads you to want to unblind the treatment condition? 2. What prevents you from addressing all possible causes of the adverse event simultaneously? 3. What prevents you from stopping the study drug blindly and waiting a few days to evaluate the course of the adverse event, and then make decisions about other interventions accordingly?     In all cases in which unblinding has occurred, the study physician treating the participant has been unblinded and will record and maintain these data in a confidential log so the case can be reviewed and the reasons for unblinding tracked. The treating physician should be reminded not to reveal the treatment assignment to any other staff members unless this information is essential to patient management, or to the patient or the patient’s family.   Note: To avoid inadvertent or non-essential episodes of unblinding, the PI (or designee) should assure that the covering physician staff, residents, physician’s assistants and nursing staff is informed that stringent guidelines must be followed when starting and stopping all medications. Unblinding cannot occur unless the Guidelines for Unblinding have been reviewed and completed by the PI.   A record of each subjects’ assignment from Johnson Compounding and Wellness Center, “Active” or “Placebo,” is placed in a sealed envelope labeled with the Study Name and ID along with the subjects name and Study ID Number on the outside. This envelope is placed in a larger envelope labeled with the Study Name and ID in the SRH Night Pharmacy Omnicell automated dispensing machine. Only SRH Nursing Managers and the SRH IND Pharmacist, using the Omnicell machine can access the study envelope using the product identifier “unblinding key  DESCRIPTION OF ASSESSMENTS:    Clinical Assessments: 
Detailed Protocol 15 A rater blind to the treatment arm will administer the following:   1. Jebson Taylor Hand Function Test (JTHF): This will be our primary outcome. This test was designed as a broad measure of hand function. It provides information on the time required for the subject to turn cards, pick up small objects, simulate feeding by picking up beans with a spoon, stack checkers, and lift empty and 500 g full cans (Jebsen et al., 1969). This instrument showed to be sensitive to measure motor changes induced by motor cortex stimulation (REVIEW marcel - BJ). When performing a certain sub-task, if the subject demonstrates the inability to complete that task and verbally acknowledges he/she cannot perform, we will move on to the next task and score appropriately.  2. Fugl-Meyer motor scale (FMMS): This instrument was the main outcome used in the FLAME study and is widely used for assessment of motor recovery after stroke. (Gladstone et al, 2002). 3. Modified Ashworth Scale: This instrument is a 6-point rating scale that is used to measure muscle tone. This test is performed by moving the body part through the joint range of motion (ROM), with no specification as to the speed of the movement. 4. Beck Depression Inventory (BDI):  This 21-item multiple-choice test measures the presence of and the degree of depression in adults.   5. Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE): The MMSE is a brief screening instrument used to assess cognitive abilities. We will be using this assessment as a baseline evaluation and a follow- up. Consistency of MMSE scores should suggest that a subject had no cognitive changes throughout the intervention period that may have affected test performance or carryover of the program. 6. National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIH SS): is a tool used to objectively quantify the impairment caused by a stroke. It is composed of 11 items, each of which scores a specific ability between a 0 and 4. 7. Visual analogue scale (VAS) for anxiety: This tool is a visual scale of 0-10 where the subject can rate their level of anxiety where 0 is no anxiety, and 10 is the worst anxiety that the subject has ever felt. 8. Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) for pain /comfort: This tool is a visual scale of 0-10 where the subject can rate their level of pain where 0 is no pain, and 10 is the worst pain that the subject has ever felt. 9. Side Effects / Adverse event tracking Questionnaire for rTMS: After each session, subjects will complete a questionnaire to evaluate potential common adverse effects rTMS (headache, neck pain, itching and redness at the site of stimulation) on a 5-point scale. 10. The Antidepresant Side-Effect Checklist (ASEC): The ASEC is a questionnaire that assesses the possible appearance of side effects related to the use of common antidepresants, their severity and if they are linked or not to the drug (Uher, 2010).  11. Blinding Questionnaire: to be performed at the end of the daily stimulation sessions and at the end of the weekly stimulation sessions.. This questionnaire will ask the rater and the subjects whether the intervention was sham or active rTMS . The confidence of these responses will be rated from 0 to 5 – 0 being no confidence and 5- total confidence. If the subject is interested in knowing what stimulation he/she received, the co-investigator may inform the subject when his/her participation in the trial has ended. . 
Detailed Protocol 16 12. A log of the hours of therapy that patients are receiving and the meditations they are taking will be kept and updated every week.  Assessment of cortical excitability and plasticity – single and paired pulse TMS and PAS:  Aim 1: Determine whether low-frequency rTMS of the unaffected M1 associated with fluoxetine offers an additional benefit on motor function over pharmacotherapy.  We will investigate changes in cortical excitability by evaluating the motor evoked potential (MEP) and the resting motor threshold (MT) (with the same methods as in our previous study (Fregni et al., 2006b)). We will also measure intracortical excitability using the technique of paired-pulse, and interhemispheric differences using transcallosal inhibition. Both the affected and unaffected M1 will be studied.   We will investigate the resting motor threshold (measured following the technique described by (Rossini et al., 1994)) before and after stimulation. For the MEP study, we will initially adjust TMS intensity to achieve a baseline MEP in the first dorsal interosseous of about 1 mV peak-to-peak amplitude before intervention. Stimulation intensity will be kept constant for each subject throughout the experiment. The MEPs will be recorded and stored in a PC computer for off-line analysis. We will record 10 MEPs for each time point (immediately before and after the rTMS stimulation) and average their peak-to-peak amplitude and area-under-the-curve. I. For the paired-pulse study, a subthreshold conditioning stimulus will be applied, followed at a variable interstimulus interval (ISI) by a second test (suprathreshold) stimulus. We will use the following ISIs: 2, 3, 6, 10, and 12.  The percentage of inhibition or facilitation for each ISI before and after stimulation will be calculated II. To measure changes in transcallosal inhibition, a suprathreshold stimulus will be applied to the motor cortex of one hemisphere, and ten milliseconds later a threshold stimulus will be applied to the contralateral motor cortex. The percentage of inhibition for each stimulus before and after stimulation will be calculated. III. PAS: To measure LTP-like in the motor cortex, we will use the measure of paired associative stimulation (PAS). For PAS, 160 pairs of peripheral nerve stimulation and TMS of motor cortex will be delivered at 0.1 Hz. Stimulation of the median nerve will precede TMS of M1 using an interstimulus interval (ISI) of 25 milliseconds (PAS-25). It has been shown that in PAS-25, the two inputs via peripheral nerve stimulation and via TMS reaches motor cortex simultaneously which results in facilitation of the MEP induced by TMS (Stefan, 2000). PAS-25 has been used as a robust marker to assess cortical plasticity in M1. Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation: TMS will be performed with a Bistim2 stimulator (Magstim Company LTDA, UK) and a commercially available 70 mm figure-of-eight coil. Responses to stimuli applied to the motor cortex will be recorded from the contralateral first dorsal interosseous (FDI) muscle. Silver/silver chloride electrodes will be placed over the muscle belly (active electrode) and joint or tendon of the muscle (reference electrode) to record MEPs. A ground electrode will be placed over the wrist. MEPs will be amplified and filtered using a Powerlab 4/30 with a band pass of 20-2000 kHz. Signals will be fed to a personal computer for off-line analysis using data collection software and conditional averaging software. In the case we are not able to 
Detailed Protocol 17 locate the motor threshold in the affected hemisphere; we will not perform MEP’s, Paired Pulse, and PAS in the affected hemisphere.  VIII. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS  Sample size justification: We planned a sample size based on our SELECT-tDCS trial combining non-invasive brain stimulation and sertraline for the treatment of depression and in addition the FLAME trial testing fluoxetine on motor function in stroke. Using these two studies, our calculation showed that a sample size of 30 participants would provide at least 80% power (alpha=0.05) to detect an effect size of 0.9 (considering the treatment difference between the two independent groups) in our main outcome between the active and sham rTMS group. Although this sample is small and may rely on large effects found in these two studies, this is a realistic sample for this initial phase II study as the effect size of 0.9 is smaller than the effect size of these two studies. Finally there will also be good statistical power to detect moderate effects of treatment on the secondary outcomes. [Given that our subaim 1 (added in the specific aims part) has the goal of assessing whether the effects found in the main comparison are also superior to spontaneous recovery, we added another group with the same size (15 subjects) as to provide the same power for the two group comparison in subaim 1 (real rTMS+fluoxetine vs. sham rTMS+placebo fluoxetine and sham rTMS+fluoxetine vs. sham rtMS+placebo fluoxetine)]  All analyses will be conducted according to the principle of intention-to-treat (using regression-based single imputation method). We will also perform an additional sensitivity analysis in which we will use the method of last observation carried forward.   For the first aim, the primary outcome will be motor function changes as indexed by Jebsen Taylor Hand Function test and secondary outcome will be Fugl-Meyer motor scores. Differences between the two groups will be tested using Student's t-test and, in addition, we will adjust for important baseline variables and also test the time effect in general mixed longitudinal models. Secondary analyses will be conducted in an exploratory manner (no correction for multiple comparisons). [We will also conduct exploratory correlational analysis as to understand whether beneficial effects of the combined intervention (active rTMS and fluoxetine) are associated with any baseline characteristics as to explore potential predictors of the effects of treatment. This result may also be used along with results for aim 2 to understand the mechanisms of the combined treatment.]  [For subaim 1: the primary outcome will be motor function changes as indexed by Jebsen Taylor Hand Function test and secondary outcome will be Fugl-Meyer motor scores. We will conduct the same analysis as aim 1 (Differences between the two groups will be tested using Student's t-test with adjustment for covariates) but in this case we conduct two comparisons (real rTMS+fluoxetine vs. sham rTMS+placebo fluoxetine and sham rTMS+fluoxetine vs. sham rtMS+placebo fluoxetine)]  For the second aim, we will initially build a mixed ANOVA model in which the dependent variable will be the parameters of cortical excitability and plasticity (PAS) indexed by 
Detailed Protocol 18 neuropsychological measures. The independent variables will be group [(active and placebo control)], time and the interaction group/time. [If we find a significant interaction effect between group and time, we will confirm our hypothesis that TMS induces a significant differential plasticity when compared to fluoxetine alone. Furthermore we will conduct additional analysis in which we will change the groups in the variable group (real rTMS+fluoxetine vs. sham rTMS+placebo fluoxetine and sham rTMS+fluoxetine vs. sham rtMS+placebo fluoxetine)    Unexpected findings and discussion: In case we obtain unexpected results (i.e. we do not confirm our initial hypothesis that TMS plus fluoxetine has not a superior effect than the control placebo group in motor function as indexed by clinical and neurophysiological measures), this would still be interesting to report as we will explore possible mechanism of actions that lead to these unexpected results] • rTMS + fluoxetine vs. sham rTMS + fluoxetine and/or placebo control; clinical results positive and neurophysiological data positive: This is our expected hypothesis. • rTMS + fluoxetine vs. sham rTMS + fluoxetine; clinical results negative/neurophysiological results positive: TMS combined with fluoxetine induces differential plasticity however the impact in clinical outcomes is minor which provides good evidence that the combined treatment may not be useful. •  rTMS + fluoxetine vs. sham rTMS + fluoxetine;  clinical results positive/neurophysiological results negative: This would be also an interesting result as the differential clinical improvements of the combined treatment are not mediated by motor cortex plasticity –we would then discuss potential mechanisms such as subcortical or cerebelar changes in the motor system. • rTMS + fluoxetine vs. sham rTMS + fluoxetine and/or placebo control; clinical results negative/neurophysiological results negative: In case we do not find differential effects in both outcomes, we will then use our third group to understand whether fluoxetine has a superior effect than placebo only as to understand whether there was a ceiling effect of the combined treatment or whether the population selected for this study was not responsive for this treatment   IX. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation:  Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation may result in a small chance of inducing local pain, neck pain, transient headache, or toothache. In such prior cases, headaches induced by rTMS can be resolved with acetaminophen or aspirin, and typically disappear shortly after sitimulation.    Repetitive TMS equipment produces a clicking sound when a current is passed through the stimulation coil. This click can result in ringing in the ear and temporary auditory threshold shifts if no protection is used. In order to prevent this potential adverse effect investigators and subjects will wear earplugs during TMS. Animal and human studies have demonstrated that ear plugs can effectively prevent the risk of hearing disturbance due to repetitive TMS.    
Detailed Protocol 19 Repetitive TMS has rarely been associated with a possible risk of seizure induction, which has been rarely reported. In fact, according to the 2009 safety and ethical consensus guideline on repetitive TMS, the 10 year prevalence of seizure was described as “extremely rare” (Rossi et al, 2009). The literature has even shown a protective effect against seizures in low frequency rTMS, while showing a “possible” 0.4% crude risk of high frequency rTMS, limited only to epileptic populations (Rossi et al, 2009). Of note, this, population is excluded from in this study. There are other extra-ordinarily rare reports, including electrode-induced skin injury, which can be minimized by attentive vigilance during the technique. rTMS has also been associated with a hypothetical risk of structural brain changes, histotoxicity, and transient TSH and lactate levels, all with inconsistent findings in the literature, of no determined implication to date (Rossi et al, 2009). The current uses of rTMS have been determined to be overall very safe, especially when used under the safety guidelines of the recent 2008 Safety, ethical considerations, and application consensus guidelines, of which the principal investigator of this study was one of the authors (Rossi et al, 2009).  Single-Pulse and Paired-Pulse Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation: We will be using a different kind of stimulation called Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS). TMS is different from rTMS, because TMS is a method of evaluating changes in the brain, whereas rTMS is a method of inducing changes in the brain. We will use TMS to measure whether rTMS caused any changes in cortical excitability and if there is any correlation between changes in cortical excitability with motor improvement.  We will be using single and paired pulse TMS as a diagnostic tool. It does not change cortical excitability or brain activity. There is a small chance of single pulse TMS inducing a mild, transient headache or neck pain. In such prior cases, headaches induced by TMS can be resolved with acetaminophen or aspirin.  TMS equipment produces a clicking sound when a current is passed through the stimulation coil. This click can result in ringing in the ear and temporary auditory threshold shifts if no protection is used. In order to prevent this potential adverse effect investigators and subjects will wear earplugs during TMS. Animal and human studies have demonstrated that ear plugs can effectively prevent the risk of hearing disturbance due to repetitive TMS.    Fluoxetine: The dose to be used in this trial (20mg) is the standard dose that currently is being used as off label treatment in several rehabilitation centers to promote motor recovery after stroke. The safety profile of this dose has been also established in several studies in the psychiatric population where chronic usage is the common denominator and tolerance and safety has been demonstrated, the most common adverse effects are gastrointestinal issues that usually are transient and self-limited. In the FLAME trial the reported adverse effects observed in the active group were transient digestive disorders and insomnia, while the former was directly attributable to fluoxetine, the later was a combination of several factors involved in the care of acute patients. The most expected side effects are: dry mouth, drowsiness, insomnia, blurred vision, headache, constipation, diarrhea, increased or decreased appetite, nausea or vomiting, problems with urination, problems with the sexual function, palpitations, light-headedness, dizziness, sweating, hyperthermia, tremor, disorientation, yawning and weight gain. We will monitor the occurrence of adverse effects using 
Detailed Protocol 20 the Antidepressant Side Effect Checklist (ASEC) . For inpatients, this document will be handled by the study personnel and the clinicians involved in the patient’s care and for outpatients by a co-investigator.  Dr. Black-Shaffer will carefully review all adverse effects during the study for all the subjects. Dr. Black-Shaffer, the director of stroke service, also has experience in the use of fluoxetine for stroke rehabilitation as it is also used in one of her studies.  Behavioral assessments/Questionnaires:  There are no potential risks posed to participants with respect to behavioral tasks.  Though participants may become fatigued during testing, they will be informed that they are allowed to take a break at any point during the experiment and that they may end their participation at any time.   X. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  As the study we aim to conduct is focused on basic research, the subjects enrolled will derive no direct benefit. The results of this study may benefit subsequent future stroke patients with hemiparesis or hemiplegia, if rTMS combined with fluoxetine prove to improve motor function.   We envision that in the near future, the information obtained from the proposed research project will provide a better understanding of motor function recovery after stroke.    XI. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  Data for this study will be collected from subjects in several forms: scores from a multitude of questionnaires measuring motor function, mood and quality of life, measures of cortical excitability, as well as demographic data. All data will be assigned a subject number, and the accompanying name will be deleted, so that it is de-identified. All data collected from subjects will be maintained in a secured and password protected database, of which only the IRB trained and approved study staff will have access, including the PI, Co-I’s, research assistant, and research fellow. In addition, data on paper (i.e. IRB approved questionnaires in subject folders) will be kept in a secured and locked storage room, of which only IRB approved study staff have access, within the Laboratory of Neuromodulation at Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital. The research assistant also maintains a password protected database of subject contact information, for those subjects who express interest in our research by phone.  Approval of protocol, informed consent procedures, and recruitment will be obtained from the IRB during annual reviews.  Adverse events, data and procedural reviews will be conducted by the study coordinator and Dr. Fregni on a monthly basis, in consultation with study staff, to identify and ameliorate any potential safety issues. Any safety concerns about the protocol will be brought to the immediate attention of Dr. Fregni. Safety will be monitored by the Adverse Effects Questionnaire, anti-depressant side effects checklist, and rTMS/TMS side effects questionnaire. The Principal Investigator will be responsible for data monitoring, accuracy and completeness of data collection, and data storage. Data will be reviewed at completion of each subject’s participation in the study.  
Detailed Protocol 21  As the sample size is relatively small, we do not plan on performing interim data analysis.  Adverse events, data, and procedures will be reviewed by Dr. Fregni and his team.  All expected and unexpected adverse outcomes will be reported to the IRB according to the Adverse Event Reporting guidelines.  A trained co-investigator on the study will administer the rTMS, sensory exams and the other evaluations. Prior to performing any study procedures, the study staff member was trained in the techniques of rTMS as well as all aspects of the evaluations. This study staff member was then evaluated by the PI of the study. The PI has given confirmation that the co-investigator is qualified to administer the stimulation and the evaluations.  All procedures in the Neuromodulation Center will be performed by research personnel having Basic Life Support (BLS) certification.  All staff performing study procedures must have reviewed and understand hospital and building 79-96 emergency procedures.  Additionally,  a one-sheet medical information summary, highlighting important medical issues (pertinent PMH, medications, allergies, functional limitation/neurologic deficits, emergency contact, PCP) will be available for each patient participating as the initial page of their study binder. Therefore, in case of emergency, the clinician will have this information easily accessible.  Emergency Procedure Plan  Testing of research subjects in experiments from the Neuromodulation Center will be conducted in two sites (79-96 Neuromodulation Center and SRH). Subjects will be preferentially tested at SRH when equipment for testing and stimulation allows.  Stimulation sessions will take place in 79/96 if there is an equipment restriction or scheduling conflict that would affect the scientific validity of the protocol (ie, would cause a missed visit during the 2 weeks of daily stimulation visits). All assessment based visits will be conducted in 79/96 (under the coverage plan explained below) as these tests require sensitive equipment which cannot be moved between 79/96-SRH after having already been calibrated and tested here.   79-96 Neuromodulation testing  Testing in the 79-96 building will take place with in-house licensed clinicians available (physician or RN). To ensure that coverage is available, one of the coordinators of the Neuromodulation lab will send out weekly e-mails to in-house clinicians to confirm their schedules for the following week.  Additionally, daily e-mails will be sent to all laboratory members with the medical coverage schedule for the day. The clinicians will be copied on these daily e-mails, and thus can let the Neuromodulation lab know if something has changed in their schedule. Finally, these weekly schedules will be posted on a white board in the main reception area of the lab so that all staff may readily see who is available when.   Should an emergency arise during stimulation that requires immediate medical attention, the investigator will use the established emergency procedures for 79/96. This includes alerting the in-house clinician, dialing the emergency number (9-911) and reporting the nature and location of 
Detailed Protocol 22 the medical emergency. Staff will assist the clinician as directed until EMS arrives. After using this system, the investigator will follow the Laboratory and IRB policies for adverse event reporting, including notification of the Principal Investigator and the Medical Monitor and filing of an adverse event report.  Should any minor incidents occur during stimulation that do not require immediate medical attention, the PI or licensed physician will be contacted to assess these issues and initiate appropriate action.   SRH testing – Research Floor Whenever is possible, testing in SRH will be prioritized especially for patients participating in the stimulation sessions, when equipment permits. Coverage for emergencies during hospital testing (SRH) is the emergency response team.  The team is activated by dialing 8-6666, giving location and type of emergency.  If due to equipment restrictions (ie, sensitive equipment that cannot be moved between 79-96 and SRH) or scheduling conflicts prevents subjects from being able to be stimulated in SRH, subjects may receive stimulation in 79-96 in accordance with the plan listed above in order to maintain the scientific validity of the protocol.   In addition to this support, the Principal Investigator or a licensed physician familiar with the research study will be available either on-site or available by pager, for all stimulation sessions. If this PI is unavailable, this licensed physician will be available to assist with identification and notification of emergencies.   In order to further monitor and quality assurance we developed a plan for assessment via an independent medical monitor. The following plan has been proposed to NIH for the independent medical monitor:  The independent medical monitor will be responsible to assess adverse events and reasons for dropouts.  • Adverse events will be collected from the start of neural stimulation and through the end of study participation.  All adverse events regardless of attribution to active neural stimulation will be collected and recorded, using standard adverse event forms for brain stimulation currently used at Harvard Medical School site.  These forms will be included as part of the IRB review package. • A diagnosis rather than signs, symptoms, and/or other clinical information will be recorded when possible.  Participants will be asked in an open-ended way about the presence of any adverse events; but also will be collected using the adverse effects questionnaire.  In this questionnaire, at each session, subjects will complete a questionnaire to evaluate potential adverse effects of stimulation (headache, neck pain, mood alterations, and seizures) on a 5-point scale. The scale will also be administered at the follow-up.  Intensity will be graded as mild, moderate, or severe for each adverse event.  The likelihood that the event is related or not related to treatment will be noted. • Adverse Events (AEs) will be measured in several areas: seriousness, severity, length of duration, and if any causal relationship exists with the intervention. 
Detailed Protocol 23 • Serious AEs (SAEs) will be defined as adverse events that resulted in death, were life-threatening/disabling, and/or required hospitalization. Please see the human subjects section for further details.  • According to Partners/Harvard Medical School policy, where the human trials will be conducted (and Highland Instruments will be bound by their IRB as part of an institutional agreement and FWA00018902) the reporting for any unanticipated untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence, including abnormal sign (for example, abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, that indicates that the research places subjects are at increased risk of physical or psychological harm than previously known or recognized are to be submitted through as an Adverse Event will include: o a detailed description of the adverse event;  o the basis for determining that the event is unexpected in nature, severity, or frequency;  o the basis for determining that the event is related or possibly related to the research procedures;  o the basis for determining that the research places subjects at an increased risk of harm (i.e., a serious adverse event); and  o whether any changes to the research or other corrective actions are warranted. • Events will be medically evaluated as appropriate, including testing and referral.  All applicable local regulatory requirements related to the reporting of serious adverse events to regulatory authorities and the IRB will be followed during this study.  Serious adverse events will be promptly reported to NIH and IRB.   o The issue of placing the study on hold will be raised by the investigators with our local IRB if any serious adverse events occur. • Data from this adverse effect questionnaire will be imputed into a secure database for medical monitor review. Data input will be performed by a blinded co-investigator and the medical monitor will have also independent access to database and all study materials.  • The independent medical monitor will review data on retention and follow-up including reasons for patient dropout (Monitoring missing data). The reasons for dropout will be detailed in the report document that will be reviewed by the medical monitor. • The independent medical monitor will review data on adverse events and safety (according to the guidelines described in this plan) and will report any concerns or issues with the NINDS and the PI, and recommending to the NINDS and PI the continuation, modification, or conclusion of the trial, while protecting the confidentiality of the trial data and the results of monitoring.  o The independent medical monitor will review the data at least after every 6 patients or whether there is any serious adverse event reported as defined above.  • In order to ensure the likelihood of successful and timely trial completion, the medical monitor will also assess: o participant recruitment  o protocol adherence o data quality and completeness o data confidentiality o Recommend planned adaptations based on pre-specified plans and decision rules.    
Detailed Protocol 24 XII. REFERENCES  Adeyemo, B. O., Simis, M., Macea, D., & Fregni, F. Systematic Review of Parameters of Stimulation: Clinical Trial Design Characteristics and Motor Outcomes in Noninvasive Brain Stimulation in Stroke. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 3, 8.  Acler M, Robol E, Fiaschi A, Manganotti P. A double blind placebo controlled RCT to investigate the effects of serotonergic modulation on brain excitability and motor recovery in stroke patients. J Neurol 2009; 256: 1152-1158.  Brown, J. A., Lutsep, H., Cramer, S. C. & Weinand, M. (2003) Motor cortex       stimulation for enhancement of recovery after stroke: case report. Neurol Res, 25, 815-8.  Brown, J. A., Lutsep, H. L., Weinand, M. & Cramer, S. C. (2006) Motor cortex stimulation for the enhancement of recovery from stroke: a prospective, multicenter safety study. Neurosurgery, 58, 464-73.  Brunoni, A. R., Valiengo, L., Baccaro, A., Zanao, T. A., de Oliveira, J. F., Goulart, A., et al. (2013). The Sertraline vs Electrical Current Therapy for Treating Depression Clinical Study: Results From a Factorial, Randomized, Controlled Trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 6, 1-9.   Chollet, F, Tardy J, Albucher J-F, Thalamas C, et al.  Fluoxetine for motor recovery after acute ischaemic stroke (FLAME):  a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 2011; 10: 123-130.   Dam M, Tonin P, DeBoni A, Pizzolato G, Casson S, Ermaniu M. Effects of fluoxetine and maprotiline on functional recovery in poststroke hemiplegic patients undergoing rehabilitation therapy. Stroke  1996; 27: 1211-1214.  Fregni, F., Santos, C. M., Myczkowski, M. L., Rigolino, R., Gallucci-Neto, J., Barbosa, E. R., Valente, K. D., Pascual-Leone, A. & Marcolin, M. A. (2004) Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation is as effective as fluoxetine in the treatment of depression in patients with Parkinson's disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry, 75, 1171-4.  Fregni, F., Boggio, P. S., Lima, M. C., Ferreira, M. J., Wagner, T., Rigonatti, S. P., Castro, A. W., Souza, D. R., Riberto, M., Freedman, S. D., Nitsche, M. A. & Pascual-Leone, A. (2006a) A sham-controlled, phase II trial of transcranial direct current stimulation for the treatment of central pain in traumatic spinal cord injury. Pain, 122, 197-209.  Fregni, F., Boggio, P. S., Valle, A. C., Rocha, R. R., Duarte, J., Ferreira, M. J., Wagner, T., Fecteau, S., Rigonatti, S. P., Riberto, M., Freedman, S. D. & Pascual-Leone, A. (2006c) A sham-controlled trial of a 5-day course of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the unaffected hemisphere in stroke patients. Stroke, 37, 2115-22.  Fregni, F., Boggio, P. S., Mansur, C. G., Wagner, T., Ferreira, M. J., Lima, M. C., Rigonatti, S. P., Marcolin, M. A., Freedman, S. D., Nitsche, M. A. & Pascual-Leone, A. (2005a) Transcranial 
Detailed Protocol 25 direct current stimulation of the unaffected hemisphere in stroke patients. Neuroreport, 16, 1551-1555.  Gangitano, M., Valero-Cabre, A., Tormos, J. M., Mottaghy, F. M., Romero, J. R. & Pascual-Leone, A. (2002) Modulation of input-output curves by low and high frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the motor cortex. Clin Neurophysiol, 113, 1249-57.   Gianotti G, Antonucci G, Marra C, Paolucci S. Relation between depression after stroke antidepressant therapy, and functional recovery. J Neurol Neurosurg Pscychiatry 2001; 71: 208-261  Hoffman, R. E. & Cavus, I. (2002) Slow transcranial magnetic stimulation, long-term depotentiation, and brain hyperexcitability disorders. Am J Psychiatry, 159, 1093-102.  Huang, Y. Z., Edwards, M. J., Rounis, E., Bhatia, K. P. & Rothwell, J. C. (2005) Theta burst stimulation of the human motor cortex. Neuron, 45, 201-6.  Hummel, F., Celnik, P., Giraux, P., Floel, A., Wu, W. H., Gerloff, C. & Cohen, L. G. (2005) Effects of non-invasive cortical stimulation on skilled motor function in chronic stroke. Brain, 128, 490-9.  Hummel, F. & Cohen, L. G. (2005) Improvement of motor function with noninvasive cortical stimulation in a patient with chronic stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair, 19, 14-9.  Jebsen, R. H., Taylor, N., Trieschmann, R. B., Trotter, M. J. & Howard, L. A. (1969) An objective and standardized test of hand function. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 50, 311-9.  Jorge RE, Acion L, Moser D, Adams HP, Robinson RG. Escitalopram and enhancement of cognitive recovery following stroke. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2010; 67(2): 187-196.  Khedr, E. M., Ahmed, M. A., Fathy, N. & Rothwell, J. C. (2005) Therapeutic trial of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation after acute ischemic stroke. Neurology, 65, 466-8.  Lloyd-Jones D, Adams R, Carnethon M, De Simone G, Ferguson Tb, Flegal K, Ford E, Furie K, Go A, Greenlund K, Haase N, Hailpern S, Ho M, Howard V, Kissela B, Kittner S, Lackland D, Lisabeth L, Marelli A, Mcdermott M, Meigs J, Mozaffarian D, Nichol G, O’donnell C, Rogerr V, Rosamon W, Sacco R, Sorlie P, Stafford R, Steinberger J, Thom T, Wasserthiell-Smoller S, Wong N, Wylie-Rosett J, Hong Y; American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease and stroke statistics--2009 update: a report from the American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Circulation. 2009 Jan 27;119(3):480-6. Erratum in: Circulation.  Maeda, F., Keenan, J. P., Tormos, J. M., Topka, H. & Pascual-Leone, A. (2000) Modulation of corticospinal excitability by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. Clin Neurophysiol, 111, 800-5.  
Detailed Protocol 26 Mansur, C. G., Fregni, F., Boggio, P. S., Riberto, M., Gallucci-Neto, J., Santos, C. M., Wagner, T., Rigonatti, S. P., Marcolin, M. A. & Pascual-Leone, A. (2005) A sham stimulation-controlled trial of rTMS of the unaffected hemisphere in stroke patients. Neurology, 64, 1802-4.  Marconi B, Filippi Gm, Koch G, Giacobbe V, Pecchioli C, Versace V, Camerota F, Saraceni Vm, Caltagrione C. Long-term effects on cortical excitability and motor  recovery induced by repeated muscle vibration in chronic stroke patients. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2011 Jan;25(1):48-60.  Narushima K, Paradiso S, Moser DJ, Jorge R, Robinson RG. Effect of antidepressant therapy on executive function after stroke. Br J Psychiatry 2007 Mar; 190: 260-265.  Nitsche, M. A. & Paulus, W. (2001) Sustained excitability elevations induced by transcranial DC motor cortex stimulation in humans. Neurology, 57, 1899-901.  Nowak Da, Grefkes C, Ameli M, Fink Gr. Interhemispheric competition after stroke: brain stimulation to enhance recovery of function of the affected hand. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2009 Sep;23(7):641-56.  Pariente J, Loubinoux I, Carel C, Albucher J-F, Leger A, et al. Fluoxetine modulates motor performance and cerebral activation of patients recovering from stroke. Ann Neurol 2001; 50: 718-729.  Pascual-Leone, A., Walsh, V. & Rothwell, J. (2000) Transcranial magnetic stimulation in cognitive neuroscience--virtual lesion, chronometry, and functional connectivity. Curr Opin Neurobiol, 10, 232-7.  Plautz, E. J., Barbay, S., Frost, S. B., Friel, K. M., Dancause, N., Zoubina, E. V., Stowe, A. M., Quaney, B. M. & Nudo, R. J. (2003) Post-infarct cortical plasticity and behavioral recovery using concurrent cortical stimulation and rehabilitative training: a feasibility study in primates. Neurol Res, 25, 801-10.   Rogers LM, Brown DA, Stinear JW. The effects of paired associative stimulation on knee extensor motor excitability of individuals post-stroke: A pilot study. Clin Neurophysiol. 2010 Dec 1.  Rossi S, Hallett M, Rossini PM, Pascual-Leone A; Safety of TMS Consensus Group (2009) Safety, ethical considerations, and application guidelines for the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation in clinical practice and research. Clin Neurophysiol, 120, 2008-39.  Rossini, P. M., Barker, A. T. & Berardelli, A. (1994) Non-invasive electrical and magnetic stimulation of the brain spinal cord and roots: basic princeples and procedures for routine clinical application: report of an ICFN committee. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol, 91, 79-91.  Triggs, W. J., Mccoy, K. J., Greer, R., Rossi, F., Bowers, D., Kortenkamp, S., Nadeau, S. E., Heilman, K. M. & Goodman, W. K. (1999) Effects of left frontal transcranial magnetic 
Detailed Protocol 27 stimulation on depressed mood, cognition, and corticomotor threshold. Biol Psychiatry, 45, 1440-6. Uher, R., Farmer, A., Henigsberg, N., Rietschel, M., Mors, O., Maier, W., ... & Aitchison, K. J. (2009). Adverse reactions to antidepressants. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 195(3), 202-210.  Wang, H., Wang, X., Wetzel, W. & Scheich, H. (1999) Rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation in auditory cortex induces LTP and LTD and impairs discrimination learning of frequency-modulated tones. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol Suppl, 51, 361-7.  Ward Ns, Brown Mm, Thompson Aj, Frackowiak RS. Neural correlates of motor recovery after stroke: a longitudinal fMRI study. Brain 2003; 126: 2476–96. Zittel S, Weiller C, Liepert J. Citalopram improves dexterity in chronic stroke patients. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 2008; 22(3) 311-314   