PINPOINT: Gaming Technology to 
Engage Adolescent Sickle Cell 
Patients in Precision Pain 
Management 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
July 2018  Usability Protocol
PINPOINT PHASE I USABILITY PROTOCOL  
PROCEDURES  
Usability testing is a  part of Specific Aim # 5, which is to conduct a series of usability testing  with 13-17-
year -olds with  sickle cell disease (SCD) . These sessions were conducted  in order to assess app 
functionality, navigation, and satisfaction.   
 
Usability sessions were led by a project coordinator at Klein Buendel in Golden, CO. Each session 
occurred over the web using Zoom videoconferencing and were approximately 1 hour in length.  
Participants were a sked to complete defined tasks within the Pinpoint app, including completion of the 
PAT. Participants were also asked to complete either the APPT or PROMIS, and System Usability Scale 
(SUS) measures on paper.  
The sessions were audio recorded via Zoom video conferencing software.  
Although identifiers such as name, email address , and phone number were used  for the collection of the 
data, all identifiers are stored in secure files and behind computer firewalls and results will be shared in 
combined form only. A lso, disclosure of participants’ responses cannot reasonably be expected to place 
the subjects at risk of criminal or civil liability, or be damaging to their financial standing, employability, 
or reputation.  
RECRUITMENT  
Participants were recruited from a list of previous focus group participants and  Sickle Cell Disease 
Association of America (SCDAA) chapters located across the country.   All participants (n=12) were 13 -17 
years old , had been diagnosed with Sickle Cell Disease , and consented to participate .  
SCREENING  
A project coordinator at KB screened the participants based on the study criteria. Participants had to  be 
between the age of 13 and 17 years, be diagnosed with SCD, able to speak and read English, and have 
parental consent to participate and assent to participate.  
 