PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 1 of 19  
 
 
 
Title:     Narrative Visualization for Breast Cancer Survivors’ Physical Activity  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:   Elizabeth J. Lyons, PhD, MPH  
    301 University Blvd., Galveston, Texas 77555 - 1124  
Phone: (409) 772 -2575, Fax: (409)772 -2577  
Email: ellyons@utmb.edu  
 
 
 
 
Funding Sponsor:    National Cancer Institute   
 
 
 
 
Clinicaltrials.gov ID:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 2 of 19  
1. SUMMARY  
Women breast cancer survivors are at increased risk for several negative health outcomes. Physical activity 
can reduce these risks, but activity levels in this population are low. Standard interventions that use self -
regulation techniques (goal setting, se lf-monitoring, and feedback) are successful in the short term but do not 
produce the long -term activity maintenance needed for optimal health benefits. Their effectiveness might be 
improved by better connecting activity feedback to individuals’ real -life e xperiences and values. Integrated 
regulation is a form of motivation related to personal values and identity and is strongly related to physical 
activity over time. Increasing this form of motivation could improve upon current intervention strategies, 
particularly in this population. Narrative visualization uses photographic, visual, and text annotation to tell a 
meaningful story with a data chart. This form of visualization can increase reflection, which in turn can predict 
integrated regulation and physic al activity. We hypothesize that an intervention that encourages participants to 
create narrative visualizations from their step self -monitoring data will produce greater increases in physical 
activity than a self -regulation intervention. To test this hypo thesis, we must first investigate the feasibility and 
acceptability of the narrative visualization intervention in a pilot randomized controlled trial. We will recruit 60 
women breast cancer survivors (aged 55 – 79, < 150 minutes of physical activity per w eek) in two phases. In 
Phase I, 20 women will use prototype materials for one week and undergo cognitive interviewing to investigate 
feasibly  and acceptability. Materials will be revised based on responses for use in the subsequent trial. In 
Phase II, we w ill randomize 40 participants to receive either the narrative visualization intervention or a 
standard self -regulation intervention for 12 weeks (with 12 weeks of no -intervention follow -up). Both groups will 
receive a wearable activity monitor and feedback  app for use during the intervention period as well as an initial 
orientation/goal setting meeting and workbook. In the self -regulation group, participants will receive a workbook 
in which they will write and log their weekly goals. The narrative visualiza tion group will also receive extended 
workbook content, a photo printer, and art supplies. The expanded workbooks will include spaces for posting 
daily photos and drawing explanations of step charts as well as reflection prompts relating the photos and 
charts to personal values and identity. Participants will be assessed at baseline, 12 weeks, and 24 weeks on 
changes to their activity, reflection, and integrated regulation. Feasibility indicators will include wear of the 
monitor and usage of the workbooks. Results from this study will be used to refine the intervention and to 
develop a follow -up study powered to investigate the relationships between reflection, motivation, and activity. 
Our overarching goal is to reduce the burden of cancer and improve quali ty of life among breast cancer 
survivors. This project represents a critical step towards this goal. Insights from the study will impact research 
and practice by testing a highly novel, scalable, and motivating intervention in a population at unique risk.  
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
Breast cancer survivors are at risk for negative health outcomes related to both cancer and its treatment .1,2 
Sustained habitual physical activity (PA) can reduce these risks,3,4 but PA levels are low in this population.5,6 
Self-regulation interventions that use techniques such as goal setting, self -monitoring, and feedback can 
produce short -term PA increases7 but have rarely demonstrated long -term behavior change.8  
A major limitation of self -regulation interventions is the lack of focus on motivation related to personal values 
and identity, which is called integrated regulation .9 Increasing evidence suggests that integrated regulation is 
strongly associated with PA over time.10,11 Individuals who self -monitor PA have reported that their adherence 
decreases over time because the feedback they are provided is inadequate : without an emotional connection 
to their values and everyday expe riences, individuals are unsure of how to use and interpret reports of their 
step progress .12,13 Older breast cancer survivors in particular face issues related to the impact of treatment on 
their identities14,15 and desire their step goals and progress to be placed in the context of their broader values.16  
Thus, a  method for connecting step data to values, identity, and real -life experiences is needed. Reflection is 
the process of transforming experience into meaning .17 Brief experiments have found that self -monitoring alone 
did not produce reflection ,18 and adding reflection prompts to self -regulatory PA programs increased PA.19 
Using visuals to pro mpt reflection may be even more successful than written prompts.20 Narrative visualization 
consists of using drawings, photographs, and text to annotate data charts to better tell a compelling personal 
story .21,22 This procedure could address limitations of current step se lf-regulation interventions and promote 
reflection and integrated regulation.  
 
 
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 3 of 19 3. SPECIFIC AIMS AND OUTCOMES  
3.1. SPECIFIC AIMS  
Aim 1.  Develop and refine reflection materials among a sample of sedentary breast cancer survivors.  
Aim 2.  Conduct a pilot randomized controlled trial comparing the self -monitoring + narrative visualization 
intervention to standard self -monitoring.  
• 2a. Determin e the feasibility and acceptability of intervention procedures and materials.  
• 2b. Compare the effects of the interventions on objectively -assessed PA and psychological outcomes 
at 12 and 24 weeks.  
3.2. Primary outcomes  will be feasibility and acceptabili ty. Specifically, indicators of feasibility and 
acceptability will include:  
• Attrition  per intervention condition as measured by study records  
• Adherence to wear of the activity monitor as measured by daily step information in the Fitbit  app 
• Adherence to use  of the workbook as measured by observation of photographs of each workbook 
page (number of photographs taken for values clarification activity, completion of written portion of 
values clarification activity, number of days with written entries, number of days with graphic entries, 
photos pasted into workbook, number of stickers pasted into workbook, number of additional drawings, 
number of “tag” annotations added to graphs, coded level of reflection of written entries)  
• Dose delivered  as measured by study l ogs of materials provision  
• Dose received  as measured by self-report  
• Adverse events  as measured by self -report and study records  
• Acceptability will be measured using quantitative items in the 12 week and 24 week questionnaires as 
well as in the brief interv iew during the 12 week assessment  
3.3. Secondary outcomes  
• Steps . PA will be measured objectively using Actigraph wGT3X BT monitors. Wear time will be seven 
days at each assessment point. Because continuous measurement is not feasible, a week -long sample 
will be taken at the three assessment periods. Estimates will be valid if the monitor is worn ≥ 10 hours 
per day on ≥ 4 days . Non-wear time will be determined by 60 or more of consecutive minutes of zero 
activity counts. Because the emphasis of the intervent ion content is on walking, steps will be the 
primary measure of PA. We will also investigate minutes of moderate -vigorous intensity PA. Based on 
criteria used for the NHANES surveys, epoch length will be one minute, and activity counts over 2020 
per minute  will be considered moderate -vigorous intensity.23 
• Anthropome tric measurements  will include height (SECA stadiometer; baseline only), weight (Tanita 
research -grade scale), and waist circumference.  
• Additional psychological variables. Table 1 shows the variables to be included in questionnaires at 
each time point.  
Table 1. Measures  
Variable  Measure  Sub-scales  Alpha  References  
Motivation  Behavioral Regulation in 
Exercise Questionnaire -3 Intrinsic motivation, amotivation, and integrated, 
identified, introjected, and external regulation  0.73 to 
0.86 24,25 
Self-reflection  Self Reflection and Insight 
Scale  Engaging in self -reflection, need for self -reflection, 
insight  0.71 – 
0.91 26 
Engaged living  Engaged Living Scale  Valued living, life fulfillment  0.78 – 
0.88 27 
Values  Chronic Pain Val ues 
Inventory  Family, intimate relations, friends, work, health, growth  0.82 28 
Basic psychological 
needs  Basic Psychological Needs 
in Exercise questionnaire  Autonomy, competence, relatedness  0.75 to 
0.86 29 
Exercise identity  Exercise Identity Scale  Exercise role identity, exercise beliefs  0.94 30 
Body image  Body Image Scale  N/A 0.86+  31 
Quality of life  Functional Assessment of 
Cancer Therapy – Breast  Physical, social, breast, functional ,emotional  0.90 32 
4. STUDY DESIGN  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 4 of 19 This study will combine an initial formative, qualitative study with a pilot randomized controlled trial. The target 
population is breast cancer survivors aged 55 – 79 who are sedentary (< 150 minutes of physical activity per 
week), and who completed their primary cancer treatments at least 6 months prior to enrollment. This trial 
corresponds approximat ely to phases Ib (formative research to refine the intervention) and IIb (pilot 
randomized controlled trial to investigate feasibility and effect sizes) in the ORBIT model of behavioral 
intervention development.  The trial itself will occur at a single cent er, but recruitment will occur at both UTMB 
and MD Anderson.  
We anticipate that the duration of the Aim 1 phase will be approximately four months. From the beginning of 
recruitment to the final data collection point, we expect the trial to take one year t o complete. The trial will 
consist of two arms: the narrative visualization intervention condition and an attention control intervention that 
includes only standard self -monitoring.  
5. Study enrollment and withdrawal  
5.1. Inclusion criteria for Aim 1  
1. Age between 55 and 79  
2. Female  
3. Self-reported diagnosis of breast cancer  
4. Participant is inactive (reports less than 150 minutes of moderate -vigorous intensity activity per week)  
5. Able to read and understand English  
6. Daily access to a smartphone or simil ar devi ce compatible with Garmin  or Fitbit  app 
5.2. Exclusion criteria for Aim 1  
No exclusion criteria for the Aim 1 study will be used.  
5.3. Inclusion criteria for RCT  
1. Age between 55 and 79  
2. Female  
3. Self-reported diagnosis of breast cancer  
4. BMI is between 18 kg/m2 and 40 kg/m2 
5. Willingness to be randomized to any condition  
6. Participant is able to walk for exercise  
7. Able to read and understand English  
8. Daily access to a smartphone or similar device compatible with Fitbit  app  
9. PAR-Q+ indicates that physical activity  would be safe (with note from physician required if any heart -
related questions are endorsed)  
During the COVID -19 pandemic, the following inclusion criteria will be implemented  
10. Must have access to teleconference capability from home (i.e. Skype, FaceTime,  Zoom or other 
teleconference programs with smart phone or webcam technology ). 
 
5.4. Exclusion criteria for RCT  
1. Participant is active (150 or more minutes of moderate -vigorous intensity activity per week)  
2. Major health interventions such as surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy within the past 6 months 
(adjuvant treatments such as tamoxifen are okay)  
3. Stroke, hip fract ure, hip or knee replacement, or spinal surgery in the past 6 months  
4. Report a history of orthopedic complications that would prevent optimal participation in the physical 
activities prescribed (e.g., heel spurs, severe arthritis)  
5. Current evidence of cancer   
6. Self-reported smoker  
7. Participant reports psychological issues that would interfere with study completion. Examples will be 
provided to illustrate potential psychological issues, such as dementia or schizophrenia.  
8. Participant reports hospitalization withi n the past year due to psychiatric problem(s)  
9. Clinical judgment concerning safety  
10. Currently participating in an organized commercial or research exercise program  
11. Another member of the household is a participant or staff member on this trial  
12. Current use of a wearable activity monitor  
5.5. Rationale for inclusion/exclusion criteria  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 5 of 19 We will not recruit individuals who cannot speak English due to the need to understand the app, which is in 
English.  
Participants will likely be moderate risk as designated by the American College of Sports Medicine, and thus 
we want to be conservative in  our eligibility criteria. If participants endorse any question on the PAR -Q+, they 
will automatically be ineligible due to unacceptably high risk unless they produce a note from their physician 
clearing them for participation.  
We will focus specifically o n cancer survivors who are at least six months post major treatment to ensure that 
complications do not impact the safety of exercises.  
Other exclusion criteria exist to exclude variables that could potentially affect participation in the trial. We will 
also exclude those with a BMI indicating that they are underweight as we are interested in adults of normal 
weight, overweight, and obese status. Underweight may indicate other health problems that could compromise 
participant safety. We will include obese a dults up to a BMI of 40, but those over 40 are likely to be 
substantially different from our target population and will require independent study in the future.  
Other health exclusions are for the purposes of safety and unbiased data (e.g., substance use d isorder).  
No exclusion criteria or quotas will be related to race, ethnicity, or gender.  
5.6. Recruitment strategies  
Participants will be recruited using several methods:  
1. In-person recruitment at UTMB  and MD Anderson  clinics  
2. Phone  and email  screening of eligible patients at MD Anderson clinics  
3. Referrals from practitioners at both institutions  
4. Flyers and brochures available in treatment and waiting areas of both institutions , community clinics in 
Galveston and surrounding areas.  
5. Mailed lette rs and emails to members of research and cancer registries at both institutions  
6. Targeted Facebook advertisements  
7. Emails to local organization listservs (each institution, local cancer support groups, etc.)  
8. Presentations at local cancer and wellness events  
9. As necessary, newspaper and radio advertisement  
 
Specifically, recruitment of MD Anderson patients may occur by flyer, in -person,  by email,  or by phone. Study 
staff at MD Anderson will review upcoming patient appointments in the clinic via EPIC. Participan ts who look to 
be eligible will be called over the phone to explain to them the study procedures and see if they are interested 
in participating. This procedure is regularly used successfully by our collaborators at MD Anderson. Whereas 
at UTMB we must obt ain practitioner permission to approach patients, a ll MD Anderson pat ients have provided 
consent to be approached by research -related phone calls.  Reciprocal approval of all screening materials, 
protocols, etc by the MD Anderson IRB will be obtained prior to any recruitment. Participants will also be 
screened at that time to ensure that they are eligible to participate in the study. If the patient is interested and 
eligible, UTMB study staff will call to set up an appointment for informed consent, baseline assessment, and 
randomization/study orientation.  MD Anderson staff will assist with this pre -screening but will not be involved in 
intervention or assessment procedures. MD Anderson clinics will be a recruitment site only, not an intervention 
site (i.e., U TMB consent forms will be used , MD Anderson personnel will not have access to any non -
screening -related study data, etc. ). 
 
5.7. Randomization  
A random number generator  will be used  to create a list of group assignments by ID number . Sheets  
containing grou p assignments (intervention or comparison group) will be placed in envelopes that are labeled 
with the corresponding ID number. The envelopes will be opaque, and foil will be placed inside to ensure that 
the randomizer cannot see inside. Carbon paper will also be included to provide an audit trail. ID numbers will 
be assigned in the order participants arrive to their randomization visit. Upon opening the envelope, the staff 
member undertaking the randomization will sign and write the date on the envelope. T he inner paper that lists 
the group assignment, with the ID, signature, and date written on it via carbon paper, will be kept in the 
participant’s file.  
5.8. Blinding  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 6 of 19 Because of the nature of this behavioral study, participants and interventionists cannot be blinded to their 
group assignment.  
5.9. Participant withdrawal  
Participants  may withdraw from the study at any time. Withdrawal prior to the end of the study will not affect the 
safety of participants.  The consent form lists the following potential reasons that participants may be removed 
by the investigators:  
• The researchers bel ieve that participation in the research is no longer safe for you.  
• The researchers believe that other treatment may be more helpful.  
• The sponsor  stops the research for the safety of the participants.  
• The sponsor cancels the research.  
• You are unable to keep appointments or to follow the researcher’s instructions.  
5.10. Premature termination or suspension of study  
There is no reason to believe that the proposed intervention  would produce increased risk as compared to 
standard self-monitoring . Because anti cipated risks and benefits t o individual participants are  small, we do not 
anticipate early termination of the study due to excessive risk or differences in anticipated benefits.  
5.11. Participant remuneration  
For the initial formative study, participants (n = 20) will receive $ 50 for their participation. Participants in this 
study do not get to keep any of the study materials. For the RCT, p articipants will receive $50 incentive for 
attending assessments ($25 at 12 weeks and $25 at 24 weeks) and will be ab le to keep the activity monitors 
and other supplies provided. Parking will also be provided.  
 
6. INTERVENTIONS  
6.1. Description of the active control group intervention  
This group will receive only a wearable activity monitor, app, and workbook. We will us e Fitbit.  The workbook 
will contain a weekly calendar with prompts to write in that week’s goal and whether each daily goal was 
achieved. Basic pen supplies will be provided for writing in the workbook. At orientation, instruction will be 
provided on the u se of the materials, and participants will set long -term (24 weeks) goals and their goals for the 
first week. Goals are based on estimates of appropriate step counts for older adults with chronic illness.33 
Goals will be negotiated with each participant, based on their baseline totals. The suggested progression will 
be from 2 days per week at 8,000 steps (week 1) to 5 days per week at 8,000 or more steps (from week 6 on). 
Negotiated goals are critical in an a utonomy -promoting study, to ensure that participants do not feel controlled. 
The standard protocol will include daily reminders to log progress in the workbook negotiated with participants 
and expected to occur via automated phone reminders set to occur ev ery day at a time they choose ). After 
their final assessment, participants in this condition will receive the additional supplies given to the narrative 
visualization intervention participants.  
In summary, the active control group will receive an activity monitor, mobile app, and a workbook. This 
workbook will include simple diary -like calendar pages. Participants will be instructed to enter their step count 
into these calendars every night.  
6.2. Description of the narrative visualization intervention  
This intervention builds upon the standard intervention by expanding the workbook and providing art supplies 
and an instant camera  for more detailed reflection activities. The orientation meeting will include extended 
instructions on using the additional materi als as well as tips and examples for creating narrative visualizations.  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 7 of 19 The workbook will include two pages for each calendar day.      Figure C.1. Example narrative visualization   
One page will include a blank chart for drawing their 
interpretation of th eir step chart for the day. Ample space will 
be provided for writing, drawing, and placing stickers or 
photos at various points in the chart to represent things that 
happened that day. The workbooks will have sufficient pages 
for 12 weeks of entries. Figur e C.1.  shows an example of 
narrative visualization, though participants will be 
encouraged to be creative in how they annotate their charts.  
In this very simple example, a standard step chart (taken from the Nike Fuelband app) was annotated with 
emojis to show what was going on that day. Without the annotations, the user would know that she met her 
step goal, but would not know why PA dropped off late in the day. Here, it is clear that a planned running bout 
and a trip to the beach to play with the wharf ca ts were the causes of the early activity. The lack of activity at 
the end of the day coincided with attending a party, drinking too much, and getting sick. This narrative clearly 
offers a starting point for reflection: perhaps in the future, more pleasant trips to do fun things could be 
planned, and the participant could limit drinking at parties. These visuals also relate the steps to personal 
values, such as spending time outdoors and socializing. Visual triggers provide a foundation for figuring out 
how to interpret PA data and what to do to change behavior in the context of one’s values and identity.  
Table C.1  shows examples of daily and weekly reflection questions that can be answered with a combination 
of text and visuals (please note that these promp ts may change based on the results of the Aim 1 interviews). 
We will also include additional one -time prompts to provide context for these reflections. For example, we will 
ask participants in their first week to take photos that represent how they feel ab out themselves and photos 
that represent their values, following the procedures of a published photo values clarification activity.20 
Art supplies will include 
adequate film for one photo 
per day for 12 weeks, 
decorative tape for pasting 
photos into the workbook, 
writing materials , and stickers 
(e.g., emojis or other 
potentially explanatory pictures).  
In summary, the narrative visualization group will receive an activity monitor, a mobile app, a w orkbook, and an 
art supply kit. This art supply kit will include an instant camera, writing materials , stickers, photo paper, and 
photo corners for pasting photos into the workbook. The workbook will differ from that of the active control 
group. This workb ook will contain a values clarification exercise, which will involve participants taking 10 
photos over a period of about one week. These photos will be of things the participant values and will be used 
as a jumping -off point for connecting personal values  to reasons to be physically active. The daily pages for 
entering steps will also be more elaborate than those of the active control group. These pages will include a 
blank graph on which participants will draw their step graph and add text, drawing, and s ticker annotations that 
explain what they were doing at different times. There will also be space for including photos of interesting 
things seen on walks (and sufficient photo paper will be provided for daily photos). Daily and weekly reflection 
questions  will encourage participants to think about why they were active each day and how their behavior 
changed over time.   
 
Element  Active control  Narrative 
visualization  
Activity monitor  x x 
Mobile app  x x 
Reminders to log steps nightly  x x 
Art supply kit (camera, writing 
materials , stickers, photo corners, 
photo paper)   x 
Workbook pages:    
Daily diary calendar pages  x  Table 1. Reflection prompts  
Timing  Prompt  
Daily  How were you active today?  
 Why do you think you were (or were not) active today?  
 What impacted your decisions about activity today?  
Weekly  Looking back, do you see any patterns in your activity?  
 How can you take this knowledge and use it to be more active next week?  
 How do you feel about your progress this week? Do you feel closer to your goals?  

PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 8 of 19 Values clarification activity   x 
Daily blank graphs   x 
Daily reflection questions   x 
Weekly reflection questions   x 
 
6.3. Administration of intervention  
The interventions are primarily self -guided, with minimal personal attention from interventioni sts. Participant 
contact with interventionists will occur at the orientation visit only.  
Daily texts/emails that serve to remind participants to complete their workbook page that day will be generic 
and not considered personal intervention.  
6.4. Procedure s for training interventionists and monitoring intervention fidelity  
Interventionists will be trained by the Principal Investigator to conduct the orientation visit. Intervention fidelity is 
itself an outcome of this study and as such is detailed in the me asures and statistical analysis sections of this 
protocol.  
6.5. Assessment of participant compliance with study intervention  
Participant compliance  is an outcome of this study and as such is detailed in the measures and statistical 
analysis sections of thi s protocol.  
7. STUDY SCHEDULE – AIM 1 FORMATIVE STUDY  
7.1. Screening  
We have collaborated with oncologists at various clinics to expand our effort in recruitment. A HIPAA waiver 
request form has been completed. With the oncologist ’s approval, we will pre -screen patients via medical 
records for eligibility. The oncologists will refer their patients. We will not approach patients unless we have 
oncologist’s and patient’s permission.  
Research staff will use the Aim 1 screening guide, either in person or by pho ne, to determine eligibility in the 
study. Should the participant be found eligible, the staff member will schedule an appointment for informed 
consent and enrollment.  
7.2. Enrollment and provision of materials  
Research staff will conduct the informed cons ent interview. Once the interview is complete and participants 
have asked any questions they may have, the participant and staff member will each sign two copies of the 
consent form. One copy will be provided to the participant and the other kept for study  records.  
The staff member will then use the Aim 1 visit 1 checklist to go through study procedures for this visit. S/he will 
provide participants with materials (activity monitor, workbook, camera, film, writing materials , photo corners, 
stickers) and go  over instructions for their use. At the conclusion of the visit, the staff member will schedule an 
appointment for the return visit after approximately one week.  
• Obtain and document consent from participant on study c onsent form  
• Administer Aim 1 Vi sit 1 c hecklist/interview guide  
• Provide  and document  the following materials:  
o Activity monitor  
o Instant camera  
o Workbook (binder with pre -printed instruction pages for 7 days + values activity + 
troubleshooting guide)  
o Writing materials  
o Stickers  
o Film for camera  
o Photo corners for pasting photos in workbook  
o Bag to hold materials  
• Set up activity monitor app on the participants’  mobile device  & daily reminder  
7.3. Cognitive interviewing visit  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 9 of 19 An interviewer, who will receive training in cognitive interviewing, will guide participants through orientation to 
the workbook and using the wearable device, mobile app, and photo printer at this initial meeting. Interviews 
one week later will use a combination of think -aloud and probing procedures from a se mi-structured guide, as 
has been used in development of other behavioral interventions.34-36 
• Collect and document returned materials  
• Prepare audio recorder  
• Administer Aim 1 Cognitive I nterviewing checklist and guide  
• Provide participant gift card  and document  
 
8. STUDY SCHEDULE  - RCT  
 
During the COVID -19 pandemic, the following consenting/interview methods will be implemented:  
 
In response to the COVID -19 pandemic and related Institutional guidelines, the following modifications are being 
implemented effective immediately:  
 
All visits will be conducted entirely by teleconference call. Ongoing participants will receive a phone call by 
study staff to inform the subject of  the implemented modifications. We will read the modification letter to the 
subject over the phone. If the subject agrees with the modifications, we will document the subject verbal 
response in a note to file. If we are not able to reach the subject, we wi ll mail the subject a letter.   
 
8.1. Screening  
We have collaborated with oncologists at various clinics to expand our effort in recruitment. A HIPAA waiver 
request form has been completed. With the oncologist’s approval, we will pre -screen patients via medical 
records for eligibility. The oncologists w ill refer their patients. We will not approach UTMB patients unless we 
have oncologist’s and patient’s permission.  
For patients at MD Anderson clinics, as discussed above in section x, staff will review upcoming patient 
appointments in the clinic via EPIC and call potentially eligible participants. Whereas at UTMB we must obtain 
practitioner permission to approach patients, all MD Anderson patients have provided consent to be 
approached by research -related phone calls  and emails . If the patient is intereste d and eligible, UTMB study 
staff will later call to set up an appointment for informed consent, baseline assessment, and 
randomization/study orientation.  
Research staff will use the RCT screening guide, either in person or by phone, to determine eligibili ty in the 
study. Should the participant be found eligible, the staff member will schedule an appointment for informed  
consent and enrollment.  
8.2. Enrollment and provision of accelerometer  
Research staff will conduct the informed consent interview. Once th e interview is complete and participants 
have asked any questions they may have, the participant and staff member will each sign two copies of the 
consent form. One copy will be provided to the participant and the other kept for study records. The staff 
member will take the participant’s height , weight  and waist circumference  at this visit and ask several 
demographic questions (age, gender, race) for the purposes of calibrating the accelerometer. Once calibrated 
and activated, the staff member will provide instructions as to wearing the accelerometer for one week. At the 
conclusion of this visit, the staff member will schedule a follow -up appointment for approximately one week 
after the enrollment appointment.  
• Obtain and document consent from participant on study c onsent form  
• Obtain height , weight and waist circumference measurements  
• Calibrate and activate accelerometer  
COVID -19 adjustments for consenting/enrollment:  
 
• The visit will be conducted using teleconference communication (examples: via phone, skype,  zoom)  
• Consent will be obtained via teleconference call and the study subjects will scan or photograph and 
transmit the signed consent form to us via email or text.  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 10 of 19 • Height , weight , and waist measurements - we will obtain self -reported height , weight , and waist 
measurements . If possible, we will obtain measurements at a future face to face visit if available.  
• We will drop off and pick up the  activity monitor. For the participant to wear for 7 days, for at least 10 
hours per day.  
• We will give the option to participants to complete an assessment visit when the recommended guidelines 
are lifted, and we are able to have a face to face visit.  
• We will give participants paper forms of the questionnaires to complete prior to the baseline visit.  
8.3. Baseline and orientation visit  
Participants  will return after approximately one week to engage in baseline assessment, be randomized to a 
condition, and  to begin the intervention. Baseline assessments will include height, weight  and waist 
circumference , collection of the accelerometer and questionnaires. A staff member will randomize the 
participant and then, based on their condition, provide them with ap propriate materials. The staff member will 
go over these materials in detail, following a specific checklist. S/he will also check off materials provided on a 
separate log sheet. Participants will engage in a brief goal -setting activity before leaving.  
• Collect and document accelerometer  
• Check accelerometer data to ensure that they include at least 10 hours on at least 4 days  
• *If not enough days are found, request that participant wear an accelerometer for an additional 7 days 
and return for their randomizat ion afterwards  
• Administer questionnaires  
• Randomize participant  
For the narrative visualization intervention:  
• Follow RCT visit 2 checklist to document each step  
• Provide activity monitor  
• Download activity monitor app onto participant’s mobile device and prov ide orientation  
• Provide workbook  
• Orient participant to contents of the workbook  
• Provide camera, film, writing materials , stickers, photo corners, film, and bag and provide orientation  
• Administer goal -setting activity  
For the self -monitoring only interventi on: 
• Follow RCT visit 2 checklist to document each step  
• Provide activity monitor  
• Download activity monitor app onto participant’s mobile device and provide orientation  
• Provide workbook  
• Orient participant to contents of the workbook  
• Provide writing materials  
• Administer goal -setting activity  
COVID -19 adjustments for baseline/orientation : 
 
• The initial portion of the visit will occur in -person. Study staff will wear personal protective equipment and 
follow safety precautions, such as sanitizing equipment. The in -person portion will consist of obtaining 
measurements, retrieving the activity monitor, providing participant materials, and assisting with 
downloading the Fitbit app onto participant phones.  
• The rest of the orientation portion  of the visit will be conducted using teleconference communication 
(examples: via phone, skype,  zoom)  
8.4. 12 week follow -up 
After approximately 10 weeks, a staff member will  document and  mail the participant a calibrated 
accelerometer and questionnaires . The staff member will call the participant to ensure receipt and to make 
sure it is fitted correctly. At approximately 12 weeks, the participant will meet with an assessor to measure 
height, weight , waist circumference  and collect the accelerometer  and questionnaires. A brief interview will also 
occur. Study staff will follow a guide with a checklist to ensure the interview proceeds as planned.  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 11 of 19 • Mail accelerometer and questionnaires (approximately 2 weeks before) , call to inform participant,  and 
document . 
• Phone/email/text reminder to bring workbook to appointment (day before)  
• Collect accelerometer  
• Check accelerometer data to ensure that they include at least 10 hours on at least 4 days  
• *If not enough days are found, request that participant wear an accelerom eter for an additional 7 days 
and return it in a provided padded, pre -stamped envelope  
• Administer  or collect  questionnaires  
• Make copies /take pictures  of workbook pages  
• Conduct interview according to RCT interview guide and checklist  
• Provide gift card and documen t 
COVID -19 adjustments for consenting/enrollment:  
 
• We will collect the activity monitor and questionnaires during a brief in -person visit. Study staff will wear 
personal protective equipment and sanitize equipment as needed. The gift card will be provided at the 
conclusion of this visit.  
 
8.5. 24 week follow -up 
After approximately 22 weeks, a staff member will mail the participant a calibrated accelerometer and possibly 
questionnaires . The staff member will call the participant to ensure re ceipt and to make sure it is fitted 
correctly. At approximately 24 weeks, the participant will meet with an assessor to measure height, weight, 
waist circumference, collect the accelerometer, and administer or collect questionnaires.  
• Mail accelerometer and possibly questionnaires (approximately 2 weeks before) , call to confirm  receipt , 
and document  
• Phone/email/text remind ing participant  to bring the workbook to appointment (day before)  
• Collect accelerometer  
• Check accelerometer data to ensure that they inclu de at least 10 hours on at least 4 days  
• *If not enough days are found, request that participant wear an accelerometer for an additional 7 days 
and return it in a provided padded, pre -stamped envelope  
• Administer  or collect  questionnaires  
• Make copies /take pi ctures  of workbook pages  
• Provide gift card and document  
COVID -19 adjustments for consenting/enrollment:  
 
• We will collect the activity monitor and questionnaires during a brief in -person visit. Study staff will wear 
personal protective equipment and sanitize equipment as needed. The gift card will be provided at the 
conclusion of this visit.  
• While reviewing data in January of 2021, we noticed that many follow -up assessments scheduled after 
March of 2020 were missing. We suspect many of these missing v isits were due to COVID -19 in some 
form and wish to investigate and gather as much information as possible from these participants. Thus, 
we are amending our procedures for follow -up to include the possibility of contacting participants more 
than one month  after their indicated follow -up time. These visits will be amended to consist only of 
questionnaire, interview, and if possible collection/photography of materials. We have added several 
questions about COVID -19 to our interview guide to find out more abo ut whether or not participants used 
intervention materials during the pandemic.  The consent form has been updated to include these 
procedures. When we contact participants with no follow -up data, we will conduct a new consent interview 
and re -consent them using the new form to ensure that they are fully aware of the updated procedures.  
 
8.6. Additional communications with participants by phone, email/text, and in person  
Study staff will ensure that participants have contact information for the research team and knows how to call 
after hours in the case of a question or problem.  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 12 of 19 Participants will be asked (but may decline) to provide alternative contacts to the study staff. At each study 
visit, participants will be asked if there have been any ch anges in their contact information or that of their 
alternative contacts.  
Attempts at contact will be documented in each participants’ contact log. Information discussed, provided to, or 
obtained from the participant will be documented in the log.  
Study s taff will provide basic technical troubleshooting with study devices ( Fitbit  monitor, app, camera) during 
business hours by text or phone. If necessary, we will set up one meeting per participant to replace broken or 
lost equipment. We will allow one other  meeting for technical support of other kinds, if necessary.  
Study staff will contact participants by phone , text or email  the day before each appointment. If emailed or text 
regarding the appointment and scheduling, staff will respond. Study staff will a lso send generic cards at 
approximately 5 months in to the intervention period to remind the participants of their participation in the study  
and that they will be contacted to schedule another appointment at a later date.   
Prior to determining that a part icipant is lost to follow up  form, we will attempt  to contact the participant at least 
3 times, attempt contacting the alternative contact(s), and attempt a final contact by mail. A form documenting  
all mailed correspondence will be stored in the participa nts’ file.  
Participants will be notified that study staff may not respond to non -emergency contacts outside of normal 
business hours.  
Additional contact may occur for the purposes of picking up/dropping off accelerometers  or questionnaires . 
Due to difficul ties from COVID19 additional contact may occur for the purpose of collecting final 
questionnaire s, interview, and collection/photography of material. The following steps will take place if we 
contact a subject for this purpose:  
We will ask for their permis sion to re -consent for the purpose of collection/photography of material, 
questionnaires, and interview. This visit may be completed by using a teleconference call or in person.  
  
9. ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  
9.1. Plan for monitoring and safety review  
The Prin cipal Investigator (PI) will be responsible for monitoring the safety environment of participants and 
ensuring that appropriate medical care and coverage is provided to all participants if necessary.  
The PI is also responsible for monitoring procedures du ring conduct of the study for each participant, including 
eligibility, enrollment, data collection, evaluation of study outcomes, problems with informed consent, and 
subject safety and well -being.  
The plan will include:  
1. Review of screening results by PI  
2. Immediate reporting of adverse events by interventionists to PI  
3. Quarterly review of collected data by PI  
4. Annual review by PI and UTMB IRB  
Screening data will be reviewed during recruitment periods by the PI. Ensuring that any values indicating 
ineligibilit y and/or unsafe practices are flagged. Flagged participants may be excused from the study or 
instructed on safer practices, as needed. These decisions will be made in consultation with Dr. Volpi.  
In the case of adverse events, standard protocol for report ed adverse events will be used. Study data will be 
reviewed by the PI  or Co-I, as needed . Finally, the UTMB IRB will review study progress yearly.  
We do not anticipate a strong ethical imperative to cease one of the arms prior to the planned end of the study, 
and thus we will not perform full statistical analysis during these periodic reviews. The reviews will focus on 
indicators of safety for partic ipants, such as large decreases in quality of life or strength, or large weight gains.  
We will not convene an external Data Safety and Monitoring Board. Should the NCI request that we do so, we 
will take advantage of protocols used in the past by investig ators associated with the Claude D. Pepper Older 
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 13 of 19 Americans Independence Center at UTMB. The center has previously convened external DSMBs for its 
investigators from its external advisory board.  
Anticipated non -serious adverse events include musculoskeletal  pain or mild injuries, other non -serious injuries 
(e.g., bruises), minor discomfort, cardiac events, fatigue, and possible loss of confidentiality. If an anticipated 
adverse event occurs, the PI will discuss as soon as possible and determine whether the e vent requires 
reporting to the IRB and/or to the NCI. The attribution and impact of each event on the overall project’s 
risk/benefit ratio will then be determined in consultation with the Co -Is. 
All unanticipated, serious, fatal, and/or life -threatening ad verse events will be immediately reported to the 
UTMB IRB within 24 hours of occurrence. All serious, fatal, and/or life -threatening adverse events will be 
reported to the program officer as well. The IRB and PI are responsible for determining if modificat ions are 
needed to the consent form and/or protocol based on the event. If a determination is made that participants are 
exposed to unacceptably high risk in comparison to benefit, the study will be suspended until proper 
modifications are made for partici pant safety. Aggregate reports of adverse events will be prepared in 
consultation with the regulatory key resource of the Institute for Translational Sciences at UTMB and forwarded 
to the IRB for review.  
Should cessation of study activities be required (te mporarily or permanently), the program officer will be 
notified immediately.  
9.2. Unexpected problems  
Unexpected problems involve risks to participants that meet all of the following criteria:  
• Unexpected in terms of nature, severity, or frequency given the  nature of the research and population  
• Related or possibly related to participation in the study  
• Suggests that the research places participants at a greater risk of harm than was previously known or 
recognized  
Incidents that meet these criteria will requir e documentation in an unanticipated problem report form submitted 
to the IRB within 1 week. The Principal Investigator will also contact the Program Officer at NCI to determine 
next steps.  
9.3. Expected adverse events  
An adverse event is an unfavorable med ical occurrence in a human subject. This population consists of 
women susceptible to adverse events related to age, cancer, cancer treatment, comorbidities, 
overweight/obesity, and sedentary lifestyle. Based on these factors and adverse events that occurre d in 
previous similar studies, we anticipate the following potential adverse events:  
• Acute mild activity -related injuries  
• Acute musculoskeletal pain  
• Minor discomfort  
• Fatigue  
• Cardiac events  
• Mild, acute illness  
• Complications of ongoing chronic illness(es)  
• Acute hospitalization for a specific, unrelated illness (e.g., flu)  
9.4. Characteristics and severity of an adverse event  
• Mild events include discomfort without disruption of daily activities. No therapy or only symptomatic 
therapy is required.  This level is equivalent to the National Cancer Institute’s Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.03 Grade 1 adverse events (mild; asymptomatic or mild 
symptoms; intervention not indicated).  
• Moderate  events include discomfort sufficient  to modify daily normal activity. Specific therapy is 
required. Laboratory test alterations indicate injury without long -term risk. This level is equivalent to NCI 
Grade 2 (moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; limiting age -approp riate 
activities of daily living).  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 14 of 19 • Severe  events include incapacity, inability to work, inability to perform normal daily activity, 
hospitalization required, prolonged emergency treatment required, life -threatening events, laboratory 
tests indicating a ser ious health threat or permanent injury, and death. This level is equivalent to NCI 
Grades 3 (severe/medically significant but not immediately life -threatening), 4 (life -threatening, urgent 
intervention indicated), and 5 (death).  
9.4.1. Relationship to stud y participation  
Attribution will be assessed by the PI on a scale used by CRC investigators: 1) not related, 2) possibly related, 
3) probably related, and 4) definitely related to the study interventions.  
9.4.2. Expectedness  
The Principal Investigator will be responsible for determining whether adverse events are expected or 
unexpected. An adverse event will be considered unexpected if the nature, severity, or frequency of the event 
is not consistent with risk information previously describ ed. We may use de -identified photographic copies of 
workbook pages in publications and /or presentations. Photographs including  an individual’s  face will be 
obscured.  
9.5. Reporting  
All unanticipated, serious, fatal, and/or life -threatening adverse events will be immediately reported to the 
UTMB IRB within 24 hours of occurrence. All serious, fatal, and/or life -threatening adverse events will be 
reported to the program officer as well. The IRB and PI are responsible for determining if modifications are 
need ed to the consent form and/or protocol based on the event. If a determination is made that participants are 
exposed to unacceptably high risk in comparison to benefit, the study will be suspended until proper 
modifications are made for participant safety. Aggregate reports of adverse events will be prepared in 
consultation with the regulatory key resource of the Institute for Translational Sciences at UTMB and forwarded 
to the IRB for review.  
Should cessation of study activities be required (temporarily or permanently), the program officer will be 
notified immediately.  
The PI will hold responsibility for monitoring and reporting adverse events of any kind. We do not anticipate 
severe adverse events, though mild and moderate events are possible. The scale to be used is the UTMB 
Clinical Research Center Adverse Event Grading Scale. Examples of each level of adverse event on the scale 
are provided below.  
Table 1 . Reporting of adverse events to IRB   
NCI Adverse Event Grade  Expected  Unexpected  
Grade 1  Reporting not required  Report within 10 days  
Grade 2  Reporting not required  Report within 10 days  
Grade 3 (UTMB level 3)  Report by phone within 24 hours  Report by phone within 24 hours  
Grade 4 (UTMB level 3)  Report by phone within 24 hours  Report by phone within 24 hours  
Grade 5 (UTMB level 3)  Report by phone within 24 hours  Report by phone within 24 hours  
The PI will follow the reporting requirements for serious and unexpected adverse events outlined in the UTMB 
IRB Adverse Event Policy. All unanticipated, serious, fatal, and/or life -threatening adverse events will be 
reported to the UTMB IRB within 24 hours of occurrence or recognition. Aggregate reports of adverse events 
will be prepared on an annual basis and forwarded to the IRB at annual review.  
10. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
10.1. Study hypotheses  
Aim 1. Participants will … 
• Complete >80% of values clarification activities  
• Complete >80% of daily workbook entries  
• Participants will wear the activity monitor <80% of days  
• Report no serious adverse events related to the study  
Aim 2. The narrative visualization intervention will produce , as compared to the self -monitoring intervention at 
12 weeks … 
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 15 of 19 • Greater physical activity  
• Greater intrinsic motivation for activity  
• Greater integrated r egulation for activity  
• Greater p erceived autonomy  
• Greater perceived competence  
• Greater engagement in self -reflection   
• Greater insight  
• Greater need for self -reflection  
• Greater perceived valued living  
• Greater perceived  life fulfillment  
• Greater exercise role identity  
• Greater exercise beliefs  
• Greater physical quality of life  
• Greater social quality of life  
• Greater functional quality of life  
• Greater emotional quality of life  
Aim 2 feasibility and acceptability  hypotheses:  
• Participants will complete >80% of values clarification activities  
• Participants will complete >80% of daily workbook entries  
• Participants will wear the activity monitor <80% of days  
• Participants will report no serious adverse events related to the study  
• Study records will indicate attrition  did not differ by group assignment  
• Study records will indicate that all intervention materials were provided as intended  
• Study records will indicate that >90% of intervention materials were reported received as intended  
• Participants will rate intervention  materials > 4 out of 5  
10.2. Sample size considerations  
As a Phase Ia evidentiary study, hypothesis tests are not powered to detect statistical significance. A study of 
40 individuals  would have 80% power to detect a large effect size of approximately F = 0.45 for an ANCOVA 
model, but we will not interpret statistical significance. Rather, we have set a priori cut points for effect sizes to 
which we will compare our outcomes. These effect sizes represent points at which we can conclude that the 
intervention  components adequately impact psychosocial and behavioral outcomes to proceed to further 
testing. For the comparison to the standard group, the intervention group must produce at least a small effect 
size difference in integrated regulation to allow us to proceed to Phase Ib.  
10.3. Final analysis plan  
10.3.1. Qualitative analyses  
Qualitative investigations of interview transcripts and workbook content will be performed using NVivo. We will 
use thematic analysis to create codes to better understand how participants reacted to specific aspects of the 
intervention.37  
Interviews will be recorded and transcribed with interviewer field notes, then the in vestigators will refine any 
materials or procedures that were flagged by participants. Once the investigators have come to a consensus, 
we will apply insights from this sub -study to orientation procedures and intervention materials as needed.  
We will use Fleck’s procedures for coding reflection levels in the workbook text.38 These procedures involve 
creating “chunks” of content surrounding a particular theme, then rating these chunks against a framework of 
reflection levels. We will count the number of instances of each level of reflection within the text w orkbook 
responses. Artistic content will be analyzed using standard thematic analysis, as Fleck’s procedures 
investigate reflective text or verbal responses to art rather than reflection in the art itself.  
10.3.2. Quantitative  
All quantitative analyses wi ll be performed by the study statistician, who will be blinded to group allocation.  For 
tests of feasibility and acceptability, we will use descriptive statistics only.  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 16 of 19 A priori benchmark indicators will be used from a variety of similar studies (e.g., 80 % completion, no serious 
related adverse events) to indicate whether feasibility or acceptability were achieved.  
For quantitative hypotheses , we will use analyses of covariance, controlling for baseline values of the 
dependent variable as wel l as time sin ce diagnosis . We will follow the intent to treat principle, and imputation 
methods will be used as necessary to account for missing data. As indicated above, these outcomes will be 
used primarily for the purposes of shaping a fully powered follow -up study.  
 
11. ETHICS AND PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
11.1. Institutional Review Board  and ethical standard  
The protocol, informed consent forms, recruitment materials, screening materials, and copies of all written or 
spoken materials/communication provided to participants will be submitted to the UTMB IRB for review and 
approval. Approval of both the protocol and the consent form must be obtained before any participant is 
enrolled. Any amendment to the protocol will require r eview and approval by the IRB before any changes are 
implemented.  
The investigator will ensure that this study is conducted in full conformity with the principles set forth in the 
Belmont Report: Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of Huma n Subjects Research, as drafted 
by the US National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research 
(April 18, 1979) and codified in 45 CFR Part 46 and/or the ICH E6 . 
11.2. Informed consent process  
All study personnel h ave attended required courses on human subject protection and HIPAA regulations, and 
certificates of Institutional Review Board training completion are on file at UTMB. Participants that are eligible 
based on initial telephone screening will be invited to attend an initial session. They will be given an individual 
orientation to the study, including information on all aspects of the study. They will be able to ask questions at 
any time. Following this explanation, potential participants will be given inform ed consent information and 
forms to sign. Only then will participants engage in assessments, be randomized to a group, and proceed with 
orientation to their study group.  
11.3. Exclusion of women, minorities, children, and vulnerable populations  
We will not  recruit children, pregnant women, or prisoners for this study.  
11.4. Participant risks  
Risks in this study are moderate and include breaches of confidentiality, minor injuries, and safety . The steps 
taken to reduce these risks include surveillance of exer cise patterns (by “friending” participants on the apps 
they are using and reviewing their activity patterns weekly ). We acknowledge that, in addition to these related 
risks, many unrelated and/or random adverse events may occur during the study period. Par ticipants may 
catch colds, flu, or other similar sicknesses and may be injured in ways unrelated to exercise.  
All known related risks will be described in the protocol and consent form.  
Confidentiality  could be breached, as is a risk in all human subjects research. Sensitive personal health 
information or other sensitive information could be divulged inappropriately to outside sources.  
Injury, pain, fatigue.  Participants may experience joint discomfort, muscle soreness, or other minor injuries due 
to increa sed physical activity. There is a low risk of cardiac events during exercise  among deconditioned 
adults, particularly those who are overweight/obese and/or older . 
Psychological stress.  Participants may feel uncomfortable due to some of the questions includ ed in the 
questionnaires.  
There is no reason to believe that the proposed intervention  would produce increased risk as compared to 
standard self-monitoring . Because anticipated risks and benefits t o individual participants are  small, we do not 
anticipate e arly termination of the study due to excessive risk or differences in anticipated benefits.  
11.5. Protection against risks  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 17 of 19 General.  Inclusion/exclusion criteria will allow us to exclude from the study anyone who is potentially at higher 
risk for developing complications due to research procedures. Participants will be able to withdraw from the 
study at any time if study procedures are  upsetting or painful for them. We will closely monitor all participants 
for adverse events (see data safety and monitoring plan below).  
Confidentiality.  All data collected will be confidential. The  risk of breached confidentiality of potentially sensitive  
data is minimal and comparable to the risk inherent in any human subjects research project. We will take 
standard precautions to ensure that personal health information is not identifiable , including:  
o Paper copies of questionnaires and screening forms will be kept in a locked file cabinet in the 
research coordinator’s locked office. ID numbers will be used on these forms to match them to 
individual participants. The database matching ID numbers to ident ifying information will be 
individually password -protected and kept separately on the password -protected server. We will 
abstract wear and step data from their Fitbit  app accounts weekly into a database kept on this 
server, but we will not otherwise collec t data from the app.  
o Data collected on measurement equipment  will be uploaded to the server as soon as possible after 
collection. Then, it will be erased from the equipment. ID numbers will be used for participant 
identification on all physiologic measurem ent equipment as an added layer of protection. No 
identifying data will be kept on measurement equipment or on portable data storage devices such 
as laptops or USB drives.  
o Transcripts and scans of workbook pages will be saved by ID number, with any identif ying 
information redacted. These files will be kept on a password -protected server.  
Injury, pain, fatigue.  Exercise may  produce minor injuries or, much less likely, adverse cardiac events. Though 
starting an exercise program can be minimally to moderately risky, depending on the individual, when 
participants are properly screened the benefits outweigh the risks. Exercise can improve fitness, quality of life, 
cardiometabolic indicators of health, mood, fatigue, and a number of other outcomes (see research pl an for 
references). The goals that we will suggest will increase slowly to ensure safety. Dr. Volpi is a physician . She 
will review all adverse events and data abstracted from the apps that indicate potentially dangerous activities.  
Psychological stress.  Participants may refuse to answer any of the questions, take a break, or stop their 
participation.  
11.5. Potential benefits  
Participants may experience improvements in mood and energy levels due to increased physical activity.   
11.6 Future used of stored identifiable data  
No identifiable data will be stored for future research use.  
12. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  
12.1. Data management responsibilities  
The PI is responsible for collection and storage of data on paper, in pdfs of workbook scans, and saved in 
recording equipment. All data of interest will be abstracted into a computer database located on a secure 
UTMB server. Data saved in recording equipment will be erased after transfer to the server.  
Questionnaire data will not be personally id entifiable. All questionnaires will use ID numbers for identification 
purposes, and the correspondence of ID numbers to names will be kept in a password -protected file on a 
password -protected, secure server. Databases will use ID numbers for identification  of data and will also be 
stored on the secure, password -protected server.  
For non -UTMB study personnel we will use UTMB SharePoint link to provide de -identified information.  
The PI is responsible for collection and storage of all data on paper questionna ires as well as in subsequent 
computer databases.  
12.2. Sources  of data  
Participants will provide verbal and written data specifically for research purposes. We will also scan their 
narrative visualizations and reflections in their workbooks for analysis.  Research -grade measurement 
equipment (activity monitors, etc.) will capture physiological data. The wearable devices and mobile apps will 
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 18 of 19 collect limited data on physical activity as well as manually entered data by the participant. Procedures for 
ensurin g the confidentiality and anonymity of these data are discussed below. Only trained study staff will have 
access to written study data. These data will be confidential.  
12.3. Study records retention  
Study documents will be retained for a minimum of 3 years  from the date of the final financial report is sent to 
the NCI. No records will be destroyed without written consent of the sponsor, if applicable.  
12.4. Protocol deviations  
A protocol deviation will be considered any noncompliance with the clinical study  protocol or good clinical 
practice requirements. The noncompliance may be on the part of the participant, the investigator, or study staff. 
Deviations will be reported to the IRB and corrective actions will be taken and documented as necessary.  
References cited  
 
1. Leach CR, Weaver KE, Aziz NM, et al. The complex health profile of long -term cancer survivors: 
prevalence and predictors of comorbid conditions. Journal of cancer survivorship : research and 
practice. Jun 2015;9(2):23 9-251. 
2. Patnaik JL, Byers T, DiGuiseppi C, Dabelea D, Denberg TD. Cardiovascular disease competes with 
breast cancer as the leading cause of death for older females diagnosed with breast cancer: a 
retrospective cohort study. Breast cancer research : BCR.  2011;13(3):R64.  
3. Barbaric M, Brooks E, Moore L, Cheifetz O. Effects of physical activity on cancer survival: a systematic 
review. Physiotherapy Canada. Physiotherapie Canada. Winter 2010;62(1):25 -34. 
4. Li T, Wei S, Shi Y, et al. The dose -response effec t of physical activity on cancer mortality: findings from 
71 prospective cohort studies. Br J Sports Med. Sep 18 2015.  
5. Boyle T, Vallance JK, Ransom EK, Lynch BM. How sedentary and physically active are breast cancer 
survivors, and which population subgr oups have higher or lower levels of these behaviors? Supportive 
care in cancer : official journal of the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer. May 
2016;24(5):2181 -2190.  
6. Tarasenko Y, Chen C, Schoenberg N. Self -Reported Physical Activity  Levels of Older Cancer 
Survivors: Results from the 2014 National Health Interview Survey. J Am Geriatr Soc. Feb 
2017;65(2):e39 -e44. 
7. Stacey FG, James EL, Chapman K, Courneya KS, Lubans DR. A systematic review and meta -analysis 
of social cognitive theory -based physical activity and/or nutrition behavior change interventions for 
cancer survivors. Journal of cancer survivorship : research and practice. Jun 2015;9(2):305 -338. 
8. Spark LC, Reeves MM, Fjeldsoe BS, Eakin EG. Physical activity and/or dietary int erventions in breast 
cancer survivors: a systematic review of the maintenance of outcomes. Journal of cancer survivorship : 
research and practice. Nov 22 2012.  
9. Deci EL, Ryan RM. The "what" and "why" of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self -determinati on of 
behavior. Psychol Inq. 2000;11(4):227 -268. 
10. Rhodes RE, Kaushal N, Quinlan A. Is physical activity a part of who I am? A review and meta -analysis 
of identity, schema and physical activity. Health Psychology Review. 2016;10(2):204 -225. 
11. Teixeira PJ, Carraca EV, Markland D, Silva MN, Ryan RM. Exercise, physical activity, and self -
determination theory: A systematic review. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. Jun 22 2012;9(1):78.  
12. Rapp A, Cena F. Personal informatics for everyday life: How users without pr ior self -tracking 
experience engage with personal data. International Journal of Human -Computer Studies. Oct 
2016;94:1 -17. 
13. Lazar A, Koehler C, Tanenbaum J, Nguyen DH. Why we use and abandon smart devices. Proceedings 
of the 2015 ACM International Joint  Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . Osaka, 
Japan: ACM; 2015:635 -646. 
14. Brunet J, Sabiston CM, Burke S. Surviving breast cancer: women's experiences with their changed 
bodies. Body Image. Jun 2013;10(3):344 -351. 
15. Pedersen B, Groenkjaer M, Falkmer U, Mark E, Delmar C. "The ambiguous transforming body" - A 
phenomenological st udy of the meaning of weight changes among women treated for breast cancer. 
International journal of nursing studies. Mar 2016;55:15 -25. 
16. Robertson MC, Tsai E, Lyons EJ, et al. Mobile Health Physical Activity Intervention Preferences in 
Cancer Survivors : A Qualitative Study. JMIR mHealth and uHealth. Jan 24 2017;5(1):e3.  
PROJECT VISUAL PROTOCOL  
Version 7 06/22/202 2 Page 19 of 19 17. Baumer EPS. Reflective Informatics: Conceptual Dimensions for Designing Technologies of Reflection. 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing System s. Seoul, 
Republic of Korea: ACM; 2015:585 -594. 
18. Muller L, Divitini M, Mora S, Rivera -Pelayo V, Stork W. Context Becomes Content: Sensor Data for 
Computer -Supported Reflective Learning. Ieee T Learn Technol. Jan-Mar 2015;8(1):111 -123. 
19. Lee MK, Kim J,  Forlizzi J, Kiesler S. Personalization Revisited: A Reflective Approach Helps People 
Better Personalize Health Services and Motivates Them To Increase Physical Activity. Proceedings of 
the 2015 Acm International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitou s Computing (Ubicomp 2015). 
2015:743 -754. 
20. Huldtgren A, Wiggers P, Jonker CM. Designing for Self -Reflection on Values for Improved Life 
Decision. Interact Comput. Jan 2014;26(1):27 -45. 
21. Rodriguez MT, Nunes S, Devezas T. Telling Stories with Data Visu alization. Proceedings of the 2015 
Workshop on Narrative &#38; Hypertext . Guzelyurt, Northern Cyprus: ACM; 2015:7 -11. 
22. Segel E, Heer J. Narrative Visualization: Telling Stories with Data. IEEE transactions on visualization 
and computer graphics. Nov-Dec 2010;16(6):1139 -1148.  
23. Tudor -Locke C, Camhi SM, Troiano RP. A catalog of rules, variables, and definitions applied to 
accelerometer data in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2003 -2006. Preventing 
chronic disease. 2012;9:E113.  
24. Markland D, Tobin V. A modification to the behavioural regulation in exercise questionnaire to include 
an assessment of amotivation. J Sport Exercise Psy. Jun 2004;26(2):191 -196. 
25. Wilson PM, Rodgers WM, Loitz CC, Scime G. "It's who I am...really!" The importance of integrated 
regulation in exercise contexts. J Appl Biobehav Res. 2006;11(2):79 -104. 
26. Grant AM, Franklin J, Langford P. The self -reflection and insight scale: A new mea sure of private self -
consciousness. Soc Behav Personal. 2002;30(8):821 -835. 
27. Trompetter HR, ten Klooster PM, Schreurs KMG, Fledderus M, Westerhof GJ, Bohlmeijer ET. 
Measuring Values and Committed Action With the Engaged Living Scale (ELS): Psychometric 
Evaluation in a Nonclinical Sample and a Chronic Pain Sample. Psychological assessment. Dec 
2013;25(4):1235 -1246.  
28. McCracken LM, Yang SY. The role of values in a contextual cognitive -behavioral approach to chronic 
pain. Pain. Jul 2006;123(1 -2):137 -145. 
29. Vlachopoulos SP. The Basic Psychological Needs in Exercise Scale: Measurement invariance over 
gender. Structural Equation Modeling -a Multidisciplinary Journal. Jan-Mar 2008;15(1):114 -135. 
30. Anderson DF, Cychosz CM. Development of an Exercise Identity  Scale. Percept Motor Skill. Jun 
1994;78(3):747 -751. 
31. Hopwood P, Fletcher I, Lee A, Al Ghazal S. A body image scale for use with cancer patients. Eur J 
Cancer. Jan 2001;37(2):189 -197. 
32. Brady MJ, Cella DF, Mo F, et al. Reliability and validity of the functional assessment of cancer therapy -
breast quality -of-life instrument. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of 
Clinical Oncology. Mar 1997;15(3):974 -986. 
33. Tudor -Locke C, Craig CL, Aoyagi Y, et al. How many steps/day are enough? For older adults and 
special populations. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity. Jul 2011;8:19.  
34. Yardley L, Ainsworth B, Arden -Close E, Muller I . The person -based approach to enhancing the 
acceptability and feasibility of interventions. Pilot and feasibility studies. 2015;1:37.  
35. Meneses K, Gisiger -Camata S, Schoenberger YM, Weech -Maldonado R, McNees P. Adapting an 
evidence -based survivorship in tervention for Latina breast cancer survivors. Womens Health (Lond). 
Mar 2015;11(2):109 -119. 
36. Morton K, Sutton S, Hardeman W, et al. A Text -Messaging and Pedometer Program to Promote 
Physical Activity in People at High Risk of Type 2 Diabetes: The Devel opment of the PROPELS Follow -
On Support Program. JMIR mHealth and uHealth. Dec 15 2015;3(4):e105.  
37. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology. 
2006;3(2):77 -101. 
38. Fleck R. Rating reflection on experien ce: A case study of teachers' and tutors' reflection around 
images. Interact Comput. Nov 2012;24(6):439 -449. 
 
 