 
 
The use of CryoBalloon Focal Ablation 
System for residual Barrett's Esophagus 
Post ablation; a pilot study. 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
April 4, 2016 
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.00 4] 
Version 4 04 2016   Effective August 28, 2012  
 
X:\StaffFolders\ Boyer \ClinicalTrials.gov \ClinicalTrials.gov Results \Wang 14- 004771\ Wang 14 -004771 Protocol.doc  Page 1 of 7 C     General Study Information 
 
Principal Investigator:       Kenneth Wang MD         Study Title :    The use of CryoBalloon Focal Ablation System for residual Barrett's Esophagus Post ablation; a 
pilot study.  Protocol version number and date:      Version 1 June 2014 
 
Purpose  
 Hypothesis:  Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a commonly used method for eliminating Barrett’s esophagus (BE). RFA is highly effective, yet there is a set of patients who continue to have persistent dysplasia or intestinal me taplasia despite several treatments, thus this population requires follow up endoscopic therapy with 
a different ablative modality such  as cryotherapy.  
 Aims, purpose, or objectives: 
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the usefulness of the  C2 CryoBalloon Focal Ablation (510K 
cleared K131523, C2 Theraputics, Redwood City CA) in treating patients with persistent Barrett’s Esophagus (less than 2 cm) despite 2 or more serial R adio Frequency ablation or endoscopic mucosal resection treatment 
sessions.  
 Background ( Include relevant experience, gaps in current knowledge, preliminary data, etc .):   
 Barrett’s esophagus (BE) is a pre-neoplastic condition formed by the metaplasia of the normal squamous mucosa of the distal esophagus into a specialize d intestinal mucosa. Its development is mostly associated with 
chronic injury from gastroesophageal reflux. BE is widely considered the leading risk factor for the development of esophageal adenocar cinoma (EAC). (1) In 2009 alone, EAC accounted for 14,500 deaths in the 
U.S.(2)  It is one of the fastest growing malignancies which carries a dismal prognosis of less than 15% survival 
in a 5 -year period.(3) 
 The development of ablative therapy for BE with high grade dysplasia (HGDDYS) aims to prevent neoplastic progression to EAC.  Several emerging endoscopic strategies have become attractive to gastroenterologists as standard esophagectomy portends 4% to 12% perioperative mortality with other long term c omplications. (4) 
Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR), in spite of its potential therapeutic and diagnostic advantages, requires further endoscopic skills and procedural time. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is another ablative technique. RFA employs bipolar electrodes, which deliver ablative energy to the tissue.(5) The latest results of the AIM Dysplasia Trial 10 at their 2 -year follow-up shows 85% and 83% eradication of dysplasia and intestinal 
metaplasia, respectively, after intention -to-treat analysis. (6)A t these rates, there is a set of patients who continue 
to have persistent dysplasia or intestinal metaplasia despite serial RFA treatments and  may  benefit from a 
different ablative modality such as cryotherapy.   
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.00 4] 
Version 4 04 2016   Effective August 28, 2012  
 
X:\StaffFolders\ Boyer \ClinicalTrials.gov \ClinicalTrials.gov Results \Wang 14- 004771\ Wang 14 -004771 Protocol.doc  Page 2 of 7 C     Subject Information – charts, records, images, or specimens are considered ‘subjects’  
 
Target accrual : In this pilot study we propose to enroll up to 20 participants. We estimate that due to potential of 
unforeseen ulcerations, lesions or other abnormalities at the time endoscopy we may need to invite 24 participants to meet our accrual target.  
 Subject population:   Inclusion Criteria  
 Eligible patients for enrollment in this study must fulfill all of the following criteria:  
 a)  Age > 18 years old 
 b) Able to provide informed consent  c) Patient s with  unifocal or multifocal BE with 2 cm who have fail ed at least 2 serial RFA or other 
endoscopic therapy such as Endoscopic Mucosal resection.     4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
  Exclusion from the study with any of the following:   a) Age younger than 18 years old  
 
b) Presence of esophageal varices  
 
c) Esophageal stricture precluding passage of an endoscope  
 
d) Inability to provide informed consent 
 
e) Esophageal cancer (T2 and above)  f)   Coagulopathy with INR > 2.0, thrombocytopenia with platelet counts < 50,000 
 g)  pregnancy (if required a pregnancy test would be performed as part of routine clinical care)  
 Will a Certificate of Confidentiality be obtained? No 
    
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.00 4] 
Version 4 04 2016   Effective August 28, 2012  
 
X:\StaffFolders\ Boyer \ClinicalTrials.gov \ClinicalTrials.gov Results \Wang 14- 004771\ Wang 14 -004771 Protocol.doc  Page 3 of 7 C     Study Design  
 
Methods: D escribe, in detail, the research activities  that will be conducted under this protocol :   
 In this pilot study results of treatment response will be documented. During clinically indicated endoscopic procedures, the Barrett’s segment length, length and presence of islands or tongues of Barrett’s mucosa, mucosa abnormali ties (type and size)  will be documented. The battery- powered  Cryoballoon Focal Ablation System 
(CbFAS) is a 510K cleared disposable through- the-scope balloon- based catheter made of conformable material 
obviating the need for sizing. The balloon catheter wi ll place at the area of persistent visible Barrett’s mucosa (2 
cm. or less) for treatment  following standard endoscopic technique. Upon activation by the physician, the 
balloon probe at the end of the catheter is simultaneously inflated and cooled with nitrous oxide.  The balloon probe comes in contact with the wall of the target tissue and ablates unwanted tissue. Nitrous oxide is fully contained within the balloon.  The nitrous oxide gas exits the patient through the proximal end of the catheter. The part icipants will be here for clinically indicated endoscopy  and therapy. Patients will return in 3 months for 
clinically indicated endoscopy and surveillance of Barrett’s Esophagus and/or esophageal cancer. At that endoscopy the Barrett’s segment length, length and presence of islands or tongues of Barrett’s mucosa, m ucosa 
abnormalities (type and size) will again be documented  to evaluate results. Results of clinical histological 
specimens obtained at both endoscopies that have been reviewed by expert GI Pathologists per clinical routine for classification of adenocarcinoma, high-grade dysplasia, low-grade dysplasia, indefinite for dysplasia, non-dysplastic intestinal metaplasia, normal squamous mucosa and normal gastric mucosa as established guidelines will be  documented. Patient demographics, Endoscopy and Pathology r esults will be review in the Electronic 
Medical record including the GI Endoscopy database, MICS and Synthesis. Patients will be identified for participation from the GI Endoscopy database. Partic ipants may have up to three cryo ablation endoscopic 
procedures performed.   
1. Levine DS, Rubin CE, Reid BJ, Haggitt RC. Specialized metaplastic columnar epithelium in Barrett's 
esophagus. A comparative transmission electron microscopic study. Lab Invest 1989;60:418-32. 2. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Hao Y, Xu J, Thun MJ. Cancer statistics, 2009. CA Cancer J Clin 
2009;59:225-49. 
3. Umar SB, Fleischer DE. Esophageal cancer: epidemiology, pathogenesis and prevention. Nature clinical 
practice Gastroenterology & hepatology 2008;5:517-26. 
4. Swisher SG, Deford L, Merrima n KW, et al. Effect of operative volume on morbidity, mortality, and 
hospital use after esophagectomy for cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2000;119:1126-32. 
5. Fleischer DE, Overholt BF, Sharma VK, et al. Endoscopic ablation of Barrett's esophagus: a multi center 
study with 2.5- year follow -up. Gastrointest Endosc 2008;68:867-76. 
6. Inadomi JM. Time to Burn? Endoscopic Ablation for Barrett's Esophagus. Gastroenterology 
2011;141:417-9. 
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.00 4] 
Version 4 04 2016   Effective August 28, 2012  
 
X:\StaffFolders\ Boyer \ClinicalTrials.gov \ClinicalTrials.gov Results \Wang 14- 004771\ Wang 14 -004771 Protocol.doc  Page 4 of 7 C      
Check all that  apply. If none apply, leave blank : 
 
  This  is a multisite study  involving Mayo Clinic and non-Mayo Clinic sites .  
When  checked, describe the research procedures/activities being conducted only at Mayo Clinic : 
 
  Mayo Clinic staff will be engaged in research activity at a non -Mayo Clinic site .  When checked, provide 
the location and a detailed description of the Mayo Clinic research staff involvement . 
 
   This study is to establish and/or maintain an ongoing database or registry  for research  purposes only. 
 
  The research involves contact or interaction with subjects , for example, surveys, questionnaires, 
observation, blood draw. 
 
  The study involves audiotaping or v ideotap ing   
 
   
Blood Collection 
 If this study involves prospective blood collection by finger, heel, ear stick or venipuncture, complete the 
following:    
  From healthy, non pregnant, adult subjects who weigh at least 110 pounds . For  a minimal risk 
application, the amount of blood drawn from these subjects may not exceed 550ml in an 8 week period and collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week. 
Volume per blood draw: _____ml   
Frequency of blood draw (e.g. single draw , time (s) per week, per year , etc. ) _______ 
  
  From other adults and children considering age, weight, and health of subject.  For a minimal 
risk application, the amount of blood drawn from these subjects  may not exceed the lesser of 50 ml or 3 
ml per kg in an 8 week period, and collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week. 
Volume per blood draw: _____ml 
Frequency of blood draw (e.g. single draw, time (s) per week, per year , etc. )_______  
 
  
 
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.00 4] 
Version 4 04 2016   Effective August 28, 2012  
 
X:\StaffFolders\ Boyer \ClinicalTrials.gov \ClinicalTrials.gov Results \Wang 14- 004771\ Wang 14 -004771 Protocol.doc  Page 5 of 7 C     Review of Chart, Images, Specimens  
Provide the date range for collection of data and/or specimens that will be included in your research dataset.  
(Example: 01/01/2000 to 12/31/2012)  
Date range: From ___/___/_____  to ___/___/_____ 
 
Check all that apply : 
 
  This study involves only data and/or specimens that exist at the time this application is submitted to the  IRB  
(IRB submission date) . No data or specimens will be collected beyond this date.  
  
  This study involves only data and/ or specimens that will be collected after submission to the IRB. 
 
  The study involves data and/or specimens  that exist at the time of submission to the  IRB and  data and/or 
specimens  that will be collected after submission to the IRB, for example a study that includes collect ion of 
existing data and prospective collection of specimens . 
 
  Data and/or specimens used in this study are collected under another IRB protocol. When checked, provide 
the IRB number(s) from which the research material will be  obtained and check the box below to attest  that 
subjects hav e provided consent for future use of their data and/or specimens, as described in this protocol .  
  IRB Number(s):  
  □Subjects have provided consent for use of their data and/or specimens, as described in this protocol. 
 
  Other data sources will be utilized in this study . When checked, provide all data sources: 
  
Data Confidentiality, HIPAA Subject Iden tifiers  
 Review the list of subject identifiers below and, if applicable, check the box next to each subject identifier being recorded at the time you are collecting/abstracting data/specimens for use in this study.  Subject Identifiers :  Individually iden tifiable information , including demographic data, that  identifies the 
individual or for which there is reasonable basis to believe it can be used to identify the individual.  NOTE: Identifiers apply to subjects enrolled in your study and to the subject ’s relatives, household members, 
employers, etc.  
 Internal  refers to subject identifiers that will be included in the dataset maintained by the study team.  
External  refers to subject i dentifiers that will be shared with persons outside of the immediate stu dy team,  for 
example,  sent to an external collaborator or shared with a national registry.  
 
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.00 4] 
Version 4 04 2016   Effective August 28, 2012  
 
X:\StaffFolders\ Boyer \ClinicalTrials.gov \ClinicalTrials.gov Results \Wang 14- 004771\ Wang 14 -004771 Protocol.doc  Page 6 of 7 C      
SUBJECT IDENTIFIERS  
Check all that apply  INTERNAL  
IDENTIFIER  EXTERNAL  
IDENTIFIE R 
Name    
Social Security number    
Medical record/patient registration number , lab accession, specimen or 
radiologic image number  X  
Study number, subject ID, or any other unique identifying number, 
characteristic or code that can be used to link the identity of the subject to the 
data X  
Dates: All elements of dates [month, day, and  year] directly related to an 
individual. Their birth date, date of death, date of diagnosis, etc.   
Note: Recording a year only is not a unique identifier.  X  
Medical d evice identifiers and serial numbers    
Biometric identifiers, including finger and v oice prints , full face photographic 
images and any comparable images    
Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs) , Internet Protocol (IP) address 
numbers , email address    
Street address, city, county, precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geocodes    
Phon e or fax numbers    
Account, member, certificate or professional license numbers, health 
beneficiary numbers    
Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers    
If None of the above identifiers will be recorded or maintained in th e 
dataset and/or sent outside of the study team, please check “None”.   None  X None 
 
 
Statistical Information  
 Note: Power analyses and study endpoints are not needed for a pilot or feasibility studies .  
  X No  statistical information . If checked , please explain: Pilot study, small study numbers.  
  
Statistical Considerations  
 Power Statement :   
     Data Analysis Plan:  
 
Minimal Risk Protocol Template [IRB 10429.00 4] 
Version 4 04 2016   Effective August 28, 2012  
 
X:\StaffFolders\ Boyer \ClinicalTrials.gov \ClinicalTrials.gov Results \Wang 14- 004771\ Wang 14 -004771 Protocol.doc  Page 7 of 7 C      
 
Endpoints 
     Primary:              Secondary :  