 
 
 
 
 
Study Title : The Effect of Play on Social and Motor Skills of Children With ASD  
NCT # : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date : 06/0 1/2020  
Study Protocol  
Participants  
45 children with ASD aged between 5 and 15 years were recruited t hrough fliers distributed to  local schools , 
ASD services , advocacy groups, as well as Simons Powering Autism Research (SPARK) participant -
research matching service  (https://www.sfari.org/resource/spark/ ). We interviewed the potential 
participants to gather their  demographic information  (i.e., age, sex, ethnicity ), and to confirm their 
eligibility for parti cipation . Children were included in the study if they had formal ASD diagnoses that were 
confirmed through a school  record (e.g., school psychologist record confirming an ASD diagnosis) and/or 
an Individualized Education Plan for ASD -related services or a medical or neuropsychological record from 
a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist using the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) and/or 
Autism Diagnostic Interview -Revised (ADI -R) measures . We additionally used the Social Communication 
Questionnai re (SCQ) as a screener  for ASD symptoms (Rutter et al., 2003).  Children were excluded if they 
have limited comprehension of one -step simple instruction and/or could not complete the pretests due to 
behavioral issues. Parents of the children completed the Vineland Adaptive Behavioral Scales -2nd edition 
(VABS; Sparrow et al., 2005), and the Social Responsive Scale questionnaire (SRS; Constantino et al., 
2000)  to assess the child’s adaptive functions and social responsiveness. Following enrollment, children 
were matched on age, sex, and level of functioning then randomly allocated to the 3 intervention arms.  
The study procedures were carried out according to t he Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by the 
University of Delaware Institutional Review Board (UD IRB, Study Approval #: 1539736 -5). Written 
informed consent of study participation was obtained from  the parent, and a written/verbal assent was 
obtai ned from the participating children.  
Experimental Procedures  
This study includes 3 pretests, 3 posttests, and 16 training sessions conducted over 10 weeks. Eight weeks 
later a follow -up test was also completed. Specifically, the pretests and posttests wer e conducted during the 
first and the last week of the study, while the training sessions were provided during the intermediate 8 
weeks (2 sessions per week). After pretests, the children were matched age, sex, and level of functioning 
and then randomized i nto the 3 groups. A parent orientation was conducted in -person/ through zoom before 
the training period to introduce the training activities  and intervention strategies. Each training session 
lasted about one hour. All sessions were video recorded for furt her behavioral coding. The current study 
was conducted in the midst of the COVID -19 pandemic  (between 2019 and 2022) . Due to the initial close 
down and the later restriction of face -to-face (F2F) interaction , we decided to be more pragmatic and used 
a hybr id clinical trial delivery model (Bhat et al., 202 1; Cleffi et al., 2022; Srinivasan et al., 2021; Su et al., 
2021 ). The participat ing families ch ose between an F2F or a Telehealth (TH) training delivery method 
based on their convenience and comfort level of social interaction s during the pandemic.  
Training Protocols  
For each intervention arm,  Applied Behavior Analysis  (ABA ), Picture Exchange Communication System  
(PECS ), TEACCH, and motor learning principles were used to provide structure, reinforcement , and free 
time for exploration . Specifically, visual, verbal, manual prompts /assistance , positive reinforcement s were 
given throughout the intervention,  and the  child  was encouraged  to choose from a set of actions or improvise  
their own movement patterns . We also used a picture schedule  to explain the order  of tasks and to provide 
more structure to the session . During the training session, people sat/stood in a triad  involving the child, 
expert trainer, and an adult model/parent w as used. The expert trainer guided the child through the training -
specific activities, while the model/parent assisted and acted as a buddy to provide visual model/assistance 
for the children. For the F2F intervention delivery format, a trained undergraduate student acted as the 
mode l, while for the TH format, the parents were trained to aid during the intervention. Both, undergraduate 
students and parents were provided in -person/Zoom trainings to explain the training goals, intervention 
principles, and the main activities according t o the intervention types. The k ey ingredients for the 
multimodal  group include d engaging in  interpersonal synchrony and multi -limb, whole -body movements 
performed to music, while the general movement group received multi -limb, whole -body movements based 
in exercise and games; whereas  the seated play, control  group focused on reading and fine motor activities.   
To ensure training fidelity, a student coder randomly chose and coded one early (session 1 -5) and one late 
session (session 12 -16) for each child using a behavior checklist assessing  trainer’s and the model’s 
behavior s. Specifically, the coder evaluated : A) the accuracy of completing the critical components of the 
training activities B) Trainer and model’s behaviors including instructions, prompts, positive 
reinforcement/praise, body movements (clarity, energy), voice, affect (smile and expressivity), score d on a 
5-point Likert score (1 indicates poor quality and 5 indicates high quality), and C) child’s compliance with 
the training activities, also scored on a 5 -point Likert score.  
Testing Protocol  
Trained testers assessed the training -related changes in motor performance using standardized during each 
test visit . For the standardized tests, we  used the Bruininks -Oseretsky Test of Motor Proficiency (BOT -2) 
to assess child ren’s gross and fine motor proficiency (Bruininks et al., 2005 ), a 2-Minute Walk Test 
(2MWT) to assess the ir endurance  (Bohannon et al., 2018), and the bilateral  motor coordination subtests of 
the Sensory Integration and Praxis Tests (SIPT)  to access their praxis performance (Ayres, 1988). Parents 
also completed the Developmental Coordination Disorder Questionnaire  (DCD -Q; Schoemaker  et al., 
2006) at each test visit , and both parents and the children filled out exit questionnaires to provide feedback 
on the feasibility, acceptability, and benefits of the interventions  
Standardized Tests 
Bruininks -Oseretsky Test of Motor Proficiency (BOT -2): BOT -2 is a valid and reliable assessment that 
targets 4 motor area composites with 8 subscales, including a) Fine Manual Control area, consisting of Fine 
Motor Precision, Fine Motor Integration s ubscales; b) Manual Coordination, consisting of Manual 
Dexterity and Upper -limb Coordination subscales; c) Body Coordination, consisting of Bilateral 
Coordination and Balance Subscales; and d) Strength and Agility, consisting of Running Speed and Agility 
and Strength subscales. The standard scores of the four motor areas were used to assess the training -related 
changes in motor performance.  
Two Minute Walk Test (2MWT)  
2MWT  is a standardized measure of endurance. The child was asked to walk as fast as they can (without 
running) around 2 cones placed 50 -feet apart for 2 minutes. The total distance the child walked in the 2 -
minute period was used to assess the training -related changes in endurance.  
Sensory Integration and Praxis Tests (SIPT) : We used the postu ral praxis and bilateral motor 
coordination subtests of the Sensory Integration and Praxis Tests  (SIPT -PP and SIPT -BMC) to evaluate the 
praxis and sensory integration performance in children with ASD (Ayres, 1988). During the SIPT -PP, the 
tester sat across the children and performed 17 novel postures that involved fingers and upper/lower limb 
movemen ts. An error was counted if the children posed with insufficient/exaggerated joint angles, incorrect 
joint and hand orientation, or using the wrong side of the body. Similarly, during the SIPT -BMC test, the 
tester sat across the children and performed 22 r hythmic action sequences involving hand -tapping, foot -
stomping, and foot -tapping. The children were asked to repeat the movement sequences back to the tester. 
An error was counted if the child paused in between the movement sequence, couldn’t pick up the r hythm, 
moved too fast or too slow, or failed to perform the right movement sequences. The number of errors the 
children made during the SIPT -PP and SIPT -BMC tests were used to monitor the training -related changes 
in praxis performance.  
Executive functionin g (EF) Task  
During the EF task, we will use e -versions of variations of the Flanker test to assess the inhibition control 
and cognitive shifting elements of EF. There will be 2 conditions in the Flanker task, including: a) 
Congruent: Five fishes facing in the same direction (left or right) will be presented, and the child will be 
asked to raise the left or right index finger depending on the direction in which all the fishes are facing, b) 
Incongruent: the child will be presented with 4 fishes facing the sa me direction while the center fish will 
be facing in the opposite direction. Children will be asked to point to the left or right index finger depending 
on the direction of the center fish.  
Drumming Synchrony Task  
During the drumming synchrony task, child ren will be seated with a drum placed on the table in front of 
them. There will be 3 conditions: a) Music : the child will be asked to drum in order to match up to rhythmic 
beats played aloud in the background, b) Social : the child will sit face to face wit h an adult and be asked to 
match up to the movements of the adult. C) Virtual Social : the child will be seated facing a laptop screen 
and drum with a virtual partner through zoom conferencing. Both the child and the virtual partner will drum 
to rhythmic be ats played aloud in the background.  
Parent reported motor outcome using the Developmental Coordination Disorder Questionnaire 
(DCD -Q) 
DCD -Q is a parent questionnaire to screen for developmental coordination disorder in children. 
Specifically, it screens for the child’s performance in three components, Control during movement (motor 
control while the child is moving or the target object is in motion, ex: catching, throwing), Fine 
motor/Handwriting (fine motor skills, ex: writing fast and legibly), and Gene ral coordination (motor 
planning/learning, ex: like sports and learn new skills).   
Children’s survey feedback  
Upon finishing all training sessions, each child  answer ed 3 questions to provide feedback on their training 
experience. The questions include: A) Did you enjoy the activities we did? B) Did you find the activities 
easy or hard, C) Will you practice similar activities on your own or with mom/dad? Each question was 
answered with a picture -assisted 5 -point Likert score (5 - definitely yes/ very easy ; 4- yes/easy ; 3- 
maybe, neither too easy nor too hard ; 2- not so much/hard ; 1- not at all/very hard ). 
 
