PI: Susana Matias 
University of California, Berkeley  
COVER PAGE  
 
Official title of the study : 
Moringa Powder Acceptability Trial Among Healthy Adults  
 Study ID: [REMOVED]  Date:  
07/30/2023  
  
PI: Susana Matias 
University of California, Berkeley  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Version history 
Version number  Version date  Prepared /reviewed by  Description of the changes 
made  
1 7/30/23  Caitlin French  
Susana Matias  Original  
 
Study Aims  
Overall objective: A ssess  the acceptability and s ide effects  of consuming dried moringa leaf powder 
(MLP) at 3 different doses (1, 2, or 3 teaspoons) daily for 7 days , among UC Berkeley staff employees . 
Specific Aim 1 : Describe the total acceptability score of MLP , and whether it  differed by dose group .  
Sub-Aim 1.1: Describe the average  scores for liking the taste, texture, and appearance of foods 
after adding MLP, and determine whether they  differed by the dose group .  
Specific Aim  2: Describe the total number of days  MLP was consumed during the 7 -day intervention 
period, and whether it differed by the assigned dose.  
Specific Aim 3: Describe the proportion of participants who report ed gastrointestinal or other symptoms 
after consuming MLP and determine whether it differed by dose group .    
Secondary Aim  1: Describe the rate of reported willingness to continue consuming MLP and whether it 
differed by dose group. 
Secondary Aim 2 : Determi ne the average number of teaspoons consumed (daily and total) for each dose 
group, based on available data (daily consumption reports), and whether the proportion of the assigned 
dose consumed differed by group.  
Secondary Aim  3: Determine whether skin carotenoid score (SCS) increased after consuming MLP for 
one week, and whether the change in SCS differed by dose group .  
Study Design and Sample  
The study design is an unblinded, randomized controlled trial in which UC Berkeley (non -student) staff 
members volunteered to be randomly assigned to consume 1, 2, or 3 teaspoons of MLP every day for 7 
days. We did not include a  control group  in order to maximize the sample size for the main outcome of 
interest, which was the acceptability of consuming moringa.   
The analytical  samples will differ for each aim based on the outcome data source (daily surveys or final 
interview), and will include those with available data . See Analysis Principles below for further details on 
the modified intention -to-treat approach.   
Variables  
Exposure :  
Daily consumption of 1, 2, or 3 teaspoons MLP added to foods or drinks for one week . Total doses of 7, 
14, or 21 teaspoons of MLP were provided to participants to take home at the beginning of the study 
PI: Susana Matias 
University of California, Berkeley  
(day 1), and compliance was measured by questions asked on daily online surveys and the final 
interview. For main analyses, the exposure will be defined as the intervention group to which the 
participant was assigned at the beginning of the study.  
Outcomes : 
• Acceptability . On day 8 of the study , 3 aspects of acceptability (taste, texture, and appearance) 
of foods or drinks after adding MLP were assessed using a 5 -point liking scale, where a reported 
value of 1 indicated “Dislike it a lot”, 2 indicated “Dislike it a little”, 3 indicated “Neither like nor 
dislike”, 4 indicated “Like it a little”, and 5 indicated “Like it a lot”. The text descriptions and numbers were accompanied by emoji faces representing the corresponding  level of like or 
dislike.  Total acceptability scores  will be calculated by summing the 3 sub -score s, with a 
potential range of 3 -15 points.  
• Consumption . The total number of days consuming MLP  during the intervention period will be 
assessed using the following question asked at the final interview (day 8): “During the past 
week, how many days did you consume moringa powder?”.  The average daily dose  (tsp)  
consumed will be defined as the mean quantity reported consumed among days where 
consumption data  is available .  Among participants with available daily consumption da ta for ≥ 4 
of the 7 intervention days , the total amount (tsp) of MLP consumed  during the intervention 
period will be calculated by  multiplying the reported number of days consumed by the average 
reported amount consumed on consumption days . To measure the degree of compliance, this 
total  will be divided by the total assigned dose and multiplied by 100  to obtain the percent of 
the assigned dose consumed.  
• Willingness to continue consuming MLP. At the final interview (day 8), p articipants were asked 
about their willingness to continue consuming MLP  using the question, “ Would you be willing to 
continue taking the moringa powder? ”. Response options included “yes”, “no”, or “not sure”.  
• Symptoms . Gastrointestinal and other symptoms  experienced in the previous 24 hours were 
assessed on day 1 of the study via the baseline interview, on days 2 -7 via the daily survey, and 
on day 8 via the final interview. Participants were asked whether  or not  they had experienced 
diarrhea, bloating, st omach ache, other digestive problems, allergic reactions (e.g. rash, hives, 
fever, difficulty breathing, low blood pressure, etc.) , or other symptoms. The proportion of 
participants who reported any symptoms  will be calculated. The total number of symptoms  
experienced  will be de scribed  as the total number of different symptoms (e.g. diarrhea + 
bloating = 2 symptoms) reported , 1) on each day , and 2)  during the whole intervention period.    
• Skin carotenoid level . Skin carotenoid level was assessed  on study days 1 and 8  using the Veggie 
Meter ®, a commercially available reflection spectrometry device that outputs a skin carotenoid 
score  (SCS) between 0 and 800, which is correlated with dietary intake of fruits and vegetables. 
Skin carotenoid levels w ere measured in triplicate and averaged by the Veggie Meter ® software. 
The change in SCS  will be calculated by subtracting each participant’s baseline SCS from their 
SCS at the final interview.  
Sociodemographic variables  
Sociodemographic variables (for re porting sample characteristics) include age (years), gender (Man, 
Woman, Non -binary, or Other), Latinx/Hispanic ethnicity  (Yes or No ), and racial/ethnic identity  (White, 
Black or African American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian or  Pacific Islander, 
PI: Susana Matias 
University of California, Berkeley  
Mixed, or Other). For gender, all respondents reported identifying as a man or a woman, so this variable 
will be analyzed as binary. For racial/ethnic identity,  responses from the two questions  will be combined 
to create a single categor ical variable, and categories will be collapsed into fewer categories if needed to 
allow for analysis .  
Analysis principles  
• Outcomes will be analyzed based on a  modified intention-to -treat  approach , in which 1) 
participants with missing outcome data  will be excluded  (i.e. no imputation will be done), and  2) 
one participant who was erroneously assigned to a different group from what the 
randomization order prescribed will be analyzed according to the dose they actually received 
and were instructed to consume.  
• Distributions of variables will be described using frequencies and percentages, in the case of 
categorical  variables , mean (SD) or median (IQR) for continuous variables, and one or both of 
these for ordinal  or count  variables.   
• Classic ANOVA , We lch’s ANOVA,  or Kruskal -Wallis tests to detect group  differences of ordinal , 
count  and continuous  variables will be selected based on  whether the following assumptions are 
met: 
o The distribution  within each group is approximately normal based on visual insp ection 
of the data  and normal probability plots  (Classic ANOVA, Welch’s ANOVA) . 
o Group variances are approximately equal, i.e., the ratio of the largest to the smallest variance is ≤  1.5
1,2 (Classic ANOVA) . 
• Chi Square or Fisher 's Exact test will be used to analyze differences by intervention group for 
categorical variables. 
• Significance level will be set at  0.05. Hypothesis testing results  will be interpreted in conjunction 
with effect sizes and overall trends in the data.  
• Missing data: For outcomes measured only at the final survey, observations from participants 
who did not complete the final interview will be e xcluded from analysis (e.g. Aim 1). For other 
outcomes, including those measured by daily surveys, available case analysis (e.g. cases with 
data at each daily survey)  will be conducted .  
• Outliers : Distributions of continuous variables will be visually insp ected for outliers, and 
potential outliers will be investigated further for input errors or other explanations. If no  
rationale for removing the observation is identified, non-parametric rank- based methods will be 
considered and/or sensitivity analyses will be conducted to determine the effect of removing 
the outlier on the results.   
Baseline participant characteristics  
Descriptive s ummary statistics for s ociodemograph ic and other variables will be reported overall and by 
intervention group. Age and baseline skin carotenoid scores  will be summarized as mean (SD) or median 
(IQR) . Gender identity, racial/ethnic identity, and gastrointestinal and other symptoms  (any, as well as 
individual symptoms) reported by participants in the last 24 hours at ba seline will be reported as 
frequency (%).  
  
PI: Susana Matias 
University of California, Berkeley  
Primary  Analyses  
Aim 1 (Acceptability) : Distributions of total acceptability scores and sub -scales will be presented as 
mean (SD) or median (IQR). We will investigate average  differences between the 3 intervention groups  
in total acceptability scores and sub -scores using one -way ANOVA , Welch’s ANOVA  or Kruskal Wallis 
tests . 
 
Aim 2 (Consumption) : We will present t he proportion of participants who  report ed consuming MLP for 
the full 7 days vs. less , as well as the proportion of participants reporting each frequency of 
consumption (e.g. 5 days , 6 days, etc. ) and/or the mean  (SD) or median (IQR) number of days consumed. 
All descriptive statistics will be reported overall and by intervention group . To investigate wheth er the 
number of days differed by intervention group, we will conduct Kruskal-Wallis tests .  
 Aim 3 (Symptoms): The proportion of participants  repor ting symptoms (any, as well as individual 
symptoms) during the intervention period will be reported overall (whole intervention period) and by 
study day  for each group . The total number of symptoms  reported will be presented in a similar manner.  
In addition, line graphs will be generated to visualize individual participant trajectories in terms of the number of symptoms reported each day and response/ non-response to the daily surveys , and will be 
color -coded by assigned dose to visualize trends by group. C hi-square or Fisher' s Exact test will be used 
to test  whether the frequency of reporting any symptoms differed by assigned dose . ANOVA , Welch’s 
ANOVA  or Kruskal -Wallis tests will be used to test whether the total number of reported symptoms 
differed by dose group.    
Secondary Analyses  
Secondary Aim 1 (willingness to consume) : We will report  the proportion of par ticipants who reported 
that they were willing to continue taking the MLP  overall and by dose, and investigate whether th e 
distribution of responses differed by dose group , using Chi-square tests  if sample sizes allow .  
Secondary Aim 2 (consumption amount):  Average daily dose consumed on consumption days , total 
MLP consumption (tsp) during the intervention period,  and the proportion consumed of the assigned 
dose will be presented as mean (SD) or median (IQR). All descriptive statistics will be reported overall 
and by intervention group. To investigate whether the proportion of assigned dose consumed differed 
by dose group, we will conduct one-way ANOVA, Welch’s ANOVA  or Kruskal -Wallis tests. Line graphs will 
be generated to visualize individual participant trajectories of the daily amount consumed and response/non -response to the daily surveys.  
Secondary Aim 3 (skin carotenoid score) : We will report baseline and post-intervention distributions of 
SCS by dose group as mean (SD) or median (IQR). To determine whether SCS changed after consuming 
MLP for one week, we will present the distribution of pre-post -intervention changes in SCS as mean (SD) 
or median (IQR) , by dose group. To investigate whether the change in SCS differed by assigned dose, we 
will perform ANOVA , Welch’s ANOVA  or Kruskal -Wallis tests of the change in SCS . As a sensitivity 
analysis, if the model assumptions for linear regression can be  met, we will model change in SCS by 
regressing endline SCS on intervention group, while adjusting  for baseline SCS in the following linear 
regression model : Endline SCS ~ D ose group + B aseline SCS .  
 
PI: Susana Matias 
University of California, Berkeley  
Reference 
1. Lowry R. One -Way Analysis of Variance for Independent Samples. Part 1. In:2002.  
2. Morgan CJ. Use of proper statistical techniques for research studies with small samples. American Journal of Physiology -Lung Cellular and Molecular Phys iology. 2017;313(5):L873-L877. 
PI: Susana Matias 
University of California, Berkeley  
Appendix. Description of Planned Qualitative Analyses  
In this small pilot study, q uantitative results will be interpreted together with the following 
qualitative analyses of free -response interview questions: 
1. Qualitative Aim 1 . Describe how participants consumed the moringa powder they received and 
whether there were patterns in response by the dose consumed.  
a. Data:  Mode of consumption was  assessed at the final interview using the multiple -
choice question, “How did you mostly consume the moringa powder?”. Answer options 
included “mixed with cold food”, “mixed with hot food”, “sprinkled over cold food”, 
“sprinkled over hot food”, “mixed with  cold drinks/smoothies”, “mixed with hot drinks”, 
“mixed with water” or other.  
b. Approach : Open -ended responses will be coded. Responses to this question will be 
summarized using frequencies.   
2. Qualitative Aim 2 . Describe what participants liked and disliked most about the moringa powder 
they received and whether there were patterns in responses by the dose consumed.   
a. Data:  In addition to quantitative scales, acceptability was assessed using 2 open -ended 
questions, which included “What did you like the most ab out the moringa powder you 
received?” and “What didn’t you like about the moringa powder?”. Responses were recorded (typed in) verbatim or near verbatim by the interviewer.   
b. Approach : To qualitatively describe trends in what participants liked most or disl iked 
about MLP, qualitative thematic analysis will be conducted. Open -ended responses will 
be coded using pre-specified and emergent themes. Visual aids (e.g. word bubbles, 
hierarchical graphics, etc.) and tables of themes with the frequency reported will be 
presented.  
3. Qualitative Aim 3 : Qualitatively describe whether acceptability of MLP differed by the mode of 
consumption (e.g., in smoothies, sprinkled over food, etc.).  
a. Data:  Total acceptability scores, responses from open -ended questions in which mode 
of consumption was discussed  
b. Approach : To explore whether acceptability of MLP might differ by the mode of 
consumption, the mean (SD) of acceptability scores will be calculated by reported mode 
of consumption, and relevant responses to open -ended questions will be summarized.  
4. Qualitative Aim 4 : Qualitatively report reasons for non-compliance.    
a. Data: If participants  reported not consuming the MLP for the whole 7 days, they were 
asked to give their reason for not consuming MLP.  
b. Approach:  Responses to this question will be summarized within the text.  
 