    
PRIME Registry  Page 1 of 5 Protocol v 3 02/19/2016  Peripheral Registry of Endovascular Clinical Outco mes 
“The PRIME  Registry ” 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
February 19. 2016  
 
1. Background /Introduction : 
Peripheral Vascular Disease (PVD) is an epidemic alarmingly on the rise  and seriously 
impacting  many individual’s quality of life. It is estimated that 20%  of patients >75 years will 
be living with the disease by the year 2030(1).  Critical Limb Ischemia (CLI), a serious form of 
PVD, is a severe blockage in the arteries of the lower extremities which markedly reduces 
blood -flow.  CLI is a chronic condition that results in severe pain in the feet and toes and is 
commonly coupled with multiple co -morbidities, including,  but not limited to,  obesity, 
hypertension, diabetes, and increased age.  With the increasing prevalence of PVD in an 
aging population , and the limitation s of vascular surgery in  patients with significant 
comorbidities, operators are gravitating more toward less invasive endovascular therapy.  
Endovascular therapy and vascular surgery  have been proven equivalent in patients with 
CLI(2). 
 
Patients with CLI can also progress to amputation.  Amputations carry a poor prognosis with 
significant co -morbidity and mortality(3).  Also , there continues to be a significant variation in 
amputation trend s across the United States dep ending on the patient’s location.  This is still 
the case despite the current evidence linking amputations to poor outcomes (4). 
 
In an effort to categorize the  anatomical properties of peripheral vascular lesions, the 
Transatlantic Inter -Society Consensus (TASC) divided peripheral lesions in four categories.  
This classification has been recently updated to TASC II(5).  The TASC classification 
however  fails to address the complexity of infra -popliteal dis ease in critical limb ischemia  
patients.  Depending on the patient population, tibial vessels tend to be diffusely diseased.  
With the increasing complexity of CLI patients, operators are tackling these lesions more  
frequently and successfully . 
 
Endovascul ar revascularization of patien ts with PVD has evolved dramati cally.  New 
technology has arisen due to a better understanding of the atherosclerotic process.  
Treatment modalities encompass balloon angioplasty, stenting , and atherectomy.  New 
modalities of therapy on the horizon include  bio-absorbable stents and drug eluting balloons.  
However, data regarding the effectiveness  of these modalities  in infra -popliteal disease is 
scarce.  A need exists for reporting on real world data, to document short and long  term 
outcomes.  
 
Metro Health  has developed a  peripheral v ascular intervention program with the on -going 
goal of being viewed as  a center of excellence in the prevention of CLI.  In a quest to 
capture  procedure -related details and  outcomes related to these  approaches, the team at 
Metro  Health  has developed  an outcomes  data registry to measure and report on minimally 
invasive endovascular therapies , to treat advanced PVD and CLI .  Multiple institutions will 
collectively contribute data to the registry to adv ance the understanding of patient 
management and outcomes across all endovascular  treatment modalities  for advanced PVD 
and CLI. 
    
PRIME Registry  Page 2 of 5 Protocol v 3 02/19/2016   
2. Objectives : 
The primary objective  of PRIME  is to systematically document endovascular 
revascularization approaches and patien t outcomes  with advanced P VD and CLI both in -
hospital and at 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and annually for 3  years following treatment.   
Secondarily, by collecting and summarizing data describing the management and outcomes 
of these patients, manuscripts will be generated with the goal of improving outcomes.  
Possible examples include:   
• A decrease in the major amputation rate  
• A decrease in complications associated with peripheral vascular i nterventions  
• Improve ments in  the quality of life for patients  with advanced PVD and CLI 
• Development of mathematical tools to assess risk and outcomes  
• Develop ment of  standardized testing methodologies  
• Development of  endovascular  treatment guidelines  
• Development of follow -up protocols for interventional  patients with advanc ed PVD 
and CLI 
• The promotion of  evidence -based care models  
• A reduction in the cost of treating patients with advanced PVD and CLI   
 
3. Methods  
Eligible patients with advanced PVD and CLI at medical centers participating  in the 
PRIME Registry will be  considere d for enrollment in the PRIME registry.    Patients 
will be asked to give consent  within 30 days prior and 60 days post  index procedure  
to participate.  Once  patient s are  are enrolled , their demographics, medical history, 
disease -relevant conditions, treat ment  details  and outcomes will be collected for 3 
years.  Please refer to the initial and follow -up data  form for variables collected in the 
PRIME registry database.  Data collected m eet the requirements of a “Limited Data 
Set” as defined by the United Sta tes HIPAA regulations.  Data contain selected 
dates but do not include patient names , initials,  or medical record numbers.  Using 
web-based data entry this information  will be placed into a  secure  password 
protected on -line database.  Patients are identifi ed in the database by a unique 
subject record number assigned sequentially by the electronic database and 
unrelated to their medical record number. This number will follow the patient for the 
duration of the study.  These unique numbers can only be matched  with patient 
identifiers by the individual site coordinator at each institution.  It is up to the 
individual  sites to keep a secure  key linking the patient and the subject id number for 
accurate patient follow -up.   
 
Oversight of the PRIME Registry is pro vided by a Steering Com mittee and 
Publications Committee.  These committees are comprised of physicians from 
participating sites  and the PRIME Coordinating Center .  Decisions regarding 
protocol changes, investigator roles, addition or deletion of participa ting sites and 
publicat ion of abstracts and manuscripts are made by these committees.  Data used 
in abstracts and manuscripts is aggregate data only.  No identifiable data is used.  
 
Participant data will be stored in PRIME for an indefinite period of time .  Participants 
will not  be informed of the results of retrospective research stud ies involving the use  
of their information contained in  PRIME.  
 
    
PRIME Registry  Page 3 of 5 Protocol v 3 02/19/2016  4. Human Subjects : 
Individuals to be approached for part icipation in PRIME will meet each of the following  
inclusi on criteria : 
a) Adult male and female  patients  > 18 years of age .  
b) Patients who are to receive or have received lower extremity endovascular 
intervention   
c) Rutherford II I-VI Classification  
d) Ability to provide informed consent  within 30 day prior to  60 days post endovascular 
intervention . 
e) Ability to follow up at enrollment site.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Inability or unwillingness to consent for participation in the registry . 
 
Note:  Since participation in PRIME  does not involve a risk of physical harm , women of 
childbearing potential will not be queried as to pregnancy status or tested for pregnancy.  
 
5. Recruitment Procedures : 
Patients who meet eligibility criteria  at participating PRIME centers  will be invited to 
participate in PRIME .  Unless otherwise approved, a ll consecutive patients  will be enrolled 
each month .  Due to the voluntary na ture of this registry, sites may have limited resources.  
If all consecutive patients are not able to be enrolled, an alternate  method of enrolling 
patients may be utilized , if used co nsistently and approved  by the site ’s IRB and the PRIME 
Steering Committee.  Some examples would be enrolling the  first 5  or 10 eligible patients  
each month  or enrolling only on odd numbered days . Although t he recruitment process may 
vary by site, potentia l participants will be approached by a member of the research staff and 
will be asked to review a copy of the  IRB-approved  informed consent form . The research 
staff will review the consent form and address any questions or concerns prior to obtaining 
written informed consent for PRIME  participation. The research staff  will also address any 
future questions or concerns  that may occur . To insure lack of selection bias, a screening 
log of subjects who meet eligibility criteria, but decline consent, will be kep t at the site. A de -
identified version of this list will be provided to the coordinating center on requ est.  
 
6. Potential Risks of Research Registry Participation : 
There are no risks of physical harm associated with participation in PRIME  as this is an 
obser vational registry only and no treatment is added or dro pped  due to a patient’s 
participation in the registry .  Participation in PRIME  does involve the potential risks of a 
breach of confidentiality of the medical record information and associated privacy o f the 
participants. Such risks will be minimized by 1) removing direct participant identifiers (i.e., 
there will be no names, social security numbers, medical record numbers  recorded ); 2) 
placing recorded information on a secure server with limited access to information  linking  
unique subject record numbers with direct participant identifiers; and 3) limiting access to 
the PRIME database to the appropriate  IRB-approved  staff at each site .  Each user at a site 
will have his or her  own log -on and password to access the database.  Obtaining access to 
the data base allows research staff the ability to enter patient s’ clinical data and to view their 
site’s data.  Site u sers are unable to access or view data from other sites.  
. 
   
7. Potential Benefits of Research Reg istry Participation:  
There are no direct benef its associated with participation in PRIME. However, the use of 
information contained within PRIME for retrospective analyses may be of future benefit to 
patients with PVD.  Participants in PRIME will be inform ed of future research studies 
involving PVD for which they may be eligible  if they so desire . 
    
PRIME Registry  Page 4 of 5 Protocol v 3 02/19/2016   
8. Costs and Payments:  
All costs associated with the implementation and maintenance of PRIME shall be supported 
by Metro Health through institutional support and un restricted grants from industry . No costs 
will be incurred by PRIME  participants . Patients will not be remunerated  for their 
participation in PRIME .  Similarly, as this is a voluntary registry, sites will not be paid to 
participate in the registry.  
 
9. Additi on of PRIME Reg istry Sites:  
Once the decision is made by the PRIME Steering Committee to add a new site, the 
Coordinating Center will communicate with that site to insure all regulatory documents are 
completed.  PRIME Registry members are required to have active IRB appr oval and a 
signed data use agreement to participate in PRIME.  Only after these documents are 
received by the Coordinating Center are users at each site issued log -ons and passwords 
for the database.  Patient consent requirements are determi ned by each sit e’s IRB.  IRB 
approval must be updated regularly based on the schedule determined by each institution’s 
review board.  Sites that ha ve not maintain ed IRB approval may not continue to add patients 
to the registry  until their IRB approval is obtained . 
 
In order to ensure data accuracy, periodic auditing of participating sites will be conducted.  
The PRIME Coordinating Center  will receive de-identified source documents for the first five 
patients  enrolled at  each  new center ; additionally, docum entation for subsequent patients 
may be requested if deemed necessary by the reviewers.  Further adjudication may be 
performed at random intervals . 
 
10. Statistical Design:  
Coordinating C enter  statisticians combine data collected from all sites in aggregate 
tables.  Only aggregate data is used in analysis.  No identifiable data are used.   
 
Continuous data shall be expressed as mean s +/-standard deviations  or medians (Q1 -Q3) 
as appropriate .  Discrete data shall be expressed as counts and percentage s.  Chi-squar ed, 
Fisher’s exact tests and student’s t -tests may be used as appropriate to determine statistical 
significance.   Linear and logistic regression and survival analysis may be applied  to create 
statistical models . 
 
11. Protocol References : 
1. Shammas NW. Epidemiology, classification, and modifiable risk factors of 
peripheral arterial disease. Vasc H ealth Risk Manag 2007;3(2):229 -34. 
2. Forbes JF, Adam DJ, Bell J, Fowkes FG, Gillespie I, Raab GM, et al. Bypass 
versus Angioplasty in Sever e Ischaemia o f the Leg (BASIL) trial: Health -related 
quality of life outcomes, resource utilization, and cost -effectiveness analysis. J 
Vasc Surg 2010;51(5 Suppl):43S -51S. 
3. Ghaferi AA, Birkmeyer JD, Dimick JB. Variation in hospital mortality associated 
with inpatient su rgery. N Engl J Med 2009;361(14):1368 -75. 
4. Goodney PP, Travis LL, Nallamothu BK, Holman K, Suckow B, Henke PK, et al. 
Variation in the use of lower extremity vascular procedures for critical limb 
ischemia. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2012;5(1 ):94-102. 
5. Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, Nehler MR, Harris KA, Fowkes FG, et al. 
Inter-Society Consensus for the Management of Peripheral Arterial Disease 
(TASC II). J Vasc Surg 2007;45 Suppl S:S5 -67. 
    
PRIME Registry  Page 5 of 5 Protocol v 3 02/19/2016   
12. Database References:  
1. Creager MA, Belkin M, Bluth E I, Casey DE J r, Chaturvedi S, Dake MD, et al.  
Key Data Elements and Definitions for Peripheral Atherosclerotic Vascular 
Disease.  J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;59(3):294 -357. 
2. Hirsch AT, Haskal ZJ, Hertzer NR, Bakal CW, Creager MA, Halperin JL, et al.  
ACC/AHA 20 05 Guidelines  for the Management of Patients With Peripheral 
Arterial Disease (Lower Extremity, Renal, Mesenteric, and Abdominal Aortic).  
JACC 2006;47(6):1239 -1312.  
3. Mehran R, Rao SV, Bhatt, DL, Gibson CM, Caixeta A, Eikelboom J, et al.  
Standardized Bleed ing Definitio ns for Cardiovascular Clinical Trials.  Circulation 
AHA 2011;123:2736 -2747  
4. Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, Nehler MR, Harris KA, Fowkes FG, et al. 
Inter-Society Consensus for the Management of Peripheral Arterial Disease 
(TASC II). J Vasc Su rg 2007;45 Su ppl S:S5 -67. 