[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  1 of 43   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognitively  Augmented  Behavioral  Activation  for Veterans  with Comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  
Protocol  #: [Version  14, 8/12/2020 ] 
Funding  Agency:  RR&D  Merit  Review  
 
Principal  Investigator/Study  Chair:  Daniel  Storzbach, Ph.D  and Amy  Wagner,  Ph.D  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  2 of 43  Abstract  
Veterans  returning  from the current  conflicts  in Iraq and Afghanistan  exhibit  high rates  of comorbid   mTBI/PTSD.  Given  the 
comorbidity and neuropsychiatric  symptom  overlap  of these  disorders,  it can be difficult  to determine  whether  problems  
and disruptions  in functioning  are due to mTBI,  PTSD,  or both.  Hence,  it is challenging  for providers  to know  how to 
prioritize  these  patients’  clinical  issues  and how to effectively  treat them.  Currently,  there  are no evidence -based  treatments  
for comorbid  mTBI/PTSD.  Further,  it is unclear  to what extent  existing  treatments  for each  disorder  can be           
adherently  and effectively  implemented  for the other.  As such,  most  current  treatment  recommendations  suggest  a holistic   
or integrated  approach  to treatment  for comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  targeting  symptoms  and functionality  rather  than underlying  
etiology.  We are proposing  a treatment  for comorbid  mTBI  and PTSD  that directly  targets  daily functioning  and quality  of 
life. The primary  objective  of this study  is to evaluate  the efficacy  of Cognitively  Augmented  Behavioral  Activation  (CABA),  a   
new hybrid  treatment  for veterans  diagnosed  with comorbid  mild Traumatic  Brain  Injury  (mTBI)  and posttraumatic         
stress  disorder  (PTSD).  The study’s  specific  goals  are to determine  whether:  1) CABA  reduces  PTSD  symptoms  in  
veterans  with mTBI/PTSD,  2) CABA  reduces  cognitive -related  functional  impairment  in veterans  with mTBI/PTSD,  3) CABA  
results  in improvements  in depression  symptoms,  cognitive  functioning,  and quality  of life in veterans  with 
mTBI/PTSD;  and 4) CABA  is an acceptable  treatment  for veterans  with mTBI/PTSD . The overall  goal is to develop  an 
evidence -based  manualized  treatment  for comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  that can be readily  implemented  in Veterans  Health  
Administration  (VHA)  treatment  settings.  The study  design  makes  use of the convergent  availability  of resources  at the two 
participating  Veterans  Administration  Medical  Centers  (VAMCs)  in Portland,  Oregon,  and Seattle,  Washington  to conduct  a 
Randomized  Controlled  Trial (RCT)  of CABA.  The study  will recruit  a total of 192 veterans  ≤ 55 years  of age, 96 participants  at 
each  site, enrolled  at participating  VAMCs  who are diagnosed  with both mTBI  and PTSD.  Inclusion  criteria  will be 1) 
Veterans  ≤ 55 years  of age enrolled  at one of the participating  VA sites who are able to provide  informed  consent,  2) Diagnosis  
of PTSD  based  on the Clinician  Administered  PTSD  Scale  (Blake  et al., 1990),  3) Positive  screen  on the Structured  Interview  
for Collecting  Head  Trauma  Event  Characteristics  as outlined  by the VA/DoD  Clinical  Practice  Guideline  for        
Management  of Concussion/mTBI  and positively  endorsed  any of the Neurobehavioral  Symptom  Inventory  (NSI)  cognitive  
symptoms  items  (items  13-17), 4) English  speaking,  able to attend treatment (if in CABA condition)  and assessment  
sessions , and willing  to refrain  from additional  mental  health  treatment  during  the first 3 1/2 months  of the active  phase  of 
treatment  if they are assigned  to the CABA  condition,  and 5) Willingness  to participate  in audio - recorded  sessions.  
Exclusion  criteria  will be 1) Current  diagnosis  of moderate  or severe  substance  (alcohol)  use disorder  using  DSM -5 criteria  
within  the past 30 days,  2) Current  Bipolar  or psychotic  disorder  (requirement  to refrain  from additional  treatments  might  be 
harmful),  3) Veterans  with a history  indicated  by medical  record  review  of a diagnosis  of moderate,  severe,  or penetrating  
TBI, or self- reported  history  on the Structured  Interview  for Collecting  Head  Trauma  Event  Characteristics  of TBI with PTA 
greater  than 24 hours  or LOC greater  than 30 minutes,  4) Active  suicidal  intent  indicating  significant  clinical  risk, which  
would  suggest  that a treatment  specifically  targeting  this intent  was indicated  clients  who report  suicidal  ideation  without   
imminent  risk will be admitted  into the study,  5) Initiated  psychotropic  medication,  including  Prazosin,  within  4 weeks  or 
changed  dosage  within  2 weeks  prior to the first assessment,  as this would  make  it difficult  to determine  which  treatment  
contributed  to change  in the CABA  condition;  additionally,  started  or changed  dosage  of sleep  medication  or low dosages  
of tricyclic  antidepressant  or trazodone  for pain or sleep  within  1 week  prior to the first assessment.  Participants  could  be 
re-considered  for eligibility  after stability  on medication  was achieved.  Enrollees  will be asked,  but not prohibited,  to hold the 
doses  of the current  medications  stable  over the course  of enrollment  (though  changes  in medications  after enrollment  will 
not exclude  them  from on-going  participation),  6) Auditory  or visual  impairments  that would  compromise  ability  to participate  
cognitive  rehabilitation  group  or benefit  from compensatory  strategies.  Eligible  participants  will be randomly  assigned  to 
either  the CABA  or Treatment  as Usual  (TAU)  group.  Participants  in the CABA  group  will receive  the CABA  intervention  via 
telehealth (video or telephone) during  the first 14 weeks  of their participation  in the  study,  whereas  TAU participants  will continue  
to receive  TAU (usual  care in a PTSD  specialty  treatment  clinic,  but no CABA)  during  their participation  in the study.  Both 
groups  will undergo  evaluations  at baseline,  7 weeks  (mid-treatment),  and 14 weeks  (post -treatment) . During  their study  
participation,  all participants  will continue  to receive  their usual  medical  care.  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  3 of 43  List of Abbreviations  
 
AIC Akaikes  Information  Criterion  
ANOVA  Analysis of Variance  
BA Behavioral  Activation  
BDI-II Beck  Depression  Inventory,  Second  Edition  
CABA  Cognitively  Augmented  Behavioral  Activation  
CAPS -IV Clinician  Administered  PTSD  Scale  
CCT Compensatory  Cognitive  Training  
CD Compact  Disc 
CIQ Community  Integration  Questionnaire  
CSQ Client  Satisfaction  Questionnaire  
CogSMART  Cognitive Symptom  Management  and Rehabilitation  Therapy  
Co-PIs Co-Principal  Investigators  
COWAT  Controlled  Oral Word  Association  Test 
CPT Cognitive Processing  Therapy  
CSRD  Clinical  Sciences  Research  Development  
CST Cognitive Strategies  Training  
CVLT -II California  Verbal  Learning  Test-2nd Edition  
df degrees  of freedom  
D-KEFS  Delis -Kaplan  Executive  Function  System  
DoD Department  of Defense  
DSMB  Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Board  
DVA Department  of Veterans  Affairs  
GW Gulf War 
HCS  Health  Care  System  
HIPAA  Health  Insurance  Portability  and Accountability  Act 
HLM  Hierarchical  Models  
HVLT -R Hopkins Verbal  Learning  Test – Revised  
IADL  Independent  Activities of Daily  Living  
ICC Intra-class  Correlation  Coefficient  
ICD International  Classification of Disease  
IRB Institutional  Review  Board  
IQ Intelligence  Quotient  
IOM Institute  of Medicine  
MCI Mild Cognitive  Impairment  
MCQ  Memory  Compensation  Questionnaire  
MS Multiple  Sclerosis  
MSNQ  Multiple  Sclerosis Neuropsychological  Screening  Questionnaire  
MINI  Mini International  Neuropsychiatric  Interview  
mTBI  Mild Traumatic Brain  Injury  
NP Neuropsychological  
Neuro -QOL Quality  of Life in Neurological  Disorders  
NIMH  National  Institute  of Mental  Health  
NINDS  National  Institute  of Neurological  Disorders  and Stroke  
NOS  Not Otherwise Specified  
NSI Neurobehavioral  Symptom  Inventory  
OEF Operation  Enduring  Freedom  
OIF Operation  Iraqi Freedom  
OND  Operation  New Dawn  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  4 of 43  PCCS  Portland  Cognitive  Strategies  Scale  
PCL-C PTSD  Checklist  – Civilian  Version  
PCL-M PTSD  Checklist  – Military  Version  
PDA Personal  Digital  Assistant  
PE Prolonged  Exposure  
PI Principal  Investigator  
PRMQ  Prospective -Retrospective Memory  Questionnaire  
PTSD  Post Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  
PEHRC  Portland  Environmental  Hazards  Research  Center  
RBANS  Repeatable  Battery  for Assessment  of Neuropsychological  Status  
RMASS  Research Management  and Study  Skills  
RR&D  Rehabilitation  Research  and Development  
RRM  Random  Regression  Model  
SAS Statistical  Analysis Software  
SD standard  deviation  
SDS Severity  Dependence  Scale  
ShDS  Sheehan  Disability  Scale  
SLS Satisfaction  with Life Scale  
SS Error  Sum of Squares  
TBI Traumatic  Brain  Injury  
TAU Treatment  as Usual  
TMT Trail Making  Test 
TRAC  Trigger  Response,  Alternative  Coping  
TRAP  Trigger  Response,  Avoidance  Pattern  
UC Usual  Care 
VAMC  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center  
VAPORHCS  Veterans  Affairs  Portland  Health  Care  System  
VAPSHCS  Veterans  Affairs  Puget  Sound  Health  Care  System  
VASDHS  Veterans  Affairs  San Diego  Healthcare  System  
VHA Veterans  Healthcare  Administration  
VISNS  Veterans  Integrated  Service  Networks  
VVC VA Video Connect  
WAIS -III Wechsler Adult  Intelligence  Scale -3rd Edition  
WAIS_IV  Wechsler Adult  Intelligenc e Scale -4th Edition  
WRAT -4 Wide  Range Achievement  Test-4th Edition  
WMS -4 Wechsler Memory  Scale -4th Edition  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  5 of 43  Contents  
Protocol  Title ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  7 
1.0 Study  Personnel  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  7 
2.0 Introducti on ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 8 
3.0 Objecti ves ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 15 
4.0 Resources and Personnel  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 16 
5.1 Study  Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  17 
5.2 Study  Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  17 
5.3 Recruitment  Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  23 
5.4 Informed  Consent  Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 25 
5.5 Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 26 
5.6 Study  Evaluations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  27 
5.7 Data  Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  31 
5.8 Withdrawal  of Subject s. ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  36 
6.0 Reporti ng ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 37 
7.0 Privacy  and Confidentialit y ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 37 
8.0 Communication  Plan ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  38 
9.0 Referen ces ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  39 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  6 of 43  Protocol  Title:  Cognitively  Augmented  Behavioral  Activation  for 
Veterans  with Comorbid  mTBI /PTSD  
 
1.1 Study  Personnel  
 
Principal  Investigator/Study  Chair  (and  Portland  Site PI): Daniel  
Storzbach,  Ph.D,  VAPORHCSVAPORHCS  503-220-8262  
x56497;  Daniel.storzbach@va.gov  
Co-PI/Study  Chair:  
Amy Wagner,  Ph.D,  VAPORHCSVAPORHCS  
503-220-8262  x33365;  Amy.wagner@va.gov  
Seattle  Site PI: 
Kathleen Pagulayan , Ph.D,  VAPSHCS  
206-768-5321; Kathleen.pagulayan@va.gov   
Co-Investigators:  
• Megan  Callahan,  Psy.D,  VAPORHCS:  Interventionist,  Multisite  Study  Coordinator   
503-220-8262  x50525;  Megan.Callahan@va.gov  
• Marilyn  Huckans,  Ph.D,  VAPORHCS  
503-220-8262  x54689;  marilyn .huckans@va.gov  
• Matthew Jakupcak , Ph.D, VAPSHCS  
206-277-1853;  matthew.jakupcak@va.gov  
• Mai Roost,  Ph.D  VAPORHCS;  Interventionist   
503-220-8262  x58308;  mai.roost@va.gov  
• Maya  O’Neil,  Ph.D,  VAPORHCS:  Multisite  Data Manager   
503-220-8262  x54522;  maya.oneil@va.gov  
• Halina  Kowalski,  MA, MFT,  NCC, LPCI,  VAPORHCS;  Interventionist   
503-220-8262  x53013  Halina.kowalski@va.gov  
Consultants/Contractors:  
• Jennifer  Vasterling,  Ph.D,  Boston VAMC  
Consultant  
857-364-6522;  jennifer.vasterling@va.gov  
• Jesse  Fann,  Ph.D,  University  of Washington  Department  of Psychiatry  
Consultant  
206-685-4280;  fann@u.washington.edu  
• Shah  Golshan,  Ph.D  UCSD  
Contracted  Study  Statistician  
858-822-7737;  sgolshan@ucsd.edu  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  7 of 43  2.0 Introduction  
 
mTBI  and PTSD  are highly  prevalent  and frequently  comorbid  among  Veterans.  Studies  estimate  that 15- 
23% of those  who have served  in Iraq and Afghanistan  have  experienced  TBIs1, the majority  of which  are 
defined  as mild traumatic  brain  injuries  (mTBI).   Many  of these  individuals  sustain  more  than one mTBI  over  
the course  of their deployments2, often  with little recovery  time between exposures  due to the demands  of a 
combat  zone.  Both of these  factors  (multiple  concussions  and insufficient  recovery  time)  increase  the risk for 
persisting  cognitive  difficulties  frequently  seen  in this population3. Posttraumatic  stress  disorder  (PTSD)  is one 
of the most  common  mental  health  disorders  among  Veterans of wartime  service,  affecting approximately  15% 
of Veterans  across  eras4. In their comprehensive review,  Carlson  et al.5 report  an overall  prevalence  of 
comorbid  TBI and PTSD  among  OIF/OEF  Veterans at 5-7%. Significantly,  individuals with TBI are at increased  
risk for developing  PTSD6. Among Veterans  with histories of TBI, rates  of PTSD  range  from 33-65%5,7, with 
rates  highest  among those  seeking clinical  care.  Both mTBI  and PTSD  are associated with significant   
functional  disability  and high personal,  social,  and health  care costs8, with accumulating  evidence  that their 
comorbidity  exacts  an even  greater  impact  on functionality  than either  disorder  alone9. 
 
The reasons  for comorbidity  between  PTSD  and mTBI  are complex,  likely  related  to both  causal  factors  
and neuropsychiatric  symptom overlap  between  disorders  (Vasterling,  Bryant,  & Keane,  2012).  First,  
many  events  (e.g.,  motor  vehicle accidents,  combat  explosions)  that increase  the risk of TBI can also be 
psychologically  traumatic.  Modern  warfare  involving  multiple  deployments  and high rates  of blast exposure  has 
greatly  increased  Service  Members’  risk of TBI and PTSD10. There  is evidence  for similar  neuroanatomical  
underpinnings  for TBI and PTSD.  Neuroimaging  studies  suggest  the same  brain  regions  are affected  in both  
TBI and PTSD  (including  prefrontal  cortex, hippocampus,  and amygdala)10,11. Neurobiological  processes  
believed  most  affected  by TBI have  been  linked  to the development  and course  of PTSD,  such as problems  
with executive  control,  affect  regulation12,13  and memory  encoding  and integration14. The overlap  between   
mTBI  and PTSD  may be accounted  for at least in part by overlap  in symptoms,  regardless  of etiology.  Core  
symptoms  of PTSD  and postconcussive  syndrome  include  problems  with concentration/attention,  memory,  
sleep  disturbance,  and irritability15,16. Moreover,  cognitive  complaints  and objective  neurocognitive  deficits  are 
common  among  individuals  with PTSD,  even  in the absence  of TBI history11,17. 
 
Comorbidity  and neuropsychiatric symptom  overlap  pose  challenges  for the treatment  of individuals  
with both  mTBI  and PTSD.  There  are no established  evidence -based  treatments or treatment  guidelines  for 
individuals  with comorbid  mTBI  and PTSD10,18  due in large  part to the complexity  of this population  and 
uncertainty  about  specific  causal  or maintaining  factors. For example,  given  the comorbidity  and symptom  
overlap,  it can be difficult  to determine  whether  problems  and disruptions  in functioning are due to mTBI,  
PTSD,  or both10,19, and hence,  how to prioritize  treatment  (e.g.,  what to treat first).  Further,  it is unclear  to what 
extent  existing treatments  for each  disorder  can be adherently  and effectively  implemented  for the other.  For 
instance,  the two evidence -based  treatments  for PTSD  that are widely  disseminated  throughout  the VA are 
Cognitive  Processing  Therapy20 and Prolonged  Exposure21. Both are considered  "trauma  processing"  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  8 of 43  therapies and require  a moderate  degree  of cognitive  resources  and assume  normative  learning  and emotion  
regulation abilities.  It is possible  that cognitive  deficits  that occur  with mTBI  could  interfere  with these  
treatments22,23, though  this is not well-studied.  Preliminary  studies  provide  some  evidence  that individuals  with 
mTBI  can engage  in and benefit  from PE  and CPT24,25, yet controlled  trials have  not been  conducted  and the 
impact  of these  treatments on cognitive  symptoms  remains unknown.  
 
Likewise,  it is conceivable  that treatment  of cognitive  problems  related  to mTBI could  be impeded  by 
symptoms  specific  to PTSD,  such  as avoidance  and emotion  dysregulation26, though  no study  has evaluated  
treatment  for mTBI -related problems among  individuals  with comorbid  mTBI/PTSD.  There  are few studies  
evaluating  treatment  for mTBI -related  cognitive  impairment  alone,  due in large  part to controversies  regarding  
definition  and measurement  of mTBI  and etiology  of cognitive  difficulties27. Investigators  from our research  
group28 conducted  a non-randomized  pilot study  examining  the efficacy  of cognitive  strategy  training  in 
OEF/OIF  Veterans  with mTBI  for whom  PTSD  symptom  severity  was also evaluated  (by the PTSD  Checklist).  
Average  pre-treatment  levels  of PTSD  were  above  clinical  cut-off for syndromal  PTSD.  At post-test, Veterans  
reported  significant  improvement  of cognitive  symptom  severity,  depression,  and quality  of life; however,  no 
changes  were  evident  in PTSD  severity.  
 
Further complicating  treatment  decisions,  current  theories  suggest  the symptoms  of mTBI  and PTSD  are 
interrelated  by two-way relationships,  creating multiple  “vicious  cycle”  feedback  loops  such  that mTBI  and 
PTSD  have  the potential  to become  mutually  self-sustaining27,28,29. For instance,  comorbid  PTSD  and mTBI - 
initiated  cognitive  problems  could  result  in maladaptive  behaviors  that reduce  postdeployment  occupational   
and social  functioning,  leading  to increased  stress  that exacerbates  PTSD  and cognitive  problems;  increased  
stress  and cognitive  problems  then result  in further  vocational  decline  (or unemployment)  and relationship  
problems,  and so on. Also implicated in these  theories  are the impacts  of additional  common  comorbidities with 
mTBI,  and PTSD,  including  chronic  pain, depression,  and functional  impairment  due to physical  injuries30. As 
such,  most  current  treatment  recommendations  suggest  a holistic  or integrated  treatment  approach  for 
comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  targeting  symptoms  and functionality  rather  than etiology10,31 . 
 
Veterans  with mTBI and PTSD  may benefit  from  alternative,  present -centered  approaches  that 
emphasize  first improving  daily  functioning,  quality  of life, and related  patient -centered  outcomes.  
Based  on population  complexities and heterogeneity,  difficulties  in isolating causal  and maintaining  factors,   
and recommendations  in the field, we are proposing  a treatment  for comorbid  mTBI  and PTSD  that directly  
targets  daily functioning and quality  of life. There  are additional  reasons  to consider  alternative,  present - 
centered  approaches.  In the treatment  of PTSD,  there  exist numerous  barriers  to the provision of evidence - 
based,  trauma -processing  therapies32. Among  Veterans,  commonly  reported  barriers include  stigma  about  
seeking  mental  health  care,  difficulties  accessing care,  and competing  life circumstances  (e.g.,  childcare33). Of 
those  who do seek care there  is substantial  drop-out from trauma -focused  treatments  (upwards  of 50%34) with 
an overall  recovery  rate for such  treatments  estimated  at 40% when  non-completers  are considered35. Further,  
there  is evidence  that many  Veterans are disinclined  to talk about  past traumatic  experiences36 and instead  
have  a preference  for present -focused,  skills-based interventions37. Present -centered  treatments have been  
found  to be efficacious  in the treatment  of PTSD  with less treatment  drop-out and comparable  long-term 
outcomes  relative  to trauma  focused  treatments38,39. Additional  provider - and systems -level barriers  to the 
provision  of trauma -focused  treatments  include  insufficient  training/confidence  and time.  Even  in the VA where  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  9 of 43  most  clinicians  in PTSD  specialty  clinics have  been  trained in CPT or PE, a recent  national  survey  found  that 
fewer  than 30% of patients were  receiving  these  treatments40. Hoge35 has estimated  that, due to issues  of 
tolerability,  evidence -based  trauma -focused  PTSD  treatments  will only reach  about  20% of all Veterans  in 
need.  Though  not yet studied,  barriers  to care may be even  greater  among  those  with comorbid  mTBI  and 
PTSD  due to their increased  functional  disabilities.  To increase  the reach  of mental  healthcare  services,  
additional  treatments  are needed  that are more  accessible  to the large  numbers  of Veterans  with PTSD  and 
comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  not currently  accessing or benefitting  from care.  
 
Our proposed  treatment  for comorbid  mTBI/PTSD,  Cognitively -Augmented  Behavioral  Activation  
(CABA)  combines  and builds  on our previously  independent  treatment  development  efforts.  Next  we 
describe  our independent  research  followed  by our collaborative  work  and the focus  of this proposal.  
Cognitive  Interventions  for mTBI . Dr. Huckans and colleagues  initially  developed  an 8-week manualized  
treatment  (Cognitive  Strategies  Training,  CST)  for cognitive  symptoms  associated with mTBI,  consisting  of 
group  interactive  didactics,  in-class  discussions,  and activities  which  introduce  participants  to a variety  of 
internal  strategies and external  aids designed  to help them  manage  problems  with memory,  attention,  
planning,  and organization.  CST aims to increase  overall  functionality  among  individuals  with mTBI  by 
encouraging  participants  to apply  their new skills  to areas  in their lives that are most  adversely  impacted  by 
cognitive  problems.  Based  on this initial  work,  CST was revised  and renamed  Compensatory  Cognitive  
Training  (CCT).  Outcome  data for both the open  trial of the initial  treatment28 and the subsequent  randomized  
controlled  trial of CCT (VA funded  through  RR&D  Merit  Review,  Storzbach,  PI) are strong.  CCT participants  
are demonstrating significant  reductions  in cognitive  symptoms  and depression.  Importantly,  participants  have  
not shown  significant  reduction in symptoms  of PTSD,  suggesting the need  for PTSD -specific  treatment  
components.  For further  details  see the Preliminary  Studies  section.  
 
Behavioral  Activation  for PTSD . Wagner  and Jakupcak  have  developed  an adaptation  of Behavioral  
Activation  therapy  (BA) for PTSD  for the large  number  of Veterans who decline,  drop out of, or do not have  
access  to trauma -focused  treatments.  BA is a well-established  treatment  for depression41,42,43,44  that targets  
patterns of avoidance  and involves  the identification  and enactment  of activities  that are reinforcing  to the 
individual  and consistent  with his/her  long-term goals45. As such, case formulations  and treatment  planning  are 
ideographic  and patient -centered,  based  on empirically -supported  principles of change.  The rationale  for the 
application  of BA to PTSD  is based  on the central  role of avoidance  in the development  and maintenance  of 
PTSD46, and is consistent  with contemporary  views of  mental  disorders  which  identify  unifying  constructs,  
including  avoidance,  across a range  of disorders47. Similar  to in vivo exposure  typical  of CBT treatment  for 
PTSD,  engaging  in goal-directed  activity  may allow  for re-learning  to conditioned  trauma -related  cues.  BA 
differs  from in vivo exposure  in that the focus is  specific  to activities  that are consistent  with Veterans'  goals,  as 
opposed  to those  that are avoided  because  they elicit fear or anxiety.  
 
Initial  studies  from our research  group  showed  BA significantly  reduced  PTSD  symptoms  among  both 
civilians48 and military  Veterans49,50,51. Importantly,  researchers  outside  of our group  have  also found  beneficial  
effects  of BA for the treatment  of PTSD52,53,54. Our most  recent  version  of BA builds on previous  work and was 
recently  evaluated in a dual-site, randomized  controlled  trial of BA for PTSD  compared  to Treatment  as Usual  
(PTSD  specialty  care)  (Wagner  & Jakupcak,  CSR&D  VA Merit Review).  Results  showed  that BA significantly  
reduced  PTSD  symptoms  with strong  effect  sizes  and demonstrated  some  superiority  over specialty PTSD  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  10 of 43  treatment  (see Preliminary Studies  for details).  Moreover,  findings  also indicate  that Veterans  who screened  
positive  for mTBI  demonstrated  an attenuated  response  to BA, underscoring  the importance  of augmenting  this 
treatment  with additional  strategies  to address  the unique  needs  of those  with mTBI/PTSD.  
 
Pilot  Data  on Our Combined  Intervention  (Cognitively -Augmented  Behavioral  Activation,  CABA)  are 
Promising.  CABA  is an integration  of CCT for mTBI -related  problems  and BA for PTSD.  Our rationale  for 
combining  CCT and BA is based  on compatibilities  in their structures and approach  and the unifying  focus  on 
increasing  functionality.  Further,  although not the focus  of the current  study,  previous  research  on BA suggests  
this integration  could  address  additional  comorbities  of the mTBI/PTSD  population,  including  depression42 and 
pain-related  problems55. CABA  is a 10-session  treatment  delivered  in weekly  90 minute  individual  therapy  
sessions.  At its core,  CABA  involves  using  Behavioral  Activation  to identify  meaningful  goals  and activities  
while simultaneously  learning  cognitive  strategies  to aid in working  towards  those  goals.  The initial  phase  of 
CABA  is devoted  to psychoeducation  about  mTBI  and PTSD,  the rationale  for BA, and lifestyle  strategies  that 
can improve  cognitive  functioning  and mood.  Cognitive  compensatory  skills  are taught  in each  subsequent  
week  that include  internal  and external  strategies  to help manage  problems  with memory,  attention,  and 
executive  functions.  The participant  and provider spend  portions  of each  session  applying  the cognitive  skills  to 
managing  real life situations  and increasing  behavioral  activation  in the service of personal  goals. Pilot data on 
5 Veterans indicate  that CABA  significantly  reduces  PTSD,  depression,  and cognitive  symptoms.  Treatment  
details  and pilot data are provided  below.  
 
Relevance  of the proposed  work  to the VA Patient  Care  Mission  
 
Demonstrating that an intervention  specifically  designed  for the treatment  of comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  is 
effective  for both PTSD  and cognitively -related  functional  impairment  would  be a significant  innovation  
addressing  a large  gap in currently  available  treatments  for Veterans.  If found  to be efficacious,  the CABA  
treatment  could  be quickly  disseminated  to all VHA facilities.  The CABA  intervention would  not only be useful    
in PTSD  specialty  care clinics,  but could  also be implemented  in rehabilitation  settings  such as Polytrauma  or 
Neuropsychology  Clinics,  specifically  targeting  Veterans  with mTBI/PTSD  who may not seek out traditional  
mental  health  treatment.  The program’s  portability  and ready  availability  make  it immediately  possible  to deliver  
evidence -based  treatment  specifically  designed  for Veterans  with comorbid  mTBI/PTSD.  Future  studies  will 
compare  CABA  to alternative  treatments  toward  further  identifying  the most  effective  treatments  for 
mTBI/PTSD.  Our proposed  study  is consistent  with one of the explicitly  stated  missions  of RR&D  which  
is to ensure  that Veterans  achieve  maximal  recovery  from  combat -related  neurotrauma by addressing  
co-occurring  conditions  or "polytrauma."  
 
PRELIMINARY  STUDIES  AND CURRENT  STATUS  OF THE FIELD  
 
The proposed  study  is a continuation  of multiple  collaborative  efforts  at VA Portland  HCS and Puget  
Sound  HCS.  A series of studies  investigating  treatments  for traumatic  psychological  effects  of battlefield  
deployment  has culminated  in the piloting  of a new intervention,  Cognitively  Augmented  Behavioral  Activation  
(CABA),  specifically  designed  for treatment  of Veterans with comorbid  mTBI/PTSD.  Wagner and Jakupcak  
have  been  pursuing  modifications  of Behavioral  Activation  therapy  to target  PTSD  as well as comorbid  PTSD  
and depression  among both civilian  and Veteran  populations.  They  recently  completed  a VA-funded  (CSR&D,  
Merit  Review)  for a dual-site (Portland  and Seattle  VAs)  randomized  controlled  trial of BA for the treatment  of 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  11 of 43  PTSD  among  OIF/OEF  Veterans.  Concurrent  with Wagner  and Jakupcak’s  research  on BA for PTSD,  
Storzbach  and Huckans  have  been  conducting research  on cognitive  rehabilitation  for Veterans with mTBI.  In 
2007,  Dr. Huckans developed  and initiated  the CST pilot study  at VAPORHCS.  Subsequently,  Dr. Storzbach’s  
currently  ongoing  3-year 4-site (VA Portland  HCS,  VA Puget  Sound  HCS,  VA San Diego  HCS,  and Boise  
VAMC)  randomized  controlled  trial of CCT was funded  through a VA Merit Review  award.  The study  evaluates  
the efficacy  of a manualized,  10-week,  CCT group  intervention  for OEF/OIF  Veterans  with cognitive  disorder  
resulting  from mTBI.  
 
Behavioral  Activation  for Veterans  with PTSD49. Feasibility  and effectiveness  of BA for PTSD  was  
examined in a sample of 11 Veterans  from a VA outpatient  PTSD  clinic  in this pre-post open  trial pilot study.  
The sample  was primarily  male,  Vietnam  era Veterans  all meeting  diagnostic  criteria  for PTSD.  Given  the 
chronic  nature  of PTSD  in this sample,  BA was delivered in its comprehensive  (i.e, 16-session)  format.  There  
was a statistically  significant  reduction  in PTSD  symptom  severity,  with five Veterans  demonstrating  reliable  
symptom  reductions on the Clinician -Administered  PTSD  Scale  for DSM -IV (CAPS -IV)56 that ranged  from 12 to 
44 points  (M = 21.6).  Six of ten Veterans  demonstrated  symptom  reduction  on the PTSD  Checklist57 and one 
demonstrated  an increase in symptom  severity.  The decrease  in PTSD  scores  was consistent  with small  to 
medium  effect  sizes.  These  results  provide  initial  support  for the application  of BA for the treatment  of PTSD  
among  Veterans.  Change  was evident  among  Veterans  with chronic  symptoms  of PTSD  and complex  
psychiatric profiles,  suggesting stronger  results  would  be likely  among  less chronic  and severe  populations.  
 
Behavioral  Activation  as an early  intervention  for PTSD  among  recently  injured  trauma  survivors48. This 
study  is an initial  examination  of BA for the treatment  of PTSD  among  civilian  survivors  of traumatic  injury.  The 
intent  was to provide  BA as an early  intervention  in an ecologically  valid (real-world)  manner.  Participants  were  
8 patients  recruited  from the surgical  ward  of a Level  1 trauma  center,  who met diagnostic  criteria  for PTSD   
one month  post-trauma,  randomly  assigned  to either  BA or treatment  as usual  (TAU).  This was an ethnically  
diverse  sample of men and women, ages  18-65. In consultation with the lead author  of the behavioral   
activation  manual  (Dr. Christopher  Martell),  the components  of comprehensive  BA were  modified  to be 
delivered  in 4-6, 90 minute  sessions.  In addition,  the psychoeducational  materials were  modified  to include  
descriptions of PTSD  symptoms  and to emphasize  the role of avoidance in PTSD.  The BA group  demonstrated  
significantly  greater  reductions in PTSD  (as measured  by the PCL)  than the control  group  (t = 2.07;  one-tailed   
p < .05; unbiased  Hedges’s  g = 1.27)  and there  was a trend  for the BA group  to score  better  than the control  
group  on a measure  of physical  functioning  (t = 1.89;  one-tailed  p = .05; unbiased  Hedges’s  g = 1.16).  These  
preliminary  data added  to the promise  of BA as an effective  alternative  for the early  intervention of PTSD.  
 
Behavioral  Activation  as a primary -care based  treatment  for PTSD  and depression  among  OIF/OEF  
Veterans50. This preliminary  study  examined  treatment -satisfaction  and potential  therapeutic  benefits  of BA as a 
primary  care-based  treatment  for PTSD  and depression among  OIF/OEF  Veterans.  Eight  Veterans  were  
enrolled,  6 completed  at least four sessions,  and 5 Veterans  completed  post-treatment  and 3-month  follow -up 
assessments  after receiving  5-8 weekly  sessions  of Behavioral  Activation  delivered  in a specialty  post- 
deployment  primary  care clinic.  The BA manual  was similar  to that used  by Wagner  and colleagues48, with the 
provision  of additional  sessions  (up to 8) in an effort  to strengthen  treatment  effects.  Participants  demonstrated  
a significant  reduction  in PTSD  over time as assessed  by both the Clinician  Administered  PTSD  Scale56 (F(2,3) 
= 10.66,  p < .05, d = 1.44,  with an average  drop in CAPS  scores  of 23.2 points)  and PTSD  Checklist57 (F(2,3) = 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  12 of 43  24.97,  p < .05, d = 1.87).  Effect  sizes  for change  in depression  and quality  of life were  strong (d = 1.28 and .62, 
respectively)  though  not statistically  significant.  Importantly,  treatment  satisfaction  ratings  were  high. 
 
Behavioral  Activation  as an alternative  treatment  for PTSD  among  OIF/OEF  Veterans  (Wagner  & 
Jakupcak,  in preparation).  This VA-funded  Merit  study  (CSR&D)  examined  our 8-session  (individual  therapy)  
adaptation  of Behavioral  Activation  (BA) for PTSD  among  returning  OIF/OEF  Veterans.  Utilizing  a randomized  
controlled  design  and two sites (Portland  and Seattle  VAs),  BA was compared  to Treatment  as Usual  (TAU),  
defined  as referral  to PTSD  Specialty  Clinics  (TAU  treatment  was not controlled  to allow  for maximum  flexibility  
in treatment  planning  and to reflect  actual  practice  in PTSD  specialty  clinics;  all TAU providers  were  trained  in 
either  Prolonged  Exposure  (PE),  Cognitive  Processing  Therapy  (CPT),  or both,  and Veterans  were  offered  a 
minimum  of 8 individual  therapy  appointments).  Our primary  aim was  to determine  whether  BA is effective  in 
reducing  PTSD  and depression  symptoms and therefore  is an effective  alternative  treatment  for veterans  with 
PTSD  (e.g.,  for Veterans  who do not want or cannot  access  trauma  processing  treatments).  Therefore,  we 
examined  within -group  as well as between -group  effects.  Participants  were  evaluated  for PTSD,  depression,  
and treatment  satisfaction  at pre- and post-treatment  as well as 3-month  follow -up. 
 
Eighty  Veterans  (40 in each  group)  were enrolled in the study.  Repeated  measures  analyses showed  strong  
treatment  effects  over time for PTSD  across  groups  as measured  by both the CAPS  and PCL (see Table  1), 
indicating that both BA and treatment  within  PTSD  specialty  clinics  are effective  in the treatment  of PTSD.   
Effect  sizes  for time (eta2) were  moderate  (CAPS=.42;  PCL=.43).  Time  effects  were also evident  for  
depression  as measured  by the BDI (eta2=.19).  There  was a significant  group  by time interaction  for the PCL 
(eta2=.08),  such  that Veterans  receiving  BA reported  greater  reductions  in PTSD  on this measure  
compared  to those  in TAU. Relevant  to the current  proposal,  exploratory  analyses  were  performed  by adding  
history  of mTBI  to the above  model.  There  was not a significant  three -way interaction.  However,  two-way 
interactions  of mTBI  by time (F=3.3,  p=.041,  eta2=.07) and treatment  by time (F=3.47,  p=.036,  eta2= .08) 
suggest  that across  groups,  individuals  without  a history  of mTBI  did significantly  better,  though  did not  
maintain  treatment  gains  over time to the same  extent  as those  with a history  of mTBI.  Treatment  satisfaction  
ratings were  high for both groups  and comparable.  These  data strongly  support  the effectiveness  of BA as an 
alternative  treatment  for PTSD  among  returning Veterans  (i.e., that it is at least as effective  and acceptable  as 
specialty  PTSD  treatment  that includes  PE or CPT),  and further  support  the rationale  for our combined  
intervention  for individuals with both PTSD  and TBI. 
 
Table  1. Pre- and Post-Treatment  and 3-month  follow -up Scores  (means,  standard  deviations)  
  BA   TAU   Time  x 
Pre Post 3-mo Pre Post 3-mo Time  F Group  F 
CAPS  72.7 (14.5)  54.7 (24.1)  57.7 (26.0)  79.4 (16.0)  62.6 (27.5)  56.5 (26.5)  31.0**  ns 
PCL 58.6 (7.7) 43.3 (12.8)  48.8 (14.4)  58.1 (8.6) 49.8 (13.1)  47.3 (13.4)  32.24**  3.8* 
BDI-II 24.2 (7.0) 18.7 (11.7)  21.0 (12.0)  24.4 (8.2) 20.3 (9.4) 18.3 (10.4)  10.1**  ns 
CAPS  = Clinician  Administered  PTSD  Scale;  PCL = PTSD  Checklist;  BDI-II = Beck  Depression  Inventory;  
**p<.01;  *p<.05  
 
Cognitive  Strategies  Training  CST (CST)  Pilot  Study28: Please  see published  study  in Appendix  4 for 
details.  Study  findings  demonstrated  beneficial  effects of CST has on self-reported  cognitive  functioning,  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  13 of 43  increased  use of compensatory  strategies and aids, and reduction  of psychiatric symptoms.  This study  was 
used  to support  the proposal  for the multi-site VA Merit  Review  study  that is currently  ongoing  (see below).  
Current  CCT multi -site Merit  Review  study:  The study  aims to evaluate  the efficacy  of a manualized,  10- 
week,  group  intervention  (Compensatory  Cognitive  Training,  CCT)  for OEF/OIF  Veterans  with cognitive  
disorder  resulting  from mTBI.  A modification  of CST,  CCT consists  of weekly  120-minute  group  sessions  over 
10 weeks.  The CCT curriculum  is an expansion  of CST  that includes  non-overlapping  elements  of a similar  
manual  developed  by Elizabeth  Twamley  and her colleagues  at the San Diego  VA59 in particular:  skills to 
manage  sleep  problems,  fatigue,  headaches,  anxiety/mood  difficulties,  improve  active  listening,  and promote  
relaxation  and mindfulness.  CCT also added  the use of behavioral  analyses  (as in BA) to individualize the 
treatment  and interventions  and therefore  improve  outcomes.  Study  design  is a randomized  controlled  trial, 
comparing  CCT to usual  care (UC).  The study  is expected  to conclude in 2013. Participants  in the CCT group  
receive  the CCT intervention  during  the first ten weeks  of their participation  in the study,  whereas  UC 
participants  continue  to receive  usual  care (which  can include  medical,  pharmacological,  and 
psychotherapeutic  care,  but no CCT intervention)  during  study  participation.  Both groups  undergo  evaluations  
at baseline,  5 weeks  (midway  through  CCT),  10 weeks  (immediately  after CCT completion),  and 15 weeks  (5 
weeks  after CCT completion).  Interim  pre- and post-treatment  cognitive  results  are shown  in Table  2. 
 
Table  2. Early  interim  results  of CCT  study  from participants  receiving  CCT (n = 20) 
 Pre-Tx score  Post-Tx score  df t p-value  Cohen’s  d 
HVLT -R 44.58  ± 12.38  54.89  ± 6.39 19 -4.06 .001 1.05 
Digit Span  8.50 ± 2.67 10.80  ± 2.71 19 -4.20 <.001  .85 
Letter  Fluency  9.90 ± 3.29 12.05  ± 2.30 19 -5.48 <.001  .96 
Category  Fluency  10.60  ± 3.19 12.15  ± 3.00 19 -2.87 .01 .50 
Note:  Data expressed  as mean  total score  ± standard  deviation  unless otherwise  noted.  
 
Cognitively -Augmented  Behavioral  Activation  (CABA)  clinical pilot study:  CABA  was developed by 
members of our research  team  (Dr. Roost,  with feedback by Drs. Storzbach  and Wagner)  and combines central  
components  of both BA for PTSD  and CCT (see "Experimental  Intervention"  below  for a detailed  description  of 
CABA;  see Appendix  2 for a draft of CABA).  CABA  is a 10-week  manualized  treatment  for comorbid   
TBI/PTSD,  delivered  in 90 minute  individual  sessions.  A clinical  pilot study,  which  began  in 2011, is being  
conducted  in order  to evaluate  the effectiveness  of this novel  approach  for individuals  with comorbid  
TBI/PTSD.  To date,  5 participants  have completed  the treatment.  All participants were  OEF/OIF  male  Veterans  
with PTSD  and cognitive  complaints  with mean  age of 37. All Veterans  completed  the 10-week  treatment;  
however,  one participant  did not complete  the post-assessment  due to the birth of his baby.  The high 
adherence  rate noted  during  the clinical  pilot study  is reflective  of CABA's  acceptability  and tolerability.  Pre-  
and post-assessment  measures  (one week  prior to and one week  following  treatment)  included  the BDI-II; 
PCL-M; NSI; MSNQ;  PRMQ;  MCQ;  WAIS  IV Matrix  Reasoning;  TMT A and B; and RBANS  List Learning,  Story  
Memory,  Digit Span, List Recall,  Story  Recall,  and Figure  Recall.  Analyses  revealed a significant  reduction in 
depression  (BDI-II; t=3.978;  p<0.05),  PTSD  (PCL -M; t=3.015;  p<0.05),  cognitive  complaints  (NSI;  t=7.816;  
p<0.01),  and attention/organization  problems  (MSNQ;  t=3/757;  p<0.05)  after the CABA  intervention.  All effect  
sizes  (Cohen's  d) were large:  0.86 for the BDI-II, 0.94 for the PCL-M, 1.61 for the NSI, and 1.26 for the MSNQ.  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  14 of 43  There  was a trend  for better  performance  on most  objective  neuropsychological  measures  (RBANS;  TMT A & 
B; WAIS -IV Matrix  Reasoning)  after the CABA  intervention;  however,  none  reached  statistical  significance.  
 
OIF/OEF/OND  Veterans  are targeted  for this project  due to the fact that Veterans  returning  from the current  
conflicts  in Iraq and Afghanistan  exhibit  high rates  of comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  for which  evidence -based  
treatments  do not currently  exist. The study  targets  outpatients  in that treatment  for both mTBI  and PTSD  
outside  of this study  occur  regularly  within  the VA clinical  setting  via outpatient  appointments.  Veterans  must  be 
adults  to serve  and thus the Veterans  we recruit  will all be 18 years  or older. Seniors  over 65 with cognitive  
complaints  will be excluded  due to increased  risk of age related  mild cognitive  impairments as opposed  to  
mTBI  which  would  confound  our results.  There  will be no other  restrictions  on age, ethnicity,  or race, and both 
men and women  will be included.  Recruitment  fliers  will specifically  include  the statement,  “women  and 
members of minority  groups  are encouraged  to participate.”  Of the OEF/OIF/OND  veterans  with mTBI,  95% of 
veterans  are reported  to be male.  Seventy -percent  of these  veterans  reported  their race to be white,  while  19% 
reported  as non-white.  The race of 11% of these  veterans was categorized as unknown.  This breakdown  of 
gender  and race is similar  to populations  seen  in studies  of OEF/OIF  veterans with mTBI  conducted  by this 
research  group.  Thus,  we would  expect  to recruit  a similar  population  that would  be representative  of OEF/OIF  
veterans  with mTBI.  
 
 
3.0 Objectives  
 
The primary  objective  of this study  is to evaluate  the efficacy  of CABA  for Veterans  with comorbid  mTBI/PTSD.  
The overall  goal is to develop  an evidence -based  manualized  treatment  that can be  readily  implemented  in 
VHA treatment  settings.  The study  will use a randomized  controlled  design to address  the following  specific  
aims and hypotheses:  
 
Specific  Aim 1: To determine  if CABA  reduces  PTSD  symptoms.  
Specific  Aim 2: To determine  if CABA  reduces  cognitive -related  functional  impairment.  
Specific  Aim 3: To determine  if CABA  is associated with additional  positive  clinical  effects  in patient -centered  
outcomes,  including  improved  mood,  adaptive  cognitive  function,  and quality  of life. 
Specific  Aim 4: To evaluate  the overall  acceptability  of this treatment.  
 
Primary  hypotheses:  
1a) CABA  treated  comorbid  mTBI/PTSD -diagnosed  Veterans  will demonstrate  significantly  decreased  PTSD  
symptom  severity  compared  to those  receiving Treatment  as Usual  (TAU),  defined  as standard  PTSD  specialty  
care.  
1b) CABA  treated  comorbid  mTBI/PTSD -diagnosed  Veterans will display  significantly  decreased  cognitive - 
related  functional  impairment  compared  to those  in the TAU group.  
 
Secondary  hypotheses:  
2a) CABA  treated  comorbid  mTBI/PTSD -diagnosed  Veterans  will demonstrate  additional  significant  
improvements  in patient -centered  outcomes  including  depression  symptom  severity,  cognitive  symptoms,  
usage  of cognitive  strategies,  and quality  of life compared  to a TAU group.  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  15 of 43  2b) Those  receiving  CABA  will report  significantly  higher  treatment  satisfaction  than those  receiving  TAU.  
 
Exploratory  Investigation  to Provide  Guidance  for Future  Research  Directions:  Exploratory  
analyses  will examine  possible  mediator  and moderator  variables  and secondary  outcome  variables,  
including  measures  of neuropsychological  test performance  and general  functioning.  We will also 
investigate  whether  CABA - associated  treatment  gains  are maintained  over a 6 month  follow -up period  
(the 6 month follow -up is discontinued when the assessments/interventions are completed over 
telehealth) . 
 
 
4.0 Resources  and Personnel  
 
The study  design  makes  use of the convergent  availability  of resources  at the VA Portland  
Health  Care  System  (VAPORHCS)  and VA Puget  Sound  Healthcare  System  (VAPSHCS)  in 
Seattle,  WA where  the research  will be conducted.  The treatment  intervention will  be conducted  
at both sites.  A private  room  will be available  at each  site to ensure  the confidentiality  of 
participants.  Office  space  is available  at both medical  centers  for the safe and confidential  
storage  of materials.  
 
The following  table  includes a list of personnel  who will work on the study  including their roles,  
affiliations,  and responsibilities.  
 
Name  Affiliation  Role  Access  to PHI?  Duties  
Daniel  Storzbach,Ph.D  VAPORHCS  Principal  
Investigator/Study  
Chair  AND 
Portland  Local  Site YES Overall  multisite  study  
oversight;  Portland  
Local  site study  
oversight  
Amy Wagner,  Ph.D  VAPORHCS  Co-Principal  
Investigator/Stud  
y Chair  YES Overall  multisite  
study  oversight  
Kathleen Pagulayan , Ph.D  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 VAPSHCS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Seattle  Local  
Site PI YES Seattle  local site 
study  oversight  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  16 of 43  Megan  Callahan,  Psy.D  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 VAPORHCS  Co-Investigator  / 
Multisite  Study  
Coordinator  YES Overall  multisite  
study  management,  
provide  the study  
intervention,  recruit  
subjects,  obtain  ICF, 
administer  
surveys/interviews  
Provide  the study  
intervention,  recruit  
subjects,  obtain  ICF, 
administer  
surveys/interviews  
Marilyn  Huckans,  Ph.D  VAPORHCS  Co-Investigator  
/ Interventionist  YES Provide  the study  
intervention  and 
assist  multisite  PI’s. 
Jennifer  Vasterling,  Ph.D  Boston  VA Co-Investigator  
/ Consultant  NO Consult  on the 
study  
Jesse  Fann,  Ph.D  University  of WA Co-Investigator  
/ Consultant  NO Consult  on the 
study  
Matthew Jakupcak , Ph.D  VAPSHCS  Co-Investigator  
/ Interventionist  YES Provide  the study  
intervention  and assist  
the Seattle  Site PI. 
Mai Roost,  Ph.D  VAPORHCS  Co-Investigator  
/ Interventionist  YES Provide  the study  
intervention  and assist  
the Portland  Site PI 
Maya  O’Neil,  Ph.D  VAPORHCS  Co-Investigator  
/ Multisite Data 
Manager  YES Will provide  data 
analysis  support  locally  
(VAPORHCS)  
Shah  Golshan,  Ph.D  UCSD  Co-Investigator  
/ Statistician  NO Will conduct  
randomization  and 
overall  interim  and final 
data analyses  
Halina  Kowalski,  MA VAPORHCS  Co-Investigator  
 YES Provide  the study  
intervention  and recruit  
subjects,  obtain  ICF, 
administer  
surveys/interviews  
 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  17 of 43   
Randomization  procedures  as well as overall  multisite  study  interim  and final data analyses  will 
be conducted  by our contracted  statistician,  Shah  Golshan,  Ph.D  who is affiliated with 
University  of California,  San Diego.  Dr. Golshan  will receive a “limited  data set” copied  in 
encrypted  format  sent via secure email . The “limited  data set” is defined  as such for inclusion  
of patient  assessment dates  and otherwise  would  be considered  de-identified.  A Data Use 
Agreement  will be pursued  between  the VAPORHCS  and Dr. Golshan  recognizing  the 
agreement  of the terms  for use of this data which  shall be transmitted  and accessed  strictly  for 
data analysis  purposes pursuant  to the goals  of this study.  
 
5.0 Study  Procedures  
5.1 Study  Design  
 
Overall  design:  
 
We propose a dual-site randomized  controlled  trial comparing Cognitively  Augmented  Behavioral  Activation  
(CABA)  with a treatment  as usual  control  group  (TAU).  The study  design  makes  use of the convergent  
availability  of resources  at the participating  VAs (Portland  and VA Puget Sound ). VA Puget Sound has two 
divisions, Seattle and American Lake, and all study activities may take place at either division. Participants will  
be Veterans ≤ 55 years  of age (both  male  and female)  with comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  enrolled  for outpatient  
medical  services  at these VAs. A total of 192 participants will be recruited,  96 at each  site. As described  in the 
“Overall  Clinical  Trial Plan"  section,  participants  in CABA  will receive  the CABA  intervention  via telehealth  
during  the first 14 weeks  of study  participation,  whereas  TAU participants  will receive  usual  care (no CABA  
intervention)  during study  participation  (but will be offered  CABA  at no cost after the end of the study).  In order  
to adhere  to a national  VA performance  measure  that requires  8 sessions  to be delivered  over a 14-week  
period,  participants  will be contacted  by phone  by a blinded  assessor  for the mid-treatment  assessment  7 
weeks after the onset  of treatment.  Allowing  14 weeks  to complete  a 10-session  treatment  protocol  accounts  
for cancellations and missed  sessions.  Participants  will then be seen  for a follow -up assessment  14 weeks  
after initiating  treatment.  During their study  participation,  all participants  will continue  to receive  their usual  
medical  care.  Due to the COVID -19 pandemic and hospital restrictions for in -person visits, all study operations 
will be conducted remotely. A detailed description of this plan is described in the following section.  
 
Overall  Clinical  Trial Plan:  
 
Experimental  intervention:  Cognitively  Augmented  Behavioral  Activation  (CABA).  CABA  combines  key 
elements  of BA for PTSD  and CCT.  In its comprehensive  form as a treatment  for depression45, BA includes  
several  key features, including  orientation  to the rationale  and components of treatment,  careful  tracking  of the 
patient’s  mood  and relationship  between  activities and mood  through  behavioral  analyses,  identification  of 
reinforcing  goals  and activities,  identification  of patterns of avoidance  that block  attainment  of these  goals  and 
activities,  and strategies  for engaging  the individual  in alternative  coping  that increases  behaviors  that are 
reinforcing.  This treatment  was originally  developed  to be delivered  in 16-24 weekly  sessions.  When  
proposing  a study  to examine  the efficacy  of BA for PTSD,  Dr. Amy Wagner, a PI on this study,  consulted 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  18 of 43  with the lead author  of the behavioral  activation  manual,  Dr. Martell.  As a result  of this consultation,  the 
components  of comprehensive  BA were  modified  to be delivered  in 8 60-minute  sessions.  The decision  to 
condense  the treatment  was based  in part on the early  intervention  focus  of this work.  The aim was to 
develop  a treatment  that was easier  to complete  for Veterans  and easier  to deliver  in primary  care settings,  
thus increasing  the potential  for future  dissemination.  Support  for the effectiveness  of BA delivered  in a 
condensed  format  is supported48,50,64. In BA for PTSD,  the psychoeducational  materials  were  modified  to 
include  descriptions  of PTSD  symptoms  and to emphasize  the role of avoidance  in PTSD.  Activity  
scheduling  was maintained  as the central  organizing  tool, with emphasis  placed  on increasing  activities  
consistent  with the individual’s  short - and long-term goals  and values.  Since  the presence  of physical  injury  
(which  can be a result  of trauma)  can lead to new restrictions  in activities  (short  term,  long term,  or 
permanent),  greater  attention was spent  on goal identification  and development.  During  behavioral  analyses,  
attention was given  to the full range  of factors  that may contribute  to avoidance  in those  with trauma  
histories,  including  fear, pain, physical  limitations,  secondary  emotions  (e.g.,  shame),  threat - and danger -
related  cognitions.  To the extent  that a patient’s  substance  use can similarly  be conceptualized  as avoidant  
behavior  65, it can be targeted in this intervention  as well. 
Cognitive  rehabilitation  therapy  used  in CABA  is taken  from the Compensatory  Cognitive  Training  (CCT)  
manual,  which  is a group  intervention  currently  being  used  in Dr. Storzbach's  Merit  Review  Study  aimed  at 
treating  mTBI  in Veterans.  The CCT treatment  manual  is an integration of two previous  treatment  manuals:  
COGSMART  at San Diego VAMC  and CST at VAPORHCS.  The CCT intervention  is designed  to be practical,  
portable,  low-tech, and engaging to clients.  The goal is to help participants  develop  new habits  that will help 
them  with real-world  situations  relevant  to cognitive  functioning.  The 10-week  CCT intervention is comprised  of 
weekly  two-hour sessions  including  interactive  didactics,  in-class discussions,  and activities  which introduce  
participants  to a variety  of lifestyle  strategies,  internal  and external/environmental  cognitive  strategies,  and 
external  aids designed  to help them  manage  problems  with memory,  attention,  and executive  functions.  
Participants  are required  to use a memory  prosthetic of their choosing,  either  a paper day planner  or an 
electronic  calendar.  Participants  are given  class  handouts  and weekly  home  exercises  so they can practice  
and implement  skills in their daily life. Participants  are encouraged  to practice  the new skills during  activities  
that relate  to their most  important  life goals.  Home  exercises  are discussed  at subsequent  sessions so that 
participants  can receive  feedback  and troubleshoot  application of new skills to their specific  real life goals  and 
problems.  Participants  receive  extensive  training  in and practice  with their day planners,  with a particular  focus  
on how the day planner  can facilitate  their use of other  compensatory  strategies  taught  in group  (e.g.,  writing  
down  important  information  for later reference,  breaking  tasks  down  into smaller  steps,  prioritizing healthy  
habits  and other  important  life goals,  using worksheets  to aid with goal planning  and problem  solving).  
 
CABA  is designed  as a 10-session  treatment,  to be delivered  in 90" individual  sessions  (see Appendix  2 for a 
draft of the CABA  manual).  Due to the COVID -19 pandemic, these sessions will be provided via 
telehealth , including VA Video Connect ( VVC, or alternative VA -approved video -based platform) or 
telephone. . CABA  is shorter  in duration  than CCT because  it is delivered  individually.  It is longer  than the BA 
for PTSD  manual  because  of the added  CCT elements.  The overlap  between  elements  of CCT and BA for 
PTSD  allows  for a shorter  treatment  than would  be required  if each  treatment  were delivered  independently.  
At its core,  CABA  involves  using  behavioral  activation  to identify  meaningful  goals  and activities  while 
simultaneously  learning  cognitive  strategies  to aid in working  towards  those  goals.  The initial  stage  of CABA  
will be devoted  to psychoeducation  on mTBI,  psychoeducation  on PTSD  and BA, and lifestyle strategies  that 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  19 of 43  can improve  cognitive  functioning  and mood.  After  the initial  phase,  the Veteran  will learn  new cognitive  
compensatory  skills  each  week  that incorporate  internal  and external  strategies  to help manage  problems  with 
memory,  attention,  and executive  functions.  Participants are required  to use a memory  prosthetic  of their 
choosing,  either  a paper  day planner  or an electronic  calendar  like a PDA or smart phone. Each  participating  
site will offer paper  day planners  to participants.  As part of this skills  training,  the Veteran  and the provider  will 
spend  portions  of each  session  applying  the cognitive  skills  to real life situations.  In CABA,  the real life 
situation  to which  the cognitive  skills  will be applied  will be chosen  through  the identification  of goals  and 
activities,  which is a BA-specific intervention.  For example,  each  week the Veteran  and provider  will work on 
scheduling  activities  that are reinforcing  to the Veteran.  If the cognitive  skill for the week  is learning to use a 
day planner,  for homework  that week  the Veteran  will apply  the skill of using a day planner  to aid in 
completion  of the scheduled  activity.  When  the Veteran  returns  the following  week,  the initial  portion  of the 
session  will be spent  reviewing  the homework  and problem -solving  any barriers  that the Veteran  had with 
regard  to completing the homework.  As in BA for PTSD,  attention  is given  to avoidance  patterns  (as well as 
cognitive  factors)  that may be interfering  with increasing  activation  and goal attainment  and to improving  
overall  functionality.  Behavioral  analyses  are maintained  as a central  tool for individualizing  goals  and 
interventions.  
Control  Intervention:  Treatment  as Usual  (TAU).  TAU refers  to the usual  care for PTSD  and mTBI  provided 
in the VA clinics  represented in our study. The VA sites employ  routine  screening  for PTSD  and mTBI, and 
providers  at both sites are familiar  with the VA Clinical  Practice  Guidelines  for the treatment  of PTSD  and 
mTBI.  Actual  clinical  practice  varies between  sites and between  providers  within  sites,  as is typical  of the VA 
health  care system  in general.  In order  to standardize  the practices  of the two sites as much  as possible  and 
ensure  that the practices  reflect  typical  practices  across  VA medical  centers,  participants  assigned  to TAU will 
be first offered a referral for PTSD  specialty  treatment  at each  site (e.g, to the PTSD  Clinical  team  at the 
Portland  site and either  the Deployment  Health  Clinic  or the PTSD  Outpatient  Clinic  at the VA Puget Sound ). 
Across  these  PTSD  specialty  clinics,  psychosocial  treatment  options  include  skills  focused  interventions  (e.g.,  
skills  for managing  PTSD,  either  in group  or individual  modalities)  and trauma -processing  therapies.  Emphasis 
is on providing  evidenced -based  psychotherapy  for PTSD,  and most  providers  are trained  in and provide  
Prolonged  Exposure  (PE) and/or  Cognitive  Processing  Therapy  (CPT).  TAU participants  may also receive 
pharmacotherapy,  either  within  PTSD  specialty  clinics or from primary  care providers.  To equate  quantity  of 
treatment  across  conditions,  participants  in TAU will be offered  an evidence  based  treatment  for PTSD  (i.e., 
PE or CPT)  which  consists  of 8-12 structured  sessions  designed  to be delivered  over a 14-weeks.  Per our 
informed  consent,  we make  Veterans  aware  of other  treatments available  and we are asking participants  to 
not engage  in CPT or PE concurrent  to participating  in CABA.  However,  at the end of participation,  all 
Veterans  will have  the option  of referral  to CPT/PE.  To ensure  adequate  attention  to TBI-related  difficulties,  it 
will be directly  communicated  to the assigned  PTSD  care provider,  referring  provider,  and primary  care 
provider  that the Veteran  has been  diagnosed  with mTBI  and may benefit  from further  assessment  and 
treatment  of mTBI -related  difficulties.  Cognitive  problems  are typically  addressed  in the Polytrauma,  
Neuropsychology,  and Speech  Pathology  clinics  and referrals  to these  clinics  will be unrestricted.  
Therefore,  TAU can be considered  “optimized”  usual  care.  Wewill record  all treatment  received.  
Procedures:  Patients  who screen  positive  for comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  may be offered  a flyer describing the 
study  by their provider.  The flyer will include  phone  numbers  to contact  the study  coordinator.  By partial  
waiver  of informed  consent  for screening  purposes,  interested participants  can also be referred  to the 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  20 of 43  study  team by the participant’s  provider to be contacted  for prescreening  or, at VA Puget Sound, can be 
identified through the Repository and Registry for Behavioral Neuroscience Research .  
Clinical  providers may refer interested  patients  and document  their willingness  to be contacted  by 
the study  through  CPRS  via their progress notes and using templated  language  provided  to them  (See 
Appendix  G). Clinicians may also send referral information via encrypted email with the same templated 
documentation (or comparable documentation that the Veteran is interested in hearing more about the 
study and gives permission for research staff to contact them). Following  a chart  review  and preliminary  
phone  screen to deter mine eligibility,  potential  participants  will be scheduled  for an initial  telehealth (by video 
or telephone) appointment during which  they will be consented  to the study . Consented participants will be 
instructed to return the informed consent form (ICF) and Authorization for Use and Release of Individually Identifiable 
Health Information Collected for VHA Research (HIPAA form) to the study team using a prepaid and preaddre ssed 
envelope. Once received, a study team member will complete an assessment appointment with the participant via 
telehealth. After all eligibility criteria are met and the assessment is complete, If telehealth appointments are conducted 
via VA Video Conn ect (VVC)  platform, participants may receive  automated  reminders and appointment links over 
email, consistent with procedures for clinical appointments using VVC. the study  statistician will  randomly  assign  
eligible  participants  to one of the two treatment  options  and will notify  the site study  coordinator  about  
randomization  status.  The site study  coordinator  or other appropriate research team member,  will contact  
the participants  to inform  them  of their group  assignment.  Those  assigned  to CABA  will be contacted  by 
their therapist  and tele-or video -therapy  will commence.  Those  assigned  to TAU will be offered a referral for 
PTSD specialty care . The assessors  will be blind to group  status  throughout  the study  whenever possible .  
Consistent  with a national  VA performance  measure  that requires  8 sessions  to be delivered  over a 14 
week  period,  participants  will be contacted  by phone  by a blinded  assessor  for the mid-treatment  
assessment  7 weeks after the onset  of treatment.  Allowing  14 weeks  to complete  a 10 session  treatment  
protocol  accounts  for cancellations and missed  sessions.  Participants  will then be seen  for follow -up 
assessments  14 weeks  after initiating  treatment.  In order  to minimize  drop-out and maximize  retention  of 
individuals  for intent -to-treat analyses,  extensive  efforts  will be made  to stay in contact  with all study  
participants,  including  individuals  who drop out of treatment.  CABA  participants  who are deemed  
nonresponders  or relapsers  (do not evidence  at least a 20% reduction  in PTSD  or cognitive  symptoms)  at 
the post-assessment  or follow -up assessment  (or an increase in suicidality  or substance  abuse) , and other 
participants as clinically appropriate,  will be offered  alternative  treatment  or appropriate  referrals.  
Blinding:  Subject  and facilitator  blinding  is not feasible  due to the study  design:  a treatment  group  vs. a 
usual  care group.  The assessors  will be blind to group  status  throughout  the study.  
Randomization:  Randomization  tables  will be prepared  by Dr. Golshan,  the statistician,  at the beginning  of 
the study,  and he will notify  the site  study  coordinator  of the participant's  randomization  status.  Over  the 
course  of the study,  Dr. Golshan  will monitor  enrollment;  if imbalance  occurs,  he will recommend  appropriate  
adjustment.  
 
Risks  to Subjects  
 
a. Human  Subjects  Involvement  and Characteristics  
 
Participants will be 192 Veterans  ≤ 55 years  of age receiving  clinical  care at the VAPSHCS  and VAPORHCS  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  21 of 43  (Portland  and Vancouver  campuses)  and affiliated clinics , who meet  diagnostic  criteria  for comorbid  
mTBI/PTSD.   Employees  or students,  pregnant  women, economically  and/or  educationally  disadvantaged  
persons,  and terminally  ill patients will be included . Based  on the nature  of the intervention,  it is anticipated  
that this treatment  will present minimal  risk to these  populations.  Individuals  with impaired  decision  making 
capacity,  illiterate,  or who have  limited  or no English  language  proficiency  will be excluded  on the basis  of 
possible  diminished  cognitive  ability  that would  compromise  their involvement  in this treatment.  Prisoners  will 
be excluded  from the study  as a result  of this study  being  conducted  on an outpatient  basis  only. There  will be 
no restrictions  on, ethnicity,  or race,  and both men and women  will be included.  Recruitment  fliers will 
specifically  include  the statement,  “women  and members of minority  groups  are encouraged  to participate.”  
Additional  inclusion  criteria  include:  1) Diagnosis of PTSD  made  by use of the Clinician  Administered  PTSD  
Scale  (Blake et al., 1990);  2) screened  positive  for mTBI  on the Structured  Interview  for  Collecting  Head  
Trauma  Event  Characteristics  as outlined  by the VA/DoD  Clinical  Practice  Guideline  for  Management  of 
Concussion/mTBI  and positively  endorsed  any of the Neurobehavioral  Symptom  Inventory  (NSI;  Cicerone  & 
Kalmar,  1995)  cognitive  symptoms  items  (items  13-17); 3) English  speaking,  willing to attend  weekly  treatment  
telehealth sessions (if randomized to the CABA condition) and the follow -up assessments,  and willing  to refrain  
from  additional  treatment  for PTSD  during the first 3 1/2 months  of the active  phase  of treatment  if they are 
assigned   to the CABA  condition;  and 4) willingness  to participate  in audio -recorded  sessions.  
b. Sources  of Materials  
 
Several  sources  of information  will serve  as data for the study,  including  neuropsychological  assessments  and 
standardized  diagnostic interviews  and questionnaires  administered  by study  personnel,  audiotaped  treatment  
sessions  for individuals  assigned  to the CABA  group  (to be used  for supervision,  determination  of adherence  
and competence  in the intervention,  achieving  reliability  in ratings of adherence  and competence and training  
purposes),  daily monitoring  forms  for individuals  in the CABA  group , and information  from medical  records.  
Other  than the information derived  from the medical  records,  data will be collected  solely  for research  
purposes.   However,  because  of the clinically -relevant  nature  of much  of this information,  patients  will be 
informed  that these  data may be reported  in their medical  record,  as clinically  indicated.   Data will be labeled  
with a code  number  that is unique  to each  patient  in the study.  All hard copy data will be stored  in locked  
filing cabinets in locked  rooms, while  all electronic  data will be stored  in password -protected  files in a limited  
access  folder  on the secure  VA network  drive.  Data may be temporarily stored in a locked filing cabinet at 
the American Lake division until it can  be transported to the Seattle VA. Data will be transported between 
American Lake and Seattle divisions by study staff in HIPAA -compliant locked containers . Each  study  site 
will maintain a key code  that links that site’s  patients  with their coded  identifier.  This key code  will be stored  
separately  from all other  study  data and available  and maintained  only to the multisite  co-PIs, the site PI’s, 
the multi-site project  coordinator,  and the site coordinators  and research assistants . Any materials  with 
protected  health  information  (e.g.,  Informed  Consents)  will be stored  in separate  locked  filing cabinets  from 
coded  materials  to ensure  the security  of patient privacy.  
 
c. Potential  Risks  
 
Minimal  risk is anticipated  with the current  investigation.  The psychotherapeutic  intervention  under  
investigation is consistent  with the treatments  recommended  in the VA/DoD  Clinical  Care  Guidelines  for the  
treatment  of PTSD  and mTBI.  Participants  randomized  to TAU will have  identical  opportunities  for treatment   
as non-research  patients.  Regarding  research  risk, participants  may experience  anxiety  and/or  distress during  
the assessment  procedure and during  the course  of treatment.  Participants  may also experience  discomfort  as 
a result  of being  audio  recorded  during  the course  of therapy.   Participants  also might not experience  
symptomatic  relief from the intervention.  Potential  study  participants  will be informed  that they may choose  not 
to participate  in the study  without risk  to their medical  care,  and that similar  interventions  not being  evaluated  in 
the study  are available  in the facility  without  participation  in the research.  
 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  22 of 43  All study  personnel  who conduct  the assessments  and interventions  will be qualified,  trained,  and closely  
supervised  by the co-Principal  Investigators  (co-PIs). Participants  will be provided with emergency  contact  
numbers.  All participants  will be clearly  informed  of their right to withdraw  from the study  at any point  without  
adversely  impacting their routine  medical, psychiatric,  or psychotherapeutic  care.  
 
Safety  monitoring  will be performed  by the study  staff who conduct  interviews,  administer  assessment  
questionnaires,  conduct  psychological  and cognitive assessments,  and conduct  interventions.  Adverse  events  
will be reported  immediately  to the co-PIs, who will examine  the patient  and determine  if any additional  
evaluation  or treatment  is needed.  The co-PIs will recommend  termination  of participation,  provide  appropriate  
referrals,  and engage in follow -up if substantial  decline  in functioning  is observed.  Referral  will also be offered  
to non-responders  and any participant  who requests  further  treatment.  The co-PIs will ensure  that adverse  
events  are properly  reported  to the IRB. The co-PIs will review  all cumulative  adverse  events  quarterly  to 
determine  if there  are any systematic problems  as the co-PIs will be ultimately  responsible  for all safety  
monitoring  conducted  for this study.  
 
Although  the proposed  study  poses  no serious  risks to participants,  participants  may notify  research  personnel  
about  pre-existing  mental  health  issues  that have  not been  previously  identified  by other  VA providers.  
Therefore,  participants  will be referred  to the VA’s Mental  Health  Division  for further  assessment  and/or  
treatment  if a previously  undiagnosed  psychiatric  disorder  is identified.  We will inform  participants of this 
procedure  as part of the informed  consent  process  and participants  must  agree  to this procedure  to be eligible  
to participate  in the study.  This ensures  that we can adequately  manage  any pre-existing  clinical  issues  that 
become  apparent  through  subject  evaluation.  
 
Adequacy  of Protection  from  Risks  
 
a.  Protection  Against  Risk 
 
Trained,  closely  supervised  staff will conduct  the assessments  and the intervention.   Assessors  conducting 
diagnostic psychiatric interviews will have at least one year of graduate experience  or equivalent work 
experience,  and therapists will be master’s or doctoral  level.  Drs. Wagner and Storzbach,  licensed  clinical  
psychologists,  will review  weekly  therapy  tapes  and attend  to any difficulties  encountered.  In addition,  
participants  will be provided  with emergency  contact  numbers.  Finally,  all participants  will be clearly  informed  
of their right to withdraw  at any point  and Drs. Wagner  and Storzbach  will recommend  termination  of 
participation  (and provide  appropriate  referral  and follow -up) if substantial  decline  in functioning  is observed  
(including  significant  increase  in alcohol  or drug use).   Referral  will also be offered  to nonresponders  and any 
participant  who requests  further  treatment.  Specific  procedures will be maintained  to maximize  the likelihood  
that participant  research  related  material  will secure  and confidential.   Data will be stored  in locked  filing 
cabinets  and computer  databases,  without  names  or other  potentially  identifiable  information  attached;  
identifiable  information  will be kept separately  and a coding system  will be used  to link data and identifiers.  
 
All SAE’s,  UAP’s,  and protocol  deviations occurring  at either  site will be communicated  to the Co-PI’s 
immediately  and necessary  documentation will be submitted  to the CIRB  within  stipulated  timeframes  and via 
designated  channels  in accordance  with the VA Central  IRB Table  of Reporting  Requirements.  
 
All study  personnel  will follow  the policies and procedures  for suicide  prevention  and management  of suicidal  
behavior and its aftermath anywhere  within  the medical  center  or on the premises  as outlined in the 
VAPORHCS  Medical  Center  Memorandum  No. 11-04 and in Memorandum  TX-74 for Seattle  both included in 
the study  Suicide  behavior  protocol,  Appendix  A. 
Imminent  risk Protection:  The following  protocol  applies  to participants  who express  indication  of imminent  
risk or clinical  emergency;  this includes  concerns  about suicidality  and homicidality.  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  23 of 43   
Participants  may express  indicators  of risk  either  to the study  clinician  or to the study  assessor;  the protocol  
differs  for each  of these  groups  and is discussed  below:  
For study  clinicians:   If a participant  presents  to his/her  study  clinician/Interventionist  with a clinical  
emergency  (e.g. suicidality),  the study  clinician  should  address  the situation  as clinically  appropriate.  
Concerns about  imminent risk should  be prompted  by an examination  of the participant’s  response  to item #9 
on the BDI (score  > 2) and/or  clinical  inquiry.  The clinician  must  assess  and intervene within  the study  
treatment  protocol  but is not limited  by the parameters  of the protocol  in cases of imminent  risk. Instead,  in 
such  cases,  clinicians  should  address  these  situations  consistent  with optimal  standards  of care including  
hospitalization if required  (see Suicidal/Homicidal  Behavior  Protocol  in Attachment  A). 
 
In addition,  any concerns  of imminent  risk among  participants  in the CABA  condition  are to be immediately  
communicated  to the site investigators  (Daniel  Storzbach,  Ph.D.  at the VAPORHCS  and Kathleen Pagulayan , 
Ph.D.,  at the VAPSHCS),  including the course  of action  taken.  The site PIs will review  such cases  and 
determine  if additional  intervention is necessary.  This review  and/or  evaluation is not required  of participants  in 
the control  group  as they will be receiving  usual  VA care and evaluation and intervention  for imminent  risk will 
follow  standard  VA procedures.  
For study  assessors:   Study  assessors  should  follow  the Suicidal/Homicidal  Behavior Protocol  under  the 
following  conditions:  if a participant  presents with a score  of 2 or higher  on item 9 on the Beck  Depression  
Inventory,  or when  there  is other  information  that suggests  that the person  may be at risk. Assessors  must  
also contact  the site investigators  who will determine if additional  intervention  is necessary;  this review  and/or  
evaluation  is not required  of participants in the control  group  as they will be receiving  usual  VA care and 
evaluation  and intervention  for imminent  risk will follow  standard  VA procedures.  Participants may be 
connected via a “warm transfer” with the National Veterans Crisis Line or be  instructed to go to their nearest 
medical facility’s emergency department.  
c. Potential  Benefit  of the Proposed  Research  to the Subject  and Others  
 
Participants  in both the CABA  and TAU conditions  may experience  a reduction in PTSD  and/or  TBI symptoms  
as benefit  to participation  in this study,  though  those  assigned  to CABA  may experience a greater  reduction  in 
PTSD  and/or  TBI symptoms.  Given  that many  Veterans  with comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  do not respond  well to 
current  EBTs  for PTSD  because  their cognitive  problems interfere  with their ability  to optimally  engage  in 
treatment,  this study  may offer a treatment  option  for those  who would  not otherwise  benefit  from care and the 
benefit  of this combined  treatment  would  be available  first to those  assigned  to the CABA  conditions  and then 
offered  to TAU participants after their completion  of the study.  The risk of increased  anxiety  or distress  (in the 
assessment  or treatment  components  of the study)  is balanced  by the potential  benefit  of reduced  distress  and 
anxiety  over time for study  participants.  Further,  since  the provision of CABA  is also expected  to reduce  
long- term health  care utilization,  this intervention  may also lessen  the burden  of primary  care providers.  
 
d. Importance  of Knowledge  to Be Gained  
 
In order  to more  effectively  meet  the mental  health  needs  of Veterans  with mTBI/PTSD,  the present  study  aims 
to evaluate  the effectiveness of a new hybrid  treatment,  Cognitively -Augmented  Behavioral  Activation  for the 
treatment  of PTSD,  cognitive -problems,  and functional  impairment.  Demonstrating  that an intervention  
specifically  designed  for the treatment  of comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  is effective  for both PTSD  and cognitively - 
related  functional  impairment  would  be a significant  innovation  that would  address  a large  gap in currently  
available  treatments  for Veterans.  If the treatment  is found  to be efficacious,  the CABA  manual  could  be 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  24 of 43  quickly  disseminated  to all VHA facilities.  The CABA  intervention would  not only be useful  in PTSD  specialty  
care clinics,  but could  also be implemented  in rehabilitation  settings  such as Polytrauma  or Neuropsychology  
Clinics,  specifically  targeting  Veterans with mTBI/PTSD  who may be hesitant to seek out traditional  mental  
health  treatment.  With the program’s  portability  and ready  availability,  it will immediately  be possible  to deliver  
evidence -based  treatment  for Veterans  with comorbid  mTBI/PTSD.  
 
e. Data  Banking  
 
Participants will be given  the option  to have  their data banked  for future  research  use in the Neuropsychology  
Data  Repository  Study  #3508  managed  by Dr. Maya  O’Neil,  housed  at the VA Portland  Health  Care  System  
and overseen  by the VAPORHCS  IRB.  Seattle participants may have the option to bank their data in an 
additional repository for future research use. This banking system, Repository and Registry for 
Behavioral Neuroscience Research, is managed by Dr. Elaine Peskind at the VA Puget Sound Health 
Care System and oversee n by the VA Puget Sound Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical 
Center and VA Puget Sound IRB. All future  research  of data maintained  within a research  data repository  
will only occur  after further  Institutional  Review  Board  and/or  other  applicable approvals  to ensure  the 
protection privacy.  Participants are not required  to provide  this permission  and not providing this permission  
will have  no impact  on their participation  in the study,  i.e., granting  permission is not a condition  of 
participating  in the study.   
5.2 Recruitment  Methods  
 
Subject  recruitment  and feasibility:  Participants will  be 192 male  and female  Veterans  ≤ 55 years  of age 
referred  for PTSD  treatment  who meet  diagnostic  criteria  for comorbid  mTBI/PTSD.  Participants will be 
recruited  from the healthcare  clinics of the VA Portland  Health  Care  System  and VA Puget Sound Health 
Care System . Potential  participants  will be recruited  through  clinic  referrals  at participating  VA’s,  flyers,  
recruitment events and patient  medical  record  review  followed  by recruitment  letters  sent to patients  who 
meet  the requisite pre-screening  criteria.   
 
Identification  and recruitment  of participants  is detailed  to occur  in one of four ways:  
1) By Referral  from provider:  Study personnel will seek provider referrals from VA outpatient clinics, 
including MIRECC mTBI/Behavioral Specialty  Clinic , Neurology, Primary Care, Mental Health, 
Neuropsychology, Rehabilitation Medicine, Polytrauma, and others; VA community -based outpatient 
clinics (CBOCs); local area Veterans centers; and National Guard and Reserve units. We will seek 
these provider referrals in conversations with colleagues , by word of mouth , by email, and via 
presentations from study s taff to appropriate clinical staff.  Providers  will be given  detailed  information 
about  study  inclusion/exclusion  criteria,  recruitment  process,  and treatment  goals . They will also be 
given templated  language  to use in CPRS notes if Veterans have agreed to be contacted by study staff.  
Participants  will be referred  to the study  by their provider  through  CPRS  and documentation  of their 
consent  to be contacted  by the study  will be documented  in CPRS  by the referring  provider.   
 
We may identify potentially eligible participants by revie wing weekly care panels of providers who 
provide services for Veterans with a history of mTBI and/or PTSD using administrative and manual 
CPRS review data pulls. Providers of p otentially eligible Veterans identified by review of care panels 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  25 of 43  with upcoming appointments may be contacted via encrypted email to inform them about the study and 
to invite them to discuss the study with the potentially eligible Veteran(s).  
 
2) By Flyer  and other advert ising methods : Study staff will be responsible for disseminating IRB-
approved flyers at hospital health fair an d hallway information tables  as well as bulletin boards ; at 
presentations by investigators;  via emails to clinicians  and staff ; in highly trafficked areas  and clinic 
waiting areas . The study may also be advertised on  VA Puget Sound research kiosks; VA Portland 
and Puget Sound electronic reader -boards; websites , and in newsletters. Participants will call the 
study  phone number  listed  on a flyer for additional details regarding the study  or if working with a 
clinician, may request that the clinician contact the study on their behalf using the referral template 
described above .  
 
3) By Recruitment  Letter:  A letter from the st udy, with an opt -out option may  be mailed to potential 
participants identified through administrative VINCI -based data pulls  and electronic review of 
aforementioned VA outpatient clinics , informing Veterans  of the pr oject.  If study staff have not received 
the opt -out postcard  after 2 weeks,  project staff will contact Veterans who were sent letters by 
telephone to assess eligibility and interest in participation  and to arrange an enrollment visit.  Study staff 
will ma ke a total of 3 calls to each listed number before deeming the participant as not interested. We 
will retain a list of individuals who were deemed not interested (either due to sending the opt -out 
postcard or non -response to recruitment calls) so that thos e individuals are not re -contacted in the 
future.  We will contact no more than 500 Veterans using this approach.  
 
4) BNG Repository: We will also screen the VA Puget Sound BNG registry of individuals who have 
specifically indicated they are interested in hearing about future research opportunities; Veterans 
identified as being highly likely to be eligible will be sent information about the study by mail. This 
mailing will include an opt -out mechanism to decline further information  described a bove . If the potential 
subjects do not return the opt -out form, we may follow up with them over the phone using our telephone 
script  (no more than three times as described above) .  
 
If a Veteran  is found to be eligible for the study and agrees to participa te, the study coordinator will 
schedule a diagnostic and pre -treatment interview. Potential participants will then meet with a staff -
member from the study, who will review study procedures (nature and frequency of assessments, nature 
of treatments, random assignment to treatments), answer any questions, and obtain written informed 
consent.  During the COVID -19 pandemic, this interaction will take place over telehealth.  Primary care 
providers will follow routine treatment and referral procedures regardless o f patient interest in the study.  
 
We expect  similar  enrollment  and recruitment  rates at the Portland  and VA Puget Sound . There  is evidence  
that a substantial  pool of potential  participants  exists,  suggesting that the goal of recruiting 192 participants  
over the course  of the study  is feasible. Even  allowing  for more  rigorous  diagnostic  procedures,  exclusionary  
criteria,  and a moderate  refusal  rate, the sample  size should  be easily  attained.  Total  enrollment  for the study  
at both sites would  be 96 participants  per site (48 CABA  and 48 TAU),  for a total of 192 participants  (96 
CABA  and 96 TAU).  
 
Steps  to minimize  dropout  rate: We had a relatively  low non-completer  rate 11% among  subjects  enrolled  in 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  26 of 43  our funded  CCT study  with OEF/OIF  Veterans  with mTBI.  We partially  attribute  the low non-completer  rate to 
reminder  phone  calls and financial  incentive.  Since  compensation  and reminder  phone  calls will once  again  be 
used  in the proposed  study,  we expect  a low attrition  rate. Subjects  will be compensated  for time involved  in 
the study  as described below.  We will also call all subjects  to remind  them  of each  session  and study  visit. 
 
Reimbursement  for time and travel:  Compensating subjects  for their participation  reduces  attrition  rates.  
We plan to compensate  participants  at each  assessment  point.  They  will receive  a payment of  $50 after each  
of the first three  assessments.  For completion of all three  assessments,  total compensation  will be $150. 
 
5.3 Informed  Consent  Procedures  
 
Informed  Consent:  This study  will make  use of a waiver  of informed  consent  for screening purposes  only. 
The waiver  will cover  the pre-screening period  of the study  during  which,  upon  provider  referral  (or participant  
response  to recruitment  flyer and/or  letter),  the study  coordinator  will conduct  a CPRS  chart  review  and 
telephone  pre-screen interview  to confirm  screening  criteria  before  the pre-treatment  assessment  is scheduled  
where  informed  consent  will be obtained  and final eligibility  will be confirmed.  Eligible participants screened for 
the study will be mailed the study informed consent form , Authorization for Use and Release of Individually 
Identifiable Health Information Collected for VHA Research form  (HIPAA form) , and detailed instructions for 
completing the forms at the time of their consent appointment. A self -addressed, pre -stamped return envelope 
will be provided to each participant and will be tracked by study staff .  
 
Trained,  closely  supervised  staff will conduct  the informed  consent  procedure  and the assessments.   
Assessors  will be the study  coordinators  or research  assistants  and will have  at least one year of graduate  
experience.  These  staff obtaining  consent will have  completed web -based  courses with post-test on Human  
Research  Protections and Good  Clinical  Practice,  and will have  received  training  from the co-PIs in obtaining  
informed  consent.  A copy of the signed  consent  form will be kept with the participant’s  research  materials  and 
a copy will be given  to the Veteran  (participants who are consenting over the phone will be sent 2 copies of the 
consent so that they can keep one for their records) . Information  provided  to the potential  participant  and 
included in the written  consent  form will include  the following:  
 
• Invitation  to participate  because of the presence  of comorbid  mTBI/PTSD  
• Duration  of the study  (4 years)  
• The general  purpose  of the study  
• The randomization  procedure  
• A description  of the CABA  intervention,  including  general  content  of sessions,  expectations  for between  
session  practice,  number  of sessions,  and the use of audiotaping  of sessions  
• A description  of TAU,  including  information  about  the PTSD  specialty  care clinic  and the types  of 
treatments  offered  by the PTSD  specialty  care clinic  
• A detailed  description  of the assessment  procedures,  including  estimated  time involved, the use of 
audiotaping  (for assessment  of reliability  and treatment  adherence),  frequency  of assessments  
• A description  of alternative  treatments  within  the facility,  including medications  and alternative  
psychotherapy  
• The expectation  that additional  psychotherapies not be participated  in during  the active  phase  of the CABA  
treatment  [with specification  that they will not be dropped  from treatment  if they do initiate  additional  
treatment]  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  27 of 43  • Description  of potential  risks,  discomfort,  and inconveniences  
• The potential  for loss of privacy  and a description  of efforts  to protect  confidentiality  and privacy  
• Specific  circumstances  that may require  loss of privacy  (e.g.,  acknowledgement  of suicidal  intent)  
• The ability  to decline  participation  or withdraw  from the study  at any time without  jeopardizing treatment  at 
the VA 
• Specification  of payment  for participation  
• Contact  information  for study  personnel  for questions  
 
Informed Consent Process via Telephone and Postal Mail  
A study staff member will arrange a time to conduct the informed consent process via telephone or video -
based telehealth platform such as VA  Video Connect (VVC). Participants will have received a self -
addressed, stamped envelope along with two copies of the approved consent form and a cover letter. The 
cover letter will specify that research staff will  call them to review the consent document, and that although 
Veterans are encouraged to review the forms in advance, they should not complete the forms until they 
have reviewed the forms with research staff at the scheduled informed consent session.  
 
 
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
 
Inclusion  criteria:  
 
1) Veterans  ≤ 55 years  of age enrolled  at participating VA sites able to provide informed  consent.  
 
2) Diagnosis  of PTSD  based  on the Clinician  Administered  PTSD  Scale60. 
3) Positive  screen  on the Structured  Interview  for Collecting  Head  Trauma  Event  Characteristics  
as per the VA/DoD  Clinical  Practice  Guideline  for Management  of Concussion/mTBI;  AND 
endorsed  any of the Neurobehavioral  Symptom  Inventory  (NSI)61 cognitive  symptoms  items  (items  
13-17). 
4) English  speaking,  able to travel  to the primary  care clinics  weekly  for 10 sessions and for the 
follow - up assessments,  and willing  to refrain  from additional  mental  health  treatment  during  the 
first 3 1/2 months  of the active  phase  of treatment  if they are assigned  to the CABA  condition.  
 
5) Willingness  to participate  in audio -recorded  sessions.  
 
Exclusion  criteria:  In order  to maximize  the generalizability  and public health  relevance  of the study,  
exclusion  criteria  are minimized  and based  primarily  on the well-being  of the participant.  
 
1) Current  diagnosis  of moderate  or severe  substance  (alcohol) use disorder  using DSM -5 within the  
past 30 days. 
 
2) Current  Bipolar  or psychotic  disorder  (requirement  to refrain  from additional  treatments  might  
be harmful).  
3) Veterans  with a history  indicated  by medical  record  review  of a diagnosis  of moderate,  severe,  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  28 of 43  or penetrating  TBI, or self-reported  history  on the Structured  Interview  for Collecting  Head  
Trauma  Event Characteristics  of TBI with PTA greater  than 24 hours  or LOC greater  than 30 
minutes.  
4) Active  suicidal  intent  indicating significant  clinical  risk, which  would  suggest  that a treatment  
specifically  targeting  this intent  was indicated  clients who report  suicidal  ideation  without  
imminent  risk will be admitted  into the study.  
 
5) Initiated  psychotropic  medication,  including  Prazosin,  within 4 weeks  or changed  dosage  within  
2 weeks  prior to the first assessment,  as this would  make  it difficult  to determine  which  
treatment  contributed  to change  in the CABA  condition;  additionally,  started  or changed  
dosage  of sleep  medication  or low dosages  of tricyclic  antidepressant  or trazodone for pain 
or sleep  within  1 week  prior to the first assessment.   Participants  could  be re-considered  for 
eligibility  after stability  on medication  was achieved.  Enrollees  will be asked,  but not prohibited,  
to hold the doses  of the current  medications  stable  over the course  of enrollment  (though  
changes  in medications  after enrollment  will not exclude  them  from on-going participation).  
 
6) Auditory  or visual  impairments  that would  compromise  ability  to participate  cognitive  
rehabilitation  group  or benefit  from compensatory  strategies . 
. 
5.5 Study Evaluations 
 
Visit  schedules  
Pre-enrollment  screening:  
1) Medical  Record  Review:  Study  personnel  will review  each  participant’s  medical  record,  including  their 
neuropsychological  assessment  records,  to document  severity  and type of current  cognitive  status,  medical  
and psychiatric  history,  current  treatment,  and medications.  
2) Clinical  Screening  Phone  Interview:  Study  personnel  will conduct  a brief phone  screening  to ensure  subjects  
meet  initial  eligibility  criteria.  Participants interested in the study will be asked to provide an email address for 
scheduling video telehealth appointments.  
 
Study  Enrollment : All eligible  participants will  complete  a consent  visit including:  
Informed  Consent:  Study  personnel  will complete  consent  procedures.  All effort  will be made  to ensure  
participants  fully comprehend  study  procedures,  risks, and benefits.  
 
Baseline Assessment:  All eligible participants will complete a baseline assessment visit  including:  
    Baseline  Psychological  and Cognitive  Assessment  Battery  (see below) . This includes assessment of  
exclusionary diagnoses as well a brief neuropsychological battery, diagnostic interviews, and self -report 
questionnaires of current emotional and post -concussive sympt oms. If an individual is found not be eligible during 
this assessment, the assessment will be discontinued at that point.  
 
Treatment  Visits:  All eligible  patients  will be randomized  (CABA  or TAU). CABA  participants  will be assigned  
to a therapist  and receive the 10-session  intervention  (during COVID -19 this will be completed using telehealth 
modalities) ; TAU participants  will be referred  to PTSD  specialty  care.   
 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  29 of 43  Mid-treatment Assessment: Participants will complete questionnaires at mid -treatment (approximately 7 
weeks after initiation of treatment) designed to assess current emotional and post -concussive symptoms.  
 
Post-treatment Assessment:  Participants  will complete  a brief cognitive  assessment  battery , diagnostic 
interviews,  and questionnaires  designed  to assess  current  emotional and post -concussive symptoms (see 
section  B “Data  Collection and Assessment”  below  for a list and description  of each  battery  measure).  This 
will take place approximately 14 weeks after the initiation of treatment.  
 
See Table  3 in section  B “Data  Collection  and Assessment”  below  for a schedule  of administration  for each  
measure.  Participants will be sent a response key via postal mail (see documents Survey Response Key 
and Response Key Cover Lette r). Staff will read the questions to participants, who will respond to each item 
with the aid of the response key. If the response key is lost, a new one may be sent  to them.  
 
Telephone  Reminder  Calls  (Visits 1-14): The site coordinator  or designated study staff member will contact  
participants  by phone  to remind  them  of the initial  visit, mid-treatment  assessment,  and post-treatment  
assessment.  CABA  therapists  may contact participants 1 -2 days prior to treatment session to remind them of 
upcoming appointment; participants who are using VA Video Connect for the CABA sessions may also 
receive automated reminders of the appointment via email . Participants  assigned  to TAU will get standard  VA 
reminder  calls.  
 
Visits  2-6 and 8-12: During  visits 2-6 and 8-12, subjects will attend  weekly  90-minute  individual  sessions  of 
the CABA  intervention  via telehealth  and TAU (at a minimum,  the opportunity  to attend  10 90-minute  
individual  sessions).  
 
Documentation in CPRS : A Research Screening/Enrollment/Disenrollment note will be entered into 
CPRS for all Veterans who consented into the study. An additional note documenting informed consent, 
completion of intake procedures, eligibility determination, and next steps will also be entered into CPRS 
following the baseline/in take visit. Disenrollment notes will be entered into CPRS at the completion of each 
Veteran’s p articipation in the study. Veteran assigned to the CABA condition will have session appointments 
entered into a research clinic and the study therapist will enter a note into CPRS summarizing the session 
content for each CABA treatment session.  
 
Complianc e: Attendance  will be recorded.  Financial  compensation  and reminder  calls will be used.  
 
Standardization  of intervention  delivery  and testing  between  sites  
Therapists  for CABA  will be PhD-level psychologists  or Master's level or greater  mental  health  practitioners.  
Two therapists  (one from each  site) are experts  in BA (Amy  Wagner,  PhD and Matthew  Jakupcak,  PhD).  
Several therapists  from the Portland  VA and VA Puget Sound  were  involved  in writing  the CCT and CABA  
manuals  and have  experience  conducting these  interventions.  Remaining therapists  will have  competence in 
cognitive -behavioral  approaches  to PTSD  and/or  cognitive  training.  All therapists  will be required  to complete  
an initial  training  which  will involve  reading  the treatment  manual,  research  protocol,  and treatment  related  
materials,  reviewing  therapy  tapes,  and, when possible,  attending  a half-day training  with Drs. Wagner,  
Jakupcak,  or Storzbach.  If therapists have significant experience/expertise in behavioral activation  and/or cognitive 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  30 of 43  rehabilitation, the half day training requirement may be waived  at the discretion of the study PIs . Dr. Wagner will 
review the session recordings of the first pat ient for each new therapist to ensure adherence to the  treatment 
protocol and to provide clinical feedback when needed. Therapists are invited to participated in biweekly study 
phone calls to discuss clinical concerns, with more immediate consultation/supe rvision available with study PIs 
on an as needed basis.  
 
To assure  treatment  fidelity,  audio  recordings of sessions  will be used  to rate therapists  on CABA  treatment  
manual  compliance.  Sessions  from both participating VA study  sites will be digitally  audio -recorded,  and 20% 
of sessions  will be randomly  selected  by Dr. Golshan,  the study  statistician,  throughout  the course  of the 
proposed  study  for quality  adherence  and fidelity  ratings. A member  of the study  team  from the main  study  site 
(Portland  VA), who will be selected  and trained by the co-PIs, will serve  as the adherence  and fidelity  rater.  
This rater will not be involved  in delivering  the treatment  intervention  and will be trained  in adherence/fidelity  
coding.  The rater and the Principal  Investigator  (Storzbach)  will individually  rate several  practice  tapes  and any 
discrepancies in the practice  coding  will be discussed  and reconciled.  An adherence  and fidelity  instrument  will 
be developed  for use with the CABA  manual  (see Appendix  3 for the CCT fidelity  instrument).  Only when  
reliability  has been  demonstrated  at 90% agreement  will the rater begin  independently  coding treatment  tapes  
from the proposed  study.  Adherence  rate will be calculated  as percentage  of goals  achieved  by Dr. Golshan.  
Audio  recordings  will be examined  on a monthly  basis.  The co-PIs will meet  with the therapists  and other  
study  team  members  on a monthly  basis  to discuss any discrepancies,  to review  any adherence/fidelity  rates  
below  80%,  and to develop  a plan for ensuring  that all session  goals  are met. If adherence  and fidelity  
monitoring  reveals  that any treatment  goals  have  not been  addressed,  then the therapist  will be retrained  on 
the corresponding  material  to properly  address  those  inefficiencies.  The therapist  will be recertified  prior to 
returning to study.  If it is not possible  to provide  the missing  information  (for example,  because  the treatment  
has ended),  then those  subjects  will be excluded  from the project’s  dataset  and statistical  analyses.  
 
Project  monitoring  and oversight  
Routine  communication  and coordination  between  the study  sites will primarily  occur  through  joint 
teleconferenced  team  meetings.  These  meetings  will be scheduled  bi-weekly  the first 6 months  of the study  
and monthly  the latter  part of the first year,  and then quarterly  during  years  two and three . Additional  meetings  
may occur  on an as-needed  basis. Some  funding will  be budgeted  toward  travel  for site visits.  
 
Data  Collection  and Instruments  
 
1) Demographics  and disorder/disease -related  assessments.  At the assessment visit, demographic  
information  including  age, gender,  ethnicity,  and education  will be collected.  We will document  severity  and 
type of current  cognitive  status,  PTSD  symptom  severity,  medical  and psychiatric  history,  current  treatment,  
and medications.  We will also collect  information  about  any new medication  changes  and/or  changes  in 
additional  mental  health  treatment  at the initial  and follow -up treatment  visits in an effort  to track any changes  
in the initial  eligibility  criteria.  
2) Measures.  The RR&D  TBI RFA requires  use of National  Institute  of Neurological  Disorders  and 
Stroke  (NINDS)  core Common  Data Elements  (CDEs)  for TBI. All current  (version  1) core CDE  measures  
are included  except  the Cognition  Subscale  of the Functional  Independence Measure  (Cog-FIM) as the 
NINDS  CDE website  indicates  that this measure  is “Not sufficiently  sensitive  for mild TBI.”  Assessment  
measures  are not limited  to TBI CDEs  because  of the need  for measures of symptoms/functional  effects  of 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  31 of 43  PTSD  or mTBI/PTSD.   
Select measures of the full testing battery will be used for telehealth administration. See below for more 
details:  
• Clinician  Administered  PTSD  Scale  (CAPS -V)60,66. A widely  used  diagnostic  interview,  provides  
an overall  severity  score  and subscale  scores  for symptom  clusters.  
• Posttraumatic  Stress  Disorder  Checklist -Fifth Version  (PCL -5)57,67. A widely  used  self-report  measure  
of PTSD  symptom  severity.  
Global  Outcome  
• Glasgow  Outcome  Scale  Extended  (GOS -E)96 A revision  of the GOS,  a commonly  used  global  
outcome  measure  in TBI studies;  a core NINDS  CDE.  This test will not be administered during 
telehealth visits.   
Cognitive  and TBI Symptom  Severity  
• Rivermead  Post Concussive  Symptom  Questionnaire  (RPQ)95 will be used  to measure  
postconcussive  symptoms  (PCS);  a core NINDS  CDE.  This test will not be administered during 
telehealth visits.  
• Structured  Interview  for Collecting  Head  Trauma  Event  Characteristics  (DoD  HTEC)  62, head  
trauma  history  and to assess  eligibility.  
• The Neurobehavioral  Symptom  Inventory  (NSI)61 a PCS measure  mandated  for use in the VA, and 
is a NINDS  TBI supplemental  CDE  recommended  for use in Military  studies.  
Cognitive  Compensation  
• Memory  Compensation  Questionnaire  (MCQ)70. Rates  the extent  to which  patients  use 
various  strategies  to improve  memory  performance.  This test will not be administered during 
telehealth visits.  
Cognitive  Functioning  (all tests were selected  because  of their excellent  validity  and reliability,  and the 
availability  of large  normative  databases)  
• The Wide  Range  Achievement  Test-4 (WRAT -4)71 Baseline  ability,  a NINDS  supplemental  TBI CDE.  
• Hopkins  Verbal  Memory  Test–Revised  (HVLT -R)72 A measure  of verbal  list learning  and delayed  recall.  
• Wechsler Adult  Intelligence  Scale –4th Edition, Digit Span  Subtest  (WAIS -IV)73 A WAIS -IV subtest  
that measures  attention  and working  memory,  and is a NINDS  supplemental  TBI CDE.  
• Wechsler Adult  Intelligence  Scale –3rd Edition,  Symbol  Search  Subtest  (WAIS -III)74 WAIS -III 
subtest  measuring processing speed;  component of WAIS  PSI, a core NINDS  TBI CDE.  This 
test will not be administered during telehealth visits.  
• Trail Making  Test (TMT)75 DKEFS - trails subtest  is a visual -motor  task used  to measure  flexibility  
in thinking (executive  function)  and processing  speed,  a core NINDS  TBI CDE.  This test will not 
be administered during telehealth visits.  
• Controlled  Oral Word  Association  Test (COWAT)76 Verbal  fluency, a supplemental  NINDS  TBI 
CDE.   
Depression:  
• Beck  Depression  Inventory -II (BDI-II)67 A widely  used  21-item measure  of current  levels  of 
depression.   
Psychiatric  Disorders:  
• Mini-international  Neuropsychiatric  Interview  – Depression,  Substance  Use Disorders,  Manic  Episode,  
Hypomanic  Episode,  and Psychotic  Disorders  subtests  (MINI)77 Brief structured  interview  for the major  
Axis I psychiatric  [DSM -V version will  be substituted if available  at the time of funding].  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  32 of 43  • Brief Symptom  Inventory  18 (BSI 18)78 Psychological  symptom  complaints;  a core NINDS  
CDE.  This test will not be administered during telehealth visits.  
Cognitive  Related  Functional  Impairment:  
• Neuro -QOL79. Health -related  quality  of life assessment  tool; a NINDS  supplemental  
TBI CDE. This test will not be administered during telehealth visits.   
Social  Role Participation : 
• Craig  Handicap  Assessment  Reporting  Technique  - Short  Form  (CHART -SF)80 Consisting  of 6 
subscales;  a NINDS  core TBI CDE.  This test will not be administered during telehealth visits.  
General  Functioning : 
• Sheehan  Disability  Scale  (ShDS)81. A brief self-report  measure  of functional  
impairment.  This test will not be administered during telehealth visits.   
Quality  of Life: 
• Satisfaction  with Life Scale  (SLS)69 A 5-item measure  assessing  global  life satisfaction  or quality  of life. 
Participant  Satisfaction:  
• The Client  Satisfaction  Questionnaire  (CSQ -8)82 A questionnaire  used  routinely  in the Seattle  Post 
Deployment  Health  Services and PTSD  Clinic  to assess  satisfaction  with care.  
Other  Measures:  
• Severity  of Dependence  Scale  (SDS)83A 5-item measure  assessing  severity  of substance  dependence.  
This test will not be administered during telehealth visits.  
• Scale  for Suicide  Ideation  (SSI)97, a 21-item interviewer -administered  rating  scale  that measures  the 
frequency  and severity  of suicidal  ideation.  This test will not be administered during telehealth visits.  
• Functional  Outcomes  of Sleep  Questionnaire  (FOSQ -10)98 A 10-item measure  of sleep  function.  
• Insom nia Severity  Index  (ISI)99 A 7-item measure  of insomnia  severity.  This test will not be administered 
during telehealth visits.  
 
Scheduling  of Assessment  Measures:  Assessment  measures are administered  at times  indicated  in Table  3. 
Table  3: Visit and Assessment  Schedule  (updated for telehealth visits)  
 
 Visit 1,Wk.  0 Visits  2-6 Visit 7,Wk.  7 Visits  8-12 Visit 13,Wk.  14 
Duration  180 mins  90 mins 60 mins 90 mins 180 mins  
Purpose  screen  + 
baseline  intervention  mid- 
assessment  intervention  post- 
assessment  
Informed  Consent  x     
Demographic  x     
CAPS -V x    x 
PCL-5 x  x  x 
DoD HTEC  x     
NSI x  x  x 
BDI-II x  x  x 
MINI – M,H,&P  x     
MINI – MDD  & 
SUD  x     
SLS x  x  x 
CSQ      x 
NP Battery  x    x 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  33 of 43   
 
 
5.6 Data  Analysis  
Statistical  Analysis  of Data  
 
Data  integrity.  Data  will be collected  at both participating sites:  Portland  VA and VA Puget Sound . The co-PIs 
and multi-site project  coordinator  will be located  at the Portland  VA. Trained  study  personnel  will conduct  the 
structured  clinical  screening  interview.  Similarly,  a paper  questionnaire  will be used  to guide  the medical  record  
review  to ensure  that the same  historical  information is gathered  and coded  for all subjects.  The self-report  
questionnaires/surveys and psychological  and cognitive  assessment  battery  consists  of standardized  protocols  
with specific/scripted  questions  and scoring  systems  that quantify  answers.  All study  personnel  from all study  
sites who will be gathering  data from these  sources will  be trained  by the co-PIs regarding  the collection of  
data and will have  professional  education  and training  as required  for these  instruments.  
Data  will be labeled  with a code  unique  to each  patient.  All hard copy  data will be stored  in locked  filing 
cabinets in locked  rooms, while  electronic  data will be stored  in password -protected  files in a limited  access  
folder  on the secure  VA network  drive.  Each  study  site will maintain a key code  that links that site’s  patients  
with their coded  identifier  with key code  stored  separately  from all other  study  data. Only the multisite  and site 
PI’s and the multisite  and site study  coordinators  and research assistants  will have  access  to the key code  
linking document.  Materials  with protected  health  information  will be stored  in separate  locked  file cabinets  
from coded  materials  to ensure  privacy.  Special  multilevel  data security  programs  have been  written  into the 
network  operating  system  to ensure  that only authorized  research  personnel  have access  to the Center  
Network.  Backups  of daily changes  are done  regularly  and all other  data are backed  up on a rotating 
schedule.  An electronic  archive  of all data is kept offsite  to insure  against  loss by fire, theft,  etc. All statistical  
transfer  routines  are inherently  secure  via operating  platform  and contain  no patient  names  or personal  data.  
A database  will be developed  using  Microsoft  Access  or Excel by the multi-site study  team  located  at the 
Portland  VA, and adapted  from the current  Merit study.  The database  will be tested  and the final version will  
be distributed  to participating study  sites by the Portland  VA data manager.  Two study  support  persons 
located  at each  site will enter  data from the hard copy forms  into the database  to ensure  accuracy  of data 
entry.  All data entry  discrepancies  will be solved  by the site study  coordinator.  Hard  copy source  documents  
will be kept and stored  at the VA site location  (Portland or VA Puget Sound) at which  they were  gathered ; data 
collected at the American Lake Division will be transported securely to the Seattle Division for storage . For 
adherence  monitoring,  digital  audio -recordings  of sessions  will be kept in limited  access drive  on the VA 
network.  The recording  will be coded,  password - protected and encrypted.  Following  completion  of the 
planned  analyses,  the statistician’s  files will be sent back to the VA site to be stored with all other  data and 
subject  to all IRB-approved  storage  and deletion  procedures.  The statistician  will be able to retain  a data 
dictionary  and all associated  syntax  and output  files, provided  that these  files do not contain  any identifiable  
data.  Throughout  the entire  course  of the study,  the off-site statistician will  only ever have access  to coded  
data.  Additionally,  the off-site statistician  holds  a VA appointment  with the San Diego  VA and will only 
analyze  and maintain  databases  from within  the VA network.  
DATA  ENTRY  FLOW:  The following  sequence  of events  will be followed:  1) Assessment  forms  completed  by 
clinical  rater; 2) Forms  reviewed  by rater and data manager  for completeness;  3) Assessment  forms  entered  
into database;  4) Data entry  procedures  verify  key items,  out of range  and unacceptable  values;  5) Data 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  34 of 43  added  to database;  6) Programs  run to check  for missing  data and for logic errors;  7) Data reviewed  by 
investigators,  clinical  staff,  and key data management  personnel  at regular  protocol  review  meeting  for final 
validity.  
 
DATA  SAFETY  MONITORING:  Safety  monitoring  analyses  will occur  every  six months  from study  inception  
through  completion.  The unblinded  data manager  will provide  the blinded  study  statistician with a limited  data 
set containing blinded  group  membership  data,  i.e., group  membership  that is numerically  labeled  but 
unidentifiable  as treatment  vs. control  group.  This dataset  will also contain  in-progress  data safety  variables  
including  CAPS  scores  and any serious  adverse  events including  1) the onset  of imminent  risk of harm  to self 
or others  such  as active  thoughts of suicide or violence  with expressed  plan and intent  to act; 2) the onset  of 
psychotic and or manic symptoms;  3) a decline  in global  daily functioning  indicating that inpatient  mental  
health  services  are required  for stabilization;  4) the onset  or exacerbation  of major  medical  illness  that 
interferes  with participation  in regular  outpatient  mental  health  services.  Differences  between  the treatment  
and control   groups  will be analyzed  using t-test comparisons..  We will consult  with the CIRB  and consider  
the appropriateness  of study  suspension  if, at the set data monitoring time periods  every  six months,  we find 
that either  group  of participants is experiencing,  on average,  an increase  in CAPS  scores  of 12 or more  points  
and/or  is experiencing,  on average  significantly  more  SAE’s  including  those  defined  above. For serious   
adverse  events,  significance  is defined  as a statistically  significant  difference  of p < .01 and/or  a large  effect  
size equivalent  to a Cohen’s  d value  of .8 or greater.  The two study  PIs will be responsible  for notifying and 
consulting the CIRB  of any conditions  meeting criteria  for possible  study  suspension  within  one business  day  
of discovery.  
Randomization  procedures  as well as overall  multisite  study  interim,  data safety  monitoring  and final data 
analyses  will be conducted  by our contracted  statistician,  Shah  Golshan,  Ph.D  who is affiliated  with University  
of California,  San Diego.  Dr. Golshan  will receive  a limited  data set copied  in encrypted  format onto  CD’s  
sent via secure  FedEx  with tracking services.  This data set will be considered  a limited  data set due to 
inclusion  of patient  assessment  dates  and otherwise  is de-identified.  A Data Use Agreement will be pursued  
between  the VAPORHCS  and Dr. Golshan  recognizing  the agreement  of the terms  for use of this data which  
shall be transmitted  and accessed  strictly  for data analysis purposes  pursuant  to the goals  of this study.  
 
Sample  size and power.  Power analyses  are performed  for primary  hypotheses  1a, 1b and 2a, 
incorporating  the longitudinal  nature  of the design.  We propose  a Random  Regression  model  (also  known  as 
Multilevel  or Growth  Curve Models)  as a basis  of the analysis.  In this approach,  the repeated  measures over  
time for each  individual  subject  form a trajectory  that can be described  by a relatively  simple  model  with a 
few parameters,  here a linear  model  described  by intercept  (baseline value) and slope  (rate of change).  With 
random  assignment  to groups,  there  should  be no group  differences in baseline  values,  and slopes  
differences  reflect  treatment  effects.  With repeated  measures,  repeated  observations  within  subjects  are 
potentially  correlated,  impacting tests of significance84. When  within  subject correlation  is properly  
incorporated,  the repeated  measures  analysis  takes  full advantage  of all information  obtained  from each  
subject,  thereby  greatly  increasing  statistical  power  over cross -sectional  methods85.This  approach  can model  
differential  patterns  over repeated  assessments  instead  of totals  at one point and therefore  increases  the 
reliability  of the measurement  of response  (since  the slope  combines  repeated  measures  which  cancel  much  
of the error of measurement),  and increases  the protection  against  the major effects of missing  data (since  
one can impute  from the non- missing  data for that subject  as well as for other  similar  subjects).  These  result  
in increased  power  to detect  effects  and precision  of effect  size estimation  without  increased  sample  size. 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  35 of 43  Power  calculations  can be made  for repeated  measures  designs  under  specified  assumptions86. Hedeker  
et al86 extend  Diggle  et al.’s87 method  for various  covariance  structures.  Procedures  described  by Hedeker  et 
al86 for Random  Regression  Models were  used  for the proposed  study  to estimate  needed  sample  size using  
RMASS  (see Hedeker  http://tigger.uic.edu/~hedeker/ml.html ). Data from our previous  studies  were used  to 
calculate  effect  sizes.  The design  consists  of a 2 (sites)  X 2 (CABA  vs TAU)  X 4 (baseline,  7, and 14 weeks)  
where  the slope  is the dependent  measure.  Site and Treatment  by Site interaction were  included  as 
"nuisance  parameters",  that is, included  to account  for possible overall  site effects  (Site)  or possible  site 
differences in treatment  effects  (Treatments  X Site).  With a balanced  design  (equal  numbers  at each  site in 
each  group),  ignoring these  would  not increase  the probability  of Type  I error,  but would  increase  the Error  
Sum of Squares  (SS) and probability  of Type  II error.  The main  effect  of treatment  represents  the common  
effect  size across  sites if there  is one, or the average  site effect,  if there  is heterogeneity  across  sites.  This is 
true because  sample  sizes  will be balanced  across  treatment  groups  and sites.  In any case,  the analysis  
procedures will  include  site and site interaction  effects  to avoid  allowing  site effects  to bias treatment  
comparisons.  However,  if we detect  imbalances  between  the treatment  groups within  each  site, we will 
follow  the primary  analyses with subsequent  analyses  considering the imbalances  to verify  that conclusions  
are not affected  by imbalances.  
Other  assumptions  needed  are number  of repeated  measures,  alpha -level,  nature  of the hypothesis  (one- or 
two-sided),  drop-out rate, and variance -covariance  matrix  of the longitudinal  data.  We assume  an overall  Type - 
I error levels  alpha  of .01 to .02, drop-out rate of 15%,  and autoregressive  covariance  structure,  with 
correlation  between  sequential  assessments  set at 0.45.  Autoregressive  covariance  structures  assume  points  
closer  together  in time are more  correlated  than points  further  in time, which  is more  plausible  compared  to the 
equal  correlation  between  all pair of assessments  regardless of time separation  assumed  by the compound  
symmetry  design.  When  multiple  analyses are conducted  for a given  hypothesis,  Type  I error rates  will be 
controlled  
by a Westfall -Young  procedure,  we would  include  an alpha  level of .04 for Hypothesis 1a, .03 for 
Hypothesis 1b and 2a, and .05 for Hypothesis 2b. We estimate  that with the proposed  sample  size of 192 
(15%  drop-out) patients  (96 for each  of the two groups),  the study  will have  minimum  power of  80% to yield a 
statistically  significant  result  for a medium  effect  size. Hedker  et al.86 defined  medium  effect  size in this model   
as a between -group  difference  increasing  linearly  from 0 at baseline  to .5 SD units at the last time point.  
Hypothesis 2b is a cross -sectional  hypothesis  using  data collected  only in the week  14 of the study.  The 
proposed  sample  size will provided  us with a minimum  power  of 90% to detect  a medium  to large  effect  size. 
The former  and foundational  Behavioral  Activation  for PTSD  study  by Wagner  and Jakupcak  yielded  the 
following  rates  which  also informed our proposed  sample  size determination:  192 screened,  81 enrolled,  10 
dropped  (12.3% dropout  rate),  101 screen  failures.  
 
Outcome  analyses:  Data analyses will  proceed  in stages.  Descriptive  statistics  and exploratory  graphing  
such  as frequencies,  means,  standard  deviations,  stem  and leaf diagrams,  and scatterplots  will be used  to 
assess  normality  of data in terms  of presence  of skew  and/or  outliers.  Continuous  outcome  data will be 
transformed  if necessary  using  an appropriate  transformation  such as the log transform  for skewed  long 
tailed data.  Prior experience with this kind of data leads  us to expect  that for all variables,  the distributions  
will be skewed  and the variances not homogeneous.  Similarly,  potential  covariates will  be summarized  with 
descriptive  statistics  and graphs  to determine  the most  appropriate  way to treat these  variables  (e.g.,  
continuous,  categorical,  or interval  representation).  For outcome  measures  acquired  at baseline,  7, and 14 
weeks,  the analytical  approach  will address  the nature  of the outcome,  as well as accommodate  the within  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  36 of 43  individual  variability  due to the repeated  assessments.  Results  from will be inspected  for bias due to drop-
outs or missing data.  
For major  analyses of central  hypotheses  (1a-1b and 2a), we propose  to use Mixed  Effects  modeling to 
account  for clustered  data (i.e., repeated  assessments  within individuals,  treatment  groups,  and sites).  The 
mixed  effects  approach  provides  more  information  and more  power  compared  to cross -sectional  analyses  
which  focus  on analysis  of one summary  index  or time-until event  methods  and traditional  analytic  approaches  
such  as a change  score,  end-point or repeated  measures  analysis  of variance  (ANOVA).  This method allows  
inclusion  of subjects  with missing  data or those  who were  terminated  early  in the study,  without  relying  on 
data imputation  procedures.  Two specific  forms  of the Mixed effects  model  strategy  are commonly  
implemented:  random  regression  models,  or hierarchical  models  (HLM)  or multilevel  models;  and mixed  
model  analysis  of variance  (MMANOVA).  Each  outcome  variable  will be graphed  versus  time for each  
subject  to evaluate what function  of time best describes  the data.  The mixed  effects  framework  is robust  with 
respect  to drop-out and missing  data,  unless  the drop-out mechanism  or cause  of missing  is informative.  We 
will use pattern -mixture  models  to assess if there  is bias due to drop out or missing  data.  As described  by 
Hedeker  and Gibbons88, these  mixed  models  allow  us to assess whether  important  estimates  are dependent  
on missing  data patterns  and provide  overall  estimates  of effects  by averaging  over the various  missing -data 
patterns.  In addition,  we will consider the extension of the Pattern -Mixture  models  as described  by Guo et 
al89 which  includes the incorporation  of random  effects  in the Pattern  mixture  model,  allowing  subject -to-
subject  heterogeneity.  
Missing  data values will  be minimized  by intensive  training  of interviewers  in techniques  of clarifying  
answers  and checking  questionnaires  while  participants are on-site. When  missing  values  are identified,  we 
will employ  several  approaches.  If possible,  participants will be rescheduled  for missed  assessments.  Missing  
data will be examined  to assess  randomness.  The pattern  of missing data will be examined  according to the 
procedure  recommended  by Little and Rubin90 which  includes  comparing  group  differences in the primary  
outcomes of subjects  with versus without  missing data.  The Mixed  effects  model  allows  inclusion  of subjects  
with missing  data or those who terminated  the study  early,  without  relying  on data imputation  procedures.  
 
Hypothesis  1a) PTSD  symptom  severity.  Dependent  variables:  CAPS -V and PCL-5. 
 
Hypothesis  1b) Functional  impairment.  Dependent  variables:  HVLT -R, WAIS -IV (Digit  Span  subtest),  
DKEFS  (Trails  subtest),  and COWAT  (Verbal  Fluency).  
Independent  variables:  Treatment  group  (2 levels,  CABA  and TAU),  & Time  (3 levels,  Weeks  0, 7, and 
14). Statistical  Analysis:  We will analyze  data on all randomized  subjects  in whom  we have  a baseline  
assessment  and at least one post-baseline  evaluation  by Mixed  effects  model  methods84, 91. Preliminary  
inspection  of data will determine  whether  the outcome  is nearly  normal,  or whether  an appropriate  
transformation  is required,  or whether  a generalized  linear  mixed  model  should  be considered.  The 
mixed effects  model  method  provides  an estimate of the individual  variability  around  the population  trend,  
the variability  of the individual  intercepts  (baseline  values)  and slopes  (changes across  time),  and the 
correlation between  them.  A fully saturated  treatment  by time model  will be utilized  for inference.  Co-
variance  structure  will be chosen  based  on Akaikes  Information  Criterion  (AIC).  Random  group  level 
treatment  effects  will also be  evaluated  for importance  based  on the model  AIC. This allows  for any 
group  level effects  to be incorporated into  the model.  Denominator  degrees  of freedom  will be calculated  
using  the Kenward -Roger  small  sample  correction.  The design  is a 2 (sites)  X 2 (CABA  vs TAU)  X 3 
(baseline,  7, and 14 weeks).  The interaction  of Site and Treatment  X Site will be included  and tested  as 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  37 of 43  "nuisance  parameters".  However,  we do not  anticipate  any Treatment  by Site or Site effects  with the 
balanced  design  (equal  numbers  at each  site in each  group),  our standard  training  procedure  of both sites 
and standard operating  procedure  used by both sites.  In any case,  the analysis  procedures  will include  
site and site interaction  effects  to avoid  allowing  site effects  to bias treatment  comparisons.  If we detect  
any imbalances  between  the treatment  groups  within  each  site, we  will follow  the primary  analyses  above  
with subsequent  analyses  considering the imbalances  to verify  that the conclusions  are not  affected  by 
imbalances.  Analyses  will be conducted within and across  nested levels  of the study  design;  this will 
involve  within -subject  analyses  (comparison of occasions of measurement  nested  within  an individual),  
as well as between -subject  analyses  (comparison of the CABA  and TAU groups,  comparison of groups  
within  a site, comparison  of sites,  etc). Any treatment  group  comparison  can be adjusted  for subject -
specific  characteristics  and adjustments  for changes  in these  characteristics over  the course  of the study  
can be incorporated  into single -subject  analyses.  All comparisons  described in this section  can be 
effectively  analyzed  using PROC  MIXED  in SAS statistical  software.  Based  on our ongoing  studies,  we 
expect  a drop-out rate of <15%  after baseline  assessment  but prior to first post-baseline  evaluation.  The 
drop-out rate is taken  into account  in power analyses,  see above.  
 
Hypothesis  2a) Patient -centered  outcomes.  Dependent  variables:  BDI-II, NSI, and SLS.  Independent  
variables:  Treatment  group  (2 levels,  CABA  and TAU),  and Time  (3 levels,  Weeks  0,7,14 ). Statistical  
Analysis:  Data will be analyzed  similar to hypotheses 1a and 1b. 
 
Hypothesis  2b) Treatment  satisfaction.  Dependent  variables:  CSQ.  Independent  variables:  Treatment  
group  (2 levels,  CABA  and TAU). Statistical  Analysis:  Hypothesis  2b will be tested  using  Analysis of 
Variance,  comparing the two groups on the treatment  credibility  and satisfaction  (CSQ).  
 
Exploratory  Investigation  to Provide  Guidance  for Future  Research  Directions:  
Guidance  for future  research  will be obtained  through  exploratory  analyses  including  possible  mediator  and 
moderator  variables in addition  to secondary  outcome  variables,  including measures  of 
neuropsychological  test performance  and general  functioning.  We will also investigate  whether  CABA -
associated  treatment  gains  are maintained  over a 6 month  follow -up period.  The effect  of moderator  and 
mediator  variables  will be explored  following  the procedures  recommended  by Kraemer92, Cohen  and 
Cohen93 and Busemeyer  and Jones94. 
 
Anticipated  time table:  Table  4 depicts  a four-year study  plan with 6 months  for start-up and 6 months  
termination;  156 weeks  for enrollment  and 6 month  follow  up assessments.  The study  will be fully 
enrolled  within  39 months  of the start of funding of the trial. The last group  of subjects  will exit by month  
42. 
 
Table  4. Anticipated  Time  Table  
 Year  One Year  Two Year  Three  Year  Four  
 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  38 of 43  Start -Up Phase:  
Establish  infrastructure;  staff 
hiring  & training;  IRB approval;  
complete  manual;  fidelity  
monitoring  implementation;  & set 
up data management  systems.                  
Data  Acquisition:  
CABA : assessments  + CABA;  
TAU: assessments;  Tx fidelity                  
Analysis and Dissemination:  
Data  analysis;  manuscript;  manual  
dissemination                  
 
Disseminat ion plan:  We will present  preliminary  and final results  at relevant  national  conferences.  Our 
co- investigators  are well-versed  in conducting  large -scale  cyber -seminars  for VA and DoD audiences.  
Drs. 
Storzbach  and O’Neil  have worked  with the VA’s Center  for Information  Dissemination  and Education  
Resources and Quality  Enhancement  Research  Initiative  to conduct  multiple  cyber -seminars  for large,  
national  audiences  of over 500 participants  at low- to no-cost, and plan do conduct  such  seminars  on 
the findings  from this trial. Multiple  VA and DoD research  reports  and academic  articles  are planned  for 
dissemination  of findings.  A website  will be established  and the treatment  manual  will be made  
available  online. This trial would  provide  critical  data on feasibility  of providing  PTSD  treatment  to 
Veterans  with mTBI,  which  is a key issue  for the VA and DoD.  We expect  to disseminate  findings  in 
multiple  research  reports  throughout  the course  of the trial as well as at least 4 peer reviewed  academic  
journal  articles  following  trial completion.  
 
5.7 Withdra walof Subjects  
Should  any findings  arise  during  assessment  study  visits  which  might  affect  the participant’s  health  or 
welfare,  the study  team  will address  those  findings  directly  with participants  during  the assessment  
study  visit within  which  the issues  are discovered.  The study  team  will use CPRS  to identify  the 
participant’s  health  care providers  as well as communicate  the findings  with those  providers and follow -
up via telephone  as needed.  
 
The co-PIs will recommend  termination  of participation,  provide  appropriate  referrals,  and engage  in 
follow -up  if substantial  decline  in functioning  is observed  at any assessment  study  visit for all 
participants  and/or  treatment  visits  for those  assigned  to the CABA  treatment  intervention.  Participation  
in this study  therefore,  will be terminated  at the discretion  of study  personnel  (with final determination  by 
co-PI’s),  based  upon  clinical  observations  and judgments  regarding  the safety  of continued  participation  
to the patient’s  physical  and/or  psychological  health  and well-being.  Additionally,  if participants  fail to 
comply  with important  instructions  that are part of the approved  study  protocol,  such as actively  abusing  
substances,  participation will be terminated  without  consent.  
 
Although  the proposed  study  poses  no serious  risks to participants,  participants  may notify  research  
personnel  about  pre-existing  mental  health  issues  that have  not been  previously  identified  by other  VA 
providers.  Therefore,  participants  will be referred  to the VA’s Mental  Health  Division  for further  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  39 of 43  assessment  and/or  treatment  if a previously  undiagnosed  psychiatric  disorder  is identified.  We will 
inform  participants of this procedure  as part of the informed  consent  process  and participants  must  
agree  to this procedure  to be eligible  to participate  in the study.  This ensures  that we can adequately  
manage  any pre-existing  clinical  issues  that become  apparent  through  subject  evaluation.  
 
If a participant  chooses  to withdraw  from the study,  study  personnel  or Drs. Dan Storzbach  or Amy Wagner 
will refer the patient  back to their providers in Primary  Care  for further  assessment  of treatment  needs.  
The reason  for withdraw  will be documented.  Participants  who choose  to withdraw  early  will still be 
allowed  to continue  participation  in follow -up assessments  and would  continue  to receive  financial  
reimbursement  for doing  so, but this would  be completely  voluntary.  A possible  consequence  of a 
participant  choosing  to withdraw  early  from the study  is that he/she  will likely  continue  to experience  
cognitive  and/or  PTSD  symptoms.  Without  treatment,  these  symptoms  may worsen  over time. 
 
 
6.0 Reporting  
 
All SAE’s,  UAP’s,  and protocol  deviations occurring  at either  site will be communicated  to the Co-PI’s 
immediately  and necessary  documentation will be submitted  to the CIRB  within  stipulated  timeframes  and via 
designated  channels  in accordance  with the VA Central  IRB Table  of Reporting  Requirements.  
 
 
7.0 Privacy  and Confidentiality  
 
This study  will involve  the use and  collection  of Protected  Health  Information  (PHI).  Multiple  steps  will be taken  
in the current  investigation  to protect  the privacy  and confidentiality  of research  participants.  All study  
personnel  will have  current  training  in GCP  procedures  for the proper  use, collection,  and disclosure  of PHI for 
research  purposes.  Study  personnel  will no longer  have  access  to study  data upon  termination of employment.  
Per VA protocol,  in the event  of improper  use and/or  disclosure,  the local ISO and Privacy  Officer  will be 
notified  within  one hour.  A code  number  will be assigned  to each  participant  and his/her  information.  Only the 
multi-site co-PI’s, the local site PI’s, the multi-site project  coordinator,  and the site coordinator  will be  
authorized  to link the code number  to the participant.  A Master  List will be retained  by the study  coordinator  
that will allow  us to match  each  participant’s  code  with their information;  however, this Master  List will  be an 
electronic  database  that is password  protected,  and Informed  Consent  Forms  will be stored  in a double -locked  
cabinet  apart  from participant  information.  We will keep  participant  information in a separate  electronic  
database  that is password  protected.  
 
Participants who are assigned  to the CABA  condition will  have  their therapy  sessions  audio -recorded  using  a 
hand  held digital  audio  recorder.   However,  these  digital  audio  files will be identified  by a number  assigned  to 
the participant  and will not be marked  with the participant’s  name  or other  identifying  information.  These  
audio - recordings  will be listened  to by a member  of the research  staff to determine  if the interventions are 
conducted  accurately  ("adherence  checks").  The audio  files will be uploaded  into a secure,  password -
protected  folder  on the VA network.  These  files will not contain  identifying  information  audio  recordings  of 
sessions  will be removed  directly  from the audio  recorders immediately  following  the session  to encrypted,  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  40 of 43  password  protected, limited  access  drives  on the VA network.  Audio  recorders  with session  content  will not 
leave  the session  room  before  transfer.  
Adequacy  of Privacy  Protection . We will take multiple  steps  to protect  participants’  privacy  and 
confidentiality.  All data will be labeled  with a code  number  that is unique  to each  patient  in the study,  and 
maintained in a Subject  Data File. We will NOT include  any protected  health information  (PHI)  in the Subject  
Data  Files.  Instead,  we will code  each  Subject  Data File with a unique  numerical  code,  which  will consist  of 
the VA station  number  + 3 digits  consecutively  numbered in order  of enrollment  (e.g.,  648-001, 648-002, etc.).  
All hard copy subject  data will be stored  in locked  filing cabinets  in locked  rooms,  while  all electronic  data will 
be stored  in password -protected  files in a limited  access  folder  on the secure  VA network  drive.  Each  study  
site will maintain  a Master  List key code  that links that site’s  subjects  with their coded  identifier.  This key code  
will be stored  separately  from all  other  study  data.  Only the multi-site co-PI’s, the local site PI’s, the multi-site 
project  coordinator,  and the site coordinator  will have access  to the Master  List key code,  and only IRB- 
approved  study  personnel  will have  access  to Subject  Data Files or Informed  Consent  Forms.  We will analyze  
and report  subject  data in aggregate  form and no PHI will be entered  into these  analyses or reports.  
 
 
8.0 Communication  Plan 
 
Routine  communication  and coordination  between  the study  sites will primarily  occur  through  joint 
teleconferenced  team  meetings.  These  meetings  will be scheduled  bi-weekly  the first 6 months  of the study  
and monthly  the latter  part of the first year,  and then quarterly  during  years  two and three.  Additional  meetings  
may occur  on an as-needed  basis.   Local  site approvals  will be sought  after confirmation of multi-site approval  
is received.  As per VA protocol,  local site facility  directors  will be notified  of local site research  via the standard  
mechanism  of the required  PPQ (proposed  project  questionnaire)  paperwork  for local R&D approval,  
concurrent  with CIRB  local site applications.  
 
We will utilize  the CIRB  sharepoint  site designated  for our study  as well as email  to coordinate  local site 
submissions.  Once  Multi-site approvals  have  been  acquired,  local sites will be informed  of changes  to the 
protocol,  informed  consent,  and HIPAA  authorization via email.  Templates  with the necessary  changes  
tracked  will be emailed  to local site coordinators  and uploaded  onto the CIRB  sharepoint  site for this study.  
 
All SAE’s,  UAP’s,  and protocol  deviations occurring  at either  site will be communicated  to the Co-PI’s 
immediately  and necessary  documentation will be submitted  to the CIRB  within  stipulated  timeframes  and via 
designated  channels  in accordance  with the VA Central  IRB Table  of Reporting  Requirements.  Any SAE’s,  
UAP’s,  and/or  protocol  deviations which  will affect  local site operations will be communicated  immediately  to 
local site PI’s and coordinators  via email  followed  up by telephone  confirmation.  Templates  of forms  with 
tracked  changes  regarding  SAE/UAP/PD  information will  be emailed  to site coordinators  to be edited  for local 
site submission  whenever  applicable.  
 
All local sites will be required  to strictly  adhere  to the most  recently  IRB-approved  protocol  of this study.  
Thorough  review  of the protocol  will be a mandatory  component  of training  for all study  personnel  and 
we will maintain  both electronic  and hard copy records  with tracking  logs of each  dated  version of the 
protocol.  All study  staff will be directed  to refer to the protocol  when  operational  questions  arise.  
[CABA,  Version  14, 8.12.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  10/26/2012  Page  41 of 43  Given  the nature  of this multisite  study,  in that the Portland  site is both the multi-site study  
headquarters and a local site with the same  staff members in place  for the duties of both,  a plan for 
notifying  all local facility  directors  of termination  of engagement  at the local site level is not  necessary.  
The Portland  and Seattle  sites will continue  to recruit  participants  and operate  normally  until recruitment  
goals  are met and/or  until the timeframes  of the study  necessitate  termination.  At that point,  local sites 
will submit applicable  termination  paperwork  to the local R&D committees  and the CIRB  and the 
Portland  site will continue  to remain  open  for data analysis at the multi-site level. 
[CABA,  Version  13, 2.26.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  
10/26/2012  Page  40 of 43  9.0 References  
 
1. Terrio,  H., et al (2009).  Traumatic  brain  injury  screening:  Preliminary  findings  in a US Army  Brigade  combat  
team.  Journal  of Head  Trauma  Rehabilitation,  24(1),  14-23. 
2. Galarneau,  M. R., Woodruff,  S. I., Dye, J. L., Mohrle,  C. R., & Wade,  A. L. (2008).  Traumatic brain  injury  
during  Operation  Iraqi Freedom:  findings  from the United  States  Navy –Marine  Corps  Combat  Trauma  Registry.  
3. Tanielian,  T., & Jaycox,  L.H. (Eds).  (2008).  Invisible  wounds  of war: Psychological  and cognitive  injuries,  their 
consequences,  and services  to assist  recover.  Santa  Monica,  CA: Rand  Corporation.  
4. Wagner,  A. W. & Jakupcak,  M. (2012).  Combat -related  stress  reactions  among  U.S. veterans of wartime  
service.  In J.H. Laurence  & M.D. Matthews  (Eds.),  The Oxford  Handbook  of Military  Psychology,  pp.15 -28. New 
York:  Oxford  University  Press.  
5. Carlson,  K.F., et al (2011).  Prevalence,  assessment,  and treatment  of mild traumatic  brain  injury  and 
posttraumatic  stress  disorder:  A systematic  review  of the evidence.  Journal  of Head  Trauma  Rehabilitation,  
26(2),  103-115. 
6. Hoge,  C.W.,  Castro,  C., Messer,  S.C.,  McGurk,  D., Cotting,  D.L., Koffman,  R.L. (2008).  Mild traumatic  brain  
injury  in US soldiers  returning  from Iraq. The New England  Journal  of Medicine,  358, 453-463. 
7. Cohen,  B.E., et al (2010).  Mental  health  diagnoses  and utilization  of VA non-mental  health  medical  services  
among  returning  Iraq and Afghanistan  veterans.  Journal  of General  Internal  Medicine,  25(1),  18-24. 
8. Hendricks,  A., et al (2012).  Estimating the costs  of care.  In J.J. Vasterling,  R.A. Bryant,  & Keane,  T.M. (Eds.),  
PTSD  & mild traumatic  brain injury,  pp.260 -284. New York:  Guildford  Press.  
9. Uomoto,  J.M, Williams,  R.M.,  Randa,  L.A. (2010).  Neurobehavioral  Consequences  of Combat -Related  Blast  
Injury  and Polytrauma.  In. Ashley,  M.J. (Ed.),  Traumatic  Brain  Injury:  Rehabilitation,  Treatment,  and Case  
Management  (pp 63-96). (3rd ed.). Boca  Raton,  FL: CRC  Press.  
10. Bogdanova,  Y., & Verfaellie,  M. (2012).  Cognitive  sequelae  of blast-induced  traumatic  brain  injury:  recovery  
and rehabilitation.  Neuropsychology  review,  22(1),  4-20. 
11. Dolan,  S., et al (2012).  Neuropsychological  sequelae of PTSD  and TBI following  war deployment  among  
OEF/OIF  veterans.  Neuropsychology  Review,  22(1),  21-34. 
12. Cohen,  B.E., et al (2010).  Mental  health  diagnoses  and utilization  of VA non-mental  health  medical  services  
among  returning  Iraq and Afghanistan  veterans.  Journal  of General  Internal  Medicine,  25(1),  18-24. 
13. Bryant,  R. (2011).  Post-traumatic  stress  disorder  vs traumatic  brain  injury,  Diaglogues  in Clinical  
Neuroscience,  13, 251-262. 
14. Verfaellie,  M., Amick,  M.M.,  & Vasterling,  J.J. (2012).  Effects  of traumatic  brain  injury -associated  
neurocognitive  alterations on posttraumatic  stress  disorder.  In J.J. Vasterling,  R.A. Bryant,  & Keane,  T.M. (Eds.),  
PTSD  & mild traumatic  brain injury,  pp.82 -104. New York:  Guildford  Press.  
15. American  Psychiatric   Association  (2000).  Diagnostic and statistical  manual  of mental  disorders  (Revised  
4th ed.). Washington,  DC: Author.  
16. Ruff,  R.M. & Grant,  I. (1999).  Postconcussional  disorder:  Background  to DSM -IV and future  considerations.  
In N.R.Varney  & R.J. Roberts  (Eds.),  Evaluation  and treatment  of mild traumatic  brain  injury,  pp. 315-326. 
Mahwah,  Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates,  Inc. 
17. Vasterling,  J.J. & Proctor,  S.P. (2011).  Understanding  the neuropsychological  consequences  of deployment  
stress:  A public  health  framework.  Journal  of the International  Neuropsychological  Society,  17, 1 -6. 
18. Sayer,  N. et al (2009)  Veterans  with history  of mild traumatic  brain  injury  and posttraumatic  stress  disorder:  
Challenges  from provider  perspective.  Journal  of Rehabilitation  Research  & Development,  46(6),  703–716. 
19. Stein,  M.B. & McAllister,  T.W.  (2009).  Exploring  the convergence  of posttraumatic  stress disorder  and mild 
traumatic  brain  injury.  The American  Journal  of Psychiatry,  166(7),  768-776. 
20. Resick,  P.A., Monson,  C.M.,  & Chard,  K.M. (2008). Cognitive  Processing  Therapy:  therapist’s  manual.  
Department  of Veterans  Affairs.  
[CABA,  Version  13, 2.26.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  
10/26/2012  Page  40 of 43  21. Foa, E., Hembree, E., & Rothbaum,  B.O. (2007).  Prolonged  Exposure  Therapy  for PTSD:  Emotional  
processing  of traumatic  experiences  therapist  guide.  New York:  Oxford  University  Press.  
22. Vasterling,  J.J., Verfaellie,  M., Sullivan,  K.D. (2009).  Mild traumatic brain  injury  and posttraumatic  stress  
disorder  in returning  veterans:  Perspectives  from cognitive  neuroscience.  Clinical  Psychology  Review,  29, 674- 
684. 
23. Wild,  J. & Gur, R.C. (2008).  Verbal  memory  and treatment  response in post-traumatic  stress  disorder.  The 
British  Journal  of Psychiatry,  193, 254-255. 
24. Davis,  J. J., et al. (2013).  Treatment  adherence  in cognitive  processing  therapy  for combat -related  PTSD  
with history  of mild TBI. Rehabilitation  psychology,  58(1),  36. 
25. Sripada et al. (2013). Mild  traumatic  brain  injury  and treatment  response in prolonged  exposure  for PTSD.  
Journal  of traumatic  stress.  
26. Bryant,  R. A. & Hopwood,  S. (2006).  Commentary  on “trauma  to the psyche  and soma”.  Cognitive  and 
Behavioral  Practice,  13(1), 17-23. 
27. Ponsford,  J., et al (2012).  Predictors  of postconcussive  symptoms  3 months  after mild traumatic brain  injury.  
Neuropsychology,  26(3),  304-313. 
28. Huckans,  M., Pavawalla,  S., Demadura,  T., Kolessar,  M., Seelye,  A., Roost,  N., Twamley,  E.W.,  & 
Storzbach,  D. (2010).  A pilot study  examining  effects of group -based  Cognitive  Strategy  Training  treatment  on 
self-reported  cognitive  problems,  psychiatric  symptoms,  functioning,  and compensatory  strategy  use in OIF/OEF  
combat  veterans  with persistent  mild cognitive  disorder  and history  of traumatic  brain injury.  Journal  of 
Rehabilitation  Research  & Development,  47(1), 43-60. 
29. Brenner,  L.A., Vanderploeg,  R.D, Terrio,  H. (2009).  Assessment  and diagnosis of mild traumatic  brain  injury,  
posttraumatic  stress  disorder,  and other  polytrauma  conditions:  Burden  of adversity  hypothesis.  Rehabilitation  
Psychology,  54(3),  239-246. 
30. Walker,  R.L., Clark,  M.E.,  & Sanders,  S.H. (2010).  The “postdeployment  multi-symptom  disorder”:  An 
emerging syndrome in need  of a new treatment  paradigm.  Psychological  Services,  7(3), 136-147. 
31. Uomoto,  J.M. & Williams,  R.M. (2009).  Post-acute  polytrauma  rehabilitation  and integrated  care of returning  
veterans:  Toward  a holistic approach.  Rehabilitation Psychology,  54(3),  259-269. 
32. Trusz,  S.G.,  Wagner,  A.W.,  Russo, J., Love,  J., & Zatzick,  D.F. (2011).  Assessing  barriers  to care and 
readiness  for cognitive  behavioral  therapy  in early  acute  care PTSD  interventions.  Psychiatry:  Interpersonal  and 
Biological  Processes,  74(3),  207-233. 
33. Hoge,  C.W.,  et al (2004).  Combat  duty in Iraq and Afghanistan,  mental  health  problems  & barriers  to care.  
The New England  Journal  of Medicine,  351, 13-22. 
34. Schottenbauer,  M.A.,  Glass,  C.R.,  Arnkoff,  D.B.,  Tendick,  V., & Gray  S.H. (2008).  Nonresponse  and dropout  
rates  in outcome  studies  on PTSD:  Review  and methodological  considerations.  Psychiatry:  Interpersonal  and 
Biological  Processes,  71(2),  134-168. 
35. Hoge,  C. W. (2011).  Interventions  for war-related  posttraumatic  stress  disorder:  Meeting  veterans  where  
they are. JAMA,  306(5),  549-551. 
36. Stecker,  T. & Fortney,  J. (2011).  Barriers  to mental  health  treatment  engagement  among  veterans.  In J.I. 
37. Johnson,  D.R. & Lubin, H. (1997).  Treatment  preferences of Vietnam  veterans with posttraumatic  stress  
disorder.  Journal  of Traumatic  Stress,  10(3),  391-405. 
38. Schnurr,  P.P et al (2007).  Cognitive  Behavioral  Therapy  for posttraumatic  stress  disorder  in women:  A 
randomized  controlled  trial. JAMA,  297(8),  820-830. 
39. Schnurr,  P.P., Kaloupek,  D., Sayer,  N., Weiss,  D.S.,  Cohen,  J., Galea,  S. & Weaver,  T.L. (2010).  
Understanding  the impact  of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.  Journal  of Traumatic  Stress,  23(1),  3-4. 
40. Rosen,  C.S. (2011).  Survey  of PTSD  specialists  and clinic  leaders  participating  in the PTSD  Mentoring  
Program.  Unpublished  data analysis.  
41. Dimidijan,  S., et al (2006).  Randomized  trial of behavioral  activation,  cognitive therapy,  and antidepressant  
medication  in the acute  treatment  of adults  with major  depression.  Journal  of consulting  and clinical  psychology,  
74(4),  658. 
[CABA,  Version  13, 2.26.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  
10/26/2012  Page  41 of 43  42. Dobson,  K.S., et al. (2008).  Randomized  trial of behavioral  activation,  cognitive  therapy,  and antidepressant  
medication  in the prevention of relapse  and recurrence in major  depression.  Journal  of Consulting  and Clinical  
Psychology,  76(3),  468-477. 
43. Gortner,  E. T., Gollan,  J. K., Dobson,  K. S., & Jacobson,  N. S. (1998).  Cognitive –behavioral  treatment  for 
depression:  Relapse  prevention.  Journal  of Consulting  and Clinical  Psychology,  66(2),  377. 
44. Jacobson,  N.S.,  et al (1996).  A component  analysis  of cognitive -behavioral  treatment  for depression.  
Journal  of Consulting  and Clinical  Psychology,  64(2),  295-304. 
45. Martell,  C.R.,  Addis,  M.E.,  & Jacobson,  N.S. (2001).  Depression  in context:  Strategies  for guided  action.  
New York:  W W Norton  & Co. 
46. Foa, E. B., & Kozak,  M. J. (1986).  Emotional  processing  of fear: exposure  to corrective  information.  
Psychological  bulletin,  99(1), 20. 
47. Allen,  L. B., McHugh,  R. K., & Barlow,  D. H. (2008).  Emotional  disorders:  A unified  protocol.  
48. Wagner,  A.W.,  Zatzick,  D.F., Ghesquiere,  A., & Jurkovich,  G.J. (2007).  Behavioral  Activation  as an early  
intervention  for posttraumatic  stress  disorder  and depression  among  physically  injured  trauma  survivors,  
Cognitive  and Behavioral  Practice,  14(4),  341-349. 
49. Jakupcak,  M., Roberts,  L.J., Martell,  C., Mulick,  P., Michael,  S., Reed, R., Balsam,  K.F., Yoshimoto,  D., & 
McFall,  M. (2006).  A pilot study  of behavioral  activation  for veterans with posttraumatic  stress  disorder.  Journal  
of Traumatic  Stress,  19(3), 387-391. 
50. Jakupcak,  M., Wagner,  A., Paulson,  A., Varra,  A., & McFall,  M. (2010).  Behavioral  activation  as a primary  
care based  treatment  for PTSD  and depression  among  returning  veterans.  Journal  Traumatic  Stress,  23, 491- 
495. 
51. Turner,  A. & Jakupcak,  M. (2010).  Behavioral  activation  for treatment  of PTSD  and depression in an Iraqi 
combat  veteran  with multiple  physical  injuries.  Behavioral  and Cognitive  Therapy,  38(3),  355-361. 
52. Gros,  D. F., Price,  M., Strachan,  M., Yuen,  E. K., Milanak,  M. E., & Acierno,  R. (2012).  Behavioral  
Activation  and Therapeutic Exposure:  An investigation  of relative  symptom  changes in PTSD  and depression  
during  the course  of integrated  Behavioral  Activation,  situational  exposure,  and imaginal  exposure  techniques.  
Behavior  Modification,  36(4),  580-599. 
53. Gortner,  E.T., Gollan,  J.K., Dobson,  K.S., & Jacobson,  N.S. (1996).  Cognitive -behavioral  treatment  for 
depression:  Relapse  prevention.  Journal  of Consulting  and Clinical  Psychology,  66(2),  377-384. 
54. Strachan,  M., et al (2012).  An integrated  approach  to delivering  exposure -based  treatme nt for symptoms  of 
PTSD  and depression  in OIF/OEF  veterans:  Preliminary  findings.  Behavioral  Therapy.43,  560-569. 
55. Plagge  et al. (2013).  Treatment  of Comorbid  Pain and PTSD  in Returning  Veterans:  A Collaborative  
Approach  Utilizing  Behavioral  Activation.  Pain Medicine.  
56. Blake,  D.D.,  et al (1990).  A clinician  rating scale  for assessing current  and lifetime  PTSD:  The CAPS -1, 
Behavior  Therapist,  13, 187-188. 
57. Weathers,  F.W.,  et al (1993,  October).  The PTSD  Checklist:  Reliability,  validity,  & diagnostic  utility.  Paper  
presented  at the meeting  of the International  Society  for Traumatic  Stress  Studies,  San Antonio,  TX. 
58. Wagner,  A. & Jakupcak,  M. (2011).   Behavioral  Activation  as an accessible  and acceptable  early  
intervention  for trauma -related  problems.   Paper  presented  at the 27nd  annual  meeting  of the International  
Society  for Traumatic Stress  Studies,  Baltimore,  MD. 
59. Twamley,  E. W., Vella,  L., Burton,  C. Z., Heaton,  R. K., & Jeste,  D. V. (2012).  Compensatory  cognitive  
training  for psychosis:  effects in a randomized  controlled  trial. The Journal  of clinical  psychiatry,  73(9),  1212.  
60. Blake,  D.D.,  et al (1990).  A clinician  rating scale  for assessing current  and lifetime  PTSD:  The CAPS -1, 
Behavior  Therapist,  13, 187-188. 
61. Cicerone,  K. & Kathleen,  K. (1995). Persistent  postconcussion  syndrome:  The structure  of subjective  
complaints  after mild traumatic  brain  injury.  The Journal  of Head  Trauma  Rehabilitation,  10(3),  1-17. 
62. Veterans  Affairs/Department  of Defense.  (2009).  VA/DoD  Clinical  practice  guideline  for management  of 
concussion/mild  traumatic  brain  injury.  
63. Brueton,  V, et al. (2011).  Strategies  to reduce  attrition in randomised  trials.  Trials,  12(Suppl1):  A128.  
[CABA,  Version  13, 2.26.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  
10/26/2012  Page  42 of 43  64. Hopko,  D.R.,  Lejuez,  C.W.,  Ruggiero,  K.J., & Eifert,  G.H. (2003).  Contemporary  behavioral  activation  
treatments  for depression:  Procedures,  principles,  and progress.  Clinical  Psychology  Review,  23(5),  699-717. 
65. Hayes,  S.C.,  Wilson,  K.G.,  Gifford,  E.V., Follette,  V.M.,  & Strosahl,  K. (1996).  Experiential  avoidance  and 
behavioral  disorders:  A functional  dimensional  approach  to diagnosis  and treatment.  Journal  of Consulting  and 
Clinical  Psychology,  64(6),  1152 -1168.  
66. Blake,  D.D.,  et al (1995).  The development  of a Clinician -Administered  PTSD  Scale.  Journal  of Traumatic  
Stress,  8(1), 75-90. 
67. Blanchard,  E.B., Jones -Alexander,  J., Buckley,  T.C.,  Forneris,  C.A. (1996).  Psychometric properties  of the 
PTSD  checklist  (PCL).  Behavior  Research  and Therapy,  34(8),  669-673. 
68. Beck,  A.T., Steer,  R.A.,  Brown,  G.K: Manual  for Beck  Depression  Inventory -II (BDI-II). San Antonio,  
Psychology  Corporation,  2001.  
69. Diener,  E., et al (1985).  The Satisfaction  with Life Scale.  Journal  of Personality  Assessment,  49(1),  71-75. 
70. de Frias,  C.M. & Dixon,  R.A. (2005). Confirmatory  Factor  Structure  and measurement  invariance  of the 
Memory  Compensation  Questionnaire.  Psychological  Assessment,  17(2),  168-178. 
71. Wilkinson,  G. & Robertson,  G. Wide  Range  Achievement  Test-fourth  edition.  Lutz , FL : Psychological  
Assessment  Resources,  Inc., 2006.  
72. Shapiro,  A. M., Benedict,  R. H., Schretlen,  D., & Brandt,  J. (1999).  Construct  and concurrent  validity  of the 
Hopkins Verbal  Learning  Test–revised.  The Clinical  Neuropsychologist,  13(3),  348-358. 
73. Wechsler,  D. Wechsler  Adult  Intelligence  Scale —Fourth  Edition  (WAIS -IV). San Antonio,  TX: Pearson  
Corporation;  2008.  
74. Wechsler,  D. Wechsler  Adult  Intelligence  Scale —Fourth  Edition  (WAIS -III). San Antonio,  TX: Pearson  
Corporation;  1997.  
75. Reitan,  R, & Wolfson,  D (1985).  The Halstead -Reitan  Neuropsychological  Test Battery.  Tucson,  AZ: 
Neuropsychology  Press.  
76. Spreen,  O. (1998).  A compendium  of neuropsychological  tests:  Administration,  norms,  and commentary.  
Oxford  University  Press.  
77. Sheehan,  D. V., et al (1997).  The validity  of the Mini International  Neuropsychiatric  Interview  (MINI)  
according to the SCID -P and its reliability.  European  Psychiatry,  12(5),  232-241. 
78. Derogatis,  L.R. (2001).  Brief Symptom  Inventory  18 (BSI 18): Administration,  Scoring  and Procedures  
Manual.   Minneapolis,  MN : NCS Pearson,  Inc. 
79. Cella,  D., Nowinski,  C., Pterman,  A., Victorson,  D., Miller,  D., Lai, J-S., & Moy, C. (2011).  The Neurology  
Quality -of-Life Measurement  Initiative.  Archives  of Physical  Medicine  and Rehabilitation,  92, S28-S36. 
80. Whiteneck  G, Charlifue  S, Gerhart  K, Overholser  J, Richardson  G. Quantifying  handicap:  a new measure  of 
long-term rehabilitation outcomes.  Arch Phys Med Rehabil  1992;73:519 -526. 
81. Sheehan,  D. V. (1983).  The Sheehan  disability  scales.  The Anxiety  Disease.  New York,  Charles Scribner  
and Sons,  151. 
82. Attkisson,  C.C. & Zwick,  R. (1982).  The client  satisfaction  questionnaire:  Psychometric  properties  and 
correlations  with service  utilization  and psychotherapy  outcome.  Evaluation and Program  Planning,  5, 233-237. 
83. Gossop,  M., Darke,  S., Griffiths,  P., Hando,  J., Powis,  B., Hall, W., & Strang,  J. (1995).  The Severity  of 
Dependence  Scale  (SDS): psychometric  properties  of the SDS in English  and Australian  samples  of heroin,  
cocaine  and amphetamine  users.  Addiction,  90(5),  607-614. 
84. Kraemer,  H. C. (1981).  Extension of Feldt's  approach  to testing  homogeneity  of coefficients  of reliability.  
Psychometrika,  46(1),  41-45. 
85. Diggle, P., Liang,  K., Zeger,  S. (1994).  Analysis of Longitudinal  Data . New York, NY:  Oxford  Univ Press.  
86. Gibbons,  R. D., Hedeker,  D. R., & Davis,  J. M. (1993).  Estimation  of effect  size from a series  of experiments  
involving  paired  comparisons.  Journal  of Educational  and Behavioral  Statistics,  18(3),  271-279. 
87. Hedeker  D, Gibbons  R, Waternaux  C. (1999).  Sample  size estimation  for longitudinal  designs with attrition:  
Comparing time -related  contrasts  between  groups. Journal  of Educational  and Behavioral  Statistics,  24, 70-93. 
88. Hedeker,  D., & Gibbons,  R.D. (1997).  Application  of random -effects  pattern -mixture  models  for missing  data 
in longitudinal  studies.  Psychological  Methods,  2, 64-78. 
[CABA,  Version  13, 2.26.2020]    VA Central  IRB Protocol  Template  – version  
10/26/2012  Page  43 of 43  89. Guo,  W., Ratcliffe,  S. J., & Have,  T. T. T. (2004).  A random  pattern -mixture  model  for longitudinal  data with 
dropouts.  Journal  of the American  Statistical  Association,  99(468),  929-937. 
90. Little,  R. J. A., & Rubin, D. B. (1987).  Statistical  analysis  with missing  data. Wiley.  New York,  278. 
91. Hedeker,  D., Gibbons,  R.D.,  David,  J.D. (1991).  Random  regression  models  for multicenter  clinical  trials 
data. Psychopharmacology  Bulletin,  27, 73-77. 
92. Kraemer,  H. C., Wilson,  G. T., Fairburn, C. G., & Agras,  W. S. (2002).  Mediators  and moderators  of 
treatment  effects  in randomized  clinical  trials.  Archives  of General  Psychiatry,  59(10),  877. 
93. Cohen,  J., & Cohen,  P. (1983).  Applied  multiple  regression/correlation  analysis  for the behavioral  sciences  
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale,  N J: Erlbaum.  
94. Busemeyer,  Jerome  R., and  Lawrence  E. Jones.  "Analysis of multiplicative  combination  rules  when  the 
causal  variables are meas ured with error."  Psychological  Bulletin  93, no. 3 (1983):  549. 
95. King,  N. S., Crawford,  S., Wenden,  F. J., Moss,  N. E. G., & Wade,  D. T. (1995).  The Rivermead Post - 
Concussion  Symptoms  Questionnaire:  a measure of symptoms  commonly  experienced  after head -injury  and its 
reliability.  Journal  of Neurology,  242, 587-592. 
96. Wilson  JTL, Pettigrew  LEL, Teasdale  GM. Structured interviews  for the Glasgow  Outcome  Scale  and the 
Extended  Glasgow  Outcome  Scale:  Guidelines  for their use. J Neurotrauma  1998;15:573 -85. 
97. Beck,  A. T., Kovacs,  M., & Weissman,  A. (1979).  Assessment  of suicidal  intention:  The Scale  for Suicide  
Ideation.  Journal  of Consulting  and Clinical  Psychology,  47, 343-352. 
98. Weaver,  T.E., Laizner,  A.M.,  Evans,  L.K., et al. (1997).  An instrument  to measure  functional  status  
outcomes  for disorders  of excessive sleepiness.  Sleep Medicine,  20, 835-843. 
99. Bastien,  C.H.,  Vallieres,  A., Morin,  C.M. (2001).  Validation of the Insomnia  Severity  Index  as an 
outcome  measure  for insomnia  research.  Sleep  Medicine,  2, 297-307. 