Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 1of 166Clinical Study Protocol 
Drug Substance Tezepelumab
Study Code D5180C00013
Version 4.0
Date 30 Apr 2020
A Phase 2, Randomized, Double -blind, Parallel Group, Placebo Controlled 
Study to Evaluate the Effect of Tezepelumab on Airway Inflammation in 
Adults with Inadequately Controlled Asthma on Inhaled Corticosteroids and 
at least one additional asthma controller (CASCADE)
 
Sponsor: AstraZeneca AB, 151 85 Södertälje, Sweden
Regulatory Agency Identifying Number(s):
EudraCT number: 2018 -002069 -21
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 2of 166VERSION HISTORY
Versi on 4.0, 30 Apr 2020 
Changes to the protocol are summarized below
For enti re CSP -Updated “From baseline to Week 28” to “from baseline to end of treatment 
visit (EOT) due to the possibilit y of addi tional visits during COVID- 19 pandemic
Secton 1.1, SoA, Table 1, footnote #3 –Added “During the COVID -19 pandemic 
unscheduled visits may  occur so that si tes m ay perform  EOT assessments 4 weeks after last 
dose of IP at either week 28, 32, 36, 40, 44 or 48(as needed) until the sites are able to 
resum e the EOT assessments ." This change is to minimize the risk for subjects being 
exposed to SARS -CoV -2with these visits during the pandemic
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1, footnote # 8 –Added “ Durin g the COVID -19 pandemic, 
recording, collect ing and dispensing will continue once administration of extra dosing is 
implemented ” to accommodate for extra visits
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added footn ote ‘18’ –“During the COVID -19 pandemic an 
additional 1 to 6 IP doses may be administered to subjects during unscheduled visits at 
weeks 28, 32, 36, 40, 44 and 48(as needed) unt il the sites are able to resume performing all 
EOT study  assessments, including bronchoscopies. All assessments during the unscheduled 
visit may  not be necessarily completed. Please refer to appendix J.” This change is being 
made because somesites are not abl e to perform  research rel ated bronchoscopies during the 
COVID -19 pandemic.  The change will enable subjects to continue dosing wit hIP until 
sites are able to perform bronchoscopy  for the EOT vi sit during the COVID -19 pandemic
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added “Asterix *** During the COVID -19 pandemic 
unscheduled visits may  occur so that si tes m ay perform  EOT assessments 4 weeks after last 
dose of IP at either week 28, 32, 36, 40, 44 or 48 (as needed) unt il the sites are able to 
resum e the EOT assessments.” This change is also being made because sites are not able to 
perform  research rel ated bronchoscopies during the COVID -19 pandemic
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added “X” to include healt hcare resource utilization , Urine 
pregnancy test ( dipstick) and distribut ion and collection of paper diary to the unscheduled 
visit co lumn. This is to collect/distribute during addit ional visitsduring the COVID -
19 
pandemic
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Under Table 1 added guidance on how to proceed with respect 
to Schedule of Activit ies during the Covid -19 pandemic to ensure the safet y of the study  
subjects , to maintain co mpliance wit h GCP and to minimize risks to data integrity
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 3of 166Secti on 1.2, Synopsis, Secondary  Object ive # 3 –Added “determined by RNAseq of 
bronchial brushings at baseline” to the end of the sentence under outcome variable to clarify 
the methodol ogy for determining the T2 status
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Synopsis 1.2, Number of Subjects, -Changed the eosinophil count stratificat ion criteria to 
match the program specified criteria: Changed the medium group to be 150 - < 300 cells/µL 
instead of 150 -300 cells/µL and the high group to be ≥300 cells/µL instead of > 300 at 
Visit 1to correct the ty pographical error and to align with IXRS
Secti on 1.2, Treatm ents and treatm ent durati on – Added “(or later due to COVID -19 
pandemic)” near the end of the paragraph for clarity 
Secti on 1.2, Synopsis, Treatments and treatment duration, -Added “ Please note : During th e 
COVID -19 pandemic, the treatment period may be extended and therefore subjects may  be 
given 1 to 6 doses (as needed) every 4 weeks for a lo nger period than init ially planned 
(please refer to Appendix J). For the last fo llow up visit, a phone call visit c an repl ace an 
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 4of 166on-site visi t. Please refer to Appendix J” This change i s being m ade because sites are unable 
to perform research bronchoscopies during the COVID -19 pandemic.  Addit ional treatments 
will allow subjects to receive IP up until 4 weeks before the EOT visit and bronchoscopy
Secti on 1.2, Stati stical methods, -Added “During the COVID -19 pandemic, all subjects 
with EOT assessments performed after unscheduled visits will be summarized and analyzed 
together with all subjects with EOT assessments perfo rmed during the scheduled EOT visit 
at week 28 and will be reported as having completed the EOT assessments ” Please refer to 
Appendix J. This change is to accommodate for extra visits to minimize the risk for subjects 
during the COVID -19 pandemic
Secti on 1.2, Stati stical methods, -Changed the eosinophil count stratification criteria to 
match the program specified criteria: Changed the medium group to be 150 - < 300 cells/µL 
instead of 150 -300 cells/µL and the high group to be ≥300 cells/µL instead of > 300 at 
Visit 1to correct the ty pographical error and to align with IXRS
Secti on 1.3, Schem a, Figure 1, Study  Design –Week 28 is now EOT and Week 40 is now 
EOS. Fi gure has been updated to align with implemented changes during COVID- 19 (ie) 
extra dosing 
Secti on 3, Object ives and Endpo ints, Secondary  Object ive #3 -Added “determined by 
RNAseq of bronchial brushings at 
baseline” to the end of the sentence under outcome 
variable to clarify the m ethodol ogy for determining the T2 status
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CCI
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 5of 166 
 
 
Secti on 4.1, Overall Design – Added “ Please note: During the COVID -19 pandemic, there 
is an option for patients to have an extra dose every 4 weeks up to 6 addit ional doses, as 
needed. (please refer to Appendix J). F or the l ast foll ow up visi t, a phone call visit can 
replace an on -site visi t. Please refer to Appendix J
Secti on 4.1, Overall Design – Changed “act ivities” to “Spectrum ” in the first sentence o f 
the 6thparagraph to provi de m ore cl arity to the sentence 
Section 4.1, Overall Design - Changed the eosinophil count stratification criteria to match 
the program specified criteria: Changed the medium group to be 150 - < 300 cells/µL 
instead of 150 -300 cells/µL and the high group to be ≥300 cells/µL instead of > 300 at 
Visit 1to correct the ty pographical error and to align with IXRS
Secti on 5.1, Inclusion Criteria -Under Inclusi on #2 added wording that outlines re-consent ing 
of subjects during the COVID -19 pandemic to accommodate the changes made to the protoc ol
Secti on 6.2, Preparation/handling/storage/accountabilit y, Dose Administrati on – Added 
“Please Note: During the COVID -19 pandemic, if allowed by local/regional guidelines, 
IP preparation and administration can be performed at the subject’s home by a 
qual ified HCP. Please refer to Appendix J for further details” at the end of the sect ion 
to accommodate for home visits
Secti on 6.2, Preparation/handling/storage/accountabilit y, Dose Administrati on, Tabl e 4 -
Invest igational product dose preparation –Added “2 or” within footnote as pertaining to the 
syringe size
Secti on 6.3, Measure to minimize bias: randomizatio n and blinding, Methods for assigning 
treatm ent groups -Changed the eosinophil count stratification criteria to match the program 
specified criteri a: Changed the m edium  group to be 150 
-< 300 cells/µL instead of 150 -
300 cells/µL and the high group to be ≥300 cells/µL instead of > 300 at Visit 1to correct 
the typographical  error and to align with IXRS
Secti on 6.6, Dose Modificat ion -Added “Duri ng the COVID -19 pandemic an addit ional1-6 
IP doses may  be administered to subjects during unscheduled visits at weeks 28, 32, 36, 40, 
44 and 48 (as needed) unt il the sites are able to resume performing all study assessments, 
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 6of 166including bronchoscopies, in a ccordance to l ocal regul ations/guidelines. Please refer to 
Appendix J”
Secti on 6.7, Treatment after the end of the study –Changed “Subjects who complete week 
40 shoul d be given standard of care at the discret ion of the Invest igator” to “Subjects who 
complete the study  shoul d be given standard of care at the discret ion of the Invest igator” as 
there m ay be addi tional weeks during the COVID -19 Pandemic
Secti on 7.1.1, Procedures for discont inuat ion of study  treatm ent –Point # 2and # 3 –
Added “(or later due to COVID -19 pandemic)” near the end of the paragraph
Secti on 7.1.1, Procedures for discont inuat ion of study  treatm ent –Added “(or later due to 
COVID -19 pandemic)” at the end of the sentence in the first paragraph
Secti on 7.1.1, Procedures for discont inuat ion of study  treatm ent –Added “ orhad an EOT 
visit date greater than 12 weeks after date of last dose of IP” to paragraph as some patients 
will now be receiving addit ional doses beyo nd the dose of week 24 during COVID -19 
pandemic
Secti on 7.1.1 , Procedures for discont inuat ion of study  treatm ent –Added “ For m ore 
inform ation related to COVID -19 pl ease refer to eCRF instructions” as the last sentence of 
the section for more clarit y on instructi ons
Secti on 7.3, Wi thdrawal  from the Study  –Added “For more informat ion related to COVID -
19 please refer to eCRF instructions” near the end of the section for more cl arity on eCRF 
instructi ons
Secti on 8.0, Study  Assessment and Procedures –Added “ Addit ional d ata to assess the
impact of COVID -19 pandemic will be co llected. ” at the end of paragraph # 2 
Secti on 8.1.18.1, Paper Diary –Added “ Please note: During the COVID -19 pandemic, 
once extra dosing and/or home IP administration is implemented, recording, coll ection, and 
dispensat ion of the subject's paper diaries will continue” to accommodate for extra visits
Secti on 8.8, Bi omarkers, -Changed “ The results of this bio marker research will not be 
reported in the CSR but in an addendum, or separately in a scient ific report or publicat ion. 
To “Sel ected resul ts of this biomarker research may  be reported in the CSR (as per section 
8.1.6). Bio markers not reported in the CSR may be reported in an addendum, or separately 
in a scient ific report or publicat ion.” since th ere are certain bio markers that may be included 
in the CSR
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 7of 166Secti on 8.8.3, Transcriptomics –Changed “preparation” to “collection” in second sentence 
to provi de m ore cl arity
Secti on 9.2, Popul ations for analyses, Table 8, Evaluable Analysis Set  -Changed t he 
descript ion from “All subjects randomized to study  treatm ent and com pleted at l east 20 
weeks of study  treatm ent” to  “All subjects randomized to study  treatm ent who com pleted 
at least 20 weeks of study  treatm ent and had an EOT visit date not greater tha n 8 weeks 
after date of l ast dose of IP” This change is that some pat ients will now be receiving 
additional doses bey ond the dose of week 24 during COVID -19 pandemic 
Secti on 9.3.2, Primary  outcom e measure, Remo ved“week 28 (Visit 11(V11)) i .e 
(V11/V3b)”   added “ EOT /V3b” due to the possibilit y of addi tional visi ts 
Secti on 9.3.4.2, Effect on large airways remodeling –Added “structure and funct ion” to the 
exploratory  object ive to provide more clarit y and specificit y
Secti on 9.3.4.2, Effect on large airways rem odeling –Removed bullet point #2 “Large 
airway dimensio ns and est imated airway resistance determined fro m computed tomography 
(CT) ”and bullet point # 4 “Airway resistance for airway generations 3, 4 and 5 estimated 
based on l umen area” to clarify the analysis and remo ve duplication
Secti on 9.3.4.2, Effect on large airways remodeling –Removed the fo llowing wording from  
bullet point # 3 “segmental, sub- segmental , sub sub -segmental” to simplify the explanation 
for analysis
Secti on 9.3.4.2, Effec t on l arge ai rways rem odeling -Added “wall thickness” ,  “and 3 & 4 
combined” and“as evaluated by computed tomography (CT)”to bullet point # 3 to provide 
more clarity and specificit y for these variables 
Secti on 9.3.4.2, Effect on large airways remodeling –added Bullet point # 4 “Mucus score 
as evaluated by  CT” as another variable for analysis 
Secti on 9.3.4.3, Effect on small airways obstruction – Removed bullet point #2 “ Regional 
matching of the inspiratory /expi ratory  CT scans to assess air trapping/sma ll airway 
obstructi on” as i t will  be repl aced wi th fSAD 
Secti on 9.3.4.3, Effect on small airways obstruction – Added bullet point # 2 “Functional 
small airway  disease (fSAD), ai r trapping index and expiratory -to-inspiratory  (E/I) rati o as 
evaluated by CT” as another variable for analysis
Secti on 9.3.4.8, Pharmacokinet ics and immunogenicit y of tezepel umab –Changed first 
sentence in second paragraph fro m“ADA status (posit ive vs. negative) at each visit will be 
summarized by  treatm ent group” to “ADA status( posit ive vs. negative) and titers at 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 8of 166specified  visits will be summarized by treatment group” because the ADA assessment is 
not done for every  visit 
Secti on 9.4, Stati stical Analyses – Added “EOT assessments done at either week 28 or later 
will be discuss ed in the Statist ical Analysis Plan (SAP) .” to specify how analyses will be 
conducted with subjects receiving extra doses
Secti on 9.4.1, Efficacy  analyses –Removed “For the primary  endpoints only, only those 
subjects who complete at least 20 weeks of tre atment will be included in the analysis” fro m 
the second paragraph, as some subjects will have addit ional doses after week 28 during the 
COVID -19 pandemic 
Secti on 9.4.2, Analysis of the primary  variable(s) -Changed the eosinophil count 
stratificat ion criteria to m atch the program specified criteria: Changed the medium group to 
be 150 - < 300 cells/µL instead of 150 -300 cells/µL and the high group to be ≥300 
cells/µL instead of > 300 at Visit 1 to correct the typographical error and to align with 
IXRS
Secti on 9.4.4, Supportive analysis –Updated second paragraph fro m “For the primary 
variables, the analysis may  be repeated using the full analysis set, hence including 
assessments in subjects who complete between 16 and 20 weeks of treatment as a 
supportive analysis to “For the primary variables, the analysis may be repeated using the 
full analysis set, hence including assessments in subjects who complete at least 16 weeks of 
study  treatm entand had an EOT visit date not greater than 12 weeks after date o f last dose 
of IPas a supportive analysis” Change has been made due to the COVID -19 pandemic 
Secti on 9.4.4, Supportive analysis –Added the fo llowing wording “Addit ional analyses 
assessing the impact of COVID- 19 may be incl uded in the SAP”
Secti on 9.4.7, Other Analyses -Removed “ To assess consistency  of treatm ent effect across 
T2 activit y as a continuum, a similar model will be fitted as for the primary  analysis wit h 
additional factors for the subgroup variable (i.e. T2 quartiles) and its interaction wit h 
treatm ent.” as thi s is a repeat of the analysis for one of the secondary  variables 
Appendix A 3 –Added “ During the COVID -19 pandemic, re -consent ing remotely may be 
obtained if local/regional guidelines allow” to accommodate the changes made in the 
protocol
Appendix J, -Added Appendix J to describe in more detail the changes made during the 
COVID -19 pandemic
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 9of 166Various ty pographical and grammat ical corrections have been made 
Version 3.0, 03 May 2019
Changes to the protocol are summarized below
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added “ ” symbo l and subsequent footnote to V4, V12, and 
V13 further clarifying these visit s can be conducted via telephone. 
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added “Blood for” prior to Tezepelumab PK clarifying 
tezepel umab PK will be assessed via blood sample analysis. 
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added “Proposed order of assessments as fo llows: Vi sit 11 Day  
1 -ACQ -6, paper diary c ompletion, vi tal signs, ECG, FeNO, AO, physical exam, and AHR; 
Visit 11 Day  2 -vitals signs, pre -BD spi rometry, blood draw, and bronchoscopy  (biopsy , 
brushing, then BAL). Pre -BD spi rometry can be done 1 day  prior to bronchoscopy  if there 
is a safet y conce rn” to f ootnote ‘3’ to provide recommended order of procedures if Visit 11 
is performed over more than one day .
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Updated footn ote ‘6’ from  “Blood sam ples f or PK and blood 
samples for ADA/nAb, bio marker and transcriptomics evaluat ions will be collected before 
the administration o f IP.” to “Blood and BAL samples for PK and blood samples for ADA 
andnAb, biomarker and transcriptomics evaluat ions will be co llected before the 
administration of IP. Samples w ith confirmed positive ADAs w ill be archived for possible 
testing for nAb .” This change is to clarify that both blood and BAL PK samples are intended 
to be collected, not only  PK bl ood and that nAb samples will be archived for possible future 
testing. 
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added “The morning diary will include: questions about rescue 
medicat ions, night -time awakening, and use of mainten ance m edicat ions. The evening diary  
will include: quest ions about rescue medicat ions.” to footnote ‘8’ and corrected the 
corresponding inclusio n criteria referenced to 14 & 15 as opposed to 15 & 16. This change 
is to detail the information that is captured on the paper diaries.
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Updated footn ote ‘9’ from  “ACQ -6 will  not be done at Visit 2 
except if the criterion was not met at Visit 1” to “ACQ -6 will be performed at Vi sit 2 only if 
the eligibility criterion isnot m et at Vi sit 1.” This change is to better clarify when it is 
acceptable to complete ACQ -6 at V2.
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Updated footn ote ‘12’ fro m “At EOT visit, AO, BAL, brushing, 
CT, and AHR will be performed only if baseline assessment is performed successfully, as 
confirmed by invest igator.” to “At EOT visit, AO, BAL, brushings , CT, and AHR will be 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 10of 166perform ed only  if baseline assessment is performed successfully , as confi rmed by  
investigator.” This change is to clarify that bronchial brushing will also not be com pleted if 
the baseline measurement is unsuccessful. 
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Updated footn ote ‘13’ fro m “…All post -randomizat ion 
spirometry assessments should be performed within ± 1.5 hours of the time that the baseline 
spirometry (Visit 3b) was perf ormed.” to “…All post -randomizat ion spiro metry assessments 
shoul d be perform ed wi thin ± 1.5 hours of the time that the baseline spirometry  (Visit 1  
and/or Visit 2) was performed.” in order to be in line wit h details in Table 1.
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Removed footnote ‘15’ and updated the numbering of 
subsequent footnotes as no longer required due to update to footnote #6 as described above.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secti on 1.2, Synopsis, Treatments and tr eatment duration –Updated “After init ial 
enrolment and confirmat ion of entry  criteria (Visi t 1) subjects will proceed to a run -in 
period of  4 weeks during which their suitabilit y for randomizat ion will  be confirmed.” to 
“After init ial enro lment and confir mation o f entry  criteria (Vi sit 1) subjects will  proceed to 
a screening/run -in period of  4 weeks during which their suitabilit y for randomizat ion will 
be confirmed.”. This change was to clarify that the screening & run -in period together 
constitute 4 weeks as opposed to run -in alone. 
Secti on 1.2, Synopsis, Statistical Methods –Added “expressed as a ratio” when discussing 
change from baseline to week 28 in the number of airway submucosal inflammatory  cells to 
clarify that the change is reported as a ratio .
Secti on 1.2, Synopsis, Statistical Methods –Updated “Covariates and factors included in 
the model will include at least treatment, and baseline number of airway  submucosal  
eosinophils” to “Covariates and factors included in the model will include at le ast screening 
blood eosinophil strata (screening blood eosinophil count < 150 cells/µL, 150 - 300 
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 11of 166cells/µL, and > 300 cells/µL at Visit 1), treatment, and baseline value ” to specify the exact 
stratificat ion factor. 
Secti on 1.2, Synopsis, Statistical Meth ods –Added “across the spectrum of T2 status” to 
clarify that this will be across the ent ire spectrum  of T2 status as opposed to within the T2 
spectrum. 
Secti on 1.2, Synopsis, Statistical Methods –Updated “To account for this, 55 subjects will 
be randomized in each treatment arm” to “To account for this and subject dropouts , 55 
subjects will be rando mized in each treatment arm” to clarify that the total n umber of 
rando mized subjects per treatment arm has also taken subject dropouts into considerat ion.
Secti on 2.2, Background –Updated “ We believe that tezepelumab will be efficacious in 
both T2 low and T2 high subjects (based on the Phase 2b data) so the e ffect of tezepelumab 
across the T2 continuum as determined by the three gene mean signature, will be explored” 
to “We believe that tezepelumab will be efficacious in both T2 low and T2 high subjects 
(based on the Phase 2b data) so the effect of tezepelumab across the T2 spectrum as 
determined by the three gene mean signature, will be explored” to indicate that this will be 
across the ent ire spectrum  of T2 status. 
Secti on 2.2, Background –Updated “These results are similar to those observed in the 
overall ITT populati on (AERR of 61%...” to “These results are similar to those observed in 
the overall ITT populat ion (AAERR of 61%...” This change was made to clarify  that the 
resul ts are of the Annual Asthma Exacerbat ion Reduction Rate. 
Secti on 2.3, Benefit/risk assessment – Updated “Risks of the study include those associated 
with invasive study  assessments like the bronchoscopy , bronchial biopsy , and 
bronchoalveo lar lavage (BAL).” to “Risks o f the study  include those associated with 
invasive study  assessment s such as bronchoscopy , bronchial biopsy ,bronchial brushing
and bronchoalveo lar lavage (BAL).” This change is to correct an oversight in the previous 
wording as bronchial brushing is also considered an invasive procedure with potential 
associ ated risks. 
 
 
 
 
  
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 12of 166 
 
 
Secti on 4.1, Overall Design – Corrected “Table 4 and Table 5” to “Table 5 and Table 6” 
when reference the list of medicat ion restrict ions and prohibit ions. 
Secti on 4.2, Sci entific rat ionale for the study  design –Updated “In the present study , to 
ensure recruitment of adequate numbers of T2 low and T2 high subjects for analysis, 
subjects will be enrolled based on baseline blood eosinophil counts.” to “In the present 
study , to ensure recrui tment of adequate numbers of T2 low and T2 high subjects for 
analysis, subjects will be enrolled based on screening blood eosinophil counts.” This 
change was to clarify that the baseline blood eosinophil counts will be collected at the 
screening visit. 
Section 5.1, Incl usion criteria #13 –Further defined abst inence requirement and clarified 
that bilateral tubal occlusio n, intrauterine device/levonorgestrel intrauterine system are 
acceptable methods of female contraception.
Secti on 5.1, Incl usion criteria #15 – Added “with a minimum o f 4 days of compliance 
during the last 7 days of the run -in period” to clarify the period within the background 
asthma m edicat ion compliance must be maintained. 
Secti on 5.1, Incl usion criteria #18 – Updated to indicate that “Successful BAL and 
brushings are not inclusio nary.” to cl arify that brushings are also not inclusio nary as was 
inadvertent ly omitted from this inclusio n criterion. 
Secti on 5.2, Exclusio n criteria #7 and Sect ion 5.3.2, Alcoho l, tobacco, and other –Updated 
from “Current smokers or subjects with smoking history  ≥ 10 pack -years. Former smokers 
with a sm oking history  of <10 pack y ears must have stopped for at least 6 mon ths prior to 
Visit 1 to be eligible.” to “Current smokers or subjects with smoking history  ≥ 10 pack -
years, including the use of vaping products, such as electronic cigarettes . Form er sm okers 
with a sm oking history  of <10 pack y ears, including vaping or e -cigarette users, must have 
stopped for at least 6 months prior to Visit 1 to be eligible.” to clarify that tobacco 
restri ctions also apply to vaping and e -cigarette products. 
Secti on 5.4, Screen Failures –Added “If the t imefr ame between screening and re-screening 
exceeds 30 days, the subject will not be permitted to rescreen without repeating Visit 1 
assessments, as per PI discretion.” to reduce the risk of not ident ifying the status change in 
HIV 1, HIV 2, Hepatit is B, Hepatit is C and FSH prior to res creening, if init ial screening 
visit 1 was more than 30 day s ago.
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 13of 166Secti on 6.2, Preparation/handling/storage/accountabilit y –Clarified that the acceptable 
syringe size can be 2 or 3mL as opposed to strictly 3mL, as it meets requirements for dose 
preparati on and administration. 
Secti on 6.2, Preparation/handling/storage/accountabilit y –Removed “The subject, in the 
opinio n of the Invest igator, is experiencing an acute or emerging asthma exacerbat ion.” 
from the list of scenarios when IP should not be admini stered. An exacerbat ion per se is not 
a contraindicat ion for IP administration. Reasons for not administering IP are well covered 
by the rem aining bullets.
Secti on 6.3. Measure to minimize bias: randomizatio n and blinding, Methods for assigning 
treatm ent groups –Updated “Rando mizat ion will be stratified by  baseline bl ood eosinophil 
level. ” to “ Rando mization will be stratified by screening blood eosinophil level. ” to cl arify 
that the baseline blood eosinophil counts will be collected at the screening visit .
Secti on 6.3, Measure to minimize bias: randomizatio n and blinding, Ensuring blinding –
Added “Applicable DSMB members” and removed “ADA, nAb, and bio marker” at 
‘Ensuring blinding’ to clarify that the laboratory  does not requi re the randomizat ion list fo r 
performing bio marker, ADA and nAb sample analysis and that DSMB members may 
requi re access to the randomizat ion list.  
Secti on 6.3. Measure to minimize bias: randomizatio n and blinding, Ensuring blinding –
Updated “ No other m ember of the extended study team  at AstraZeneca, or any  CRO 
handling data, will have access to the rando mizat ion scheme during the conduct of the 
study” to “No other member of the extended study  team  at AstraZeneca, or any  CRO 
handling data, will have access to the rando mizat ion sch eme during the conduct of the study  
and until database lock” to clarify that access to th e randomization scheme will not be 
available unt il after database lock. 
Secti on 6.3, Measure to minimize bias: randomization and blinding, Methods for unblinding 
– Updated “ Individual treatment codes, indicat ing the treatment rando mizat ion for each 
rando mized subject, will be available to the Invest igator(s) or pharmacist at the study sites 
from the IVRS/IWRS.” to “Individual treatment codes, indicat ing the treatment 
rando mizat ion for each rando mized subject, will be available to the Invest igator(s) or 
delegate at the study  sites from the IVRS/IWRS.” to clarify  that any  individual properly 
delegated by the PI m ay have access to individual treatment codes. 
Secti on 6.5 , Concomitant therapy , Tabl e 5 –Updated “No changes in either dose or regimen 
are allowed from V1 and throughout the IP treatment and preferably 4 weeks after the last 
dose of IP” to “No changes in either dose or regimen are allowed fro m V1 and until at l east 
the EOT visit, unless there is a medical need as judged by the Investigator .” for 
‘Maintenance treatm ent wi th ICS and l ong-acting bronchodilators (including ICS/LABA 
combinat ions)’, ‘Short -acting beta -agoni sts (SABA)’, ‘Addit ional maintenance controll ers’, 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C 00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 14of 166and ‘Short -acting ant icholinergics (e.g. ipratropium)’. This change is t o further detail the 
restri ction peri od and permit use of the aforementioned medicat ion if needed m edically.  
Secti on 6.5, Concomitant therapy , Tabl e 6 –Updated “No changes in either dose or regimen 
are allowed from V1 and throughout the IP treatment and preferably 4 weeks after the last 
dose of IP” to “No changes in either dose or regimen are allowed fro m V1 and until at least 
the EOT visit, unless there is a medical need as j udged by the Investigator .” for ‘ Long -
acting beta -agoni sts as a reliever (e.g. Symbicort Maintenance and Reliever Treatment)’, 
‘Suplatast tosilate (T2 cy tokine inhibitor)’, ‘Ant icoagulants’, ‘Any  immunom odulators or 
immunosuppressives (except for OCS used in the treatment of asthma/asthma 
exacerbations)’, ‘Immunoglobulin or blood products’, ‘ Other IPs (including invest igational 
use of an approved drug)’, ‘Herbal remedies for the treatment of allergic, inflammatory , or 
respi ratory  diseases’ and ‘Medicat ions not currently  licensed for use in the treatment of 
asthma, for example medications approved for Chronic Obstructive Pulmo nary Disease and 
not part of current standard of care’. This change is t o further detail the restrict ion peri od 
and permit use of the a forementioned medicat ion if needed m edically.  
Secti on 7.1, Di scontinuati on of  study  treatm ent –Added “except subjects who develop 
basal cell carcino ma or l ocalized squamous cell carcino ma of the skin, provided the 
malignancy is excised and determined to have clean margins” when discussing 
discontinua tion due to any  malignancy  to align wi th the updated IB version 4.2. 
Secti on 7.1.1, Procedures for discont inuat ion of study  treatm ent –Updated “If the last IP 
administration was after week 16 for options 1 or 2, the subject will return to the clinic for 
an EOT visit at week 28 (+/ -3 day s).” to “If the last IP administrati on was at or after week 
16 for options 1 or 2, the subject will return to the clinic for an EOT visit at week 28 (+/ - 3 
days).” to clarify that the EOT visit will be completed for subjects who complete at least 
week 16 of IP administration. 
Secti on 7.1.1 , Procedures for discont inuat ion of study  treatm ent –Updated “ Devel opment 
of study  specific discont inuat ion criteria’ on the terminat ion form in the eCRF.” to 
“Development of study  specific discont inuat ion criteri a’ on the Discontinuation of 
Investigation alProduct form in the eCRF.” to be in line wit h eCRF guidelines. 
Secti on 8.1.2, Bronchial brushing –Added “The brushings at the EOT Visit will be 
perform ed only  if the baseline visit brushing is performed successfully, as judged by  the 
Invest igator.” t o clarify  that the bronchial brushing will only  be collected if a successful 
baseline brushing is obtained. 
Secti on 8.1.4, Ai rwave Oscillo metry  –Removed “AO evaluat ion will be performed in 
accordance with the schedule provided in Table 1. Assessment at week -1 will be a training 
maneuver for the subjects.”, as training is not conducted and there is no week -1 visit. 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 15of 166Secti on 8.1.5, Ai rway hyper -responsiveness –Clarified that the mannito l challenge will also 
be perform ed in accordance to the vendor’s ma nual and added “Medicat ion washouts 
shoul d be f ollowed as per the m annitol vendor's manual detailed in Appendix I”
Secti on 8.1.13, Com puted tom ography  –Removed “of procedures” and “Principal” and 
updated “ EOT CT will be performed only  if baseline CT i s perf ormed successfully , as 
judged by  the invest igator.” to “EOT CT will be performed only if baseline CT is 
perform ed successfully, as confirmed by imaging QC review by the imaging vendor .” Thi s 
change i s to clarify  that the imaging vendor will confirm prop er baseline CT scan 
assessment.
Secti on 8.1.18, Pati ent reported outcom es –Replaced “ The quest ionnaires will be 
administered at home in the fo llowing order…” to “The quest ionnaires will be completed at 
home in the fo llowing order…” and corrected the corr esponding inclusio n criteria 
referenced to 14 & 15 as opposed to 15 & 16, due to ty pographical error.
Secti on 8.2.2, Weight and height –Added “Body Mass Index (BMI) will be automatically 
calculated in the eCRF.”
Secti on 8.2.4, Vi tal signs –Replaced “Pu lse rate will be obtained before blood pressure.” 
with “Pulse rate will be obtained before blood pressure only if the manual measuring 
technique is used ”. to specify that the order of measurements is only applicable when 
manually measurement occurs. 
Section 8.2.5, Electrocardiograms –Updated “ A 12 -lead ECG will be taken in supine 
position, pri or to bl ood draw, spi rometry , BD administrati on, and IP administration” to “ A 
12-or 15- lead ECG will be taken in supine posit ion, pri or to bl ood draw, spi rometry, and 
BD administration” to be in line with the ECG timepoints detailed in the SoA and to clarify  
that either 12 -or 15 -lead ECGs are acceptable. 
Secti on 8.4.2.2, Paternal exposure –Removed “Mal e subjects shoul d refrain fro m fathering 
a child or donating sperm  during the study  and f or 16 weeks (5 half -lives) fo llowing the last 
dose" to align with the updated IB version 4.2.
Secti on 8.5.1, Collect ion of samples and drug concentration –Added “Urea concentration 
will be measured in blood and BAL samples to correct for the dilution factor of the BAL 
samples” to clarify  that correcti on for the dilut ion factor for PK measurements in BAL will 
occur. 
Secti on 8.5.2, Collect ion of samples to measure the presence of ADAs –Removed “and 
ADA -neutralizing ant ibodies” and updated “Samples with confirmed posit ive ADAs will be 
analyzed for the presence of neutralizing ant ibodies (nAb).” to “Samples with confirmed 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 16of 166positive ADAs will be archived for possible testing for neutralizing ant ibodies (nAb).” as 
nAb samples will be archived for possible future testing. 
Secti on 8.7.1, Opti onal expl oratory  genet ic sample –Removed “Healt hy vo lunteers and 
pediatric patient samples will not be collected for optional genetic research.” as no healt hy 
volunteers or pediatric patients are permitted on this study .
Secti on 9, Statistical considerations – Updated “The null hypothesis H0: The ratio 
(tezepelumab/placebo) equals 1 and will be tested vs. H1: The ratio is not equal to 1.” to 
“The null hypothesis H0: The ratio (tezepelumab/placebo) of the change, expressed as a 
ratio, from baseline to w eek 28 for each primary and secondary endpoint between 
tezepelumab and placebo equal s 1 and will be tested versus the alternative hypothesis H1: 
The rati o (tezepelumab/placebo) of the change, expressed as a ratio, from baselin e to w eek 
28 for each primary and secondary endpoint betw een tezepelumab and placebo is not equal 
to 1.” and removed “For the primary  endpoints only , one -sided tests will be conducted 
against the alternative hypothesis H1: The ratio tezepelumab/placebo is < 1”. This change is 
to clarify  the hypotheses definit ions. 
Secti on 9.1, Sam ple size determinat ion –Updated “It is estimated that 50 subjects in each 
treatm ent arm  will provi de (using a nominal 10% significance level for each endpoint)” to 
“It is estima ted that 50 subjects in each treatment arm will provide (using a 2-sided test w ith 
anominal 10% significance level for each endpo int)” to clarify that all results will be 
presented as 2- sided tests. 
Secti on 9.2, Popul ations for analyses, Table 8 –Defin ed addi tional analysis populat ion set 
“Evaluable analysis set” to account for subjects in the full analysis set with at least 20 
weeks of treatment. 
Secti on 9.2, Popul ations for analyses –Replaced “For analysis of efficacy  variables, 
subjects will be as signed to the full  analysis set (defined above) according to their 
rando mized treatment. For consistency, demographic and baseline characterist ics will be 
presented using the full analysis set.” with “ For analysis o f efficacy variables, subjects will 
be as signed to the evaluable analysis set (defined above) according to their rando mized 
treatm ent. For consistency, demographic and baseline characterist ics will be confirmed by 
presenting using both the evaluable analysis set (to correspond to the primary effi cacy 
analysis population) and full analysis set .” This change was made to be consistent with 
safet y and efficacy analysis populations. 
Secti on 9.3.3, Secondary  outcom e measures –Updated “The change, expressed as a ratio, in 
airway inflammatory  cells/mm2from baseline up to week 28 within T2 spectrum” to “The 
change, expressed as a ratio, in airway inflammatory  cells/mm2from baseline up to week 28 
across the spectrum of T2 status ” to cl arify that this will be across the ent ire spectrum o f T2 
status as op posed to within the T2 spectrum. 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 17of 166Secti on 9.3.4.5, Rescue use –Removed “Total  rescue m edicat ion use defined as the average 
number of inhalat ions (puffs) per day  will be calculated as the outcome variable. The 
number of inhalat ions (puffs) per day  will becalculated as fo llows: Number of night inhaler 
puffs + 2 x [number of night nebulizer times] + number of day  inhaler puffs + 2 x [number 
of day nebulizer times]. Biweekly  mean number of inhalations (puffs) per day  will be 
calculated as the outcom e vari able” as this inform ation is captured vi a paper di aries and 
outcom e variable analysis will not be possible. 
Secti on 9.3.4.6, Ni ghts wi th awakening due to asthma –Removed sub -section and 
subsequent subsect ion numbering adjusted accordingly as this informat ion is captured vi a 
paper diaries and outcome variable analysis will not be possible.
Secti on 9.3.4.7, Effect on lung funct ion and bronchial hyper -responsiveness –Removed 
“…and post -BD” when discussing the change in baseline to week 28 for FEV 1, FVC, 
FEF 25-75% as post -BD spiro metry measurement is not performed at EOT.
Secti on 9.3.4.8, Calculation or derivat ion of pharmacokinet ics and immunogenicit y 
variables –Removed “These validated methods are conducted using a bridging assay 
format and stati stically determined floating screening assay  cut point factor and 
confirmatory  assay  cut point. The minimal sample dilut ion is 1:13. Titer values are reported 
as the reci procal  of the highest dilut ion that yields a value above the cut point.” and added 
“Details o f the method will be provided in validat ion reports as well as in bioanalyt ical 
reports.”. This change was made to clarify where the details of the method will be 
maintained.
Secti on 9.3.4.8, Calculation or derivat ion of pharmacokinet ics and immunogenicit y 
variables –Updated “Samples that confirm posit ive for ADA will also be tested for nAb 
activit y.” to “Samples with confirmed positive ADAs will be archived for possible testing 
for nAb .”. This change was to clarify that nAb samples will be archived for pos sible future 
testing. 
Secti on 9.3.4.8, Calculation or derivat ion of pharmacokinet ics and immunogenicit y 
variables –Added “The prevalence and incidence of ADA over the course of the study will 
be calculated and tabulated by  treatment group.” and removed “Neutralizing antibody  
evaluat ions will be conducted on those serum samples that test posit ive for ADA at end of 
treatm ent and al so during the study  follow up period. The test sample is deemed posit ive or 
negat ive for the presence of nAb to tezepelumab rel ative to a predetermined (in assay 
validat ion), stati stically derived cut point. Samples posit ive for nAb to tezepelumab are then 
titered to determine relat ive amounts of nAb present in each test sample.” This change was 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 18of 166made to clarify  how ADA resul ts wil l be presented and that nAb samples will be archived 
for possible future testing.
Secti on 9.3.5, Cal culat ion or derivat ion of safet y variables –Updated “The fo llowing safet y 
data will be co llected: vital signs, physical examination, 12 -lead ECG, hematolo gy, clinical  
chemistry , urinalysis, and reported AEs.” to “The following safet y data will be co llected: 
vital signs, physical  examinat ion, 12- or 15 -lead ECG, hematology, clinical chemistry, 
urinalysis, and reported AEs.” to clarify that either 12 -or 15 -lead ECGs are acceptable.
Secti on 9.3.5.3, Laboratory  variables –Corrected “Table 3” to “Table 7” when referencing 
the lab parameters to be collected. 
Secti on 9.4.1, Efficacy  analyses –Replaced “ Efficacy  analyses will be based on the full 
analysis set (FAS) populat ion, and subjects will be classified according to their rando mized 
treatm ent.” wi th “Efficacy analyses will be primarily based on the evaluable analysis set , 
and subjects will be classified according to their rando mized treatment.” to accoun t for 
subjects in the full analysis set with at least 20 weeks of treatment. 
Secti on 9.4.1, Efficacy  analyses –Removed “%change” when discussing outcome measure 
for primary/secondary  outcom es as this will only be presented as a ratio. 
Secti on 9.4.1, Efficacy  analyses –Updated “ All hypothesis testing will be reported using 2-
sided tests at the nominal 10% significance level. For the primary  endpoints only, 
hypothesis tests with a no minal 5% significance level using 1 -sided tests will also be 
reported. The alternat ive hypothesis for the 1- sided tests i s that the ratio 
tezepel umab/placebo is lower than 1.” to “All hypothesis testing will be reported using 2 -
sided tests with anominal 10% significance level and 90% confidence intervals (CIs) . For
the primary  endpoints only, 2-sided 95% CIs will also be reported. The direction of interest
for each of the primary endpoints is that the ratio tezepelumab/placebo is lower than 1 .” 
This change is to clarify the method of reporting the testing of the hyp otheses.  
Secti on 9.4.2, Analysis of the primary  variable(s) –Added “expressed as a ratio” when 
discussing change fro m baseline to week 28 and updated “The primary variable of within 
subject change from baseline to week 28 (expressed as a ratio) in numb ers of  each of the 
airway submucosal inflammatory  cells will  be analyzed using an analysis of covariance 
(ANCOVA) including at least baseline value and treatment as covariates.” to "The primary 
variable of wit hin subject change from baseline to week 28 (ex pressed as a ratio) in 
numbers of each o f the airway  subm ucosal  inflammatory  cells will be analyzed using an 
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) including at least screening blood eosinophil strata 
(screening blood eosinophil count < 150 cells/µL, 150 - 300 ce lls/µL, and > 300 cells/µL at 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 19of 166Visit 1), baseline value, andtreatm entas covariates.” to clarify that the change is expressed 
as a rati o change and to specify the exact stratificatio n factor.
Secti on 9.4.2, Analysis of primary  variable(s) –Remo ved “ Patients that discontinue IP prior 
to week 20 visit will be excluded fro m the primary analyses.” as contained in the evaluable 
analysis set definit ion. 
Secti on 9.4.3, Analysis of the secondary  variable(s) -Added “expressed as a ratio” when 
discussing change from baseline to week 28 to clarify that the change is expressed as a ratio 
change. 
Secti on 9.4.4, Supportive analysis –Updated “For the primary  and secondary  variables, 
non-parametri c analysis methods will be applied as supportive analyses. For the pri mary  
analysis, the same method will be used including subjects who complete at least 16 weeks 
of treatm ent as a supportive analysis.” to “For the primary  and secondary variables,
alternative transformations or non-parametri c analysis methods may be applied as
supportive analyses if substantial deviations from the parametric assumptions are observed .  
This w ill be assessed and documented prior to unblinding . For the primary variables, the 
analysis may be repeated using the full analysis set, hence including assessments in subjects 
who complete between 16 and 20 w eeks of treatment as a supportive analysis. ” Thi s change 
was m ade to further cl arify the supportive analysis, including the definit ion of the 
supportive analysis set. 
Appendix A, Regulatory , ethi caland study  oversi ght consi derat ions –Added details 
regarding the sponsor’s right to close a study  site or terminate the study  and potential  
reasons for early closure of a study  site to A9 and Publicat ion Policy shift ed to A10. This 
change was made as per new AstraZeneca guidelines.  
Appendix E, Actions required in cases of increases in liver biochemistry  and eval uation of  
Hy’s Law –Added “All sources of laboratory  data are appropriate for the determinat ion of 
PHL and HL events; this includes samples taken at scheduled study  visits an d other visits 
including central and all local laboratory  evaluat ions even if co llected outside of the study  
visits; for example, PHL criteria could be met by  an elevated ALT from a central laboratory  
and/or elevated TBL from a local laboratory . The Invest igator will also review AE data (for 
example, for AEs that may indicate elevat ions in liver biochemistry ) for possible PHL 
events.” to E1. The appendix has been updated in conjunct ion with sponsor's routine 
pharmacovigilance act ivities/processes. 
Appendix E, Acti ons requi red in cases of increases in liver biochemistry  and eval uation of  
Hy’s Law –Removed “Determine whether PHL criteria were met at any  study  visit prior to 
starting Study  treatment (See Section E 6 Actions Required When Potential Hy’s Law 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 20of 166Criteria are Met Before and After Starting Study  Treatm ent) f rom E4.2. The appendix has 
been updated in conjunct ion with sponsor's routine pharmacovigilance activit ies/processes.  
Appendix E, Actions required in cases of increases in liver biochemistry  and evaluation of  
Hy’s Law – Updated “Once the necessary supplementary  information is obtained, repeat the 
review and assessment to determine whether HL criteria are met. Update the SAE report 
according to the outcome of the review amending the reported term i f an al ternative 
explanat ion for the liver biochemistry  elevat ions is determined.” to “Once the necessary 
supplementary  informat ion is obtained, repeat the review and assessment to determine 
whether HL criteria are stillmet.  Update the previously submitt ed PHL SAE report 
follow ing CSP process for SAE reporting , according to the outcome of the review amending 
the reported term if an alternat ive explanat ion for the liver biochemistry  elevat ions is 
determined.” at E5. The appendix has been updated in conjunc tion wi th the sponsor's 
routi ne pharmacovigilance act ivities/processes.   
Appendix E, -Updated “Update the previously submitted PHL SAE report according to the 
outcom e of the review amending the reported term if an alternat ive explanat ion for the liver 
biochemistry  elevat ions is determined.” to “Update the previously submitted PHL SAE 
report follow ing CSP process for SAE reporting , according to the outcome o f the review 
amending the reported term if an alternat ive explanat ion for the liver biochemistry  
elevations is determined.” at E5.The appendix has been updated in conjunct ion with 
sponsor's routine pharmacovigilance act ivities/processes. .  
Appendix E, Actions required in cases of increases in liver biochemistry  and eval uation of  
Hy’s Law –Removed su bsect ion E6 and E7 and renumbered subsequent subsect ions. The 
appendix has been updated in conjunct ion with the sponsor's routi ne pharmacovigilance 
activit ies/processes.   
Appendix F, Maintenance therapy  equivalence table –Updated to include ICS/LABA 
combinat ion therapies and changed footnote ‘a’ to confirm the source of the ICS/LABA 
combinat ion therapy  dose details. This change was made to provide Invest igators additional 
inform ation when assessing eligibilit y. 
Appendix F, Maintenance therapy  equivalen ce table –removed the low dose references for 
ICS- LABA medicat ion as low dose is not applicable to this study . 
Added Appendix I, Medicat ion washout period for airway  hyper -responsiveness, as these 
restri ctions are more stringent than the medicat ion wash out for the study  and are required to 
be wit hheld for safet y and pharm acokinetic purposes. 
Various ty pographical and grammat ical corrections have been made.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 21of 166Version 2.0, 12 Nov 2018
Changes to the protocol are summarized below
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Removed Pre -BD spi rometry from V3a.
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added Safet y Spirometry  (opti onal) to V3b.
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Removed FeNO from  V3b and added to V3a.
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Removed AO from  V3b and added to V3a.
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Updated footn ote ‘*’ from  “Order of assessments at V3a would 
be ACQ -6, vital signs, spirometry , physical exam.” to “Order of assessments at V3a would 
be ACQ -6, vital signs, FeNO, AO, physical exam.” and added “ A compliance check for 
backgrou nd medication and paper diary completion to be completed. ”.
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Updated footn ote ‘**’ fro m “Order of assessments at V3b 
woul d be FeNO, AO , vital signs, blood draw, bronchoscopy , then IP administration. Visit 3a 
and 3b shoul d be perf ormed wi thin 7 days of each other.” to “Order of assessments at V3b 
woul d be vi tal signs, spirometry , blood draw, bronchoscopy  (biopsy, brushing, then BAL),
then IP administration. Per PI discretion, the IP can be administered on the day after V3b if 
there is any safety concern. Visit 3a and 3b should be performed within 7 days of each 
other.”
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Updated footn ote ‘8’ from  “Paper diary  will capture rescue 
medicat ion, night time awakening, and use of maintenance medicat ions from  the e vening of 
V2 to the morning of V14. Paper diary  will be distributed at V2 to V11 (sufficient paper 
diaries will  be distributed at V11) and collected at V3 to V11 and V14.” to “Paper diary  will 
capture rescue medicat ion, night time awakening, and use of mai ntenance m edicat ions from  
the evening of V2 to the morning o f V14. Paper diary  will be distributed at V2 to V11 
(sufficient paper diaries will be distributed at V11 for follow -up phase ) and co llected at V3 
to V11 and V14. The diary dispensed at V2 w ill be re-used for both V3a and V3b. Diary 
and background medications compliance for inclusion criteria numbers 15 and 16 w ill be 
performed at V3a. ” to indicate that the diary dispensed at V2 will be re -used for both V3a 
and V3b. Diary  and background m edicati ons compliance for inclusio n criteria 15 and 16 
will be performed at V3a.
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Changed “baseline spirometry (Visit 3b)” to “baseline 
spirometry (Visit 1 or 2)”.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 22of 166Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added footn ote ‘16’ to indicate that CT is to be perform ed 
between V3a and V3b.
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added footn ote ‘17’ to indicate that “In case of repeat of 
spirometry at V2, the AHR will be rescheduled to be done within 3 days of V2.”
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added ADA testing at Unschedul ed al ong with footnote ‘18’ to 
indicate that “ADA sample should be co llected in case of any suspected immuno logically -
related AEs.”
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Updated “Tezepelumab PK” to “ Blood for Tezepel umab PK”
Secti on 1.1, SoA, Table 1 –Added “(excep t for spirom etry which shoul d be done pre -BD at 
V11)” to footnote ‘3’.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secti on 1.2, Syn opsis –Added information regarding the Data Safet y Moni toring Board
Secti on 2.2, Background –Updated with addit ional published informati on regarding Study  
CD-RI-MEDI9929-1146.
CCI
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 23of 166 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secti on 5.1, Incl usion criteria #7 –Replaced “Subjects on OCS are allowed in the study , 
provi ded they  are on a stable dose for at l east 6 m onths before V1.” with “Subjects on OCS 
are allowed in the study , provi ded they  are on a stable maintenance dose for at l east 6 
months before V1.”
Secti on 5.1, Incl usion #9 –Replaced “15- 30min” with “15 -60min”
Secti on 5.1 -Removed Inclusio n #14 which stated “Non -sterilized males who are sexually 
active wit h a female partner of childbearing potential must use a male condo m plus 
spermicide fro m enrolment through 16 weeks after receipt of the final dose of IP. In the 
countri es where the abovement ioned method of contraception is not available a condom can 
be used alo ne. Male subjects m ust not donate or bank sperm during this same time period”
Secti on 5.1, Incl usion criteria #16 –Corrected “Subjects must have demo nstrated a 
minim um 70% com pliance wi th background asthma medicat ion the during run-in period.” 
to read as “Subjects must have demo nstrated a minimum 70% compliance with background 
asthma m edicat ion during the run-in period.”
Secti on 5.1, Incl usion #19 –Added “at Visit 3b ”
Secti on 5.2, Exclusio n #21 –Removed “the current study  or”
Secti on 5.4, Screen failures –Added “Subjects who experience an asthma exacerbat ion 
during run -in period may be re -screened after 14 days of complete resolut ion of the asthma 
exacerbation, and when the subjects return to their baseline, at Investigator discret ion.” and 
removed ty po “X`”
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 24of 166Secti on 6.4, Treatm ent Com pliances –Removed “as well as any missed doses”
Secti on 6.5, Table 5 –Updated “ Use of SABA should be avo ided wit hin 6 hours before 
ECG assessments.” to “Use of SABA or SAMA shoul d be avo ided wit hin 6 hours before 
ECG assessments.”
Secti on 6.5.2, Rescue medication –Added “or SAMA” and removed “When possible, ho me 
lung funct ion shoul d be taken at least 6 hours after the last dose of SABA rescue 
medicat ion.”
Secti on 7.1.1, Procedures for discont inuat ion of study  medicat ion –Corrected “…post last 
IP administration for the EOT visit at Week 28 (+/- 3 days).” to “…post last IP 
administration andfor the EOT vi sit at Week 28 (+/- 3 days).”
Section 7.3, Withdrawal fro m the study  –Added “AstraZeneca reserves the right to 
discontinue a subject’s participat ion in the study for any safet y reasons.”
Secti on 8.1.1, Bronchial biopsy –Updated “Subjects will receive a sedat ive and local 
anesthet ic to re duce any disco mfort.” to “Subjects will receive a sedative and local 
anesthet ic to reduce any disco mfort, local guidelines to be followed.”
Secti on 8.1.1, Bronchial biopsy –Added “Bronchial biopsy, being the primary  endpoint, 
will be conducted first follo wed by bronchial brushing then BAL.” to clarify  the order of 
assessments. 
Secti on 8.1.5, Ai rway hyper -responsiveness –Added “In case of repeat spirometry  at V2, 
AHR will be rescheduled within 3 days o f Visit 2.”
Secti on 8.1.6, Bi omarkers –Updated “Blood samples shoul d be collected pre -dose at the 
pre-specified scheduled visit in the SoA” to “All biomarker samples should be collected 
pre-dose at the pre- specified scheduled visit in the SoA”
Secti on 8.1.7, Bl ood eosinophils and neutrophils –Added “All blo od eosinophils and 
neutrophils results will be redacted from the laboratory  reports except for Visit 1 and Visit 
3.” and rem oved “Result s will be blinded after randomizat ion.”
Secti on 8.1.9, Serum  IgE –Added “All total serum IgE results will be redacted f rom the 
laboratory  reports except for Visit 3.”
Secti on 8.1.11, DNA for genetics – Added “ This data will be reported separately fro m the 
CSR in an addendum or in a scient ific report or publicat ion.”
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 25of 166Secti on 8.1.12, Urine Bio markers –Removed “which may  include, but not limited to, lipids 
such as thromboxane.” 
Secti on 8.1.16.1, General requirements –Updated “ SABAs shoul d be wi thheld at l east 6 
hours prior to scheduled spiro metry at si te.” to “ SABAs and SAMAs should be withheld at 
least 6 hours prior to scheduled spiro metry at si te.”
Secti on 8.1.16.1, General requirements –Removed “ and at randomizat ion visit s (Vi sit 3b 
(V3b))” and replaced “rando mizat ion spirometry ” with “enrolment s pirometry”.
Secti on 8.1.16 .2, Fi gure 3 –Replaced “Wait 15 -30min” wit h “Wait 15 -60min”
Secti on 8.1.16.2, FeNO –Moved to new section 8.1.17
Secti on 8.1.17 (form erly sect ion 8.1.16.2), FeNO –Updated “ Subjects shoul d not use thei r 
rescue SABA medicat ion (e.g. albuterol/salbutamol) within 6 hours of the measurement .” to 
“Subjects shoul d not use thei r rescue SABA medicati on (e.g. albuterol /salbutam ol) or 
SAMA medications within 6 hours of the measurement.”
Secti on 8.1.17 (form erly sect ion 8.1.16.2), FeNO –Updated “All FeNO measureme nts will 
be blinded for sites and subjects throughout.” to “All post-randomization FeNO 
measurements will be blinded for sites and subjects throughout the study .”
Secti on 8.1.17, Pati ent Reported Outcom es –Updated to section 8.1.18
Secti on 8.2.2, Weight a nd height –Removed “BMI will be automat ically calculated in the 
eCRF.”
Secti on 8.2.5, El ectrocardi ograms –Removed “overall data and”
Secti on 8.3.2, Time period and frequency for collecting AE and SAE informat ion –Added 
“AEs and SAEs should st ill be co llected after IP discontinuation for subjects that 
prem aturely  discontinue from  IP and will be encouraged to undergo appropriate study  
visits/procedures for the full 40 -week peri od.”
Secti on 8.3.3, Follow -up of  AEs and SAEs –Updated “ All SAE/non -serious AEs /AEs of  
special interest will be fo llowed unt il resolut ion, stabilizat ion, the event is otherwise 
explained, or the subject is lost to fo llow-up.” to “All SAE/non -serious AEs/AEs of special 
interest, AEs leading to premature discontinuation will be fo llowed unt il resolut ion, 
stabilization, the event is otherwise explained, or the subject is lost to follow -up.”
Secti on 8.3.7, Adverse events based on examinat ions and tests –Updated to include ECG 
and removed “unless unequivocally related to the disease under study ”.
Secti on 8.4.2, Pregnancy –Added “ Any cases o f pregnancy during the study  period or 
follow up will be recorded in the specific CRF mo dule.”
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 26of 166Secti on 8.4.2.1, Maternal Exposure –Updated “ The PREGREP module in the CRF is used 
to report the pregnancy and PREGOUT is used to report the outcome of the pregnancy.” to 
“The PREGREP module in the CRF is used to report the pregnancy and the paper -based 
pregnancy outcome report is used to report the outcome of the pregnancy .”
Secti on 8.4.2.2, Paternal Exposure –Removed “Male subjects should refrain fro m fathering 
a child or donating sperm during the study  and f or 16 weeks (5 half -lives) fo llowing the last 
dose.”
Secti on 8.4.6, Data Safet y Moni toring Board –section was added with details regarding the 
scope of the DSMB
Secti on 8.5.1 Collect ion of samples and drug concentrations –Removed “and BAL” and 
added "Samples for determinat ion of tezepelumab concentration in BAL will be analyzed 
by a designated third party  on behalf o f AstraZeneca using a qualified bioan alytical method. 
Samples for determination of urea will be analyzed by  a designated thi rd party  on behalf o f 
AstraZeneca using qualified bioanalyt ical methods."
Secti on 8.5.2, Collect ion of samples to measure the presence of ADAs –Added “ADA 
sample shoul d be collected in case of any  suspected immunol ogically -related AEs.”
Secti on 8.8.2, Serum  IgE –Added “All total serum IgE results will be redacted from the 
laboratory  reports except for Visit 3.”
Secti on 9.2, Popul ations for analyses –Added “and PK BAL”
Secti on 9.3.4.4, Effect on restoring peripheral pulmo nary vasculature –Removed 
“Exploratory  biomarker of tissue vascularit y in bronchial biopsy  specimens assessed by 
histol ogy, IHC, or ISH.”
Appendix E, Actions required in cases of increases in liver bio chemistry  and eval uation of  
Hy’s Law –Appendix has been updated including addit ion of sect ion E6, E7, and E8.
Appendix F, Maintenance Therapy Equivalence Table –Updated as per GINA 2018 
guidelines. 
Appendix F, Maintenance Therapy Equivalence Table –Added “Breo®” as example of 
Fluticasone furoate. 
Various ty pographical and grammat ical corrections have been made. 
Version 1.0, 20 Jul 2018
Initial Creat ion
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 27of 166This Clinical Study  Protocol  has been subject to a peer review according to AstraZeneca 
Standard procedures.  The Clinical Study  Protocol  is publicly  registered and the results are 
disclosed and/or published according to the AstraZeneca Global Policy  on Bi oethics and in 
compliance wi th prevailing laws and regulat ions.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 28of 166TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE PAGE ........................................................................................................................ 1
VERSION HISTORY ........................................................................................................... 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS .................................................................................................... 28
1. PROTOCOL SUMMARY ................................................................................ 33
1.1 SoA .................................................................................................................. 33
1.2 Synopsis ........................................................................................................... 38
1.3 Schema ............................................................................................................. 46
2. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ 47
2.1 Study  rationale .................................................................................................. 47
2.2 Background....................................................................................................... 48
2.3 Benefit/risk assessment ..................................................................................... 50
3. OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS ................................................................... 51
4. STUDY DESIGN ............................................................................................. 55
4.1 Overall design ................................................................................................... 55
4.2 Scientific rat ionale for the study  design ............................................................. 56
4.3 Justification for dose ......................................................................................... 57
4.4 End of s tudy defini tion...................................................................................... 57
5. STUDY POPULATION ................................................................................... 58
5.1 Inclusio n criteria............................................................................................... 58
5.2 Exclusio n criteria.............................................................................................. 61
5.3 Lifest yle restrict ions.......................................................................................... 65
5.3.1 Meals and dietary  restricti ons............................................................................ 65
5.3.2 Alcoho l, tobacco and other ................................................................................ 65
5.3.3 Activity............................................................................................................. 65
5.4 Screen failures .................................................................................................. 66
6. STUDY TREATMENT S.................................................................................. 67
6.1 Treatments administered ................................................................................... 67
6.1.1 Invest igational products .................................................................................... 67
6.2 Preparation/handling/storage/accountabilit y...................................................... 68
6.3 Measure to minimize bias: rando mizat ion and blinding ..................................... 71
6.4 Treatment compliance ....................................................................................... 74
6.5 Concomitant therapy ......................................................................................... 74
6.5.1 Other co ncomitant treatment ............................................................................. 78
6.5.2 Rescue medicat ion............................................................................................ 78
6.6 Dose m odificat ion............................................................................................. 79
6.7 Treatment after the end of the study .................................................................. 79
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 29of 1667. DISCONTINUATION OF T REATMENT AND SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL . 79
7.1 Discontinuati on of  study  treatm ent.................................................................... 79
7.1.1 Procedures for discont inuat ion of study  treatm ent............................................. 80
7.2 Lost to follow -up.............................................................................................. 81
7.3 Withdrawal fro m the study ................................................................................ 82
7.3.1 Withdrawal due to recruit ment com pletion........................................................ 83
7.3.2 Discontinuati on or suspensi on of  the who le study  program ............................... 83
8. STUDY ASSESSMENTS AN D PROCEDURES .............................................. 83
8.1 Efficacy assessments ......................................................................................... 84
8.1.1 Bronchial biopsy ............................................................................................... 84
8.1.2 Bronchial brushing ............................................................................................ 84
8.1.3 Bronchoalveo lar lavage ..................................................................................... 85
8.1.4 Airwave oscillo metry ........................................................................................ 85
8.1.5 Airway hyper -responsiveness ............................................................................ 85
8.1.6 Biomarkers ....................................................................................................... 86
8.1.7 Blood eosinophils and neutrophils ..................................................................... 86
8.1.8 Airway  inflammatory  cells ................................................................................ 86
8.1.9 Serum  IgE......................................................................................................... 86
8.1.10 RNA transcriptomics ......................................................................................... 87
8.1.11 DNA for genet ics.............................................................................................. 87
8.1.12 Urine b iomarkers .............................................................................................. 87
8.1.13 Com puted tom ography ...................................................................................... 87
8.1.14 Assessment of asthma exacerbat ion................................................................... 88
8.1.15 Allergen specific IgE (FEIA) ................................
............................................ 90
8.1.16 Spirometry........................................................................................................ 90
8.1.16.1 General requi rements ........................................................................................ 90
8.1.16.2 Post-BD spiro metry and FEV 1 reversibili ty assessment ..................................... 91
8.1.17 Fract ional exhaled nitric oxide .......................................................................... 93
8.1.18 Patient reported outcomes ................................................................................. 94
8.1.18.1 Paper Diary ....................................................................................................... 94
8.1.18.2 Asthma control quest ionnaire (ACQ-6) ............................................................. 95
8.2 Safety assessments ............................................................................................ 95
8.2.1 Clinical safet y laboratory  assessments ............................................................... 95
8.2.1.1 Pregnancy Test ................................................................................................. 96
8.2.2 Weight and height............................................................................................. 97
8.2.3 Physical examinat ions....................................................................................... 97
8.2.4 Vital signs ......................................................................................................... 97
8.2.5 Electrocardiograms ........................................................................................... 98
8.2.6 Other sa fety assessments ................................................................................... 98
8.2.6.1 Serol ogy........................................................................................................... 98
8.3 Collect ion of adverse events .............................................................................. 98
8.3.1 Method of detecting AEs and SAEs .................................................................. 99
8.3.2 Time period and frequency  for collect ing AE and SAE informat ion.................. 99
8.3.3 Follow-up of  AEs and SAEs ............................................................................. 99
8.3.4 Adverse event data collect ion.......................................................................... 100
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 30of 1668.3.5 Causalit y collection ......................................................................................... 100
8.3.6 Adverse events based on signs and symptoms ................................................. 101
8.3.7 Adverse events based on examinat ions and tests ............................................. 101
8.3.8 Adverse events of special interest .................................................................... 102
8.3.9 Hy’s law ......................................................................................................... 102
8.4 Safety reporti ng and medical management ...................................................... 103
8.4.1 Reporting of serious adverse events ................................................................ 103
8.4.2 Pregnancy ................................
....................................................................... 103
8.4.2.1 Maternal expos ure........................................................................................... 104
8.4.2.2 Paternal  exposure ............................................................................................ 104
8.4.3 Overdose ......................................................................................................... 104
8.4.4 Medicat ion error ............................................................................................. 105
8.4.5 Management of IP -related toxicit ies................................................................ 105
8.4.6 Data safet y monitoring board .......................................................................... 106
8.5 Pharmacokinet ics............................................................................................ 106
8.5.1 Collect ionof samples and drug concentration ................................................. 106
8.5.2 Collect ion of samples to measure the presence of ADAs ................................. 107
8.5.3 Storage and destruction of pharmacokinet ic/ADA samples .............................. 107
8.6 Pharmacodynamics ......................................................................................... 107
8.7 Genet ics.......................................................................................................... 107
8.7.1 Optional exploratory  genet ic sample ............................................................... 107
8.7.2 Storage and destruction of genet ic samples ..................................................... 108
8.8 Biomarkers ..................................................................................................... 108
8.8.1 Storage, re -use and destruction of bio marker sam ples..................................... 109
8.8.2 Serum  IgE....................................................................................................... 109
8.8.3 Transcriptomics .............................................................................................. 109
8.8.4 Storage, r e-use and destruction of transcriptomics samples .............................. 109
8.9 Healthcare Resource Utilization and Healt h Economics .................................. 110
9. STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS ............................................................. 110
9.1 Sample size determinat ion............................................................................... 110
9.2 Popu lations for analyses ................................
.................................................. 111
9.3 Outcom e measures for analyses ....................................................................... 112
9.3.1 Definit ion of baseline and subject baseline analyses ........................................ 112
9.3.2 Primary outcome measure ............................................................................... 112
9.3.3 Secondary  outcom e measures .......................................................................... 113
9.3.4 Exploratory  outcom e measures ....................................................................... 113
9.3.4.1 Other bio markers of airway inflammat ion....................................................... 113
9.3.4.2 Effect on large airways remodeling ................................................................. 114
9.3.4.3 Effect on small airways obstruction ................................................................. 114
9.3.4.4 Effect on restoring peripheral pulmo nary vasculature ...................................... 114
9.3.4.5 Rescue Use ..................................................................................................... 114
9.3.4.6 Asthma control quest ionnaire (ACQ-6) ........................................................... 115
9.3.4.7 Effect on lung funct ion and bronchial hyper -responsiveness ........................... 115
9.3.4.8 Calculation or derivat ion of pharmacokinetics and immunogenicit y variables . 116
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00 013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 31of 1669.3.5 Calculation or derivat ion of safet y variables .................................................... 116
9.3.5.1 Adverse events ................................................................................................ 116
9.3.5.2 Other si gnificant adverse events ...................................................................... 117
9.3.5.3 Laboratory  variables ....................................................................................... 117
9.3.5.4 ECGs .............................................................................................................. 118
9.3.5.5 Physical Examinat ion...................................................................................... 118
9.3.5.6 Vital signs ....................................................................................................... 119
9.4 Statistical an alyses .......................................................................................... 119
9.4.1 Efficacy analyses ............................................................................................ 119
9.4.2 Analysis of the primary  variable(s) ................................................................. 120
9.4.3 Analysis of the secondary variable(s) .............................................................. 121
9.4.4 Supportive analysis ......................................................................................... 121
9.4.5 Exploratory  analysis ........................................................................................ 121
9.4.6 Safety analyses ............................................................................................... 122
9.4.7 Other analyses ................................................................................................. 122
9.5 Interim anal yses.............................................................................................. 122
10. REFERENCES ............................................................................................... 123
11. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTA TION AND OPERATIONAL
CONSIDERATIONS ...................................................................................... 130
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 –Schedule of Act ivities.......................................................................................... 33
Table 2 –Objectives and Endpo ints.................................................................................... 51
Table 3 –Study  treatm ents.................................................................................................. 67
Table 4 –Investigational product dose preparation .............................................................. 69
Table 5 –Restricted medicat ions......................................................................................... 75
Table 6 –Prohibited medicat ions........................................................................................ 77
Table 7 –Laboratory safet y variables .................................................................................. 96
Table 8 –Populat ion descript ions...................................................................................... 111
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Study  design ............................................................................................ 46
Figure 2 Suggested schema of rotation of inject ion sites ........................................ 70
Figure 3 Reversibilit y algorithm ............................................................................ 92
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 32of 166LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A Regulatory , ethi cal and study  oversight considerations ........................... 131
Appendix B Adverse event definit ions and addit ional safet y inform ation................... 136
Appendix C Handling of human bio logical samples ................................................... 141
Appendix D Genet ics................................................................................................. 144
Appendix E Actions requi red in cases of increases in liver biochemistry  and 
evaluat ion of Hy’s Law .......................................................................... 148
Appendix F Maintenance therapy  equivalence tabl e.................................................. 154
Appendix G Anaphylaxis: si gns and symptoms, management .................................... 155
Appendix H Abbreviat ions........................................................................................ 159
Appendix I Medicat ion washout periods for airway hyper -responsiveness ................ 164
Appendix J Changes related to COVID 19 Pandemic ................................................ 165
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 33of 1661. PROTOCOL SUMMARY
For detailed schedule o f activit ies (SoA) please see section 1.1below.
1.1 SoA
Table 1 –Schedule of Activities
Assessment/ activityScreeningRun
-inRandomization Treatment periodEOT
***/ 
IPDFUUNS 
visit1Details in CSP Section 
or Appendix 
Visits
Visit number1 2 3a* 3b** 42 5 6 7 8 9 10 113 122
132
14Details in CSP Section or 
Appendix
Weeks
Visit week-4 -2 0 2 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40
Visit window (days)4N/A ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3
Routine Clinical Procedures
Informed consent X See Section 5.1
Inclusion/exclusion criteria X X X X See Section 5.1& 5.2
Demographics X See Section 5.1& 5.2
Medical/surgical and asthma history X XSee Section 5.1
Height X See Section 8.2.2
Weight X X X X See Section 5.1& 8.2.2
Hematology X X X X X X See Section 8.2.1
Serology (Hepatitis B, C; HIV -1,2) X See Section 8.2.6
Serum pregnancy test X X See Section 8.2.1
Urine pregnancy test (dipstick) X X X X X X X X See Section 5.1
FSH X5 See Section 8.2.1
Blood for Tezepelumab ADA and nAb6X X X X X17See Section 8.5.2 & 
9.3.4.8
Serum IgE X X X X See Section 8.1.9
IgE (FEIA) X See Section 8.1.15
Healthcare resource utilization7X X X X X X X X X X X X X See Section 8.9
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 34of 166Assessment/ activityScreeningRun
-inRandomization Treatment periodEOT
***/ 
IPDFUUNS 
visit1Details in CSP Section 
or Appendix 
Visits
Visit number1 2 3a* 3b** 42 5 6 7 8 9 10 113 122
132
14Details in CSP Section or 
Appendix
Weeks
Visit week-4 -2 0 2 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40
Visit window (days)4N/A ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3
Routine Safety Procedures
Distribution and collection of paper diary8X X X X X X X X X X X X See Section 8.1.18.1
Clinical chemistry X X X X X X See Section 8.2.1
Urinalysis (dipstick) X X X X X See Section 8.2.1
Adverse events X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X See Section 8.3
Concomitant medications X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X See Section 5.2& 6.5
Vital signs X X X X X X X X X X X X XSee Section 8.2.4 & 
9.3.5.6
Local EC G X X See Section 5.2& 8.2.5
Complete physical examination X X X See Section 9.3.5.5
Brief physical exam X X X See Section 9.3.5.5
Efficacy Measurements
ACQ -6 X X9X X XSee Section 8.1.18.2 & 
9.3.4.6
Urine for biomarker X X X X See Section 8.1.12
Asthma exacerbation reporting10X X X X X X X X X X X X X See Section 8.1.14
Blood for serum and plasma biomarkers6X X X X See Section 8.1.6
Blood for RNA transcriptomics6,11X X X X See Section 8.8.3
Fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) X X X X See Section 8.1.17
Computed tomography (CT) X15X12 See Section 8.1.13
Pre-BD, spirometry X X13X X X See Section 8.1.16
Post-BD, spirometry X X13 See Section 8.1.16.2
Safety spirometry, optional X See Section 8.1.16.1
Airwave oscillometry (AO) X X12 See Section 8.1.4
Airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) X16X12 See Section 8.1.5
Bronchoscopy/biopsy/brushing and 
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)6, 11X X12See Section 8.1
Pharmacokinetic Measurements
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 35of 166Assessment/ activityScreeningRun
-inRandomization Treatment periodEOT
***/ 
IPDFUUNS 
visit1Details in CSP Section 
or Appendix 
Visits
Visit number1 2 3a* 3b** 42 5 6 7 8 9 10 113 122
132
14Details in CSP Section or 
Appendix
Weeks
Visit week-4 -2 0 2 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40
Visit window (days)4N/A ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3
Blood for Tezepelumab PK6X X X X See Section 8.5
Pharmacogenetic Sampling
Blood for DNA (optional) X See Section 8.7.1
Study Treatment Administration
Randomization X See Section 6.3
IP administration14X X X X X X X X18 See Section 6.2
*Order of assessments at V3a would be ACQ -6, vital signs, FeNO, AO, physical exam. A compliance check for background medication and paper diary completion to be comple ted. 
** Order of assessments at V3b would be vital signs, spirometry (if performed), blood draw, bronchoscopy (biopsy, brushing th en BAL), then IP administration. Per PI discretion, the IP can be 
administered on the day after V3b if there is any safety concern. Visit 3a and 3b should be performed within 7 days of each other. 
*** During the COVID -19 pandemic unscheduled visits may occur so that sites may perform EOT assessments 4 weeks after last dose of IP at either we ek 28, 32, 36, 40, 44 or 48 (as needed) unt il 
the sites are able to resume the EOT assessments.
Telephone Visit
1PI can add more assessments as needed to unscheduled visits.
2Visits 4, 12 and 13 are phone visits. 
3Based on investigator’s judgement and site resources, EOT assessments (V11) will be performed over more than one day, within a 7 -day window. The sequence of assessments during Visit 11 
should be performed in the same order as completed at Visits 3a, 3b (except for spirometry which should be done pre -BD at V11). Proposed order of assessmen ts as follows: Visit 11 Day 1 -
ACQ -6, paper diary completion, vital signs, ECG, FeNO, AO, physical exam, and AHR; Visit 11 Day 2 -vitals signs, pre -BD spirometry, blood draw, and bronchoscopy (biopsy, brushing, 
then BAL). Pre -BD spirometry can be done 1 day prior to bronchoscopy if there is a safety concern. During the COVID -19 pandemic unscheduled visits may occur so that sites may perform 
EOT assessments 4 weeks after last dose of IP at either week 28, 32, 36, 40, 44 or 48(as needed) until the sites are able to resume the EOT assessments.
4All visits are to be scheduled from the date of randomization, not from the date of the previous visit. 
5FSH will be done only for women < 50 years old, if they have been amenorrheic for 12 months or more following ces sation of exogenous hormonal treatment.
6Blood and BAL samples for PK and blood samples for ADA and nAb, biomarker and transcriptomics evaluations will be collected b efore the administration of IP. Samples with confirmed 
positive ADAs will be archived for p ossible testing for nAb.
7Asthma specific resource utilization (e.g. unscheduled physician visits, unscheduled phone calls to physicians, use of other asthma medications).
8Paper diary will capture rescue medication, night time awakening, and use of maintena nce medications from the evening of V2 to the morning of V14. The morning diary will include: 
questions about rescue medications, night -time awakening, and use of maintenance medications. The evening diary will include: questions about rescue medications. Paper diary will be 
distributed at V2 to V11 (sufficient paper diaries will be distributed at V11) and collected at V3 to V11 and V14. The diary dispensed at V2 will be re -used for both V3a and V3b. Diary and 
background medications compliance for inclusion criteria numbers 14 and 15 will be performed at V3a .During the COVID -19 pandemic, recording, collecting and dispensing will continue 
once administration of extra dosing is implemented .
9ACQ -6 will be performed at Visit 2 only if the eligibility criterion is not met at Visit 1.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 36of 16610Any asthma exacerbation before randomization will be reported as an AE/SAE. Any asthma exacerbation that will occur during tr eatment and FU will be reported in the exacerbation page in 
the eCRF.
11RNA samples will be obtained from the peripheral blood and bronchial brushings. RNA may also be collected from lung biopsies and BAL cells if sufficient sample remains after the other 
assessments on these cells are completed. 
12At EOT visit, AO, BAL, brushi ngs, CT, and AHR will be performed only if baseline assessment is performed successfully, as confirmed by investigator. EOT b iopsy will only be performed if 
baseline biopsy meets pathology QC.
13Pre-and post -BD spirometry to assess FEV 1and its reversibilit y will be performed at Visit 2 only if eligibility criteria is not met at Visit 1. The spirometry will be rescheduled if the subject did 
not withhold their BD at V1. Pre -BD spirometry testing must be initiated in the morning between 6:00 AM and 11:00 AM.  All post -randomization spirometry assessments should be 
performed within ± 1.5 hours of the time that the baseline spirometry (Visit 1 and/or Visit 2) was performed. 
14IP will be administered after performing all the visit -specific assessments. 
15CT to be pe rformed during the period between V3a and V3b.
16In case of repeat of spirometry at V2, the AHR will be rescheduled to be done within 3 days of V2.
17ADA sample should be collected in case of any suspected immunologically -related AEs
18During the COVID -19 pandem ic an additional 1 to 6 IP doses may be administered to subjects during unscheduled visits at weeks 28, 32, 36, 40, 44 and 48 (as needed) until the sites are able to 
resume performing all EOT study assessments, including bronchoscopies .All assessments dur ing the unscheduled visit may not be necessarily be completed. Please refer to Appendix J.
CHANGES REQUIRED DURING COVID- 19 PANDEMIC
Please Note: Changes below sho uld only be implemented during the COVID -19 pandemic.
During the COVID- 19 pandemic, changes are being implemented in order to ensure the safet y of study subjects, to m aintain 
compliance wi th good clinical pract ices, and to minimize risks to trial integrit y. Where allowable by  local  health authori ties, ethics 
committees and healt hcare provider guidelines (e.g. hospital po licies), these changes include:
● The option of providing ho me-administrati on of  Invest igational Product (IP) performed by  a site qualified Heal th Care Professio nal 
(HCP) or HCP provided by a third-party vendor (TPV), if possible. More informat ion related to the visit can be obtained via ph one 
call and/or virtual visits. The rationale for this change is to ensure that subjects are not missing any scheduled visit s due to 
inabilit y/unwillingness to visit the site during COVID- 19 pandemic. 
●Adding 1 -6 extra IP doses every  4 weeks after week 24 (possibly through weeks 28, 32, 36, 40, 44 and 48)   The rationale for this 
change i s to ensure that the duration between the last IP dose and end of treatment assessments is wit hin the protocol specif ied 
durati on. Adding addit ional doses will give the su bject a chance to resume bronchoscopies and other assessments when the pandemic 
is over. 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 37of 166●Phone call and/or virtual visit s to replace the last on -site follow up visit, if subjects cannot attend the visits at the study  site where 
necessary . The rati onale for this change is to ensure that we collect the safet y informat ion if the last follow up cannot be done at the 
site. 
●Re-consent will be obtained verbally if allo wed by  local and regi onal guidelines. The rati onale is to ensure that the subject agrees to 
the changes implemented to the COVID- 19 pandemic. 
For further details, please refer to Appendix J
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 38of 1661.2 Synopsis
International Co -ordinating Investigator: 
Professor Chris Bright ling
NIHR Senior Invest igator
Universit y of Leicester
Leiceste r, Uni ted Kingdom
LE3 9QP
Protocol Title: A Phase 2, Rando mized, Double -Blind, Parallel Group, Placebo Controlled 
Study  to Eval uate the Effect of Tezepelumab on Airway  Inflammat ion in Adult s with 
Inadequately Controlled Asthma on Inhaled Corticosteroids an d at l east One Addit ional 
Asthma Controller (CASCADE)
Short Title: 
Bronchoscopy Mechanistic Study
Rationale: 
Tezepel umab has been shown to significant ly reduce exacerbat ion rates in severe asthma.  It is 
assumed that this effect was achieved by tezepelumab effect ively controlling airway 
inflammat ion, but this has not been previously  confi rmed. This study  is inten ded to expl ore 
the mechanism of a tezepelumab airway ant i-inflammatory effect in improving asthma 
outcom es. Of particular interest in this study , is the acti on of  tezepel umab across the spectrum 
of Type 2 (T2) activit y, including the effect of tezepelumab in the T2 low populat ion. The 
primary  object ive of this study  is to direct ly explore the airway ant i-inflammatory effect of 
tezepel umab. The secondary  object ives will explore whether tezepelumab treatment (1) 
reduces reticular basement membrane (RBM) thick ness, (2) improves airway epit helial 
integrity, (3) benefits subjects across the spectrum of T2 airway inflammat ion. In addit ion, 
this study  will address several exploratory  quest ions. First, it will explore the effect of 
tezepel umab on large airway remodeling and small airway  obstructi on. Second, i t will expl ore 
the effect of tezepelumab on various bio markers in the lung, bronchoalveo lar lavage (BAL), 
blood, and urine. Third, the relat ionship between improvement in airway inflammat ion, lung 
funct ion and br onchial  hyper -responsiveness will also be assessed. Fourth, the relationship 
between tezepelumab and the effect on different inflammatory cells in the blood will be 
explored. Finally , the effect of tezepelumab on the pulmonary  vasculature will be assessed.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 39of 166Objectives and Endpoints
Primary Objective Outcome Measure:
To expl ore the ai rway anti -
inflammatory  effect of tezepel umabOutcom e Variable: The change, expressed as a ratio, in the 
number of airway submucosal inflammatory  cells/mm2of 
bronchoscopic biopsies fro m baseline to end of treatment 
(EOT). Airway submucosal inflammatory  cells will 
include eosinophils, neutrophils, T cells and mast cells
Outcom e Measure: Rat io of tezepelumab to placebo at 
EOT 
Secondary Objective: Outcome Measure:
To expl ore the effect of tezepelumab 
on RBM thickening   Outcom e Variable: The change , expressed as a ratio, in 
RBM thickness determined by  microscopi c evaluatio n of 
bronchoscopic biopsies fro m baseline to EOT 
Outcom e Measure: Rat io of tezepel umab to pl acebo at 
EOT 
To expl ore the effect of tezepelumab 
on ai rway  epithelial integri ty   Outcom e Variable: The change , expressed as a ratio, in % 
airway epi thelial  integrity determined by microscopic 
evaluat ion of bronchoscopic biopsies from baseline to EOT 
Outcom e Measure: Rat io of tezepelumab to placebo at 
EOT 
To expl ore the ai rway anti -
inflammatory  effect of tezepel umab 
across the spectrum of T2 status by  
three gene mean derived fro m 
bronchial brushing RNA 
transcri ptomicsOutcom e Variable: The change , expressed as a ratio, in 
number of airway submucosal inflammatory  cells per mm2
determined by microscopic evaluat ion of bronchos copic 
biopsies fro m baseline to EOT in subjects across the 
spectrum of T2 status determining by RNAseq of bronchial 
brushings at baseline 
Outcom e Measure: Rat io of tezepelumab to placebo at 
EOT across the spectrum of T2 status.
Safety Objectives: Outcom e Measures:
To evaluate the safet y and 
tolerabilit y of tezepelumab Adverse events (AEs)/serious adverse events 
(SAEs)/adverse events of special interest (AESIs)
Clinical chemistry /hematol ogy/urinalysis
Vital signs
Electrocardiograms (ECG)
Exploratory Objectives: Outcome Measure:
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 42of 166Objectives and Endpoints
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
Overall design:
This is a Phase 2, mult icentre, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, parallel group 
study  to eval uate the effect of tezepelumab on airway  inflammat ion in adults w ith 
inadequately controlled moderate -to-severe asthma. Patients will have background asthma 
therapy  of medium-or high dose ICS plus at least one addit ional asthma controller 
medicat ion, such as a long- acting β2 agonist (LABA), leukotriene receptor antagon ist 
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 43of 166(LTRA), l ong-acting ant i - muscarinic (LAMA), cromo ne, and theophylline, wit h or without 
maintenance oral corticosteroids (OCS) from screening and throughout the study  including the 
follow-up period.
The study  will consist of a screening/run -in period of up to 4 weeks, a treatment period of 28 
weeks and a post -treatm ent follow-up period of 12 weeks. One dose level o f tezepel umab, 210 
mg will be compared with placebo administered subcutaneously (SC) every 4 weeks (Q4W) 
over the treatment period. Subjects who discont inue invest igational product (IP) during the 
study  will be encouraged to undergo appropriate study  visits/procedures for the full 40 -week 
period. Any  new treatm ents that are init iated will be recorded.
Subjects who com plete the 28 -week study  visit will complete a 12 week off -treatm ent follow-
up period.
Study period:
Estimated date of first patient enro lled: Q4 2018
Estimated date of last patient completed : Q1 2021
Number of subjects:
Approximately  110 subjects will be randomized 1:1 to the following groups: 
Tezepel umab 210 m g administered SC Q4W or
Matching placebo administered SC Q4W
The study  aims to randomize subjects across the spectrum of T2 low and high activat ion. 
Approximatel y 30% of  rando mized subjects will have < 150 blood eosinophils/μL, 
approximately  30% of  subjects wi th 150 –<300 blood eosinophils/μL and approximately 40% 
of subjects wi th ≥ 300 blood eosinophils/ μL. When the target percentage of subjects for each 
eosinop hil subgroup in the study  is reached, consideration will be given to closing the 
IWRS/IVRS rando mizat ion for that subgroup, which may  be done on the study  level 
irrespect ive of the region. Once a subgroup is closed, subjects in the screening/run -in period in 
the closed subgroup will not be allowed to be randomized and will be screen failed.
Treatments and treatment duration:
After init ial enro lment and confirmat ion of entry  criteria (Visi t 1) subjects will  proceed to a 
screening/run -in period of 4 weeks dur ing which their suitabilit y for randomizat ion will be 
confirmed. The subjects’ currently prescribed ICS and addit ional asthma controller medicat ion 
will remain unchanged during the run- in and treatment period. Subjects who meet the 
eligibilit y criteria at week -2 and randomizat ion criteri a at day  0 will  be randomized to a 28 -
week treatm ent peri od and will receive either tezepelumab or placebo as an IP in addit ion to 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 44of 166their exist ing asthma controller medicat ions. IP will be administered at weeks 0, 4, 8, 12, 16, 
20 and 24. End of treatment (EOT) visit will be at week 28 (or later due to COVID -19 
pandemic). A safet y follow-up peri od for all subjects will be for 12 weeks fro m EOT. 
Please note : During the COVID -19 pandemic, the treatment period may  be extended a nd 
therefore subjects may  be given 1 to 6 doses (as needed) every  4 weeks for a l onger peri od 
than initially planned (please refer to Appendix J). For the last fo llow up visit, a phone call 
visit can replace an on- site visi t. Please refer to Appendix J
Data safety monitoring board:
A Data Safet y Moni toring Board (DSMB) i s an external  independent expert advisory  group 
commissio ned and charged wit h the responsibilit y of eval uating cumulat ive safet y data at 
regul ar intervals and making appropriate recommendat ions based on the available data. The 
DSMB will perio dically review unblinded safet y summary  tables and list ings and evaluate for 
subject safety  and make appropri ate recommendations. 
DSMB will have access to the individual treatment codes and will be able to merge these with 
the collected study  data while t he study  is ongoing if and as required. The personnel invo lved 
in the clinical study  at AstraZeneca will remain blinded to these analyses and will have no 
knowl edge of the results presented to the DSMB. The committee will operate in accordance 
with a DSMB Charter.
Statistical methods:
During the COVID- 19 pandemic, all subjects with EOT assessments performed after 
unscheduled visits will be summarized and analyzed together with all subjects with EOT 
assessments performed during the scheduled EOT visit at we ek 28 and will be reported as 
having co mpleted the EOT assessments ” Please refer to Appendix J. 
The primary  analysis of the efficacy endpoints will include all data captured during the double 
blind, treatm ent peri od (intent -to-treat approach).  However, only subjects with co mplete data 
for an endpo int will be included in the primary analysis o f that endpoint.
The primary  efficacy  objective will  be evaluated through s tatistical test ing of the within 
subject change, expressed as a ratio, from baseline to EOT in number of airway submucosal 
inflammatory  cells. The null hypothesis test H0 will be: The ratio tezepelumab/placebo equals 
1 and will be tested vs. H1: The ratio is not equal to 1. The test will be based on an analysis of 
covari ance m odel. Covariates and factors included in the model will include at least screening 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 45of 166blood eosinophil strata (screening blood eosinophil count <150 cells/μL, 150 –<300 cells/μL, 
and ≥300 cells/μL at Vi sit 1), treatm ent, and baseline value. 
The secondary  variables of wi thin subject change from  baseline up to EOT in the RBM 
thickness and epithelial integrit y will be analysed using a similar model as for the primary 
variable. The secondary variable of wit hin subject change from baseline up to EOT across the 
spectrum of T2 status in airway  submucosal  inflammatory  cells will be assessed by using a 
similar model as for the primary  variable wi th additi onal term s for T2 quartil es and thei r 
interact ions wit h treatment and by visual data displays. 
The analyses will be performed by  using l og-transform ed data and estimated geometric means 
and the ratio of geo metric means wi th 90% confidence intervals will be presented. 
The study  is sized to explore reductions in airway submucosal inflammat ion, from  baseline to 
EOT, for tezepelumab versus placebo in the overall study  popul ation and across the T2 
continuum. 
The sample size is based on the primary endpo int: change from bas eline to EOT in number of 
airway submucosal inflammatory  cells. Given the assumed standard deviat ion of the log 
values of change in number of eosinophils in the two treatment groups are 1.87 and 2.06, it is 
estimated that 50 subjects in each treatment arm will be sufficient to achi eve 80% power to 
detect a 2.7 -fold difference in number of eosinophils versus placebo using a two -sided test at 
10% significance level. Given the assumed standard deviat ion of the log values of change in 
number of neutrophils in t he two treatment groups are 0.71 and 0.97, it is est imated that 50 
subjects in each treatment arm will be sufficient to achieve > 90% power to detect a 2.7 -fold 
difference in number of neutrophils versus placebo using a two- sided test at 10% significance 
level. 
It is assumed that a non -neglectable proportion of the subjects will not have an evaluable 
primary  endpoint val ue due to failed biopsies. To account for this and subject dropouts, 55 
subjects will be rando mized in each treatment arm.
The results for the exploratory  variables will be summarized using descriptive statist ics and 
graphical displays by  treatm ent group. All safet y param eters will  be analyzed descript ively. 
The safet y analyses will be based on the safet y analysis data set, defined as all su bjects who 
received at least one dose of IP.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 46of 1661.3 Schema
The general study  design is summarized in Figure 1
Figure 1 Study design
  

Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 47of 1662. INTRODUCTION
Asthma i s a chronic inflammatory  airway  disorder caused by  the interacti on of  genet ic and 
environmental fac tors. It is characterized by widespread, variable reversible airflow 
obstructi on, ai rway  inflammat ion, excessive mucus production, and airway 
hyperresponsiveness that lead to recurrent episodes of wheezing, breathlessness, chest 
tightness, and coughing ( The Co llaborative Study on the Genetics of Asthma (CSGA) 1997, 
GINA 2018 ).
Progressive patho logic airway rem odeling and scarring may occur in persistent asthma 
resul ting in only  parti ally reversible or i rreversible ai rway obstructi on (Pascual and Peters 
2005). The eti ology of asthma is thought to be multi -factorial, influenced by both genetic and 
environmental mechanisms. The majorit y of cases ari se when a person beco mes 
hypersensit ive to allerge ns. Despite the availabilit y of mult iple therapeut ic options, asthma 
continues to be a major healt h probl em. Worl dwide, asthm a current ly affects approximately 
300 millio n people and by 2020, it is predicted to affect 400 millio n peopl e (Partri dge 2007 ). 
Each year in the US, asthma accounts for an estimated 8.9 millio n outpati ent vi sits, 1.9 millio n 
emergency room  visits, 479,000 hospi talizat ions (Corren et al 20 17), and 3,400 deaths 
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevent ion 2017 ). 
Approximately  5% to 10% of asthma patients have severe asthma, which may be inadequately  
controlled by ICS and LABA combinat ions together with addit ional controller therapies 
(Brightling et al 2008 ). These pati ents are at ri sk of asthma exacerbat ions (Tough et al 1998 , 
Turner et al 1998 ) and have the greatest medical need among the asthmatic populat ion today . 
Patients wi th severe asthma represent the greatest economic cost (>50% of total asthm a
-
related healt h care costs) ( Antonicelli et al 2004 , Serra Batlles et al 1998 , Barnes and Kuitert 
1996).
2.1 Study rationale
Tezepel umab is a human immunoglobulin G (IgG) 2λ monoclonal ant ibody  (mAb) di
rected 
against thymic stromal lymphopoiet in (TSLP) . It binds to human TSLP and prevents its 
interact ion with thymic strom al lymphopoi etin receptor (TSLPR). A Phase 1b study 
(Gauvreau et al 2014) provi ded indi rect evi dence that tezepelumab acts as an airway  anti-
inflammatory  by showing attenuation of both the late asthmat ic response (LAR) and the early 
asthmatic response (EAR) after allergen chall enge; tezepel umab also reduced the expected 
increases in blood and sputum eosinophilia after this allergen challenge. A Phase 2b study  
(CD- RI-MEDI9929- 1146) showed doses of 70 mg and 210 mg administered every 4 weeks 
(Q4W) and 280 mg of tezepelumab adminis tered every  2 weeks resul ted in reducti on of  
annualized asthma exacerbation rates (AAER) by 61%, 71% and 66% respectively in the all -
comer popul ation (Corren et al 20 17).  Analysis of subgroups in the Phase 2b study  also 
showed that tezepelumab benefited subjects with low and high baseline eosinophil counts and 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C0001 3
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 48of 166a low and high T2 profile. These analyses suggest that tezepelumab, unlike other currently 
available bi ologics on the m arket used to treat severe asthma, is effective in subjects with T2 
high and T2 low airway  inflammat ion. It is assumed that tezepelumab reduces the AAER by 
acting as an airway ant i-inflammatory . However, informat ion directly suppo rting thi s 
assumpt ion is current ly not available and this study will invest igate this further. 
2.2 Background
Biologic therapies used to treat asthma have been shown to reduce the AAER in severe 
asthma patients who are uncontrolled with medium -to-high dose IC S and additional asthma 
controller medicat ions. Omalizumab provided benefit for a subgroup of patients with proven 
reactivit y to an aeroallergen and elevated serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels who remain 
inadequately controlled with ICS plus LABA ( XOLAIR US PI 2016 ). Three addit ional 
biologics, m epolizumab, reslizumab, and benralizumab have recently been approved for 
severe asthma with an eosinophilic phenoty pe (XOLAIR US PI 2016 ; CINQAIR US PI 2016; 
FASENRA US PI 2017 ). Benralizumab is indicated for the add -on m aintenance treatm ent of  
patients wi th severe asthma aged 12 y ears and ol der, and wi th an eosinoph ilic phenoty pe 
(FASENRA US PI 2017 ).  Bio logics targeting IL -5 and IgE are now included in internat ional 
treatment gui delines ( GINA 2018 ) as an add- on treatment to patients uncontrolled with 
ICS/LABA treatment. However, when using the currently available bio logics, substant ial 
proporti ons of  patients continue to experience exacerbat ions and may benefit from agents that 
target different mo lecular pathways ( Wenzel 2016 , Froidure et al 2016 , Swedin et al 2017). 
These approved bio logic therapies show efficacy  mainly  in the T2 hi gh subpopul ation, but 
there are no current biologic therapies that address the need of the T2 low patients.
Tezepel umab is the first biologic that has shown promising data in a Phase 2b study  for both 
T2 hi gh and T2 l ow popul ation (Corren et al  2017). This m echanist ic study  is designed to 
understand how tezepelumab works in the T2 low populat ion. Therefore, despite these 
additional therapeuti c opti ons, there is st ill a clear unmet medical need among pat ients with 
severe asthma, independent ly of IgE status or eosinophil level, who are unable to gain 
complete asthm a control  using currently available therapies.
Thymic stromal lymphopoiet in (TSLP) is an epit helial cell -derived cy tokine that acts as a 
danger signal and i s produced in response to numerous proinflammatory  stimuli (e.g., 
infect ious, allergic and environmental agents) and trauma. TSLP has a central role in the 
initiation of immune responses and can act ivate a broad range of cell t ypes including 
eosinoph ils, mast cells, T cells, dendrit ic cells, ILC -2 cells and basophils ( Watson and 
Gauvreau 2014). Cl assically , TSLP i s believed to be a crit ical component in the init iation and 
perpetuation of the T2 response and the result ing cascade of cytokines associated with T2 
driven asthma ( Kaur and Bright ling 2012 ). Asthm a is recogni zed as a heterogeneous disease. 
There are subsets of patients that do not exhibit T2- associ ated disease ( Wenzel 2012 ), and 
there is exist ing data that TSLP may also mediate non -allergic (non -T hel per cell  2) 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 49of 166inflammat ion (Tanaka et al  2009 , Ziegler et al  2013 ). The three gene mean, derived fro m 
epithelial expressio n levels o f periostin (POSTN), chloride channel accessory  1 (CLCA1), and 
serpin family B member 2 (SERPIN B2), has been demonstrated as a surrogate marker of T2 -
driven inflammat ion in mild to moderate asthmat ics (Woodruff et al 2009, Cho y et al 2011 , 
Bhakta et al 2013 ). This epithelial gene expression signature will be used to retrospectively 
deter mine the degree of T2 activit y of each individual at randomizat ion (Vi sit 3b). We believe 
that tezepelumab will be efficacious in both T2 low and T2 high subjects (based on the Phase
2b data) so the effect of tezeplumab across the T2 spectrum as determined by the three gene 
mean signature, will be explored.
Tezepel umab is a fully  human immunogl obulin G (IgG) 2λ monoclonal ant ibody  (mAb) 
directed against TSLP. Tezepelumab binds to human TSLP and prevents its interaction with 
TSLP receptor (TSLPR). Owing to t he central role of TSLP in init iating and maintaining a T2 
response, ant i-TSLP therapy  may provi de an opportuni ty to treat the upstream underlying
mechanisms of asthma by reversing the established inflammatory  responses to asthma 
triggers.
Results of a co mpleted inhaled allergen challenge study  in 31 adult subjects with mild atopic
asthma (Study  20101183) dem onstrated that tezepelumab attenuated the LAR and EAR to 
allergen challenge, as measured by the Area Under the Curve (AUC) for the percent fall in 
FEV 1and the maximum percent fall in FEV 1. Tezepelumab also attenuated the expected 
increase in FeNO value as well as sputum and blood eosinophils on the post -allergen day 
compared wi th the pre -allergen day . Mul tiple doses of 700 mg IV tezepelumab demonstrated
an acceptable safety  profile in subjects wi th mild atopic asthma. No subjects developed ADA 
after receiving tezepelumab in this exploratory  study . 
Study  CD-RI-MEDI9929- 1146 was a Phase 2b mult icenter, mult inational, dose -ranging, 
doubl e-blind, rando mize d, parallel -arm, placebo -controlled study  to eval uate the effect of 3 
dose l evels o f tezepel umab on the AAER in adult subjects with inadequately  controlled, 
severe asthma. Subjects were randomized in a 1:1:1:1 ratio to 1 of 3 dose levels o f SC 
tezepel umab (280 m g Q2W, 210 m g Q4W, 70 m g Q4W) or pl acebo (Q2W) for 52 weeks. A 
total of 584 subjects received at least 1 dose of tezepelumab or placebo. One site was excluded 
from all analysis due to GCP noncompliance making the total number of subjects analyzed to 
550. A post -hoc sensit ivity analysis excluding these subjects (38 subjects in the active 
treatm ent arm s and 13 subjects in placebo arm) was performed for the primary  and selected 
secondary  endpoints. Resul ts from the post -hoc analysis showed that reduction s in AAER at 
Week 52 of 62% (p<0.001), 71% (p<0.001), and 66% (p<0.001) for the 70 mg Q4W, 210 mg 
Q4W, and 280 mg Q2W doses, respectively, compared with placebo were observed. These 
resul ts are similar to those observed in the overall ITT population (AAERR of 61%, 71%, and 
66% for the 70 mg Q4W, 210 mg Q4W, and 280 mg Q2W tezepelumab groups, respectively, 
compared wi th placebo. After repeated SC administration, mean serum trough concentration 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 50of 166increased over time and achieved steady -state by  week 12. Tezepelumab exhibi ted linear 
pharmacokinet ics (PK) across 3 doses. A low incidence of ADA was observed across all 
treatm ent subjects. The ADA incidences were 9.4%, 3.7%, 0.8%, and 2.3% for placebo, 70 
mg Q4W, 210 mg Q4W, and 280 mg Q2W, respectively and no subjec ts tested posi tive for 
neutralizing ant ibodies. There was no impact of ADA on tezepelumab PK. The results of this 
study  did not i dentify safet y concerns associated wit h tezepelumab for any  dosing regimen. 
The overall incidence of TEAEs were similar between the placebo (65.9%) and the 
tezepel umab (66.0%) dose groups. A majorit y of subjects had TEAEs that were Grade 1 
(mild) or Grade 2 (moderate) in severit y and not related to IP. TEAEs that resulted in 
perm anent discont inuat ion of IP occurred in few subjects , and at a similar incidence between 
the tezepelumab (5 subjects [1.2%] overall) and placebo (1 subject [0.7%]) groups. Overall, 
tezepel umab was well- tolerated wi th an acceptable safet y profile and no ident ified safet y risks 
were noted.
2.3 Benefit/risk assess ment
In order to evaluate the clinical benefit -risk balance for tezepelumab, preclinical and clinical 
data have been taken into considerat ion, as well as a review of the available informat ion for
monoclonal antibodies that are approved for and are in development for the treatment of 
severe asthma. Benefits for tezepelumab over placebo include a clinically meaningful 
reducti on in asthma exacerbat ions, as well as improvements in lung function and asthma 
control  metrics.
Tezepel umab has been well tolerate d with noidentified ri sks in the clinical studies to date. No 
serious allergic reactions or anaphylact ic react ions considered related to tezepelumab were
reported in the Phase 2 program. Alt hough TSLP suppressio n could theoretically have
unant icipated imm une-related si de effects impairing host defense against certain infect ions, 
there is no clear preclinical or clinical evidence supporting such a role, and no safet y signals 
related to infect ions have been detected to date in the tezepelumab program.
The p otenti al benefi ts of the study  are expected to be Category  IIB as described in the 
guidance docum ent aimed di rectly at the diagnosis, cure, or prevent ion of disease.
Biopsies will be perform ed by qualified pulmo nologists experienced in research 
bronchoscop ies, and all due precaut ions will be taken to minimize the risk to subjects. Risks 
of the study  include those associated with invasive study  assessments such as bronchoscopy , 
bronchial biopsy , bronchial brushing and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL).  Although rare, 
complicat ions of bronchoscopy and bi opsy include pneum othorax and the ri sks associ ated 
with anesthesia. BAL has so me possible co mplicatio ns like cough, transient fever, transient 
chills and myalgias, bronchospasm, or transient decrease of lung functi on. Also, there is a 
minor risk of exposure to radiat ion by the CT scans, the use of CT may cause an increase in 
the risk of radiogenic tumors in subjects.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 51of 166The benefit/risk assessment for tezepelumab in severe asthma based on the development 
through Phase 2 is favorable. The future benefit/risk assessment will be defined by the results 
of the Phase 3 program.
More detailed informat ion about the known and expected benefits and risks and reasonably 
expected adverse events of tezepelumab may be fo und in the In vestigator’s Brochure. 
3. OBJECTIVES AND ENDPO INTS
Table 2 –Objectives and Endpoints
Objectives and Endpoints
Primary Objective Outcome Measure:
To expl ore the ai rway anti -
inflammatory  effect of tezepel umabOutcom e Variable: The change, expressed as a ratio, in the 
number of airway submucosal inflammatory  cells/mm2of 
bronchoscopic biopsies fro m baseline to EOT. Airway 
submucosal inflammatory  cells will include eosinophils, 
neutrophils, T cells and mast cells
Outcom e Measure: Rat io of tezepelumab to placebo at 
EOT 
Secondary Objective: Outcome Measure:
To expl ore the effect of tezepelumab 
on RBM thickening   Outcom e Variable: The change , expressed as a ratio, in 
RBM thickness determined by  microscopi c evaluatio n of 
bronchoscopic biopsies fro m baseline toEOT 
Outcom e Measure: Rat io of tezepelumab to placebo at 
EOT 
To expl ore the effect of tezepelumab 
on ai rway  epithelial integri ty   Outcom e Variable: The cha nge, expressed as a ratio, in % 
airway epi thelial  integrity determined by microscopic 
evaluat ion of bronchoscopic biopsies from baseline to EOT  
Outcom e Measure: Rat io of tezepelumab to placebo at 
EOT 
To expl ore the ai rway anti -
inflammatory  effect of tezepel umab 
across the spectrum of T2 status by  
three gene mean derived fro m 
bronchial brushing RNA 
transcri ptomicsOutcom e Variable: The change , expressed as a ratio, in 
number of airway submucosal inflamm atory  cells per mm2
determined by microscopic evaluat ion of bronchoscopic 
biopsies fro m baseline to EOT in subjects across the 
spectrum of T2 status determined by  RNAseq of bronchial 
brushings atbaseline
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 52of 166Objectives and Endpoints
Outcom e Measure: Rat io of tezepelumab to placebo at
EOT across the spectrum of T2.
Safety Objectives: Outcome Measures:
To evaluate the safet y and 
tolerabilit y of tezepelumab AEs/SAEs/AESIs
Clinical chemistry /hematol ogy/urinalysis
Vital signs
ECG
Exploratory Objectives: Outcome Measure:
  
 
 
 
  
  
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 53of 166Objectives and Endpoints
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 55of 1664. STUDY DESIGN
4.1 Overall design
For an overview of the study  design see Figure 1, Secti on 1.3. For details on treatments given 
during the study , see Secti on 6.1Treatments Administered.  
For details on what is included in the efficacy and safet y endpo ints, see Section 3Object ives 
and Endpo ints.  
This is a Phase 2, mult icentre, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, parallel group 
study  to eval uate the effect of tezepelumab on airway  inflammat ion in approximately  110 
adults wi th inadequately  controlled m oderate -to-severe asthma. Patients will have background 
asthma therapy  of medium -or high dose ICS pl us at l east one addit ional asthma controller 
medicat ion, such as a long- acting β2 agonist (LAB A), leukotri ene receptor antagonist 
(LTRA), l ong-acting ant i - muscarinic (LAMA), cromo ne, and theophylline, wit h or without 
maintenance oral corticosteroids (OCS) from screening and throughout the study  including the 
follow-up period.
The study  will consis t of a screening/run -in period of up to 4 weeks, a treatment period of 28 
weeks and a post -treatm ent follow-up period of 12 weeks. One dose level o f tezepel umab, 210 
mg will be compared with placebo administered SC Q4W over the treatment period. Subjects 
who discont inue IP during the study will be encouraged to undergo appropriate study 
visits/procedures for the full 40 -week peri od. Any  new treatm ents that are init iated will be 
recorded. Subjects who complete the 28- week study visit will complete a 12 -week post-
treatm ent follow-up peri od.
Please note : During the COVID -19 pandemic, there is an option for patients to have an extra 
dose every  4 weeks up to 6 addit ional doses, as needed. (please refer to Appendix J). For the 
last follow up visit, a phone call visit can replace an on -site visi t. Please refer to Appendix J
The study  aims to randomize subjects across the T2 spectrum. To ensure this, the study  will 
rando mize approximately 30% of subjects with < 150 blood eosinophils/μL, approximately 
30% of subjects with 150 -<300 blood eosinophils/μL and approximately 40% of subjects 
with ≥ 300 blood eosinophils/ μL. 
When the target percentage of subjects for each blood eosinophil subgroup in the study  is 
reached, considerat ion will be given to closing the IWRS/IVRS rando mizat ion for that 
subgroup, which may  be done on the st udy level irrespective of region. Once a subgroup is 
closed, subjects in the screening/run -in peri od in the cl osed subgroup will not be allowed to be 
rando mized and will be screen failed.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 56of 166Secti on 6.5(Table 5and Table 6) provi des a list of medicat ion restrict ions and prohibit ions to 
be followed throughout the conduct of the clinical trial.
4.2 Scientific rationale for the study design
Given that TSLP is an upstream and pleiotropic cytokine, TSLP blockade is ant icipated t o 
have broad impact on the spectrum of inflammatory responses observed in asthma. Due to the 
mechanism o f action it is expected that severe asthmat ics, irrespective of their phenoty pe of  
asthma, woul d benefit fro m treatm ent wi th tezepelum ab.
To better understand the effect of tezepelumab on airway inflammat ion, the study  will assess 
multiple airway ant i-inflammatory cells ( eosinophils, neutrophils, T cells and mast cells) by 
microscopic evaluat ion of bronchoscopic biopsies. 
These cells have been chosen as they are the ty pical  airway inflammatory  cells of asthma and 
represent both T2 and non -T2 driven inflammatory cell t ypes. Published literature supports a 
potenti al role for TSLP, and therefore tezepelumab, on all of these cell t ypes; eosinophils 
(Wong et al 2010, Cook et al 2012), neutrophils ( Li et al  2018 ), T cells ( Soum elis et al  2002 , 
Torii et al 2008 , Tanaka et al 2009 , Rochm an et al  2007 ) and m ast cells ( Allakhverdi et al 
2007). This m echanist ic study  is desi gned to i nvestigate the efficacy of tezepelumab in T2 
high and T2 low subjects, hence we will examine the ant i
-inflammatory effects of 
tezepel umab on a broad array  of airway  inflammatory  cells. Bronchoscopic biopsies will be 
also use d to assess the effect of tezepelumab on airway  epithelial integrity and reticular 
basement membrane thickness. As an epit helia l barrier alarmin, TSLP is predicted to be 
involved in epit helial ho meostasis and wound healing. TSLP has also been reported to p lay a 
role in ai rway  smooth m uscle proliferat ion (Redhu et al 2013). Therefore, we believe the 
remodeling end po ints of ai rway  epithelial integri ty and reti cular base ment membrane 
thickness may  be impacted by  tezepelumab and this will be explored in this study .
The BAL will be used to assess different bio markers and tezepelumab PK. The study  is also 
assessing the effect of tezepelumab on large airways using CT and the effect of tezepelumab 
on the small airways using AO and CT. 
Bronchial epit helial brushings will be used to assess the T2 status of the subjects using the 
three gene mean. In addit ion, exploratory  biomarkers in blood and urine will also be assessed.
The t reatment period of 28 weeks allows ample time for tezepelumab to show effect on airway 
epithelial integri ty and RBM thickness. 
In the Phase 2b trial subgroups, those with low and high baseline blood eosinophil counts and 
low and high T2 profile, clearly  improved with tezepelumab treatment (CD -RI-MEDI9929-
1146). In the present study, to ensure recruit ment of adequate numbers o f T2 low and T2 hi gh 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepel umab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 57of 166subjects for analysis, subjects will be enro lled based on screening blood eosinophil 
counts. Blood eosinophils are not sufficient to determine T2 status, but are a convenient 
approach to use during the screening process. At study  end, epi thelial expressi on of periostin 
(POSTN), chloride channel accessory  1 (CLCA1), and serpin family  B m ember 2 
(SERPINB2); a gene signature dem onstrated as a surrogate marker of T2 -driven inflammat ion 
in mild to m oderate asthm atics (Woodruff et al 2009 , Choy et al 2011 , Bhakta et al 2013 ),will 
be assessed to confirm that a range of subjects spanning the T2 continuum was included in 
this study . 
In order to avoid bias, this study  will be randomized and doubl e-blinded. A placebo group will 
be included to ensure a con trol for com parison effects.
4.3 Justification for dose
A 210 m g Q4W dosing regimen was selected for the Phase 3 studies based on efficacy data 
and an exposure -response analysis fro m the Phase 2b Study  CD-RI-MEDI9929- 1146 using 
popul ation PK/PD methodology . The populati on PK m odel of tezepel umab was developed 
based on all available data from 5 Phase 1 studies (Study  20070620, Study 20080390, Study  
2010118, Study  D5180C00003, Study  D5180C00002), and 2 Phase 2 studies (Study  
D5240C00001 and Study  CD-RI-MEDI9929-1146). The exposure -response analysis was 
based on the Phase 2b Study  CD-RI-MEDI9929- 1146.
Analysis of data fro m the Phase 2b study  identified a stati stically significant exposure -
response against the primary  efficacy  endpoint of AAER and the pharmacodynamic (PD) 
endpo int of FeNO. These relationships indicate that the dose of 70 mg Q4W is a sub -
optimally  effect ive dose and the dose of 210 mg Q4W is optimally effective. In summary, 
characterizat ion of AAER data from Study  CD-RI-MEDI9929- 1146 indicate the 210 m g Q4W 
dose provi des improved efficacy  over the 70 m g Q4W dose, whereas the 280 mg Q2W dose 
did not f urther reduce AAER. Tezepelumab was well- tolerated at all doses and the safet y 
profile was well balanced between the tezepelumab and placebo groups with no evidence of a 
dose rel ationship to TEAEs in the adult populat ion.
This study  will use the same dose as the Phase 3 studies.
  
4.4 End of study definition
The end o f study  is defined as the last expected visit/contact of the last subject undergoing the 
study .
A subject i s considered to have co mpleted the study when he/she has co mpleted his/her last 
scheduled contact.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 58of 166See Appendix A 6for guidelines for th e disseminati on of  study  resul ts.
5. STUDY POPULATION
Prospective approval o f protocol  deviati ons to recrui tment and enro lment criteria, also known 
as protocol waivers or exemptions, is not permitted.
Each subject should meet all o f the inclusion criteria and none o f the exclusio n criteria for this 
study  in order to be assigned/rando mized to a study intervent ion. Under no circumstances can 
there be exceptions to this rule. Subjects who do not meet the e ntry requi rements are screen 
failures, refer to section 5.4.
In thi s protocol , “enrolled” subjects are defined as those who sign the informed consent.
“Rando mized” subjects are defined as those who undergo randomizat ion and receive a
rando mizat ion number.
For procedures for withdrawal o f incorrectly enro lled subjects see Sect ion 7.3.
5.1 Inclusion criteria
Subjects are eligible to be included in the study  only  if all of the following inclusion criteria 
and none of the exclusio n criteria apply:
Informed consent
1. Provisio n of signed and dated, wri tten informed consent form prior to any
mandatory  study  specific procedures, sampling, and analyses. 
2. Provisio n of signed and dated written genet ic informed consent prior to collect ion 
of optional sample for genet ic analysis. 
The ICF process is described in Appendix A 3.
Please note: During COVID
-19 pandemic, ongoing patients in the study may need to be 
re-consented. Local/regional guidelines must be followed with regard to informed 
consent. Please refer to Appendix J. 
Age
3. Subject must be 18 to 75 y ears of age inclusive, at the time of signing the informed 
consent form.
Type of subject and disease characteristics
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 59of 1664. Docum ented physician -diagnosed asthma for at least 12 months prior to Visit 1 
(V1).
5. Subjects who have received a physician -prescribed asthm a controller medicat ion 
with medium or hi gh dose ICS as per G INA guideline ( GINA 2018 ) for at l east 12 
months prior to V1. 
6. Subjects who have received a physician -prescribed asthm a controller medicat ion 
with medium-or high-dose ICS m ust have been on a stabl e dose for at l east 
3months pri or to V1.
 High-dose ICS i s defined as total daily  dose of >500 μg fl uticasone dry powder 
inhaler or a total daily dose of 440 μg fluticasone metered dose inhaler or equivalent
 Medium -dose ICS is defined as a total daily  dose of >250- 500 μg flut icasone dry 
powder inhaler or a total daily dose of >220 -440 μg flut icasone metered dose 
inhaler or equivalent 
 Equivalent ICS doses will be based upon GINA guidelines ( GINA 2018
), as 
detailed in Appendix F.
7. At least 1 addit ional maintenance asthma controller medicat ion is required 
according to standard practice of care; e.g. LABA, LTRA, theophylline, LAMA, 
crom one etc. Use of addit ional asthma controller medicat ions m ust be docum ented 
for at least 3 m onths pri or to V1. 
Notes: 
 Patients who are on triple background medicat ion, e.g. ICS plus LABA plus 
LAMA, will be eligible for enrolment. 
 The ICS and LABA can be parts of a combinat ion product or given by separate 
inhalers.
 Subjects on OCS are allowed in the study , provi ded they  are on a stabl e 
maintenance dose for at least 6 months before V1.
8. The subject must have a predicted normal value (PNV) for the morning pre -
bronchodilator (BD) FEV 1>50% and more than 1 L at V1. If this is not met at V1, 
this criterion m ust be m et at V2. 
NB: If the subject did not withho ld their morning BD dose, all other V1 study 
assessments may be completed, except for the spirometry  procedure, which should 
be scheduled within 3 days o f V1.  
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 60of 1669. Subjects m ust have evidence of asthma as documented by  post -BD 
(albuterol/salbutamo l) reversibilit y of FEV 1≥12% and ≥200 mL (15- 60 min after 
administration of 4 puffs of albuterol/salbutamo l), docum ented ei ther in the 
previous 12 months prior to V1, at V1, or at V2. 
10. ACQ -6 score ≥ 1.5 at V1. If patient does not meet c riterion at V1, ACQ -6 score ≥ 
1.5 m ust be m et at V2. 
Weight 
11. Weight ≥ 40 kg at V1.
Reproduction
12. Negative serum pregnancy test f or female subjects of childbearing potential at V1.
13. Females of childbearing potential who are sexually active must use a highly  
effect ive method of contraception fro m screening and must agree to continue using 
such precautions for 16 weeks after the final dose of IP. Cessation of contraception 
after thi s point should be discussed wit h a responsible physician. Periodic 
abstinence, the rhy thm method, and the wi thdrawal  method are not acceptable 
methods of contraception. 
 A highly effect ive method of co ntraception is defined as one that results in a low 
failure rate (i.e., less than 1% per y ear) when used consistent ly and correctly . 
Highly effect ive forms of bi rth control  methods incl ude: true sexual abstinence 
[periodic abstinence (e.g. calendar, ovulat ion, symptothermal, post -ovulation 
methods) is not permitted], a vasectomized sexual partner, Etonogestrel (e.g. 
Implanon™), bilateral tubal occlusion, intrauterine device/levonorgestrel 
intrauterine system,, Medroxyprogesterone (e.g. Depo -Provera™) inject ions, oral  
contraceptive, Norelgestromin/ Ethinyl Estradio l patch (e.g. Evra Patch ™) or 
etonogestrel/ethinyl estradio lvaginal ring (e.g. Nuvaring™).
 Women not of childbearing potential are defined as women who are either 
perm anent ly sterilized (hysterect omy, bilateral oophorectomy, or bilateral 
salpingectomy ), or who are postm enopausal . Women will be considered 
postm enopausal if they  have been amenorrheic for 12 months prior to the planned 
date of rando mizat ion without an al ternat ive medical cause. The fo llowing age 
specific requirements apply:
 Women < 50 y ears ol d woul d be considered postmenopausal 
if they have been amenorrheic for 12 months or more 
following cessat ion of exogenous hormonal treatment and 
follicle stimulat ing horm one (FSH) l evels in the 
postmenopausal range.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 61of 166 Women ≥ 50 y ears ol d woul d be considered postmenopausal 
if they have been amenorrheic for 12 months or more 
following cessat ion of all exogenous hormonal treatment.
Inclusion criteria at randomization: 
14. Subjects m ust have demo nstrated a minimum 70% compliance with diary 
completion during the run -in period with a minimum o f 4 days of compliance 
during the last 7 days of the run -in period
A co mpliant day  requi res com pletion of evening diary  and subsequent m orning diary  
The run -in period f or thi s criterion is defined as the period between diary  assignment 
(evening assessment) of Visit 2 (V2) and Visit 3a (morning assessment).
15. Subjects m ust have demo nstrated a minimum 70% compliance with background 
asthma m edicat ion during the run -in period with a minimum  of 4 day s of 
compliance during the last 7 days of the run -in period. 
16. For WOCBP only: have a negat ive urine pregnancy test prior to administration of 
the IP.
17. Subjects m ust have the abilit y to perf orm acceptable inhaler and spirometry
techniques as judged by the Invest igator. 
18. Subjects m ust have a successful bronchial biopsy  procedure at Vi sit 3b as j udged by  
the Invest igator. Successful BAL and bronchial brushing are not inclusio nary.
5.2 Exclusion criteria 
Medical conditions
1. Any clinica lly important pulm onary disease other than asthma (e.g. active lung 
infect ion, chronic obstructive pulmo nary disease (COPD), bronchiectasis, 
pulmo nary fibrosis, cystic fibrosis, hypovent ilation syndrome associated with 
obesit y, lung cancer, history  or pl anned lung lo bectomy, alpha 1 ant i-trypsin 
deficiency, and primary ciliary dyskinesia) or pulmo nary or sy stemic diseases, other 
than asthma, that are associated with elevated peripheral eosinophil counts (e.g. 
allergic bronchopulmo nary aspergill osis/mycosis, Churg -Strauss syndro me, 
hypereosinophilic syndro me).
2. Any disorder, including but not limited to, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, hepat ic, 
renal, neuro logical, muscul oskeletal , infect ious, endocrine, metabo lic, 
hematol ogical, psychiatric, or major physic al impairment that is not stable in the 
opinio n of the Invest igator and could: 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 62of 166 Affect the safet y of the subject throughout the study
 Influence the findings of the study  or the interpretati on
 Impede the subject's abilit y to com plete the enti re durati on of  
study
3. History  of cancer: 
Subjects who have had basal cell carcino ma, l ocalized squamous cell carcino ma of the skin or 
in situ carcinom a of the cervix are eligible to participate in the study  provi ded that curative 
therapy  was com pleted at l east 12 m onths prior to V1. 
Subjects who have had other malignancies are eligible provided that curative therapy was 
completed at l east 5 y ears pri or to V1.
4. Subjects who had been hospitalized or required OCS for an asthma exacerbat ion 
event wi thin 6 weeks o f enrolment o r who had more than 3 asthma exacerbat ions 
requi ring OCS or hospitalizat ion in the year prior to V1 or who had either been 
intubated or admitted to the ICU for an asthma exacerbat ion in the year prior to 
enrolment will be excluded. For this study , an asthm a exacerbat ion is defined as a 
worsening of asthma that either:
 requi red treatm ent wi th a burst of systemic corticosteroids for at least 3 days or a 
single IM depo -injectable dose of corticosteroids will be considered equivalent to a 
3-day burst of systemi c corti costeroi ds 
OR
 resul ted in an emergency department visit (defined as evaluat ion and treatment for 
<24 hours in an ER or urgent care center) which required systemic corticosteroids 
(as per above) 
OR
 an inpat ient hospitalization due to asthma (define d as admissio n to an inpatient 
facilit y and/or evaluat ion and treatment in a healt hcare facilit y for ≥24 hours)
NOTE: F or subj ects receiving a stable maintenance dose of OCS, a temporary  increase 
for at least 3 consecut ive days over and above the stable exist ing maintenance dose 
qualifies as an exacerbat ion.
5. History  of a clinically significant infect ion, including upper (URTI) or lower 
respi ratory  tract infect ion (LRTI), requiring treatment with ant ibiotics or antiviral 
medicat ions finalized < 2 weeks bef ore V1 or duri ng the run -in period.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 63of 1666. A helmint h parasit ic infection diagnosed within 6 mo nths prior to V1 that has not 
been treated with, or has failed to respond to, standard of care therapy . 
7. Current sm okers or subjects with smoking history  ≥ 10 pack -years including the use 
of vaping products, such as electronic cigarettes. Former smokers with a smoking 
history  of <10 pack y ears, incl uding form er vaping or e -cigarette users, m ust have 
stopped for at least 6 months prior to Visit 1 to be eligible.
8. History  of chronic al coho l or drug abuse within 12 months prior to V1. 
9. Tuberculosis requiring treatment within the 12 months prior to V1.
10. History  of known immunodeficiency disorder including a posit ive human 
immunodeficiency  virus (HIV) test at V1, or the subject taking ant iretrovi ral 
medicat ions as determined by  medical history  and/or subject’s verbal report.
11. Major surgery  within 8 weeks pri or to V1 or pl anned surgi cal procedures requi ring 
general anesthesia or in -patient status for > 1 day  during the con duct of the study .
Prior/concomitant therapy
12. Receipt of any  marketed or invest igational biologic agent wi thin 4 m onths or 5 half -
lives (whichever is longer) prior to V1 or receipt of any invest igational non -biologic 
agent wi thin 30 days or 5 half -lives (wh ichever i s longest) pri or to V1.  
Note: Subjects on previous bio logics treatm ent are allowed to enter the study  
provi ded the appropriate washout period is fulfilled.
13. Treatment with the following medicat ions wit hin the last 12 weeks prior to 
rando mizat ion:Systemic immunosuppressive/immuno modulating drugs (e.g. 
methotrexate, cy closporine, etc.) except for OCS used in the treatment of 
asthma/asthma exacerbat ions or receipt of the T2 cytokine inhibitor suplatast 
tosilate within 15 days prior to V1. 
14. Receipt o f immunoglobulin or blood products within 30 days prior to V1.  
15. Receipt of live attenuated vaccines 30 day s prior to the date of randomizat ion 
16. Subjects that have been treated with bronchial thermoplast y in the last 24 months 
prior to V1.
17. Known or suspect ed history  of immunosuppressio n, immune dysfunction or 
immune dysregulation which may  include but is not limited to condit ions such as: 
Guillain -Barré syndro me, invasive opportunist ic infect ions (e.g. histoplasmosis, 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 64of 166listeri osis, cocci dioidomycosis, pneumo cystosi s, aspergillosis), or unusually  
frequent, recurrent, or prolonged infect ions, per Investigator judgment
Prior/concurrent clinical study experience 
18. Known history  of sensit ivity to any  com ponent of the IP form ulation or a history  of 
drug or other all ergy that, in the opinion of the Investigator or medical monitor, 
contraindicates their participat ion (see sect ion 6.1.1 ) 
19. History  of anaphylaxis or documented immune complex disease (Type III 
hypersensit ivity react ions) fo llowing any  biologic therapy. 
20. Concurrent enrolment in another clinical study  involving an IP.
21. Subject randomizat ion in previous tezepelumab studies.
22. Involvement in the planning and /or conduct of the study  (applies to AstraZeneca 
staff and/or site staff), or subjects emplo yed by or relat ives of the emplo yees of the 
site or sponsor.
Diagnostic assessments
23. Any clinically  meaningful  abnorm al finding in physical examinat ion, vital signs,
ECG, hem atology, clinical chemistry , or uri nalysis during the run -in period, which 
in the opinio n of the Invest igator, may put the subject at risk because of his/her 
participat ion in the study, or may influence the results of the study, or the subject's 
ability to complete the ent ire durati on of  the study .
24. Evidence of act ive liver disease , including j aundice or aspartate transaminase, 
alanine transaminase, or alkaline phosphatase > 2 times the upper limit of normal 
(ULN) at V1. 
25. Positive hepat itis B surface ant igen, or hepat itis C virus antibody serology  at 
screening, or a positive medical history  for hepati tis B or C. Subjects with a history  
of hepati tis B vaccinat ion without a hi story  of hepati tis B and subjects with hepatit is 
C who have been cured are allowed to participate.   
Other exclusions
26. Pregnant, breastfeeding, or lactating wo men.  
A serum β -HCG pregnancy  test m ust be drawn for women of childbearing potential
atthe screening visit. If test result is posit ive, the subje ct shoul d be excl uded. Since 
urine and serum tests may miss a pregnancy  in the fi rst days after concept ion, 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 65of 166relevant menstrual  history  and sexual history , including m ethods of contracepti on, 
shoul d be considered. Any subject whose menstrual and/or sexual history  suggests 
the possibilit y of early pregnancy should be excluded. 
27. Judgment by  the Invest igator that the subject should not participate in the study  if 
the subject i s unlikely to comply wit h study  procedures, restri ctions and 
requi rements or for safet y reasons.
Genetic Research exclusion criteria
28. Previous allogeneic bone marrow transplant.
29. Non-leukocyte depleted whole blood transfusio n wit hin 120 days of genet ic sample 
collect ion.
5.3 Lifestyle restrictions
Subjects m ust abstain fro m donating blood and plasma f rom the time of informed consent, and
for 16 weeks (5 half -lives) after last dose of IP.
5.3.1 Meals and dietary restrictions
Subjects should avo id eating a large meal for at least 2 hours prior to all lung function
assessments at the center.
Subjects sh ould not eat or drink 1 hour prior to having FeNO assessment.
5.3.2 Alcohol, tobacco and other
Chronic alcoho l, or drug abuse within 12 months is restricted priorto V1 and throughout the 
conduct of the study  is restri cted.
Current sm okers or subjects with smoki ng history  ≥ 10 pack -years, including the use of 
vaping products such as electronic cigarettes at V1 are not allowed.
Former smokers with a smoking history  of <10 pack y ears, including former vaping or e -
cigarette users, m ust have stopped for at least 6 mo nths to be eligible. Smoking is not allowed 
throughout the course of the study
The use of e -cigarettes is also not allowed during the course of the study .
5.3.3 Activity
Subjects should avo id engaging in strenuous exertion for at least 30 minutes prior to all lung
funct ion assessments at the center.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 66of 1665.4 Screen failures
Screen failures are defined as subjects who signed the informed consent form to participate in 
the clinical study  but are not subsequently randomized. A minimal set of screen failure 
inform ation is required to ensure transparent reporting of screen failure subjects to meet the 
Conso lidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) publishing requirements and to 
respond to queries from regulatory  authori ties. Minimal information includes demography , 
screen failure details, eligibilit y criteria, and any  adverse events (AEs) or serious adverse 
events (SAEs).
These subjects should have the reason for study  withdrawal  recorded as ‘ Screen Failure’ (i.e., 
subject does not meet the required inclusio n/exclusio n criteria) in the eCRF. This reason for 
study  withdrawal  is only  valid for screen failures, and not randomized subjects. 
Re-screening is allowed only  once under the follo wing circumstances:
Subjects with respiratory  infect ions requiring ant ibiotics or antiv iral medicat ion within 
14 day s prior to the screening/run -in peri od may  be re -screened 14 days after recovery, 
i.e., com pletion of the therapy . 
Subjects who experience an asthma exacerbat ion during run -in period may be re -
screened after 14 days of complet e resol ution of the asthma exacerbat ion, and when 
the subjects return to their baseline at Investigator discretion.
If the reason for screen failure was transient (including but not limited to study -supplied 
equipment failure, unforeseen personal events that mandate missed screening visit s, etc.), then
subjects may  potenti ally be re -screened. These cases should be discussed wit h the 
AstraZeneca study  physician and docum ented in the Invest igator Study  File (ISF).
Any re -screened subject will be re -enrolledand reassigned their originally  assigned enrolment
number after signing a new Informed Consent Form (ICF) and after all V1 assessments have 
been performed as listed in SoA, Table 1(with the excepti on of  testing for HIV1 and HIV2, 
hepat itis B and C, and FSH). If the timefra me between screening and re -screening exceeds 30 
days, the subject will not be permitted to re -screen without repeating Visit 1 assessments, as 
per PI discretion. 
Subjects who experience an asthma exacerbat ion before the EOT assessments should have 
their EOT vi sit rescheduled to be after 14 days after the complete resolution of the asthma 
exacerbation, and when the subjects return to their baseline, provided that the Invest igator has 
no safet y concerns.
Rescreening should be documented so that its effect o n study results, if any, can be assessed.
IMPORTANT: Re-screening for subjects who have screen -failed due to PRO criteria (e.g.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 67of 166ACQ -6 score <1.5 or did not report adequate compliance wit h maintenance m edicati ons) i s 
not allowed.
Re-screening of a subject f or any  other reason (transient reasons including, but not limit ed to 
study  supplies, equi pment failures, unforeseen personal event, missed visit s, etc.) will be 
allowed only  upon approval  of the AstraZeneca study  physician. A docum ented approval for 
re-screening should be filed in the Invest igator Study  File (ISF).
6. STUDY TREATMENTS
Study  treatm ent is defined as an IP (including placebo) intended to be administered to a study  
participant according to the study  protocol . Study  treatm ent in this study  refers to tezepel umab 
or placebo.
6.1 Treatments administered
6.1.1 Investigational products
Table 3 –Study treatments
Treatment 1 Treatment 2
Study treatment name: Tezepel umab Placebo
Dosage formulation: 0.7% (w/v) sodium
carboxy methyl
cellulose in 10 mM
acetate, 250 mM L -
proline,
0.01% (w/v)
polysorbate 80, pH 5.0
Route of administration Subcutaneous Subcutaneous
Dosing instructions: Refer to section 6.2 Refer to section 6.2
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 68of 166Packaging and labelling Study  treatm ent will be
provi ded in 5cc vial. Each
vial will be labelled in
accordance with Good
Manufacturing Practice
(GMP) Annex 13 and per
country  regul atory
requi rement.Study  treatm ent will be
provi ded in 5cc vial.
Each vial will be
labelled in accordance
with Good
Manufacturing Practice
(GMP) Annex 13 and
per coun try regul atory
requi rement.
6.2 Preparation/handling/storage/accountability
The IP will be supplied to the site in a kit with one vial o f either tezepelumab or placebo. Each 
kit has a unique number that is printed on all labels within the kit (i.e. the outer carton label 
and the label o f each container within the carton).
The Investigator or designee must confirm appropriate temperature condit ions have been
maintained during transit for all study  treatm ent received and any  discrepancies are reported 
and reso lved before use of the IP.
Only subjects enro lled in the study  may receive study  treat ment and only authorized site staff
may supply  or administer study  treatm ent. All  study  treatm ents m ust be stored in a secure,
environmentally  controlled, and m onitored (m anual  or autom ated) area i n accordance with the
labelled storage conditions with acce ss limit ed to the Invest igator and authorized site staff.
The Investigator, inst itution, or the head of the medical inst itution (where applicable) is
responsible for study  treatm ent accountabilit y, reconciliat ion, and record maintenance (i.e.,
recei pt, rec onciliat ion, and final disposit ion records).
Please Note: During the COVID- 19 pandemic, if allowed by local/regional guidelines, IP 
preparation and administration can be performed at the subject’s home by a qualified 
HCP. Please refer to Appendix Jfor further details 
Dose preparation
Each vial should be visually  inspected pri or to dose preparation. The IP will be provided to the 
study  sites as a co lorless to slight ly yellow clear solut ion contained in a 5 -mL single use glass 
vial to be stored at 2°C to 8°C unt il used. If defects are noted with the IP, the Invest igator and 
site monitor shoul d be notified immediately. Preparation of IP must be perform ed by a 
qualified person (e.g. pharmacist, Invest igator or qualified designee )at the si te.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 69of 166The IP does not contain preservatives and any unused portion must be discarded. Preparation 
of the IP i s to be perform ed asept ically. Total in -use storage time fro mneedle puncture of the 
IP vi al to start of administration should not exceed 4 hours at room temperature. If storage 
time exceeds this limit, a new dose must be prepared fro m new vials.
To prepare the subject’s dose, the IP will be selected for administrat ion according to the kit 
ident ificat ion numbers assigned by the IVRS. One vial o f IP will be assigned by  IVRS for 
each dose. 
Dose preparation steps:
1. Allow the vial to equilibrate at room temperature (about 30 minutes to 1 hour). 
Ensure that the vial is a dequately protected from light during the warming process. 
Gent ly swirl the vial to ensure the contents are mixed to a clear, ho mogeneous 
solution. Do not shake.
2. To prepare IP for administration remove the tab portion of the vial cap and clean the 
stopper with 70% ethyl alcoho l or equivalent. 
3. Attach a 21G 1½ -inch sterile disposable needle to a 2 or 3 -mL sterile syringe. 
4. Withdraw 1.9 mL of the IP from the vial.
5. Remove and discard the 21G 1 ½-inch sterile di sposable needle from the syringe. 
6. Attach a new 27G ½-inch sterile disposable needle to the same syringe in step 5. 
7. Apply the appropriate label to the sy ringe.
The assigned vial should be used at one time to prepare the dose required at each visit. Unused 
product in opened and dispensed vials should not b e used for subsequent dosing and should be 
stored for IP accountabilit y. If the opened and dispensed vials must be discarded immediately  
after dose preparation as per site’s SOP, the vial labels alo ng with the kit boxes must be 
retained for IP accountabili ty.
The IP will be administered by one SC inject ion (see Table 4) and m ust be prepared using 
disposable plast ic syringes and asept ic technique.
Table 4 – Investigational product dose preparation
Dose Number of vial (s) 
requi redSyringe size 
requi redTotal  Volume 
administered
210 m g a1 2 or 3 mL 1.9 m L
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 70of 166Placebo 1 2 or 3 mL 1.9 m L
aDue to the gradations available on 2 or 3 mL disposable plastic syringe, dose based on 1.9 mL administered 
volume is 209 mg. 
Dose administration
IP will be administered by a qualified healt hcare professio nal (e.g. pharmacist, Invest igator or 
qualified designee) at the site. The inject ion site must be recorded in the source documents at 
each treatment visit and in the eCRF. The person administering the dose will wipe the skin 
surface of the upper arm, anterior thigh or abdomen with alcoho l and allow to a ir dry. The 
skin will be pinched to iso late the SC ti ssue from  the muscle. The needle will be inserted at a 
90-degree angle approximately halfway into the SC tissue. The IP will be slowly injected (at 
least 5 second duration is reco mmended) into the SC tis sue using gent le pressure. The area 
shoul d not be m assaged after inject ion. It i s advised that the site of inject ion of IP be rotated 
such that the subject receives IP at a different anatomical site at each treatment visit. Inject ion 
site must be documente d on the eCRF and in the source documents at each treatment visit. In 
cases when rotation of the injection site is not feasible, and/or the subject prefers not to rotate 
inject ion sites, the reason for not rotating the injectio n site shoul d be docum ented i n the source 
docum ents. The suggested injection site rotation sequence is presented below in Figure 2. 
Note: Time of dispense of IP fro m IVRS, time IP taken out of th e fridge and time of IP 
administration should be logged in a specific log. This log must be a part of the subject’s 
source documents. 
Figure 2 Suggested schema of rotation of injection sites 
Subjects should be observed for a minimum of 2 hours after administration o f the first two IP

Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 71of 166administrations for the appearance of any  acute drug reacti ons. For the remaining doses, 
subjects will be observed for a minimum o f 1 hour after IP administration for any such 
reacti on.
If any o f the following shoul d occur, the IP shoul d not be administered:
The subject received allergen immunotherapy  injection on the sam e day  as scheduled 
IP administration.
The subject has an intercurrent illness that in the opinio n of the Invest igator and/or 
medi cal m onitor m ay com promise the safet y of the subject in the study  (e.g. vi ral 
illnesses).
The subject is febrile ( ≥ 38°C; ≥ 100.4°F) within 72 hours prior to IP administration.
The visit should be rescheduled within the allowed visit window and IP should b e 
administered at that visit. If this is not possible, the IP administration should be skipped. If 
subject skips 2 consecutive IP administrations, the AstraZeneca study physician should be 
contacted to discuss further participat ion.
If the subject reports an injection site react ion, the Invest igator or qualified designee will
complete the AE eCRF page and an addit ional eCRF quest ions about the inject ion site 
reacti on.
6.3 Measure to minimize bias: randomization and blinding
The Investigator(s) will:
1. Obtain signed informed consent or assent fro m the potential subject, or their 
guardi an/legal representative, before any study  specific procedures are performed.
2. Assign the potential subject a unique enrolment number (which begins with an ‘E’) 
via the interactive web response system/interactive voice response system 
(IWRS/IVRS).
3. Determine subject eligibilit y. 
4. Assign the eligible subject unique rando mizat ion code via IWRS/IVRS.
5. Subjects will be allocated to receive tezepelumab or placebo in a 1:1 ratio and 
stratifi ed by baseline eosinophil level (< 150, 150 -300, > 300). Randomizat ion 
numbers will be grouped in blocks. If a subject withdraws fro m the study , then 
his/her enrolment/rando mizat ion code cannot be reused. Wit hdrawn subjects will 
not be replaced.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 72of 166Specific information concerning the use of the IWRS/IVRS will be provided in a separate 
manual.
Procedures for handling incorrectly enrolled or randomized subjects
Subjects who fail to meet the eligibilit y criteria shoul d not, under any  circumstances, be 
rando mize d or receive study  medicati on. There can be no except ions to this rule. Subjects who 
are enrolled, but subsequent ly found not to m eet all  the eligibilit y criteria must not be 
rando mized or init iated on treatment and must be withdrawn from the study .
If a subject does not meet all the eligibilit y criteria but is randomized in error, or incorrectly  
started on treatment, the Invest igator should inform the AstraZeneca study physician 
immediately , and a discussi on shoul d occur between the AstraZeneca study  phys ician and the 
Invest igator regarding whether to continue or discontinue the subject from treatment. Study 
treatm ent m ust be di scont inued in all cases where continued treatment is deemed to pose a 
safet y risk to the patient. In those cases where continuat ion of the study  therapy  is judged not 
to present a concern related to safet y and di sease management, the rationale for continuing 
study  therapy  must be cl early  docum ented. Regardless of what is decided about IP, all 
rando mized patients should remain in the study  and the subjects should continue to be 
followed up in accordance with defined study  procedures.
Methods for assigning treatment groups
Randomization will be stratified by screening blood eosinophil level. Approximately 30% of 
subjects wi th < 150 bl ood eosinophils/μL, approximately 30% of subjects with 150 - <300 
blood eosinophils/μL, and approximately 40% of subjects with ≥300 blood eosinophils/μL. 
Randomization codes will be assigned strict ly sequent ially in each stratum  as subjects beco me 
eligible for randomizat ion.
The rando mizat ion code will be assigned fro m a rando mizat ion list prepared by a 
computeri zed system  provi ded by PAREXEL Inform atics on behalf of AZ (AZRand). 
Ensuring blinding
This is a double -blind study  in which tezepelumab and plac ebo are not visually  distinct from
each other. All packaging and labelling of IP will be done in such way as to ensure blinding 
for all sponsor and investi gational site staff. Neit her the subject nor any  of the Investi gators or 
sponsor staff who are invo lved in the treatm ent or clinical evaluat ion and m onitoring of the
subjects will be aware of the treatment received. Since tezepelumab and placebo are not 
visually dist inct, IP will be handled by a qualified person (e.g. pharmacist, Investigator or 
qualified designee) at the site.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 73of 166An AstraZeneca site monitor will perform IP accountabilit y. In the event that the treatment
allocat ion for a subject becomes known to the Investigator or other study  staff invo lved in the
management of study  subjects or needs to be known to treat an individual subject for an AE, 
the sponsor m ust be notified immediately  by the Investi gator and, if possible, before 
unblinding.
The fo llowing personnel will have access to the rando mizat ion list:
 Those carrying out the packaging and label ling of IP
 Those generat ing the randomization list
 Personnel at the IXRS company
 Supply  Chain Management department
 Bioanaly tical lab performing PK sample analysis.
 Patient Safet y department at AstraZeneca
 Applicable DSMB members
The informat ion in the randomization list will be kept from other personnel invo lved in the
conduct of the study  and in a secure location unt il the end of the study.
No other m ember of the extended study  team  at AstraZeneca, or any  CRO handling data, will
have access to the rand omization scheme during the conduct of the study  and until database 
lock.
Methods for unblinding
Individual treatment codes, indicat ing the treatment randomizat ion for each rando mized 
subject, will be available to the Investigator(s) or delegate at the study  sites from the 
IVRS/IWRS. Routines for this will be described in the IVRS/IWRS user manual that will be 
provi ded to each site.
The treatment code should not be broken except in medical emergencies when the appropriate
management of the subject requir es knowl edge of  the treatment randomizat ion. The 
Invest igator should document and report the action to AstraZeneca, without revealing the 
treatm ent given to subject to the AstraZeneca staff. 
AstraZeneca retains the right to break the code for SAEs that ar e unexpected and are 
suspected to be causally  related to an IP and that potentially  require expedi ted reporti ng to 
regul atory  authori ties. Treatment codes will not be broken for the planned analyses of data 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelu mab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 74of 166until all decisio ns on the evaluabilit y of the da ta from each individual subject have been made 
and docum ented.
6.4 Treatment compliance
The IP Storage Manager is responsible for managing the IP from receipt by  the study  site unt il 
the destruction or return of all unused IP. The date and time o f all IP admi nistrati ons shoul d be 
recorded in the appropriate section of the eCRF.
6.5 Concomitant therapy
All ICS asthma medicat ions taken in the 12 months prior to V1 must be recorded in the eCRF 
along wi th reason for treatm ent.
To sati sfy inclusio n criterion 6, a history  of cont inuous treatment with medium or high dose 
ICS pl us a second controller medicat ion for at least 3 m onths pri or to V1 shoul d be 
docum ented in source and re corded in the eCRF prior to the date of rando mizat ion. 
In order to satisfy inclusio n criterion 7, a hi story  of all  asthma controller m edicat ions for the 3 
months prior to V1 until the end of the study  should be docum ented in source and recorded in 
the eCRF. No changes are allowed to background asthma medicat ions throughout the duration 
of the study  except during the treatment of an asthma exacerbat ion.
All other medicat ions taken for condit ions other than asthma in the 3 months prior to V1 must 
be recorded in the eCRF along wit h reason for treatment by  the Investi gator/authori zed 
delegate at each visit (as shown in Table 1). 
Maintenance asthma medicat ion is not regarded as an IP, but will be provided/reimbursed by 
AstraZeneca according to local regulations in order to maintain appropriate oversig ht and 
access to this conco mitant therapy .
As theophylline has a narrow therapeutic window, please note that subjects on maintenance 
treatm ent wi th theophylline should have blood concentration levels within therapeut ic range. 
docum ented before V1. If this is not documented before signing the informed consent, it can 
be obtained after informed consent has been given or as part of the V1 procedures. The sample 
can be analyzed at the central or local lab as applicable. Investigator can use their clinical
judge ment about the therapeutic range of theophylline levels on the basis o f sampling time 
and other factors that may impact the results.
Any medicat ion or vaccine including over -the
-counter or prescript ion medicines, vitamins, 
and/or herbal supplements that t he subject is receiving at the time o f enrolment or receives 
during the study  must be recorded along wit h:
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 75of 166 Reason for use
 Dates of administration including start and end dates
Table 5 –Restricted medications
Medication/class of dr ug: Usage 
Maintenance treatment with ICS and long -
acting bronchodilators (including
ICS/LABA combinations)No changes in either dose or regimen are allowed 
from V1 and until at least the EOT visit, unless there 
is a medical need as judged by the Investigator. 
The patients should be instructed not to take their 
usual asthma controller medication (i.e., LABA) p rior 
to scheduled ECG assessment (please refer below for 
long-acting bronchodilator restrictions). Use of 
SABA or SAMA should be avoided within 6 hours 
befor e ECG assessments. The medication restrictions 
are waived for the screening ECG at V1.
Twice daily bronchodilators should be withheld for at 
least 12 hours prior to the scheduled FeNO and 
spirometry at site. 
Once daily bronchodilators should be withheld for at 
least 24 hours prior to the scheduled FeNO and 
spirometry at site.
Subjects will not need a washout of their asthma 
medications for unscheduled visits due to asthma 
worsening.
Short -acting beta -agonists
(SABA)Regular scheduled use of SABA is not allowed from 
V1 and until at least the EOT visit, unless there is a 
medical need as judged by the Investigator. 
PRN use is allowed if needed, however attention 
should be paid to the following restrictions.
SABA shoul d be withheld for at least 6 hours prior to 
scheduled spirometry, FeNO, ECG at site with the 
exception of any unscheduled visits due to asthma 
worsening. 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 76of 166Medication/class of dr ug: Usage 
Additional maintenance
controllersNo changes in either dose or regimen are allowed 
from V1 and until at least the EOT visit, unless there 
is a medical need as judged by the Investigator. 
Once daily LABA and LAMA should be withheld for 
at least 24 hours prior scheduled spirometry and 
FeNO at site visits with the exception of any 
unscheduled visits due to asthma worsening.
Twice daily LABA or LAMA containing therapies 
should be withheld for at least 12 hours prior to 
scheduled spirometry and FeNO at site with the 
exception of any unschedul ed visits due to asthma 
worsening.
LTRA should be restricted for at least 24 hours prior 
to scheduled spirometry and FeNO at site with the 
exception of any unscheduled visits due to asthma 
worsening.
Subjects on theophylline should have blood 
concentration levels within therapeutic range 
documented before proceeding in the study.
Twice daily theophyllines should be withheld for at 
least 12 hours prior to scheduled spirometry and 
FeNO at site with the exception of any unscheduled 
visits due to asthma worsen ing.
Once daily theophyllines should be withheld for at 
least 24 hours prior to scheduled spirometry and 
FeNO at site with the exception of any unscheduled 
visits due to asthma worsening.
Short -acting anticholinergics (e.g. ipratropium) These are not al lowed as a rescue treatment for 
worsening asthma symptoms from V1 and until at 
least the EOT visit, unless there is a medical need as 
judged by the Investigator. They may be used for 
managing an asthma exacerbation event.
Inactive/killed vaccinations (e.g. inactive 
influenza)Allowed provided they are not administered within 5 
days before or after any study visit.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 77of 166Medication/class of dr ug: Usage 
Allergen immunotherapy Allowed, if on stable therapy for at least 2 months 
prior to date of V1 with no anticipated change during 
the trea tment period. 
These should not be administered on the same day as 
IP administration.
Table 6 –Prohibited medications
Prohibited medication/class of drug: Usage
Long -acting beta -agonists as a
reliever (e.g. Symbicort Maintenance and 
Reliever Treatment)Not allowed 15 days prior to V1, during 
screening/run -in and until at least the EOT visit, 
unless there is a medical need as judged by the 
Investigator. 
Suplatast tosilate (T2 cytokine inhibitor) Not allowed within 15 days prior to V1, during 
screening/run -in and until at least the EOT visit, 
unless there is a medical need as judged by the 
Investigator.
Live attenuated vaccines Not allowed 30 days prior to the date of 
randomization, and during the study including the 
follow -up period.
Anticoagulants Not allowed 15 days prior to V1, during 
screening/run -in and until at least the EOT visit, 
unless there is a medical need as judged by the 
Investigator. 
Any immunomodulators or
immunosuppressives (except for OCS used in 
the treatment of asthma/asthma exacerbations)Not allowed 12 weeks prior to randomization , during 
screening/run -in and until at least the EOT visit, 
unless there is a medical need as judged by the 
Investigator. 
Immunoglobulin or blood products Not allowed 30 days prior to V1, during 
screening/run -in and until at least the EOT visit, 
unless there is a medical need as judged by the 
Investigator.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 78of 166Prohibited medication/class of drug: Usage
Any marketed (e.g. omalizumab, 
mepolizumab, reslizumab, benralizumab) or to 
be marketed or investigational biologic 
treatmentNot allowed 4 months or 5 half -lives (whichever is 
longer) prior to the date of V1, throughout the entire, 
screening run in period, treatment period (even if the 
subject has discontinued IP) and unti l the follow up 
visit at week 40.  
Other IPs
(including investigational use of an approved 
drug)Not allowed 30 days or 5 half -lives (whichever is 
longer) prior to V1, during screening/run -in and until 
at least the EOT visit, unless there is a medical need 
as judged by the Investigator.
Herbal remedies for the treatment of allergic, 
inflammatory, or respiratory diseasesNot allowed 30 days prior to V1, during 
screening/run -in and until at least the EOT visit, 
unless there is a medical need as judged by the 
Investigator.
Medications not currently licensed for use in 
the treatment of asthma, for example 
medications approved for Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease and not part of current 
standard of careNot allowed 30 days prior to V1, during 
screening /run-in and until at least the EOT visit, 
unless there is a medical need as judged by the 
Investigator. 
6.5.1 Other concomitant treatment
Other medication other than that described above, which is considered necessary  for the 
subject’s safet y and wellbeing, may be given at the discret ion of the Invest igator and recorded 
in the appropriate sections of the Case Report Form.
6.5.2 Rescue medication
SABA should be withheld for at least 6 hours prior to scheduled site visit spiro metry, FeNO,
and ECG at site with the exc eption of any  unschedul ed visi ts due to asthm a worsening. 
Albuterol  (US)/salbutam ol (ex US) rescue medicatio n will be provided by  the sponsor and
obtained locally . Rescue use of SABA administered via nebulizat ion is discouraged, except as
urgent treatment during an asthma exacerbat ion. Occasio ns where SABA is administered via
nebulizat ion will be recorded separately  from metered dose inhaler inhalat ions in the paper 
diary.
The date and time of rescue medication administration as well as the name and dosage
regimen of the rescue medication must be recorded.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 79of 1666.6 Dose modification
During the COVID- 19 pandemic an addit ional 1-6 IP doses may  be administered to subjects 
during unscheduled visits at weeks 28, 32, 36, 40, 44 and 48 (as needed) unt il the sites are 
able to resume performing all study  assessments, including bronchoscopies, in accordance to 
local regulati ons/guidelines. Pl ease refer to Appendix J
6.7 Treatment after the end of the study
Subjects who complete the study  shoul d be given standard of care at the discret ion of the 
Invest igator.
7. DISCONTINUATION OF T REATMENT AND SUBJECT
WITHDRAWAL 
7.1 Discontinuation of study treatment 
Subject may  be discont inued fro m IP in the fo llowing si tuations. 
Note that discontinuation fro m study  treatm ent does NOT m ean co mplete wi thdrawal  from the 
study . 
Subject decisio n.  The subject is at any  time free to discont inue IP, without 
prejudice to further treatment 
An adverse event considered to jeopardize the safety  of a subject parti cipat ing in the 
study
Pregnancy or breastfeeding
Severe non -compliance wi th the CSP. 
Development of any study  specific cri teria for discontinuat ion, including:
An anaphylact ic react ion to the IP 
A helmint h parasit ic infestation requiring hospitalization
An asthma -related event requiring intubat ion
Any malignancy  except subjects who develop basal cell carcino ma 
or localized squamous cell carcino ma of the skin, provided the 
malignancy is excised and d etermined to have clean margins
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 80of 166Development of one or more of the fo llowing:
Confirmed ALT or AST increase of ≥ 8 x ULN
Confirmed ALT or AST increase of ≥ 5 x ULN for more than 2 weeks
Confirmed ALT or AST increase of ≥ 3 x ULN and total bilirubin of ≥ 2 x
ULN
ALT or AST of ≥ 3 x ULN with the appearance of fat igue, nausea, vo miting, 
right upper quadrant pain or tenderness, fever, rash, and/or eosinophilia 
(≥ 5%)
See the SoA for data to be collected at the time of IP discont inuat ion and fo llow-up and for 
any further evaluations that need to be completed.
7.1.1 Procedures for discontinuation of study treatm ent
Subjects are free to discontinue IP or withdraw from the study  at any  time without prejudice to 
further treatment. Discont inuing study treatment is not the same as study wit hdrawal. 
Procedures to fo llow for study withdrawal  are detailed bel ow. If  the subject decides to 
withdraw consent, then the reason for t his must be recorded separately in the eCRF. A subject 
that deci des to discont inue IP should always be asked about the reason(s) and the presence of 
any adverse events. The reason for discont inuing treatment and the date of last IP 
administration should be recorded in the eCRF. Subjects permanent ly discont inuing IP 
administration should be given locally available standard of care therapy , at the discret ion of 
the Invest igator. However, treatment with marketed or invest igational biologics is not all owed 
until week 40 even if the subject has discont inued IP. Interaction studies between tezepelumab 
and other bio logics indicated for the treatment of asthma have not been conducted. For 
additional information regarding pharmacokinet ic and pharmacodynamic effects o f 
tezepel umab reference should be made to the Investigator brochure. 
All subjects who prematurely discontinue IP should return to the study center and 
complete the procedures described for the premature IP Discontinuation visit (IPD) at 4 
weeks (+/ -7 day s) post last IP administration. Subjects who discont inue treatment should be 
encouraged to return for all regularly scheduled visits for safet y and efficacy  assessments.
At the IPD visit the subject will be given three options as to how they  will be fo llowed as 
follows:
1. The subject should be encouraged to return for all regular clinic visits and perform 
all scheduled assessments unt il he/she completes a total of 28 weeks treatment 
period.  
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 81of 1662. The subject will be offered fo llow-up on a m onthly  basis via tel ephone calls unt il 
the subject completes 28 weeks in the study . The subject shoul d return for a follow -
up visit 16 weeks (+/- 3 day s) post l ast IP administrati on and for the EOT visit at 
Week 28 (or later due to COVID -19 pandemic) (+/ -3 days). 
3. If the subject cannot or does not wish to comply wit h any o f the opti ons above, (or 
any co mponent of them such as only telephone based visits wit hout complet ion of 
the diary , they  will com plete a follow -up visit at 16 weeks (+/ -7 day s) (refer to SoA, 
Visit 14 –week 40) post last IP administration. Aft er this visit the Investigator will 
only contact the subject at 28 weeks post -randomization (or later due to COVID -19 
pandemic) No other study  assessments will be performed prior to this contact.
If the last IP administration was at or after week 16 for options 1 or 2, the subject will return 
to the clinic for an EOT visit at week 28 (or later due to COVID -19 pandemic) (+ /-3 day s). 
The PI will not perform the EOT bronchoscopy  assessment unl ess the subject has had IP 
administered at least through the week 16 dose. Any subjects who discont inues IP before 
week 16 (V8) or had an EOT visit date greater than 12 weeks after date of last dose of IP will 
not have the EOT bronchoscopy  assessment performed. For option 3, the Invest igator will 
contact the subject at 28 weeks post rando mizat ion. For all options 1, 2 and 3, subjects will 
then return for a follow -up Visi t 16 weeks (+/ - 7days) post -last IP administration (refer to 
SoA, V14 –Week 40). The EOT visit will be completed immediately in the case of 
subsequent early  withdrawal  from option 1 or 2. Subjects who do not wish to have any fo llow-
up contacts will be discont inued fro m the study . All discontinued subjects m ust return the 
paper diaries at the EOT visit. If the subject chooses option 1, all assessments will be 
completed as per the SoA as indicated in Section 1.1. If the subject chooses 2 or 3, the key  
inform ation to be collected during the telephone calls are AEs/SAEs, changes in conco mitant 
medicat ion, healt h care utilizat ion, and asthma exacerbat ion informat ion. 
Subjects who init ially choose options 1 or 2 and subsequent ly cannot or do not wish to comply 
with the requi rements of their option can cont inue with a less intensive option (i.e. subject 
initially choosing opti on 1 can cont inue with options 2 or 3, subjects init ially choo sing option 
2 can continue with option 3).
If a subject discont inues IP due to a study -specific di scontinuat ion criterion, thi s shoul d 
always be recorded as ‘Development of study  specific discontinuation criteria’ on the 
Discontinuati on of  Invest igational Product form  in the eCRF. For m ore inform ation related to 
COVID -19 please refer to eCRF instructions. 
7.2 Lost to follow -up
A subject will be considered potentially  lost to f ollow-up if he or she fails to return for 
scheduled visits and is unable to be contacted by  the study  site.  
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 82of 166The fo llowing acti ons m ust be taken if a subject fails to return to the clinic for a required 
study  visit:
The site must attempt to contact the subject and reschedule the missed visit as soon as 
possible and counsel the subject on the importance of maintaining the assigned visit 
schedule.
Before a subject is deemed lost to fo llow-up, the Investigator or desig nee m ust m ake 
every effort to regain contact with the subject or next of kin by either repeated 
telephone calls, certified letter to the subject ´s last known mailing address or local 
equivalent m ethods. These contact attempts should be documented in the su bject’s 
medical record. 
Efforts to reach the subject should continue until the end of the study. Should the 
subject be unreachable at the end of the study , the subject should be considered to be 
lost to foll ow-up wi th unknown vital status at end of study  and censored at latest 
follow-up contact.
A subject i s considered lost to follow -up when any of the fo llowing attem pts of  contact are 
failed: 3 attempts of either phone calls, faxes or emails; having sent 1 registered letter/certified 
mail; or one unsucces sful effort to check the status of the subject using publicly  available 
sources, if allowed by  local regulati ons.
7.3 Withdrawal from the study
A subject m ay withdraw from  the study  (e.g. wi thdraw consent), at any  time (IP and 
assessments) at his/her own request, without prejudice to further treatment. A subject who 
considers withdrawing fro m the study  must be info rmed by the Investigator about mo dified 
follow-up opti ons (e.g. tel ephone contacts, con tacts wi th a rel ative or treating physician, or 
inform ation from medical records) as per section 7.1.1 . 
A subject who withdraws consent will always be asked about the reason(s) and the presence of 
any AEs.  The Invest igator will fo llow-up subjects as medically indicated. A withdrawal visit 
is essent ial to collect as m uch data as possible for the s ubject as per EOT visit described in 
SoA, Secti on 1.1.
If the subject withdraws consent for disclosure of future informat ion, the sponsor may  retain 
and cont inue to use any data collected before such a withdrawal o f consent.
If a subject withdraws fro m the study , he/she m ay request destructi on of any samples taken, 
and the Investigator must document this in the site study records.  
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 83of 166If the subject only wit hdraws consent for the retentio n of blood samples for future exploratory  
use (e.g. DNA, study  of markers of asthma, ident ifying potential new dr ug targets for asthma, 
or for assay  devel opment purposes), the subject will not be withdrawn from the study .
Withdrawal o f consent fro m the study  must be ascertained and documented by  the Invest igator 
and recorded in the eCRF. For m ore inform ation related to COVID -19 please refer to eCRF 
instructi ons. 
AstraZeneca reserves the right to discont inue a subject’s participation in the study for any 
safet y reasons.
7.3.1 Withdrawal due to recruitment completion
When the required number of subjects are randomized in the study , ongoing subjects in run -in 
will not be randomized and will be withdrawn from the study . The reason of the withdrawal 
shoul d be docum ented in the source and eCRF. As with screen failures, no further study  
related fo llow-up of  these patients is requi red.
7.3.2 Discontinuation or suspension of the whole study program
If AstraZeneca decides to prematurely terminate or suspend the study , the PI, and regulatory  
authori ties shoul d receive wri tten notificat ion of the reasons for the premature terminat ion or 
suspe nsion. The PI will immediately  notify  the decisi on to the subjects and if relevant give 
appropriate medical treatment; take necessary measures and document these in the source 
notes .
8. STUDY ASSESSMENTS AN D PROCEDURES
Study  procedures and their timing are su mmarized in the SoA (Table 1).  
The Investigator will ensure that data are recorded on the electronic Case Report Forms 
(CRFs). The Web Based Data Capture (WBDC) system will be used for data collect ion and 
query  handling.  
The Investigator ensures the accuracy, completeness, legibilit y and timeliness of the data 
recorded and of the provisio n of answers to data queries according to the Clinical Study  
Agreement.  The Invest igator will sign the completed electronic CRFs.  A copy o f the 
completed el ectroni c CRFs will be archived at the study site.Addit ional data to assess the 
impact of COVID -19 pandemic will be co llected .
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 84of 166Immediate safet y concerns should be discussed wit h the sponsor immediately upon occurrence 
or awareness to determine if the subject should cont inue or discont inue study  treatment.
Adherence to the study  design requi rements, including those specified in the SoA, is essent ial 
and required for study  conduct.
All screening evaluat ions must be com pleted and reviewed to confirm that potential subjects 
meet all eligibilit y criteria.  The Investi gator will maintain a screening log to record details of 
all subjects screened and to confirm eligibilit y or record reasons for screening failure, as
applicable.  
The am ount of  blood collected from  each subject over the duration of the study  (excl uding 
optional blood sam ples) will  be approximately  220 mL, including any extra assessments that 
may be required, and will not exceed 450 mL. Repeat or unsch eduled samples may  be taken 
for safet y reasons or for technical issues wit h the samples .
8.1 Efficacy assessments 
8.1.1 Bronchial biopsy
Facilit ies for the m anagement of m edical  emergenci es and cardiopulmo nary resusci tation will 
be available. Biopsies will be perfo rmed by qualified pulmono logists experienced in research
bronchoscopies, and all due precaut ions will be taken to minimize the risk to subjects.
Subjects will receive a sedat ive and local anesthet ic to reduce any  disco mfort and l ocal 
guidelines to be foll owed. Subjects will be informed of the risks associated with bronchoscopy  
and bronchial biopsy procedure before participat ing in the study .
The biopsy  at the EOT Vi sit will be perform ed only  if the baseline biopsy  tissue passes qualit y 
control , as judged b y the study  pathol ogist. QC cri teria include ti ssue area, qualit y and 
architecture which must all be sufficient to allow quant ificat ion of inflammatory  cells, RBM 
and epit helium to enable primary and secondary endpoints to be quant ified.
Details for conduc ting bronchial biopsies will be described in a separate manual. Samples will 
be analyzed at a central facilit y designated by  AstraZeneca. Details of assessment and analysis 
param eters will  be described in a separate manual.
Bronchial biopsy, being the prim ary endpoint will be conducted first followed by  bronchial 
brushing then the BAL.
8.1.2 Bronchial brushing
During bronchoscopy , bronchial brushings will be obtained. Details for sample collect ion, 
handling, processing, storage and transportation will be described in a separate manual. 
Samples will  be analyzed at a central facilit y designated by  AstraZeneca. Det ails o f 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 85of 166assessment and analysis parameters and transporting samples will be described in a separate 
manual. The periostin (POSTN), chloride channel accessory  1 (CLCA1), and serpin family  B 
member 2 (SERPINB2) three gene mean gene signature for each subject will be reported in 
the CSR, but additional transcriptomics data will be analyzed separately and will be reported 
separately  from the CSR in a scient ific report or publicat ion.
The brushings at the EOT Visit will be performed only if the baseline visit brushing is 
perform ed successfully, as judged by  the Invest igator.
8.1.3 Bronchoalveolar lavage
Bronchoalveo lar lavage (BAL) will be obtained during bronchoscopy . BAL will  be mandatory  
for all subjects (unless if there is any safet y concern by the Invest igator), b ut it is not an 
inclusio n criterion for patients to be randomized in the study . BAL sam ples shoul d be 
collected pre -dose at the pre- specified scheduled visit in the SoA. Details for sample 
collect ion, handling, processing, storage and transportation will be described in a separate 
manual. The results of the exploratory  BAL bi omarker analyses may  be reported separately  
from the CSR in a scient ific report or publicat ion.
The BAL at the EOT Visit will be performed only if the baseline visit BAL is performed 
successfully, as judged by the Invest igator. 
8.1.4 Airwave oscillometry
AO is a non -invasive lung funct ion test included in this study  to evaluate treatment effect on 
small airway  physi ology. A Z will provide the equipment for testing.
A calibrated sy stem  will be used for measurements. Detailed procedures for performing, 
recording and analyzing AO data will be described in a separate manual. 
By measuring subje ct’s airflow and response to sound waves, frequency -dependent resi stance 
and reactance will be calculated by the AO system software. A signed and dated copy  of the 
resul ts printout from  the equi pment m ust be kept at the study  site for source data verificat ion 
(SDV). The printout must be marked with the study code, subject enrolment code, date and 
time of measurement, and visit number. Number of parameters including (but not limited to) 
R5, R20 and AX for each trial will be recorded and analyzed.
The AO asse ssment at EOT Visit will be performed only if the baseline visit AO is performed 
successfully, as judged by the Invest igator. 
8.1.5 Airway hyper -responsiveness
AHR m easured by mannitol challenge testing (MCT) will be assessed in a subgroup of 
patients according to the schedule provided in Table 1. MCT will be performed in acc ordance 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 86of 166to GINA guidelines ( GINA 2006 ), vendor’s manual , and applicable SOP and clinical 
standards of care at invest igational sites. Medicat ion washout s should be fo llowed as per the 
mannito l vendor’s manual detailed in Appendix I.
Signed and dated worksheets from the measurements will be kept in the ISF for SDV. If a 
worksheet cannot be printed, required measurements will be recorded in the subject’s medical 
records for SDV. Sponsor will provide the mannit ol kits to the si tes.
The AHR assessment at EOT Visit will be performed only  if Visi t 2 AHR is perform ed 
successf ully, as j udged by the Invest igator. 
In case of repeat spirometry  at V2, AHR will be rescheduled within 3 days of Visit 2.
8.1.6 Biomarkers
Multiple sample t ypes (blood, plasma, serum, BAL, bronchoscopic biopsies, bronchial 
brushings and urine) will be collecte d accordi ng to the Table 1for expl oratory  analyses to 
investigate the effect of tezepelumab on bio markers of inflammat ion, asthma, rem odeling, 
pharmaco logy of tezepel umab and for potential predictors of response. All biomarker samples 
shoul d be collected pre -dose at the pre- specified scheduled visit in the SoA. Instructi ons for 
sample collect ion, processing, storage, and shipment can be found in the separate manual 
provi ded to the si tes. Sam ples may be analyzed separately . The resul ts of the exploratory  
biomarker analyses may be reported separately from the CSR in an addendum, in a scient ific 
report or publicat ion.
8.1.7 Blood eosinophils and neutrophils
Samples for assessment of blood eosinophils and neutrophils will be collected as hematology  
samples according to the schedule in Table 1. Bl ood eosinophil and neutrophil counts will be 
obtained fro m the total  and different ia
l white blood cell  (WBC) counts. All blood eosinophil 
and neutrophil results will be redacted fro m the laboratory  reports except for Visit 1 and Vis it 
3. Instructi ons for sam ple collect ion, processing, storage, shipment and analysis will be 
provi ded in a separate laboratory  manual  provided to the sites. 
8.1.8 Airway inflammatory cells
Lung biopsy t issue will be collected by  bronchial biopsy at baseline an d EOT to evaluate the 
effect of tezepelumab on inflammatory  cell infiltrate. 
8.1.9 Serum IgE
Testing for Serum IgE will be performed as per schedule in Table 1. The analysis for this test 
will be managed by the central laboratory . All total serum  IgE resul ts will  be redacted from  
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 87of 166the laboratory  reports except for Visit 3. Instructions for sample collect ion, processing, 
storage, and shipment will be provided in a separate l aboratory  manual provided to the si tes. 
8.1.10 RNA transcriptomics
Transcriptomic analysis will be performed on the RNA sample obtained fro m bronchial 
brushing as per schedule in Table 1. Details for bronchial brushing collect ion will be as 
described above ( 8.1.2 ).Three gene mean gene signat ure will be reported in the CSR but 
additional transcri ptomics data from  bronchoscopic brushings will be reported separately fro m 
the CSR in an addendum, scientific report or publication.
In addition, other samples including who le blood, BAL cells and bro nchial biopsies will be 
collected, stored and may  be processed for RNA transcriptomics. Instructions for sample 
collect ion, processing, storage, shipment and analyses will be provided in a separate manual 
of procedures provided to the sites. Samples may  beanalyzed separately.  Any exploratory  
transcri ptomics analyses on BAL cells, who le blood and biopsy  tissue, will be reported 
separately  from the CSR in an addendum, in a scient ific report or publicat ion.
8.1.11 DNA for genetics
An optional blood sample will be c ollected as per schedule in Table 1for genetic analysis. 
Instructi ons for sam ple collect ion, processing, storage, shipment and analyses will be provid ed 
in a separate manual o f procedures provided to the sites. This data will be reported separately 
from the CSR in an addendum, in a scient ific report or publication.
8.1.12 Urine biomarkers
Urine will be collected and stored as per schedule in Table 1for expl oratory  biomarker 
analysis of inflammatory  markers. Instructi ons for sample collect ion, processing, storage, 
shipment and analyses will be provided in a separate m anual  of procedures provi ded to the 
sites. Sam ples may  be analyzed separately . The resul ts of the exploratory  biomarker analyses 
will be reported separately  from the CSR in an addendum, in a scient ific report or publicat ion.
8.1.13 Computed tomography
Chest CT will be performed in accordance with the schedule provided in Table 1. Pri or to CT 
scan, subject will be asked to inhale 100 µg of salbutamo l using a m etered dose inhaler and a 
valve spacer device. This procedure will be repeated 4 times. CT scan procedure should be 
within 10
-60 minutes post -bronchodilat ion. Scans will be performed in both full inspirat ion 
and full expiration. Detailed procedures for the acquisit ion, storage, anonymization and 
transfer of the CT image data will be described in a separate manual. 
Details for the analysis o f the CT image data to obtain parameters for large airway  
morphometry , air trapping, vascular pruning and fun ctional imaging will be described in a 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 88of 166separate imaging bio marker document. The CT scans will be assessed clinically at each site, 
and the Investigator is responsible for the clinical reporting of findings and its subsequent 
management. Clinically  signific ant findings not related to asthma will be reported as medical 
history  or AEs by  the Invest igator.
EOT CT will be performed only  if baseline CT i s perform ed successfully, as confirmed by 
imaging QC review by  the imaging vendor. 
8.1.14 Assessment of asthma exacerbation 
The list below defines what is acceptable documentation for historical exacerbat ions:
 Discharge summaries from a hospital, emergency room, or an urgent care 
facilit y indicat ing that a subject was hospitalized/treated with systemic 
steroi ds for an asthm a exacerbat ion.
 Signed and dated notes from a referring physician, including information 
regarding diagnosis and treatment of an exacerbat ion with systemic 
steroi ds.
 Evidence of prescriptions for sy stemic steroi ds used during an 
exacerbation.
 A docum ented conversat ion that i s recorded in a timely  manner between 
the Invest igator/nurse or nurse practit ioner and a subject who is already on 
an OCS act ion plan, detailing the diagnosis and treatment of an asthma 
exacerbation.
 A docum ented conversat ion between the treating/referral physician or 
nurse/nurse pract itioner certifying that a subject was treated for an 
exacerbation wit h steroids at their clinic or under their supervisio n. The 
dates (m onth/year) of the exacerbat ions and verbal confirmat ion that
appropriate prescript ions were provided is necessary . This opti on shoul d 
be used only  if reasonable attem pts to procure subject records have been 
unsuccessful.
During the study , an asthma exacerbat ion will be defined as a worsening of asthma that leads 
toany o f the following:
 A tem porary  bolus/burst of systemic corticosteroids (or a temporary  
increase in stable OCS background dose) for at least 3 consecutive days to 
treat symptom s of asthma worsening; a single depo -injectable dose of 
corticosteroi ds will be considered equivalent to a 3 -day bolus/burst of 
systemic corticosteroids.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 89of 166 An emergency  room  or urgent care visit (defined as evaluat ion and 
treatm ent for < 24 hours in an emergency department or urgent care 
center) due to asthma that required systemic corticosteroids (as per the 
above).
 An in-patient hospi talizat ion (defined as admission to an inpatient facilit y 
and/or evaluation and treatment in a healt hcare facilit y for ≥ 24 hours) due 
to asthm a.
Subjects are required to report any  of the f ollowing in the paper di ary:
 An increase in rescue medicat ion use of 4 or more puffs on at least 2 
consecut ive days co mpared with the average use during baseline or use of 
12 puffs/day on any one day , and/or
 An addit ional nebulized β2 agonist use on at least 2 consec utive days 
compared wi th the average use during baseline, and/or
 An increase of 2 or more nights with awakenings due to asthma requiring 
rescue m edicati on over a 7 -day period com pared wit h the average during 
baseline, and/or ≥ 6 out of previous 7 nights wi th awakenings due to 
asthma requiring rescue medicat ion (thi s criterion shoul d be met on 2 
consecut ive days)
If an exacerbat ion event is not associated with deterioration in at least 1 of the pre -specified 
objective measurements, the Investigator will have to justify the decisio n for defining the 
event as an exacerbat ion and record it in the eCRF. Events that are not supported by  any 
objective assessment will be deemed not to be a protocol- defined exacerbation.
The start of an exacerbat ion is defined as the start date of systemic corticosteroids or of a 
temporary  increase in a stable OCS background dose, date of ER or urgent care visit s 
requi ring systemic corticosteroids, or date of hospital admissio n due to asthma, whichever 
occurs earlier.
The end date of an exacerbat ion is defined as the last date of systemic corticosteroids or of a 
temporary  increase in a stable OCS background dose, date of ER or urgent care visit, or date 
of hospi tal discharge, whichever occurs later.
If less than 7 days have elapsed sin ce the end date of an asthma exacerbation and the start date 
of a new asthma exacerbat ion, the second event will be considered a relapse of the prior 
asthma exacerbation.
All asthma exacerbat ions that occur during the treatment period and fo llow up, m ust b e 
recorded in the exacerbat ion eCRF.  See section 8.3.7 for addi tional information on recording 
asthma exacerbations as an AE/SAE during the study .
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 90of 1668.1.15 Allergen specific IgE (FEIA)
Testing for Phadiatop in blood (allergy screening test) will be performed as per schedule in 
Table 1. The analyses for these tests will be managed by the central laboratory . Instructi ons 
for sam ple collect ion, processing, storage, and shipment will be provided in a separate 
laboratory  manual provided to the si tes.
8.1.16 Spirometry
8.1.16.1 General requirements
Lung funct ion (FEV 1and FEF 25-75%) will  be measured by spirom etry using equipment 
provi ded by a central vendor. Spiro metry will be perform ed by  the Invest igator or authorized 
delegate according to American Thoracic Societ y/European Respiratory  Soci ety (ATS/ERS) 
guidelines ( Miller et al  2005 ).
The vendor providing central spiro metry is responsible for assuring that the spiro meter meets
ATS/ERS recommendations and that the study  center personnel who will be performing the
testing is properly certified. Spirometry  calibrat ion will be detailed in a separate spirometry
procedures manual.
Important!
 Subjects should avo id engaging in strenuous exertion for at least 30 minutes prior to 
all lung function assessments at the center.
 Subjects should avo id eating a large meal for at least 2 hours prior to all lung 
funct ion assessments at the center. 
 Subjects should wit hhold their usual maintenance therapies on the day(s) when lung 
funct ion testing is being performed as below:
SABAs and SAMAs should be wit hheld at least 6 hours prior to scheduled 
spirometry at si te. 
Twice daily LABA or LAMA -containing therapies should be withheld for at 
least 12 hours prior to scheduled spiro metry at si te.
Once daily  LABA or LAMA -containing therapies should be withheld for at 
least 24 hours prior to scheduled spiro metry at si te.
LTRA should be restricted for at least 24 hours prior to scheduled spiro metry 
at site.
Twice daily theophyllines should be withheld fo r at least 12 hours pri or to 
scheduled spiro metry at si te.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepeluma b-D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 91of 166Once daily  theophyllines for at l east 24 hours prior to scheduled spiro metry 
at site. 
Note: If any  of the above restrictions are not met, the spirometry  assessment shoul d be 
rescheduled within the allowed visit window.
Time of day for scheduled center visit spirometry
Spirometry testing shoul d be done according to the SoA. For all subjects, spir ometry testing 
must be init iated in the morning between 6:00 AM and 11:00 AM during the screening or re -
screening period. 
All post -randomizat ion spirometry  assessments should be performed wit hin ± 1.5 hours of the 
time that the enrolment spirometry  was performed. For example, if the enrolment spirometry  
was started at 8:00 AM, then all subsequent spirometry  testi ng needs to be initiated between 
6:30 AM and 9:30 AM.
Spirometry technique
Detailed procedure for performing spiro metry will be described in a separate instruction 
manual. Details regarding assessment of the qualit y of spirom etry and the best test report 
(BTR) process will also be detailed in the manual.
Spirometry references
The Gl obal Lung Funct ion Init iative (GLI) equations will be used to determine the Predicted 
Norm al Values (PNV) and are pre -programmed int o the spiro meter (Quanjer et al 2012 ). 
FEV 1, expressed as percent of the PNV, will be calculated as fo llows:
FEV 1% of PNV = (FEV 1measured/FEV 1PNV) x 100
8.1.16.2 Post-BD spirometry and FEV 1 reversibility assessment 
All subjects m ust m eet inclusio n criteria 9either by  having docum ented histori cal reversibili ty 
or by  dem onstrating reversibilit y either at V1 or V2. 
Even if documented historical reversibilit y is available, the post -BD spiro metry procedures 
must be performed at V1 to categorize subjects (establish baseline characteristic) prior to 
rando mizat ion. The documented historical reversibilit y must be recorded in the 
eCRF/spirometer prior to randomizat ion.  Further details will be provided in a separate 
instructi on m anual .
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 93of 166Reversibilit y is calculated as fo llows:
% Reversibilit y = (post -BD FEV 1-pre-BD FEV 1) × 100/pre -BD FEV 1
Record keeping
A signed and dated copy  of the pre -and post -BD printout must be kept at study  center for 
source data ve rificat ion. The printout must be marked with the study  code, enrolment code, 
date and time of measurement, visit number. If a printout cannot be printed, the mean value o f 
the measurements will be recorded in the subject’s charts. 
8.1.17 Fractional exhaled nitri c oxide
Airway  inflammat ion will be evaluated using a standardized single -breath FeNO test in 
accordance with the SoA.A single exhalat ion technique re commended by the manufacturer 
will be fo llowed ( Allakhverdi et al 2007 , Alving et al 2017 ).
Subjects will be asked whether they  have had a respi ratory  infecti on in the 2 weeks prior to 
the measurement. The FeNO measurements will not be performed wit hin 2 weeks o f a 
respi ratory  infect ion. The FeNO test will be performed prior to spirometry. Subjec ts shoul d 
not eat or drink 1 hour prior to having the FeNO test. Subjects should not use their rescue 
SABA medicat ion (e.g. albuterol/salbutamo l) or SAMA m edicat ions wi thin 6 hours of the 
measurement. Inhaled BDs (including ICS/LABA) should be withheld for the effect duration 
specific to the BD as described in the spiro metry secti on. If not, the assessment should be 
postponed till after the required t ime has passed since the meal or drink or the visit must be 
rescheduled within the allowed visit window. 
The NIOX VERO® Airway Inflammat ion Monitor will be used to measured FeNO . 
Instructi ons for use of this monitor will be provided in a separate user’s manual.  
NIOX VERO® sensors will be replaced as recommended by the manufacturer. The vendor 
supplying the equipment will  be responsible for ensuring that the equipment and procedures 
for the m easurement of FeNO are validated prior to the start of the study . 
All post -randomizat ion FeNO assessments should be performed within ± 1.5 hours of the time 
that the rando mizat ion FeNO was perform ed.
All post -randomizat ion FeNO measurements will be blinded for sites and subjects throughout 
the study . The sponsor will be unblinded to the FeNO values pri or to randomizat ion and 
blinded to the FeNO values post randomizat ion.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 94of 1668.1.18 Patient reported outcomes
Patient reported outcomes (PRO) data will be captured by  paper di aries at hom e and at the 
site. Subj ects will be trained on at -home use of the diary at V2. Training will emphasize the 
importance of co mpleting the paper diary assessments as scheduled to capture the subject's 
experience and meet the object ives of the study. The quest ionnaires will be co mpleted at home 
in the fo llowing order: Rescue medicat ion, nocturnal awakening, maintenance medication. At 
every visit, subjects will be asked to return their paper diaries to be filed with the source 
docum ents. Si te will  give the subject a new diary  bookl et every  visit, as specified in the SoA.
At-home paper diary assessments will start the evening of V2. Subjects will co mplete 
assessments twice daily  at timepoints specified in the SoA. 
The Investigator/authorized delegate will check subject’s adherence to the paper diary 
completion to minimize missing data at each study visit. Frequent compliance checks between 
visitswill be necessary  to ensure sufficient data is available to meet inclusio n criteria 14and 
15.
8.1.18.1 Paper Diary
The paper diary  will be com pleted each day  from the evening of V2 to the morning of Visit 14 
(V14). The morning diary  will include: quest ions about rescue medicat ion, night -time 
awakening, and use of maintenance medicat ions. The evening diary  will include: quest ions 
about rescue medicat ions. Only the occurrence of worsening or new asthma symptoms will be 
reported on the paper diary . 
Please note: During the COVID -19 pandemic, once extra dosing and/or home IP 
administration is implemented, recording, collect ion, and dispensat ion of the subject's paper 
diaries will  cont inue. 
Rescue medication
The number of rescue medicat ion inhalat ions (puffs) an d nebulizer treatm ents taken will be 
recorded by  the subject in the paper diary  twice daily  (i.e., in the m orning and evening) 
beginning the evening of V2 unt il the morning of V14. The number of inhalat ions taken 
between the morning and evening lung funct ion assessments will be recorded in the evening. 
The number of inhalations taken between the evening and the morning will be recorded in the 
morning.
Nocturnal awakenings
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 95of 166Nocturnal  awakenings due to asthma symptoms will be recorded by the subject in the paper 
diary each m orning, beginning in the morning after V2 until the morning of V14, by 
answering a quest ion as to whether he/she woke up during the night due to asthma symptoms 
by a “yes” or “no” response. 
Maintenance medication
Maintenance medicat ion admi nistrati on will be recorded daily in the paper diary  in the 
morning, beginning in the morning after V2 until the morning of V14.
8.1.18.2 Asthma control questionnaire (ACQ -6) 
The ACQ- 6 captures asthma symptoms (night -time waking, symptoms on waking, activit y 
limit ation, shortness of breath, wheezing) and short -acting β2 -agonist use via paper subject 
report.
Quest ions are weighted equally and scored from 0 (totally controlled) to 6 (severely 
uncontrolled). The mean ACQ -6 score i s the m ean of  the responses. Mean scor es of ≤ 0.75 
indicate well -controlled asthma, scores between 0.75 and ≤1.5 indicate partly  controlled 
asthma, and a score >1.5 indicates uncontrolled asthma ( Juniper et al 2006 ). Individual 
changes of at least 0.5 are considered to be clinically meaningful, and a decrease o f at least 0.5 
is the responder definit ion for ACQ -6.
8.2 Safety assessments 
Planned time po ints for all safet y assessments are provid ed in the SoA.
8.2.1 Clinical safety laboratory assessments
See Table 7for the list of clinical safet y laboratory tests to be performed, and the SoA for the 
timing and frequency . All protocol -requi redlaboratory  assessments, as defined in the Table 7, 
must be conducted in accordance wit h the l aboratory  manual and the SoA. 
The Investigator should make an assessment of the available results with regard to clinically 
relevant abnorm alities.  The l aboratory  resul ts shoul d be si gned and dated and retained at 
center as source data for laboratory  variables.  
For informat ion on ho w AEs based on laboratory  tests shoul d be recorded and reported, see 
Secti on 8.3.7 .
The clinical chemistry , hematol ogy and urinalysis will be perfor med at a central laboratory .
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 96of 166Table 7 –Laboratory safety variables
Hematology/Hemostasis (whole blood) Clinical Chemistry (serum or plasma)
B-Hemoglobin (Hb) S-Alka line phosphatase (ALP)
B-Leukocyte count S-Alanine transaminase (A LT)
B-Leukocyte differential count (absolute count) S-Aspartate transaminase (AST)
B-Platelet count S-Bilirubin, total
B-Hematocrit S-Blood urea nitrogen
B-Mean Corpuscular Volume S-Calcium, total
B-Red blood cell (RBC) count S-Chloride
S-Creatinine
Urinalysis (dipstick)* S-Creatinine kinase (CK)
U-Blood S-CRP
U-Protein S-Gamma -glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)
U-Glucose S-Glucose
S-Phosphorus
U-Microscopy and culture as required** S-Potassium
S-Sodium
S-Total cholesterol
S-Uric acid
*The urine dipstick test is not only limited to Blood, Protein and Glucose, but also additional test analytes as defined by 
central lab.
**Urine samples will be analyzed locally with the urine dipstick test and sent to the central laboratory only for further 
microscopy and culture analysis when a positive dipstick result for any parameter is observed.
NB. In case a subject shows an AST orALT ≥3xULN together with total  bilirubin ≥2xULN 
please refer to Appendix E for further instructions.
8.2.1.1 Pregnancy Test 
The fo llowing tests are applicable to female subjects only  and will  be conducted in accordance 
with the schedule provided in sect ion 1.1.
 Serum  ß-human chorionic gonadotropin (ß -HCG) –the test will be mandatory  
at enrolment (V1) and at EOT visit, for women of child -bearing potential 
(WOCBP).
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 97of 166 FSH –the test done at enrolment (V1) only, for female subjects to confirm 
postm enopausal stat us in women <50 y ears who have been amenorrheic for 
>12 m onths.
 Urine HCG –the test will be performed at the study site for WOCBP at each 
treatm ent visi t before IP administrati on using a di pstick. Posi tive urine test 
resul t must be confi rmed wi th serum  β-HCG.
8.2.2 Weight and height 
Weight and height will be measured in accordance with the SoA. The subject’s weight will be 
recorded in kilograms, and height w ill be recorded in cent imeters. Weight and height 
measurements will be performed in light clothing and with shoes off. Body  Mass Index (BMI) 
will be automat ically calculated in the eCRF. 
8.2.3 Physical examinations
A co mplete physical examinat ion will be perfor med and include an assessment of the 
following: general appearance , respi ratory , cardi ovascular, abdom en,skin, head and neck 
(including ears, eyes, nose and throat), lymph nodes, thy roid, musculo skeletal  (including spine 
and extremit ies) and neurological systems. Bri ef physical  examinat ion will also be performed 
and include an assessment of the general appearance, abdomen, cardiovascular and respiratory  
system . For the bri ef physical  examinat ion, only, informat ion on whether the assessment was 
perform ed or not will be recorded.
Physical examinat ion (com plete and bri ef) will  be perform ed at timelines as specified in the 
SoA. Invest igators should pay speci al attenti on to clinical signs related to previous serious 
illnesses, as new or worsening abnormalit ies may qualify  as adverse events, see Secti on 8.3.7
for details.
8.2.4 Vital signs
Vital signs (i .e. pul se, blood pressure, respiration rate and body  temperature) will be obtained 
in accordance wit h SoA. 
Vital signs will  be taken pri or to bl ood drawing, IP administration, and, if possible, usual 
asthma controller medicat ion. 
Blood pressure and pulse measurements will be assessed in sitt ingposition wi th a com pletely  
autom ated device. Manual techniques will be used only  if an autom ated device is not 
available.
Blood pressure and pulse measurements should be preceded by  at least 5 minutes of rest for 
the subject in a quiet setting without dis tracti ons (e.g. televisio n, cell phones). 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 98of 166Pulse rate will be obtained before blood pressure only  if the manual measuring technique is 
used.
Respiration rate will be obtained after subject has been rest ing for at least 5 minutes, by  
counting number of brea ths (i.e., how m any times the chest rises) for one minute.
Body  temperature will be measured in degrees Celsius prior to IP administration, in 
accordance with local standards.
8.2.5 Electrocardiograms
A 12 -or 15 -lead ECG will be taken in supine position, prior to blood draw, spiro metry, and 
BD administration. 
The Investigator or authorized delegate will be responsible for the overall interpretation and 
determinat ion of clinical significance o f any potential ECG findings. In case of discrepancy 
between the Inv estigator's interpretation and that provided by the ECG machine (if 
applicable), the Invest igator's interpretation will take precedence and should be noted on the 
printout and recorded in the eCRF. A copy  of the ECG will be produced, and qualit y checked 
and kept in case of further need for re -evaluat ion.
It is highly  recommended that the same machine is used for assessment throughout the 
subject’s participat ion in the study .
ECG evaluat ion will be recorded in the eCRF.
8.2.6 Other safety assessments
8.2.6.1 Serology
Hepa titis B surface ant igen, hepat itis C antibody, HIV -1 and HIV -2 antibodies will be 
assessed at enrolment (V1) only.  All test ing for these will be performed at a central 
laboratory .
Instructi ons for sam ple collect ion, processing, storage, and shipment will be provided in a 
separate laboratory  manual provided to the si tes.
8.3 Collection of adverse events
The Investigator is responsible for ensuring that all staff invo lved in the study  are familiar 
with the content of thi s sect ion.
The definit ions of an AE or SAE can be found in Appendix A.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 99of 166AEs will be reported by  the subject (or, when appropriate, by  a caregiver, surrogate, or the 
subject's legally  authori zed representative). 
The Investigator and any designees are responsible for detecting, document ing, and recording 
events that meet the definit ion of an AE or SAE. For informat ion on how to fo llow
-up AEs 
see sect ion 8.3.3 . 
8.3.1 Method of detecting AEs and SAEs
Care will be taken not to introduce bias when detecting AEs and/or SAEs.  Open -ended and 
non-leading verbal quest ioning of the subject is the preferred method to inquir e about 
AEoccurrences.  
8.3.2 Time period and frequency for collecting AE and SAE information 
All AEs, including SAEs will be collected from t ime of signature of informed consent form 
throughout the treatment period and the fo llow-up peri ods. AEs and SAEs sho uld still be 
collected after IP discont inuat ion for subjects that prematurely  discontinue from  IP and will be 
encouraged to undergo appropriate study  visits/procedures for the full 40 -week peri od.
All SAEs will be recorded and reported to the sponsor or de signee wi thin 24 hours, as 
indicated in Appendix B. The Investi gator will submit any updated SAE data to the sponsor 
within 24 hours of it being ava ilable.
Invest igators are not obligated to actively seek AEs or SAEs in former study subjects. 
However, if the Invest igator learns o f any SAE, including a death, at any  time after a subject’s 
last vi sit and he/she considers the event to be reasonably relat ed to the study  treatm ent or 
study  participati on, the Invest igator must notify the sponsor.
The m ethod of recording, evaluat ing, and assessing causalit y of AEs and SAEs and the 
procedures for complet ing and transmitting SAE reports are provided in Appendix B. 
8.3.3 Follow- up of AEs and SAEs
After the init ial AE/SAE report, the Invest igator is required to proactively fo llow each subject 
at subsequent visits /contacts. All SAEs/non -serious AEs/AEs of special interest, AEs leading 
to prem ature discont inuat ion will be fo llowed unt il resolution, stabilizat ion, the event is 
otherwi se explained, or the subject is lost to follow -up.
Any AEs that are unresolved at th e subject’s last AE assessment or other assessment/visit as 
appropriate in the study  are f ollowed up by the Investigator for as long as medically indicated, 
but without further recording in the CRF.  AstraZeneca retains the right to request additional 
information for any  subject wi th ongoing AE(s)/SAE(s) at the end of the study , if judged 
necessary .
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 100of 1668.3.4 Adverse event data collection
The fo llowing variables will be collected for each AE;
 AE (verbat im)
 The date when the AE started and stopped
 Whether the AE is se rious or not
 Invest igator causalit y rating against the IP(s) (y es or no)
 Action taken with regard to IP(s)
 Select the appropri ate as required: AE caused subject’s withdrawal from study  (yes 
or no)
 Outcom e.
In addit ion, the fo llowing vari ables will be collected for SAEs:
 Date AE m et cri teria for seri ous AE
 Date Invest igator became aware of serious AE
 AE is seri ous due to 
 Date of hospitalization
 Date of discharge
 Probable cause of death
 Date of death
 Autopsy  performed
 Causalit y assessment in relat ion toStudy  procedure(s)
 Causalit y assessment to other medicat ion'
8.3.5 Causality collection
The Investigator will assess causal relat ionship between IP and each Adverse Event, and
answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to the question ‘Do y ou consider that there is a reasonable poss ibilit y that 
the event may have been caused by the IP?’
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 101of 166For SAEs, causal relat ionship will also be assessed for other medicat ion and study  procedures.  
Note that for SAEs that could be associated with any  study  procedure the causal relationship is 
implied as ‘yes’.
A guide to the interpretation of the causalit y quest ion is found in Appendix Bto the Clinical 
Study  Protocol .
8.3.6 Adverse events based on sig ns and symptoms
All AEs spontaneously reported by  the subject or reported in response to the open question 
from the study  site staff : Have you had any health problems since the previous visit/you 
were last asked? or revealed by observat ion will be collecte d and recorded in the CRF. When 
collect ing AEs, the recording of diagnoses is preferred (when possible) to recording a list of 
signs and symptoms. However, if a diagnosis is known and there are other signs or symptoms 
that are not generally part of the dia gnosis, the di agnosis and each sign or symptom will be 
recorded separately
8.3.7 Adverse events based on examinations and tests
The results from the CSP mandated laboratory  tests, vi tal signs and ECG will be summarized 
in the CSR. Deterioration as co mpared to ba seline in protocol -mandated laboratory  
values/vital signs/ECG should therefore only be reported as AEs if they fulfil any of the SAE 
criteria or are the reason for discontinuation of treatment with the IP.
If deteri oration in a laboratory  value/vi tal sign/ ECG is associated with clinical signs and 
symptoms, the sign or symptom will be reported as an AE and the associated laboratory  
resul t/vital sign will  be considered as addi tional inform ation. Wherever possible the reporting 
Invest igator uses the clinical, rather than the laboratory  term  (e.g. anemia versus low 
hemoglo bin value). In the absence of clinical signs or symptoms, clinically relevant 
deteri orations in non -mandated parameters should be reported as AE(s).
Any new or aggravated clinically relevant ab normal  medical finding at a physical examinat ion 
as com pared wi th the baseline assessment will be reported as an AE. 
When co llecting AEs, the recording of diagnoses is preferred, when possible, to recording a 
list of signs and symptoms. Asthma symptoms or signs, such as wheeze, cough, chest 
tightness, dy spnea, breathlessness and phlegm, will be recorded as AEs only when:
The sign or symptom is serious according to definitions, see Appendix B
The patient discont inues IP due to the sign or symptom
The sign or symptom is new to the patient or not consistent with the patient’s pre -
exist ing asthma history  (defined as within 1 y ear of V1) as j udged by the Invest igator.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 102of 166Asthma exacerbation should be recorded as an AE or SAE only if it fulfils any o f the above 
criteria.
8.3.8 Adverse events of special interest
An adverse event of special interest (AESI) is an event of scient ific and medical interest 
towards improvi ng the understanding o f the IP. An AESI may be serious or non -serious. For 
this study , AESIs include:
 Anaphylactic reactions 
 Immune com plex disease (Ty pe III hy persensi tivity reacti ons)
 Malignancy
 Helmint h infect ions 
 Severe infect ions which are defined as:
 SAEs or 
 Requi ring treatm ent wi th antiviral medicat ions, intravenous ant ibiotics or 
medicat ions for helmint h parasit ic infect ion or
 Requi ring a perm anent discont inuat ion of study  drug
 Inject ion site reactions 
 Opportuni stic infect ions
 Guillain Barre Sy ndrome
8.3.9 Hy’s law
Cases where a subject shows elevat ion in liver bio chemistry  may require further evaluat ion 
and occurrences o f AST or ALT ≥ 3xULN together with total bilirubin ≥ 2xULN may need to 
be reported as SAEs.  Please refer to Appendix Efor further instruction on cases of increases 
in liver bio chemistry  and evaluat ion of Hy’s Law.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 103of 1668.4 Safety reporting and medical management
8.4.1 Reporting of serious adverse events
All SAEs must be reported, whether or not considered causally related to the IP, or to the 
study  procedure(s). All SAEs will be recorded in the CRF.
If any SAE occurs in the course of the study, then Invest igators or other site personnel mus t 
inform  the appropri ate AstraZeneca representatives within one day i.e., immediately but no 
later than 24 hours of when he or she becom es aware of i t.
The designated AstraZeneca representative will work with the Invest igator to ensure that all 
the necessa ry information is provi ded to the AstraZeneca Pat ient Safet y data entry  site within 
1calendar day of initial receipt for fatal and life -threatening events and within 5 calendar
days of initial receipt for all other SAEs.
For fatal  or life -threatening adverse events where important or relevant informat ion is missing, 
active fo llow-up will be undertaken immediately . Investi gators or other si te personnel will 
inform  AstraZeneca representatives o f any fo llow-up informat ion on a previously reported 
SAE wi thin one calendar day  i.e., immediately but no later than 24 hours of when he or she 
beco mes aware of it .
Once the Invest igators or other site personnel indicate an AE is serious in the WBDC system, 
an autom ated email alert is sent to the designated AstraZen eca representative(s).
If the WBDC system is not available, then the Investigator or other study  site staff must report 
a SAE to the appropriate AstraZeneca representative(s) by telephone.
The AstraZeneca representative(s) will advise the Investigator/stud y site staff how to proceed.  
The reference document for definit ion of expectedness/listedness is the Investigator’s 
Brochure for the AstraZeneca IP.
For further guidance on the definit ion of a SAE, see Appendix B.
8.4.2 Pregnancy
All pregnancies and outcomes of pregnancy should be reported to AstraZeneca except if the 
pregnancy is discovered before the study  subject has received any study  drug. If a pre gnancy 
is reported, the Invest igator should inform the sponsor within 24 hours of learning of the 
pregnancy. Any cases of pregnancy during the study  period or f ollow up will be recorded in 
the specific CRF module.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 104of 166Abnorm al pregnancy outcom es (e.g. spontane ous aborti on, fetal  death, stillbirth, congenital 
anomalies, ectopi c pregnancy ) are considered SAEs.
8.4.2.1 Maternal exposure
If a subject beco mes pregnant during the course of the study, IP should be discont inued 
immediately .
Pregnancy itself is not regarded as an adverse event unless there is a suspicio n that the IP 
under study  may have interfered with the effect iveness of a contraceptive medication.  
Congenital abnormalit ies/birth defects and spontaneous miscarriages should be reported and 
handled as SAEs.  Ele ctive abortions without complicat ions should not be handled as AEs.  
The outcome o f all pregnancies (spontaneous miscarriage, elect ive terminat ion, ectopic 
pregnancy, normal birth or congenital abnormalit y) should be fo llowed up and docum ented 
even if the subject was di scont inued fro m the study.
If any pregnancy  occurs in the course of the study , then the Invest igator or other site personnel 
must inform the appropriate AstraZeneca representatives within 1 day i.e., immediately but no 
later than 24 hours of when he or she beco mes aware of it .
The designated AstraZeneca representative works with the Invest igator to ensure that all 
relevant informat ion is provided to the AstraZeneca Patient Safet y data entry  site wi thin 1 or 5 
calendar day s for SAEs (see Secti on 8.4.1 ) and within 30 days for all other pregnancies.
The same timelines apply when outcome informat ion is available.
The PREGREP module in the CRF is used to report the pregnancy and the paper -based 
pregnancy outcome report is used to report the outcome of the pregnancy.
8.4.2.2 Paternal exposure 
Pregnancy of the subject’s partners will not be considered an AE.  However, the outcome of 
all pregnancies ( spontaneous miscarriage, elective termination, ectopic pregnancy, normal 
birth, or congenital abnormalit y) shoul d be f ollowed up and docum ented for concept ions 
occurring from the date of the first administration of IP until 16 weeks (5 half -lives) after th e 
last administration of IP.
8.4.3 Overdose
A dose in excess of 280 mg administered within a 2- week period is considered an overdose.
There i s currently no specific treatment in the event of overdose of IP and possible symptoms 
of an overdose are not established .
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 105of 166An overdose with associated AEs is recorded as the AE diagnosis/symptoms on the relevant 
AE m odules in the CRF and on the Overdose CRF module.
An overdose without associated symptoms is only reported on the Overdose CRF module.
If an overdose on an Astra Zeneca study  drug occurs in the course of the study , then the 
Invest igator or other site personnel inform appropriate AstraZeneca representatives 
immediately ,or no later than 24 hours of when he or she beco mes aware of it.
The designated AstraZeneca repre sentative works with the Invest igator to ensure that all 
relevant informat ion is provided to the AstraZeneca Patient Safet y data entry  site.
For overdoses associated with a SAE, the standard reporting t imelines apply, see Sect ion 
8.3.2 .  For other overdoses, reporting must occur within 30 days.
8.4.4 Medication error
If a medicat ion error occurs during the course of the study, then the Invest igator or other site 
personnel informs the appropriate AstraZeneca representatives within 1 day i.e., immediately 
but no later than 24 hours of when he or she becomes aware of it.
The designated AstraZeneca representative works with the Invest igator to ensure that all 
relevant informat ion is completed wi thin 1 (Init ial Fatal /Life -Threatening or follow -up 
Fatal /Life -Threatening) or 5 (other serious init ial and fo llow-up) cal endar day s if there is an 
SAE associated with the medicat ion error (see Sectio n 8.3.2 ) and within 30 days for all other 
medicat ion errors.
The definit ion of a Medicat ion Error can be found in Appendix B 8.
8.4.5 Management of IP
-related toxicities 
Appropriate drugs, such as epinephrine, H1 and H2 antihistami nes, and corti costeroi ds, as 
well as medical equipment to treat acute anaphylactic reactions, must be immediately 
available when IP is being administered.  Study  site personnel must be trained to recognize 
and treat anaphylaxis ( Lieberm an et al  2010 ). Details on anaphylaxis management are 
provi ded in Appendix G.
Anaphylaxis will be defined as a serious reaction that is rapid in onset and may cause death 
(Sampson et al  2006 ). Anaphylaxis t ypically manifests as 1 of 3 clinical scenarios:
1. The acute onset of a reaction (minutes to hours) with invo lvement of the skin, 
mucosal t issue or both and at least one of the fo llowing: a) respiratory  com promise; 
or b) reduced blood pressure or symptoms of end- organ dysfunction 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 106of 1662. Two or more of the fo llowing that occur rapidly  after exposure: involvement of the 
skin/mucosal t issue, respiratory  com promise, reduced blood pressure or associated 
symptoms and/or persistent gastrointest inal symptom s
3. Reduced blood pre ssure after exposure.
Subjects will have had a pre -assessment (i.e., vital signs and lung funct ion) pri or to IP 
administration. At Visits 3 and 5, subjects should be observed for a minimum o f 2 hours after 
IP administration for the appearance o f any acute drug reactions. For the remaining visit s 
involving IP administration, subjects will be observed for a minimum o f 1 hour after IP 
administration for any  such react ion.
If an anaphylact ic react ion occurs, a blood sample will be drawn fro m the subject as soo n as 
possible after the event, at 60 minutes ± 30 minutes after the event, and at discharge for 
analysis of serum try ptase. The sample will be tested at the local lab or central lab where 
applicable.
8.4.6 Data safety monitoring board
The DSMB is an external independent expert advisory  group commissio ned and charged with 
the responsibilit y of evaluat ing cumulat ive safet y data at regular intervals and making 
appropriate recommendat ions based on the available data. The DSMB will funct ion 
independent ly of all oth er individuals associated wit h the conduct of the study , including the 
study  sponsor, AstraZeneca, and operate in accordance with a DSMB Charter.
The DSMB will have access to the individual treatment codes and will be able to merge these 
with the collect ed study  data while the study  is ongoing if and as required. The personnel 
involved in the clinical study  at AstraZeneca will remain blinded to these analyses and will 
have no knowledge of the results presented to the DSMB. 
8.5 Pharmacokinetics
8.5.1 Collection of samples and drug concentration
Serum  and BAL samples for determinat ion of tezepelumab will be co llected pre -dose 
according to the SoA (Secti on 1.1, Table 1)
Samples will  be collected, l abeled, stored, and shipped as detailed in the Laboratory  Manual. 
Samples for determination of tezepelumab concentration in serum will be analyzed by a 
designated third party  on behalf o f AstraZeneca using a validated bioanalyt ical method. 
Samples for determination of tezepelumab concentration in BAL will be analyzed by a 
designated third party  on behalf o f AstraZeneca using a qualified bioanalyt ical method. 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 107of 166Samples for determination of urea will be analyzed by  a designated thi rd party  on behalf o f 
AstraZeneca using qualified bioanalyt ical methods. Urea concentration will be measured in 
blood and BAL samples to correct for the dilut ion factor of the BAL samples. Details of the 
analyt ical method used will be described in a bio analytical report.
Full details o f the analy tical method used will be described in a separate Bioanaly tical 
Validat ion Report. 
8.5.2 Collection of samples to measure the presence of ADAs
The presence of ADA will be assessed in serum samples according to the SoA (secti on 1.1).
Samples will  be measured for the presence of ADAs for tezepelumab using validated assays. 
Tiered analysis will be performed to include screening, confirmatory , and ti ter assay  
components, and posi tive-negative cut points previously statistically  determined from  drug -
naïve validat ion samples will be emplo yed. Sam ples wi th confirmed posi tive ADAs will be 
archived for possible testing for neutralizing ant ibodies (nAb).
ADA sample should be collected in case of any  suspected immunol ogically -related AEs.
8.5.3 Storage and destruction of pharmacok inetic/ADA samples
The PK and ADA samples will be retained for future use at AstraZeneca or designee for a 
maximum o f 15 years fo llowing Last Subj ect Last Vi sit (LSLV).
Pharmacokinet ic and ADA samples may be disposed of or destroyed and anonymized by 
pooli ng.  Addi tional analyses may  be conducted on the anonymized, pooled pharmacokinet ic 
samples to further evaluate and validate the analyt ical method.  Any results fro m such 
analyses may be reported separately from the CSR.
8.6 Pharmacodynamics
Pharmacodynamic parameters will be evaluated using bio markers (see section 8.8).
8.7 Genetics
8.7.1 Optional exploratory genetic sample
The blood sample for DNA iso lation will  be collected from  subjects who have consented to 
participate in the genet ic analysis co mponent of the study. Participation is optional. Patients 
who do not wish to participate in the genetic research may still participate in the study .
In the event of DNA extraction failure, a replacement genet ic blood sample may be requested 
from the subject. Si gned informed consent will be required to obtain a replacement sample 
unless it was included in the original consent.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Teze pelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 108of 166See Appendix Dfor Inform ation regarding genet ic research. Details on processes for 
collect ion and shipment and destruction of these samples can be found in Appendix Dor in 
the separate Laboratory  Manual provi ded to the si tes.
The results of the analyses wil l be reported separately fro m the CSR in a scientific report or 
publicat ion.
8.7.2 Storage and destruction of genetic samples
The processes adopted for the coding and storage of samples for genet ic analysis are 
important to maintain subject confidentialit y. Sampl es may be stored for a maximum of 15 
years or as per local regulat ions from the date of the LSLV, after which they  will be 
destroy ed. DNA is a finite resource that may be used up during analyses. The results of any 
further analyses will be reported ei ther in the CSR itself or as an addendum, or separately in a 
scientific report or publicat ion.
No personal details identifying the individual will be available to AstraZeneca or designated 
organi zations working wit h the DNA.
8.8 Biomarkers
Mandatory  collect ionof samples for biomarker research is also part of this study. The patient's 
consent to the use of the donated bio logical samples is mandatory . 
Biological samples will be collected for exploratory  analyses to invest igate the effect of 
tezepel umab on bio markers of inflammat ion, asthma, pharmaco logy of tezepl eumab and for 
potenti al predictors of response. 
The fo llowing samples for bio marker research are required and will be co llected fro m all 
subjects in this study  as specified in the SoA: Blood, pl asma, serum , BAL, bronchial 
brushings, bronchoscopic biopsy  and urine samples will be collected according to the SoA in 
order to evaluate changes in bio markers related to asthma, inflammat ion and the TSLP 
pathway . Biomarkers that m ay be analyzed include, but are not limited to, cy tokines, 
chemokines and i nflammatory  mediators associated with asthma and the TSLP pathway .
Instructi ons for sam ple collect ion, processing, storage, and shipment can be found in a 
separate laboratory  manual provi ded to the centers. 
Selected resul ts of this biomarker research may be reported in the CSR (as per section 8.1.6). 
Biomarkers not reported in the CSR may be reported in an addendum, or separately  in a 
scientific report or publicat ion.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 109of 1668.8.1 Storage, re -use and destruction of biomarker samples
AstraZeneca or a designee will reta in bio marker samples for invest igation of research on 
asthma, the pharmaco logy of tezepel umab, and potent ial predi ctors of response for a 
maximum o f 15 years fro m the date of the LSLV, after which they  will be destroyed.
The results of this bio marker resea rch m ay be pooled wi th biomarker data from  other studi es 
with the study  drug to generate hy potheses to be tested in future research. Any  residual  
samples may  be retained for up to 15 years and used for the purpose of invest igating asthma, 
the pharmaco logy of tezepel umab, predictors of response or assay  validati on work. If a subject 
does not allow samples to be used for future bio marker research they  may cont inue wit h their 
samples being used for the main study .
8.8.2 Serum IgE
The l evels o f serum  IgE m ay be teste d by a central laboratory  in accordance with the SoA.  
All total serum IgE results will be redacted from the laboratory  reports except for Visit 3. 
Instructi ons for sam ple collect ion, processing, storage and shipment will be provided in a 
separate laboratory  manual.
8.8.3 Transcriptomics
RNA will be iso lated from bronchial brushings. Sample co llection will be in accordance wit h 
SoA. In addit ion, other samples including who le blood sam ples f or RNA will be co llected in 
PAX gene blood RNA tubes for ribonucleic acid (RNA), BAL cells and bronchial biopsies 
will be co llected, s tored and may be processed for RNA transcriptomics if sufficient material 
is co llected. RNA may be used in the analyses of host gene expressio n and microbio me 
research using quant itative methods that may include but are not be limited to RNA 
microarrays, R NA Seq and quant itative reverse -transcri ptase polymerase chain react ion 
techno logies and stored for future analyses. Instruction for sample collection, processing, 
storage and shipment will be provided in a separate laboratory  manual . The epi thelial three 
gene mean signature (POSTN, CLCA1, SERPINB2) will be reported in the CSR. Any 
additional transcri ptomics data from  bronchoscopic brushings will be reported separately fro m 
the CSR in an addendum or in a scient ific report or publication. Any exploratory 
transcriptomics analyses on BAL cells, who le blood and biopsy  tissue, will be reported 
separately  from the CSR in an addendum or in a scient ific report or publicat ion
8.8.4 Storage, re -use and destruction of transcriptomics samples
Transcriptomics samples are considered bio marker sam ples so all storage, re -use and 
destruction instructions defined in section 8.8.1 also applies to any samples c ollected for 
transcri ptomics.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 110of 1668.9 Healthcare Resource Utilization and Health Economics
Healthcare resource utilization and healt h econo mics data, associated with medical 
encounters, will be co llected in the CRF by the Investigator and study- site personnel  for all 
subjects throughout the study . At randomizat ion, Healthcare Resource Utilization (HRU) 
inform ation will be co llected with a ‘one year’ recall period. All the subsequent visits will 
collect HRU informat ion with a recall period of ‘since the last scheduled visit’. The data may  
be used as input to health econo mic analysis for example cost utilit y analysis or cost 
effect iveness analysis. Protocol -mandated procedures, tests, and encounters are excluded. Any 
resul ts from such analyses may  be reported separately from the CSR.
9. STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS
Statistical hypotheses: The null hypothesis H0: The ratio (tezepelumab/placebo) of the 
change, expressed as a ratio, from baseline to EOT for each primary and secondary endpo int 
between tezepelumab and placebo equa ls 1 and will be tested versus the alternat ive hypothesis 
H1: The ratio (tezepelumab/placebo) of the change, expressed as a ratio, from baseline to EOT 
for each primary and secondary  endpoint between tezepelumab and placebo is not equal to 1. 
Improvem ent u nder treatment is characterized by a reduction in the number of inflammatory  
cells, so ratios of tezepelumab/placebo less than 1 correspond to beneficial treatment effect of 
tezepel umab over placebo.  
9.1 Sample size determination 
The study  is sized to exp lore reducti ons in airway submucosal inflammat ion, from  baseline to 
EOT for tezepelumab, versus placebo in the overall study  popul ation and across the T2 
continuum. 
The sample size chosen is based on the change from baseline to EOT in number of airway 
submucosal eosinophils and in number of airway submucosal neutrophils (ratio of 
tezepel umab to placebo). 
It is estimated that 50 subjects in each treatment arm will pr ovide (using a 2 -sided test wi th a 
nominal 10% significance level for each endpo int); 
 80% power to observe a reduction in number of airway submucosal eosinophils if 
the true effect is a 2.7 -fold difference versus placebo (assuming standard deviation 
on log scale of 1.87 and 2.06 for placebo and tezepelumab respect ively based on 
tralokinumab study  D2210C00014). 
 >90% power to observe a reduction in number of airway submucosal neutrophils if 
the true effect is a 2.7 -fold difference versus placebo (assuming s tandard deviation 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 111of 166on log scale of 0.71 and 0.97 for placebo and tezepelumab respect ively based on 
tralokinumab study  D2210C00014)
This sample size allows exploratory  assessment of the effect of tezepelumab on airway  
inflammat ion within quart iles across the T2 continuum and within other subgroups of interest. 
It is assumed that a small proportion of subjects will not have an evaluable primary  endpoint 
value due to failed biopsies. To accoun t for thi s and subject dropouts, 55 subjects will be 
rando mized in ea ch treatm ent arm . A2.7-fold change has been chosen because it is wit hin the 
range of effect sizes observed with Nucala ( Haldar et al  2009) and Fasenra ( Lavio lette et al 
2013)
9.2 Populations for analyses
For purposes of analysis, the following popul ations are defined: 
Table 8
–Population descriptions
Population Description
Enrolled All subjects who sign the ICF
Randomized All subjects rando mized to study treatment 
(irrespect ive of or whether treatment is 
subsequent ly taken)
Full analysis set All subjects rando mized to study treatment who 
received at least one dose of IP, irrespect ive of 
their protocol  adherence and cont inued 
participat ion in the study
Evaluable analysis set All subjects rando mized to study treatment who 
completed at l east 20 weeks of study  treatm ent 
and had an EOT visit date not greater than 8 
weeks after date of last dose of IP
Safety analysis set All subjects who received at least one dose of IP
PK analysis set All subjects in th e full analysis set who received 
tezepel umab and fro m whom  PK bl ood and PK 
BAL samples are assumed not to be affected by  
factors such as
protocol  deviat ions (e.g. disallowed medicat ion or 
incorrect study  medicat ion received).
Efficacy analyses will be based on the evaluable analysis set unless otherwise stated, with 
patients cl assified by their randomized treatment, in line wit h the Intention to Treat (ITT) 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 112of 166principle. Demographic and baseline characteristics will be presented u sing both the evaluable 
analysis set and full analysis set.  
Safety presentati ons and ant i-drug ant ibodies (ADA) presentations will be based on the safet y
analysis set, with subjects assigned according to the treatment they  received. A subject who 
has on one or several occasions received active treatment will be classified as act ive. Any 
important deviat ions from the rando mized treatment assignment, and any subjects that have 
received IP without being rando mized, will be listed and considered when interpre ting the 
safet y data.
All PK summaries will be based on the PK analysis set.
9.3 Outcome measures for analyses
9.3.1 Definition of baseline and subject baseline analyses
In general, the last measurement on or prior to the date of rando mizat ion will serve as the 
baseline measurement. If there is no value on or prior to the date of rando mizat ion, then the 
baseline value will not be imputed and will be set to missing. The baseline for outcome 
variables based on efficacy  biomarkers is defined as value recorded at the V3 (a or b); if a 
measurement is not scheduled to be measured at V3 or if the V3 measurement is missing, the 
last non -missing value before V3 will be used as baseline instead.
The baseline for ACQ -6 will  be captured using paper questionnaire at Visit 3b. 
Forlaboratory  data and physical examinat ion, baseline will be defined as the latest non -
missing assessment prior to first dose (V3b).
Absolute change from baseline outcome variables is co mputed as (post -randomizat ion value –
baseline value).
Percent change fr om baseline is computed as 100 x 1((post -randomizat ion value –baseline 
value) / baseline value) %. If either the post -randomizat ion value or the baseline value is 
missing, then the abso lute or percent change fro m baseline value will also be set to missing .
The rati o post -randomizat ion value / baseline value will also be co mputed when stated below.
9.3.2 Prim ary outcome measure
The change, expressed as a ratio, in number of airway  inflammatory  cells per mm2determined 
by microscopi c evaluat ion of bronchoscopic biopsies from baseline (V3b) to EOT/V3b will be 
compared between treatments. This will be done separately for eosinophils, neutrophils, T 
cells, and mast cells. 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 115of 1669.3.4.6
 
 
 
 
CCI
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 117of 166 AEs occurring during run -in (onset date ≥ V1 and before the first dose of study  
treatm ent)
 AEs occurring during treatment (onset date ≥ the first day  of study  treatm ent and ≤ 
the last day  of study  treatm ent + 4 weeks)
 AEs occurring during fo llow-up (onset date > the last day  of study  treatment + 4 
weeks and ≤ the l ast d ay of study  treatm ent + 16 weeks)
The timing of AEs will be assigned to the period in which they  first occurred. If an AE has a 
missing onset date, then unless the stop date of the AE indicates otherwise, this will be 
considered an on -treatm ent event. Similarly, if an AE has a partial onset date, then unless the 
partial onset date or the stop date indicates otherwise, this will be considered an on -treatment 
AE.
9.3.5.2 Other significant adverse events
During the evaluat ion of the AE data, an AstraZeneca medically qualified expert will review 
the list of AEs that were not reported as SAEs or discontinuat ions due to AEs.
Based on the expert’s judgment, significant AEs of particular clinical importance may , after 
consultation wit h the Gl obal Patient Safety  Physicia n, be considered other significant AEs 
(OSAEs) and reported as such in the CSR.
Examples of these are marked hematological and other laboratory  abnorm alities, and certain 
events that led to intervent ion (other than those already  classified as serious), dos e reduction, 
or significant addit ional treatment.
9.3.5.3 Laboratory variables
Blood and urine samples for determinat ion of clinical chemistry , hematol ogy and urinalysis 
param eters will  be taken at the times detailed in the CSP and will be assessed in a central 
laboratory . The parameters outlined in Table 7in Section 8.2.1 , will be co llected. Laboratory 
data will be reported in SI units.
Changes in hematology  and clinical chemistry  variables between baseline and each 
subsequent on treatment assessment will be calculated as described in Section 9.3.1 . There 
will be no imputation for missing values.
Absolute values will be compared to the relevant reference range and classified as low (below 
range), normal (within r ange or on limit s) or hi gh (above range). The AstraZeneca extended 
reference ranges will be used for laboratory  variables (where they  exist). All  values (absol ute 
and change) falling outside the reference ranges will be flagged.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 118of 166Urinalysis data will be cat egori zed as negat ive (0), posit ive (+), or strongly posit ive (++, +++, 
or >+++) at each time -point.
For the purposes of hematology , clinical chemistry and urinalysis shift tables, baseline will be 
defined as the latest non -missing assessment prior to first dose, and on -treatm ent will be 
defined as the latest non -missing assessment whilst the subject is ongo ing on treatment.
For the liver funct ion tests: AST, ALT, ALP, GGT and total bilirubin, the mult iple of the 
AstraZeneca ULN (not extended) range will be calcul ated for each data point.
Multiple = Value / ULN
i.e. if the ALT value was 72 IU/L (ULN 36) then the mult iple woul d be 2.
Subjects who meet any  of the f ollowing cri teria at any point duri ng the study  will be flagged:
 AST ≥ 3x ULN
 ALT ≥ 3x ULN
 TBL ≥ 2xULN
9.3.5.4 ECGs
Twelve -lead ECG measurements will be recorded in accordance wit h the protocol, with the 
baseline visit being defined as V1.
The outcome o f the overall evaluat ion is to be recorded as normal/abnormal in the eCRF, with 
any abnormalit ies being recor ded as not clinically significant or clinically significant.
9.3.5.5 Physical Examination
Com plete and bri ef physical examinat ions will be performed at time po ints specified in 
Table 1.
What i s included in the assessment will be dependent on whether the examinat ion is co mplete 
or bri ef, as described in Sect ion 8.2.3 . For the brief physical examinat ion, only  information on 
whether the assessment was performed or not will be recorded.
Each component of the complete physical examination at baseline visit (i .e., V3a) will be 
recorded as normal or abnormal. Each co mponent of the physical examinat ions at fo llow-up 
will be recorded as normal, same as baseline, or new/aggravated.
Any new finding(s), or aggravated exist ing finding(s), judged as clinically signific ant by  the 
Invest igator, will be reported as an AE.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 119of 1669.3.5.6 Vital signs
Pre-dose vital signs (pulse, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, respirat ion rate 
and body  temperature) will be obtained in accordance wit h the schedule provided in Table 1.
Changes in vital sign variables between baseline and each subsequent scheduled assessment 
will be calculated as described in 9.3.1 . There will be no imputation for missing values.
Absolute values will be compared to the relevant reference range and classified as low (belo w 
range), normal (within range or on limit s) or hi gh (above range). All values (abso lute and 
change) falling outside the reference ranges will be flagged.
BMI will be calculated from the height (in meters) and weight (in kilograms) as BMI = kg/m2
9.4 Statistic al analyses
Analyses will be performed by AstraZeneca or its representatives. A comprehensive 
statist ical analysis plan (SAP) will be developed and finalized before database lock and will 
describe the subject populat ions to be included in the analyses and procedures for accounting 
for missing, unused, and spurious data. This sect ion is a summary of the planned statist ical 
analyses o f the primary  and secondary  endpoints. Any deviat ions from this plan will be 
reported in the clinical study  report.
All person nel involved wit h the analysis o f the study  will remain blinded unt il database lock 
and protocol vio lators ident ified.
EOT assessments done at either week 28 or later will be discussed in the Statist ical Analysis 
Plan (SAP).
9.4.1 Efficacy analyses
Efficacy analyses will be based on the evaluable analysis set, and subjects will be classified 
according to their rando mized treatment.
The analysis of study  endpoints will include all data captured during the double -blind 
treatm ent peri od. This includes data rega rdless of whether study  treatm ent was prem aturely 
discontinued or delayed, and/or irrespect ive of protocol adherence, unless the subject 
withdraws consent to study  parti cipat ion. 
Summary  data will be presented in tabular format by  treatm ent. Categori cal data will  be 
summarized by  the number and percentage of subjects in each category . Continuous variables 
for param etric data will be summarized by  descri ptive stati stics including N, mean, standard 
deviat ion (SD), geometric mean, SD of log values, median, an d range. All data will be listed 
and data list ings will be sorted by  treatm ent and subject number.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 120of 166The primary  and secondary  variables will be analyzed using geo metric m eans. Geom etric 
mean is often used to evaluate data covering several orders of magnitud e, and for evaluat ing 
ratios, percentages, or other data sets bounded by  zero. A geom etric mean, unlike an 
arithmetic m ean, tends to dam pen the effect of very  high values, which might bias the mean if 
an arithmet ic mean was calculated. The geometric mean i s also a l og-transformat ion of data to 
enable meaningful statist ical evaluat ions; it accounts for some of the expected skewness in the 
data, but with the possibilit y to use a param etric analysis wit h a p -value direct ly linked to the 
confidence interval for the treatment effect. Both the difference in number of cells and the 
ratio will  be reported, but the statist ical analysis will only be based on the ratio. 
Nonparam etric analyses will be applied as sensit ivity analyses.
All hypothesis testing will be repor ted using 2- sided tests wi th a no minal 10% significance 
level and 90% confidence intervals (CIs). For the primary  endpoints only , 2-sided 95% CIs 
will also be reported. The direction o f interest for each o f the primary  endpoints is that the 
ratio tezepel umab/placebo is lower than 1. Nominal p -values will be reported for primary  and 
secondary  variables i .e., no adj ustment of multiplicity will be perform ed. P- values will be 
rounded to 3 decimal places.
9.4.2 Analysis of the primary variable(s)
The primary  efficacy  objective will be evaluated through statist ical test ing of the within 
subject change from baseline to (EOT) , expressed as a ratio, in number of airway submucosal 
inflammatory  cells (separately  eosinophils, neutrophils, T cells, and Mast cells). 
The primar y variable of within subject change from baseline to EOT (expressed as a ratio) in 
numbers of each o f the airway  subm ucosal  inflammatory  cells will be analyzed using an 
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) including at least screening blood eosinophil strata 
(screening blood eosinophil count <150 cells/µL, 150 - <300 cells/µL, and ≥ 300 cells/µL at 
Visit 1), baseline value, and treatment as covariates. The analysis will be performed by  using 
log-transform ed data and estimated geometric means and the ratio of geo metric means wi th 
both 95% and 90% two -sided confidence intervals will be presented.
If the change fro m baseline for a subject, expressed as a ratio, is zero, the value will be 
replaced by  half the smallest observed value among the subjects with non -zero v alues, before 
doing the logarithmic transformat ion.  If the baseline value for a subject is zero, the baseline 
value will be replaced by half the smallest observed value among subjects with non -zero 
values, before calculat ing the change from baseline.  If both baseline and on -treatm ent for a 
subject is zero, the value for the ratio is defined to be 1.  
Available values at both baseline and (EOT) are required for a subject to be included in the 
analysis and it is unlikely that a subject with a missing basel ine value will undergo a second 
biopsy.  
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 121of 1669.4.3 Analysis of the secondary variable(s)
The secondary  variables of wi thin subject change, expressed as a ratio, from baseline up to 
EOT in RBM thickness and % airway epit helial int egrity will be analysed using the sa me 
ANCOVA model described for the primary  variable. The secondary  analysis o f inflammatory 
cells across the spectrum o f T2 status will be assessed by using the same ANCOVA model 
described for the primary  variable wi th the addi tion of  elements in the ANCOVA model for 
T2 quartile (categorical) and interact ions between T2 quartile and treatment as well as visual 
data di splays. 
The analyses of inflammatory  cells will  be performed by  using l og-transform ed data.  The 
scale (i .e. rati o, percent change, or absolut e change) and possible log transformat ion for the 
other secondary  endpoints will be determined using blinded data prior to database lock.   
9.4.4 Supportive analysis
For the primary  and secondary  variables, al ternative transformat ions or non -param etric 
analysis methods may be applied as supportive analyses if substant ial deviat ions from the 
param etric assumpt ions are observed.  This will be assessed and documented prior to 
unblinding.  
For the primary  variables, the analysis may  be repeated using the full analy sis set, hence 
including assessments in subjects who complete at least 16 weeks of study  treatm entand had 
an EOT visit date not greater than 12 weeks after date of last dose of IP as a supportive 
analysis. 
It is likely  that som e biopsy specimens will not be evaluable. Also, due to the invasive 
procedures performed, it is likely that some subjects will wit hdraw fro m the study . We cannot 
rule out that there is a relat ionship between unobserved values and the likelihood of data being 
missing and therefore th e effect of missing data may be assessed using mult iple imputations 
and a range o f assumpt ions for the missing data.
Addit ional analyses assessing the impact of COVID- 19 may be incl uded in the SAP.
Full details o f the supportive analyses will be pre -specified in SAP and documented prior to 
database lock of the study . 
9.4.5 Exploratory analysis
Exploratory  variables will be summarized using descript ive statist ics and graphical displays. 
How changes in bio markers correl ate wi th changes in airway  inflammat ion and remodeling 
will be explored graphically.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 122of 1669.4.6 Safety analyses
Safety analyses will be based on the Safet y Analysis Set, and subjects will be classified 
according to the treatment they  received. A subject who has on one or several occasions 
received act ive treatment will be classified as active.
9.4.7 Other analyses 
PK, immunogenicit y, pharm acodynamic analyses will be described in the statistical analysis 
plan finalized before database lock. Details o f the bio marker analyses will be described in the 
exploratory  analyses plan, which will be finalized before the database lock. The results will be 
reported outside the CSR.
Three gene mean fro m epithelial brushings transcriptomics will be used to determine T2 
activi ty. Analysis for any other transcriptomic data, if generated, will be described in the 
exploratory  analysis plan (EAP), which will be finalized before the database lock. The results 
from the EAP will be reported outside the CSR.
9.5 Interim analyses
No interim analyses are pl anned in this trial.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 123of 16610. REFERENCES
Allakhverdi et al 2007
Allakhverdi Z, Comeau MR, Jessup HK, Yoon BR, Brewer A, Chartier S, Paquette N, Ziegler 
SF, Sarfat i M, Del espesse G. Thymic stromal lymphopoiet in is released by human epithelial 
cells i n response to microbes, trauma, or inflammation and potently  activates m ast cells. J Exp 
Med. 2007 Feb 19;204(2):253 -8. Epub 2007 Jan 22. PubMed PMID: 17242164; PubMed 
Central  PMCID: PMC2118732.
Alving et al 2017
Alving K, Anolik R, Crater G, LaForce C F, Rickard K. Validat ion of a New Portable Exhaled 
Nitric Oxide Analyzer, NIOX VERO®: Randomized Studies in Asthma. Pulm Ther. 2017 
Jun;3(1):207- 218. 
Antonicelli et al 2004
Antoni celli L, Bucca C, Neri  M, De Benedetto F, Sabbatani P, Bonifazi F, et al. Asthma 
severit y and medical resource utilizat ion. Eur Respir J. 2004 May ;23(5):723- 9. 
ATS Guideline 1999
American Thoracic Societ y (ATS) -Guidelines for Methacho line and Exercise Challenge 
Testing -1999. Available fro m: 
http://www.thoracic.org/statements/resources/pfet/methacho line1 -21.pdf .
Barnes and Kuitert 1996
Barnes NC, Kuitert LM. Risk of severe life -threatening asthma. Thorax. 1996
Nov;51(11):1073.
Brightling et al 2008
Brightling C, Berry M, Amrani Y. Targeting TNF -a: A novel therapeut ic approach for asthma. 
J Allergy  Clin Immunol . 2008 Jan;121(1):5 -10. 
Bhakta et al 2013 
Bhakta NR, Solberg OD, Nguy en CP, Nguy en CN, Arron JR, Fahy JV, Woodruff PG. A 
qPCR -based metric of Th2 airway inflammat ion in asthma. Clin Transl Allergy. 2013 Jul 
17;3(1):24. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2017
Centers for Disease Control and Prevent ion. Asthma’s impact on the nation. Available fro m
[URL]: https://www.cdc.gov/asthma/impacts_nat ion/asthmafactsheet.pdf . Accessed 19 May
2017.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00 013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 124of 166Choy et al 2011 
Choy DF, Modrek B, Abbas AR, Kummerfeld S, Clark HF, Wu LC, Fedorowicz G,
Modrusan Z, Fahy  JV, Wo odruff PG, Arron JR. Gene expression patterns of Th2 
inflammat ion and intercellular co mmu nicat ion in asthmat ic airways. J Immuno l. 2011 
February  1; 186(3): 1861 –1869
CINQAIR US PI 2016
CINQAIR (reslizumab). Prescribing informat ion. Teva Respiratory  LLC, F razer, PA, USA; 
2016. Available at: http://www.cinqair.co m/pdf/PrescribingInformat ion.pdf
Cook et al 2012
Cook EB, Stahl JL, Schwantes EA, Fox KE, Mathur SK. IL -3 and TNFα increase Thymic 
Strom al Lymphopoi etin Receptor (TSLPR) expression on eosinophils and enhance TSLP -
stimulated degranulat ion. Clin Mo l Allergy . 2012 Jul  28;10(1):8. doi : 10.1186/1476 -7961-10-
8. PubMed PMID: 22838633; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3418208.
Corren et al 20 17
Tezepel umab in Adults wit h Uncontrolled Asthma. Corren J, Parnes JR, Wang L, Mo M, 
Roseti  SL, Griffit hs JM, van der Merwe R. N Engl J Med. 2017 Sep 7;377(10):936 -946. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1704064. PMID: 28877011
DeFrances et al 2008
DeFrances CJ, Lucas CA, Buie VC, Gol osinskiy A. 2006 National Hospital Discharge
Survey . Nati onal health statistics report; no 5. Hy attsville, MD: National Center for Health
Statistics. 2008. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhsr/nhsr005.pdf. Accessed 25
May 2011.
FASENRA US PI 2017
Fasenra (benralizumab). Prescribing informat ion. AstraZeneca Pharmaceut icals LP, 
Wilmington, DE, USA; 2017. Available at: 
https://www.azpicentral .com /fasenra/fasenra_pi.pdf#page=1
FDA Guidance for Industry 2009
FDA Guidance for Industry  (issued July  2009) ‘Drug -induced liver injury: Premarket ing 
clinical evaluat ion’
Froidure et al 2016
Froidure A, Mouthuy  J, Durham  SR, Chanez P, Sibille Y, Pilette C. Asthma phenoty pes and 
IgE responses. Eur Resp J. 2016;47:304 -
19.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 125of 166Fuhlbrigge et al 2017
Fuhlbrigge AL, Bengtsson T, Peterson S, Jauhiainen A, Eriksson G, Da Silva CA et al. A 
novel endpo int for exacerbat ions in asthma to accelerate clinical development:  a post- hoc 
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Lancet Respir Med. 2017 Jul;5(7):577 -590.
GINA 2006
Global Strategy  for Asthma Management and Prevent ion, Gl obal Init iative for Asthma
(GINA). Updated 2006. Available fro m: http://www.ginasthma.org/ .
GINA 2018
Global Strategy  for Asthma Management and Prevent ion, Gl obal Init iative for Asthma
(GINA). Updated 2018. Available fro m: http://www.ginasthma.org/ .
Gauvreau et al 2014
Gauvreau GM, O'By rne PM, Boul et LP, Wang Y, Cockcroft D, Bigler J, et. al. Effects of an 
Anti-TSLP Ant ibody  on Allergen -Induced Asthmati c Responses. N Engl  J Med 2014; 
370:2102-2110 
Globe et al 2015
Globe G, Martin M, Schatz M, Wiklund I, Lin J, von Maltzahn R, et. al. Symptoms and 
markers of symptom severit y in asthma -content validit y of the asthm a symptom  diary . Heal th 
Qual Life Outcom es 2015; 13: 21
Haldar et al 20 09
Haldar P, Bri ghtling C, Hargadon B, Gupta S, Monteiro W, Sousa A et. al. Mepolizumab and 
Exacerbat ions of Refractory  Eosinophilic Asthma. NEJM 2009 360:973 -84
Hopkins et al 2009
Hopkins C, Gillett S, Slack R, Lund VJ, Browne JP. Psy chometric validit y of the 22-item 
Sinonasal Outcome Test. Clinical otolaryngo logy. 2009;34(5):447 -45.
Jones et al 1991
Jones PW, Quirk FH, Baveystock CM. The St George’s Respiratory  Quest ionnaire. Respir 
Med. 1991;85 Suppl B:25-31.
Jones et al 2009
Jones PW, Harding G, Berr y P, Wi klund I, Chen W -H, Leidy  NK. Devel opment and first 
validat ion of the COPD Assessment Test. Eur Respir J 2009, 34: 648–654.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 126of 166Juniper et al 2006
Juniper EF, Bousquet J, Abetz L, Bateman ED, The GOAL Committee. Identifying ‘well 
controlled’ and ‘not we ll-controlled’ asthma using the Asthma Control Questionnaire. Respir 
Med. 2006; 100:616-21.
Kaur and Brightling 2012
Kaur D, Bright ling C. OX40/OX40 ligand interactions in T -cell regulat ion and asthma. Chest. 
2012; 141:494 -9.
Keene et al 2007
Keene ON, Jones RK, Lane PW, Anderson J. Analysis o f exacerbat ion rates in asthma and 
chronic obstructive pulmo nary disease: example from  the TRISTAN study . Pharm  Stat 2007; 
6: 89 -97.
Laviolette et al 2013
Lavio lette M, Gossage DL, Gauvreau G, Leigh R, Olivenstein R, Katial  R. Effects of 
benralizumab on airway eosinophils in asthmat ic patients with sputum eosinophilia. J Allergy 
Clin Immuno l 2013; 132:1086-96
Li et al 2018
Li Y, Wang W, Lv Z, Li  Y, Chen Y, Huang K, Corrigan CJ, Ying S. Elevated Expression of 
IL-33 and TSLP in the Airways o f Hum an Asthmati cs In Vivo: A Potential Bio marker of 
Severe Refractory  Disease. J Immunol. 2018 Apr 1;200(7):2253- 2262. doi : 
10.4049/jimmuno l.1701455. Epub 2018 Feb 16. PubMed PMID: 29453280.
Lieberman et al 2010
Lieberman P, Nick las RA, Oppenheimer J, Kemp SF, Lang DM, Bernstein DI, et al. The
diagnosis and m anagement of anaphylaxis pract ice parameter: 2010 update. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2010 Sep;126(3):477- 80. e1-42.
Miller et al 2005
Miller MR, Hankinson J, Brusasco V, Burgos F, Casaburi R, Coates A, Crapo R, Enright P, 
van der Grinten CP, Gustafsson P, Jensen R, Johnson DC, MacInty re N, McKay  R, Navajas 
D, Pedersen OF, Pellegrino R, Viegi G, Wanger J; ATS/ERS Task Force. Standardizat ion of 
spirometry. Eur Respi r J. 2005 Aug;26 (2):319 -38.
NUCALA US PI 2015
NUCALA (mepolizumab). US Prescribing information. GlaxoSmit hKline, Research Triangle 
Park, NC, USA;2015. Available at: 
https://www.gsksource.com/pharma/content/dam/GlaxoSmit hKline/US/en/Prescribing_Inform
ation/Nucala/pdf/NUCALA -PI-PIL.PDF
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 127of 166Partridge 2007
Partri dge MR. Examining the unmet need in adults with severe asthma. Eur Resp Rev.
2007; 1 6:67-72.
Pascual and Peters 2005
Pascual RM, Peters SP. Airway remodeling contributes to the progressive loss of lung
funct ion in asthma: an overview. J Allergy Clin Immuno l. 2005 Sep;116(3):477- 86.
Piccirillo et al 2002
Piccirillo JF, Merritt MG, Richards ML. Psycho metric and clinimetric validit y of the 20 i tem 
Sino-Nasal Outcome Test (SNOT -20). Otolaryngology --Head and Neck Surgery . 2002; 
126(1);41-47.
Quanjer et al 2012
Quanjer PH, Stanojevic S, Cole TJ, Baur X, L Hall GL, Culver B, et al. Mult iethnic reference
values for spiro metry for the 3 -95 year age range: the glo bal lung funct ion 2012 equations. 
2012;40(6):1324 -43.
Redhu et al 2013
Redhu NS, Shan L, Movassagh H, Gounni AS. Thymic stromal lymphopoiet in induces 
migration in human airway smo oth muscle cells. Sci  Rep. 2013; 3:2301. doi: 
10.1038/srep02301. PubMed PMID: 23892442; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3725475.
Rochman et al 2007
Rochman I, Watanabe N, Arima K, Liu YJ, Leonard WJ. Cutting edge: direct action of thymic 
strom al lymphopoi etin on activated human CD4+ T cells. J Immuno l. 2007 Jun 
1;178(11):6720 -4. PubMed PMID: 17513717.
Sampson et al 2006
Sampson H.A, A. Munoz -Furlong, R.L. Cam pbell , N.F. Adkinson Jr., S.A. Bock, A. Branum
et al. Second symposium on the definit ion and management o f anaphylaxis: summary report:
Second National Inst itute of Allergy  and Infect ious Di sease/Food Allergy  and Anaphylaxis
Network symposium. J Allergy  Clin Immunol , 117 (2006), pp. 391 –397.
Serra Batlles et al 1998
Serra -Batlles J, Plaza V, Morejón E, Comel
la A, Brugués J. Costs of asthma according to the
degree of severit y. Eur Respi r J. 1998 Dec;12(6):1322-6.
Sorkness et al 2008
Sorkness RL, Bleecker ER, Busse WW, Calhoun WJ, Castro M, Chung KF, et al. Lung
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 128of 166funct ion in adults with stable but severe asthma : air trapping and inco mplete reversal o f
obstructi on wi th bronchodilati on. J Appl Physio l, 2008;104:394 –403.
Soumelis et al 2002
Soum elis V, Reche PA, Kanzler H, Yuan W, Edward G, Homey  B, Gilliet M, Ho S, 
Antonenko S, Lauerma A, Smit h K, Gorman D, Zurawski S, Abrams J, Menon S, 
McClanahan T, de Waal -Malefy t Rd R, Bazan F, Kastelein RA, Liu YJ. Human epit helial 
cells tri gger dendrit ic cell mediated allergic inflammat ion by producing TSLP. Nat Immuno l. 
2002 Jul;3(7):673
-80. Epub 2002 Jun 10. PubMed PM ID: 12055625.
Swedin et al 2017
Swedin L, Saarne T, Rehnberg M, Glader P, Niedzielska M, Johansson G, et al. Patient
stratificat ion and the unmet need in asthma. Pharmacol Ther. 2017; 169:13 -34.
Tanaka et al 2009
Tanaka J, Watanabe N, Kido M, Saga K, Aka matsu T, Nishio A, et al. Human TSLP and 
TLR3 ligands promote different iation of Th17 cells with a central memory  phenoty pe under 
Th2-polarizing condi tions. Clin Exp Allergy . 2009 Jan;39(1):89 -100.
The Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Asthma (CSGA) 1997
The Collaborative Study  on the Genetics of Asthma (CSGA). A geno me-wide search for
asthma suscept ibilit y loci in ethnically diverse populat ions. Nat Genet. 1997 Apr;15(4):389-
92.
Torii et al 2008
Torii Y, Ito T, Amakawa R, Sugimoto H, Amuro H, Tanij iri T, Katashiba Y, Ogata M, Yokoi 
T, Fukuhara S. Imidazoquino line acts as immune adjuvant for funct ional alterati on of  thymic 
strom al lymphopoi etin-mediated allergic T cell response. J Immuno l. 2008 Oct 15; 
181(8):5340 -9. PubMed PMID: 18832690.
Tough et al 1998
Tough SC, Hessel PA, Ruff M, Green FH, Mitchell I, Butt JC. Features that dist inguish those
who die from asthma fro m communit y control s with asthma. J Asthma1998.35(8):657 -65.
Turner et al 1998
Turner MO, Noertjo jo K, Vedal S, Bai T, Crump S, Fitz geral d JM. Risk factors for near -fatal
asthma. A case -control  study  in hospi talized pati ents wi th asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med. 1998 Jun;157(6 Pt 1):1804 -9.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 129of 166Watson and Gauvreau 2014
Watson B, Gauvreau GM. Thymic stromal lymphopoiet in: a central regul ator of allergic 
asthma. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2014; 18:771 -85.
Wenzel 2012
Wenzel SE. Asthma phenoty pes: the evo lution from clinical to mo lecular approaches. Nat 
Med. 2012; 18:716-25.
Wenzel 2016
Wenzel SE. Emergence of bio molecular pathways to define novel asthma phenoty pes. Ty pe-
2 immunit y and bey ond. Am J Respi r Cell Mol  Mol ec Bi ol. 2016; 55:1 -4. 
Woodruff et al 2009
Woodruff PG, Modrek B, Choy  DF, Jia G, Abbas AR, Ellwanger A, Koth LL, Arron JR, Fahy  
JV. T -helper type 2 -driven inflammat iondefines major subphenoty pes o f asthma. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med. 2009 Sep 1;180(5):388 -95. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200903 -0392OC. Epub 2009 
May 29. Erratum  in: Am  J Respir Cri t Care Med. 2009 Oct 15;180(8):796. 
Wong et al 2010
Wong CK, Hu S, Cheung PF, Lam C W. Thymic stromal lymphopoiet in induces chemotactic 
and prosurvival effects in eosinophils: implicat ions in allergic inflammat ion. Am J Respir Cell 
Mol Biol. 2010 Sep;43(3):305- 15. doi : 10.1165/rcmb.2009- 0168OC. Epub 2009 Oct 20. 
PubMed PMID: 19843704.
XOLAIR US PI 2016
XOLAIR (omalizumab). Prescribing informat ion. Novarti s Pharm aceut icals Corporation, East 
Hanover, NJ, USA; 2016. Available at: 
https://www.gene.com/download/pdf/xo lair_prescribing.pdf
Zhu and Lakkis 2014
Zhu H, Lakkis H. Sample size calculat ion for comparing two negative bino mial rates. Stat 
Med 2014; 33(3):376-87.
Ziegler et al 2013
Ziegler SF, Roan F, Bell BD, Stoklasek TA, Ki tajima M, Han H. The biology  of thymic 
strom al lymphopoi etin (TSLP). Adv Pharmaco l. 2013; 66:129-55.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 130of 16611. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTA TION AND OPERATIONAL
CONSIDERATIONS
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 131of 166Appendix ARegulatory, ethical and study oversight considerations
A 1 Regulatory and ethical considerations
This study  will be conducted in accordance wit h the protocol and with the fo llowing:
 Consensus ethical principles derived from international guidelines including the 
Declaration of Helsinki and Council for International Organizat ions of Medical 
Sciences (CIOMS) International Ethical Guidelines
 Applicable ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Guidelines
 Applicable laws and regulations
The protocol, protocol amendments, ICF, Investigator Brochure, and other relevant documents 
(e.g. advertisements) must be submitted to an IRB/IEC by the Invest igator and reviewed and 
approved by  the IRB/IEC before the study  is init iated.  
Any amendments to the protocol will require IRB/IEC approval before implementation of 
changes made to the study  design, except for changes necessary  toeliminate an immediate 
hazard to study  subjects.  
The Investigator will be responsible for the fo llowing:
 Provi ding wri tten summaries of the status of the study  to the IRB/IEC annually  or 
more frequent ly in accordance wit h the requirements, policies, and procedures 
established by  the IRB/IEC
 Notifying the IRB/IEC of SAEs or other significant safet y findings as required by 
IRB/IEC procedures
 Provi ding oversight of the conduct of the study at the site and adherence to 
requi rements of 21 CFR, ICH guidelines, the IRB/IEC, European regulat ion 
536/2014 for clinical studies (if applicable), and all other applicable local 
regul ations
The study  will be perform ed in accordance with the AstraZeneca policy  on Bi oethics and 
Hum an Bi ological  Samples.
A 2 Financial disclosur e
Invest igators and Sub -Invest igators will provide the sponsor with sufficient, accurate financial 
inform ation as requested to allow the sponsor to submit complete and accurate financial 
certification or disclosure statements to the appropriate regulatory  authori ties.  Invest igators 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 132of 166are responsible for providing information on financial interests during the course of the study 
and for 1 y ear after com pletion of  the study .
A
3 Informed consent process
The Investigator or his/her representative will explain the nature of the study  to the subject or 
his/her legally  authori zed representative and answer all quest ions regarding the study .  
Subjects m ust be informed that their part icipation is vol untary .  Subj ects or thei r legally 
authori zed representative will be required to sign a statement of informed consent that meets 
the requirements of 21 CFR 50 , local regul ations, ICH guidelines, Health Insurance Portabilit y 
and Accountabili ty Act (HIPAA) requi rements, where applicable, and the IRB/IEC or study  
center.  
The m edical  record m ust include a statem ent that wri tten inform ed consent was obtained 
before the subject was enro lled in the study  and the date the written consent was ob tained.  
The authorized person obtaining the informed consent must also sign the ICF.
Subjects m ust be re -consented to the most current versio n of the ICF(s) during their 
participat ion in the study.  
A copy  of the ICF(s) m ust be provi ded to the subject or th e subject’s legally authorized 
representative.  
If subject declines to participate in any  voluntary  exploratory  genet ic research co mponent of 
the study , there will be no penalt y or loss of benefit to the subject and he/she will not be 
excluded fro m other aspects of the study .
Subjects who are rescreened are required to sign a new ICF.
The ICF will contain a separate section that addresses the use of remaining mandatory 
samples for optional exploratory  research.  The Investigator or authorized designee will 
explain to each subject the object ives o f the exploratory  research.  Subjects will be told that 
they are f ree to refuse to participate and may  withdraw thei r consent at any  time and for any  
reason duri ng the storage period.  The subject will give a separate agreem ent to allow any 
remaining specimens to be used for exploratory  research.  Subjects who decline to participate 
in this optional research will indicate this in the ICF.  If a subject withdraws consent to the use 
of donated bi ological samples, the sam ples will be disposed of/destroy ed, and the acti on 
docum ented.  If samples already have been analyzed at the time of the request, AstraZeneca 
will not be obliged to destroy  the resul ts of this research.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 133of 166During the COVID- 19 pandemic, re -consent ing remotely may be obtained if local/regio nal 
guidelines allow.
A 4 Data protection
Each subject will be assigned a unique ident ifier by the sponsor.  Any subject records or data 
sets transferred to the sponsor will contain only the identifier; subject names or any  
inform ation which would make the subject ident ifiable will not be transfer red.  
The subject must be informed that his/her personal study -related data will be used by  the 
sponsor in accordance wit h local data protecti on law.  The l evel of discl osure must al so be 
explained to the subject.  
The subject must be informed that his/h er medical  records m ay be examined by  Clinical  
Qualit y Assurance auditors or other authorized personnel appo inted by  the sponsor, by  
appropriate IRB/IEC members, and by inspectors from regulatory  authori ties.
A 5 Committees structure
The safet y of all AstraZen eca clinical studies is cl osely monitored on an on -going basis by  
AstraZeneca representatives in consultat ion with Patient Safet y.  Issues i dentified will be 
addressed; for instance, this could invo lve amendments to the CSP and letters to Invest igators.
A 6 Dissemination of clinical study data
A descript ion of this clinical trial will be available on http://astrazenecaclinicaltrials.com and 
http://www.clinicaltrials.gov as will the summary  of the m ain study  resul ts when they  are 
available. The clinical trial an d/or summary  of main study  resul ts may also be available on 
other websites according to the regulat ions of the countries in which the main study  is 
conducted.
A 7 Data quality assurance
All subject data relat ing to the study  will be recorded on printed or elec troni c CRF unless 
transmitted to the sponsor or designee electronically (e.g. laboratory  data).  The Investigator is 
responsible for verifying that data entries are accurate and correct by  physically  or 
electroni cally signing the CRF.  
The Investigator mu st maintain accurate documentation (source data) that supports the 
inform ation entered in the CRF.  
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 134of 166The Investigator must permit study -related m onitoring, audi ts, IRB/IEC review, and 
regul atory  agency inspecti ons and provi de di rect access to source data d ocum ents.  
The sponsor or designee is responsible for the data management of this study  including qualit y 
checking o f the data.  
Study  monitors will perform  ongoing source data verification to confirm that data entered into 
the CRF by  authori zed si te per sonnel are accurate, complete, and verifiable fro m source 
docum ents; that the safet y and ri ghts of  subjects are being protected; and that the study  is 
being conducted in accordance with the current ly approved protocol and any other study 
agreements, ICH GC P, and all applicable regulatory requirements.  
Records and documents, including signed ICFs, pertaining to the conduct of this study  must 
be retained by the Investigator for 15 y ears after study  com pletion unless l ocal regulat ions or 
institutional polici es requi re a l onger retenti on period.  No records may  be destroy ed during 
the retention period without the written approval of the sponsor.  No records may be 
transferred to another location or party  without written notificat ion to the sponsor. 
A 8 Source doc uments
Source documents provide evidence for the existence of the subject and substant iate the 
integrity of the data collected.  Source documents are filed at the Invest igator’s site.
Data reported on the CRF that are transcribed fro m source documents must be consistent with 
the source documents or the discrepancies must be explained.  The Invest igator may need to 
request previous medical records or transfer records, depending on the study .  Also, current 
medical records must be available.
Definit ions of wh at const itutes source data can be found in the monitoring plan.
A 9 Site and Study Closure
The sponsor designee reserves the right to close the study  site or terminate the study  at any  
time for any  reason at the sole discret ion of the sponsor. Study  sites will be closed upon study  
completion. A study  site is considered cl osed when all required documents and study  supplies 
have been co llected and a study -site closure visi t has been perform ed.
The Investigator may  initiate study -site closure at any time, provided there is reasonable cause 
and sufficient notice is given in advance of the intended terminat ion.
Reasons for the early closure of a study  site by the sponsor or Invest igator may include but are 
not limited to:
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 135of 166•Failure of the Invest igator to comply wit h the protocol, the requirements of the IRB/IEC 
or local health authori ties, the sponsor's procedures, or GCP guidelines
•Inadequate recruit ment of parti cipants by  the Investi gator
•Discontinuati on of  further study  intervent ion developm ent
A 10 Publication policy
The results of this study  may be published or presented at scient ific meet ings.  If this is 
foreseen, the Invest igator agrees to submit all manuscripts or abstracts to the sponsor before 
submissio n.  Thi s allows the sponsor to protect proprietary  information and to provide 
comments.  
The sponsor will co mply wit h the requirements for publication o f study  resul ts.  In accordance 
with standard edi torial and ethical pract ice, the sponsor will generally support publicat ion of 
multicenter studies only in their enti rety and not as individual site data.  In this case, a 
coordinat ing Invest igator will be designated by mutual agreement.
Authorship will be determined by  mutual  agreement and in line wit h Internat ional Committee 
of Medical Journal Editors authors hip requirements.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 136of 166Appendix BAdverse event definitions and additional safety information
B 1 Definition of adverse events
An adverse event is the development of any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or 
clinical study  subject administered a medicinal product and wh ich does not necessarily  have a 
causal relat ionship with this treatm ent.   An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and 
unintended sign (e.g. an abnormal laboratory  finding), symptom (for example nausea, chest 
pain), or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal product, whether or not 
considered related to the medicinal product.  
The term  AE is used to include both serious and non -serious AEs and can include a 
deteri oration of  a pre -exist ing medical occurrence.  An AE may occur at any  time, i ncluding 
run-in or washout periods, even if no Study treatment has been administered.
B 2 Definitions of serious adverse event
A serious adverse event is an AE occurring during any study  Phase (i .e., run -in, treatment, 
washout, follow -up), that fulfils one or more of the fo llowing cri teria:
 Results in death
 Is immediately life -threatening
 Requi res in -subject hospi talizat ion or prolongation of exist ing hospitalizat ion 
 Results in persistent or significant disabilit y or incapaci ty.  
 Is a congenital abnormalit y or birth defect.
 Is an important medical event that may jeopardize the subject or may require 
medical treatment to prevent one of the outcomes listed above.
B 3 Life threatening
‘Life -threatening’ means that the subject was at immediate risk of death from the A E as i t 
occurred or it is suspected that use or continued use of the product would result in the 
subject’s death.  ‘Life -threatening’ does not mean that had an AE occurred in a more severe 
form it might have caused death (e.g. hepatitis that resolved witho ut hepati c failure).
B 4 Hospitalization
Outpati ent treatm ent in an emergency room is not in itself a serious AE, although the reasons 
for it may be (e.g. bronchospasm, laryngeal edema).  Hospital admissio ns and/or surgical 
operati ons planned before or during a study  are not consi dered AEs if the illness or disease 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 137of 166existed before the subject was enrolled in the study, provided that it did not deteriorate in an 
unexpected way  during the study .
B 5 Important medical event or medical treatment
Medical and scientific judgement should be exercised in deciding whether a case is serious in 
situations where important m edical events may  not be immediately life threatening or result in 
death, hospi talizat ion, disabilit y or incapaci ty but may jeopardize the subject or may req uire 
medical treatment to prevent one or more outcomes listed in the definit ion of serious.  These 
shoul d usually be considered as serious.
Simply stopping the suspect drug does not mean that it is an important medical event; medical 
judgement must be used . Exam ples of such events are:
 Angioedema not severe enough to require intubation but requiring iv hydrocortisone 
treatm ent
 Hepatotoxicit y caused by paracetamo l (acetaminophen) overdose requiring 
treatm ent wi th N-acetylcysteine
 Intensive treatment in an emergency room  or at home for allergic bronchospasm
 Blood dy scrasias (e.g. neutropenia or anemia requiring blood transfusio n, etc.) or 
convulsio ns that do not result in hospitalizat ion
 Development of drug dependency or drug abuse
B 6 Intensity rating scale:
1. mild (awareness of sign or symptom, but easily tolerated)
2. moderate (di scomf ort sufficient to cause interference with normal act ivities)
3. severe (incapacitat ing, with inabilit y to perform norm al activities)
It is important to dist inguish between serious and se vere AEs.  Severit y is a measure of 
intensity whereas seri ousness is defined by the criteria in Appendix B 2.  An AE of severe 
intensity need not ne cessarily be considered serious.  For example, nausea that persists for 
several hours may  be consi dered severe nausea, but not a SAE unless it meets the criteria 
shown in Appendix B
2. On the other hand, a stroke that results in only a limited degree of 
disabili ty may be considered a mild stroke but would be a SAE when it satisfies the criteria 
shown in Appendix B 2.
B 7 A Guide to interpreting the causality question
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 138of 166When making an assessment of causalit y consi der the foll owing f actors when deciding if there 
is a ‘reasonable possibilit y’that an AE may have been caused by the drug.
 Time Course.  Exposure to suspect drug.  Has the subject actually received the 
suspect drug?  Did the AE occur in a reasonable temporal relat ionship to the 
administration of the suspect drug?
 Consistency wit h known drug profile.  Was the AE consistent with the previous 
knowl edge of the suspect drug (pharmaco logy and toxi cology) or drugs of the same 
pharmaco logical class? Or could the AE be ant icipated from its pharmaco logical 
properties?
 De-challenge experience.  Di d the A E resolve or improve on stopping or reducing 
the dose of the suspect drug?
 No al ternative cause.  The AE cannot be reasonably  explained by another etio logy 
such as the underlying disease, other drugs, other host or environmental factors.
 Re-challenge exper ience.  Di d the AE reoccur if the suspected drug was 
reintroduced after having been stopped? AstraZeneca would not normally 
recommend or support a re-challenge .
 Laboratory  tests.  A specific laboratory  invest igation (if performed) has confirmed 
the relationship .
In difficult cases, other factors could be considered such as:
 Is this a recogni zedfeature of overdose of the drug?
 Is there a known mechanism?
Causalit y of ‘related’ is m ade if fo llowing a review of the relevant data, there is evidence for a 
‘reasonable possibilit y’ of a causal relationship for the individual case.  The expressio n 
‘reasonable possibilit y’ of a causal relationship is meant to convey, in general, that there are 
facts (evidence) or arguments to suggest a causal relat ionship.
The causalit y assessment i s perform ed based on the available data including enough 
inform ation to m ake an informed judgment.  With limited or insufficient information in the 
case, i t is likely  that the event(s) will be assessed as ‘not related’.
Causal relat ionship in cases where the disease under study  has deteri orated due to l ack of 
effect shoul d be classified as no reasonable possibilit y.
B 8 Medication error
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 139of 166For the purposes of this clinical study  a medicat ion error is an unintended failure or mistake in 
the treatment process for an AstraZeneca study  drug that ei ther causes harm to the participant 
or has the potential to cause harm to the participant.  
A medi cation error is not lack of efficacy o f the drug, but rather a human or process related 
failure while the drug is in control of the study  site staff or parti cipant.
Medicat ion error includes situat ions where an error: 
 Occurred
 Was i dentified and intercept ed before the participant received the drug
 Did not occur, but circumstances were recognized that could have led to an error
Examples of events to be reported in clinical studies as medication errors:
 Drug name confusio n
 Dispensing error e.g. medicat ion prepared incorrectly , even if i t was not actually  
given to the participant
 Drug not administered as indicated, for example, wrong route or wrong site of 
administration
 Drug not taken as indicated e.g. tablet disso lved in water when it should be taken as 
a solid tablet 
 Drug not stored as instructed e.g. kept in the fridge when it should be at room 
temperature 
 Wrong participant received the medicat ion (excluding IVRS/IWRS errors)
 Wrong drug administered to participant (excluding IVRS/IWRS errors)
Examples o f events that do not require reporting as medicat ion errors in clinical studies:
 Errors related to or resulting fro m IVRS/IWRS -including those which lead to one 
of the above listed events that would otherwise have been a medication error 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 140of 166 Parti cipant acc identally missed drug dose(s) e.g. forgot to take medication
 Accidental  overdose (will be captured as an overdose)
 Parti cipant f ailed to return unused medicat ion or empt y packaging
 Errors related to background and rescue medicat ion, or standard of care med ication 
in open l abel studi es, even if an AZ product 
Medicat ion errors are not regarded as AEs but AEs may  occur as a consequence of the 
medicat ion error.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Teze pelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 141of 166Appendix CHandling of human biological samples
C 1 Chain of custody of biological samples
A full chain o f custody  is maintained for all samples throughout their lifecycle.
The Principal Invest igator keeps full traceabilit y of collected bio logical samples from  the 
subjects while in storage at the center until shipment or disposal (where appropriate).
The sample receive r keeps full traceabilit y of the sam ples while in storage and during use unt il 
used or disposed of or until further shipment and keeps documentation of receipt of arrival.
AstraZeneca will keep oversight of the entire life cycle through internal procedures , 
monitoring of study  sites, audi ting or process checks, and contractual requirements of external 
laboratory  provi ders
Samples retained for further use will be stored in the AZ- assigned bi obanks and will be 
registered by  the AstraZeneca Bio bank Team during the ent ire life cycle.
If required, AstraZeneca will ensure that remaining bio logical samples are returned to the site 
according to local regulations or at the end of the retention period, whichever is the sooner.
C 2 Withdrawal of informed consent for donate d biological samples 
If a subject withdraws consent to the use of donated bio logical samples, the sam ples will  be 
disposed of/destroy ed, and the acti on documented.  If samples are already  analyzed ,
AstraZeneca is not obliged to destroy  the resul ts of this research.
As collect ion of the bio logical sample(s) i s an integral  part of the study , then the subject i s 
withdrawn from  further study  parti cipat ion.
The Investigator:
 Ensures subjects’ wit hdrawal o f informed consent to the use of donated samples is 
notif ied immediately  to AstraZeneca
 Ensures that bio logical samples from that subject, if stored at the study  site, are 
immediately  identified, disposed of /destroy ed, and the action documented
 Ensures the organizat ion(s) ho lding the samples is/are informed abo ut the 
withdrawn consent immediately and that samples are disposed of/destroy ed, the 
action docum ented and the signed document returned to the study  site
 Ensures that the subject and AstraZeneca are informed about the sample disposal.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 142of 166AstraZeneca ensures t he organizat ions holding the samples is/are informed about the 
withdrawn consent immediately and that samples are disposed of/destroy ed and the act ion 
docum ented and returned to the study  site.
C 3 International airline transportation association (IATA) 6.2 
Guidance document
LABELLING AND SHIPMENT OF BIOHAZARD SAMPLES
International Airline Transportation Associat ion (IATA) classifies bio hazardous agents into 3 
categori es
(http://www.iata.org/whatwedo/cargo/dangerous_goods/infectious_substances.htm) . For 
transpo rt purposes the classificat ion of infect ious substances according to risk groups was 
removed from  the Dangerous Goods Regulat ions in the 46th edition (2005). Infect ious 
substances are now classified eit her as Category  A, Category B or Exem pt. There is no d irect 
relationship between Risk Groups and Categories A and B.
Category A Infectious Substances are infect ious substances in a form that, when exposure to 
it occurs, i s capable of causing permanent disabilit y, life-threatening or fatal  disease in 
otherwi sehealt hy humans or animals. Category  A pathogens are e.g. Ebola, Lassa fever virus:
 are to be packed and shipped in accordance wit h IATA Instruction 602.
Category B Infectious Substances are infect ious Substances that do not meet the criteria for 
inclusio nin Category  A. Category  B pathogens are e.g. Hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E viruses, 
Hum an immunodeficiency virus ty pes 1 and 2. They  are assigned the following UN number 
and proper shipping name:
 UN 3373 –Biological Substance, Category  B
 are to be packed i n accordance with UN3373 and IATA 650
Exempt -all other materials wit h minimal risk of containing pathogens
 Clinical trial samples will fall into Category  B or exempt under IATA regulations
 Clinical trial samples will routinely be packed and transported at ambient
 temperature in IATA 650 compliant packaging 
(http://www.iata.org/whatwedo/cargo/dangerous_goods/infect ious_substances.ht m)
 Biological samples transported in dry  ice requi re addi tional dangerous goods 
specification for the dry -ice content
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 143of 166 IATA co mpliant courier and packaging materials should be used for packing and 
transportation and packing should be done by an IATA certified person, as 
applicable
 Samples routinely transported by  road or rail are subject to local regulations which 
requi re that th ey are al so packed and transported in a safe and appropriate way  to 
contain any  risk of infect ion or contaminat ion by using approved couriers and 
packaging/containment materials at all times. The IATA 650 bio logical sample 
containment standards are encoura ged wherever possible when road or rail transport 
is used.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 144of 166Appendix D Genetics
D 1 Use/analysis of DNA
Genet ic variat ion may impact a subject’s response to therapy , susceptibilit y to, and severi ty 
and progression of disease.  Variable response to therapy may  be due to ge netic determinants 
that impact drug absorption, distribut ion, metabo lism, and excret ion; mechanism of act ion of 
the drug; disease etio logy; and/or m olecular subt ype of the disease being treated.  Therefore, 
where local regulat ions and IRB/IEC allow, blood samples will be co llected for DNA analysis 
from consent ing subjects.
AstraZeneca intends to collect and store DNA for genet ic research to explore how genetic 
variat ions may affect clinical parameters, risk and prognosis o f diseases, and the response to 
medications.  Genetic research may lead to better understanding of diseases, better diagnosis 
of diseases or other improvements in healt h care and to the discovery o f new di agnost ics, 
treatm ents or m edicat ions.  
In addit ion, collect ion of DNA samples from po pulat ions wit h well described clinical 
characterist ics may lead to improvements in the design and interpretation of clinical trials and, 
possibly , to geneti cally guided treatment strategies.
Genet ic research may consist of the analysis o f the structure of the subject ´s DNA, i.e. the 
entire geno me. 
The results of genet ic analyses may be reported in the clinical study  report (CSR) or in a 
separate study  summary.
The sponsor will store the DNA samples in a secure storage space with adequate measures to 
protec t confident iality.
The samples will be retained while research on tezepelumab cont inues but no l onger than 15
years or other period as per local requirements.
D 2 Genetic research plan and procedures
Selection of genetic research population
Study selection record
All subjects will be asked to participate in this genetic research.  Participat ion is vo luntary and 
if subject declines to participate there will be no penalt y or loss of  benefit.  The subject will 
not be excluded from any aspect of the main study .
Inclusion criteria
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 145of 166 For inclusio n in this genet ic research, subjects must fulfil all o f the 
inclusio n criteria described in the main body  of the CSP and :Provi de 
inform ed consent for the genetic sampling and analyses.
Exclusion criteria
Exclusio n from this genet ic research may be for any o f the excl usion criteria specified in the 
main study  or any  of the fo llowing:
 Previous allogeneic bone marrow transplant
 Non-leukocyte depleted whole blood transfusio n in 120 days of genetic sample 
collect ion
Withdrawal of consent for genetic research:  
Subjects m ay withdraw from  this genetic research at any  time, independent of any decisio n 
concerning participat ion in other aspects of the main study .  Vol untary  withdrawal will  not 
prejudice further treatment.   Procedures for withdrawal are outlined in Sect ion 7.3of the m ain 
Clinical Study  Protocol .
Collection of samples for genetic research
Blood sam ples for geneti c research will be obtained from subjects at any  time after the 
consent is signed. Although DNA is stable, early sample co llection is preferred to avoid 
introducing bias through excluding subjects who may withdraw due to an adverse event (AE),
such subjects would be important to include in any genet ic analysis. Only one sample should 
be co llected per subject for genetics during the study. Samples will be co llected, labelled, 
stored, and shipped as detailed in the Laboratory  Manual.
Coding and s torage of DNA samples
The processes adopted for the coding and storage of samples for genet ic analysis are 
important to maintain subject confidentialit y.  Sampl es will  be stored for a m aximum  of 15
years, fro m the date of LSLV, after which they  will be des troyed.  DNA is a finite resource 
that is used up during analyses.  Samples will be stored and used unt il no further analyses are 
possible or the maximum storage time has been reached.
An addit ional second code will be assigned to the blood either before o r at the time of DNA 
extracti on repl acing the information on the sample tube.  Thereafter, the sample will be 
ident ifiable only by the second, unique number.  This number is used to ident ify the sample 
and corresponding data at the AstraZeneca genetics lab oratori es, or at the desi gnated 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 146of 166organi zation.  No personal details identifying the individual will be available to any person 
(AstraZeneca emplo yee or designated organizat ions working with the DNA).
The link between the subject enrolment/randomization code and the second number will be 
maintained and stored in a secure environment, with restricted access at AstraZeneca or 
designated organizat ions.  The link will be used to ident ify the relevant DNA samples for 
analysis, facilitate correlat ion of genoty pic results wi th clinical  data, all ow regulatory  audi t, 
and permit tracing o f samples for destruction in the case of withdrawal of consent.
Ethical and regulatory requirements
The principles for ethical and regulatory  requi rements for the study , incl uding this genet ics 
research component, are outlined in Appendix D.
Informed consent
The genetic component of this study  is opti onal and the subject may parti cipate in other 
components of the m ain study  without parti cipat ing in the genet ic component.  To participate 
in the genet ic co mponent of the study the subject must sign and date both the consent form for 
the main study  and the genet ic co mponent of the stud y.  Copi es of both si gned and dated 
consent forms must be given to the subject and the original filed at the study  center.  The 
Principal Invest igator(s) is responsible for ensuring that consent is given freely and that the 
subject understands that they  may freely  withdraw fro m the genetic aspect of the study  at any  
time.
Subject data protection
AstraZeneca will not provide individual genoty pe resul ts to subjects, any  insurance com pany, 
any emplo yer, their family members, general physician unless required t o do so by  law.
Extra precautions are taken to preserve confident iality and prevent genetic data being linked to 
the identi ty of the subject. Regul atory  authori ties may requi re access to the relevant files, 
though the subject’s medical informat ion and the genet ic files would remain physically 
separate.
Data management
Any genoty pe data generated in this study  will be stored at a secure system at AstraZeneca 
and/or designated organizations to analyze the samples.
AstraZeneca and its designated organizat ions may share summary results (such as genet ic 
differences fro m groups of individuals with a disease) fro m this genetic research with other 
researchers, such as hospitals, academic organizat ions or health insurance co mpanies.  This 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 147of 166can be done by placing the r esults in scient ific databases, where they can be combined wit h 
the resul ts of similar studies to learn even more about healt h and disease.  The researchers can 
only use this inform ation for healt h-related research purposes.  Researchers may  see summary  
results but they  will not be able to see individual subject data or any  personal  identifiers.  
Some or all  of the clinical datasets from the main study  may be merged wi th the genet ic data 
in a suitable secure environment separate from the clinical database.
Statistical methods and determination of sample size
The number of subjects that will agree to participate in the genet ic research is unknown.  It is 
therefore not possible to establish whether sufficient data will be collected to allow a formal 
statist ical evaluati on or whether only  descri ptive statist ics will be generated.  A Statist ical 
Analysis Plan may be prepared where appropriate.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 148of 166Appendix EActions required in cases of increases in liver biochemistry 
and evaluation of Hy’s Law
E 1 Introduction
This Appendix descr ibes the process to be fo llowed in order to ident ify and appropriately 
report Potential Hy’s Law (PHL) and Hy’s Law (HL) cases.  It is not intended to be a 
comprehensive gui de to the m anagement of el evated liver biochemistries. Specific guidance 
on managi ng liver abnormalit ies can be found in Section 7.1of the Clinical Study  Protocol .
During the course of the study  the Invest igator will remain vigilant for increases in liver 
biochemistry .  The Invest igator is responsible for determining whether a subject meets PHL 
criteria at any  point during the study .
All sources of l aboratory  data are appropri ate for the determinat ion of PHL and HL events; 
this includes samples taken at scheduled study  visits and other vi sits including central  and all 
local laboratory  evaluat ions even if co llected outside of the study  visit s; for exam ple, PHL 
criteria coul d be m et by  an elevated ALT from  a central  laboratory  and/or el evated TBL fro m 
a local laboratory .
The Investigator will also review AE data (for example, for AEs that may indicate elevations 
in liver bio chemistry ) for possible PHL events.
The Investigator participates, together with AstraZeneca clinical proje ct representatives, in 
review and assessment of cases meet ing PHL criteria to agree whether HL criteria are met.  
HL cri teria are m et if there is no alternat ive explanation for the elevat ions in liver 
biochemistry  other than drug induced liver injury  (DILI ) caused by  theInvest igational 
Medicinal Product (IMP).  
The Investigator is responsible for recording data pertaining to PHL/HL cases and for 
reporting AE and SAE according to the outcome of the review and assessment in line with 
standard safet y reporti ng processes.
E 2 Definitions
Potential Hy’s Law (PHL)
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ≥ 3× upper limit of 
norm al (ULN) together with total bilirubin (TBL) ≥ 2×ULN at any po int during the study  
following the start of study  medicat ionirrespect ive of an increase in alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP).  
Hy’s Law (HL)
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 149of 166AST or ALT ≥ 3× ULN together with TBL ≥ 2×ULN, where no other reason, other than the 
IMP, can be found to explain the combinat ion of increases, e.g.. elevated ALP indicat ing 
cholestasis, viral hepat itis, another drug.  
For PHL and HL the elevat ion in transaminases must precede or be coincident with (i.e., on 
the sam e day) the el evation in TBL, but there is no specified time frame wit hin which the 
elevations in transaminas es and TBL must occur.
E 3 Identification of potential Hy’s Law cases
In order to i dentify  cases of PHL i t is important to perform a comprehensive review of 
laboratory  data for any  subject who m eets any of the fo llowing i dentificat ion criteria in 
isolation orin combinat ion:
 ALT ≥ 3×ULN
 AST ≥ 3×ULN
 TBL ≥ 2×ULN
Central laboratories being used:
When a subject meets any o f the PHL i dentificat ion criteria, in isol ation or in co mbinat ion, the 
central  laboratory  will immediately  send an alert to the Invest igator (also sent to AstraZeneca 
representative). 
The Investigator will also remain vigilant fo r any  local  laboratory  reports where the PHL 
ident ificat ion criteria are met, where this is the case the Investigator will:
 Notify  the AstraZeneca representative
 Request a repeat of the test (new blood draw) by  the central  laboratory  without 
delay
 Com plete the appropriate unscheduled laboratory  CRF m odule(s) wi th the ori ginal  
local laboratory  test resul t
When the identificat ion criteria are m et from central  or local laboratory  resul ts the Invest igator 
will wit hout del ay:
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 150of 166 Determine whether the subject meets PHL criteria (See Appendix E 2for definit ion) 
by reviewing laboratory  reports from  all previ ous visi ts (including both central and 
local laboratory resul ts)
The Investigator will wit hout delay review each new laboratory  report and if the ident ificat ion 
criteria are met will:
 Notify  the AstraZeneca representative
 Determine whether the subject meets PHL criteria (see Appendix E 2for definit ion) 
by reviewing laboratory  reports from  all previ ous visi ts
 Prom ptly enter the laboratory  data into the l aboratory  CRF
E 4 Follow -up
E4.1 Potential Hy’s Law criteria not met
If the subject does not meet PHL criteria the Investigator will:
 Inform  the AstraZeneca representative that the subject has not met PHL criteria.
 Perform  follow-up on subsequent laboratory  resul ts according to the guidanc e 
provi ded in the CSP.
E4.2 Potential Hy’s Law criteria met
If the subject does meet PHL criteria the Invest igator will:
 Notify  the AstraZeneca representative who will then inform the central Study  Team  
 Within 1 day of PHL criteria being met, the Invest igator will report the case as an 
SAE of Potential Hy’s Law; serious criteria ‘Important medical event’ and causalit y 
assessment ‘y es/related’ according to CSP process for SAE reporting.
 For subjects that met PHL criteria prior to starting IMP, the Invest igator i s not 
requi red to submit a PHL SAE unless there is a significant change in the subject’s 
condi tion.
 The Study  Physician contacts the Invest igator, to provide guidance, discuss and 
agree an approach for the study  subjects’ fo llow-up and the continuous review of 
data.  
 Subsequent to this contact the Invest igator will:
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 151of 166Moni tor the subject until liver bioch emistry  parameters and appropriate clinical 
symptoms and signs return to normal or baseline levels, or as long as medically 
indicated. Completes fo llow-up SAE form  as required. 
Invest igate the aetiology o f the event and perform diagnostic investigat ions as 
discussed wi th the Study  Physician. This includes deciding which tests available in 
the Hy ’s law lab ki t shoul d be used. 
Com plete the three Liver CRF Modules as information becomes available 
E 5 Review and assessment of potential Hy’s Law cases
The instruc tions in this sect ion shoul d be fo llowed for all  cases where PHL cri teria are m et.
As soon as possible after the biochemistry  abnormalit y was ini tially detected, the Study  
Physician contacts the Invest igator in order to review available data and agree on w hether 
there is an alternat ive explanat ion for meeting PHL criteria other than DILI caused by the IMP 
to ensure timely analysis and reporting to health authorities within calendar days fro m the date 
PHL cri teria was m et.  The AstraZeneca Glo bal Clinical Le ad or equivalent and Global Safet y 
Physician will also be invo lved in this review together with other subject matter experts as 
appropriate.  
According to the outcome of the review and assessment, the Invest igator will fo llow the 
instructi ons bel ow.
Where there is an agreed alternative explanation for the ALT or AST and TBL elevations, 
a determination of whether the alternat ive explanatio n is an AE will be made and 
subsequent ly whether the AE meets the criteria for a SAE:
 If the alternat ive explanat ion is notan AE, record the alternative explanation on the 
appropriate CRF
 If the alternat ive explanat ion is an AE/SAE, update the previously submitted PHL 
SAE and AE CRFs accordingly wit h the new informat ion (reassessing event term; 
causalit y and seri ousness cr iteria) fo llowing the AZ standard processes. 
If it is agreed that there is no explanat ion that would explain the ALT or AST and TBL 
elevations other than the IMP:
 Send updated SAE (report term ‘Hy’s Law’) according to AstraZeneca standard 
processes. 
The ‘Medically  Important’ seri ous cri terion shoul d be used if no 
other serious criteria apply
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 152of 166As there is no alternat ive explanation for the HL case, a causalit y 
assessment of ‘related’ should be assigned.
If there is an unavo idable delay o f over 15 calendar d ays in obtaining the informat ion 
necessary  to assess whether or not the case meets the criteria for HL, then it is assumed that 
there is no alternat ive explanation unt il such time as an informed decisio n can be made:
 Provi de any further update to the previ ously  submitted SAE of Potenti al Hy’s Law, 
(report term now ‘Hy’s Law case’) ensuring causalit y assessment i s related to IMP 
and seriousness criteria is medically important, according to CSP process for SAE 
reporting.
 Continue fo llow-up and review accordin g to agreed plan.  Once the necessary  
supplementary  informat ion is obtained, repeat the review and assessment to 
determine whether HL criteria are still met.  Update the previously submitted PHL 
SAE report following CSP process for SAE reporting, according to the outcom e of 
the review amending the reported term if an alternative explanat ion for the liver 
biochemistry  elevat ions is determined.
E 6 Laboratory tests
The list below represents the standard, comprehensive list of fo llow-up tests which are 
recommended but not mandatory  when using a central laboratory . 
If required, addit ional assistance on which tests could be used to evaluate other potential 
causes o f liver dysfunct ion consult wit h the Hepatic Safety  Knowl edge Group. Any  test 
resul ts need to be recorded. 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 153of 166Hy’s Law lab kit for central laboratories
*HCV RNA is only  tested when IgG anti -HCV i s posi tive or inconclusive 
**Carbohydrate deficient transferrin (CD -transferrin) i s not available in China. 
Study  teams shoul d am end this list accordingly 
References 
Aithal et al 2011, Clinical Pharmaco logy and Therapeuti cs 89(6):806 -815.
FDA Guidance for Industry  (issued July  2009) ‘Drug -induced liver injury: Premarket ing 
clinical evaluat ion’.Addit ional standard 
chemistry  and coagul ation 
testsGGT 
LDH 
Prothrombin t ime 
INR
Viral hepati tis IgM ant i-HAV 
IgG anti -HBc 
HBsAg 
HBV DNA 
IgM and IgG anti -HCV 
HCV RNA* 
IgM ant i-HEV 
HEV RNA
Other viral infect ionsIgM & IgG anti -CMV 
IgM & IgG anti -HSV 
IgM & IgG anti -EBV
Alcoho lic hepat itis Carbohydrate deficient transferrin (CD -
transferrin)**
Autoimmune hepatit isAntinuclear antibody (ANA) 
Anti-Liver/Kidney  Microsom al Antibody  
(AntiLKM) 
Anti-Smooth Muscle Ant ibody  (ASMA)
Metabo lic diseasesAlpha -1-antitrypsin 
Cerul oplasmin 
Iron 
Ferri tin 
Transferrin 
Transferrin saturation
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 154of 166Appendix FMaintenance therapy equivalence table
Estimated daily doses for inhaled corticosteroids
Asthma Therapy Total Daily Dos e (μg/day)
Inhaled CorticosteroidaMedium High
Beclomethasone dipropionate (CFC)b>500–1000 >1000
Beclomethasone dipropionate (HFA)c>200–400 >400
Budesonide >400–800 >800
Ciclesonide >160–320 >320
Fluticasone furoate (e.g. Arnuity®Ellipta®Breo®) n.a. 200
Fluticasone propionate >250–500 >500
Fluticasone propionate HFA >250–500 >500
Mometasone furoate >220–440 >440
Triamcinolone acetonide >1000–2000 >2000
Inhaled Corticosteroid in ICS/LABA com binationaMedium High
Beclomethasone dipropionate (e.g. Fostair®) >200–400 >400
Fluticasone propionate HFA (e.g. Seretide®, Advair®) >250–500 >500
Fluticasone furoate (e.g. Relvar® Ellipta®, Breo® Ellipta®) n.a. 184-200
Budesonide, if as delivered dose (e.g. Symbicort®) >400–640 >640
Mometasone Furoate (e.g. Dulera®) >220–400 >400
a The ICS doses were derived from GINA 2018 and the ICS/LABA combinations were derived from GINA 2017 and 2018 
and using prescribing information
bCFC: Chlorofluorocarbon propellant
cHFA: hydrofluoroalkane propellant 
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 155of 166Appendix GAnaphylaxis: signs and symptoms, management
G 1 Introduction
As wi th any antibody , allergic reactions to dose administration are possible. The World Healt h 
Organizat ion has categorized anaphylaxis into 2 subgroups, which are clinically 
indist inguishable: immuno logic [IgE -mediated and non -IgE-mediated (e.g. IgG and immune 
complex mediated) and nonimmuno logic (Johansson et al, 2004). The clinical criteria for 
defining anaphylaxis for th is study are listed in Appendix G 2. A gui de to the si gns and 
symptoms and management of acute anaphylaxis is provided in Appendix G
3. Appropri ate 
drugs, such as epinephrine, antihistamines, corticosteroids, etc., and medical equipment to 
treat anaphylact ic reactions must be immediately avail able at study  sites, and study  personnel 
shoul d be trained to recognize and treat anaphylaxis according to local guidelines. 
If an anaphylact ic react ion occurs, a blood sample will be drawn fro m the subject as soon as 
possible after the event, at 60 minut es ± 30 minutes after the event, and at discharge for 
analysis of serum try
ptase.
G 2 Clinical criteria for defining anaphylaxis and immune complex 
disease
Anaphylaxis
In adults, anaphylaxis is highly likely when any one of the fo llowing 3 cri teria is fulfilled:
1. Acute onset of an illness (minutes to several hours) with invo lvement of the skin, 
mucosal t issue, or both (e.g. generalized hives, pruritus or flushing, swo llen lips -
tongue -uvula)
AND AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING
(a) Respiratory  com promise ( e.g. dyspnea, wheeze -bronchospasm, stridor, 
hypoxemia).
(b) Reduced blood pressure (BP) or associated symptoms of end -organ dysfunct ion 
(e.g. hypotonia [collapse], syncope, incont inence).
2. Two or more of the fo llowing that occur rapidly  after exposure to a likely allergen 
for that subject (minutes to several hours):
(c) Involvement of the skin -mucosal t issue ( e.g. generalized hives, itch -flush, 
swollen lips -tongue-uvula).
(d) Respiratory  com promise ( e.g. dyspnea, wheeze -bronchospasm, stridor, 
hypoxemia).
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 156of 166(e) Reduced BP or associa ted sym ptoms ( e.g. hypotonia [collapse], syncope, 
incont inence).
(f) Persi stent gastrointestinal symptoms ( e.g. crampy abdo minal pain, vomit ing).
3. Reduced BP after exposure to known allergen for that subject (minutes to several 
hours): Adults: systolic BP of le ss than 90 mm Hg or greater than 30% decrease 
fromthat subject’s baseline.
Immune complex disease
Immune com plex disease or Hy persensi tivity Type III i s evoked by  the deposi tion of  antigen-
antibody  or anti gen-antibody -complement com plexes on cell surfaces, with subsequent 
involvement of breakdown products of complement, platelets, and polymorphonuclear 
leukocy tes, and development of vasculit is; serum sickness and nephrit is is co mmo n.
G 3 Signs and symptoms and management of acute anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxi s is an acute and potentially lethal mult i-system  allergic reacti on in which som e or 
all of the following si gns and symptoms occur: 
Diffuse ery thema
Pruri tus
Urticaria and/or angioedema
Bronchospasm
Laryngeal edema
Hypotensi on
Cardi ac arrhy thmias
Feeling of impending doom
Unconsciousness
Shock
Other earlier or concomitant signs and symptoms can include:
Itchy  nose, ey es, pharynx, genitalia, palms, and so les
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 157of 166Rhinorrhea
Change in voice
Metallic taste
Nausea, vo miting, di arrhea, abdominal cramps and bloating
Lightheadedness
Headache
Uterine cramps
Generalized warmt h
G 4 Management of acute anaphylaxis
Immediate intervention
1. Assessment of airway , breathing, ci rculation, and adequacy  of mentati on
2. Administer epinephrine intramuscularly  every  5-15 minutes, in appropri ate doses, 
as necessary , depending on the presenting signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis, to 
control  signs and symptoms and prevent progression to more severe symptoms such 
as respiratory  distress, hy potensi on, shock and unconsciousness.
Possibly app ropriate, subsequent measures depending on response to epinephrine
(a) Place subject in recumbent posit ion and elevate lower extremit ies.
(b) Establish and maintain airway.
(c) Administer oxy gen.
(d) Establish venous access.
(e) Norm al saline IV for fluid replacement.
Specifi c measures to consider after epinephrine injections, where appropriate
(a) Consider epinephrine infusio n.
(b) Consider H1 and H2 ant ihistamines.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 158of 166(c) Consider nebulized β2 agonist [e.g. albuterol (salbutamo l)] for bronchospasm 
resistant to epinephrine.
(d) Consider systemi c corti costeroi ds.
(e) Consider vasopressor (e.g. dopamine).
(f) Consider glucagon for subject taking β -blocker.
(g) Consider atropine for symptomat ic bradycardia.
(h) Consider transportation to an emergency  depart ment or an intensive care facilit y.
(i)For cardi opulm onary arrest during anaphylaxis, high -dose epinephrine and 
prolonged resuscitat ion efforts are encouraged, if necessary .
Adapted from: Kemp SF, Lockey  RF, Simo ns FE; World Allergy Organization Ad hoc 
Committee on Epinephrine in Anaphylaxis. Epinephrine: the drug of choice for anaphylaxis. 
A statement of the World Allergy Organizat ion. Allergy . 2008; 63(8):1061 -70.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 159of 166Appendix HAbbreviations
The fo llowing abbreviat ions and special terms are used in this study  CSP.
Abbreviation or special 
termExplanation
AAER Annualized Asthma Exacerbation Rate
ACQ -6 Asthma Control Questionnaire -6
ADA Anti-Drug Antibodies
AE Adverse Event
AESI Adverse Event of Special Interest
AHR Airway Hyperresponsiveness
ALP Alkaline Phosphatase
ALT Alanine Aminotransferase
ANA Antinuclear Antibody
AntiLKM Anti-Liver/Kidney Microsomal Antibody
AO Airwave Oscillometry
ASMA Anti-Smooth Muscle Antibody
AST Aspartate Aminotransferase
ATS Amer ican Thoracic Society
AX Area under the reactance curve
BAL Bronchoalveolar Lavage
BD Bronchodilator
β-HCG Beta-Hum an Chorionic Gonadotropin
BUN Blood Urea Nitrogen
BV5 Blood Vessels less than 5mm2in Cross -Sectional Area
BV10 Blood Vessels less than 10mm2in Cross -Sectional Area
CLCA1 Chloride Channel Accessory 1
CONSORT Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials
COPD Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
CRF Case Report Form (paper)
CSA Clinical Study Agreement
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 160of 166Abbreviation or special 
termExplanation
CSR Clinical Study Report
CT Computed Tomography
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid 
DSMB Data Safety Monitoring Board
DUS Disease under Study
EC Ethics Committee, synonymous to Institutional Review Board (IRB) and 
Independent Ethics Committee (IEC)
E/I Expiratory -to-Inspiratory
EDN Eosinophil -derived Deurotoxin
ER Emergency Room
EOT End of Treatment 
PRO Patient Reported Outcome 
EU European Union
FAS Full Analysis Set
FEIA Fluor escent Enzyme Immunoassay
FEF 25%-75% Forced Expiratory Flow over 25 -75% of the Vital Capacity
FeNO Fractional Exhaled Nitric Oxide
FEV 1 Forced Expiratory Volume in 1 second
FRI Functional Respiratory Imaging
fSAD Functional Small Airway Disease 
FSH Follicle -Stimulating Hormone
FU Follow -Up
FVC Forced Vital Capacity
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GGT Gamma -Glutamyl Transpeptidase
GINA Global Initiative for Asthma
GLI Global Lung Function Initiative
GMP Good Manufacturing Practice
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 161of 166Abbreviation or special 
termExplanation
HCP Health Care Professional 
HIV Hum an Immunodeficiency Virus
IATA International Air Transport Association
ICH International Conference on Harmonization
ICI International Co -ordinating Investigator (If a study is conducted in 
several countries the International Co -ordinating Investigator is the 
Investigator coordinating the Investigators and/or activities 
internationally). 
ICF Infor med Consent Form 
ICS Inhaled Corticoster oids
IgE Immunoglobulin E
IHC Immunohistochemistry
IMP Investigational Medicinal Product
IP Investigational Product 
IPD Investigational Product Discontinuation
IRB Institutional Review Board
ISF Investigator Study File
ISH In-Situ Hybridization
ITT Intent -to-Treat
IVRS Interactive Voice Response System
IWRS Interactive Web Response System
IXRS Interactive Voice/Web Response System
LABA Long -Acting β2 -Agonist
LAMA Long -Acting Muscarinic Antagonists
LAR Late Asthmatic Response
LIMS Laboratory Information Management System
LRTI Low Respiratory Tract Infection
LTRA Leukotriene Receptor Antagonists
LSLV Last Subject Last Visit
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 162of 166Abbreviation or special 
termExplanation
MAb Monoclonal Antibody
MAR Missing at Random
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MCID Minimum Clinically Important Difference
MCT Mannitol Challenge Testing
MNAR Missing -Not-at-Random
nAB Neutralizing Antibodies
OCS Oral Corticosteroids
OSAE Other Significant Adverse Event
PD Pharmacodynamic
PGx Genetic research
PGI-C Patient Global Impression of Change
PGI-S Patient Global Impression of Severity
PI Principal Investigator 
PK Pharmacokinetic(s)
PNV Predicted Normal Value
PRO Patient Reported Outcome
POSTN Periostin
PT Preferred Term
Q4W Every 4 Weeks
R5-R20 Peripheral airway resistance defined as the difference in resistance 
between 5 Hz (R5, total respiratory system resistance) and 20 Hz (R20, 
central resistance)
RBM Reticular Basement Membrane
RNA Ribonucleic Acid
SABA Short -Acting β2 -Agonist
SAE Serious Adverse Event 
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan
SC Subcutaneous
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 163of 166Abbreviation or special 
termExplanation
SERPINB2 Serpin Family B Member 2
SGRQ St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire
SoA Schedule of Activities
SOC System Organ Class
SDV Source Data Verification
TLC Total Lung Capacity
TPV Third Party Vendor
TSLP Thymic Stromal Lymphopoietin
ULN Upper Limit of Normal
UNS Unscheduled
WBDC Web Based Data Capture
WOCBP Women of Childbearing Potential
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 164of 166Appendix IMedication washout periods for airway hyper -responsiveness
Medication Time to 
Withhold 
INHALED NON -STEROIDAL ANTI -INFLAMMATORY AGENTS 
(e.g. sodium cromoglycate, nedocromil sodium)6-8 hours 
SHORT -ACTING BETA 2 AGONISTS 
(e.g. salbutamol, terbutaline)8 hours 
INHALED CORTICOSTEROIDS 
(e.g. beclomethasone dipropionate, budesonide, fluticasone propionate)12 hours 
IPRATROPIUM BROMIDE 12 hours 
LONG -ACTING BETA 2 AGONISTS 
(e.g. salmeterol, formoterol)24 hours 
INHALED CORTICOSTEROIDS PLUS LONG -ACTING BETA 2 AGONISTS 
(e.g. fluticasone and salmeterol, budesonide and formoterol)24 hours 
THEOPHYLLINE 24 hours 
TIOTROPIUM BROMIDE 72 hours 
ANTIHISTAMINES 
(e.g. cetirizine, fexofenadine and loratadine)72 hours 
LEUKOTRIENE -RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
(e.g. montelukast sodium)4 days 
Food: Ingest ion of significant quant ities of co ffee, tea, cola drinks, chocolate or other food 
containing caffeine may decrease bronchial responsiveness and should be totally avo ided on 
the day  of the test.
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00 013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 165of 166Appendix J Changes related to COVID 19 Pandemic
Please Note: Changes below should only b e implemented during the COVID- 19 pandemic 
and if allowable by  local/regi onal guidelines.
J1 Home IP Administration Instructions
Due to local travel  restrictions and/or site restri ctions, patients may not wish to or m ay not be 
able to go to the study  site for study  visits and related procedures. If an on-site visit is not 
possible, it is recommended home administrati on of IP by a qualified HCP, provi ded this is 
acceptable within local regulat ion/guidance. This is to ensure safet y of the study  subjects and
minimum disrupt ion to IP administration that may occur during the COVID -19 
pandemic. Minimum requirements for collect ion are listed below under the extra dose(s) 
instruction (J.3)
Please refer to the Transportation, Preparation, Administration by the Health Care 
Professio nal and Handling o f Invest igational Product (IP) for Home Administration (or 
alternat ive site) of the IP  working instructions for more informat ion.
J2 Phone Call visit to replace On -site visit (where applicable)
The l ast follow up v isit is an on -site visi t where safety  assessments are performed including 
vital signs, bl ood and urine samples and physical examinat ion. There are several current ly 
enrolled subjects who are expected to have their last follow up visit on site. During the 
COVID -19 pandemic, on -site follow up visit may  be replaced by a phone call and/or a virtual 
visit if allowed by local/regio nal guidelines. 
Having a phone call and/or a virtual visit with the subject will allow :
Adverse Events 
Concomitant Medication
Exacer bation history  to be reported and documented for safet y
J3 Extra Dose(s)
During the COVID- 19 pandemic, sites may administer 1 -6 addit ional IP doses at weeks 28, 
32, 36, 40, 44 and 48 (as needed) unt il the sites may be able to resume performing the end of 
treatm ent (EOT) study  assessments, m ainly  bronchoscopi es, in accordance to local 
regul ations/guidelines during COVID -19 pandemic. Once the bronchoscopy  can be 
perform ed, the si te shoul d schedule the patient to have the EOT study  assessments 4 weeks 
after the last dose. If the subjects have extra IP doses administered, at minimum, the following 
is expected:
Clinical Study Protocol -4.0
AstraZeneca
Tezepelumab -D5180C00013
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 166of 166Vital Signs
Urine pregnancy  test (di pstick) prior to IP administration
Any worsening of underlying asthma symptoms/Asthma exacerbat ions since last 
contact wi th the subject
Adverse events reported since last contact with the subject
Collect ion of healt hcare ut ilization data
New concomitant medicat ions since last contact wit h the subject
Collect ion of paper diaries from previous visit and distribut ion of new paper diaries
Com plete the appropri ate eCRF pages related to COVID -19
Optional Safety  lab samples and/or vi sit specific lab samples , as per the PI di scret ion
J 4Reconsenting of subjects during the COVID -19 pandemic
It is critical that where a subject is unable to travel to the site, obtaining re -consent remotely  
necessary  for the implementati on of  the new urgent changes in the Cascade study  during the 
COVID -19 pandemic. Please ensure that applicable local guidelines and regul ations are 
followed on re -consent ing process.
SIGNATURE PAGE
This is a representation of an electronic record that was signed
electronically and this page is the manifestation of the electronic signature
Document Name: d5180c00013-csp-v4
Document Title: D5180C00013 Clinical Study Protocol version 4
Document ID: Doc ID-003832814
Version Label: 4.0 CURRENT LATEST APPROVED
Server Date
(dd-MMM-yyyy HH:mm ‘UTC’Z)Signed by Meaning of Signature
06-May-2020 07:40 UTC Content Approval
05-May-2020 16:22 UTC Author Approval
05-May-2020 18:35 UTC Content Approval
05-May-2020 19:43 UTC Content Approval
Notes: (1) Document details as stored in ANGEL, an AstraZeneca document management system.
PPD
PPD
PPD
PPD