Official title: Retention in HIV Care for Hispanic Immigrants (ADELANTE)  
NCT number:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document date: 4/7/2022 
 
 
 
 
 
Official title: Retention in HIV Care for Hispanic Immigrants (ADELANTE)  
NCT number:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document date: 4/7/2022  
Official title: Retention in HIV Care for Hispanic Immigrants (ADELANTE)  
NCT number:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document date: 4/7/2022 
 
 
Study protocol  
Randomization : At baseline we will randomly assign participants through computer -generated 
allocation sequence . We anticipate minimal risk of contamination  but will survey participants 
about whether they have discussed the intervention with other participants. We considered 
alternative designs, including a waitlist control condition or an active treatment arm wit hout the 
novela  but these were deemed impractical for the pilot intervention.  
 
Baseline and exit assessment and interview visits : At baseline  assessment , study staff will 
evaluate participants using instruments to measure demographics and self -percei ved bar riers to 
care for Hispanic immigrant populations. Study interviews to administer the questionnaires will 
last up to 4 hours and will occur in a private room at the clinic or community -based organization. 
Participants will receive $40 in gift card an d $10 t ransportation for completing this study visit. 
Study staff will offer a meal or meal ticket and allow for breaks as needed by the participant. The 
instruments we have selected are based on published  evidence  of barriers to HIV care in Latino 
immigra nts, ou r qualitative research, and  framed by our adapted Andersen M odel of Health 
Care Utilization . Consistent with this conceptual model, instruments will measure the 
environment (e.g. neighborhood characteristics and access to services) ; predisposing 
individual -level factors (e.g. acculturation , family cohesion, social position, depression, 
substance use);  individual enabling factors (e.g. self -efficacy,  patient activation,  cultural norms); 
and perceived health care need.  We have selected scales that as m uch as possible have been 
validated in a Spanish -speaking low -literacy population. Most of the measures have been 
developed and validated by a national epidemiological survey in Latinos led by members of the 
study team that have strong reliability and vali dity in  Spanish -speaking populations. For scales 
that have no prior Spanish language translation, the study team composed of multi -national 
native -Spanish speaking investigators, have performed translations and reviewed the 
translations for accuracy of con tent. S tudy staff will guide the participant through questions 
administered on REDCAP. If REDCAP is not available at the time of administration, questions 
will be documented on paper and subsequently uploaded to REDCAP. Latino immigrants have 
numerous barr iers th at may inhibit their ability to participate in research (e.g. multiple jobs, lack 
of access to transportation, family responsibilities). In the event, that the participant cannot 
come in person for the study visit and requests to participate in the baselin e or exit assessment 
and interview visits  by telephone, study staff will arrange to conduct the interview by telephone 
in a private room with the conversation recorded for accuracy and fidelity. Answers to the 
questionnaires will be documented in RE DCAP by  study staff. While we will attempt to obtain all 
exit assessments and interviews (quantitative measurements and qualitative feedback) at week -
24, we will allow a window of approximately 2 weeks prior and 4 weeks after the week -24 date 
to accommodat e parti cipants’ availability.  
     
     CHW -delivered questionnaires : At each CHW session, the CHW will also administer a 3 item 
questionnaire covering antiretroviral adherence, perceived need for HIV care, and global effort 
needed to attend HIV visits.   
     
     Intervention evaluation : To ensure fidelity of the intervention, we will obtain client consent to 
audio record the sessions. The CHW will also provide a brief written survey for the participant to 
complete on feedback for the session. Responses w ill be anonymous. Study staff will also 
conduct a n exit assessment and interview  with participants . During the interview study staff will 
use qualitative methods to assess impressions and ideas for improvement  on the intervention 
process including suitabil ity of the instruments to assess risk factors for inconsistent HIV clinic 
Official title: Retention in HIV Care for Hispanic Immigrants (ADELANTE)  
NCT number:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document date: 4/7/2022 
attendance . The CHW  will likewise complete an exit survey to solicit feedback for improvement. 
Study staff  will present de -identified results to a Latino/HIV oriented community advis ory boa rd, 
to discern the need for iterative revisions of the intervention manual and intervention design. 
Study staff will make revisions to the questionnaire content to account for participant feedback 
on acceptability of the content and feasibility base d on du ration to complete the questionnaire.  
We estimate a need to enroll  100 individuals to randomize  75. Estimated conservative rate of 
attrition is 30%.  This sample size is consistent with recommendations for randomized pilot 
studies for preliminary est imation  of effect sizes and lower bounds. The primary purpose of our 
pilot is to determine the feasibility of the intervention program and evaluation protocols, 
including treatment acceptability, data collection procedures, and expected eligibility, 
recrui tment t ime and effort, and follow -up rates.  Given the small sample size, we will not be able 
to determine intervention efficacy; rather, our analyses will be mainly descriptive and will focus 
on confidence interval estimation.  The primary focus is to asses s feasi bility and acceptability of 
the CHW+ telenovela  intervention and its impact on retention in care . Study staff will measure 
attended HIV primary care visits  over weeks 0 -16 and 17 -32 weeks  as well as CD4 and HIV 
RNA from the electronic medical recor d at week -24 and week -48, to assess short and long -term 
effects of the intervention. To obtain further information on feasibility and acceptability of the 
instruments at baseline and exit assessment and interview visits , study staff will present 
portions o f the que stionnaires to a focus group of Latino HIV peer workers with extensive 
experience working with the population, drawn from local HIV -related community advisory 
boards or AIDS service organizations. Study staff will present instruments to the group and 
perfo rm cognitive debriefing to ascertain if the items are conveying the intended meaning. We 
will also receive additional feedback on acceptability of format and content. We will also ask 
work with these community colleagues to perform back translatio n from Sp anish to English on 
items created by the study team to confirm preservation of content. We will reimburse these 
individuals each for $40 for two hours of service.  
 
     Data analysis : We will compare baseline distributions of key demographic and out come 
variables for comparability between intervention and control groups using nonparametric tests.  
The pre -specified primary outcome was retention in care . We defined this outcome  as having at 
least one visit  attended  in HIV clinic at both time periods (week s 1-16 and 17 -32) post-
randomization. These definitions are  consistent with consensus guidelines on visit consistency . 
Two s tudy staff blinded to  randomization allocation , extracted HIV primary care appointment 
history  from the medical record with disagreements  reconciled by a third reviewer . An HIV 
primary care appointment was defined as an appointment with an HIV provider, meaning a 
health care provider (e.g. , physician or mid -level provider ) who could prescribe antiretroviral 
treatment . The prespecified secon dary outcomes were proportion with viral suppression (HIV 
RNA<200 copies/ml) and change in CD4 count (cells/ microlit er) from baseline  to weeks -24 and 
-48 post -rando mization , extracted from the medical record . Obtaining a measure of effect size 
may not be  justified given the  limited sample size but we will use these data to inform power 
calculations for a subsequent large -scale trial with attention to matched -arms in an R01.  
Participant sociodemographic and clinical characteristics were summarized by intervention 
allocation  with Chi-square  tests and  t-tests. The primary outcome of RIC and secondary 
outcomes of v iral suppression and CD4 count at week s-24 and -48 were compared by group  
using Chi -square tests.  Statistical significance was defined by two -sided p≤ 0.05. Analyses were 
conducted using SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).  